SEVERAL DISCOURSES UPON THE EXISTENCE AND ATTRIBUTES OF GOD.

By that late Eminent Minister of Christ, Mr. STEPHEN CHARNOCKE, B. D. And
sometimes Fellow of New-Colledge in Oxon.

LONDON, Printed for D. Newman, T. Cockerill, Benj. Griffin, T. Simmons, and
Benj. Alsop. M DC LXXXII.

TO THE READER.
THIS long since promised, and greatly expected Volume of the Reverend Author
upon the Divine Attributes, being Transcribed out of his own Manuscripts, by
the unwearied diligence of those worthy Persons that undertook it, Mr. J.
Wichens. Mr. Ashton.
is now at last come to thy hands: Doubt not but thy Reading will pay for thy
waiting, and thy satisfaction make full compensation for thy patience. In the
Epistle before his Treatise of Providence, it was intimated that his following
Discourses would not be inferior to that, and we are persuaded that ere thou
have perused one half of this, thou will acknowledge that it was modestly
spoken. Enough, assure thy self, thou will find here for thy entertainment and
delight, as well as profit: The sublimeness, variety, and rareness of the
Truths here handled, together with the elegancy of the Composure, neatness of
the Style, and whatever is wont to make any Book desirable, will all concur in
the recommendation of this. What so high and noble a Subject, what so fit for
his Meditations or thine, as the highest and noblest Being, and those
transcendently glorious Perfections wherewith he is clothed? A mere
Contemplation of the Divine Excellencies may afford much pleasure to any man
that loves to exercise his Reason, and is addicted to speculation: But what
incomparable sweetness then will holy Souls find, in viewing and considering
those Perfections now, which they are more fully to behold hereafter; and
seeing what manner of God, how wise and powerful, how great, and good, and holy
is he, in whom the Covenant interests them, and in the enjoyment of whom their
happiness consists? If rich men delight to sum up their vast Revenues, to read
over their Rentals, look upon their Hoords; if they bless themselves in their
great Wealth, or, to use the Prophets words, Jer. 9.23. glory in their Riches,
well may Believers rejoice and glory in their knowing the Lord, verse. 24. and
please themselves in seeing how rich they are in having an immensely full, and
All-sufficient God for their Inheritance. Alas, how little do most men know of
that Deity they profess to serve, and own, not as their Sovereign only, but
their Portion? To such this Author might say, Acts 17.23.
as Paul to the Athenians, Whom you ignorantly worship, him declare I unto you.
These Treatises, Reader, will inform thee who he is whom thou call thine,
present thee with a view of thy chief good, and make thee value thy self a
thousand times more upon thy interest in God, than upon all external
Accomplishments, and worldly Possessions. Who but delights to hear well of one
whom he loves? God is thy Love if thou be a Believer, and then it cannot but
fill thee with delight and ravishment to hear so much spoken in his Praise.
David desired to dwell in the House of the Lord, that he might there behold his
beauty; How much of that beauty (if thou art but capable of seeing it) may
thou behold in this Volume, which was our Author's main business, for about
three years before he died, to display before his hearers? True indeed, the
Lord's Glory, as shining forth before his heavenly Courtiers above, is
unapproachable by mortal Men; but what of it is visible in his Works, Creation,
Providence, Redemption, falls under the cognizance of his Inferior Subjects
here; and this is in a great measure presented to view in these Discourses, and
so much we may well say, as may (by the help of Grace) be effectual to raise
thy Admiration, attract thy Love, provoke thy Desires, and enable thee to make
some guess at what is yet unseen; and why not likewise to clear thy Eyes, and
prepare them for future sight, as well as turn them away from the contemptible
Vanities of this present Life? Whatever is glorious in this World, yet (as the
Apostle in another case) has no glory by reason of the glory that excels: 2
Cor. 3.10.
This excellent Glory is the Subject of this Book, to which all Created Beauty
is but mere shadow and duskyness. If thy Eyes be well fixed on this, they will
not be easily drawn to wander after other Objects: If thy heart be taken with
God, it will be mortified to every thing that is not God.

But thou have in this Book, not only an excellent Subject in the general, but
great variety of Matter, for the employment of thy Understanding, as well as
enlivening thy Affections, and that too such as thou will not readily find
elsewhere; many excellent things which are out of the rode of ordinary
Preachers and Writers, and which may be grateful to the Curious, no less than
satisfactory to the Wise and Judicious. It is not therefore a Book to be played
with, or slept over, but read with the most intent and serious Mind; for though
it afford much pleasure for the Fancy, yet much more work for the heart, and
has indeed enough in it to busy all the Faculties. The Dress is count and
decent, yet not garish nor Theatrical; the Rhetoric masculine and vigorous,
such as became a Pulpit, and was never borrowed from the Stage; the Expressions
full, clear, apt, and such as are best suited to the weightiness and
spirituality of the Truths here delivered. It Is plain, he was no empty
Preacher, but was more for sense than sound, filled up his words with matter,
and chose rather to inform his Hearers Minds, than to claw any itching Ears.
Yet we will not say but some little things, a Word, or a Phrase now and then he
may have, which no doubt, had he lived to Transcribe his own Sermons, he would
have altered. If in some lesser matters he differ from thee, it is but in such
as Godly and Learned Men do frequently, and may without breach of Charity
differ in among themselves; in some things he may differ from us too, and it
may be we from each other; and where are there any two Persons, who have in
all, especially the more disputable Points of Religion, exactly the same
Sentiments, at least express themselves altogether in the same terms? But this
we must say, that though he treat of many of the most abstruse and mysterious
Doctrines of Christianity, which are the Subjects of great Debates and
Controversies in the World, yet we find no one material thing in which he may
justly be called Heterodox (unless old Heresies be of late grown Orthodox, and
his differing from them must make him faulty) but generally delivers (as in his
Treatise of Providence and of Thoughts.
former Pieces) what is most consonant to the Faith of This, and other the best
Reformed Churches. He was not indeed for that Modern Divinity which is so much
in vogue with some, who would be counted the only sound Divines; having tasted
the old, he did not desire the new, but said, the old is better. Some Errors,
especially the Socinian, he sets himself industriously against, and cuts the
very Sinews of them, yet, sometimes, almost without naming them.

In the Doctrinal Part of several of his Discourses thou will find the depth of
Polemical Divinity, and in his Inferences from thence the sweetness of
Practical; some things which may exercise the profoundest Scholar, and others
which may instruct and edify the weakest Christian; nothing is more nervous
than his Reasonings, and nothing more affecting than his Applications. Though
he make great use of Schoolmen, yet they are certainly more beholden to him,
than he to them; he adopts their Notions, but he refines them too, and improves
them, and reforms them from the barbarousness in which they were expressed, and
dresseth them up in his own Language (so far as the nature of the matter will
permit, and more clear terms are to be found) and so makes them intelligible to
Vulgar Capacities, which in their original rudeness were obscure and strange,
even to Learned Heads.

In a word, he handles the great Truths of the Gospel, with that Perspicuity,
Gravity, and Majesty which best becomes the Oracles of God; and we have reason
to believe, that no judicious and unbiassed Reader, but will acknowledge this
to be incomparably the best practical Treatise the World ever saw in English
upon this Subject What Dr. Jackson did (to whom our Author gave all due
respect) was more brief, and in another way. Dr. Preston did worthily upon the
Attributes in his day, but his Discourses likewise are more succinct, when this
Authors are more full and large. But whatever were the mind of God in it, it
was not his Will, that either of these two should live to finish what he had
begun, both being taken away when Preaching upon this Subject. Happy Souls!
whose last breath was spent in so noble a Work, Psalm. 146.2
praising God while they had any being.

His Method is much the same in most of these Discourses, both in the Doctrinal
and Practical Part, which will make the whole more plain, and facile to
ordinary Readers. He rarely makes Objections, and yet frequently answers them,
by implying them in those Propositions he lays down for the clearing up the
Truths he asserts. His Dexterity is admirable in the Applicatory Work, where he
not only brings down the highest Doctrines to the lowest Capacities, but
collects great variety of proper, pertinent, useful, and yet (many times)
unthought of Inferences; and that from those Truths, which however they afford
much matter for Inquisition and Speculation, yet might seem (unless to the most
intelligent and judicious Christians) to have a more remote influence upon
Practice. He is not like some School Writers, who attenuate and rarefie the
Matter they Discourse of to a degree bordering upon Annihilation; at least beat
it so thin, that a puff of breath may blow it away; spin their Thread so fine,
that the Cloth, when made up, proves useless; Solidity dwindles into Niceties,
and what we thought we had got by their Assertions, we lose by their
Distinctions. But if our Author have some Subtilties and superfine Notions in
his Argumentations, yet he condenseth them again, and consolidates them into
substantial and profitable Corolaries in his Applications: And in them his main
business is, as to discipline a profane World for its neglect of God, and
contempt of him in his most adorable and shining Perfections; so likewise to
show how the Divine Attributes are not only infinitely excellent in themselves,
but a grand Foundation for all true Divine Worship, and should be the great
Motives to provoke men to the exercise of Faith, and Love, and Fear, and
Humility, and all that holy Obedience they are called to by the Gospel: And
this without peradventure is the great end of all those rich Discoveries God
has in his Word made of himself to us. And, Reader, if these elaborate
Discourses of this holy Man, through the Lord's blessing, become a means of
promoting Holiness in thee, Psalm. 109.1.
and stir thee up to love and live to the God of his praise, we are well
assured that his end in Preaching them is answered, and so is ours in
publishing them.

Thine in the Lord, EDW. VEEL. RI. ADAMS.


The several Discourses in this Volume. VIZ.
Page 1. and 47. THE Existence of God, and Practical Atheism; from Psalm. 14.1.
The Fool has said in his heart there is no God, etc. Page 109. and 129. God a
Spirit, and Spiritual Worship; from John 4.24. God is a Spirit, and they that
worship him, must worship him in spirit and truth. Page 179. The Eternity of
God; from Psalm. 90.2. Before the Mountains were brought forth, or ever thou
had formed the Earth and the World: Even from everlasting to everlasting thou
art God. Page 203. The Immutability of God; From Psalm. 102, 26, 27. They shall
perish, but thou shall endure: Yea, all of them shall wax old, like a Garment;
as a Vesture shall thou change them, and they shall be changed. But thou art
the same, and thy years shall have no end. Page 241. The Omnipresence of God;
from Jer. 23.24. Can any hide himself in secret places, that I shall not see
him? says the Lord. Do not I fill Heaven and Earth, says the Lord? Page 272.
God's Infinite Knowledge; from Psalm. 147.5. Great is our Lord, and of great
Power: His Understanding is infinite. Page 341. God's Infinite Wisdom; from
Romans 16.27. To God only wise, be glory through Jesus Christ for ever. Amen.
Page 417. God's Infinite Power; from Job 26.14. Lo, these are parts of his
ways, but how little a portion is heard of him; But the Thunder of his Power
who can understand? Page 493. God's Infinite Holiness; From Exodus 15.11. Who is
like unto thee, O Lord, among the Gods? Who is like thee, glorious in holiness,
fearful in praises, doing wonders? Page 577. God's Infinite Goodness; from Mark
10.18. And Jesus said unto him, Why call thou me good? There is none good
but one, that is God. Page 697. The Dominion of God; from Psalm. 103.19. The
Lord has prepared his Throne in the Heavens, and his Kingdom rules over all.
Page 787. God's Infinite Patience; from Nahum 1.3. The Lord is slow to Anger,
and great in Power, and will not all acquit the Wicked: The Lord has his way
in the Whirlwind, and in the Storm, and the Clouds are the Dust of his feet.
A DISCOURSE UPON THE Existence of God.
Psalm 14.1. The fool has said in his heart, there is no God; they are
corrupt, they have done abominable Works: there is none that does good.


THIS Psalm is a description of the deplorable corruption by Nature of every
Son of Adam, since the withering of that Common Root. Some restrain it to the
Gentiles, as a Wilderness full of Briars and Thorns, as not concerning the
Jews, the Garden of God, planted by his Grace, and watered by the Dew of
Heaven. But the Apostle, the best Interpreter, rectifies this in extending it
by name to Jews, as well as Gentiles, Romans 3.9. [ We have before proved both
Jews and Gentiles, that they are all under sin.] And v. 10.11, 12. Cites part
of his Psalm and other passages of Scripture for the further evidence of it,
concluding by Jews and Gentiles, every person in the world naturally in this
State of Corruption.

The Psalmist first declares the Corruption of the faculties of the Soul, the
fool has said in his heart. Secondly, the streams issuing from thence, they
are corrupt, etc. the first in Athestical principles, the other in unworthy
practices; and lays all the Evil, Tyranny, Lust and Persecutions by men, (as if
the World were only for their sake) upon the neglects of God, and the Atheism
cherished in their hearts.

The fool, a term in Scripture signifying a wicked man, used also by the
Heathen Philosophers to signify a vicious person, (...) as coming from (...)
signifies the extinction of life in Men, Animals and Plants, so the word (...)
is taken Isa. 40.7. (...) the flower fades Isa. 28.1.
, a plant that has lost all that juice that made it lovely and useful. So a
fool is one that has lost his Wisdom, and right notion of God and Divine
things which were communicated to man by creation; one dead in sin, yet one not
so much void of rational faculties as of Grace in those faculties, not one that
wants reason, but abuses his reason: In Scripture the word signifies foolish.
Mais (...) and (...) put together Deuteronomy. 32.6. Oh foolish people and unwise.


* Said in his heart, that is, he thinks, or he doubts, or he wishes. The
thoughts of the heart are in the nature of words to God, though not to men. It Is
used in the like case of the Atheistical person, Psalm. 10.11.13. He has said
in his heart, God has forgotten, he has said in his heart thou will not
require it. He does not form a Syllogism, as Calvin speaks, that there is no
God: he dares not openly publish it, though he dares secretly think it. He can
not raze out the thoughts of a Deity, though he endeavors to blot those
Characters of God in his Soul. He has some doubts whither there be a God or
no: He wishes there were not any, and sometimes hopes there is none at all. He
could not so ascertain him self by convincing arguments to produce to the
World, but he tampered with his own heart to bring it to that persuasion, and
smothered in himself those notices of a Deity; which is so plain against the
light of nature, that such a man may well be called a fool for it.

There is no God (...) No God
] (...) non potestas Domini, Chaldae. It Is not Jehovah, which name signifies the
Essence of God, as the Prime and Supreme being; But Eloahia, which name
signifies the Providence of God, Muis.
God as a Rector and Judge. Not that he denies the Existence of a Supreme
being, that Created the World, but his regarding the Creatures, his Government
of the world, and consequently his reward of the Righteous or Punishments of
the Wicked.

Cocceius.
There is a threefold denial of God, 1. Quoad exisientiam; this is absolute
Atheism, 2. Quoad Providentiam, or his inspection into, or care of the things
of the World, bounding him in the Heavens, 3. Quoad naturam, in regard of one
or other of the perfections due to his nature.

Not owning him as the Egyptians called, (...)
Of the denial of the Providence of God most understand this Eugubin in cloc.
not excluding the absolute Atheist, as Diagoras is reported to be, nor the
Skeptical Atheist, as Protagoras, who doubted whither there were a God. Those
that deny the Providence of God, do in effect deny the being of God; for they
strip him of that Wisdom, Goodness, Tenderness, Mercy, Justice, Righteousness,
which are the Glory of the Deity. And that principle, of a greedy desire to be
uncontrolled in their Lusts, which induces men to a denial of Providence, that
thereby they might stifle those seeds of fear which infect and embitter their
sinful pleasures, may as well lead them to deny that there is any such being as
a God.

That at one blow, their fears may be dashed all in pieces and dissolved by the
removal of the Foundation: As men who desire liberty to commit works of
darkness, would not have the lights in the House dimmed, but extinguished. What
men say against Providence, because they would have no check in their Lusts,
they may say in their hearts against the existence of God upon the same
account; little difference between the dissenting from the one and disowning
the other.

They are corrupt, they have done abominable works, there is none that does
good.

He speaks of the Atheist in the singular, the fool; of the corruption issuing
in the life in the plural; Intimating that though some few may choke in their
hearts the sentiments of God and his Providence, and positively deny them, yet
there is something of a secret Atheism in all which is the fountain of the evil
practices in their lives, not an utter disowning of the Being of a God, but a
denial or doubting of some of the rights of his nature: Atheism absolute is not
in all men's judgments, but practical is in all men's actions. The Apostle in
the Romans applying the later part of it to all mankind, but not the former. As
the word translated corrupt signifies.
When men deny the God of purity they must needs be polluted in Soul and Body
and grow brutish in their actions: When the sense of Religion is shaken off,
all kind of wickedness is eagerly rusht, into, whereby they become as loathsome
to God as putrified carcases are to men: Atheism absolute is not in all men's
judgments, but practical is in all men's actions. The Apostle in the Romans
applying the later part of it to all mankind, but not the former. As the word
translated corrupt signifies.
Not one or two evil actions is the product of such a principle, but the whole
scene of a man's life is corrupted and becomes execrable.

No man is exempted from some spice of Atheism by the depravation of his
nature, which the Psalmist intimates, there is none that does good: Though
there are indelible convictions of the being of a God that they cannot
absolutely deny it; yet there are some Atheistical bublings in the hearts of
men, which Evidence themselves in their actions: As the Apostle, Tit. 1.16.
They profess that they know God, but in works they deny him. Evil works are a
dust stirred up by an Atheistical breath. He that habituates himself in some
sordid lust, can scarcly be said seriously and firmly to believe that there is
a God in being, and the Apostle does not say that they know God, but they
profess to know him: True knowledge and profession of knowledge are distinct.
It intimates also to us, the unreasonableness of Atheism in the Consequence,
when men shut their eyes against the beams of so clear a sun, God revengeth
himself upon them for their impiety, by leaving them to their own wills, lets
them fall into the deepest sink and dregs of iniquity; and since they doubt of
him in their hearts, suffers them above others to deny him in their works, this
the Apostle discourses at large Romans 1.24.
.

The Text then is a description of man's Corruption.

1. Of his mind. The fool has said in his heart. No better title than that of
a fool is afforded to the Atheist.

2. Of the other faculties, 1. In sins of Commission, expressed by the
loathsomeness [corrupt, abominable] 2. In sins of Ommission [there is none that
does good] he lays down the Corruption of the mind as the cause, the corruption
of the other faculties as the effect.

I. It Is a great Folly to deny or doubt of the Existence or Being of God. Or,
An Atheist is a great Fool.

II. Practical Atheism is natural to man in his corrupt State. It Is against
Nature as constituted by God, but Natural, as Nature is depraved by Man: The
absolute disowning of the Being of a God is not natural to men, but the
contrary is natural; but an inconsideration of God, or mis-representation of
his Nature, is natural to Man as corrupt.

III. A secret Atheism, or a partial Atheism is the Spring of all the wicked
Practices in the world: The disorders of the Life spring from the ill
dispositions of the Heart.

For the first, every Atheist is a Grand Fool. If he were not a Fool, he would
not imagine a thing so contrary to the stream of the Universal Reason of the
world, contrary to the rational Dictates of his own Soul, and contrary to the
Testimony of every Creature, and Link in the Chain of Creation: If he were not
a Fool, he would not strip himself of Humanity, and degrade himself lower than
the most despicable Brute.

It Is a Folly, for tho God be so Inaccessible, that we cannot know him
perfectly, yet he is so much in the light, that we cannot be totally ignorant
of him: As he cannot be comprehended in his Essence, he cannot be unknown in
his Existence, it is as easy by Reason to understand that he is, as it is
difficult to know what he is.

The Demonstrations Reason furnishes us with for the Existence of God, will be
Evidences of the Atheist's Folly. One would think there were little need of
spending time in evidencing this Truth, since in the Principle of it, it seems
to be so universally owned, and at the first proposal and demand, gains the
assent of most men.

But 1. Does not the growth of Atheism among us render this Necessary? may it
not justly be suspected, that the swarms of Atheists are more numerous in our
times, than History Records to have been in any age, when men will not only say
it in their hearts, but publish it with their lips, and boast that they have
shaken of those Shackles which bind other men's Consciences? Does not the
barefaced Debauchery of men evidence such a settled Sentiment, or at least a
careless Belief of the truth, which lies at the root and sprouts up in such
venomous branches in the World? Can men's hearts be free from that Principle
wherewith their Practices are so openly depraved? It Is true, the light of
Nature shines too vigorously for the Power of Man totally to put it out; yet
loathsome Actions impair and weaken the actual thoughts and considerations of a
Deity, and are like Mists that darken the light of the Sun, though they cannot
extinguish it: their Consciences as a Candlestick, must hold it, though their
unrighteousness obscure it, Romans 1.18. [Who hold the Truth in Unrighteousness.]
The engraved Characters of the Law of Nature remain, though they dawb them with
their muddy Lusts to make them illegible: So that since the inconsideration of
a Deity is the cause of all the wickedness and extravigancies of men; and as
Austin says, the Proposition is always true, the Fool has said in his heart,
etc. and more evidently true in this age than any, it will not be unnecsseary
to discourse of the Demonstrations of this first Principle.

The Apostles spent little time in urgng this Truth, it was taken for granted
all over the world, and they were generally devout in the Worship of those
Idols, they thought to be Gods: That age run from one God to many, and our age
is running from one God to none at all.

2. The Existence of God, is the Foundation of all Religion. The whole Building
totters if the Foundation be out of Course: If we have not deliberate and right
Notions of it, we shall perform no Worship, no Service, yield no affection to
him. If there be not a God, it is impossible there can be one; for Eternity is
Essential to the notion of a God; so all Religion would be vain, and
unreasonable to pay Homage to that which is not in being, nor can ever be. We
must first believe that he is, and that he is what he declares himself to be,
before we can seek him, adore him, and devote our Affections to him: Heb. 11.6.
We cannot pay God a due and regular Homage, unless we understand him in his
Perfections, what he is; and we can pay him no Homage at all, unless we believe
that he is.

3. It Is sit, we should know why we believe, that our Belief of a God, may
appear to be upon undeniable Evidence, and that we may give a better reason for
his Existence, than that we have heard our Parents and Teachers tell us so, and
our acquaintance think so. It Is as much as to say there is no God, when we know
not why we believe there is, and would not consider the Arguments for his
Existence.

4. It is necessary to depress that secret Atheism which is in the heart of
every man by nature. Though every visible object which offers it self to our
sense, presents a Deity to our minds, and exhorts us to subscribe to the truth
of it, yet there is a Root of Atheism springing up sometimes in wavering
thoughts, and foolish imaginations, inordinate actions, and secret wishes.
Certain it is, that every man that does not love God, denies God; now can he
that disaffects him, and has a slavish fear of him, wish his Existence, and
say to his own heart with any cheerfulness, there is a God, and make it his
chief care to persuade himself of it? he would persuade himself there is no
God, and stifle the seeds of it in his Reason and Conscience, that he might
have the greatest liberty to intertain the allurements of the Flesh.

It Is necessary to Excite men to daily and actual considerations of God and his
nature, which would be a bar to much of that wickedness which overflows in the
lives of men.

5. Nor is it unuseful to those who effectually believe and love him; Coccei
Sum. Theol. c. 8. 1.
for those who have had a converse with God, and felt his powerful influences
in the secrets of their hearts, to take a prospect of those satisfactory
accounts which reason gives of that God they adore and love; to see every
Creature justify them in their owning of him, and affections to him: Indeed
the Evidences of a God striking upon the Conscience of those who resolve to
cleave to sin as their chiefest darling, will dash their pleasures with
unwelcome mixtures.

I shall further premise this.

That the folly of Atheism is evidenced by the light of Reason. Men that will
not listen to Scripture, as having no counterpart of it in their Souls, cannot
easily deny natural Reason, which rises up on all sides for the justification
of this Truth: There is a natural as well as a revealed Knowledge, and the Book
of the Creatures is legible in declaring the Being of a God, as well as the
Scriptures are in declaring the Nature of a God; there are outward objects in
the World, and common Principles in the Conscience, whence it may be inferred,

For, 1. God in regard of his Existence is not only the discovery of Faith, but
of Reason. God has revealed not only his Being, but some sparks of his eternal
Power and Godhead in his Works, as well as in his Word. Romans 1.19, 20. God has
showed it unto them, how? Aquin.
in his works; by the things that are made, it is a discovery to our Reason, as
shining in the Creatures; and an object of our Faith as breaking out upon us in
the Scriptures: it is an Article of our Faith, and an Article of our Reason.
Faith supposes natural knowledge, as Grace supposes nature. Faith indeed is
properly of things above Reason, purely depending upon Revelation: What can be
demonstrated by natural light, is not so properly the object of Faith; though
in regard of the addition of a certainty by Revelation it is so.

The belief that God is, which the Apostle speaks of, Heb. 11.6.
is not so much of the bare Existence of God, as what God is in Relation to
them that seek to him, viz. a Rewarder. The Apostle speaks of the Faith of
Abel, the Faith of Enoch, such a Faith that pleases God: But the Faith of Abel
testified in his sacrifice, and the Faith of Enoch testified in his walking
with God, was not simply a Faith of the Existence of God. Cain in the time of
Abel, other men in the World in the time of Enoch, believed this as well as
they: But it was a Faith joined with the Worship of God, and desires to please
him in the way of his own appointment; so that they believed that God was such
as he had declared himself to be in his promise to Adam, such an one as would
be as good as his word, and bruise the Serpents head: He that seeks to God
according to the mind of God, must believe that he is such a God that will
pardon sin, and justify a seeker of him; that he is a God of that ability and
will, to Justify a sinner in that way he has appointed for the clearing the
Holiness of his Nature, and vindicating the Honor of his Law violated by man.

No man can seek God or love God, unless he believe him to be thus, and he
cannot seek God without a discovery of his own mind how he would be sought. For
it is not a seeking God in any way of man's Invention, that renders him capable
of this desired fruit of a Reward: He that beleives God as a Rewarder, must
believe the promise of God concerning the Messiah. Men under the Conscience of
sin, cannot tell without a divine discovery, whither God will reward, or how he
will reward the seekers of him; and therefore cannot act toward him as an
object of Faith. Would any man seek God merely because he is, or love him
because he is, if he did not know that he should be acceptable to him? The bare
Existence of a thing is not the ground of affection to it, but those qualities
of it and our interest in it, which render it amiable and delightful. How can
men whose Consciences sly in their faces, seek God or love him, without this
knowledge that he is a Rewarder? Nature does not show any way to a sinner, how
to reconcile Gods provoked Justice with his Tenderness. The Faith the Apostle
speaks of here, is a Faith that eyes the reward as an encouragement, and the
Will of God as the Rule of its acting, he does not speak simply of the
Existence of God.

I have spoken the more of this place, because the Socinians Voet. Theol
natural. cap. 3. 1. p. 22.
use this to decry any natural knowledge of God, and that the Existence of God
is only to be known by Revelation, so that by that reason any one that lived
without the Scripture has no ground to believe the being of a God.

[The Scripture ascribes a knowledge of God to all Nations in the world, Romans
1.19. not only a faculty of knowing, if they had arguments and demonstrations;
as an ignorant man in any art has a faculty to know; but it ascribes an actual
knowledge ver. 19. manifest in them, ver. 21. They knew God, not they might
know him, they knew him when they did not care for knowing him: the notices of
God are as intelligible to us by reason, as any object in the world is visible,
he is written in every Letter.

2. We are often in the Scripture sent to take a prospect of the Creatures for
a discovery of God. The Apostles drew arguments from the Topics of nature,
when they discoursed with those that owned the Scripture, Romans 1.19. As well as
when they treated with those that were ignorant of it; as Acts 14.16, 17. And
among the Philosophers of Athens, Acts 17.27, 29. such arguments the Holy Ghost
in the Apostles thought sufficient to convince men of the Existence, Unity,
Spirituality and Patience of God. Voet Theol. natural. cap. 3. 1. p. 22.
Such arguments had not been used by them and the Prophets from the visible
things in the world to silence the Gentiles with whom they dealt, had not this
Truth, and much more about God, been demonstrable by natural Reason: they knew
well enough that probable arguments would not satisfy peircing and inquisitive
minds.

In Paul's account, the Testimony of the Creatures was without contradiction;
God himself justifies this way of proceeding by his own example, and remits Job
to the consideration of the Creatures, to spell out something of his Divine
Perfections. Job. 28.39.40. etc. It Is but one truth in Philosophy and Divinity,
That which is false in one, cannot be true in another; Truth in what appearance
so ever does never contradict it self.
And this is so convincing an argument of the Existence of God, that God never
vouchsafed any Miracle, or put forth any act of Omnipotency, besides what was
evident in the Creatures for the satisfaction of the Curiosity of any Atheist,
or the evincing of his Being, as he has done for the Evidencing those Truths
which were not written in the book of nature, or for the restoring a decayed
worship, or the protection or deliverance of his people: Those Miracles in
publishing the Gospel, indeed did demonstrate the existence of some supreme
Power; but they were not seals designedly affixt for that, but for the
confirmation of that truth, which was above the ken of purblind Reason, and
purely the birth of Divine Revelation: Yet what proves the Truth of any
Spiritual Doctrine, proves also in that act the Existence of the Divine Author
of it: The Revelation always implies a Revealer, and that which manifests it
to be a Revelation, manifests also the supreme Revealer of it. By the same
light the Sun manifests other things to us, it also manifests it self. But what
Miracles could rationally be supposed to work upon an Atheist, who is not drawn
to a sense of the Truth proclaimed aloud by so many wonders of the Creation?

Let us now proceed to the demonstration of the Atheists Folly.

It Is a Folly to deny or doubt of a Sovereign Being, incomprehensible in his
Nature, infinite in his Essence and Perfections, independent in his Operations,
who has given Being to the whole frame of sensible and intelligible Creatures,
and governs them according to their several natures, by an unconceivable
Wisdom; who fills the Heavens with the Glory of his Majesty, and the Earth with
the influences of his Goodness.

It Is a Folly inexcusable, to renounce in this case all appeal to universal
consent, and the joint assurances of the Creatures.

Reason 1. It Is a Folly to deny or doubt of that which has been the
acknowledged Sentiment of all Nations, in all places and ages. There is no
Nation but has owned some kind of Religion, and therefore no Nation but has
consented in the notion of a supreme Creator and Governor.

1. This has been universal.

2. It has been constant and uninterrupted.

3. Natural and innate.

First, I. It has been universally assented to by the Judgments and practices
of all Nations in the World.

1. No Nation has been exempt from it. All Histories of former and latter Ages
have not produced any one Nation but fell under the force of this Truth. Though
they have differed in their Religions, they have agreed in this Truth; here
both Heathen, Turk, Jew and Christian, center without any Contention. No
quarrel was ever commenced upon this score; though about other opinions Wars
have been sharp and Enmities Irriconcilable; The notion of the Existence of a
Deity was the same in all, Indians as well as Britains; Americans as well as
Jews.

It has not been an opinion peculiar to this or that people, to this or that
Sect of Philosophers; but has been as universal as the reason whereby men are
differenced from other Creatures, so that some have rather defined man by
animal religiosum, then animal rationale. It Is so twisted with Reason that a
man cannot be accounted rational, unless he own an object of Religion:
Therefore he that understands not this, renounceth his Humanity when he
renounceth a Divinity.

No instance can be given of any one people in the World that disclaimed it. It
has been owned by the Wise and ignorant, by the learned and stupid, by those
who had no other guide but the dimmest light of Nature, as well as by those
whose Candles were snuft by a more polite Education, and that without any
solemn debate and contention: Though some Philosophers have been known to
change their opinions in the concerns of Nature, yet none can be proved to have
absolutely changed their opinion concerning the Being of a God: One died for
asserting one God, none in the former Ages upon record has died for asserting
no God. Go to the utmost bounds of America, you may find people without some
broken pieces of the Law of nature, but not without this signature and stamp
upon them, though they wanted commerce with other Nation; except as Savage as
themselves, in whom the light of nature was as it were sunk into the Socket,
who are but one remove from Brutes, who cloth not their bodies, cover not
their shame, yet were they as soon known to own a God, as they were known to be
a people: they were possessed with the Notion of a Supreme Being, the Author of
the World, had an object of Religious adoration, put up Prayers to the Deity
they owned for the good things they wanted, and the diverting the evils they
feared: no people so untamed where absolute perfect Atheism has gained a
footing.

Not one Nation of the World known in the time of the Romans that were without
their Ceremonies, whereby they signified their devotion to a Deity. They had
their places of Worship, where they made their Vows, presented their Prayers,
offered their Sacrifices, and implored the Assistance of what they thought to
be a God. And in their distresses run immediately, without any deliberation, to
their Gods, so that the notion of a Deity was as inward and settled in them as
their own Souls, and indeed runs in the blood of mankind: the distempers of the
understanding, cannot utterly deface it, you shall scarce find the most
distracted Bedlam in his raving sits to deny a God, though he may Blaspheme and
fancy himself one.

2. Nor does the Idolatry and multiplicity of Gods in the World weaken, but
confirm this universal consent. Whatsoever unworthy conceits men have had of
God in all Nations, or whatsoever degrading representations they have made of
him, yet they all concur in this, that there is a Supreme Power to he adored.
Tho one People worshipped the Sun, others the Fire, and the Egyptians, gods out
of their Rivers, Gardens, and Fields; yet the Notion of a Deity existent, who
created and governed the World, and conferred daily benefits upon them, was
maintained by all, tho applied to the Stars, and in part to those sordid
Creatures. All the Dagons of the World establish this Truth, and fall down
before it. Had not the Nations owned the Being of a God, they had never offered
Incense to an Idol: Had there not been a deep impression of the Existence of a
Deity, they had never exalted Creatures below themselves to the honor of
Altars: Men could not so easily have been deceived by forged Deities, if they
had not had a Notion of a real one. Their fondness to set up others in the
place of God, evidenced a natural knowledge that there was one, who had a right
to be worshipped. If there were not this sentiment of a Deity no man would ever
have made an Image of a piece of Wood, worshipped it, prayed to it, and said
deliver me for thou art my God Isa. 44.17.
. They applied a general Notion to a particular Image. The difference is in the
manner, and immediate object of worship, not in the formal ground of worship.
The worship sprung from a true Principal, though it was not applied to a right
object: While they were rational Creatures, they could not deface the Notion;
yet while they were corrupt Creatures it was not difficult to apply themselves
to a wrong object from a true principle. A blind man knows he has a way to go
as well as one of the clearest sight, but because of his blindness he may miss
the way and stumble into a Ditch. No man would be imposed upon to take a
Bristol Stone instead of a Diamond, if he did not know that there were such
things as Diamonds in the World: nor any man spread forth his hands to an Idol,
if he were altogether without the sense of a Deity. Whether it be a false or a
true God men apply to, yet in both, the natural sentiment of a God is
evidenced; all their mistakes were grafts inserted in this Stock, since they
would multiply gods rather than deny a Deity.

Charron de la Sagesse Livr. 1. Cha. 7. p. 43. 44.
How should such a general submission be entered into the by all the world, so
as to adore things of a base alloy, if the force of Religion were not such,
that in any fashion a man would seek the satisfaction of his natural instinct
to some object of worship? This great diversity confirms this consent, to be a
good argument, for it evidenceth it not to be a Cheat, combination or
conspiracy to deceive, or a mutual intelligence, but every one finds it in his
climate, yea in himself. Gassend. Phys. 1. lib. 4. Ca. 2. p. 291.
People would never have given the Title of a God to men or Brutes, had there
not been a preexisting and unquestioned persuasion, that there was such a
Being, how else should the Notion of a God come into their minds, the Notion
that there is a God must be more ancient.

3. Whatsoever disputes there have been in the World, this of the existence of
God was never the subject of contention. All other things have been questioned.
What Jarrings were there among Philosophers about natural things, into how many
parties were they split, with what animosities did they maintain their several
judgments? but we hear of no solemn Controversies about the Existence of a
Supreme Being: this never met with any considerable contradiction: no Nation,
that has put other things to question, would ever suffer this to be
disparaged, so much as by a public doubt. Amyrant des Religion p. 50.
We find among the Heathen contentions about the Nature of God and the number
of gods; some asserted an innumerable multitude of gods, some affirmed him to
be subject to birth and death, some affirmed the entire World was God; others
fancied him to be a circle of a bright Fire; others that he was a Spirit
diffused through the whole World: Yet they unanimously concurred in this, as
the judgment of Universal Reason, that there was such a sovereign Being: And
those that were skeptical in every thing else, and asserted that the greatest
certainty was that there was nothing certain, professed a certainty in this. The
question was not whether there was a First Cause, but why it was. Gassend.
Phys. 1. l^b 4. Ca. 2. p. 291.
It Is much the same thing, as the disputes about the Nature and matter of the
Heavens, the Sun and Planets, tho there be great diversity of Judgments, yet
all agree that there are Heavens, Sun, Planets; so all the Contentions among
men about the Nature of God, weaken not, but rather confirm, that there is a
God, since there was never a public formal debate about his Existence. Those
that have been ready to pull out one another eyes for their dissent from their
judgments, sharply censured one another sentiments, envied the births of one
another wits, always shook hands with an unanimous consent in this; never
censured one another for being of this persuasion, never called it into
question; as what was never controverted among men professing Christianity, but
acknowledged by all, though contending about other things, has reason to be
judged a certain Truth belonging to the Christian Religion; so what was never
subjected to any Controversy, but acknowledged by the whole World, has reason
to be embraced as a Truth without any doubt.

4. This Universal Consent is not prejudiced by some few Dissenters. History
does not reckon twenty professed Atheists in all Ages in the compass of the whole
World: Gassend. Phys. 1. lib. 4. cap. 7. p. 282.
and we have not the name of any one absolute Atheist upon Record in Scripture:
yet it is questioned, whether any of them, noted in History with that infamous
name, were downright denyers of the Existence of God, but rather because they
disparaged the Deities commonly worshipped by the Nations where they lived, as
being of a clearer reason to discern, that those qualities, vulgarly attributed
to their gods, as lust and luxury, wantonness and quarrels, were unworthy of
the nature of a God. But suppose they were really what they are termed to be,
what are they to the multitude of men, that have sprung out of the loins of
Adam? not so much as one grain of ashes is to all that were ever turned into
that form by any fires in your Chimnies. And many more were not sufficient to
weigh down the contrary consent of the whole World, and bear down an universal
impression. Should the Laws of a Country, agreed universally to, by the whole
Body of the People be accounted vain, because a hundred men of those millions
disapprove of them, when not their reason, but their folly and base interest,
persuades them to dislike them and dispute against them? Gassend. ibid. p. 290.
What if some men be blind, shall any conclude from thence that eyes are not
natural to men? shall we say that the notion of the Existence of God is not
natural to men, because a very small number have been of a contrary opinion?
shall a man in a dungeon, that never saw the Sun, deny that there is a Sun,
because one or two blind men tell him there is none, when thousands assure him
there is? Why should then the exceptions of a few, not one to millions,
discredit that which is voted certainly true by the joint consent of the World?
Add this too, that if those that are reported to be Atheists had had any
considerable reason to step aside from the common persuasion of the whole
world, it is a wonder it met not with entertainment by great numbers of those,
who, by reason of their notorious wickedness, and inward disquiets, might
reasonably be thought to wish in their hearts that there were no God. It Is
strange if there were any reason on their side, that in so long a space of
time, as has run out from the Creation of the World, there could not be
engaged a considerable number to frame a Society for the profession of it. It
has died with the Person that started it, and vanished as soon as it appeared.

To conclude this, is it not folly for any man to deny or doubt of the being of
a God, to dissent from all mankind, and stand in contradiction to humane
Nature? What is the general dictate of Nature is a certain Truth. It Is
impossible, that Nature can naturally and universally lie. And therefore those
that ascribe all to Nature, and set it in the Place of God, contradict
themselves, if they give not credit to it in that which it universally affirms.
Cicero.
A general consent of all Nations is to be esteemed as a Law of Nature. Nature
cannot plant in the minds of all men an assent to a falsity, for then the Laws
of Nature would be destructive to the reason and minds of men. How is it
possible, that a falsity should be a persuasion spread through all Nations,
engraven upon the minds of all men, men of the most towering, and men of the
most creeping understanding; that they should consent to it in all places, and
in those places, where the Nations have not had any known commerce with the
rest of the known World? A Consent not settled by any Law of Man to constrain
People to a belief of it: And indeed it is impossible, that any Law of man can
constrain the Belief of the mind. Would not he deservedly be accounted a fool,
that should deny that to be gold, which has been tried and examined by a great
number of knowing Goldsmiths, and has past the test of all their touch-stones?
what excess of folly would it be for him to deny it to be true gold, if it had
been tried by all that had skill in that metal in all Nations in the World?

Secondly, 2. It has been a constant and uninterrupted consent. It has been
as Ancient as the first age of the World; no man is able to mention any time,
from the beginning of the World, wherein this Notion has not been universally
owned; it is a old as mankind, and has run along with the course of the Sun,
nor can the date be fixed lower than that.

1. First, In all the changes of the World, this has been maintained. In the
overturnings of the Government of States, the alteration of Modes of Worship
this has stood unshaken. The reasons upon which it was founded were in all
Revolutions of time accounted satisfactory and convincing, nor could absolute
Atheism in the changes of any Laws ever gain the favor of any one Body of
people to be established by a Law. When the Honor of the Heathen Idols was
laid in the dust, this suffered no impair. The being of one God was more
vigorously owned, when the unreasonableness of multiplicity of Gods was
manifest; and grew taller by the detection of counterfeits. When other parts of
the Law of nature have been violated by some Nations, this has maintained its
standing. The long series of Ages has been so far from blotting it out, that
it has more strongly confirmed it, and makes further progress in the
confirmation of it. Time which has eaten out the strength of other things and
blasted mere inventions, has not been able to consume this. The discovery of
all other Impostures, never made this by any society of men to be suspected as
one. It will not be easy to name any Imposture that has walked perpetually in
the world without being discovered, and whipped out by some Nation or other.
Falsities have never been so universally and constantly owned without public
control and question. And since the world has detected many errors of the
former age, and learning been increased, this has been so far from being
dimmed, that it has shone out clearer with the increase of natural knowledge,
and received fresh and more vigorous confirmations.

2. The fears and anxieties in the Consciences of men, have given men
sufficient occasion to root it out, had it been possible for them to do it. If
the Notion of the Existence of God, had been possible to have been dashed out of
the minds of men, they would have done it rather than have suffered so many
troubles in their Souls upon the Commission of sin; since there did not want
wickedness and wit in so many corrupt ages to have attempted it and prospered
in it, had it been possible. How comes it therefore to pass that such a
multitude of profligate persons that have been in the world since the fall of
man, should not have rooted out this principle, and dispostest the minds of men
of that which gave birth to their tormenting fears? How is it possible that all
should agree together in a thing which created fear, and an obliligation
against the Interest of the Flesh, if it had been free for men to discharge
themselves of it? No man, as far as corrupt nature bears sway in him, is
willing to live contrould.

The first Man, would rather be a God himself than under one: Genesis 3.5.
Why should men continue this Notion in them, which shackled them in their vile
inclinations, if it had been in their power utterly to deface it? If it were an
Imposture, how comes it to pass that all the wicked ages of the world could
never discover that to be a cheat, which kept them in continual alarums? Men
wanted not will to shake off such apprehensions; As Adam, so all his Posterity
are desirous to hide themselves from God upon the Commission of sin, Genesis 3.9.
and by the same reason they would hide God from their Souls. What is the
reason they could never attain their will, and their wish by all their
endeavors? Could they possibly have satisfied themselves that there were no
God, they had discarded their fears, the disturbers of the repose of their
lives, and been unbridled in their pleasures. The wickedness of the world would
never have preserved that which was a perpetual molestation to it, had it been
possible to be rased out.

But since men under the turmoils and lashes of their own Consciences could
never bring their hearts to a settled dissent from this Truth, it evidenceth,
that as it took its birth at the beginning of the world, it cannot expire, no
not in the ashes of it, nor in any thing but the reduction of the Soul to that
nothing from whence it sprung. This conception is so perpetual, that the nature
of the Soul must be dissolved before it be rooted out, nor can it be extinct
whiles the Soul endures.

3. Let it be considered also by us that own the Scripture, that the Devil
deems it impossible to root out this sentiment. It seems to be so perpetually
fixed, that the Devil did not think fit to tempt man to the denial of the
Existence of a Deity, but persuaded him to believe he might ascend to that
Dignity and become a God himself, Genesis 3.1. Has God said? and he there owns
him ver. 5. Ye shall become as Gods. He owns God in the question he asks the
Woman, and persuades our first Parents to be Gods themselves. And in all
stories both Ancient and Modern, the Devil was never able to Tincture mends
minds, with a professed denial of the Deity, which would have opened a door to
a world of more wickedness than has been acted, and took away the bar to the
breaking out of that evil, which is naturally in the hearts of men, to the
greater prejudice of human societies. He wanted not malice to raze out all the
Notions of God, but power: He knew it was impossible to effect it, and
therefore in vain to attempt it. He set up himself in several places of the
ignorant world as a God, but never was able to overthrow the opinion of the
being of a God: The impressions of a Deity were so strong as not to be struck
out by the malice and power of Hell.

What a folly is it then in any to contradict or doubt of this Truth, which all
the periods of time have not been able to wear out; which all the Wars and
Quarrels of men with their own Consciences have not been able to destroy; which
Ignorance and Debauchery, its two greatest Enemies, cannot weaken; which all
the falsehoods and errors, which have reigned in one or other part of the
world, have not been able to banish; which lives in the consents of men in
spite of all their wishes to the contrary, and has grown stronger and Shone
clearer by the improvements of natural reason?

3. Natural and innate; which pleads strongly for the perpetuity of it. It Is
natural tho some think it not a Principle writ in the heart of man; Pink. Ephesians.
6. page 10. 11.
it is so natural that every man is born with a restless instinct to be of some
kind of Religion or other, which implies some object of Religion. The
impression of a Deity is as common as reason, and of the same age with reason.
King. en Jonah page 16.
It Is a Relic of knowledge after the fall of Adam, like fire under ashes, which
sparkles as soon as ever the heap of ashes is opened. A notion sealed up in the
Soul of every man; Amyrant des Religious page 6. 5. 8. 9.
else how could those people who were unknown to one another, separate by Seas
and Mounts, differing in various customs and manner of living, had no mutual
intelligence one with another, light upon this as a common Sentiment, if they
had not been guided by one uniforme reason in all their minds, by one nature
common to them all: though their Clymates be different, their tempers and
constitutions various, their imaginations in somethings as distant from one
another as Heaven is from Earth, the Ceremonies of their Religion not all of
the same kind; Yet wherever you find human nature, you find this settled
persuasion. So that the Notion of a God seems to be twisted with the nature of
man, and is the first natural branch of Common reason, or upon either the first
inspection of a man into himself and his own state and constitution, or upon
the first sight of any external visible object. Nature within man, and nature
without man agree upon the first meeting together to form this Sentiment, that
there is a God. It Is as natural as any thing we call a Common Principle. One
thing which is called a Common Principle and natural is, that the whole is
greater than the parts. If this be not born with us, yet the exercise of reason
essential to man settles it as a certain Maxim; upon the dividing any thing
into several parts, he finds every part less than when they were altogether. By
the same exercise of reason, we cannot cast our eyes upon any thing in the
world, or exercise our understandings upon our selves, but we must presently
imagine, there was some cause of those things, some cause of my self and my own
being; so that this Truth is as natural to man as any thing he can call most
natural or a Common Principle.

It must be confessed by all, that there is a Law of nature writ upon the hearts
of men, which will direct them to commendable actions, if they will attend to
the writing in their own Consciences. This Law cannot be considered without the
notice of a Lawgiver. For it is but a natural and obvious conclusion, that some
superior hand engrafted those principles in man, since he finds something in
him twitching him upon the pursuit of uncomely actions, though his heart be
mightily inclined to them; man knows he never planted this principle of
Reluctance in his own Soul; he can never be the cause of that, which he cannot
be friends with. If he were the cause of it, why does he not rid himself of it?
No man would endure a thing that does frequently molest and disquiet him if he
could casheir it. It Is therefore sown in man by some hand more powerful than
man, which rises so high and is rooted so strong, that all the force that man
can use cannot pull it up. If therefore this principle be natural in man, and
the Law of Nature be natural, the Notion of a Lawgiver must be as natural, as
the Notion of a Printer or that there is a Printer is obvious upon the sight of
a stamp impressed: After this the multitude of effects in the World step in to
strengthen this beam of natural light, and the direct Conclusion from thence
is, that that power which made those outward objects, implanted this inward
principle: This is sown in us, born with us and sprouts up with our growth, or
as one says Cha^le^^^
it is like Letters carved upon the bark of a young plant which grows up together
with us and the longer it grows the Letters are more legible.

This is the ground of this universal consent, and why it may well be termed
natural.

This will more evidently appear to be natural because,

1. This consent could not be by mere Tradition.

2. Nor by any mutual intelligence of Governors to keep people in aw, which are
two things the Atheist pleads, the first has no strong foundation, and that
other is as absurd and foolish as it is wicked and abominable.

3. Nor was it fear first introduced it.

1. It could not be my mere Tradition. Many things indeed are entertained by
posterity which their Ancestors delivered to them, and that out of a common
reverence to their Forefathers, and an opinion that they had a better prospect
of things than the increase of the corruption of suceeding ages would permit
them to have.

But if this be a Tradition handed from our Ancestors, they also must receive
it from theirs, we must then ascend to the first man, we cannot else escape a
confounding ourselves with running into infinite; was it then the only
Tradition he left to them, is it not probable he acquainted them with other
things in conjunction with this, the nature of God, the way to Worship him, the
manner of the Worlds Existence, his own state? We may resonably suppose him to
have a good stock of knowledge, what is become of it? It cannot be supposed,
that the first man should acquaint his posterity with an object of Worship, and
leave them ignorant of a Mode of Worship and of the end of Worship, we find in
Scripture his immediate posterity did the first in Sacrifices, and without
doubt they were not ignorant of the other: how come Men to be so uncertain in
all other things, and so confident of this, if it were only a Tradition? how
did debates and irreconcilable questions start up concerning other things, and
this remain untouched, but by a small number? whatsoever Tradition the first
Man left besides this, is lost, and no way recoverable, but by the Revelation
God has made in his Word.

How comes it to pass this of a God is longer lived, than all the rest which we
may suppose Man left to his immediate descendents? How come men to retain the
one, and forget the other? What was the reason this survived the ruin of the
rest, and surmounted the uncertainties into which the other sunk? Was it likely
it should be handed down alone without other attendants on it at first? Why did
it not expire among the Americans, who have lost the account of their own
descent, and the Stock from whence they sprung, and cannot reckon above eight
hundred or a thousand years at most? Why was not the manner of the worship of a
God transmitted as well as that of his Existence? How came men to dissent in
their Opinions concerning his Nature, whether he was corporeal or incorporeal,
finite or infinite, omnipresent or limited? Why were not men as negligent to
transmit this of his Existence as that of his Nature? No reason can be rendered
for the security of this above the other, but that there is so clear a tincture
of a Deity upon the minds of men, such traces and shadows of him in the
creatures, such indelible instincts within, and invincible arguments without to
keep up this universal consent. The Characters are so deep that they cannot
possibly be rased out, which would have been one time or other, in one Nation
or other, had it depended only upon Tradition, since one Age shakes off
frequently the Sentiments of the former.

I cannot think of above one which may be called a Tradition, which indeed was
kept up among all Nations, viz. Sacrifices, which could not be natural but
instituted: What ground could they have in Nature, to imagine that the blood of
Beasts could expiate and wash off the guilt and stains of a rational Creature?
Yet they had in all places (but among the Jews, and some of them only) lost the
knowledge of the reason and end of the Institution, which the Scripture
acquaints us was to typifie and signify the Redemption by the Promised Seed.
This Tradition has been superannuated and laid aside in most parts of the
World, while this Notion of the Existence of a God has stood firm.

But suppose it were a Tradition, was it likely to be a mere intention and
figment of the first Man? Had there been no reason for it, this Posterity would
soon have found out the weakness of its Foundation: What advantage had it been
to him to transmit so great a falsehood to kindle the fears or raise the hopes
of his Posterity, if there were no God? It cannot be supposed he should be so
void of that natural affection, men in all ages bear to their Descendents, as
so grossly to deceive them, and be so contrary to the simplicity and plainness
which appears in all things nearest their Original.

2. Neither was it by any mutual Intelligence of Governors among themselves to
keep people in subjection to them. If it were a political design at first, it
seems it met with the general nature of Mankind very ready to give it
entertainment.

I. It is unaccountable how this should come to pass. It must be either by a
joint Assembly of them, or a mutual Correspondence. If by an Assembly, who were
the persons? let the name of any one be mentioned, When was the time? Where was
the place of this appearance? By what Authority did they meet together? Who
made the first motion, and first started this great Principle of Policy? By
what means could they assemble from such distant parts of the World? humane
Histories are utterly silent in it, And the Scripture, the antientest History
gives an account of the attempt of Babel, but not a word of any design of this
nature.

What mutual Correspondence could such have, whose Interests are for the most
part different, and their designs contrary to one another? How could they who
were divided by such vast Seas have this mutual Converse? How could those who
were different in their Customs and Manners, agree so unanimously together in
one thing to gull the People? If there had been such a Correspondence between
the Governors of all Nations, what is the reason some Nations should be
unknown to the world till of late times? How could the business be so secretly
managed, as not to take Vent, and Issue in a discovery to the World? Can reason
suppose so many in a joint Conspiracy, and no man's Conscience in his life under
sharp Afflictions, or on his death bed, when Conscience is most awakened,
constrain him to reveal openly the Cheat that beguiled the World? How came they
to be so uanimous in this Notion, and to differ in their Rites almost in every
Country? why could they not agree in one Mode of Worship throughout all the
World, as well as in this universal Notion? If there were not a mutual
intelligence, it can not be conceived how in every Nation such a state-Engineer
should rise up with the same trick to keep people in aw. What is the reason we
cannot find any Law in any one Nation to constrain men to the belief of the
Existence of a God, since politic Stratagems have been often fortified by
Laws? Besides, such men make use of Principles received to effect their
Contrivances, and are not so impolitick as to build designs upon Principles
that have no Foundation in nature: Some Heathen Lawgivers have pretended a
converse with their Gods to make their Laws be received by the people with a
greater veneration, and fix with stronger obligation the observance and
perpetuity of them; but this was not the introducing of a new Principle, but
the supposition of an old received Notion, that there was a God, and an
application of that Principle to their present design. The pretense had been
vain had not the notion of a God been ingrafted: Politicians are so little
possessed with a Reverence of God, that the first Mighty one in the Scripture,
(which may reasonably gain with the Atheist the credit of the Ancientest
History in the World) is represented without any fear of God. Genesis 10.9. Nimrod
was a mighty hunter before the Lord.
An Invader and Oppressor of his Neighbors, and reputed the Introducer of a new
Worship, and being the first that built Cities after the flood, (as Cain was
the first Builder of them before the flood,) built also Idolatry with them. And
erected a new Worship, and was so far from strengthing that Notion the people
had of God, that he endeavored to corrupt it; The first Idolatry in common
Histories being noted to proceed from that part of the World; the Ancientest
Idol being at Babylon, and supposed to be first invented by this Person: Whence
by the way perhaps Rome is in the Revelations called Babylon, with respect to
that similitude of their Saint-Worship, to the Idolatry first set up in that
place. Or if we understand it as some think that he defended his invasions
under a pretext of the preserving Religion, it assures us that there was a
notion of an object of Religion before, since no Religion can be without an
object of Worship.
It Is evident Politicians have often changed the Worship of a Nation, but it is
not upon record that the first thoughts of an object of Worship ever entered
into the minds of people by any trick of theirs.

But to return to the present Argument, the Being of a God is owned by some
Nations, that have scarce any form of policy among them. It Is as wonderful how
any wit should hit upon such an Invention, as it is absurd to ascribe it to
any humane device, if there were not prevailing Arguments to constrain the
consent. Besides, how is it possible they should deceive themselves? What is
the reason the greatest Politicians have their fears of a Deity upon their
unjust practices, as well as other men, they intended to befool? How many of
them have had forlorn Consciences upon a Death bed, upon the consideration of a
God to answer an account to in another world? Is it credible they should be
frighted by that wherewith they knew they beguiled others? No man satisfying
his pleasures would impose such a deceit upon himself o render and make
himself more miserable than the Creatures he has dominion over.

2. It is unaccountable how it should endure so long a time. That this Policy
should be so fortunate as to gain ground in the Consciences of men, and
exercise an Empire over them, and meet with such an universal success. If the
Notion of a God were a a State-Engine and introduced by some Politic Grandees
for the ease of Government, and preserving people with more facility in order,
how comes it to pass the first broachers of it were never upon record? there is
scarce a false opinion vented in the World, but may as a stream be traced to
the first head and fountain. The Inventors of particular forms of worship are
known, and the reasons why they prescribed them known; but what Grandee was the
Author of this? who can pitch a time and person that sprung up this Notion? If
any be so insolent as to impose a cheat, he can hardly be supposed to be so
successful as to deceive the whole world for many ages: Impostures pass not
free through the whole world without Examination and discovery; Falsities have
not been universally and constantly owned without control and question. If a
cheat imposes upon some Towns and Countries, he will be found out by the more
peircing enquiries of other places; and it is not easy to name any Imposture
that has walked so long in its disguise in the World, without being unmasked
and whipped out by some Nation or other: If this had been a mere trick, there
would have been as much craft in some to discern it as there was in others to
contrive it. No Man can be imagined so wise in a Kingdom, but others may be
found as wise as himself: And it is not conceivable, that so many clear sighted
men in all ages should be ignorant of it, and not endeavor to free the world
from so great a falsity. Fotherby a Theomastix, p. 64.
It cannot be found that a trick of State should always beguile men of the most
piercing insights, as well as the most credulous: That a few crafty men should
befool all the wisemen in the world; and the world lie in a belief of it and
never like to be freed from it. What is the reason the succeeding Politicians
never knew this Stratagem, since their Maxims are usually handed to their
Successors? And there is not a Richlieu but leaves his Axioms to a Mazarine.


This persuasion of the Existence of God, ows not it self to any Imposture or
subtelty of Men: If it had not been agreeable to common Nature and Reason, it
could not so long have born sway. The imposed yoke would have been cast off by
Multitudes; Men would not have charged themselves with that which was attended
with consequences displeasing to the Flesh, and hindered them from a full swing
of their rebellious Passions; such a shackle would have mouldred of it self, or
been broke by the extravigances humane nature is inclined unto: The wickedness
of men without question, has prompted them to endeavor to unmask it, if it
were a Cosenage, but could never yet be so successful as to free the world from
a persuasion, or their own Consciences from the tincture of the Existence of a
Deity. It must be therefore of an ancienter Date than the Craft of Statesmen,
and descend into the world with the first appearance of humane nature. Time,
which has rectified many Errors, improves this Notion, makes it shock down its
roots deeper and spread its branches larger

It must be a natural Truth that shines clear by the detection of those Errors
that have befooled the World, and the wit of Man is never able to name any
humane Author that first insinuated it into the beleifs of men.

3. Nor was it Fear first introduced it. Fear is the Consequent of Wickedness.
As Man was not created with any inherent sin, so he was not created with any
terrifying fears, the one had been against the Holiness of the Creator, the
other against his Goodness: Fear did not make this Opinion, but the Opinion of
the Being of a D^ity was the cause of this Fear, after his sense of angring the
Deity by his Wickedness. The Object of Fear is before the Act of Fear; there
could not be an Act of Fear exercised about the Deity, till it was believed to
be existent, and not only so, but Offended: For God as existent only, is not
the Object of Fear or Love; it is not the Existence of a thing that excites any
of those Affections, but the Relation a thing bears to us in particular. God is
good and so the object of Love, as well as just and thereby the object of Fear.
He was as much called Love, (...)
and Men's, or Mind in regard of his Goodness and Understanding, by the
Heathens, as much as by any other Name. Neither of those names were proper to
insinuate Fear; neither was Fear the first Principle that made the Heathens
worship a God; they offered Sacrifices out of Gratitude to some, as well as to
others out of Fear; the fear of Evils in the world, and the hopes of Releif and
Assistance from their Gods, and not a terrifying Fear of God, was the principal
Spring of their Worship: When Calamities from the hands of Men, or Judgments by
the influences of Heaven were upon them, they implored that which they thought
a Deity; It was not their Fear of him, but a Hope in his Goodness and
Persuasion of Remedy from him, for the averting those Evils that rendered them
Adorers of a God: If they had not had preexistent Notions of his Being and
Goodness, they would never have made Addresses to him, or so frequently sought
to that they only apprehended as a terrifying Object: Gassend. Phys. sect. 1.
l. 4. c. 2. p. 291. 292.
When you hear men calling upon God in a time of affrighting Thunder, you
cannot imagine that the fear of Thunder did first introduce the Notion of a God,
but implies that it was before apprehended by them, or stamped upon them, though
their Fear does at present actuate that Belief, and engage them in a present
Exercise of Piety: and whereas the Scripture says the fear of God is the
beginning of Wisdom, or of all Religion; Pro. 9.16. Psalm. 111.10.
it is not understood of a distracted and terrifying Fear, but a reverential
Fear of him, because of his holiness, or a worship of him, a submission to him,
and sincere seeking of him.

Well then is it not a folly for an Atheist to deny that which is the reason
and common Sentiment of the whole world, to strip himself of humanity, run
counter to his own Conscience, prefer a private before a universal Judgment,
give the lie to his own nature and reason, assert things impossible to be
proved, nay impossible to be acted, Forge irrationalities for the support of
his fancy against the common persuasion of the world and against himself and so
much of God as is manefest in him and every man Romans 1.19.
?

Jupiter est quodcunque vides, etc.
II. It is a folly to deny that which all Creatures or all things in the World
manifest. Let us view this in Scripture since we acknowledge it, and after
consider the arguments from natural reason.

The Apostle resolves it, Romans 1.19, 20. The invisible things of him from the
Creation of the World are clearly seen, being understood by the things that are
made, even his Eternal power and Godhead, so that they are without excuse: They
know or might know, by the things that were made, the Eternity and power of
God; their sense might take a Circuit about every object, and their minds
collect the being and something of the perfections of the Deity: The first
discourse of the mind upon the sight of a delicate piece of workman-ship, is
the Conclusion of the being of an Artificer and the admiration of his skill and
industry. The Apostle does not say, the invisible things of God are believed,
or they have an opinion of them, but they are seen and clearly seen: They are
like Cristal glasses which give a clear representation of the Existence of a
Deity, like that Mirror reported to be in a Temple in Arcadia, which
represented to the Spectator, not his own face, but the Image of that Deity
which he Worshipped.

The whole world is like a looking-glass, which whole and entire represents the
Image of God, and every broken piece of it, every little shred of a Creature
does the like, not only the great ones, Elephants and the Leviathan, but Ants,
Flies, Worms, whose bodies rather then names we know: The greater Cattle and
the Creeping things Genesis 1.24. Not naming there any intermediate Creature, to
direct us to view him in the smaller Letters, as well as the greater Characters
of the World. His name is Glorious and his Attributes are excellent in all the
Earth, Psalm. 8.1.
in every Creature, as the glory of the Sun is in every beam and smaller flash;
he is seen in every Insect, in every Spire of grass: The voice of the Creator
is in the most contemptible Creature: Banes in Aquin. Par. 2. Qu. 2. Artic. 2.
pa. 78. Col. 2.
The Apostle adds that they are so clearly seen, that men are inexcusable if
they have not some knowledge of God by them; if they might not certainly know
them, they might have some excuse: So that his Existence is not only probably
but demonstratively proved from the things of the world.

Especially the Heavens declare him, which God stretches out like a Curtain,
Psalm. 104.2.
or as some render the word, a Skin, whereby is signified, that Heaven is as an
open book, which was Anciently made of the skins of beasts, that by the
knowledge of them we may be taught the knowledge of God. Where Scripture was
not revealed the world served for a witness of a God; what ever arguments the
Scripture uses to prove it, are drawn from nature, (though indeed it does not
so much prove as suppose the Existence of a God) but what Arguments it uses are
from the Creatures, and particularly the Heavens, which are the public
Preachers of this Doctrine: The breath of God sounds to all the World through
those Organ-pipes. His Being is visible in their Existence, his Wisdom in their
frame, his Power in their motion, his Goodness in their usefulness: For their
voice goes to the end of the Earth, Psalm. 19.1, 2.
They have a voice, and their voice is as intelligible as any common Language.
And those are so plain Heralds of a Deity, that the Heathen mistook them for
Deities, and gave them a particular adoration which was due to that God they
declared. The first Idolatry seems to be of those Heavenly bodies, which began
probably in the time of Nimrod. In Jobs time it is certain they admired the
Glory of the Sun, and the brightness of the Moon, not without kissing their
hands, a sign of Adoration. Job. 31.26.27.
It Is evident a man may as well doubt whither there be a Sun when he sees his
beams guilding the Earth, as doubt whither there be a God when he sees his
works spread in the World.

The things in the World declare the Existence of a God.

1. In their Production, 2. Harmony, 3. Preservation, 4. Answering their
several ends.

First, 1. In their production. The declaration of the Existence of God was the
chief end for which they were Created, that the Notion of a Supreme and
Independent Eternal Being, might easier incur into the active understanding of
man from the objects of sensedispersed in every corner of the World, that he
might pay a homage and devotion to the Lord of all, Isa. 40.12, 13, 18, 19.
etc. Have you not understood from the foundation of the Earth, it is he that sits
upon the Circle of the Heaven, etc. How could this great heap be brought into
being, unless a God had framed it? Every plant, every Atome, as well as every
Star, at the first meeting whispers this in our Ears, I have a Creator, I am
witness to a Deity; who ever saw Statues or Pictures but presently thinks of a
Statuary and Limner? Who beholds Garments, Ships or Houses, but understands
there was a Weaver, a Carpenter, an Architect? Philo. ex Petav. Theolo. Dog.
Tom 1. li. 1. cap. 1, pa. 4. somewhat changed.
Who can cast his eyes about the world, but must think of that power that
formed it, and that the goodness which appears in the formation of it has a
perfect Residence in some Being? [those things that are good must flow from
something perfectly good: that which is chief in any kind is the cause of all of
that kind. Fire which is most hot is the cause of all things which are hot.
There is some being therefore which is the cause of all that Perfection, which
is in the Creature; and this is God. Aquin. 1 qu. 2. Artic. 3.] All things that
are, demonstrate something from whence they are. All things have a contracted
perfection and what they have is Communicated to them. Perfections are
parcelled out among several Creatures. Any thing that is imperfect cannot exist
of it self. We are led therefore by them to consider a fountain which bubbles
up in all perfection; a hand which distributes those several degrees of Being
and Perfection to what we see; we see that which is imperfect, our minds
conclude something perfect to exist before it; our eye sees the streams, but our
understanding rises to the head: as the eye sees the shadow, but the
understanding informs us whither it he the shadow of a man, or of a beast.

God has given us Sense to behold the objects in the World, and Understanding
to reason his Existence from them; the understanding cannot conceive a thing to
have made it self; that is against all reason. Romans 1.20.
As they are made they speak out a Maker; and cannot be a trick of chance,
since they are made with such an immense Wisdom, that is too big for the grasp
of all humane understanding. Those that doubt whither the Existence of God be
an implanted Principle, yet agree that the effects in the world lead to a
supreme and universal cause: And that if we have not the knowledge of it rooted
in our Natures, yet we have it by discourse, since by all Masters of reason a
Processus in Infinitum must be accounted impossible in subordinate causes.

This will appear in several things.

First, I. The World and every Creature had a beginning. The Scripture
Ascertains this to us; Genesis 1. By Faith we understand that the worlds were
framed by the word of God etc.
David who was not the first man gives the praise to God of his being curiously
wrought, etc. Psalm. 139.14.15. God gave being to Men and Plants and Beasts,
before they gave being to one another. He gives being to them now as the
Fountain of all being, though the several Modes of being are from the several
natures of second causes. Heb. 11.3.


It Is true indeed we are ascertained that they were made by the true God, that
they were made by his word, that they were made of nothing, and not only this
lower world wherein we live, but according to the Jewish division the world of
Men, the the world of Stars and the world of Spirits, and Souls: We do not
waver in it or doubt of it as the Heathen did in their disputes, we know they
are the workmanship of the true God, of that God we adore, not of false Gods:
By his Word, without any instrument or engine, as in earthly S^ructures; of
things which do not appear, without any preexistent matter, as all Artificial
works of men are framed.

Yet the proof of the beginning of the world is affirmed with good reason; and
if it had a beginning, it had also some higher cause than it self: Every effect
has a cause.

Daille 20. Sermon. Psa. 102.26. pa. 13. 14.
The World was not Eternal or from Eternity. The matter of the world cannot be
Eternal: Matter cannot subsist without form, nor put on any form without the
action of some cause, this cause must be in being before it acted; that which
is not cannot act. The cause of the world must necessarily exist before any
matter was endued with any form; that therefore cannot be Eternal before which
another did subsist; if it were from Eternity it would not be subject to
mutation: If the whole was from Eternity why not also the parts, what makes the
changes so visible then, if Eternity would exempt it from mutability?

1. Time cannot be infinite, and therefore the World not Eternal; Daille ut
Supra.
All motion has its beginning, if it were otherwise, we must say the number of
Heavenly revolutions of days and nights, which are past to this instant, is
actually infinite, which cannot be in nature: If it were so, it must needs be
granted, that a part is equal to the whole; because infinite being equal to
infinite, the number of days past in all Ages to the beginning of one year
being Infinite (as they would be, supposing the World had no beginning) would
by consequence be equal to the number of days, which shall pass to the end of
the next; whereas that number of days past is indeed but a part, and so a part
would be equal to the whole.

2. Generations of Men, Animals and Plants could not be from Eternity. Petar.
Theo. Dogmat. tom. 1. lib. 1. cap. 2. page 15.
If any Man say the world was from Eternity, then there must be propagations of
living Creatures in the same manner as are at this day: For without this the
World could not consist; what we see now done must have been perpetually done,
if it be done by a necessity of nature: But we see nothing now that does arise
but by a mutual propagation from another: If the world were Eternal therefore,
it must be so in all Eternity: take any particular species, suppose a man, if
men were from Eternity, then there were perpetual generations, some were born
into the World and some died: Now the natural condition of generation is, that
a man does not generate a man, nor a Sheep a Lamb, as soon as ever it self is
brought into the World, but get strength and vigor by degrees, and must arrive
to a certain stated age before they can produce the like, for whilst any thing
is little and below the due age, it cannot increase its kind; Men therefore and
other Creatures did propagate their kind, by the same Law, not as soon as ever
they were born, but in the interval of some time, and Children grew up by
degrees in the Mothers Womb till they were fit to be brought forth: If this be
so, then there could not be an Eternal succession of propagating: For there is
no Eternal continuation of time: Time is always to be conceived as having one
part before another: But that perpetuity of Nativities is always after some
time, wherein it could not be for the weakness of age: If no man then can
conceive a propagation from Eternity, there must be then a beginning of
Generation in time, and consequently the Creatures were made in time.

To express (...) in the words of one of our own. Wolscley of Atheism pa. 4^.
[If the World were Eternal, it must have been in the same posture as it is now,
in a state of Generation and Corruption; And so Corruption must have been as
Eternal as Generation, and then things that do generate and corrupt must have
Eternally been and Eternally not have been: There must be some first way to set
Generation on work.] We must lose our selves in our conceptions; we cannot
conceive a Father before a Child, as well as we cannot conceive a Child before
a Father: And reason is quite bewildred, and cannot return into a right way of
Conception till it Conceive one first of every kind: One first man, one first
animal, one first Plant from whence others do proceed. The argument is
unanswerable, and the wisest Atheist (if any Atheist can be called wise) cannot
unlose the knot. We must come to something, that is first in every kind, and
this first must have a cause, not of the same kind, but Infinite and
Independent; otherwise men run into unconceivable Labyrinths and contradictions.

Man, the Noblest Creature upon Earth, has a beginning. No Man in the World
but was some years ago no man. If every man we see had a beginning, then the
first Man had also a beginning, then the World had a beginning: For the Earth
which was made for the use of man, had wanted that end for which it was made.
We must pitch upon some one man that was unborn, that first man must either be
Eternal, Petav. ut supr. p. 10.
that cannot be, for he that has no beginning has no end; or must spring out
of the Earth as Plants and Trees do: That cannot be: Why should not the Earth
produce men to this day, as it does Plants and Trees? He was therefore made;
and whatsoever is made has some cause that made it, which is God. Damason
If the World were uncreated it were then immutable, but every Creature upon
the Earth is in a continual flux, always changing: If things be mutable, they
were Created, if Created they were made by some Author; whatsoever has a
beginning, must have a maker, if the World has a beginning, there was then a
time when it was not; it must have some cause to produce it. That which makes
is before that which is made, and this is God.

Secondly, II. Which will appear further in this proposition, No Creature can
make it self: The world could not make it self.

If every man had a beginning, every man then was once nothing; he could not
then make himself, because nothing cannot be the cause of something, Psa.
100.3. The Lord he is God he has made us and not we our selves, [whatsoever
begun in time, was not; and when it was nothing, it had nothing, and could do
nothing: And therefore could never give to it self nor to any other to be, or
to be able to do: For then it gave what it had not, and did what it could not.
Petav. Theo. Dog. tom. 1. lib. 1. cap. 2. page 14.
Since reason must acknowledge a first of every kind, a first Man, etc. it must
acknowledge him Created and made, not by himself: why have not other men since
rise up by themselves? not by Chance; why has not Chance produced the like in
that long time the World has stood? If we never knew any thing give being to
it self, how can we Imagine any thing ever could? If the chiefest part of this
lower World cannot, nor any part of it has been known to give being to it
self, then the whole cannot be supposed to give any being to it self: Man did
not form himself: His body is not from himself, it would then have the power
of moving it self, but that is not able to live or act without the presence of
the Soul: Whilst the Soul is present the body moves, when that is absent, the
body lies as a senseless log, not having the least action or motion. His Soul
could not form it self, can that which cannot form the least mote, the least
grain of dust, form it self a nobler substance than any upon the Earth?

This will be evident to every Man's reason, if we consider

1. Nothing can act before it be. The first Man was not, and therefore could
not make himself to be: For any thing to produce it self is to act; if it acted
before it was, it was then something and nothing at the same time; it then had
a being before it had a being; it acted when it brought it self into being. How
could it act without a being, without it was? So that if it were the cause of
it self, it must be before it self as well as after it self; it was before it
was; it was as a cause before it was as an effect. Action always supposes a
priciple from whence it flows; as nothing has no Existence, so it has no
operation; there must be therefore something of real Existence to give a Being
to those things that are, and every cause must be an effect of some other
before it be a cause: To be and not be at the same time, is a manifest
contradiction, which would be, if any thing made it self: That which makes is
always before that which is made: Who will say the House is before the
Carpenter, or the Picture before the Limbner? The world as a Creature, must be
before it self as a Creature.

2. That which does not understand it self and order it self could not make it
self. If the first Man fully understood his own nature, the excellency of his
own Soul, the manner of its operations, why was not that understanding conveyed
to his posterity? Are not many of them found, who understand their own nature,
almost as little as a Beast understands it self; or a Rose understands its own
sweetness; or a Tulip its own Colors? The Scripture indeed gives us an account
how this came about, viz. by the deplorable Rebellion of Man, whereby Death was
brought upon them (a Spiritual Death, which includes ignorance as well as an
inability to Spritual action Genesis 2.17. Psalm. 49.8.
). Thus he fell from his Honor and became like the Beasts that perish, and not
retaining God in his knowledge, retained not himself in his own knowledge.

But what reply can an Atheist make to it, who acknowledges no higher cause
than nature? If the Soul made it self, how comes it to be so muddy, so wanting
in its knowledge of it self, and of other things? If the Soul made its own
understanding whence did the defect arise? If some first principle was settled
by the first man in himself, where was the stop that he did not implant all in
his own mind, and consequently in the minds of all his descendents? Our Souls
know little of themselves, little of the World, are every day upon new
enquiries, have little satisfaction in themselves, meet with many an invincible
rub in their way; and when they seem to come to some resolution in some cases,
stagger again, and like a stone rould up to the top of the Hill, quickly find
themselves again at the foot. How come they to be so purblind in Truth? So
short of that which they Judge true goodness? How comes it to pass they cannot
order their own Rebellious affections, and suffer the rains they have to hold
over their affections to be taken out of their hands by the unruly fancy and
flesh?

This no man that denies the being of a God, and the Revelation in Scripture
can give an account of. Blessed be God that we have the Scripture, which gives
us an account of those things, that all the wit of men could never inform us
of; and that when they are discovered and known by Revelation, they appear not
contrary to reason.

3. If the first Man made himself, how came he to limit himself? If he gave
himself being, why did he not give himself all the perfections and Ornaments of
being? Nothing that made it self could sit down contented with a little, but
would have had as much power to give it self that which is less, as to give it
self being, when it was nothing. The exellencies it wanted had not been more
difficult to gain than the other which it possessed as belonging to its nature.
If the first man had been independent upon another, and had his perfection from
himself, he might have acquired that perfection he wanted as well as have
bestowed upon himself that perfection he had; and then there would have been no
bounds set to him. He would have been Omniscient and Immutable. He might have
given himself what he would; if he had had the setting his own bounds, he would
have set none at all; For what should restrain him? No man now wants Ambition
to be what he is not; and if the first man had not been determined by another,
but had given himself being, he would not have remained in that determinate
being, no more than a Toad would remain a Toad, if it had power to make it self
a man, and that power it would have had, if it had given it self a being.
Whatsoever gives it self being, would give it self all degrees of being, and so
would have no imperfection, because every imperfection, is a want of some
degree of being. Therefore the Heathens called God (...) the only Being. Other
things were not beings, because they had not all degrees of being.
He that could give himself matter and life, might give himself every thing.
The giving of life is an act of Omnipotence, and what is Omnipotent in one
thing, may be in all. Besides, if the first man had made himself, he would have
conveyed himself to all his posterity in the same manner, every man would have
had all the perfections of the first man, as every Creature has the
perfections of the same kind, from whence it naturally Issues, all are desirous
to communicate what they can to their posterity. Communicative goodness belongs
to every nature. Every plant propagates its kind in the same perfection it has
itself; and the nearer any thing comes to a rational nature, the greater
affection it has to that which descends from it; therefore this affection
belongs to a rational nature much more. The first man therefore, if he had had
power to give himself being, and consequently all perfection, he would have had
as much power to convey it down to his posterity; no impediment could have
stopped his way; then all Souls proceeding from that first man would have been
equally intellectual. What should hinder them from inheriting the same
perfections? whence should they have diverse qualifications and differences in
their understandings? No man then would have been subject to those weaknesses,
doubtings, and unsatisfied desires of knowledge and perfection. But being all
Souls are not alike, it is certain they depend upon some other cause for the
communication of that excellency they have. If the perfections of Man be so
contracted and kept within certain bounds, it is certain that they were not in
his own power, and so were not from himself. Whatsoever has a determinate
being must be limited by some superior cause. There is therefore some superior
power, that has thus determined the Creature by set bounds and distinct
measures, and has assigned to every one its proper nature, that it should not
be greater or less than it is; who has said of every one as of the waves of
the Sea, Job 38.11.
Hitherto shall thou come, but no further; and this is God. Man could not have
reserved any perfection from his Posterity. For since he does propagate not by
choice but nature, he could no more have kept back any perfection from them,
than he could, as he pleased, have given any perfection belonging to his nature
to them.

4. That which has power to give it self being, cannot want power to preserve
that being. Preservation is not more difficult than Creation. If the first Man
made himself, why did he not preserve himself? He is not now among the living
in the world. How came he to be so feeble as to sink into the Grave? Why did he
not inspire himself with new heat and moisture, and fill his languishing limbs
and declining body with new strength? Why did he not chase away Diseases and
Death at the first approach? What Creature can find the dust of the first Man?
All his posterity traverse the Stage and retire again; in a short space their
Age departs, and is removed from them as a Shepherds Tent, and is cut off with
pining Sickness. Isa. 38.12.
The life of Man is as a wind, and like a cloud that is consumed and vanishes
away, Job 7.6, 7, 8, 9.
The Eye that sees him shall see him no more, he returns not to his house,
neither does his place know him any more The Scripture gives us the reason of
this, and lays it upon the score of sin against his Creator; which no Man
without revelation can give any satisfactory account of.

Had the first Man made himself, he had been sufficient for himself, able to
support himself without the assistance of any creature. He would not have
needed animals and plants, and other helps to nourish and refresh him, nor
Medicines to cure him. He could not be beholding to other things for his
support, which he is certain he never made for himself. His own nature would
have continued that vigor, which once he had conferred upon himself. He would
not have needed the heat and light of the Sun; he would have wanted nothing
sufficient for himself in himself; he needed not have sought without himself
for his own preservation and comfort. What depends upon another is not of it
self, and what depends upon things inferior to it self is less of it self.
Since nothing can subsist of it self, since we see those things upon which Man
depends for his nourishment and subsistence, growing and decaying, starting
into the world and retiring from it, as well as man himself; some preserving
cause must be concluded, upon which all depends.

5. If the first Man did produce himself, why did he not produce himself before?

It has been already proved, that he had a beginning, and could not be from
Eternity. Why then did he not make himself before? Not because he would not.
For having no being, he could have no will; he could neither be willing nor not
willing. If he could not then, how could he afterward? if it were in his own
power he could have done it, he would have done it; if it were not in his own
power, then it was in the power of some other cause, and that is God. How came
he by that power to produce himself? If the power of producing himself were
communicated by another, then Man could not be the cause of himself. That is
the cause of it which communicated that power to it. But if the power of being
was in and from himself and in no other, nor communicated to him, man would
always have been in act, and always have Existed; no hinderance can be
conceived. For that which had the power of being in it self was invincible by
any thing that should stand in the way of its own being.

We may conclude from hence, the excellency of the Scripture; that it is a Word
not to be refused credit. It gives us the most rational account of things in
the 1. and 2. of Genesis, which nothing in the world else is able to do.

Thirdly, III. Proposition, no Creature could make the world. No Creature can
create another. If it creates of nothing, it is then Omnipotent and so not a
Creature. If it makes something of matter unfit for that which is produced out
of it, then the inquiry will be, who was the cause of the matter? and so we
must arrive to some uncreated being, the cause of all. Whatsoever gives being
to any other must be the highest being and must possess all the perfections of
that which it gives being to. what visible Creature is there which possesses
the perfections of the whole world? If therefore an invisible Creature made the
world, the same enquiries will return whence that Creature had its being? for
he could not make himself. If any Creature did Create the World, he must do it
by the strength and virtue of another, which first gave him being; and this is
God. For whatsoever has its Existence and virtue of acting from another, is
not God. If it has its virtue from another it is then a second cause, and so
supposes a first cause. It must have some cause of it self, or be Eternally
Existent. If Eternally Existent, it is not a second cause, but God; if not
Eternally Existent, we must come to something at length which was the cause of
it, or else be bewildred without being able to give an account of any thing. We
must come at last to an Infinite Eternal Independent Being, that was the first
cause of this Structure and Fabric wherein we and all Creatures dwell. The
Scripture proclaims this aloud, Isa. 45.6.7. Deuteronomy. 4.35.
I am the Lord and there is none else: I Form the light and I Create darkness.
Man the Noblest Creature cannot of himself make a man, the chiefest part of the
World. If our Parents only without a Superior power made our Bodies or Souls,
they would know the frame of them; as he that makes a Lock knows the Wards of
it; he that makes any curious piece of Arras, knows how he setts the various
colors together, and how many threads went to each division in the Web; he
that makes a Watch, having the Idea of the whole work in his mind, knows the
motions of it and the reason of those motions. But both Parents and Children
are equally ignorant of the nature of their Souls and Bodies, and of the reason
of their motions. God only that had the Supreme hand in forming us, in whose
Book all our members are written, Psalm. 139.16.
which in continuance were fashioned, knows what we all are ignorant of. If man
has in an ordinary course of generation his being chiefly from an higher cause
than his Parents, the World then certainly had its being from some infinitely
wise intelligent Being, which is God. If it were, as some fancy, made by an
Assembly of Atoms, there must be some infinite intelligent cause that made
them, some cause that separated them, some cause that mingled them together for
the piling up so comely a structure as the world. It Is the most absurd thing to
think they should meet togeither by hazard, and rank themselves in that order
we see without a higher and a wise agent. So that no Creature could make the
world. For supposing any Creature was formed before this visible world and
might have a hand in disposing things, yet he must have a cause of himself, and
must act by the virtue and strength of another; and this is God.

Fourthly, IV. Proposition. From hence it follows, that there is a first cause
of things which we call God. There must be something supreme in the order of
nature, something which is greater than all, which has nothing beyond it or
above it; otherwise we must run in infinitum. We see not a River but we
conclude a Fountain; a Watch but we conclude an Artificer. As all number begins
from unity, so all the multitude of things in the world begins from some unity,
Oneness as the principle of it. It Is natural to arise from a view of those
things, to the conception of a nature more perfect than any. As from heat mixed
with cold, and light mixed with darkness, men conceive and arise in their
understandings to an intense heat and a pure light: And from a Corporeal or
bodily substance joined with an incorporeal, (as man is an earthly body, and a
Spiritual Soul,) we ascend to a conception of a substance purely incorporeal
and Spiritual. So from a multitude of things in the world, Reason leads us to
one choice being above all. And since in all natures in the World, we still
find a superior nature; the nature of one beast, above the nature of another;
the nature of man above the nature of beasts; and some invisible nature, the
worker of strange effects in the Air and Earth, which cannot be ascribed to any
visible cause, we must suppose some nature above all those of unconceivable
perfection.

Coccei sum. Theol. cap. 8. 33. etc.
Every Sceptick, one that doubts whither there be any thing real or no in the
World, that counts every thing an appearance, must necessarily own a first
cause. They cannot reasonably doubt, but that there is some first cause which
makes the things appear so to them. They cannot be the cause of their own
appearance. For as nothing can have a being from it self, so nothing can appear
by it self and its own force. Nothing can be and not be, at the same time. But
that which is not and yet seems to be; if it be the cause why it seems to be
what it is not, it may be said to be and not to be. But certainly such persons
must think themselves to exist. If they do not, they cannot think; and if they
do exist, they must have some cause of that Existence. So that which way soever
we turn our selves, we must in reason own a first cause of the World.

Well then might the Psalmist term an Atheist a fool, that disowns a God
against his own reason. Without owning a God as the first cause of the world,
no man can give any tolerable or satisfactory account of the world to his own
reason.

And this first cause,

1. Must necessarily exist. Petav. Theol. Dog. Tom. 1. lib. 1. cap. 2. pa. 10.
11.
It Is necessary that he by whom all things are, should be before all things and
nothing before him. And if nothing be before him, he comes not from any other;
and then he always was, and without beginning. He is from himself; not that he
once was not but because he has not his Existence from another, and therefore
of necessity he did exist from all Eternity. Nothing can make it self, or bring
it self into being; therefore there must be some being which has no cause,
that depends upon no other, never was produced by any other, but was what he is
from Eternity, and cannot be otherwise; and is not what he is by will, but
nature, necessarily existing, and always existing without any capacity or
possibility ever not to be.

2. Must be infinitely perfect. Since man knows he is an imperfect being, he
must suppose the perfections he wants, are seated in some other being which
has limited him, and upon which he depends. Whatsoever we conceive of
excellency or perfection, must be in God. For we can conceive no perfection but
what God has given us a power to conceive. And he that gave us a power to
conceive a transcendent perfection above whatever we saw or heard of, has much
more in himself; else he could not give us such a conception.

Secondly, II. As the production of the world, so the harmony of all the parts
of it declare the being and wisdom of a God. Without the acknowledging God the
Atheist can give no account of those things. The multitude, elegancy, variety,
and beauty of all things are steps whereby to ascend to one fountain and
orignal of them.

Is it not a folly to deny the being of a wise Agent, who sparkles in the
beauty and motions of the Heavens; rides upon the wings of the wind, and is
writ upon the flowers and fruits of Plants. As the cause is known by the
effects, so the wisdom of the cause is known by the elegancy of the work, the
proportion of the parts to one another. Who can imagine the world could be
rashly made, and without consultation, which in every part of it is so
Artificially framed? Philo. Judae. Petav. Theolog. Dogmat. Tom. 1. lib. 1. cap.
1. page 9.
No work of Art springs up of its own accord. The world is framed by an
excellent Art, and therefore made by some skilful Artist. As we hear not a
melodious instrument, but we conclude there is a Musician that touches it, as
well as some skilful hand that framed, and disposed it for those Lessons. And
no man that hears the pleasant sound of a Lute but will fix his thoughts, not
upon the Instrument it self, but upon the skill of the Artist that made it, and
the art of the Musician that strikes it, though he should not see the first,
when he saw the Lute, nor see the other when he hears the harmony. So a
rational Creature confines not his thoughts to his sense when he sees the Sun
in its Glory and the Moon walking in its brightness; but rises up in a
contemplation and admiration of that infinite Spirit that composed, and filled
them with such sweetness.

This appears.

1. In the linking contrary qualities together. All things are compounded of
the Elements. Those are endued with contrary qualities, dryness and moisture,
heat and cold. These would always be contending with and infesting one another
rights, till the contest ended in the destruction of one or both. Where fire is
predominant, it would suck up the water; where water is prevalent, it would
quench the fire. The heat would wholly expel the cold, or the cold overpower
the heat. Yet we see them chained and linkt one within another in every body
upon the Earth, and rendering mutual offices for the benefit of that body
wherein they are seated, and all conspiring together in their particular
quarrels for the public interest of the body. How could those contraries that
of themselves observe no order, that are always preying upon one another,
jointly accord together of themselves, for one common end, if they were not
linkt in a common band, and reduced to that order by some incomprehensible
wisdom and power, which keeps a hand upon them, orders their motions and
directs their events, and makes them friendly pass into one another Natures?
Confusion had been the result of the discord and diversity of their Natures. No
composition could have been of those conflicting qualities for the frame of any
body, nor any harmony arose from so many jarring strings, if they had not been
reduced, into concord by one that is supreme Lord over them, and knows how to
dispose their varieties and enmities for the public good. Athanasius Petav.
Theol. Dog. Tom. 1. lib. 1. cap. 1. page 4. 5.
If a man should see a large City or Country consisting of great multitudes of
men of different tempers, full of Frauds and Factions and Animosities in their
natures against one another, yet living together in good order and peace,
without oppressing and invading one another and joining together for the
public good; he would presently conclude, there were some excellent Governor,
who tempered them by his Wisdom, and preserved the public Peace, though he had
never yet beheld him with his eye. It Is as necessary to conclude a God, who
moderates the contrarieties in the world; as to conclude a wise Prince who
overrules the contrary dispositions in a state, making every one to keep his
own bounds and confines. Things that are contrary to one another subsist in an
admirable order.

2. In the subserviency of one thing to another. Gassend. Physic. sect. 1. lib.
4. cap. 2. page 315.
All the Members of living Creatures are curiously fitted for the service of
one another, destined to a particular end, and endued with a virtue to attain
that end, and so distinctly placed, that one is no hinderance to the other in
its operations. Is not this more admirable than to be the work of chance, which
is incapable to settle such an order and fix particular and general ends,
causing an exact correspondency of all the parts with one another, and every
part to conspire together for one common end? One thing is fitted for another.
The Eye is fitted for the Sun, and the Sun fitted for the Eye. Several sorts of
food are fitted for several Creatures, and those Creatures fitted with Organs
for the partaking that food.

1. Subserviency of Heavenly bodies. Lessius.
The Sun, the heart of the world, is not for it self but for the good of the
World, as the heart of man is for the good of the body. How conveniently is the
Sun placed, at a distance from the Earth, and the upper Heavens, to enlighten
the Stars above and enliven the Earth below? If it were either higher or lower,
one part would want its influences. It Is not in the higher parts of the Heavens;
the Earth then which lives and fructifies by its influence would have been
exposed to a perpetual Winter and chilness, unable to have produced any thing
for the sustenance of man or beast. If seated lower, the Earth had been parched
up, the world made uninhabitable and long since had been consumed to ashes by
the strength of its heat. Consider the motion as well as the Situation of the
Sun. Had it stood still, one part of the World had been cherished by its beams,
and the other left in a desolate Widow-hood, in a disconsolate darkness.
Besides, the Earth would have had no shelter from its perpendicular beams
striking perpetually and without any remission upon it. The same incommodities
would have followed upon its fixedness as upon its too great nearness. By a
constant day the beauty of the Stars had been obscured, the knowledge of their
motions been prevented, and a considerable part of the Glorious wisdom of the
Creator in those choice works of his fingers Psalm. 8.3.
had been veiled from our eyes. It moves in a fixed line, visits all parts of
the Earth, scatters in the day its refreshing blessings in every creek of the
Earth, and removes the mask from the other beauties of Heaven in the night,
which sparkle out to the glory of the Creator. It spreads its Light, warms the
Earth, cherishes the Seeds, excites the Spirit in the Earth, and brings Fruit
to maturity. View also the Air, the vast extent between Heaven and Earth, which
serves for a Watercourse, a Cistern for water, to bedew the face of the
Sunburned Earth, to satisfy the desolate ground and to cause the bud of the
tender herb to spring forth. Job. 38.25 27.
Could Chance appoint the Clouds of the Air to interpose as fans between the
scorching heat of the Sun, and the faint bodies of the Creatures? Can that be
the Father of the Rain or beget the drops of dew? Job. 38.28.
Could any thing so blind settle those ordinances of Heaven for the
preservation of Creatures on the Earth? Can this either bring or stay the
bottles of Heaven, when the dust grows into hardness, and the Clods cleave fast
together? Job. 38.37.38.


2. Subserviency of the lower World, the Earth, and Sea, which was Created to
be inhabited, Isa. 45.18. The Sea affords water to the Rivers, the Rivers like
so many veins are spread through the whole body of the Earth to refresh and
enable it to bring forth fruit for the sustenance of man and beast, Psalm.
104.10.11. He sends the Springs into the Valleys, which run among the Hills,
they give drink to every Beast of the Field, the wild Asses quench their
thirst. He causes the Grass to grow for the Cattle, and the herb for the
service of man, that he may bring forth food out of the Earth, v. 14. The Trees
are provided for shades against the extremity of heat, a refuge for the panting
beasts, an habitation for Birds wherein to make their nests. ver. 17. and a
Basket for their provision. How are the Valleys and Mountains of the Earth
disposed for the pleasure and profit of man? Every year are the Feilds covered
with Harvests, for the nourishing the Creatures, no part is Barren but
beneficial to man. The Mountains that are not clothed with grass for his food
are set with stones to make him an Habitation; they have their peculiar
services of metals and minerals for the convenience and comfort and benefit of
man. Things which are not fit for his food are medicines for his cure under
some painful sickness. Where the Earth brings not forth Corn, it brings forth
Roots, for the service of other Creatures. Wood abounds more in those Countries
where the cold is stronger than in others. Can this be the result of Chance, or
not rather of an infinite Wisdom?

Consider the usefulness of the Sea, for the supply of Rivers to refresh the
Earth. Which go up by the Mountains and down by the Valleys into the place God
has founded for them, Psalm. 104.8. A storehouse for fish for the nourishment
of other Creatures, a shop of Medicines for cure, and Pearls for ornament. The
band that ties remote Nations together, by giving opportunity of passage to and
commerce with one another. How should that natural inclination of the Sea to
cover the Earth, submit to this subserviency to the Creatures? Who has pounded
in this fluid mass of Water in certain limits, and confined it to its own
Channel, for the accommodation of such Creatures, who by its common Law can
only be upon the Earth? Naturally the Earth was covered with the deep as with a
Garment, the waters stood above the Mountains. Who set a bound that they might
not pass over, that they return not again to cover the Earth? Psa. 104.6.9.
Was it blind Chance, or an Infinite Power, that shut up the Sea with doors,
and made thick darkness a swaddling band for it, and said hitherto shall thou
come and no further, and here shall thy proud waves be staid? Job. 38.8.9.11.


All things are so ordered that they are not propter se but propter aliud. What
advantage accrues to the Sun by its unwearied rouling about the World? Does it
increase the perfection of its nature by all its Circuits? No, but it serves
the inferior world, it impregnates things by its heat. Not the most abject
thing, but has its end and use. There is a strait connection, the Earth could
not bring forth fruit without the Heavens, the Heavens could not water the
Earth without vapors from it.

3. All this Subserviency of Creatures centers in man. Other Creatures are
served by those things as well as our selves, and they are provided for their
nourishment and refreshment as well as ours; Amirald. de Trinitate pa. 13. and
page 18.
yet both they and all Creatures meet in man as lines in their Centers: Things
that have no life or sense are made for those that have both life and sense,
and those that have life and sense are made for those that are endued with
reason. When the Psalmist admiringly considers the Heavens, Moon and Stars, he
intimates man to be the end for which they were Created, Psalm. 8.3, 4. What is
man that thou art mindful of him? He expresses more particularly the Dominion
that Man has over the beasts of the field, the fowl of the Air, and whatsoever
passes through the paths of the Sea, verse. 6.7.8. and concludes from thence the
excellency of Gods Name in all the Earth. All things in the World one way or
other Center in an usefulness for man, some to feed him, some to clothe him,
some to delight him, others to instruct him, some to exercise his wit, and
others his strength. Since man did not make them, he did not also order them
for his own use. If they conspire to serve him who never made them, they direct
man to acknowledge an other, who is the joint Creator both of the Lord and the
Servants under his Dominion. And therefore as the inferior natures are ordered
by an invisible hand for the good of man; so the nature of man is by the same
hand ordered to acknowledge the Existence and the glory of the Creator of him.
This visible order man knows he did not constitute, he did not settle those
Creatures in subserviency to himself; they were placed in that order before he
had any acquaintance with them, or Existence of himself, which is a question
God puts to Job, to consider of, Job 38.4. Where wast thou when I laid the
foundation of the Earth, declare if thou have understanding? All is ordered for
Man's use, the Heavens answer to the Earth as a roof to a floor, both composing
a delightful habitation for man; vapors ascend from the Earth, and the Heaven
concocts them, and returns them back in welcome showers for the supplying of
the Earth. Jer. 10.13.
The light of the Sun descends to beautify the Earth, and imploys its heat to
midwife its fruits, and this for the good of the community, whereof Man is the
head; and though all Creatures have distinct natures and must act for
particular ends according to the Law of their Creation; yet there is a joint
combination for the good of the whole, as the common end; just as all the
Rivers in the world, from what part soever they come, whether North or South,
fall into the Sea for the supply of that mass of waters; which loudly proclaims
some infinitely wise nature, who made those things in so exact an harmony.
Morn. de verit. cap. 1. page 7.
[As in a Clock, the hammer which strikes the bell, leads us to the next Wheel,
that to another, the little wheel to a greater, whence it derives its motion,
this at last to the spring, which acquaints us that there was some Artist that
framed them in this subordination to one another for this orderly motion.]

4. This order or Subserviency is regular and uniforme. Every thing is
determined to its peculiar nature. Amiraut.
The Sun and Moon make day and night, months and years, determine the seasons,
never are defective in coming back to their station and place, they wander not
from their Roads, shock not against one another, nor hinder one another in the
functions assigned them. From a small grain or seed a Tree springs, with body,
root, bark, leaves, fruit of the same shape, figure, smell, taste; that there
should be as many parts in one as in all of the same kind, and no more, and
that in the Womb of a sensitive Creature, should be formed one of the same
kind, with all the due members and no more, and the Creature that produces it
knows not how it is formed or how it is perfected. If we say this is nature; this
nature is an intelligent being; if not, how can it direct all causes to such
uniforme ends. If it be intelligent, this nature must be the same we call God,
Who ordered every herb to yield seed, and every fruit-Tree to yield fruit after
its kind, and also every Beast and every creeping thing after its kind, Genesis
11, 12, 24.

And every thing is determined to its particular season. The sap rises from
the Root at its appointed time, enlivening and clothing the branches with a
new Garment at such a time of the Suns returning, not wholly hindered by any
accidental coldness of the weather, it being often colder at its return, than
it was at the Suns departure. All things have their Seasons of flourishing,
budding, blossoming, bringing forth fruit; they ripen in their seasons, cast
their leaves at the same time; throw off their old clothes, and in the spring
appear with new Garments, but still in the same fashion.

Coccei. sum. Theol. cap. 8. 77.
The Winds and the Rain have their seasons and seem to be administered by laws
for the profit of man: No satisfactory cause of those things can be ascribed to
the Earth, the Sea, to the Air or Stars. Can any understand the spreading of
his clouds or the noise of his Tabernacle? Job 38.29. The natural reason of
those things cannot be demonstrated without recourse to an infinite and
intelligent being: Nothing can be rendered capable of the direction of those
things but a God.

This regularity in Plants and Animals is in all Nations. The Heavens have the
same motion in all parts of the world; all men have the same Law of nature in
their mind; all Creatures are stamped with the same law of Creation: In all
parts the same Creatures serve for the same use; and though there be different
Creatures in India and Europe, yet they have the same subordination, the same
subserviency to one another, and ultimately to man; which shows that there is a
God, and but one God, who tunes all those different strings to the same notes
in all places. Is it nature merely conducts these natural causes in due
measures to their proper effects, without interfering with one another? Can
mere nature be the cause of those musical proportions of time? You may as well
conceive a Lute to sound its own strings without the hand of an Artist; a City
well Governed without a Governor; an Army keep its Stations without a General,
as imagine so exact an order, without an Orderer: Would any Man, when he hears
a Clock strike, by sit intervals, the hour of the day, imagine this regularity
in it, without the direction of one that had understanding to manage it? He
would not only regard the motion of the Clock, but commend the diligence of the
Clock-Keeper.

5. This order and Subserviency is constant. Children change the customs and
manners of their Fathers: Magistrates change the Laws they have received from
their Ancestors, and enact new ones in their room: But in the world all things
consist as they were created at the beginning; The Law of nature in the
Creatures has met with no change. Petav. ex Athanas. T^eol. Dog. tom. 1. lib.
1. cap. 1. 4.
Who can behold the Sun rising in the morning; the Moon shining in the night;
increasing and decreasing in its due spaces; the Stars in their regular motions
night after night, for all ages, and yet deny a President over them? And this
motion of the Heavenly bodies, being contrary to the nature of other Creatures,
who move in order to rest; must be from some higher cause. But those ever since
the settling in their places, have been perpetually rounding the world: (Whether
it be the Sun, or the Earth that moves, it is all one: Whence have either of
them this constant and uniform motion?)
What nature, but one powerful and intelligent, could give that perpetual
motion to the Sun, which being bigger than the Earth a hundred sixty six times,
runs many thousand miles with a mighty swiftness in the space of an hour, with
an unwearied diligence, performing its daily task, and as a strong man,
rejoicing to run its race, for above five thousand years together, without
intermission, but in the time of Joshuah? Josh. 10.13.
It Is not natures Sun, but Gods Sun, which he makes to rise upon the just and
unjust. Mat. 5.45.


So a Plant receives its nourishment from the Earth, sends forth its juice to
every branch, forms a bud which spreads it into a blossom and flower, the
leaves of this drop off, and leave a fruit of the same color and taste, every
year; which being ripened by the Sun, leaves seeds behind it for the
propagation of its like, which contains in the nature of it, the same kind of
buds, blossoms, fruit which were before; and being nourished in the Womb of the
Earth, and quickened by the power of the Sun, discovers it self at length, in
all the progresses, and motions which its predecessor did: Thus in all ages, in
all places, every year it performs the same task, spinns out fruit of the same
color, taste, virtue, to refresh the several Creatures, for which they are
provided.

This settled state of things comes from that God who laid the foundations of
the Earth, that it should not be removed for ever; Psalm. 104.5.
and set ordinances for them to act by a stated law; Job. 38.33.
according to which they move as if they understood themselves to have made a
Covenant with their Creator. Jer. 33.20


3. Add to this union of contrary qualities, and the subserviency of one thing
to another, the admirable variety and diversity of things in the World. What
variety of Metals, living Creatures, Plants, what variety and distinction in
the shape of their leaves, flowers, smell, resulting from them? Who can number
up the several sorts of Beasts on the Earth, Birds in the Air, Fish in the Sea?
How various are their motions? Some Creep, some Go, some Fly, some Swim; And in
all this variety each Creature has Organs or members, fitted for their
peculiar motion. If you consider the multitude of Stars, which shine like
Jewels in the Heavens, their different magnitudes; Or the variety of colors in
the Flowers and Tapestry of the Earth, you could no more conclude they made
themselves, or were made by chance, than you can imagine a piece of Arras, with
a diversity of figures and colors, either wove it self, or were knit together
by hazard.

How delicious is the sap of the Vine, when turned into Wine, above that of a
Crab? Both have the same Womb of Earth to conceive them, both agree in the
nature of Wood and Twigs, as Channels to convay it into fruit: What is that
which makes the one so sweet, the other so sower, or makes that sweet, which
was a few weeks before unpleasantly sharp? Is it the Earth? No: They both have
the same soil; the Branches may touch each other; the strings of their Roots
may under ground entwine about one another. Is it the Sun? both have the same
beams: Why is not the taste and color of the one as gratifying as the other? Is
it the root? The taste of that is far different from that of the fruit it bears.
Why do they not when they have the same Soil, the same Sun, and stand near one
another, borrow something from one another natures? No reason can be rendered,
but that there is a God of infinite Wisdom, has determined this variety, and
bound up the nature of each Creature within it self. Amirald. de Trinitate pa.
21.
[Everything follows the Law of its Creation, and it is worthy observation,
that the Creator of them has not given that power to Animals, which arise from
different species, to propagate the like to themselves; As Mules that arise
from different species: No reason can be rendered of this, but the fixed
determination of the Creator, that those species which were Created by him
should not be lost in those mixtures, which are contrary to the Law of the
Creation.] This cannot possibly be ascribed to that which is commonly called
nature, but unto the God of nature, who will not have his Creatures exceed
their bounds or come short of them.

Now since among those varieties, there are somethings better than other, yet
all are good in their kind, and partake of Goodness, Genesis 1.31.
there must be something better and more execellent than all those, from whom
they derive that goodness, which inheres in their nature and is communicated by
them to others: And this excellent Being must inherit in an eminent way in his
own nature, the goodness of all those varieties, since they made not
themselves, but were made by another. All that goodness which is scattered in
those varieties must be infinitely concentred in that nature, which distributed
those various perfections to them, Psalm. 94.9. He that Planted the Ear shall
not he hear; he that formed the Eye, shall not he see; he that teaches Man
knowledge shall not he know? The Creator is greater than the Creature, and
whatsoever is in his effects, is but an Impression of some excellency in
himself; There is therefore some chief fountain of goodness, whence all those
various goodnesses in the world do flow.

From all this it follows, if there be an Order, and Harmony, there must be an
Orderer, one that made the Earth by his Power, established the world by his
Wisdom, and stretched out the Heavens by his Discretion, Jer. 10.12. Order
being the effect, cannot be the cause of it self: Order is the disposition of
things to an end, and is not intelligent, but implies an intelligent Orderer:
And therefore it is as certain that there is a God, as it is certain there is
order in the world: Order is an effect of Reason and Counsel; this reason and
Counsel must have its residence in some being, before this order was fixed: The
things ordered are always distinct from that Reason and Counsel whereby they
are ordered, and also after it as the effect is after the cause. No Man begins
a piece of work, but he has the Model of it in his own mind: No Man builds an
House, or makes a Watch, but he has the Idea or Copy of it in his own head:
This beautiful world bespeaks an Idea of it, or a model: Since there is such a
magnificent wisdom in the make of each Creature, and the proportion of one
Creature to another, this model must be before the World, as the pattern is
always before the thing that is wrought by it. This therefore must be in some
intelligent and wise agent, and this is God: Since the reason of those things
exceed the reason and all the art of Man, who can ascribe them to any inferior
cause? Chance it could not be; the motions of Chance are not constant, and at
set seasons, as the motions of Creatures are: That which is by Chance is
contingent, this is necessary; Uniformity can never be the birth of Chance: Who
can imagine that all the parts of a Watch can meet together and put themselves
in order and motion by Chance? [ Lactant.
Nor can it be nature only which indeed is a disposition of second causes: If
nature has not an understanding, it cannot work such effects: If nature
therefore uses Counsel to begin a thing, reason to dispose it, art to effect
it, virtue to complete it and power to Govern it, why should it be called
nature rather than God?] Nothing so sure as that that which has an end to
which it tends, has a cause by which it is ordered to that end: Since
therefore all things are ordered in subserviency to the good of man, they are
so ordered by him that made both man and them; And man must acknowledge the
wisdom and goodness of his Creator, and act in subserviency to His glory, as
other Creatures act in subserviency to His good: Sensible objects were not made
only to gratify the sense of man, but to hand something to his mind as he is a
rational Creature; to discover God to him as an object of love and desire to be
enjoyed: Coccei. sum. Theol. cap. 8. 63.64.
If this be not the effect of it, the order of the Creature, as to such an one,
is in vain, and falls short of its true end.

To conclude this; As when a Man comes into a Palace, built according to the
exactest rule of art, and with an unexceptionable convenience for the
Inhabitants, he would acknowledge both the being and skill of the Builder: So
whosoever shall observe the disposition of all the parts of the World, their
connection, comelines, the variety of seasons, the swarms of different
Creatures, and the mutual offices they render to one another, cannot conclude
less, than that it was contrived by an Infinite Skill, effected by Infinite
Power, and governed by Infinite Wisdom. None can imagine a Ship to be orderly
conducted without a Pilot; Nor the parts of the World to perform their several
functions without a wise guide; considering the Members of the Body, cannot
perform theirs, without the active presence of the Soul. The Atheist then is a
fool, to deny that which every Creature in his constitution asserts, and
thereby renders himself, unable to give a satisfactory account of that constant
uniformity in the motions of the Creatures.

Thirdly, III. As the production and harmony, so particular Creatures, pursuing
and attaining their ends, manifest that there is a God. All particular
Creatures have natural instincts, which move them for some end: The intending
of an end, is a property of a rational Creature; since the lower Creatures
cannot challenge that title, they must act by the understanding and direction
of another: And since man cannot challenge the honor of inspiring the Creatures
with such instincts, it must be ascribed to some nature infinitely above any
Creature in understanding. No Creature does determine it self. Why do the
fruits and grain of the Earth nourish us, when the Earth which instrumentally
gives them that fitness, cannot nourish us, but because their several ends are
determined by one higher than the world?

1. Several Creatures have several Natures. How soon will all Creatures, as
soon as they see the light, move to that whereby they must live, and make use
of the natural arms God has given their kind, for their defense, before they
are grown to any maturity to afford them that defense? The Scripture makes the
appetite of Infants to their milk a foundation of the divine Glory, Psalm. 8.3.
Out of the Mouths of Babes and Sucklings, have thou ordained strength; that is,
matter of praise and acknowledgment of God, in the natural appetite they have
to their milk and their relish of it. All Creatures have a natural affection
to their young ones; all young ones by a natural instinct, move to, and receive
the nourishment that is proper for them: Some are their own Physicians as well
as their own Caterers, and naturally discern what preserves them in life, and
what restores them when sick. The Swallow flies to its Celendine, and the Toad
hastens to its Plantain.

Can we behold the Spiders Nets, or Silkworms Web, the Bees Closets, or the
Ants Granaries, without acknowledging a higher Being than a Creature, who has
planted that Genius in them? The consideration of the nature of several
Creatures God commended to Job, (Chap. 39. where he discourses to Job of the
natural instincts, of the Goat, the Ostrich, Horse and Eagle, etc.) to persuade
him to the acknowledgment and admiration of God and humiliation of himself.

The Spider, as if it understood the art of weaving, fits its web both for its
own Habitation, and a Net to catch its prey. The Be builds a Cell which serves
for Chambers to reside in, and a repository for its provision. Birds are
observed to build their Nests with a clammy matter without, for the firmer
duration of it, and with a soft moss and down within for the convenience and
warmth of their young: The Stork knows his appointed time. Jer. 8.7. And the
Swallows observe the time of their coming; they go and return according to the
seasons of the year, This they gain not by consideration, it descends to them
with their nature: They neither gain nor increase it by rational deductions.
It Is not in vain to speak of these. How little do we improve by Meditation those
objects, which daily offer themselves to our view, full of instructions for us?
And our Savior sends his disciples to spell God in the Lillies. Mat. 6.28.
It Is observed also that the Creatures offensive to man go single: If they went
by troops, they would bring destruction upon man and beast. This is the nature
of them for the preservation of others.

2. They know not their end. They have a Law in their natures, but have no
rational understanding, either of the end to which they are appointed, or the
means fit to attain it: They naturally do what they do, and move by no Counsel
of their own, but by a Law impressed by some higher hand upon their natures.

What Plant knows why it strikes its root into the earth? Does it understand
what storms it is to contest with, or why it shoots up its branches toward
Heaven? Does it know it needs the droppings of the clouds to preserve it self,
and make it fruitful? These are acts of understanding: The root is downward to
preserve its own standing, the branches upward to preserve other Creatures:
This understanding is not in the Creature it self, but originally in another.
Thunders and Tempests know not why they are sent, yet by the direction of a
mighty hand they are instruments of Justice upon a wicked world.

Coccei. sum. Theolog. cap. 8. 67. etc.
Rational Creatures that act for some end, and know the end they aim at, yet
know not the manner of the natural motion of the members to it. When we intend
to look upon a thing, we take no counsel about the natural motion of our eyes,
we know not all the principles of their operations; or how that dull matter
whereof our bodies are composed, is subject to the order of our minds. Peirson,
on the Creed p. 35.
We are not of Counsel with our stomachs about the concoction of our meat, or
the distribution of the nourishing juice to the several parts of the body.
Neither the Mother nor the Foetus sit in Council how the formation should be
made in the Womb. We know no more than a plant knows what Stature it is of, and
what medicinal virtue its fruit has for the good of man; yet all those natural
operations are perfectly directed to their proper end, by an higher wisdom than
any human understanding is able to conceive, since they exceed the ability of
an inanimate or fleshly nature, yea and the wisdom of a man. Do we not often
see reasonable Creatures acting for one end, and perfecting a higher than what
they aimed at, or could suspect? When Joseph's Brethren sold him for a Slave,
their end was to be rid of an Informer: Genesis 37.2.
But the action issued in preparing him to be the preserver of them and their
families. Cyrus his end was to be a Conqueror, but the action ended in being
the Jews deliverer, Prove. 16.9. A man's heart devises his way, but the Lord
directs his steps.

3. Therefore there is some superior understanding and nature which so acts
them. That which acts for an end unknown to it self, depends upon some
overruling wisdom that knows that end. Who should direct them in all those
ends, but he that bestowed a being upon them for those ends, Lessius de
providen. lib. 1. page 652.
who knows what is convenient for their life, security and propagation of their
natures? An exact knowledge is necessary both of what is agreeable to them, and
the means whereby they must attain it, which since it is not inherent in them,
is in that wise God, who puts those instincts into them, and governs them in
the exercise of them to such ends. Any man that sees a dart flung, knows it
cannot hit the mark without the skill and strength of an Archer. Or he that sees
the hand of a Dial pointing to the hours successively, knows that the Dial is
ignorant of its own end, and is disposed and directed in that motion by an
other. All Creatures ignorant of their own natures could not universally in the
whole kind, and in every Climate and Country, without any difference in the
whole world, tend to a certain end, if some overruling wisdom did not preside
over the world and guide them: and if the Creatures have a Conductor, they have
a Creator: All things are turned round about by his Council, that they may do
whatsoever he Commands them upon the face of the world in the earth. Job. 37.12.


So that in this respect the folly of Atheism appears. Without the owning a God
no account can be given of those actions of Creatures, that are an imitation of
Reason: To say the Bees, etc. are rational, is to equal them to man; nay make
them his superiors, since they do more by nature than the wisest man can do by
art: It Is their own Counsel whereby they act, or another; If it be their own,
they are reasonable Creatures; If by another, it is not mere nature that is
necessary; Then other Creatures would not be without the same skill: There
would be no difference among them: If nature be restrained by another, it has
a superior; if not it is a free agent: It Is an understanding being that directs
them: And then it is something superior to all Creatures in the world, and by
this therefore we may ascend to the acknowledgment of the necessity of a God.

Fourthly, IV. Add to the production and order of the world and the Creatures
acting for their end, the preservation of them. Nothing can depend upon it self
in its preservation, no more than it could in its being. If the order of the
world was not fixed by it self, the preservation of that order cannot be
continued by it self.

Tho the matter of the world after Creation cannot return to that nothing
whence it was fetched, without the power of God that made it, (because the same
power is as requisite to reduce a thing to nothing as to raise a thing from
nothing,) yet without the actual exerting of a power that made the Creatures,
they would fall into confusion. Those contesting qualities which are in every
part of it, could not have preserved, but would have consumed, and extinguished
one another, and reduced the world to that confused Chaos, wherein it was before
the Spirit moved upon the waters: As contrary parts could not have met together
in one form, unless there had been one that had conjoined them: So they could
not have kept together after their conjunction unless the same hand had
preserved them. Natural contrarieties cannot be reconciled. It Is as great power
to keep discords knit, as at first to link them. Who would doubt, but that an
Army made up of several Nations and humors, would fall into a Civil War, and
sheath their Swords in one another bowels, if they were not under the
management of some wise General, or a Ship dash against the Rocks without the
skill of a Pilot? Gassend. Phy. sect. 6. lib. 4. cap. 2. pa. 101.
As the body has neither life nor motion, without the active presence of the
Soul, which distributes to every part the virtue of acting; sets every one in
the exercise of its proper function and resides in every part: So there is some
powerful cause which does the like in the world, that rules and tempers it.
There is need of the same power and action, to preserve a thing, as there was
at first to make it. When we consider that we are preserved, and know that we
could not preserve our selves; we must necessarily run to some first cause
which does preserve us. All works of art depend upon nature, and are preserved
while they are kept by the force of nature: As a Statue depends upon the matter
whereof it is made, whither stone or brass; this nature therefore must have
some superior by whose influx it is preserved. Since therefore we see a stable
order in the things of the world, that they conspire together for the good and
beauty of the universe; that they depend upon one another: There must be some
principle upon which they do depend; something to which the first link of the
chain is fastened, which himself depends upon no superior, but wholly rests in
his own essence and being: It Is the title of God to be the preserver of man and
beast. Psa. 36.6.
The Psalmist elegantly describes it, Psalm. 104.24. etc. The Earth is full of
his riches, all wait upon him, that he may give them their meat in due season;
when he opens his hand he fills them with good; when he hides his face they are
troubled if he take away their breath they die and return to dust; he sends
forth his Spirit and, they are Created, and renews the face of the Earth, the
glory of the Lord shall endure for ever, and the Lord shall rejoice in his
works: Upon the consideration of all which the Psalmist v. 34. takes a pleasure
in the Meditation of God as the cause and manager of all those things; which
issues into a joy in God and a praising of him. And why should not the
consideration of the power and wisdom of God in the Creatures produce the same
effect in the hearts of us, if he be our God? Or as some render it, my
Meditation shall be sweet, or acceptable to him, whereby I find matter of
praise in the things of the world, and offer it to the Creator of it.

Thirdly, III. Reason, The third Reas.
It Is a folly to deny that which a man's own nature witnesses to him. The whole
frame of bodies and Souls bears the impress of the infinite power and wisdom of
the Creator. A body framed with an admirable Architecture, a Soul endowed with
Understanding, Will, Judgment, Memory, Imagination. Man is the Epitome of the
World, contains in himself the substance of all natures, and the fullness of the
whole universe; not only in regard of the universalness of his knowledge,
whereby he comprehends the reasons of many things; but as all the perfections
of the several natures of the world are gathered and united in man, for the
perfection of his own, in a smaller volum. In his Soul he partakes of Heaven,
in his body of the earth. There is the life of Plants, the sense of beasts, and
the intellectual nature of Angels. Genesis 2.7.
The Lord breathed into his Nostril the breath of life, and man, etc. (...) of
life's. Not one sort of, life's; but several, not only an Animal, but a Rational
life; a Soul of a Nobler extract and nature, than what was given to other
Creatures.

So that we need not step out of doors, or cast our eyes any further than our
selves, to behold a God. He shines in the capacity of our Souls and the vigor
of our Members. We must fly from our selves and be stripped of our own humanity,
before we can put off the Notion of a Deity: He that is ignorant of the
Existence of God, must be possessed with so much folly, as to be ignorant of
his own make and frame.

1. In the parts whereof he does consist, Body and Soul.

First, I. Take a prospect of the Body. The Psalmist counts it a matter of
praise and admiration, Psalm. 139.15, 16. I will praise thee for I am fearfully
and wonderfully made; when I was made in secret and curiously wrought in the
lowest parts of the Earth, in thy book all my Members were written. The Scheme
of man and every Member was drawn in his book: All the Sinews, Veins, Arteries,
Bones, like a piece of Embroidery or Tapestry, were wrought by God, as it were
with deliberation; like an Artificer that draws out the model of what he is to
do in writing, and sets it before him when he begins his work.

And indeed the Fabric of man's Body, as well as his Soul, is an argument for a
Divinity. The artificial structure of it, the Elegancy of every part, the
proper Situation of them, their proportion one to another, the fitness for
their several functions, drew from Galen, Lib. 3. de usu. partium. Petav.
Theol. Dog. Tom. 1. lib. 1. cap. 1. pa. 6.
(a Heathen and one that had no raised sentiments of a Deity,) a confession of
the admirable Wisdom and Power of the Creator, and that none but God could
frame it.

1. In the order, fitness and usefulness of every part. The whole model of the
body is grounded upon reason. Every member has its exact proportion, distinct
office, regular motion. Every part has a particular comeliness, and convenient
temperament bestowed upon it, according to its place in the Body. The Heart is
hot to enliven the whole. The Eye clear to take in objects to present them to
the Soul: Every member is fitted for its peculiar service and action: Some are
for sense, some for motion, some for preparing, and others for dispensing
nourishment to the several parts: They mutually depend upon, and serve one
another. What small strings fasten the particular members together, as the
Earth that hangs upon nothing? Job. 26.7.
Take but one part away, and you either destroy the whole, or stamp upon it
some mark of deformity. All are knit together by an admirable Symmetry; all
orderly perform their functions, as acting by a settled Law; none swerving from
their rule, but in case of some predominant humor: And none of those in so
great a multitude of parts, stifled in so little a Room, or justling against
one another to hinder their mutual actions; none can be better disposed. And
the greatest wisdom of man could not imagine it, till his eyes present them
with the sight and connection of one part and member with another.

1. The Heart. Theod. de providentia. Orat. 3.
How strongly it is guarded with ribs like a Wall, that it might not be easily
hurt! It draws blood from the Liver, through a channel made for that purpose:
Rarifies it and makes it fit to pass through the Arteries and Veins, and to
carry heat and life to every part of the body: And by a perpetual motion, it
sucks in the blood and spouts it out again; which motion depends not upon the
command of the Soul, but is pure natural.

2. The Mouth, takes in the meat, the teeth grind it for the stomach, the
stomach prepares it, nature strains it through the milky veins, the liver
refines it and mints it into blood, separates the purer from the drossy parts,
which go to the heart, circuites through the whole body, running through the
Veins like Rivers through so many channels of the world, for the watering of
the several parts: Which are framed of a thin skin for the straining the blood
through, for the supply of the members of the body, and framed with several
valves or doors, for the thrusting the blood forwards to perform its circular
motion.

3. The Brain, fortified by a strong skull to hinder outward accidents, a tough
membrane or skin to hinder any oppression by the skull; the seat of sense; that
which coins the animal spirits by purifying and refining those which are sent
to it, and seems like a curious piece of Needlework.

4. The Ear, framed with windings and turnings, to keep any thing from entering
to offend the Brain; so disposed as to admit sounds with the greatest safety
and delight; Eccles. 12.4.
filled with an air within, by the motion whereof the sound is transmitted to
the Brain: As sounds are made in the Air by diffusing themselves, as you see
Circles made in the water by the flinging in a stone. This is the Gate of
knowledge, whereby we hear the Oracles of God, and the instruction of men for
arts: It Is by this they are exposed to the mind, and the mind of another Man
framed in our understandings.

5. What a curious Workmanship is that of the Eye, which is in the body, as the
Sun in the World; set in the head as in a Watchtower, having the softest
nerves for the receiving the greater multitude of Spirits necessary for the act
of Vision? How is it provided with defense, by the variety of Coats to secure
and accomodate the little humor and part whereby the vision is made? Made of a
round figure and unequal, as most commodious to receive the species of objects;
shaded by the eyebrows and eyelids, secured by the eyelids which are its
ornament and safety; which refresh it when it is too much dried by heat, hinder
too much light from insinuating it self into it to offend it, cleanse it from
impurities, by their quick motion preserve it from any invasion, and by
contraction confer to the more evident discerning of things: Both the eyes
seated in the hollow of the bone for security; yet standing out that things may
be perceived more easily on both sides: And this little Member can behold the
earth, and in a moment veiw things as high as Heaven.

6. Coccei. sum. Theol. cap. 8. 49.
The Tongue for speech framed like a Musical instrument; the Teeth serving for
variety of sounds; the lungs serving for Bellows to blow the Organs as it were,
to cool the Heart; by a continual motion transmitting a pure Air to the Heart,
expelling that which was smoky and superfluous. It Is by the Tongue that
communication of Truth has a passage among men; it opens the sense of the
mind; there would be no converse and commerce without it: Speech among all
Nations has an elegancy and attractive force, mastering the affections of men.

Not to speak of other parts, or of the multitude of Spirits that act every
part; he quick flight of them where there is a necessity of their presence.
Solomon 12 Ecclesiast. makes an elegant description of them, in his Speech of
old age: And Job ^peaks of this formation of the body, Job 10.9, 10, 11, etc.
Not the least part of the body is made in vain. The hairs of the Head have
their use, as well as are an ornament. The whole Symmetry of the body is a
ravishing object. Every Member has a Signature and mark of God and his Wisdom:
He is visible in the formation of the Members, the beauty of the parts, and the
vigor of the body: This structure could not be from the body, that only has a
passive power, and cannot act in the absence of the Soul: Nor can it be from
the Soul. How comes it then to be so ignorant of the manner of its formation?
The Soul knows not the internal parts of its own body, but by information from
others, or inspection into other bodies: It knows less of the inward frame of
the body than it does of it self: But he that makes the Clock can tell the
number and motions of the wheels within, as well as what figures are without.

This short discourse is useful to raise our admirations of the Wisdom of God,
as well as to demonstrate, that there is an Infinite, Wise Creator: And the
consideration of our selves every day, and the wisdom of God in our frame would
maintain Religion much in the world; Since all are so framed that no man can
tell any error in the constitution of him. If thus the body of man is fitted
for the service of his Soul by an infinite God, the body ought to be ordered
for the service of this God and in obedience to him.

2. In the admirable difference of the features of Men. Which is a great
argument that the world was made by a wise Being: This could not be wrought by
Chance or be the work of mere nature, since we find never or very rarely two
persons exactly alike. This distinction is a part of infinite wisdom; otherwise
what confusion would be introduced into the World? Without this, Parents could
not know their Children, nor Children their Parents, nor a Brother his Sister,
nor a Subject his Magistrate: Without it there had been no comfort of
Relations, no Government, no commerce: Debtors would not have been known from
strangers, nor good men from bad: Propriety could not have been preserved, nor
justice executed; the innocent might have been apprehended for the nocent;
wickedness could not have been stopped by any Law.

The Faces of men are the same for parts, not for features: A dissimilitude in
a likeness. Man, like to all the rest in the World, yet unlike to any, and
differenced by some mark from all, which is not to be observed in any other
species of Creatures. This speaks some wise Agent which framed man; since for
the preservation of human society and order in the world, this distinction was
necessary.

Secondly, II. As man's own nature witnesses a God to him in the structure of
his body, so also in the nature of his Soul. Co^cei. sam. Theolog. cap. 8.
50.51.
We know that we have an understanding in us; a substance we cannot see, but we
know it by its operations; as thinking, reasoning, willing, remembering; And as
operating about things that are invisible and remote from sense: This must
needs be distinct from the body, for that being but dust and Earth in its
original, has not the power of reasoning, and thinking; for then it would have
that power, when the Soul were absent, as well as when it is present. Besides,
if it had that power of thinking, it could think only of those things which are
sensible and made up of matter, as it self is. This Soul has a greater
excellency, it can know it self, rejoice in it self, which other Creatures in
this world are not capable of: The Soul is the greatest glory of this lower
world, and as one says; More.
There seems to be no more difference between the Soul and an Angel, than
between a Sword in the Scabbard and when it is Out of the Scabbard.

First, I. Consider the vastness of its capacity. The understanding can
conceive the whole world, and paint in it self the invisible Pictures of all
things. It Is capable of apprehending and discoursing of things superior to its
own nature. [ Culverwel.
It Is suited to all objects, as the Eye to all Colors, or the Ear to all
sounds.] How great is the Memory to retain such varieties, such diversities?
The Will also can accomodate other things to it self. It invents Arts for the
use of Man; prescribes rules for the Government of States; ransacks the bowels
of nature; makes endless conclusions, and steps in reasoning from one thing to
another, for the knowledge of Truth; It can contemplate and form notions of
things higher than the world.

2. The quickness of its motion. [ Theodoret.
Nothing is more quick in the whole course o^ nature; the Sun runs through the
World in a day, this can do it in a moment. It can with one flight of fancy
ascend to the battlements of Heaven.] The mists of the Air that hinder the
sight of the Eye, cannot hinder the flights of the Soul; it can pass in a
moment from one end of the World to the other, and think of things, a thousand
miles distant. It can think of some mean thing in the world, and presently by
one cast in the twinkling of an Eye, mount up as high as Heaven. As its desires
are not bounded by sensual objects, so neither are the motions of it restrained
by them. It will break forth with the greatest vigor, and conceive things
infinitely above it; Though it be in the body, it acts as if it were ashamed to
be Cloystered in it. This could not be the result of any material cause:
Whoever knew mere matter understand, think, will? And what it has not, it
cannot give. That which is destitute of Reason and Will, could never confer
Reason and Will. Coccei. sum. The dog. cap. 8. 51.52.
It Is not the effect of the Body, for the Body is fitted with members to be
subject to it: It Is in part ruled by the activity of the Soul, and in part by
the Counsel of the Soul; It Is used by the Soul and knows not how it is used. Nor
could it be from the Parents, since the Souls of the Children often transcend
those of the Parents in vivacity, acuteness and comprehensiveness: One man is
stupid and begets a Son with a capacious understanding; one is debauched and
beastly in morals, and begets a Son who from his Infancy testifies some
virtuous inclinations, which sprout forth in delightful fruit with the ripeness
of his age. I do not dispute whether the Soul were generated or no; Suppose the
substance of it was generated by the Parents, yet those more excellent
qualities were not the result of them.
Whence should this difference arise, a fool begat the wise man, and a
debauched the virtuous man? The wisdom of the one could not descend from the
foolish Soul of the other; nor the virtues of the Son, from the deformed and
polluted Soul of the Parent; it lies not in the Organs of the Body; For if the
folly of the Parent proceeded not from their Souls, but the ill disposition of
the Organs of their bodies, how comes it to pass that the bodies of the
Children are better Organized beyond the goodness of their immediate cause? We
must recur to some invisible hand, that makes the difference, who bestows upon
one at his pleasure richer qualities, than upon another: You can see nothing in
the World endowed with some excellent quality, but you must imagine some
bountiful hand did enrich it with that dowry: None can be so foolish as to
think that a vessel ever inricht it self with that spritely Liquor, wherewith
it is filled; or that any thing worse than the Soul should indow it with that
knowledge and activity which sparkles in it. Nature could not produce it: That
nature is intelligent, or not; if it be not, then it produces an effect more
excellent than it self, in as much as an understanding being surmounts a being
that has no understanding; If the supreme cause of the Soul be intelligent,
why do we not call it God as well as nature? We must arise from hence to the
notion of a God; a Spiritual nature cannot proceed but from a Spirit higher
than it self, and of a transcendent perfection above it self: If we believe we
have Souls and understand the state of our own faculties, we must be assured
that there was some invisible hand which bestowed those faculties and the
riches of them upon us: A man must be ignorant of himself before he can be
ignorant of the Existence of God: By considering the nature of our Souls, we
may as well be assured that there is a God, as that there is a Sun by the
shining of the beams in at our Windows: And indeed the Soul is a Statue and
representation of God, as the Land-Skip of a Country or Map represents all the
parts of it, but in a far less proportion than the Country it self is. The Soul
fills the body, and God the world; the Soul sustains the body, and God the
World; the Soul sees, but is not seen; God sees all things, but is himself
invisible. How base are they then that prostitute their Souls an image of God
to base things unexpressibly below their own nature?

3. I might add the union of Soul and Body. Man is a kind of compound of Angel
and Beast, of Soul and body; if he were only a Soul, he were a kind of Angel;
if only a body, he were another kind of brute: Now that a body as vile and dull
as earth, and a Soul that can mount up to Heaven, and rove about the world with
so quick a motion, should be linkt in so strait an acquaintance; that so noble
a being as the Soul should be an inhabitant in such a Tabernacle of Clay, must
be owned to some infinite power that has so chained it.

3. Man witnesses to a God in the operations and reflections of Conscience.
Romans 2.15. Their thoughts are accusing or excusing. An inward comfort attends
good actions, and an inward torment follows bad ones; for there is in every
man's Conscience, fear of punishment and hope of reward: There is therefore a
sense of some superior Judge, which has the power both of rewarding, and
punishing: If man were his supreme rule, what need he fear punishment, since no
man would inflict any evil or torment on himself; nor can any man be said to
reward himself, for all rewards refer to another, to whom the action is
pleasing, and is a conferring some good a man had not before: If an action be
done by a Subject or Servant, with hopes of reward, it can not be imagined,
that he expects a reward from himself, but from the Prince or person whom he
eyes in that action, and for whose sake he does it.

1. There is a Law in the minds of men, which is a rule of good and evil. There
is a Notion of Good and Evil in the Consciences of men, which is evident by
those Laws which are common in all Countries, for the preserving human
societies, the encouragment of Virtue, and discouragement of Vice; What
Standard should they have for those Laws, but a common reason? The design of
those Laws was to keep men within the bounds of Goodness, for mutual commerce,
whence the Apostle calls the Heathen Magistrate a Minister of God for Good.
Romans 13.4. and the Gentiles do by nature the things contained in the Law, Romans
2.14.

Man in the first instant of the use of reason, finds natural principles within
himself, directing and choosing them; he finds a distinction between good and
evil; how could this be if there were not some rule in him to try and
distinguish good and evil? If there were not such a law and rule in man, he
could not sin; for where there is no Law there is no transgression. If man were
a Law to himself and his own will his Law, there could be no such thing as
evil; whatsoever he willed would be good and agreeable to the Law; and no
action could be accounted sinful: The worst act would be as commendable as the
best. Every thing at man's appointment would be good or evil. If there were no
such Law, how should men that are naturally inclined to evil disapprove of that
which is unlovely, and approve of that good which they practice not. No man but
inwardly thinks well of that which is good, while he neglects it; and thinks
ill of that which is evil, while he commits it. Those that are vicious, do
praise those that practice the contrary virtues. Those that are evil would seem
to be good, and those that are blameworthy, yet will rebuke evil in others.
This is really to distinguish between good and evil; whence does this arise, by
what rule do we measure this, but by some innate principle?

And this is universal, the same in one man as in another, the same in one
Nation as in another, they are born with every man, and inseparable from his
nature, Prove. 27.19. As in water face answers to face, so the heart of man to
man. Common reason supposes, that there is some hand which has fixed this
distinction in man: How could it else be universally impressed? No Law can be
without a Lawgiver; no sparks but must be kindled, by some other: Whence
should this Law then derive its original? Not from man; he would fain blot it
out, and cannot alter it when he pleases: Natural generation never intended it;
it is settled therefore by some higher hand, which as it imprinted it, so it
maintains it against the violences of men; who, were it not for this Law, would
make the world more than it is, an Aceldema and field of blood: For had there
not been some supreme good, the measure of all other goodness in the world, we
could not have had such a thing as good. The Scripture gives us an account that
this good was distinguished from evil before man fell, they were objecta
scibilia; good was commanded and evil prohibited, and did not depend upon man:
From this a man may rationally be instructed that there is a God: For he may
thus argue; I find my self naturally obliged to do this thing and avoid that, I
have therefore a superior that does oblige me; I find something within me that
directs me to such actions, contrary to my sensitive appetite, there must be
something above me therefore that put this principle into man's nature: If there
were no superior, I should be the supreme Judge of good and evil: Were I the
Lord of that Law which does oblige me, I should find no contradiction within my
self between reason and appetite.

2. From the Transgression of this law of nature, fears do arise in the
Consciences of men. Have we not known or heard of men struck by so deep a dart,
that could not be drawn out by the strength of men, or appeased by the pleasure
of the world, and men crying out with horror upon a deathbed of their past
life, when their fear has come as a desolation, and destruction as a
whirlewind, Prove. 1.27. And often in some sharp affliction, the dust has been
blown off from men's Consciences, which for a while has obscured the writing of
the law. If men stand in awe of punishment, there is then some superior to whom
they are accountable: If there were no God, there were no punishment to fear.
What reason of any fear, upon the dissolution of the knot between the Soul and
body, if there were not a God to punish, and the Soul remained not in being to
be punished?

How suddenly will Conscience work upon the appearance of an affliction, rouse
it self from sleep like an armed man, and fly in a man's face before he is aware
of it? It will surprise the Hipocrites. Isa. 38.14. It will bring to mind
actions committed long ago, and set them in order before the face, as Gods
deputy acting by his authority and Omniscience. As God has not left himself
without a witness among the Creatures, Acts 14.17. So he has not left himself
without a witness in a man's own breast.

1. This operation of Conscience has been universal. No Nation has been any
more exempt from it, than from reason: Not a man but has one time or other
more or less smarted under the sting of it. All over the world Conscience has
shot its darts. It has torn the hearts of Princes in the midst of their
pleasures: It has not flattered them whom most men flatter, nor feared to
disturb their rest, whom no man dares to provoke. Judges have trembled on a
Tribunal, when Innocents have rejoiced in their condemnation: The Iron bars
upon Pharaohs Conscience, were at last broke up, and he acknowledged the
Justice of God in all that he did, Exodus 9.27. I have sinned, the Lord is
righteous, and I and my people are wicked. Had they been like Childish frights
at the apprehension of bug-bears, why has not reason shaken them off? But on
the contrary the stronger reason grows, the smarter those lashes are:
Groundless fears had been short lived, Age and Judgment would have worn them
off, but they grow sharper with the growth of persons. The Scripture informs us
they have been of as ancient a date as the revolt of the first man, Genesis 3.10.
I was afraid, says Adam, because I was naked; which was an expectation of the
Judgment of God. All his posterity inherit his fears, when God expresses
himself in any tokens of his Majesty and Providence in the world. Every man's
Conscience testifies that he is unlike what he ought to be according to that
law engraven upon his heart. In some indeed Conscience may be feared, or
dimmer, or suppose some men may be devoid of Conscience; shall it be denied to
be a thing belonging to the nature of Man? Some Men have not their eyes, yet
the power of seeing the light is natural to Man, and belongs to the integrity
of the body: Who would argue, that because some men are mad and h^ve lost their
reason by a distemper of the brain, that therefore reason has no reality, but
is an imaginary thing? But I think it is a standing truth, that every man has
been under the scourge of it, one time or other, in a less or greater degree:
For since every man is an offender, it cannot be imagined, Conscience which is
natural to man and an active faculty, should always lie idle, without doing
this part of its office? The Apostle tells us of the thoughts, accusing or
excusing one another, (or by turns) according as the actions were. Nor is this
truth weakened by the corruptions in the world, whereby many have thought
themselves bound in Conscience to adhere to a false and superstitious worship
and Idolatry, as much as any have thought themselves bound to adhere to a
Worship commanded by God. This very thing infers that all men have a reflecting
principle in them; it is no argument against the being of Conscience, but only
inferrs that it may Err in the application of what it naturally owns. We can no
more say, that because some men walk by a false rule, there is no such thing as
Conscience, than we can say that because men have Errors in their minds,
therefore they have no such faculty as an Understanding; or because men will
that which is evil, they have no such faculty as a Will in them.

2. These operations of Conscience, are when the wickedness is most secret.
These tormenting fears of Vengeance, have been frequent in men, who have had no
reason to fear man, since their wickedness being unknown to any but themselves,
they could have no accuser but themselves. They have been in many acts which
their companions have justified them in: Persons above the stroke of human
laws, yea such as the people have honored as Gods, have been haunted by them.
Conscience has not been frighted by the power of Princes, or bribed by the
pleasures of Courts: David was pursued by his horrors, when he was by reason of
his dignity above the punishment by the Law, or at least was not reached by the
Law; since though the Murder of Vriah was intended by him, it was not acted by
him. Such examples are frequent in human Records: When the crime has been
above any punishment by man, they have had an Accuser, Judge and Executioner in
their own breasts: Can this be originally from a man's self? He who loves and
cherishes himself, would fly from any thing that disturbs him: It Is a greater
Power and Majesty from whom man cannot hide himself, that holds him in those
fetters. What should affect their minds for that which can never bring them
shame or punishment in this World, if there were not some supreme Judge, to
whom they were to give an account, whose instrument Conscience is? Does it do
this of it self; has it received an Authority from the man himself to sting
him? It is some supreme power, that does direct and commission it against our
Wills.

3. These operations of Conscience cannot be totally shaken off by Man. If
there (...) no God, why do not men silence the clamors of their Consciences,
and scatter th^^e fears that disturb their rest and pleasures? How inquisitive
are men after some remedy against those convulsions? Sometimes they would
render the charge insignificant and sing a rest to themselves, though they walk
in the wickedness of their own hearts: De^^
How often do men attempt to drown it by sensual pleasures, and perhaps
overpower it for a time; but it revives, reinforceth it self and Acts a
revenge for its former stop. It holds sin to a man's view, and fixes his eyes
upon it, whether he will or no: The wicked are like a troubled Sea, and cannot
rest, Isa. 57.20. They would wallow in sin without control, but this inward
principle will not suffer it; nothing can shelter men from those blows. What is
the reason it could never be cried down? Man is an Enemy to his own disquiet;
what man would continue upon the rack, if it were in his power to deliver
himself? why have all human remedies been without success; and not able to
extinguish those operations, though all the wickedness of the heart has been
ready to assist and second the attempt? It has pursued men notwithstanding all
the violence used against it, and renewed its scourges with more severity, as
men deal with their resisting Slaves. Man can as little silence those Thunders
in his Soul, as he can the Thunders in the Heavens: He must strip himself of
his humanity before he can be stripped of an accusing and affrighting Conscience;
It sticks as close to him as his nature: Since man cannot throw out the Process
it makes against him, it is an evidence that some higher power secures its Throne
and standing: Who should put this scourge into the hand of Conscience, which no
man in the World is able to wrest out?

4. We may add, the comfortable reflections of Conscience. There are excusing
as well as accusing reflections of Conscience, when things are done as works of
the law of nature, Romans 2.15. As it does not forbear to accuse and torture,
when a wickedness though unknown to others is committed; So when a man has
done well, though he be attackt with all the calumnies the wit of man can
forge, yet his Conscience justifies the action, and fills him with a singular
contentment. As there is torture in sinning, so there is peace and joy in well
doing: Neither of those it could do, if it did not understand a Sovereign
Judge, who punishes the Rebels and rewards the well-doer. Conscience is the
foundation of all Religion; and the two Pillars upon which it is built, are the
being of God and the bounty of God to those that diligently seek him. Heb. 11.6.


This proves the Existence of God: If there were no God, Conscience were
useless; the operations of it would have no foundation, if there were not an
eye to take notice, and a hand to punish or reward the action. The accusations
of Conscience evidence the Omniscience and the Holiness of God; The terrors of
Conscience, the justice of God; The approbations of Conscience, the Goodness of
God: All the order in the world owes it self, next to the Providence of God, to
Conscience; Without it the world would be a Golgotha. As the Creatures witness,
there was a first cause that produced them, so this Principle in man evidenceth
it self to be set by the same hand, for the good of that which it had so
framed: There could be no Conscience if there were no God, and man could not be
a rational Creature, if there were no Conscience. As there is a Rule in us,
there must be a Judge whether our actions be according to the rule. And since
Conscience in our corrupted state is in some particular misled, there must be a
power superior to Conscience to judge how it has behaved it self, in its
deputed office: We must come to some supreme Judge, who can Judge Conscience it
self. As a man can have no surer evidence, that he is a being, than because he
thinks; he is a thinking being: So there is no surer evidence in nature, that
there is a God, than that every man has a natural principle in him, which
continually cites him before God, and puts him in mind of him, and makes him
one way or other fear him, and reflects upon him whether he will or no: A man
has less power over his Conscience, than over any other faculty: He may choose
whether he will exercise his understanding about, or move his will to such an
object, but he has no such Authority over his Conscience; he cannot limit it,
or cause it to cease from acting and reflecting; and therefore both that, and
the law about which it acts, are settled by some supreme Authority in the mind
of man, and this is God.

Fourthly, IV. The evidence of a God results from the vastness of desires in
man, and the real dissatisfaction he has in every thing below himself. Man
has a boundless appetite after some Sovereign Good: As his understanding is
more capacious, than any thing below, so is his Appetite larger. This affection
of desire exceeds all other affections. Love is determined, to something known.
Fear to something apprehended; but Desires approach nearer to Infiniteness, and
pursue, not only what we know, or what we have a glimps of; but what we find
wanting in what we already enjoy. That which the desire of man is most
naturally carried after, is Bonum; some fully satisfying good. We desire
knowledge by the sole impulse of reason; but we desire Good before the
excitement of reason, and the desire is always after Good, but not always after
Knowledge.

Now the Soul of man finds an imperfection in every thing here, and cannot
scrape up a perfect satisfaction and felicity. In the highest fruitions of
worldly things, it is still pursuing something else, which speaks a defect in
what it already has. The world may afford a felicity for our dust, the body,
but not for the inhabitant in it; it is two mean for that. Is there any one Soul
among the Sons of men, that can upon a due enquiry say, it was at rest and
wanted no more, that has not sometimes had desires after an immaterial Good?
The Soul follows hard after such a thing, and has frequent looks after it,
Psalm. 63.8. Man desires a stable Good, but no sublunary thing is so: And he
that does not desire such a Good, wants the rational nature of a man: This is
as natural as Understanding, Will and Conscience: Whence should the Soul of man
have those desires? How came it to understand that something is still wanting
to make its nature more perfect; if there were not in it some notion of a more
perfect being, which can give it rest?

Can such a capacity be supposed to be in it without something in being able to
satisfy it? If so, the noblest Creature in the world is miserablest and in a
worse condition than any other: Other Creatures obtain their ultimate desires,
they are filled with good, Psalm. 104.28. And shall man only have a vast desire
without any possibility of enjoyment? Nothing in man is in vain: He has
objects for his affections, as well as affections for objects. Every Member of
his body has its end, and does attain it. Every affection of his Soul has an
object, and that in this World, and shall there be none for his desire, which
comes nearest to infinite of any affection planted in him? This boundless
desire had not its original from man himself: Nothing would render it self
restless; something above the bounds of this world implanted those desires
after a higher Good, and made him restless in every thing else. And since the
Soul can only rest in that which is infinite, there is something infinite for
it to rest in: Since nothing in the world, though a man had the whole, can give
it a satisfaction, there is something above the world only capable to do it,
otherwise the Soul would be always without it, and be more in vain than any
other Creature.

There is therefore some infinite being that can only give a contentment to the
Soul, and this is God. And that goodness which implanted such desires in the
Soul, would not do it to no purpose, and mock it in giving it an infinite
desire of satisfaction, without intending it the pleasure of enjoyment, if it
does not by its own folly deprive it self of it. The felicity of human nature
must needs exceed that which is allotted to other Creatures.

4. And last Reason. Fourth Reason.
As it is a folly to deny that which all Nations in the World have consented to,
which the frame of the world evidenceth, which man in his Body, Soul,
Operations of Conscience witnesses to: So it is a folly to deny the Being of
God, which is witnessed unto by extraordinary occurrences in the world.

1. In extraordinary Judgments. When a just revenge follows abominable crimes,
especially when the Judgment is suited to the sin, by a strange Concatenation
and succession of Providence, methodized to bring such a particular
punishment; When the sin of a Nation or person is made legible in the inflicted
Judgment, which testifies that it cannot be a casual thing. The Scripture gives
us an account of the necessity of such Judgments, to keep up the reverential
thoughts of God in the World. Psalm. 9.16. The Lord is known by the judgment
which he executes, the wicked is snared in the work of his own hand. And
Jealousy is the name of God, Exodus 34.14. Whose name is Jealous: He is
distinguished from false Gods by the Judgments which he sends, as men are by
their names.

Extraordinary Prodigies in many Nations have been the Heralds of extraordinary
Judgments, and presages of the particular Judgments which afterward they have
felt, of which the Roman Histories, and others are full. That there are such
things is undeniable, and that the events have been answerable to the
threatening, unless we will throw away all human Testimonies, and count all the
Histories of the World Forgeries. Such things are evidences of some invisible
Power which orders those affairs. And if there be invisible Powers, there is
also an efficacious cause which moves them: A Government certainly there is
among them, as well as in the world, and then we must come to some supreme
Governor which presides over them.

Judgments upon notorious offenders have been evident in all ages; The
Scripture gives many instances. I shall only mention that of Herod Agrippa,
which Josephus mentions. Lib. 19. Antiq. Act. 12.21.22.23.
He receives the flattering applause of the people, and thought himself a God.
But by the sudden stroke upon him, was forced by his torture to confess
another. I am God says he in your account, but a higher calls me away: The
will of the Heavenly Deity is to be endured. The Angel of the Lord smote him.
The Judgment here was suited to the sin; he that would be a God is eaten up of
Worms, the vilest Creatures. Tully Hostilius, a Roman King, who counted it the
most unroyal thing to be Religious, or own any other God but his Sword, was
consumed himself and his whole House by Lightning from Heaven.

Many things are unaccountable unless we have recourse to God: The strange
Revelations of Murderers, that have most secretly committed their crimes: The
making good some dreadful imprecations, which some wretches have used to
confirm a lie, and immediately have been struck with that Judgment they
wished: The raising often unexpected persons to be instruments of Vengeance on
a sinful and perfidious Nation: The overturning the deepest and surest Counsels
of men, when they have had a succesful progress and came to the very point of
execution; the whole design of men's preservation has been beaten in pieces by
some unforeseen circumstance, so that Judgments have broken in upon them
without control, and all their subtilties been outwitted. The strange
crossing of some in their Estates, though the most wise, industrious and frugal
persons, and that by strange and unexpected ways: And it is observable how
often every thing contributes to carry on a Judgment intended, as if they
rationally designed it. All those loudly proclaim a God in the world: If there
were no God, there would be no sin; if no sin, there would be no punishment.

2. In Miracles. The course of nature is uniforme; and when it is put out of
its course, it must be by some superior power invisible to the world; and by
whatsoever invisible instruments they are wrought, the efficacy of them must
depend upon some first cause above nature. Psalm. 72.18. Blessed be the Lord God
of Israel, who only does wondrous things, by himself and his sole power.

That which cannot be the result of a natural cause, must be the result of
something supernatural: What is beyond the reach of nature, is the effect of a
power superior to nature. For it is quite against the order of nature, and is
the elevation of something to such a pitch, which all nature could not advance
it to. Nature cannot go beyond its own limits: If it be determined by another,
as has been formerly proved, it cannot lift it self above it self, without
that power, that so determined it. Natural agents act necessarily: The Sun does
necessarily shine, fire does necessarilly burn. That cannot be the result of
nature, which is above the Ability of nature. That cannot be the work of
nature, which is against the order of nature: Nature cannot do any thing
against it self, or invert its own course

We must own that such things have been, or we must accuse all the Records of
former ages to be a pack of lies; which whosoever does, destroys the greatest
and best part of human knowledge. The Miracles mentioned in the Scripture,
wrought by our Savior, are acknowledged by the Heathen, by the Jews at this
day, though his greatest enemies. There is no dispute whether such things were
wrought, the dead raised, the blind restored to sight. The Heathens have
acknowledged the Miraculous Eclipse of the Sun, at the Passion of Christ, quite
against the rule of nature, the Moon being then in opposition to the Sun. The
propagation of Christianity contrary to the methods whereby other Religions
have been propagated, that in a few years the Nations of the world should be
sprinkled with this Doctrine, and give in a greater Catalogue of Martyrs
courting the devouring flames, than all the Religions of the world.

To this might be added, the strange hand that was over the Jews, the only
people in the world professing the true God, that should so often be befriended
by their Conquerors, so as to rebuild their Temple, though they were looked
upon as a people apt to rebel. Dion and Seneca observe, that wherever they
were transplanted, they prospered and gave laws to the Victors: So that this
proves also the Authority of the Scripture, the truth of Christian Religion, as
well as the being of a God, and a superior power over the world.

To this might be added, the bridling the tumultuous passions of men for the
preservation of human societies, which else would run the world into
unconceivable confusions, Psalm. 65.7. Which stilleth the noise of the Sea, and
the tumults of the people. As also the Miraculous deliverance of a person or
Nation, when upon the very brink of ruin; The sudden answer of Prayer when God
has been sought to, and the turning away a Judgment, which in reason could not
be expected to be averted, and the raising a sunk people from a ruin which
seemed inevitable, by unexpected ways.

3. Accomplishments of Prophecies. Those things which are purely contingent,
and cannot be known by Natural signs and in their causes, as Ecclipses and
changes in Nations, which may be discerned by an observation of the signs of
the times; such things that fall not within this compass, if they be foretold
and come to pass, are solely from some higher hand, and above the cause of
Nature. This in Scripture is asserted to be a notice of the true God, Isa.
41.23. Show the things that are to come hereafter, that we may know that you
are God, and Isa. 46.10. I am God declaring the end from the beginning, and
from ancient times, the things that are not yet done, saying my Counsel shall
stand, and I will do all my pleasure. And Prophecy was consented to by all the
Philosophers to be from Divine illumination: That power which discovers things
future, which all the foresight of men cannot kenn and conjecture, is above
nature. And to foretell them so certainly as if they did already exist, or had
existed long ago, must be the result of a mind infinitely intelligent: Because
it is the highest way of knowing, and a higher cannot be imagined: And he that
knows things future in such a manner, must needs know things present and past.
Cyrus was Prophesied of by Esaias. chapter 44.28. and 45.1. long before he was born:
His Victories, Spoils, all that should happen in Babylon, his bounty to the
Jews came to pass, according to that Prophecy; and the sight of that Prophecy
which the Jews showed him, as other Historians report, was that which moved him
to be favorable to the Jews.

Alexanders sight of Daniels Prophecy concerning his Victories moved him to
spare Jerusalem. And are not the four Monarchies plainly deciphered in that
Book, before the fourth rose up in the world? That power which foretells things
beyond the reach of the wit of man, and orders all causes to bring about those
predictions, must be an infinite power, the same that made the world, sustains
it and governs all things in it according to his pleasure, and to bring about
his own ends; And this Being is God.

It Is then pernicious to the World, and to the Atheist himself. Wisdom is the
band of human societies, the glory of Man. Folly is the disturber of Families,
Cites, Nations: The disgrace of human nature.

First, I. It Is pernicious to the World.

1. It would root out the foundations of Government. It demolisheth all order
in Nations. The being of a God is the guard of the world: The sense of a God is
the foundation of Civil order; without this there is no tie upon the
Consciences of men. What force would there be in Oaths for the decisions of
controversies, what right could there be in Appeals made to one that had no
being? A City of Atheists would be a heap of confusion; there could be no
ground of any commerce, when all the sacred bands of it in the Consciences of
men were snapt asunder, which are torn to pieces and utterly destroyed by
denying the Existence of God: What Magistrate could be secure in his standing,
what private person could be secure in his right? Lessius de Provid. p. 665.
Can that then be a truth that is destructive of all public good? If the
Atheists sentiment, that there were no God, were a truth; and the contrary that
there were a God, were a falsity; It would then follow, that falsity made men
good and serviceable to one another: That error were the foundation of all the
beauty and order and outward felicity of the world; the fountain of all good to
man. If there were no God, to believe there is one, would be an error, and to
believe there is none would be the greatest wisdom, because it would be the
greatest truth. And then as it is the greatest wisdom to fear God, upon the
apprehension of his Existence; Psalm. 111.1^.
So it would be the greatest error to fear him, if there were none. It would
unquestionably follow, that Error is the support of the world, the spring of
all human advantages; and that every part of the world were obliged to a
falsity for being a quiet habitation, which is the most absurd thing to
imagine. It Is a thing impossible to be tolerated by any Prince, without laying
an Axe to the root of the Government.

2. It would introduce all evil into the World. If you take away God, you take
away Conscience, and thereby all measures and rules of good and evil. And how
could any Laws be made when the measure and standard of them were removed? All
good Laws are founded upon the dictates of Conscience and reason, upon common
sentiments in human nature, which spring from a sense of God: So that if the
foundation be demolisht, the whole superstructure must tumble down: A man might
be a Thief, a Murderer, an Adulterer, and could not in a strict sense be an
offender. The worst of actions could not be evil, if a man were a God to
himself, a Law to himself. Nothing but evil deserves a Censure, and nothing
would be evil, if there were no God, the Rector of the world against whom evil
is properly committed: No man can make that morally evil that is not so in it
self. As where there is a faint sense of God, the heart is more strongly
inclined to wickedness; so where there is no sense of God, the bars are
removed, the floodgates set open for all wickedness to rush in upon mankind.
Religion pinions men from abominable practices, and restrains them from being
Slaves to their own passions: An Atheists arms would be loose to do any thing.
Lessius de Provid. p. 664.
Nothing so villainous and unjust but would be Acted if the natural fear of a
Deity were extinguished. The first consequence issuing from the apprehension of
the Existence of God, is his Government of the world. If there be no God, then
the natural consequence is that there is no supreme Government of the world:
Such a Notion would cashiere all sentiments of good, and be like a Trojan
Horse, whence all impurity, tyranny and all sorts of mischeifs would break out
upon mankind: Corruption and abominable works in the text are the fruit of the
fools persuasion that there is no God. The perverting the ways of men,
oppression and extortion owe their rise to a forgetfulness of God. Jer. 3.21.
They have perverted their way, and they have forgotten the Lord their God.
Ezekiel. 22.12. Thou have greedily gained by extortion and have forgotten me,
says the Lord. The whole Earth would be filled with violence, all flesh would
corrupt their way, as it was before the deluge, when probably Atheism did
abound more than Idolatry; and if not a disowning the being, yet denying the
Providence of God by the posterity of Cain: Those of the Family of Seth only
calling upon the name of the Lord, Genesis 6.11.12. compared, which Genesis 4.26.

The greatest sense of a Deity in any, has been attended with the greatest
innocence of life and usefulness to others: And a weaker sense has been
attended with a baser impurity. Iessius de Provid. p. 665.
If there were no God, Blasphemy would be praiseworthy: As the reproach of
Idols is praiseworthy, because we testify that there is no Divinity in them.
What can be more contemptible than that which has no being? Sin would be only
a false opinion of a violated Law, and an offended Deity. If such appresensions
prevail, what a wide door is opened to the worst of villainies? If there be no
God, no respect is due to him; all the Religion in the world is a trifle, and
Error, and thus the Pillars of all human society, and that which has made
Commonwealths to flourish, are blown away.

Secondly, 2: It Is pernicious to the Atheist himself. If he fear no future
punishment, he can never expect any future reward: All his hopes must be
confined to a Swinish and despicable manner of life, without any imaginations
of so much as a dram of reserved hapiness. He is in a worse condition than the
filliest animal, which has something to please it in its life: Whereas an
Atheist can have nothing here to give him a full content, no more than any
other man in the World, and can have less satisfaction hereafter. He deposes
the noble end of his own being, which was to serve a God and have a
satisfaction in him, to seek a God and be rewarded by him: And he that departs
from his end, recedes from his own nature. All the content any Creature finds,
is in performing its end, moveing according to its natural instinct: As it is a
joy to the Sun to run its race: Psalm. 19.5.
In the same manner it is a satisfaction to every other Creature, and its
delight to observe the Law of its Creation. What content can any man have that
runs from his end, opposes his own nature, denies a God by whom and for whom
he was Created, whose Image he bears, which is the Glory of his nature; and
sinks into the very, dregs of bruitishness? How elegantly is it described by
Bildad, Job. 18.7.8. etc. to the end.
his own Counsel shall cast him down, terrors shall make him afraid on every
side, destruction shall be ready at his side, the first born of Death shall
devour his strength, his confidence shall be rooted out, and it shall bring him
to the King of Terrors: Brimstone shall be scattered upon his Habitation, he
shall be driven from light into darkness, and chased out of the World; they
that come after him shall be astonished at his day, as they that went before
were affrighted: and this is the place of him that knows not God. Ver. 21,
If there be a future reckoning, (as his own Conscience cannot but sometimes
inform him of) his condition is desperate, and his misery dreadful and
unavoidable: It Is not righteous a Hell should entertain any else, if it refuse
him.

How lamentable is it, that in our times this folly of Atheism should be so
rise? That there should be found such Monsters in human nature, in the midst of
the improvements of Reason, and shinings of the Gospel, who not only make the
Scripture the matter of their Jeers, but Scoff at the Judgments and Providence
of God in the World, and envy their Creator a being, without whose goodness
they had had none themselves; who contradict in their carriage what they assert
to be their sentiment, when they dreadfully imprecate damnation to themselves?
Whence should that damnation they so rashly wish, be poured forth upon them, if
there were not a revenging God? Formerly Atheism was as rare as prodigious,
scarce two or three known in an age. * And those that are reported to be so in
former ages, are rather thought to be counted so, for mocking at the senceless
Deities, the common people adored, and laying open their impurities. A mere
natural strength would easily discover that those they adored for Gods, could
not deserve that title, since their original was known, their uncleanness
manifest and acknowledged by their worshippers. And probably it was so, As
Justin inf^rm us.
since the Christians were termed (...), because they acknowledged not their
vain Idols.

I question whether there ever was, or can be in the world, an uninterrupted
and internal denial of the being of God, or that men, (unless we can suppose
Conscience utterly dead) can arrive to such a degree of impiety: For before
they can stifle such sentiments in them, (whatsoever they may assert) they must
be utter strangers to the common conceptions of reason, and despoile themselves
of their own humanity. He that dares to deny a God with his lips, yet sets up
something or other as a God in his heart. Is it not lamentable that this sacred
truth, consented to by all Nations, which is the band of civil societies, the
source of all order in the world, should be denied with a bare face, and
disputed against in Companies; And the Glory of a wise Creator ascribed to an
unintelligent nature, to blind chance? are not such worse then Heathens? They
worshipped many Gods, these none: They preserved a notion of God in the world
under a disguise of Images: These would banish him both from Earth and Heaven,
and demolish the Statues of him in their own Consciences: They degraded him,
these would destroy him: They coupled Creatures with him; Rom 1.25. Who
worshipped the Creature with the Creator, as it may most properly be rendered:
And these would make him worse than the Creature, a mere nothing. Earth is
hereby become worse than Hell. Atheism is a persuasion, which finds no footing
any where else. Hell that receives such persons, in this point reforms them:
They can never deny or doubt of his being, while they feel his strokes. The
Devil that rejoices at their wickedness, knows them to be in an error; for he
believes and trembles at the belief. Jam. 2.19.
This is a forerunner of Judgment: Boldness in sin is a presage of vengeance,
especially when the honor of God is more particularly concerned therein. It
tends to the overturning human society, taking off the Bridle from the wicked
inclinations of men. And God appears not in such visible Judgments against sin
immediately committed against himself, as in the case of those sins that are
destructive to human society. Besides, God as Governor of the world will uphold
that, without which all his ordinances in the world would be useless. Atheism
is point blank against all the Glory of God in Creation, and against all the
glory of God in Redemption, and pronounces at one breath, both the Creator,
and all Acts of Religion and Divine Institutions useless and insignificant.

Since most have had one time or other, some risings of doubt, whether there be
a God, tho few do in expressions deny his being, it may not be unnecessary to
propose somethings for the further impressing this truth, and guarding
themselves against such temptations.

1. It Is utterly impossible to demonstrate there is no God. He can choose no
Medium, but will fall in as a proof for his Existence, and a manifestation of
his excellency, rather than against it. The pretenses of the Atheist are so
ridiculous, that they are not worth the mentioning.

They never saw God, and therefore know not how to believe such a Being; they
cannot comprehend him. He would not be God, if he could fall within the narrow
Model of an humane Understanding: He would not be infinite, if he were
comprehensible, or to be terminated by our sight. How small a thing must that
be which is seen by a bodily Eye, or graspt by a weak Mind? If God were visible
or comprehensible, he would be limited: Shall it be a sufficient Demonstration
from a blind man, that there is no fire in the Room, because he sees it not,
though he feel the warmth of it? The knowledge of the effect is sufficient to
conclude the existence of the cause. Who ever saw his own Life? Is it
sufficient to deny a man lives, because he beholds not his Life, and only knows
it by his motion? He never saw his own Soul, but knows he has one by his
thinking power: The Air renders it self sensible to Men in its Operations, yet
was never seen by the eye.

If God should render Himself visible, they might question as well as now,
whether that which was so visible, were God or some delusion. If he should
appear glorious, we can as little behold him in his Majestic Glory, as an Owl
can behold the Sun in its brightness; we should still but see him in his
Effects, as we do the Sun by his Beams. If he should show a new Miracle, we
should still see him but by his Works; so we see him in his Creatures, every
one of which would be as great a Miracle as any can be wrought, to one that had
the first prospect of them. To require to see God, is to require that which is
impossible, 1 Timothy 6.16. He dwells in the Light which no man can approach unto,
whom no man has seen nor can see. It Is visibe that he is, for he covers
himself with Light as with a Garment, Psalm. 104.2. It Is invisible what he is,
for he makes Darkness his seceret place, Psalm. 18.11. Nothing more clear to the
Eye than Light, and nothing more difficult to the understanding than the nature
of it: as Light is the first Object obvious to the Eye, so is God the first
Object obvious to the Understanding. The Arguments from Nature do with greater
strength evince his Existence, than any pretenses can manifest there is no God.
No man can assure himself by any good reason there is none: For as for the
likeness of Events to him that is righteous and him that is wicked, to him that
sacrifices and to him that sacrifices not, Eccles. 9.2. It is an Argument for
a reserve of Judgment in another State, which every man's Conscience dictates to
him; when the Justice of God shallbe glorified in another world, as much as his
Patience is in this.

2. Whosoever doubts of it, makes himself a Mark, against which all the
Creatures fight.

All the Stars fought against Sisera for Israel: All the Stars in Heaven, and
the Dust on Earth fight for God against the Atheist. He has as many Arguments
against him as there are Creatures in the whole compass of Heaven and Earth: He
is most unreasonable, that denies or doubts of that whose Image and Shadow he
sees round about him; he may sooner deny the Sun that warms him, the Moon that
in the Night walks in her brightness, deny the Fruits he enjoys from the Earth,
yea and, deny that he does exist. He must tear his own Conscience, fly from his
own Thoughts, be changed into the nature of a Stone which has neither reason
nor sense, before he can disingage himself from those Arguments which evince
the Being of a God. He that would make the natural Religion professed in the
world a mere Romance, must give the lie to the common sense of Mankind; he must
be at an irreconcilable enmity with his own Reason, resolve to hear nothing
that it speaks, if he will not hear what it speaks in this case, with a greater
evidence than it can ascertain any thing else. God has so settled himself in
the reason of Man, that he must vilify the noblest Faculty God has given him,
and put off Nature it self before he can blot out the Notion of a God.

3. No question but those that have been so bold as to deny that there was a
God, have sometimes been much afraid they have been in an Error, and have at
least suspected there was a God, when some sudden Prodigy has presented it
self to them and roused their fears. And whatsoever Sentiments they might have
in their blinding Prosperity, they have had other kind of motions in them in
their stormy afflictions: and like Jonah's Mariners have been ready to cry to
him for help, whom they disdained to own so much as in being, while they swam
in their pleasures. The thoughts of a Deity cannot be so extinguished, but they
will revive and rush upon a Man, at least under some sharp affliction. Amazing
judgments will make them question their own apprehensions. God sends some
Messengers to keep alive the apprehension of him as a Judge, while men resolve
not to own or reverence him as a Governor. A man cannot but keep a scent of
what was born with him. As a vessel that has been seasoned first with a strong
juice will preserve the scent of it, whatsoever liquors are afterward put into
it.

4. What is it for which such men rack their wits, to form Notions, that there
is no God? Is it not that they would indulge some vicious habit, which has
gained the possession of their Soul, which they know cannot be favored by that
holy God, whose Notion they would raze out Psalm. 94.6.7.
? Is it not for some brutish affection, as degenerative of human Nature, as
derogatory to the Glory of God; a lust as unmanly as sinful?

The terrors of God are the effects of guilt; and therefore men would wear out
the apprehensions of a Deity, that they might be brutish without control. They
would fain believe there were no God, that they might not be men, but beasts.
How great a folly is it to take so much pains in vain, for a slavery and
torment; to cast off that which they call a yoke, for that which really is one!
There is more pains and toughness of Soul requisite to shake off the
apprehensions of God, than to believe that he is, and cleave constantly to him.
What a madness is it in any to take so much pains to be less than a man, by
razing out the apprehensions of God, when with less pains, he may be more than
an earthly man, by cherishing the notions of God, and walking answerably
thereunto.

5. How unreasonable is it for any man to hazard himself at this rate in the
denial of a God? The Atheist says he knows not that there is a God; but may he
not reasonably think, there may be one for ought he knows? and if there be,
what a desperate confusion will he be in, when all his bravado's shall prove
false? What can they gain by such an Opinion? a freedom say they from the
burdensome yoke of Conscience, a liberty to do what they list: that does not
subject them to Divine Laws. It Is an hard matter to persuade any that they can
gain this. They can gain but a sordid pleasure, unworthy the Nature of Man. But
it were well, that such would argue thus with themselves: If there be a God,
and I fear and obey him, I gain a happy Eternity; but if there be no God, I
lose nothing but my sordid lusts by firmly beleiving there is one. If I be
deceived at last, and find a God, can I think to be rewarded by him, for
disowning him? Do not I run a desperate hazard to lose his favor, his Kingdom
and endless felicity, for an endless torment? By confessing a God I venture no
loss; but by denying him I run the most desperate hazard, if there be one.

He is not a reasonable Creature, that will not put himself upon such a
reasonable arguing.

What a doleful meeting will there be between the God who is denied, and the
Atheist that denies him, who shall meet with reproaches on Gods part, and
terrors on his own? All that he gains is a liberty to defile himself here, and
a certainty to be despised hereafter, if he be in an error, as undoubtedly he
is.

6. Can any such person say he has done all that he can to inform himself of
the being of God, or of other things which he denies? Or rather they would fain
imagine there is none, that they may sleep securely in their lusts and be free
(if they could) from the thunderclaps of Conscience? Can such say they have
used their utmost endeavors to instruct themselves in this, and can meet with
no satisfaction? Were it an abstruse Truth it might not be wondered at: but not
to meet with satisfaction in this which every thing minds us of, and helps,
is the fruit of an extreme negligence, stupidity, and a willingness to be
unsatisfied, and a judicial process of God against them. It Is strange any man
should be so dark in that upon which depends the conduct of his life, and the
expectation of happiness hereafter.

I do not know what some of you may think, but I believe these things are not
useless to be proposed for our selves to answer temptations: We know not what
wicked temptation in a debauched and sceptick Age, meeting with a corrupt
heart, may prompt men to: And tho there may not be any Atheist here present,
yet I know there is more than one, who have accidentally met with such, who
openly denied a Deity. And if the like occasion happen, these considerations
may not be unuseful to apply to their Consciences. But I must confess, that
since those that live in this sentiment, do not judge themselves worthy of their
own care, they are not worthy of the care of others; and a man must have all
the Charity of the Christian Religion, which they despise, not to contemn them,
and leave them to their own folly. As we are to pity mad men, who sink under an
unavoidable distemper, we are as much to abominate them, who wilfully hug this
prodigious frenzy.

It Is our wisdom to be firmly settled in this Truth, That God is. We should
never be without our Arms in an Age wherein Atheism appears bare faced without
a disguise.

You may meet with suggestions to it; though the Devil formerly never attempted
to demolish this notion in the World, but was willing to keep it up, so the
worship due to God might run in his own Channel; and was necessitated to
preserve it, without which he could not have erected that Idolatry, which was
his great design in opposition to God: yet since the Foundations of that are
torn up, and never like to be rebuilt, he may endeavor, as his last refuge, to
banish the Notion of God out of the World; that he may reign as absolutely
without it, as he did before by the mistakes about the divine Nature. But we
must not lay all upon Satan; the corruption of our own hearts ministers matter
to such Sparks. It Is not said Satan has suggested to the Fool, but the Fool
has said in his heart there is no God. But let them come from what principle
soever, silence them quickly, give them their dismiss; oppose the whole Scheme
of Nature to sight against them, as the Stars did against Sisera. Stir up
sentiments of Conscience to oppose sentiments of corruption. Resolve sooner to
believe, that your selves are not, than that God is not: And if you suppose
they at any time come from Satan, object to him that you know he believes the
contrary, to what he suggests. Settle this principle firmly in you, let us
behold Him that is invisible, as Moses did: Heb. 11.27.
Let us have the sentiments following upon the Notion of a God; to be
restrained by a fear of him, excited by a love to him, not to violate his Laws
and offend his Goodness. He is not a God careless of our actions, negligent to
inflict punishment, and bestow rewards, he forgets not the labor of our love,
Heb. 6.10.
nor the integrity of our ways: He were not a God, if he were not a Governor:
And punishments and rewards are as essential to Government, as a Foundation to
a building: His being and his Government in rewarding, which implies
punishment, (for the neglects of him are linkt together,) Heb. 11.6.
are not to be separated in our thoughts of him.

1. Without this truth fixed in us, we can never give him the worship due to
his Name. When the knowledge of any thing is fluctuating and uncertain, our
actions about it are careless. We regard not that which we think does not much
concern us. If we do not firmly believe there is a God, we shall pay him no
steady worship; and if we believe not the excellency of his nature, we shall
offer him but a slight service. Mal. 1.13.14.
The Jews Maimon. funda. Legis cap. 1.
call the knowledge of the being of God, The Foundation and Pillar of wisdom.
The whole frame of Religion is dissolved without this apprehension, and totters
if this apprehension be wavering. Religion in the heart is as water in a
weather glass which rises or falls according to the strength or weakness of
this belief: How can any man worship that which he beleives not to be, or
doubts of? Could any man omit the paying a homage to one, whom he did believe
to be an Omnipotent, Wise Being, possessing, (infinitely above our conceptions)
the perfections of all Creatures? He must either think there is no such being,
or that he is an easy drowsy inobservant God, and not such a one as our natural
Notions of him, if listened to, as well as the Scripture, represents him to be.

2. Without being rooted in this, we cannot order our lives. All our baseness,
stupidity, dullness, wanderings, vanity spring from a wavering and unsetledness
in this principle. This gives ground to brutish pleasures, not only to
solicit, but conquer us. Abraham expected violence in any place where God was
not owned, Genesis 20.11. Surely the fear of God is not in this place, and they
will slay me for my Wises sake. The natural knowledge of God firmly impressed,
would choke that which would stifle our reason and deface our Souls. The belief
that God is, and what he is, would have a mighty influence to persuade us to a
real Religion, and serious Consideration, and casting about how to be like to
him and united with him.

3. Without it we cannot have any comfort of our Lives. Who would willingly
live in a stormy world, void of a God? If we waver in this Principle, to whom
should we make our complaints in our afflictions? Where should we meet with
supports? How could we satisfy our selves with the hopes of a future Happiness?
There is a Sweetness in the Meditation of his Existence, and that he is a
Creator. Psalm. 104.24.
Thoughts of other things have a Bitterness mixed with them: Houses, Lands,
Children now are, shortly they will not be; but God is, that made the World:
His Faithfullness as he is a Creator, is a Ground to deposite our Souls and
Concerns in our innocent Sufferings. 1 Pet. 4.19.
So far as we are weak in the acknowledgment of God, we deprive our selves of
our content in the veiw of his infinite perfections.

4. Without the rooting of this Principle, we cannot have a firm belief of
Scripture. The Scripture will be a slight thing to one that has weak
sentiments of God. The Belief of a God must necessarily precede the Belief of
any Revelation; The latter cannot take place without the former as the
foundation. We must firmly believe the Being of a God, wherein our Happiness
does consist, before we can believe any means which conduct us to him: Moses
begins with the Author of Creation, before he treats of the Promise of
Redemption. Paul preached God as a Creator to a University, before he preached
Christ as Mediator. Acts 17.24.
What influence can the Testimony of God have in his Revelation upon one that
does not firmly assent to the truth of his Being? All would be in vain that is
so often repeated [thus says the Lord] if we do not believe there is a Lord
that speaks it. There could be no aw from his Soveraignity in his Commands, nor
any comfortable taste of his Goodness in his Promises. The more we are
strengthened in this Principle, the more credit we shall be able to give to
divine Revelation, to rest in his Promise, and to reverence his Precept; the
Authority of all depends upon the Being of the Revealer.

To this purpose, since we have handled this discourse by natural Arguments,

1. Study God in the Creatures as well as in the Scriptures. The primary use of
the Creatures, is to acknowledge God in them; they were made to be witnesses of
himself and his Goodness, and Heralds of his Glory, which Glory of God as
Creator shall endure for ever, Psalm. 104.31. that whole Psalm is a Lecture of
Creation and Providence. The World is a sacred Temple; Man is introduced to
contemplate it, and behold with Praise the Glory of God in the pieces of his
Art. As Grace does not destroy Nature, so the Book of Redemption blots not out
that of Creation: Had he not shown himself in his Creatures, he could never
have shown himself in his Christ: The order of things required it. God must be
read where ever he is legible; The Creatures are one book, wherein he has writ
a part of the excellency of his name, Psalm. 8.9.
as many Artists do in their Works and Watches. Gods Glory like the Filings of
Gold is too precious to be lost where ever it drops: Nothing so vile and base
in the World, but carries in it an instruction for Man, and drives in further
the Notion of a God. As he said of his Cottage; Enter here, Sunt hic etiam Dij,
God disdains not this place: So the least Creature speaks to Man, every Shrub
in the Field, every Fly in the Air, every Limbin a Body; consider me, God
disdains not to appear in me; he has discovered in me his Being and a part of
his Skill, as well as in the highest. The Creatures manifest the Being of God
and part of his Perfections. We have indeed a more excellent way, a Revelation
setting him forth in a more excellent manner, a firmer Object of Dependence, a
brighter Object of Love, raising our hearts from self confidence to a
confidence in him. Though the appearance of God in the one be clearer than in
the other, yet neither is to be neglected: The Scripture directs us to Nature
to view God; it had been in vain else for the Apostle to make use of natural
Arguments: Nature is not contrary to Scripture, nor Scripture to Nature; unless
we should think God contrary to himself, who is the Author of both.

2. View God in your own experiences of him. There is a taste and sight of his
Goodness, though no sight of his Essence. Psalm. 34.98.
By the taste of his Goodness you may know the reality of the fountain, whence
it springs and from whence it flows: This surpasses the greatest Capacity of a
mere natural Understanding. Experience of the sweetness of the ways of
Christianity is a mighty preservative against Atheism. Many a Man knows not how
to prove Honey to be sweet by his reason, but by his sense; and if all the
reason in the world be brought against it, he will not be reasoned out of what
he tastes.

Have not many found the delightful illappses of God into their Souls, often
sprinkled with his inward blessings upon their seeking of him; had secret
warnings in their approaches to him; and gentle rebukes in their Consciences
upon their swervings from him? Have not many found sometimes an invisible hand
raising them up when they were dejected; some unexpected providence stepping in
for their relief; and easily perceived that it could not be a work of chance,
nor many times the intention of the instruments he has used in it? You have
often found that he is, by finding that he is a rewarder, and can set to your
seals that he is what he has declared himself to be in his word, Isa. 43.12. I
have declared, and have saved, therefore you are my witnesses says the Lord
that I am God. The secret touches of God upon the heart and inward converses
with him are a greater evidence of the Existence of a supreme and infinitely
good being, than all nature.

It Is a folly also not to worship God, when we acknowledge his Existence: It Is
our Wisdom then to Worship him. As it is not indifferent whether we believe
there is a God or no: So it is not indifferent whether we will give Honor to
that God or no. A worship is his right as he is the Author of our being, and
fountain of our happiness. By this only we acknowledge his Deity: Tho we may
profess his being, yet we deny that profession in neglects of worship. To deny
him a Worship is as a great folly, as to deny his being. He that renounceth all
homage to his Creator, envies him the being which he cannot deprive him of. The
natural inclination to worship is as universal as the Notion of a God; Idolatry
else had never gained footing in the world. The Existence of God was never
owned in any Nation, but a Worship of him was appointed. And many people who
have turned their backs upon some other parts of the Law of nature, have paid a
continual homage to some superior and invisible being. The Jews give a Reason
why Man was Created in the Evening of the Sabbath, because he should begin his
being with the worship of his Maker. As soon as ever he found himself to be a
Creature, his first solemn act, should be a particular respect to his Creator.
Eccl. 12.
To fear God and keep his Commandment, is the whole of man, or is Heb.
whole man; he is not a man but a beast, without observance of God. Religion is
as requisite as reason to complete a man: He were not reasonable if he were not
Religious; because by neglecting Religion, he neglects the chiefest dictate of
reason. Either God framed the world with so much Order, Elegancy, and variety
to no purpose, or this was his end at least, that reasonable Creatures should
admire him in it, and Honor him for it. The Notion of God was not stamped upon
men, the shadows of God did not appear in the Creatures, to be the Subject of
an idle contemplation, but the motive of a due homage to God: He Created the
world for his glory, a people for himself, that he might have the Honor of his
works: That since we live and move in him and by him, we should live and move
to him and for him. It was the condemnation of the Heathen world, that when
they knew there was a God, they did not give him the Glory due to him. Romans
1.21.
He that denies his being is an Atheist to his essence: He that denies his
worship is an Atheist to his Honor.

5. If it be a folly to deny the being of God, It will be our Wisdom then,
since we acknowledge his being, often to think of him. Thoughts are the first
issue of a Creature as reasonable: Pro. 4.23.
He that has given us the faculty whereby we are able to think, should be the
principal object about which the power of it should be exercised. It Is a Justice
to God the Author of our understandings, a Justice to the nature of our
understandings, that the noblest faculty should be employed about the most
excellent object. Our minds are a beam from God; and therefore, as the Beams of
the Sun, when they touch the Earth, should reflect back upon God: As we seem to
deny the being of God, not to think of him; we seem also to unsoul our Souls,
in misimploying the activity of them any other way: like Flies to be oftener on
Dunghils than Flowers.

It Is made the black mark of an ungodly Man or an Atheist, that God is not in
all his thoughts, Psalm. 10.4. What comfort can be had in the being of God
without thinking of him with Reverence and delight? A God forgotten is as good
as no God to us.

A DISCOURSE UPON PRACTICAL ATHEISM.
Psalm 14.1.
Doct. 2. PRACTICAL Atheism is natural to Man in his depraved state, and very
frequent in the hearts and lives of Men.

The Fool has said in his heart there is no God. He regards him as little as
if he had no being: He said in his heart, not with his tongue, nor in his head:
He never firmly thought it, nor openly asserted it: Shame put a Bar to the
first, and natural reason to the second. Yet perhaps he had sometimes some
doubts whether there were a God or no: He wished there were not any, and
sometimes hoped there were none at all: He could not raze out the Notion of a
Deity in his mind, but he neglected the fixing the sense of God in his heart,
and made it too much his business to deface and blot out those Characters of
God in his Soul, which had been left under the ruins of original nature.

Men may have Atheistical hearts without Atheistical heads. Their reasons may
defend the Notion of a Deity, while their hearts are empty of affection to the
Deity: Jobs Children may curse God in their hearts, tho not with their lips.
Job. 1.5.


There is no God. Most understand it of a denial of the Providence of God; as I
have said in opening the former Doctrine.

He denies some essential Attribute of God, or the exercise of that Attribute
in the world. So the Chalde reads. (...) Non potestas, denying the authority of
God in the world.


He that denies any essential Attribute, may be said to deny the being of God.
Whosoever denies Angels or men to have Reason and Will, denies the human and
Angelical nature, because Understanding and Will are essential to both those
Natures; there could neither be Angel nor Man without them. No Nature can
subsist without the perfections essential to that Nature, nor God be conceived
of without His: The Apostle tells us, Ephesians. 2.12. that the Gentiles were without
God in the World: So in some sense all unbelievers may be termed Atheists; for
rejecting the Mediator appointed by God, they reject that God who appointed him.

But this is beyond the intended scope; Natural Atheism being the only subject:
Yet this is deducible from it. That the title of (...), does not only belong to
those who deny the Existence of God, or to those who contemn all sense of a
Deity, and would root the Conscience and Reverence of God out of their Souls:
But it belongs also to these who give not that Worship to God which is due to
him: Who Worship many Gods, or who Worship one God in a false and superstitious
manner; when they have not right conceptions of God, nor intend an adoration of
him according to the excellency of his Nature: All those that are unconcerned
for any particular Religion, fall under this Character. Though they own a God
in general, yet are willing to acknowledge any God that shall be coined by the
powers under whom they live. The Gentiles were without God in the world;
without the true Notion of God, not without a God of their own framing.

This general or practical Atheism is natural to men.

1. Not natural by Created, but by corrupted Nature: It Is against nature, as
nature came out of the hand of God: But universaly natural, as nature has been
sophisticated and infected by the Serpents breath. Inconsideration of God, or
misrepresentations of his nature, are as agreeable to corrupt nature, as the
disowning the being of a God is contrary to common reason. God is not denied
natura, sed vitiis. Augustine de Civit. Dei.


2. It Is universally natural: The wicked are estranged from the Womb, Psa. 58.3.
They go astray as soon as they be born, their poison is like the poison of a
Serpent. The wicked: And who by his birth has a better title? They go astray
from the dictates of God and the rule of their Creation as soon as ever they be
born; Their poison is like the poison of a Serpent, which is radically the same
in all of the sames species. It Is seminally and fundamentally in all men, though
there may be a stronger restraint by a Divine hand upon some men, than upon
others. This principle runs through the whole stream of Nature. The natural
bent of every man's heart is distant from God: When we attempt any thing
pleasing to God, it is like the climbing up a Hill, against nature; when any
thing is displeasing to him, it is like a Current running down the Channel in its
natural course: When we attempt any thing that is an acknowledgment of the
Holiness of God, we are fain to rush with Arms in our hands through a
multitude of natural passions, and fight the way through the oppositions of our
own sensitive appetite. How softly do we naturally sink down into that which
sets us at a greater distance from God? There is no active, potent, efficacious
sense of a God by nature. The heart of the Sons of men is fully set in them to
do evil, Eccl. 8.11. The heart in the singular number; as if there were but one
Common heart beat in all mankind, and bent as with own pulse, with a joint
consent and force to wickedness, without a sense of the Authority of God in the
Earth; as if one heart acted every Man in the world.

The great Apostle cites the Text to verefie the charge he brought against all
mankind. Romans 3.9, 10.11.12.
In his interpretation, the Jews, who owned one God, and were dignified with
special privileges, as well as the Gentiles that maintained many Gods, are
within the compass of this Character: The Apostle leaves out the first part of
the Text, the fool has said in his heart, but takes in the latter part, and
the verses following: He charges all, because all, every man of them was under
sin: There is none that seeks God, and ver. 19. He adds what the law says, it
speaks to those that are under the Law. That none should imagine he included
only the Gentiles and exempted the Jews from this description. The Leprosy of
Atheism had infected the whole Mass of human nature: No Man among Jews or
Gentiles did naturally seek God; and therefore all were void of any spark of
the practical sense of the Deity. The effects of this Atheism are not in all
externally of an equal size: Yet in the fundamentals and radicals of it, there
is not a hairs difference between the best and the worst men that ever
traversed the world. The distinction is laid either in common Grace, bounding
and suppressing it; or in special Grace killing and crucifying it. It Is in every
one either triumphant or militant, reigning or deposed. No Man is any more born
with sensible acknowledgments of God, than he is born with a clear knowledge of
the nature of all the Stars in the Heavens, or Plants upon the Earth. None
seeks after God. Coccei.
None seek God as his rule, as his end, as his happiness, which is a debt the
Creature naturally owes to God; he desires no communion with God: He places his
happiness in any thing inferior to God: He prefers every thing before him,
glorifies every thing above him; he has no delight to know him; he regards not
those paths which lead to him; he loves his own filth better than Gods
Holiness; his actions are tinctured, and dyed with self, and are void of that
respect which is due from him to God.

The noblest Faculty of Man, his Understanding, wherein the remaining
Lineaments of the Image of God are visible; the highest Operation of that
Faculty, which is Wisdom, is in the Judgment of the Spirit of God Devilish,
whiles it is earthly and sensual Jam. 3.15.
: and the Wisdom of the best man is no better by Nature; a legion of impure
Spirits possess it. Devilish, as the Devil, who though he believe there is a
God, yet acts as if there were none, and wishes he had no Superior to prescribe
him a Law, and inflict that punishment upon him which his Crimes have merited.
Hence the Poison of Man by Nature is said to be like the Poison of a Serpent,
alluding to that serpentine temptation which first infected Mankind, and
changed the nature of Man into the likeness of that of the Devil. Psalm. 58.4.
So that notwithstanding the Harmony of the World that presents men not only
with the Notice of the Being of a God, but darts into their minds some remarks
of his Power and Eternity; yet the thoughts and reasonings of Man are so
corrupt, as may well be called Diabolical, and as contrary to the Perfection of
God and the original Law of their Nature, as the actings of the Devil are: For
since every natural Man is a Child of the Devil, and is acted by the Diabolical
Spirit, he must needs have that Nature which his Father has, and the Infusion
of that Venom which the Spirit that acts him, is possessed with; though the
full Discovery of it may be restrained by various Circumstances, Ephesians. 2.2. To
conclude, though no man, or at least very few arrive to a round and positive
Conclusion in their hearts that there is no God, yet there is no man that
naturally has in his heart any reverence of God.

In general, before I come to a particular Proof, take some Propositions.

Proposition 1. Actions are a greater discovery of a Principle than Words. The
Testimony of Works is louder and clearer than that of Words, and the Frame of
men's hearts must be measured, rather by what they do, than by what they say.
There may be a mighty distance between the Tongue and the Heart, but a Course
of Actions is as little guilty of lying as Interest is, according to our common
saying: All outward Impieties are the branches of an Atheism at the root of our
Nature, as all pestilential sores are expressions of the Contagion in the
Blood. Sin is therefore frequently called Ungodliness in our English Dialect.
Men's Practices are the best Indexes of their Principles: The Current of a Man's
Life, is the counter-part of the Frame of his Heart: Who can deny an Error in
the Spring or Wheels, when he perceives an Error in the hand of the Dial? Who
can deny an Atheism in the Heart, when so much is visible in the Life? The Taste
of the water discovers what Mineral it is strained through. A practical Denial
of God is worse than a verbal, because deeds have usually more of deliberation
than words; words may be the fruit of a Passion, but a set of evil actions are
the fruit and evidence of a predominant evil Principle in the Heart: All
slighting words of a Prince do not argue an habitual Treason, but a succession
of overt treasonable Attempts signify a settled treasonable disposition in the
Mind: Those therefore are more deservedly termed Atheists, who acknowledge a
God and walk as if there were none, than those (if there can be any such) that
deny a God and walk as if there were one.

A Sense of God in the Heart, would burst out in the Life: Where there is no
reverence of God in the Life, it is easily concluded there is less in the Heart.

What does not influence a Man when it has the addition of the Eyes, and
censures of outward Spectators, and the care of a Reputation (so much the God
of the world) to strengthen it and restrain the action, must certainly have
less power over the Heart when it is single without any other concurrence. The
Flames breaking out of a house discover the Fire to be much stronger and
fiercer within. The Apostle judges those of the Circumcision, who gave heed to
Jewish Fables, to be Denyers of God, though he does not tax them with any
notorious Profaneness. Tit. 1.16. They profess that they know God, but in works
they deny him; he gives them Epithites contrary to what they arrogated to
themselves: Illyric.
They boasted themselves to be holy, the Apostle calls them abominable; They
bragged that they fulfilled the Law and observed the Traditions of their
Fathers, the Apostle calls them disobedient, or unperswadable; They boasted
that they only had the Rule of Righteousness, and a sound Judgment concerning
it, the Apostle said they had a Reprobate Sense and unfit for any good work;
and judges against all their vain glorious braggs, that they had not a
Reverence of God in their Hearts; there was more of the Denial of God in their
Works than there was Acknowledgement of God in their Words: Those that have
neither God in their Thoughts, nor in their Tongues, nor in their Works, cannot
properly be said to acknwledge him: Where the Honor of God is not practically
owned in the lives of men, the Being of God is not sensibly acknowledged in the
hearts of men: The Principle must be of the same kind with the Actions; if the
Actions be Atheistical, the Principal of them can be no better.

Prop. 2. All Sin is founded in a secret Atheism. Atheism is the Spirit of
every Sin; all the Floods of Impieties in the World break in at the Gate of a
secret Atheism: And though several sins may disagree with one another, yet like
Herod and Pilate against Christ, they join hand in hand against the interest of
God. Though lusts and pleasures be diverse, yet they are all united in
Disobedience to him. Tit. 3.3.
All the wicked inclinations in the heart, and struggling motions, secret
repinings, self applauding confidences in our own wisdom, strength, etc. envy,
ambition, revenge, are sparks from this latent fire; the language of every one
of these is, I would be a Lord to my self, and would not have a God Superior to
me.

The variety of sins against the first and second Table, the neglects of God
and violences against Man are derived from this in the Text, first the Fool
has said in his heart, and then follows a legion of Devils: As all virtuous
actions spring from an acknowledgment of God; so all vicious actions rise from
a lurking Denial of him. All licentiousness goes glib down where there is no
sense of God. Abraham judged himself not secure from Murder, nor his Wife from
Defilement in Gerar, if there were no Fear of God there. Genesis 20.11.
He that makes no Conscience of Sin has no regard to the Honor, and
consequently none to the Being of God. By the Fear of God men depart from Evil,
Pro. 16.6. By the non-regarding of God men rush into Evil. Pharaoh oppressed
Israel because he knew not the Lord. If he did not deny the Being of a Deity,
yet he had such an unworthy Notion of God as was inconsistent with the Nature
of a Deity; he a poor Creature thought himself a Mate for the Creator.

In sins of Ommission we own not God, in neglecting to perform what he enjoins:
In sins of Commission we set up some lust in the place of God, and pay to that
the Homage which is due to our Maker: In both we disown him; in the one by not
doing what he commands, in the other by doing what he forbids.

We deny his Sovereignty when we violate his Laws; we disgrace his Holiness
when we cast our filth before his Face; we disparage his Wisdom when we set up
another Rule as the Guide of our Actions than that Law he has fixed; we slight
his Sufficiency when we prefer a satisfaction in sin before a happiness in Him
alone, and his Goodness, when we judge it not strong enough to attract us to
him. Every sin invades the Rights of God, and strips him of one or other of his
Perfections: It Is such a vilifying of God as if he were not God; as if he were
not the supreme Creator and Benefactor of the World; as if we had not our Being
from Him; as if the Air we breathed in, the Food we lived by, were our own by
right of Supreamacy not of Donation: For a Subject to slight his Sovereign, is
to slight his Royalty; or a Servant his Master, is to deny his Superiority.

Prop. 3. Sin implies that God is unworthy of a Being. Every Sin is a kind of
cursing God in the Heart Job. 1.5.
; an aim at the destruction of the Being of God; not actually, but vertually;
not in the intention of every Sinner, but in the nature of every Sin. That
Affection which excites a man to break his Law, would excite him to annihilate
his Being if it were in his power. A Man in every sin aims to set up his own
will as his rule, and his own glory as the end of his actions against the will
and glory of God; and could a Sinner attain his end, God would be destroyed:
God cannot out live his will and his glory: God cannot have another rule but
his own will, nor another end but his own honor: Sin is called a turning the
back upon God, Jer. 32.33. Deuteronomy. 32.15.
a kicking against him, Jer. 32.33. Deuteronomy. 32.15.
as if he were a slighter person than the meanest beggar. What greater contempt
can be showed to the meanest, vilest person, than to turn the back, lift up the
heel, and thrust away with indignation? All which actions, though they signify
that such a one has a Being; yet they testify also that he is unworthy of a
Being, that he is an unuseful Being in the world, and that it were well the
world were rid of him.

All Sin against Knowledge is called a Reproach of God. Numb. 15.30. Ezekiel.
20.27.
Reproach is a vilifying a man as unworthy to be admitted into Company. We
naturally Judge God unfit to be conversed with. God is the term turned from by
a sinner: Sin is the term turned to; which implies a greater excellency in the
nature of sin, than in the nature of God. And as we naturally Judge it, more
worthy to have a being in our affections, so consequently more worthy to have a
being in the world, than that infinite nature from whom we derive our beings,
and our all; and upon whom with a kind of disdain we turn our backs. Whosoever
thinks the Notion of a Deity unfit to be cherished in his mind by warm
Meditation, implies that he cares not whether he has a being in the world or
no. Now tho the light of a Deity shines so clearly in Man, and the stings of
Conscience are so smart, that he cannot absolutely deny the being of a God; yet
most Men endeavor to smother this knowledge, and make the Notion of a God a
sapless and useless thing, Romans 1.28. They like not to retain God in their
knowledge.

It is said, Cain went out from the presence of the Lord, Genesis 4.16. That is,
from the Worship of God. Our refusing or abhorring the presence of a man
implies a carelessness whether he continue in the World or no: It Is a using him,
as if he had no being, or as if we were not concerned in it. Hence all men in
Adam, under the Emblem of the prodigal, are said to go into a far Country. Not
in respect of place, because of Gods Omnipresence; but in respect of
acknowledgment and affection; they mind and love any thing but God. And the
descriptions of the Nations of the world, lying in the Ruins of Adams fall,
and the dregs of that revolt, is that they know not God: They forget God, as if
there were no such being above them; and indeed he that does the works of the
Devil, owns the Devil to be more worthy of observance, and consequently of a
being, than God, whose nature he forgets and whose presence he abhors.

Proposition, 4. Every sin in its own nature would render God a foolish and
impure being. Many Transgressors esteem their acts, which are contrary to the
Law of God, both Wise and Good: If so, the Law against which they are
committed, must be both foolish and impure: What a reflection is there then
upon the Lawgiver? The Moral Law is not properly a mere act of Gods Will
considered in it self, or a Tyrannical Edict, like those of whom it may well be
said, stat pro ratione voluntas: But it commands those things, which are good
in their own nature, and prohibits those things, which are in their own nature
evil; and therefore is an act of his Wisdom and Righteousness; the result of
his wise Council, and an extract of his pure nature; as all the Laws of just
Lawgivers, are not only the acts of their Will, but of a Will governed by
Reason and Justice, and for the good of the public, whereof they are
conservators. If the Moral commands of God were only acts of his Will, and had
not an intrinsic necessity, reason and goodness, God might have commanded the
quite contrary, and made a contrary Law, whereby that which we now call Vice,
might have been canonized for Virtue: He might then have forbid any Worship of
him, Love to him, fear of his name: He might then have commanded Murders,
Thefts, Adulteries. In the first he would have untied the link of duty from the
Creature, and dissolved the obligations of Creatures to him, which is
impossible to be conceived; for from the Relation of a Creature to God,
obligations to God, and duties upon those obligations, do necessarily result.
It had been against the rule of Goodness and Justice, to have commanded the
Creature not to love him, and fear and obey him: This had been a command
against Righteousness, Goodness, and intrinsic obligations to Gratitude: And
should Murder, Adulteries, Rapines have been commanded instead of the contrary,
God would have destroyed his own Creation; he would have acted against the rule
of goodness and order; he had been an unjust tyrannical Governor of the world:
Public society would have been cracked in pieces, and the world become a
Shambles, a Brothel House, a place below the common sentiments of a mere man.
All sin therefore being against the Law of God, the Wisdom and holy rectitude
of Gods Nature is denied in every Act of disobedience: And what is the
consequence of this, but that God is both foolish and unrighteous in commanding
that, which was neither an Act of Wisdom, as a Governor, nor an Act of
goodness, as a benefactor to his Creature?

As was said before, presumptuous sins are called reproaches of God, Number.
15.30. The Soul that does ought presumptuously, reproacheth the Lord.
Reproaches of men are either for natural, moral, or intellectual defects. All
reproaches of God must imply a charge, either of unrighteousness, or ignorance:
If of unrighteousness, it is a denial of his Holiness: If of Ignorance, it is a
blemishing his Wisdom. If Gods Laws were not wise and holy, God would not
enjoin them: And if they are so, we deny infinite Wisdom and Holiness in God by
not complying with them. As when a man believes not God when he promises, he
makes him a liar, 1 John 5.10. So he that obeys not a wise and holy God
commanding, makes him guilty either of folly, or unrighteousness.

Now suppose you knew an absolute Atheist, who denied the being of a God, yet
had a life free from any notorious spot or defilement; would you in reason
count him so bad as the other that owns a God in being, yet lays, by his course
of action, such a black imputation, of folly and impurity upon the God he
professes to own; an imputation which renders any man a most despicable
Creature?

Proposition, 5. Sin in its own nature endeavors to render God the most
miserable being. It Is nothing but an opposition to the will of God: The will of
no Creature is so much contradicted, as the Will of God is by Devils and Men:
And there is nothing under the Heavens that the affections of human nature
stand more point blank against, than against God. There is a slight of him in
all the faculties of Man; our Souls are as unwilling to know him, as our Wills
are averse to follow him, Romans 8.7. The carnal mind is enmity against God, it is
not subject to the Law of God, nor can be subject. It Is true, Gods will cannot
be hindered of its effect, for then God would not be supremely blessed, but
unhappy and miserable: All misery arises from a want of that, which a nature
would have, and ought to have: Besides if any thing could frustrate Gods Will,
it would be superior to him: God would not be Omnipotent, and so would lose the
perfection of the Deity, and consequently the Deity it self; for that which did
wholly defeat Gods Will, would be more powerful than he. But sin is a
contradiction to the Will of Gods Revelation; to the Will of his precept, and
therein does naturally tend to a superiority over God, and would usurp his
Omnipotence, and deprive him of his blessedness. For if God had not an infinite
power to turn the designs of it to his own glory, but the will of sin could
prevail, God would be totally deprived of his blessedness. Does not sin
endeavor to subject God to the extravagant and contrary wills of men, and make
him more a slave than any Creature can be? For the Will of no Creature, not the
meanest and most despicable Creature, is so much crossed, as the Will of God is
by sin, Isa. 43.24. Thou have made me to serve with thy sins: Thou have
endeavored to make a mere slave of me by sin: Sin endeavors to subject the
blessed God to the humor and lust of every person in the world.

Proposition, 6. Men sometimes in some circumstances do wish the not being of
God. This some think to be the meaning of the Text, the fool has said in his
heart there is no God, that is, he wishes there were no God. Many tamper with
their own hearts to bring them to a persuasion that there is no God: And when
they cannot do that, they conjure up wishes that there were none. Men naturally
have some Conscience of sin, and some notices of Justice; Romans 1.32. They know
the Judgment of God, and they know the demerit of sin; they know the Judgment
of God, and that they which do such things are worthy of death. What is the
consequent of this but fear of punishment; and what is the issue of that fear,
but a wishing the Judge either unwilling or unable to vindicate the Honor of
his violated Law? When God is the object of such a wish, it is a vertual
undeifying of him: Not to be able to punish, is to be impotent; not to be
willing to punish, is to be unjust; Imperfections inconsistent with the Deity:
God cannot be supposed without an infinite Power to act, and an infinite
Righteousness as the Rule of acting. Fear of God is natural to all men; not a
Fear of offending him, but a Fear of being punished by him: The wishing the
Extinction of God has its degree in men, according to the degree of their Fears
of his just Vengeance: And though such a Wish be not in its Meridian but in the
Damned in Hell, yet it has its starts and motions in affrighted and awakened
Consciences on the Earth: Under this Rank of Wishers, that there were no God,
or that God were destroyed, do fall

1. Terrified Consciences, that are Magor missabib, see nothing but matter of
fear round about. As they have lived without the bounds of the Law, they are
afraid to fall under the stroke of his Justice: Fear wishes the destruction of
that which it apprehends hurtful: It considers him as a God to whom Vengeance
belongs, as the Judge of all the Earth. Psalm. 94.12.
The less hopes such a one has of his Pardon, the more joy he would have to
hear that his Judge should be stripped of his Life: He would entertain with
delight any reasons, that might support him in the conceit that there were no
God: In his present State such a Doctrine would be his Security from an
Account: He would as much rejoice, if there were no God to inflame an Hell for
him, as any guilty Malefactor would if there were no Judge to order a Gibbet
for him. Shame may bridle men's words, but the Heart will be casting about for
some Arguments this way, to secure it self: Such as are at any time in Spira's
Case, would be willing to cease to be Creatures, that God might cease to be
Judge. The Fool has said in his heart, there is no Elohim, no Judge, fancying
God without any exercise of his judicial Authority. And there is not any wicked
man under anguish of Spirit, but, were it within the reach of his power, would
take away the Life of God, and rid himself of his fears, by destroying his
Avenger.

2. Debaucht Persons are not without such wishes sometimes: An obstinate
Servant wishes his Masters death, from whom he expects Correction for his
Debaucheries. As Man stands in his corrupt Nature, it is impossible but one time
or other most debaucht persons, at least have so me kind of velleities, or
imperfect wishes. It Is as natural to men to abhor those things which are
unsuteable and troublesome, as it is to please themselves in things agreeable
to their minds and humors: And since Man is so deeply in love with Sin, as to
count it the most estimable good, he cannot but wish the abolition of that Law
which checks it, and consequently the change of the Lawgiver which Enacted it;
and in wishing a change in the holy Nature of God, he wishes a destruction of
God, who could not be God, if he ceased to be immutably holy. They do as
certainly wish, that God had not a holy Will to command them, as desparing
Souls wish, that God had not a righteous Will to punish them; and to wish
Conscience extinct for the molestations they receive from it, is to wish the
power Conscience represents out of the world also.

Since the State of Sinners is a State of distance from God, and the Language
of Sinners to God is departed from us: Joh. 21.14.
They desire as little the continuance of his Being as they desire the knowledge
of his Ways: The same reason which moves them to desire Gods distance from
them, would move them to desire Gods not Being: Since the greatest distance
would be most agreeable to them, the Destruction of God must be so too: Because
there is no greater distance from us, than in not Being. Men would rather have
God not to be, than themselves under control, that sensuality might range at
pleasure: He is like a Heifer sliding from the Yoke, Hos. 4.16. The Cursing of
God in the Heart feared by Job of his Chidren, intimates a wishing God despoild
of his Authority, that their pleasure might not be dampt by his Law. Besides,
is there any natural man that sins against actuated knowledge, but either
thinks or wishes that God might not see him, that God might not know his
actions? And is not this to wish the Destruction of God, who could not be God
unless he were immense and omniscient?

3. Under this rank fall those, who perform external Duties only out of a
Principle of slavish Fear. Many Men perform those Duties that the Law enjoins
with the same Sentiments that Slaves perform their Drudgery, and are
constrained in their Duties by no other considerations but those of the Whip
and the Cudgel. Since therefore they do it with reluctance, and secretly murmur
while they seem to obey, they would be willing that both the Command were
recalled, and the Master that commands them were in another world. The Spirit
of Adoption makes men act toward God as a Father, a Spirit of Bondage only
eyes him as a Judge. Those that look upon their Superiors as tyrannical, will
not be much concerned in their welfare; and would be more glad to have their
Nails pared, than be under perpetual fear of them.

Many men regard not the infinite goodness in their service of him, but
consider him as cruel, tyrannical, injurious to their Liberty. Adam's Posterity
are not free from the Sentiments of their common Father, till they are
regenerate. You know what Conceit was the Hammer whereby the Hellish Jael
struck the Nail into our first Parents, which conveyed Death, together with the
same Imagination to all their Posterity, Genesis 3.5. God knows that in the day
you eat thereof, your eyes shall be opened, and you shall be as Gods knowing
Good and Evil: Alas poor Souls! God knew what he did when he forbad you that
Fruit: He was jealous you should be too happy: It was a cruelty in him to
deprive you of a Food so pleasant and delicious. The apprehension of the
severity of Gods Commands rises up no less in desires that there were no God
over us, than Adam's apprehension of Envy in God for the restraint of one Tree
moved him to attempt to be equal with God: Fear is as powerful to produce the
one in his Posterity, as Pride was to produce the other in the Common-Root.
When we apprehend a thing hurtful to us, we desire so much evil to it, as may
render it incapable of doing us the hurt we fear. As we wish the preservation
of what we love or hope for; so we are naturally apt to wish the not being of
that whence we fear some hurt or trouble. We must not understand this as if any
man did formally wish the destruction of God, as God. God in himself is an
infinite Mirror of Goodness and ravishing Loveliness: He is infinitely good,
and so universally good, and nothing but good; and is therefore so agreeable to
a Creature, as a Creature, that it is impossible that the Creature, while it
bears itself to God as a Creature, should be guilty of this, but thirst after
him and cherish every motion to him. As no man wishes the destruction of any
Creature, as a Creature, but as it may conduce to something which he counts may
be beneficial to himself; so no man does, nor perhaps can wish the cessation of
the Being of God, as God; for then he must wish his own Being to cease also;
But as he considers him clothed with some perfections, which he apprehends as
injurious to him; as his Holiness in forbidding Sin, his Justice in punishing
Sin: And God being judged in those perfections contrary to what the revolted
Creature thinks convenient and good for himself, he may wish God stripped of
those perfections, that thereby he may be free from all fear of trouble and
grief from him in his fallen State. In wishing God deprived of those, he wishes
God deprived of his Being; because God cannot retain his Deity without a love
of Righteousness and Hatred of Iniquity; and he could not testify his love to
the one, or his loathing of the other, without encouraging Goodness, and
witnessing his Anger against Iniquity.

Let us now appeal to ourselves, and examine our own Consciences: Did we never
please our selves sometimes in the thoughts, how happy we should be, how free
in our vain pleasures, if there were no God? Have we not desired to be our own
Lords without control, subject to no Law but our own, and be guided by no Will
but that of the Flesh? Did we never rage against God under his afflicting Hand?
Did we never wish God stripped of his Holy Will to command, and his Righteous
Will to punish, etc.

Thus much for the general.

For the proof of this, many considerations will bring in Evidence: Most may be
reduced to these two Generals.

Man would set himself up, First as his own Rule. Secondly as his own End and
Happiness.

1. Man would set himself up as his own Rule instead of God: This will be
evidenced in this Method.

1. Man naturally disowns the Rule God sets him. 2. He owns any other Rule
rather than that of Gods prescribing. 3. These he does in order to the setting
himself up as his own Rule. 4. He makes himself not only his own Rule, but
would make himself the Rule of God, and give Laws to his Creator.
1. Man naturally disowns the Rule God sets him. It Is all one to deny his
Royalty and to deny his Being: When we disown his Authority, we disown his
Godhead: It Is the Right of God to be the Sovereign of his Creatures; and it
must be a very loose and trivial assent that such men have to Gods Superiority
over them, (and consequently to the Excellency of his Being, upon which that
Authority is founded) who are scarce at ease in themselves, but when they are
invading his Rights, breaking his Bands, casting away his Cords, and
contradicting his Will.

Every man naturally is a Son of Belial, would be without a Yoke, and leap over
Gods Enclosures; and in breaking out against his Soveraignity, we disown his
Being as God: For to be God and Sovereign are inseparable: He could not be God,
if he were not Supreme; nor could he be a Creator without being a Lawgiver. To
be God and yet inferior to another, is a Contradiction. To make Rational
Creatures without prescribing them a Law, is to make them without Holiness,
Wisdom and Goodness.

1. There is in Man naturally an unwillingness to have any acquaintance with
the Rule God sets him, Psalm. 14.2. None that did understand and seek God. The
refusing Instruction and casting his Word behind the back is a part of Atheism.
Psalm. 50.1^.
We are heavy in hearing the Instructions either of Law or Gospel, Heb. 5.11,
12.
and slow in the Apprehension of what we hear. The people that God had hedged
in from the Wilderness of the World for his own Garden, were foolish and did
not know God; were sottish and had no understanding of him. Jer. 4.22.
The Law of God is accounted a strange thing; Hos. 8.12.
a thing of a different Clymate, and a far Country from the heart of Man;
wherewith the mind of Man had no natural acquaintance, and had no desire to
have any; or they regarded it as a sordid thing: What God accounts great and
valuable, they account mean and despicable. Men may show a Civility to a
Stranger, but scarce contract an Intimacy: There can be no Amicable Agreement
between the holy Will of God and the heart of a depraved Creature: One is holy,
the other unholy; one is universally good, the other stark naught. The purity
of the Divine Rule renders it nauseous to the impurity of a carnal heart. Water
and Fire may as well friendly kiss each other and live together without
quarrelling and hissing, as the holy Will of God and the unregenerate heart of
a fallen Creature.

The nauseating a Holy Rule is an Evidence of Atheism in the heart, as the
nauseating wholesome Food is of putrified Phlegm in the Stomach. It Is found more
or less in every Christian, in the Remainders, though not in a full Empire As
there is a Law in his Mind whereby he delights in the Law of God, so there is a
Law in his Members whereby he wars against the Law of God, Romans 7.22, 23, 25.
How predominant is this loathing of the Law of God, when corrupt Nature is in
its full strength, without any Principle to control it? There is in the Mind
of such a one a Darkness, whereby it is ignorant of it, and in the Will a
Depravedness whereby it is repugnant to it. If Man were naturally willing and
able to have an intimate acquaintance with, and delight in the Law of God, it
had not been such a signal favor for God to promise to write the Law in the
heart. A man may sooner engrave the Chronicle of a whole Nation, or all the
Records of God in the Scripture upon the hardest Marble with his bare finger,
than write one Syllable of the Law of God in a spiritual manner upon his heart.
For,

1. Men are negligent in using the means for the knowledge of Gods Will. All
natural men are Fools, who know not how to use the price God puts into their
hands; Pro. 17.16.
They put not a due estimate upon opportunities and means of Grace, and account
that Law-Folly which is the Birth of an infinite and holy Wisdom. The knowledge
of God which they may glean from Creatures, and is more pleasant to the natural
gust of men, is not improved to the Glory of God, if we will believe the
Indictment the Apostle brings against the Gentiles. Romans 1.21.
And most of those that have dived into the depths of Nature, have been more
studious of the qualities of the Creatures, than of the excellency of the
nature, or the discovery of the mind of God in them; who regard only the rising
and motions of the Star, but follow not with the wise men, its conduct to the
King of the Jews. How often do we see men filled with an eager thirst for all
other kind of knowledge, that cannot acquiesce in a twilight discovery, but are
inquisitive into the causes and reasons of effects, yet are contented with a
weak and languishing knowledge of God and his Law, and are easily tired with
the Proposals of them?

He now that nauseates the means whereby he may come to know and obey God, has
no intention to make the Law of God his Rule: There is no man that intends
seriously an end, but he intends means in order to that end: As when a man
intends the preservation or recovery of his health, he will intend means in
order to those ends, otherwise he cannot be said to intend his health: So he
that is not diligent in using means to know the mind of God, has no sound
intention to make the Will and Law of God his Rule. Is not the inquiry after
the Will of God made a work by the by, and fain to lacquy after other concerns
of an inferior nature, if it has any place at all in the Soul? which is a
despising the Being of God: The Notion of the Sovereignty of God, bears the
same date with the Notion of his Godhead; and by the same way that he reveals
Himself, he reveals his Authority over us; whether it be by Creatures without,
or Conscience within. All Authority over Rational Creatures consists in
commanding and directing; the duty of Rational Creatures in compliance with
that Authority consists in obeying: Where there is therefore a careless neglect
of those means which convey the knowledge of Gods Will and our Duty, there is
an utter disowning of God as our Sovereign and our Rule.

2. When any part of the Mind and Will of God breaks in upon Men, they
endeavor to shake it off; As a Man would a Sergeant that comes to arrest him;
they like not to retain God in their Knowledge, Romans 1.28. A natural Man
receives not the things of the Spirit of God; that is, into his Affection; he
pusheth them back as men do troublesome and importunate Beggars: They have no
kindness to bestow upon it: They thrust with both shoulders against the Truth
of God, when it presses in upon them; and dash as much contempt upon it as the
Pharisees did upon the Doctrine our Savior directed against their
Covetousness. As men naturally delight to be without God in the world, so they
delight to be without any offspring of God in their thoughts. Since the
Spiritual Palate of Man is depraved, Divine Truth is unsavory and ungrateful
to us, till our taste and relish is restored by Grace: Hence men damp and
quench the motions of the Spirit to Obedience and Compliance with the Dictates
of God; strip them of their Life and Vigor, and kill them in the Womb. How
unable are our Memories to retain the substance of spiritual Truth; but like
Sand in a Glass, put in at one part and runs out at the other? Have not many a
secret wish, that the Scripture had never mentioned some truths, or that they
were blotted out of the Bible, because they face their Consciences, and
discourage those boiling Lusts they would with eagerness and delight pursue? Me
thinks that interruption John gives our Savior when he was upon the Reproof of
their Pride, looks little better Mark 9.33.38
than a design to divert him from a discourse so much against the grain, by
telling him a story of their prohibiting one to cast out Devils, because he
followed not them. How glad are men when they can raise a Battery against a
Command of God, and raise some smart Objection whereby they may shelter
themselves from the strictness of it?

3. When men cannot shake off the Notices of the Will and Mind of God, they
have no pleasure in the consideration of them. Which could not possibly be, if
there were a real and fixed design to own the Mind and Law of God as our Rule:
Subjects or Servants that love to obey their Prince and Master, will delight to
read and execute their Orders. The Devils understand the Law of God in their
minds, but they loath the impressions of it upon their Wills: Those miserable
Spirits are bound in Chains of Darkness, evil Habits in their Wills, that they
have not a thought of obeying that Law they know. It was an unclean Beast under
the Law, that did not chew the Cud: It Is a corrupt Heart, that does not chew
Truth by Meditation. A natural man is said not to know God, or the things of
God; he may know them notionally, but he knows them not affectionately. A
sensual Soul can have no delight in a spiritual Law. To be sensual and not to
have the Spirit are inseparable. Jude 19.

Natural Men may indeed meditate upon the Law and Truth of God, but without
delight in it; if they take any pleasure in it, it is only as it is knowledge,
not as it is a Rule; for we delight in nothing that we desire, but upon the
same account that we desire it. Natural Men desire to know God and some part of
his Will and Law, not out of a sense of their practical excellency, but a
natural thirst after knowledge: and if they have a delight, it is in the act of
knowing, not in the Object known, not in the Duties that stream from that
Kowledge; they design the furnishing their Understandings, not the quickening
their Affections; like idle Boys that strike Fire, not to warm themselves by
the heat, but sport themselves with the Sparks; Whereas a gracious Soul
accounts not only his Meditation, or the Operations of his Soul about God and
his Will to be sweet, but he has a joy in the object of that Meditation. Psalm.
104.34.
Many have the knowledge of God, who have no delight in Him or his Will. Owls
have Eyes to perceive that there is a Sun, but by reason of the weakness of
their sight have no pleasure to look upon a Beam of it: So neither can a man by
Nature love, or delight in the Will of God, because of his natural corruption:
That Law that rises up in men for Conviction and Instruction, they keep down
under the power of Corruption; making their Souls not the Sanctuary, but Prison
of Truth, Romans 1.18. They will keep it down in their hearts, if they cannot
keep it out of their heads, and will not endeavor to know and taste the Spirit
of it.

4. There is farther, a rising and swelling of the Heart against the Will of
God. (1.) Internal. Gods Law cast against a hard Heart, is like a Ball thrown
against a stone Wall, by reason of the resistance rebounding the further from
it: The meeting of a Divine Truth and the Heart of Man, is like the meeting of
two Tides, the weaker swells and foams: We have a natural Antipathy against a
Divine Rule; and therefore when it is clapped close to our Consciences, there is
a snuffing at it, high reasonings against it, corruption breaks out more
strongly: As Water poured on Lime sets it on Fire by an Antiperistasis, and the
more Water is cast upon it, the more furiously it burns: Or as the Sun Beams
shining upon a Dunghill makes the steams the thicker and the stench the
noysomer, neither being the positive cause of the smoke in the Lime, or the
stench in the Dunghill; but by accident the causes of the eruption, Romans 7.8.
But Sin taking occasion by the Commandment, wrought in me all manner of
Concupiscence, for without the Law Sin was dead. Sin was in a languishing
posture, as if it were dead; like a lazy Garrison in a City, till upon an Alarm
from the Adversary it takes Arms and revives its courage; all the sin in the
heart gathers together its force, to maintain its standing; like the vapors of
the Night, which unite themselves more closely to resist the Beams of the
rising Sun. Deep Conviction often provokes fierce Opposition; sometimes
Disputes against a Divine Rule end in Blasphemies, Acts 13.45. Contradicting
and Blaspheming are coupled together. Men naturally desire things that are
forbidden, and reject things commanded, from the corruption of Nature, which
affects an unbounded Liberty, and is impatient of returning under that Yoke it
has shaken off; and therefore rages against the bars of the Law, as the Waves
roar against the restraint of a bank: When the Understanding is dark and the
Mind Ignorant, Sin lies as dead; These. Salmur. De Spiritu. Servitutis These. 19.
[a man scarce knows he has such Motions of Concupiscence in him, he finds not
the least breath of Wind but a full calm in his Soul; but when he is awakened
by the Law, then the vitiousness of nature being sensible of an Invasion of its
Empire, arms it self against the Divine Law, and the more the Command is urged,
the more vigorously it bends its strength, and more insolently lifts up it self
against it] he perceives more and more Atheistical Lusts than before; all
manner of Concupiscence, more leprous and contagious than before: When there
are any motions to turn to God, a reluctance is presently perceived;
Atheistical thoughts bluster in the mind like the wind, they know not whence
they come, nor whether they go: So unapt is the heart to any acknowledgement of
God as his Ruler, and any reunion with him. Hence men are said to resist the
Holy Ghost, Acts 7.51. to fall against it, as the word signifies, as a stone or
any ponderous body falls against that which lies in its way: They would dash to
pieces or grind to powder that very motion which is made for their instruction,
and the Spirit too which makes it, and that not from a fit of passion, but an
habitual repugnance. Ye always resist, etc. (2.) External, it is a fruit of
Atheism in the fourth verse of this Psalm; Who eat up my people as they eat
bread. How do the revelations of the Mind of God meet with opposition? And the
Carnal World like dogs bark against the shining of the Moon? So much men hate
the Light, that they spurn at the Lanthorns that bear it: And because they
cannot endure the Treasure, often fling the earthen vessels against the ground
wherein it is held. If the entrance of Truth render the Market worse for
Diana's Shrines, the whole City will be in an uproar. Act. 19.24.28.29.
When Socrates upon natural Principles confuted the Heathen Idolatry, and
asserted the unity of God, the whole cry of Athens, a learned University, is
against him; and because he opposed the public received Religion, though with
an undoubted Truth, he must end his Life by Violence: How has every Corner of
the World steam'd with the blood of those, that would maintain the Authority of
God in the World! The Devils Children will follow the steps of their Father,
and endeavor to bruise the Heel of Divine Truth, that would endeavor to break
the Head of corrupt Lust.

5. Men often seem desirous to be acquainted with the Will of God, not out of
any respect to his Will and to make it their Rule, but upon some other
Consideration. Truth is scarce received as truth. There is more of Hypocrisy
than Sincerity in the pale of the Church, and attendance on the Mind of God.
The outward dowry of a religious Profession makes it often more desirable than
the Beauty. Judas was a follower of Christ for the Bag, not out of any
affection to the Divine Revelation: Men sometime pretend a desire to be
acquainted with the Will of God, to satisfy their own passions, rather than to
conform to Gods Will: The Religion of such is not the judgment of the Man, but
the passion of the Brute. Many entertain a Doctrine's for the persons sake,
rather than a person for the Doctrine sake; and believe a thing because it
comes from a Man they esteem, as if his lips were more Canonical than Scripture.

The Apostle implies in the Commendation he gives the Thessalonians, 1 These.
2.13.
that some receive the Word for human interest, not as it is in truth the Word
and Will of God to command and govern their Consciences by its Sovereign
Authority: Or else they have the Truth of God (as St. James speaks of the Faith
of Christ) with respect of persons: Jam. 2.2.
and receive it not for the sake of the Fountain, but of the Channel: So that
many times the same Truth delivered by another, is disregarded, which when
dropping from the fancy and mouth of a Man's own Idol, is cried up as an Oracle.
This is to make not God, but Man the Rule: For though we entertain that which
materially is the Truth of God, yet not formally as his Truth, but as conveyed
by one we affect: And that we receive a Truth and not an Error, we ow the
obligation to the honesty of the Instrument, and not to the strength and
clearness of our own Judgment. Wrong considerations may give admittance to an
unclean as well as a clean beast into the Ark of the Soul: That which is
contrary to the Mind of God, may be entertained, as well as that which is
agreeable. It Is all one to such that have no respect to God, what they have; As
it is all one to a Sponge to suck up the foulest water or the sweetest wine,
when either is applied to it.

6. Many that entertain the Notions of the Will and Mind of God, admit them
with unsettled and wavering Affections. There is a great Levity in the heart of
Man. The Jews that one day applaud our Savior with Hosannahs as their King,
vote his Crucifixion the next, and use him as a Murderer. We begin in the
Spirit and end in the Flesh. Our hearts like Lute-strings are changed with
every change of weather, with every appearance of a Temptation; scarce one
motion of God in a thousand prevails with us for a settled abode. It Is a hard
task to make a signature of those Truths upon our affections, which will with
ease pass current with our understandings; Our affections will as soon lose
them, as our understandings embrace them. The heart of Man is unstable as
water. Genesis 49.4. Jam. 1.8.
Some were willing to rejoice in John's Light, which reflected a luster on their
minds; but not in his heat, which would have conveyed a warmth to their hearts:
and the Light was pleasing to them but for a season, Joh. 5.35.
while their corruptions lay as if they were dead, not when they were awakened.
Truth may be admitted one day, and the next day rejected. As Austin says of a
wicked Man, he loves the Truth shining, but he hates the Truth reproving. This
is not to make God, but our own humor our rule and measure.

7. Many desire an acquaintance with the Law and Truth of God, with a design to
improve some lust by it. To turn the Word of God to be a Pander to the Breach
of his Law. This is so far from making Gods Will our Rule, that we make our own
vile affections the Rule of his Law. How many forced Interpretations of
Scripture have been coined to give content to the lusts of men; and the Divine
Rule forced to bend and be squared to men's loose and carnal apprehensions! It Is
a part of the instability or falseness of the heart to wrest the Scriptures to
their own destruction; 2 Pet. 3.16.
which they could not do, if they did not first wring them to countenance some
detestable Error or filthy Crime. In Paradise the first Interpretation made of
the first Law of God, was point blank against the mind of the Lawgiver, and
venomous to the whole Race of Mankind. Paul himself feared that some might put
his Doctrine of Grace to so ill a use, as to be an Altar and Sanctuary to
shelter their Presumption, Romans 6.1.15. shall we then continue in Sin, that
Grace may abound? Poisonous Consequences are often drawn from the sweetest
Truths: As when Gods Patience is made a Topic, whence to argue against his
Providence, Psalm. 94.1.
or an encouragement to commit Evil more greedily; as though because he had not
presently a revenging Hand, he had not an all seeing Eye: Or when the Doctrine
of Justification by Faith, is made use of to depress a holy life; or Gods
readiness to receive returning sinners, an encouragement to defer repentance
till a death bed. A Liar will hunt for shelter in the reward God gave the
Midwifes that lied to Pharaoh for the preservation of the Males of Israel, and
Rahabs saving the Spies by false intelligence. God knows how to distinguish
between grace and corruption, that may lie close together; or between something
of moral goodness and moral evil, which may be mixed: We find their fidelity
rewarded, which was a moral good; but not their lie approved, which was a moral
evil. Nor will Christ's conversing with sinners, be a plea for any to thrust
themselves into evil Company. Christ conversed with sinners, as a Physician
with diseased persons, to cure them, not approve them; others with profligate
persons to receive infection from them, not to communicate holiness to them.
Satan's Children have studied their Fathers art, who wanted not perverted
Scripture to second his Temptations against our Savior. ^
How often do carnal hearts turn Divine Revelation to carnal ends, as the Sea
fresh water into salt? As me^ ^^^ject the precepts of God to carnal interests,
so they subject the truths of God to ^^^nal fancies. When men will allegorize
the Word, and make a humorous and crazy fancy the Interpreter of Divine
oracles, and not the Spirit speaking in the Word; This is to enthrone our own
imaginations as the rule of Gods Law, and depose his Law from being the rule of
our reason: This is to riflle truth of its true mind and intent. It Is more to
rob a man of his reason, the essential constitutive part of man, than of his
estate. This is to refuse an intimate acquaintance with his Will. We shall
never tell what is the matter of a precept, or the matter of a promise, if we
impose a sense upon it contrary to the plain meaning of it: Thereby we shall
make the Law of God to have a distinct sense according to the variety of men's
imaginations, and so make every man's fancy a Law to himself.

Now that this unwillingness to have a Spiritual acquaintance with Divine
Truth, is a disowning God as our rule, and a setting up self in his stead, is
evident; because this unwillingness respects Truth,

1. As it is most Spiritual and Holy. A fleshly mind is most contrary to a
Spiritual Law, and particularly as it is a searching and discovering Law, that
would dethrone all other rules in the Soul. As men love to be without a Holy
God in the world, so they love to be without a holy Law, the transcript and
image of Gods Holiness in their hearts; and without holy men, the lights
kindled by the Father of lights. As the holiness of God, so the holiness of the
Law most offends a carnal heart. Isa. 30.11. Cause the holy one of Israel to
cease from before us, prophecy to us right things: They could not endure God as
a holy one. Herein God places their Rebellion, rejecting him as their rule,
ver. 9. Rebellious Children that will not hear the Law of the Lord. The more
pure and precious any discovery of God is, the more it is disrelisht by the
world: As Spiritual sins are sweetest to a carnal heart, so Spiritual truths
are most distastful. The more of the brightness of the Sun any beam conveys,
the more offensive it is to a distempered eye.

2. As it does most relate to, or lead to God. The Devil directs his fiercest
batteries against those Doctrines in the Word, and those Graces in the heart,
which most exalt God, debase man, and bring men to the lowest subjection to
their Creator; Such is the Doctrine and grace of justifying faith. That men
hate not knowledge as knowledge, but as it directs them to choose the fear of
the Lord, was the determination of the Holy Ghost long ago. Prove. 1.29. for
that they hated knowledge and did not choose the fear of the Lord. Whatsoever
respects God, clears up guilt, witnesses man's revolt to him, rouzeth up
Conscience, and moves to a return to God, a man naturally runs from, as Adam
did from God, and seeks a shelter in some weak bushes of error, rather than
appear before it. Not that men are unwilling to inquire into and contemplate
some Divine Truths, which lie furthest from the heart, and concern not
themselves immediately with the rectifying the soul: They may view them with
such a pleasure as some might take in beholding the Miracles of our Savior,
who could not endure his searching Doctrine. The light of speculation may be
pleasant, but the light of conviction is grievous; that which galls their
Consciences, and would affect them with a sense of their duty to God.

Is it not easy to perceive, that when a man begins to be serious in the
concerns of the Honor of God and the duty of his soul, he feels a reluctance
within him, even against the pleas of Conscience; which evidenceth that some
unworthy principle has got footing in the hearts of men which fights against
the declarations of God without, and the impressions of the Law of God within,
at the same time when a man's own Conscience takes part with it, which is the
substance of the Apostles discourse, Romans 7.15, 16, etc.

Close discourses of the Honor of God, and our duty to him are irksome, when
men are upon a merry pin: They are like a damp in a Mine that takes away their
breath; they shuffle them out as soon as they can, and are as unwilling to
retain the-speech of them in their mouths, as the knowledge of them in their
hearts. Gracious speeches, instead of bettering many men, distemper them, as
sometimes sweet perfumes affect a weak head with aches.

3. As it is most contrary to self. Men are unwilling to acquaint themselves with
any truth that leads to God, because it leads from self. Every part of the Will
of God, is more or less displeasing, as it sounds harsh against some carnal
interest men would set above God, or as a Mate with him. Man cannot desire any
intimacy with that Law which he regards as a Bird of prey, to pick out his
right eye or gnaw off his right hand, his lust dearer than himself. The reason
we have such hard thoughts of Gods Will, is because we have such high thoughts
of our selves. It Is a hard matter to Believe or Will that, which has no
affinity with some principle in the understanding, and no interest in our Will
and Passions: Our unwillingness to be acquainted with the Will of God arises
from the disproportion between that and our corrupt hearts, We are alienated
from the life of God in our minds, Ephesians. 41 18, 19. As we live not like God, so
we neither think, or Will as God: There is an antipathy in the heart of man
against that Doctrine, which teaches us to deny our selves and be under the
rule of another: But whatsoever favors the ambition, lusts, and profits of
men, is easily entertainable. Many are fond of those Sciences, which may enrich
their understandings, and grate not upon their sensual delights. Many have an
admirable dexterity in finding out Philosophical reasons, Mathematical
demonstrations, or raising observations upon the Records of History, and spend
much time and many serious and affectionate thoughts in the study of them; In
those they have not immediately to do with God, their beloved pleasures are not
impaired: It Is a satisfaction to self without the exercise of any hostility
against it. But had those Sciences been against self, as much as the Law and
Will of God, they had long since been rooted out of the World. Why did the
Young Man turn his back upon the Law of Christ? because of his worldly self:
Why did the Pharisees mock at the Doctrine of our Savior and not at their own
traditions? because of Covetous self. Why did the Jews slight the person of our
Savior and put him to death, after the reading so many Credentials of his
being sent from Heaven? because of ambitious self, that the Romans might not
come and take away their Kingdom. If the Law of God were fitted to the humors
of self, it would be readily and cordially observed by all men: Self is the
measure of a world of seeming Religious actions; while God seems to be the
object, and his Law the motive, self is the rule and end; Zach. 7.5. Did you
fast unto me, etc.

2 As men discover their disowning the Will of God as a rule by unwillingness
to be acquainted with it, so they discover it, by the contempt of it, after
they cannot avoid the Notions and some impressions of it. The rule of God is
burdensome to a sinner, he flies from it as from a frightful bugbear, and
unpleasant Yoke: Sin against the knowledge of the Law is therefore called, a
going back from the Commandment of Gods lips, Job. 23.12. A casting Gods word
behind them, Psalm. 50.17.
as a contemptible thing, fitter to be trodden in the dirt, than lodged in the
heart: Nay it is a casting it off as an abominable thing, for so the word (...)
signifies, Hos. 8.3. Israel has cast off the thing that is good; an utter
refusal of God, Jer. 44.16. As for the word which thou have spoken to us in the
name of the Lord, we will not hearken. In the slight of his precepts his
essential perfections are slighted. In disowning his Will as a Rule, we disown
all those attributes which flow from his Will, as Goodness, Righteousness and
Truth. As an Act of the Divine understanding is supposed to precede the Act of
the Divine Will, so we slight the infinite reason of God. Every Law, tho it
proceeds from the Will of the Lawgiver, and does formally consist in an Act of
the Will, yet it does presuppose an act of the understanding. If the
Commandment be holy, just and good, as it is Romans 7.12. if it be the image of
Gods holiness, a transcript of his righteousness, and the efflux of his
goodness; then in every breach of it dirt is cast upon those Attributes which
shine in it, and a slight of all the regards he has to his own Honor, and all
the provisions he makes for his Creature. This Atheism or contempt of God, is
more taken notice of by God than the matter of the sin it self: As a respect to
God in a weak and imperfect obedience is more than the matter of the obedience
it self, because it is an acknowledgment of God: So a contempt of God in an act
of disobedience, is more than the matter of the disobedience. The Creature
stands in such an Act not only in a posture of distance from God, but defiance
of him: It was not the bare act of Murder and Adultery which Nathan charged
upon David, but the Atheistical principle which Spirited those evil acts. The
despising the Commandment of the Lord, was the venom of them. 2 Samuel 12.^.1^.
It Is possible to break a Law without contempt; But when men pretend to believe
there is a God, and that this is the Law of God, it shows a contempt of his
Majesty: Claud.
Men naturally account Gods Laws too strict, his Yoke too heavy, and his limits
too strait: And he that lives in a contempt of this Law, curses God in his
life: How can they believe there is a God, who despise him as a Ruler? How can
they believe him to be a guide, that disdain to follow him? To think we firmly
believe a God without living conformable to his Law, is an idle and vain
imagination. The true and sensible Notion of a God cannot subsist with disorder
and an affected unrighteousness.

This contempt is seen,

1. In any presumptuous breach of any part of his Law. Such sins are frequently
called in Scripture Rebellions, which are a denial of the Allegiance we owe to
him. By a wilful refusal of his right in one part we root up the foundation of
that rule he does justly challenge over us: His Right is as extensive to
command us in one thing, as in another: And if it be disowned in one thing, it is
vertually disowned in all, and the whole Statute book of God is contemned. Jam.
2.10.11. Whosoever shall keep the whole Law, and yet offend in one point is
guilty of all. A willing breaking one part, tho there be a willing observance
of all the other points of it, is a breach of the whole, because the Authority
of God, which gives sanction to the whole is slighted: The obedience to the
rest is dissembled: For the Love, which is the root of all obedience, is
wanting; For Love is the fulfilling the whole Law: Romans 13.^^
The rest are obeyed because they cross not carnal desire so much as the other,
and so it is an observance of himself, not of God. Besides, the Authority of God,
which is not prevalent to restrain us from the breach of one point, would be of
as little force with us to restrain us from the breach of all the rest, did the
allurements of the flesh give us as strong a diversion from the one, as from
the other: And tho the Command that is transgrest be the least in the whole
Law, yet the Authority which enjoins it is the same with that which enacts the
greatest. And it is not so much the matter of the command, as the Authority
commanding which lays the obligation.

2. In the natural averseness to the declarations of Gods Will and mind, which
way so ever they tend. Since man affected to be as God, he desires to be
boundless; he he would not have Fetters, tho they be Golden ones, and conduce
to his happiness; tho the Law of God be a strength to them, yet they will not,
Isa. 30.15. In returnning shall be your strength and you would not. They would
not have a bridle to restrain them from running into the pit, nor be hedged in
by the Law, tho for their security: As if they thought it too slavish and low
Spirited a thing to be guided by the Will of another: Hence man is compared to
a Wild-Ass, that loves to snuff up the wind in the Wilderness at her pleasure,
rather than come under the guidance of God; Jer. 2.2^
From whatsoever quarter of the Heavens you pursue her she will run to the
other.

The Israelites could not endure what was Commanded, Heb. 12.^^
tho in regard of the Moral part, agreeable to what they found written in their
own Nature; And to the observance whereof, they had the highest obligations of
any people under Heaven, since God had by many prodigies delivered them from a
cruel slavery: The memory of which prefac'd the Decalogue; Exodus 20.2. I am the
Lord thy God which have brought thee out of the Land of Egypt, out of the House
of bondage: They could not think of the rule of their duty, but they must
reflect upon the grand incentive of it in their Redemption from Egyptian
thraldom: Yet this people were cross to God, which way soever he moved: When
they were in the Brick-kilns, they cried for deliverance; when they had
heavenly Manna, they longed for their Onions and Garlic. In Number. 14.3. They
repent of their deliverance from Egypt, and talk of returning again to seek the
Remedy of their Evils in the hands of their cruellest Enemies; and would rather
put themselves into the Irons, whence God had delivered them, than believe one
word of the Promise of God for giving them a fruitful Land: But when Moses
tells them Gods Order, that they should turn back by the way of the Red Sea,
ver. 25.
and that God had confirmed it by an Oath, that they should not see the Land of
Canaan ver. 28.
: They then run cross to this Command of God, and instead of marching toward
the Red Sea, which they had wished for before, they will go up to Canaan, as in
spite of God and his threatening. We will go to the Place which the Lord has
promised, v. 40. which Moses calls a Transgressing the Comandment of the Lord,
v. 41. They would presume to go up, notwithstanding Moses his Prohibition, and
are smitten by the Amalekites: When God gives them a Precept, with a Promise to
go up to Canaan, they long for Egypt; when God commands them to return to the
Red Sea, which was nearer to the place they longed for; they will shift sides
and go up to Canaan. Number. 21.4, 5. and Daille Sermon. 1 Cor. 10. Ser. 9 p. 234.
235. 40.
And when they found they were to traverse the Solitudes of the Desert, they
took Pett against God, and instead of thanking him for the late Victory against
the Cananites, they reproach him for his Conduct from Egypt, and the Manna
wherewith he nourished them in the Wilderness: They would not go to Canaan, the
way God had chosen, nor preserve themselves by the means God had ordained: They
would not be at Gods disposal, but complain of the badness of the way, and the
lightness of Manna, empty of any necessary juice to sustain their Nature. They
murmuringly solicit the Will and Power of God to change all that Order which
he had resolved in his Council, and take another, conformable to their vain
foolish desires: And they signified thereby that they would invade his Conduct,
and that he should act according to their fancy; which the Psalmist calls a
tempting of God, and limiting the Holy One of Israel, Psalm. 78.41.

To what point soever the Declarations of God stand, the Will of Man turns the
quite contrary way. Is not the carriage of this Nation, the best then in the
world? A discovery of the depth of our natural corruption, how cross Man is to
God? And that charge God brings against them, may be brought against all men by
Nature, that they despise his Judgments, and have a rooted Abhorrency of his
Statutes in their Soul, Levit. 26.43. No sooner had they recovered from one
Rebellion, but they revolted to another: So difficult a thing it is for man's
nature to be rendered capable of conforming to the Will of God: The carriage of
this People is but a Copy of the Nature of Mankind, and is written for our
admonition, 1 Cor. 10.11. From this temper men are said to make void the Law of
God Psalm. 119.126.
: To make it of no obligation, an antiquated and moth-eaten Record. And the
Pharisees by setting up their Traditions against the Will of God, are said to
make his Law of none effect, to strip it of all its Authority, as the word
signifies, Mat. 15.6. (...)

3. We have the greatest slight of that Will of God which is most for his
Honor and his greatest Pleasure. It Is the Nature of Man, ever since Adam, to
do so, Hos. 6.6.7. God desired Mercy and not Sacrifice, the Knowledge of
Himself more than burnt Offering; but they like men, as Adam, have transgressed
the Covenant, invade Gods Rights, and not let him be Lord of one Tree.

We are more curious Observers of the Fringes of the Law, than of the greater
concerns of it. The Jews were diligent in Sacrifices and Offerings, which God
did not urge upon them as Principals, but as Types of other things; but
negligent of the Faith which was to be established by him: Holiness, Mercy,
Pity which concerned the Honor of God, as Governor of the World, and were
imitations of the Holiness and Goodness of God, they were Strangers to. This is
Gods Complaint, Isa. 1.11, 12. and 16, 17.

We shall find our hearts most averse to the observation of those Laws which
are Eternal and Essential to Righteousness; such, that he could not but
command, as he is a Righteous Governor; in the observation of which, we come
nearest to him and express his Image more clearly: As those Laws for an inward
and spiritual Worship, a supreme Affection to him. God in regard of his
Righteousness and Holiness of his Nature, and the Excellency of his Being,
could not command the contrary to these: But this part of his Will our hearts
most swell against, our corruption does most snarle at; whereas those Laws
which are only positive and have no intrinsic Righteousness in them, but
depend purely upon the Will of the Lawgiver, and may be changed at his
pleasure, (which the other, that have an intrinsic Righteousness in them,
cannot) we better comply with, than that part of his Will that does express
more the Righteousness of his Nature; Psalm. 5^.6.17, 19.
such as the Ceremonial part of Worship, and the Ceremonial Law among the Jews:
We are more willing to observe Order in some outward attendances and glavering
devotions, than discard secret affections to evil, crucify inward lusts and
delightful thoughts: A hanging down the head like a bulrish is not difficult,
but the breaking the heart like a Potters vessel to shreds and dust, (a
sacrifice God delights in, whereby the excellency of God and the vileness of
the Creature is owned) goes against the grain: To cut off an outward branch is
not so hard, as to hack at the root. What God mosts loathes, as most contrary to
his Will, we most love: No sin did God so severely hate, and no sin were the
Jews more inclined unto, than that of Idolatry. The Heathen had not changed
their God, as the Jews had changed their glory, Jer. 2.11. And all men are
naturally tainted with this sin, which is so contrary to the holy and excellent
nature of God: By how much the more defect there is of purity in our respects
to God, by so much the more respect there is to some Idol within or without us,
to humor, custom and interest, etc.

Never did any Law of God meet with so much opposition as Christianity, which
was the design of God from the first promise to the exhibiting the Redeemer,
and from thence to the end of the World: All people drew Swords at first
against it: The Romans prepared Yokes for their Neighbors, but provided Temples
for the Idols, those people Worshipped. But Christianity, the choicest design
and most delightful part of the Will of God, never met with a kind
entertainment at first in any place: Rome, that entertained all others,
persecuted this with Fire and Sword, tho sealed by greater Testimonies from
Heaven, than their own Records could report in favor of their Idols.

4. In running the greatest hazards, and exposing our selves to more trouble to
cross the Will of God, than is necessary to the observance of it. It Is a vain
charge men bring against the Divine precepts, that they are rigorous, severe,
difficult: When, besides the contradiction to our Savior, who tells us his
Yoke is easy, and his Burden light, they thwart their own calm reason and
Judgment. Is there not more difficulty to be Vicious, Covetous, Violent, Cruel,
than to be Virtuous, Charitable, Kind? Does the Will of God enjoin that, that
is not conformable to right reason, and secretly delightful in the exercise and
issue? And on the contrary what does Satan and the world engage us in, that is
not full of molestation and hazard? Is it a sweet and comely thing to combat
continually against our own Consciences, and resist our own light, and commence
a perpetual quarrel against our selves, as we ordinarily do when we sin? They
in the Prophet, Mich. 6.6, 7, 8. would be at the expense of thousands of Rams,
and ten thousand Rivers of Oil, if they could compass them; yea, would strip
themselves of their Natural affection to their firstborn to expiate the sin of
their Soul, rather then to do Justice, love mercy and walk humbly with God;
things more conducible to the Honor of God, the welfare of the world, the
security of their Souls, and of a more easy practice than the offerings they
wished for.

Do not men then disown God when they will walk in ways hedged with thorns,
wherein they meet with the Arrows of Conscience at every turn in their sides,
and slidedown to an everlasting punishment, sink under an intolerable slavery
to contradict the Will of God? When they will prefer a sensual satisfaction,
with a combustion in their Consciences, violation of their reasons, gnawing
cares and weary travels, before the Honor of God, the dignity of their
Natures, the happiness of peace and health, which might be preserved at a
cheaper rate, than they are at to destroy them?

5. In the unwillingness and awkardness of the heart, when it is to pay God a
service. Men do evil with both hands earnestly, Mich. 7.3.
but do good with one hand faintly; no life in the heart, nor any diligence in
the hand. What slight and loose thoughts of God does this unwillingness imply?
It Is a wrong to his providence, as tho we were not under his Government, and had
no need of his assistance. A wrong to his excellency, as tho there were no
aimableness in him to make his service desirable. An injury to his goodness and
power, as if he were not able or willing to reward the Creatures obedience, or
careless not to take notice of it. It Is a sign we receive little satisfaction in
him, and that there is a great unsutableness between him and us.

1. There is a kind of constraint in the first engagement. We are rather pressed
to it than enter our selves Volunteers. What we call service to God, is done
naturally, much against our Wills; it is not a delightful food, but a bitter
potion; we are rather haled, than run to it. There is a contradiction of sin
within us against our service, as there was a contradiction of sinners without
our Savior against his doing the Will of God. Our hearts are unweildy to any
Spiritual service of God; we are fain to use a violence with them sometimes
Hezekiah, it is said, walked before the Lord with a perfect heart. 2 Kings
20.9. he walked, he made himself to walk: Man naturally cares not for a walk
with God: If he has any Communion with him, it is with such a dullness and
heaviness of Spirit, as if he wished himself out of his Company. Man's nature,
being contrary to holiness, has an aversion to any act of homage to God;
because Holiness must at least be pretended: In every duty wherein we have a
Communion with God, Holiness is requisite: Now as men are against the truth of
Holiness, because it is unsuitable to them, so they are not friends to those
duties which require it, and for some space divert them from the thoughts of
their beloved lusts. The word of the Lord is a Yoke, Prayer a drudgery,
Obedience a strange Element. We are like fish, that drink up iniquity like
water, Job. 15.16.
and come not to the bank without the force of an Angle: No more willing to do
service for God, than a fish is of it self to do service for Man. It Is a
constrained act to satisfy Conscience, and such are servile, not Son-like
performances, and spring from bondage more than affection: If Conscience, like
a task Master, did not scourge them to duty, they would never perform it.

Let us appeal to our selves, whether we are not more unwilling to secret,
Closet, hearty duty to God, than to join with others in some external service;
as if those inward services, were a going to the rack, and rather our penance
than privilege. How much service has God in the world from the same principle
that Vagrants perform their task in Bridewel? How glad are many of evasions to
back them in the neglect of the Commands of God, of Corrupt reasonings from the
flesh to waylay an Act of obedience, and a multitude of excuses to blunt the
edge of the precept? The very service of God shall be a pretense to deprive him
of the obedience due to him. Saul will not be ruled by Gods Will in the
destroying the Cattle of the Amalekites, but by his own; and will impose upon
the Will and Wisdom of God, Judging God mistaken in his Command, and that the
Cattle God thought fittest to be meat to the fouls, were fitter to be
Sacrifices on the Altar. 1 Samuel 15.3.9.15.21.


If we do perform any part of his Will, is it not for our own ends to have some
deliverance from trouble? Isa. 26.16. In trouble have they visited thee, they
poured out a Prayer, when thy Chastening was upon them. In affliction he shall
find them kneeling in Homage and Devotion. In prosperity, he shall feel them
kicking with contempt; they can pour out a Prayer in distress, and scarce drop
one when they are delivered.

2. There is a slightness in our service of God. We are loath to come into his
presence, and when we do come, we are loath to continue with him. We pay not an
Homage to him heartily, as to our Lord and Governor; we regard him not as our
Master, whose work we ought to do, and whose Honor we ought to aim at.

1. In regard of the matter of service. When the torn, the lame, and the sick
is offered to God; Mal. 1.13.14.
so thin and lean a Sacrifice, that you may have thrown it to the ground with a
puff, so some understand the meaning of (you have snufft at it.) Men have
naturally such slight thoughts of the Majesty and Law of God, that they think
any service is good enough for him and conformable to his Law. The dullest and
deadest times we think fittest to pay God a service in; when sleep is ready to
close our eyes and we are unfit to serve our selves, we think it a fit time to
open our hearts to God. How few Morning Sacrifices has God from many persons
and Families? Men leap out of their beds to their carnal pleasures or worldly
employments, without any thought of their Creator and Preserver, or any
reflection upon his Will as the rule of our daily obedience. And as many
reserve the dregs of their Lives, their Old Age, to offer up their Souls to
God: So they reserve the Dreggs of the Day, their sleeping time for the
offering up their service to Him: How many grudge to spend their best time in
the serving the Will of God, and reserve for him the sickly and rheumatick part
of their Lives; the remainder of that which the Devil and their own Lusts have
fed upon?

Would not any Prince or Governor judge a Present half eaten up by
Wild-beasts, or that which died in a Ditch, a contempt of his Royalty? A
corrupt thing is too base and vile for so great a King as God is, whose Name is
dreadful. Mal. 1.14.
When by Age Men are weary of their own Bodies, they would present them to God;
yet grudgingly, as if a tired body were too good for him, snuffing at the
Command for Service. God calls for our best, and we give him the worst.

2. In respect of Frame. We think any frame will serve Gods turn, which speaks
our slight of God as a Ruler. Man naturally performs duty with an unholy heart,
whereby it becomes an abomination to God, Pro. 28.9. He that turns away his Ear
from hearing the Law, even his prayers shall be an abomination to God. The
Services which he commands, he hates for their evil frames or corrupt ends,
Amos, 5.21. I hate I despise your Feast-days, I will not smell in your Solemn
Assemblies: God requires gracious services, and we give him corrupt ones: We do
not rouse up our hearts, as David called upon his Lute and Harp to awake, Psalm.
57.8. Our hearts are not given to him, we put him off with bodily exercise: The
heart is but Ice to what it does not affect, [1.] There is not that natural
vigor in the observance of God, which we have in worldly business: When we see
a liveliness in men in other things change the Scene into a motion toward God,
how suddenly does their vigo^ shrink and their hearts freeze into sluggishness?
Many times we serve God as lan^guishingly as if we were afraid he should accept
us, and pray as coldly as if we were unwilling he should hear us, and take away
that lust by which we are Governed, and which Conscience forces us to pray
against; as if we were afraid God should set up his own throne and Government
in our hearts. How fleeting are we in Divine Meditation, how sleepy in
Spiritual exercises? but in other exercises active: The Soul does not awaken it
self, and excite those animal and vital Spirits, which it will in bodily
recreations and sports; much less the powers of the Soul; whereby it is evident
we prefer the latter before any service to God: Since there is a fullness of
Animal Spirits, why might they not be excited in holy duties as well as in
other operations, but that there is a reluctance in the Soul to exercise its.
Supremacy in this case, and perform any thing becoming a Creature in subjection
to God as a Ruler?

2. It Is evident also in the distractions we have in his service: How loath are
we to serve God fixedly one hour, nay a part of an hour, notwithstanding all
the thoughts of his Majesty, and the Eternity of glory set before our eye? What
man is there since the fall of Adam, that served God one hour without many
wanderings and unsuitable thoughts unfit for that service? How ready are our
hearts to start out and unite themselves with any worldly objects that please
us?

3. Weariness in it evidenceth it. To be weary of our dullness signifies a
desire; to be weary of service signifies a discontent, to be ruled by God: How
tired are we in the performance of Spiritual duties, when in the vain triflings
of time we have a perpetual motion? How will many willingly revel whole nights,
when their hearts will flag at the Threshold of a Religious service? Like
Dagon, 1 Samuel 5.4.
lose, both our heads to think, and hands to act, when the Ark of God is
present: Some in the Prophet wished the new Moon and the Sabbath over, that
they might sell their Corn, and be busied again in their worldly affairs: Amos
8.5.
A slight and weariness of the Sabbath, was a slight of the Lord of the
Sabbath, and of that freedom from the Yoke and rule of sin, which was signified
by it. The design of the Sacrifices in the new Moon, was to signify a rest
from the tyranny of sin, and a consecration to the Spiritual service of God.
Servants that are quickly weary of their work, are weary of the Authority of
their Master, that enjoins it: If our hearts had a value for God, it would be
with us as with the needle to the Lodestone; there would be upon his beck a
speedy motion to him, and a fixed union with him. When the Judgments and
affections of the Saints shall be fully refined in glory, they shall be willing
to behold the face of God and be under his Government to Eternity, without any
weariness. As the holy Angels, have owned God as their Sovereign near these six
thousand years, without being weary of running on his Errands: But alas while
the flesh clogs us, there will be some Relics of unwillingness to hear his
Injunctions, and weariness in performing them; tho men may excuse those things
by extrinsick causes, yet Gods unerring Judgment calls it a weariness of
himself, Isa. 43.22. Thou have not called upon me oh Jacob, but thou have been
weary of me ch Israel. Of this he taxes his own people, when he tells them he
would have the beasts of the Field; The Dragons and the Owls; the Gentiles,
that the Jews counted no better than such, to honor him and acknowledge him
their rule in a way of duty, ver. 20.21.

6. This contempt is seen in a deserting the rule of God, when our expectations
are not answered upon our service. When services are performed from carnal
principles, they are soon cast off when carnal ends meet not with desired
satisfaction. But when we own our selves Gods Servants, and God our Master, our
eyes will wait upon him till he have mercy on us. Psalm. 123.2.
It Is one part of the duty we owe to God as our Master in Heaven, to continue in
Prayer, Col. 4.1, 2. And by the same reason in all other service, and to watch
in the same with thanksgiving: To watch for occasions of praise, to watch with
cheerfulness for further manifestations of his Will, strength to perform it,
success in the performance, that we may from all draw matter of praise: As we
are in a posture of obedience to his precepts, so we should be in a posture of
waiting for the blessing of it.

But naturally we reject the duty we owe to God, if he do not speed the
blessing we expect from him. How many do secretly mutter the same as they in
Job. 21.15. What is the Almighty that we should serve him, and what profit
shall we have if we Pray to him? They serve not God out of Conscience to his
Commands, but for some carnal profit; and if God make them to wait for it, they
will not stay his leisure, but cease soliciting him any longer. Two things are
expressed that God was not worthy of any Homage from them. What is the Almighty
that we should serve him? and that the service of him would not bring them in a
good Revenue or an advantage of that kind they expected. Interest drives many
men on to some kind of service, and when they do not find an advance of that,
they will acknowledge God no more; but like some beggars, if you give them not
upon their asking, and calling you good Master, from blessing they will turn to
cursing.

How often do men do that secretly, practically, if not plainly, which Jobs
Wife advised him to, Curse God, and cast off that disguise of integrity they
had assumed? Job. 2.9. Do thou still retain thy integrity? Curse God. What a
stir and puling, and crying is here? Cast off all thoughts of Religious
service, and be at Daggers drawing with that God, who for all thy service of
him has made thee so wretched a spectacle to men, and a banquet for worms. The
like temper is deciphered in the Jews Mal. 3.14. It Is in vain to serve God, and
what profit is it, that we have kept his ordinances, that we have walked
mournfully before the Lord? What profit is it that we have regarded his
Statutes, and carried our selves in a way of subjection to God, as our
Sovereign, when we inherit nothing but sorrow, and the Idolatrous Neighbors
swim in all kind of pleasures? as if it were the most miserable thing to
acknowledge God. If men have not the benefits they expect, they think God
unrighteous in himself, and injurious to them, in not conferring the favor
they imagine they have merited: And if they have not that recompense, they will
deny God that subjection they owe to him as Creatures. Grace moves to God upon
a sense of duty; corrupt nature upon a sense of Interest: Sincerity is
encouraged by gracious returns, but is not melted away by Gods delay or
refusal: Corrupt nature would have God at its back, and steers a course of duty
by hope of some carnal profit, not by a sense of the Sovereignty of God.

7. This contempt is seen in breaking promises with God. Reyn.
[One while the Conscience of a man makes vows of new obedience, and perhaps
binds himself with many an Oath, but they prove like Jonahs Gourd, withering
the next day after their birth. This was Pharaohs temper; under a storm he
would submit to God, and let Israel go; but when the storm is ended, he will
not be under Gods control, and Isreal's slavery shall be increased: The fear of
Divine wrath makes many a sinner turn his back upon his sin, and the love of
his ruling lust makes him turn his back, upon his true Lord. This is from the
prevalency of sin, that disputes with God for the Sovereignty.]

When God has sent a sharp disease, as a messenger to bind men to their beds,
and make an interruption of their sinful pleasures, their mouths are full of
promises of a new life, in hope to escape the just vengeance of God: The sense
of Hell which strikes strongly upon them, makes them full of such pretended
resolutions when they howl upon their beds. But if God be pleased in his
Patience, to give them a respite, to take off the Chains wherewith he seemed to
be binding them for destruction, and recruit their strength, they are more
earnest in their sins, than they were in their promises of a reformation; as if
they had got the mastery of God, and had outwitted him. How often does God
charge them Amos 4.6. to ver. 11.
of not returning to him after a succession of Judgments? So hard it is, not
only to allure, but to scourge men to an acknowledgement of God as their Ruler.

Consider then,

Are we not naturally inclined to disobey the known Will of God? Can we say,
Lord, for thy sake we refrain the thing to which our hearts incline? Do we not
allow our selves to be licentious, earthly, vain, proud, revengful, tho we know
it will offend him? Have we not been peevishly cross to his declared Will? Run
Counter to him and those Laws which express most of the glory of his holiness?
Is not this to disown him as our Rule? Did we never wish there were no Law to
bind us, no precept to check our Idols? What is this, but to wish that God
would depose himself from being our Governor, and leave us to our own conduct?
or else to wish that he were as unholy as our selves, as careless of his own
laws as we are, that is, that he were no more a God then we, a God as sinful
and unrighteous as our selves? He whose heart rises against the Law of God to
unlaw it, rises against the Author of that Law to undeifie him. He that casts
contempt upon the dearest thing God has in the world, that which is the image
of his holiness, the delight of his Soul; that which he has given a special
charge to maintain, and that because it is holy, just and good; would not stick
to rejoice at the destruction of God himself. If Gods Holiness and
righteousness in the beam be despised, much more will an immense goodness and
holiness in the fountain be rejected: He that wishes a beam far from his eyes,
because it offends and scorcheth him, can be no friend to the Sun, from whence
that beam does issue. How unworthy a Creature is man, since he only, a rational
Creature, is the sole being that withdraws it self from the rule of God in this
Earth? And how miserable a Creature is he also, Since departing from the order
of Gods goodness, he falls into the order of his Justice; and while he refuses
God to be the rule of his life, he cannot avoid him being the Judge of his
punishment? It Is this is the original of all sin, and the fountain of all our
misery.

This is the first thing man disowns, the Rule which God sets him.

Secondly, 2. Man naturally owns any other rule rather than that of Gods
prescribing. The Law of God orders one thing, the heart of man desires another.
There is not the basest thing in the world, but man would sooner submit to be
guided by it, rather than by the holiness of God; and when any thing that God
commands crosses our own Wills, we value it no more, than we would the advice
of a poor despicable beggar

How many are lovers of pleasure, more than lovers of God? 2 Timothy 3.4.
To make something which contributes to the perfection of nature, as learning,
wisdom, moral virtues, our Rule, would be more tolerable: But to pay that
homage to a swinish pleasure, which is the right of God, is an inexcusable
contempt of him. The greatest excellency in the world is infinitely below God;
much more a bestial delight, which is both disgraceful and below the nature of
man. If we made the vilest Creature on Earth our Idol, it is more excusable than
to be the slave of a brutish pleasure. The viler the thing is that does possess
the throne in our heart, the greater contempt it is of him who can only claim a
right to it and is worthy of it. Sin is the first object of man's election, as
soon as the faculty whereby he chooses comes to exercise its power: And it is so
dear to man, that it is, in the estimate of our Savior, counted as the right
hand, and the right eye, dear, precious and useful members.

1. The rule of Satan is owned before the rule of God. The natural man would
rather be under the guidance of Satan than the Yoke of his Creator. Adam chose
him to be his Governor in Paradise. No sooner had Satan spoke of God in a way
of derision, Genesis 3.1, 5. Yea, has God said, but man follows his Counsel and
approves of the scoff; and the greatest part of his posterity, have not been
wiser by his fall, but would rather ramble in the Devils Wilderness, than to
stay in Gods fold. It Is by the sin of man that the Devil is become the God of
the world, as if men were the Electors of him to the Government: Sin is an
Election of him for a Lord, and a putting the Soul under his Government. Those
that live according to the course of the world, and are loath to displease it,
are under the Government of the Prince of it. The greatest part of the works
done in the world is to enlarge the Kingdom of Satan. For how many ages were
the laws whereby the greatest part of the world was governed in the affairs of
Religion, the fruits of his usurpation and policy? When Temples were erected to
him, Priests consecrated to his service; The rites used in most of the Worship
of the world were either of his own Coining, or the misapplying the Rites, God
had ordained to himself, under the notion of a God: Whence the Apostle calls
all Idolatrous Feasts, the table of Devils, the cup of Devils, Sacrifice to
Devils, fellowship with Devils, 1 Cor. 10.20.21.
Devils being the real object of the Pagan Worship, tho not formally intended
by the Worshipper; tho in some parts of the Indies, the direct and peculiar
worship is to the Devil, that he might not hurt them. And tho the intention of
others was to offer to God, and not the Devil, yet since the action was
contrary to the Will of God, he regards it as a Sacrifice to Devils. It was not
the intention of Jeroboam to establish Priests to the Devil, when he
Consecrated them to the service of his Calves, for Jehu afterward calls them
the Servants of the Lord, 2 King. 10.23. See if there be here none of the
Servants of the Lord, to distinguish them from the Servants of Baal, signifying
that the true God was Worshipped under those Images, and not Baal, nor any of
the Gods of the Heathens; yet the Scripture couples the Calves and Devils
together, and ascribes the Worship given to one, to be given to the other. 2
Cron. 11.15.
He ordained him Priests for the high places, and for the Devils, and for the
Calves which he had made; so that they were Sacrifices to Devils,
notwithstanding the intention of Jeroboam and his Subjects that had set them up
and worshipped them, because they were contrary to the mind of God and
agreeable to the Doctrine and mind of Satan, tho the object of their worship in
their own intention were not the Devil but some deified man or some Canonized
Saint: The intention makes not a good action: If so, when men kill the best
Servants of God with a design to do God service, as our Savior foretells, Joh.
16.2.
the action would not be Murder; yet who can call it otherwise, since God is
wronged in the persons of his servants? Since most of the worship of the world,
which men's corrupt natures incline them to, is false and different from the
revealed will of God, it is a practical acknowledgment of the Devil, as the
Governor, by acknowleding and practicing those Doctrines, which have not the
stamp of Divine Revelation upon them, but were minted by Satan to depress the
Honor of God in the world: It does concern men then to take good heed, that in
their acts of worship they have a Divine rule; otherwise it is an owning the
Devil as the rule; for there is no medium: Whatsoever is not from God, is from
Satan.

But to bring this closer to us, and consider that which is more common among
us: Men that are in a natural condition and Wedded to their lusts, are under
the paternal Government of Satan, Joh. 8.44. Ye are of your Father the Devil,
and the lusts of your Father you will do. If we divide sin into Spiritual and
carnal, which division comprehends all, the Devils authority is owned in both;
In spiritual, we conform to his example, because those he commits: In carnal,
we obey his will, because those he directs: He acts the one, and sets us a
Copy: He tempts to the other, and gives us a kind of a precept. Thus man by
nature being a willing servant of sin, is more desirous to be bound in the
Devils Iron Chain, than in Gods silken Cords.

What greater Atheism can there be, than to use God as if he were inferior to
the Devil? to take the part of his greatest Enemy, who drew all others into the
faction against him? to pleasure Satan by offending God, and gratify our
adversary with the injury of our Creator? For a Subject to take arms against
his Prince with the deadliest Enemy, both himself and Prince has in the whole
world, adds a greater blackness to the Rebellion.

2. The more visible rule preferred before God in the World, is man. The
opinion of the world is more our rule than the precept of God; and many men's
abstinence from sin, is not from a sense of the Divine Will, no, nor from a
priciple of reason, but from an affection to some man on whom they depend, or
fear of punishment from a superior: The same principle with that in a ravenous
beast, who abstains from what he desires for fear only of a stick or Club: Men
will walk with the Herds, go in fashion with the most, speak and act as the
most do: While we conform to the world, we cannot perform a reasonable service
to God, nor prove, nor approve practically what the good and acceptable Will of
God is: The Apostle puts them in opposition to one another. Romans 12.1, 2.


This appears,

1. In complying more with the dictates of men, than the Will of God. Men draw
encouragement from Gods forbearance to sin more freely against him; but the
fear of punishment for breaking the Will of Man, lays a restraint upon them:
The fear of man a is more powerful curb, to restrain men in their duty, than
the fear of God: So we may please a Friend, a Master, a Governor, we are
regardless whither we please God or no: Men pleasers are more than God
pleasers: Man is more advanced as a rule, than God, when we submit to human
orders and stagger and dispute against Divine. Would not a Prince think himself
slighted in his authority, if any of his Servants should decline his commands,
by the order of one of his subjects? And will not God make the same account of
us, when we deny or delay our obedience, for fear of one of his Creatures? In
the fear of man, we as little acknowledge God for our Sovereign, as we do for
our comforter: Isa. 51.12, 13. I, even I am he, that comfort you, who art
thou, thou should be afraid of a man that shall die, etc. and forgettest the
Lord thy maker, etc. We put a slight upon God, as if he were not able to bear
us out in our duty to him; and incapable to balance the strength of an arm of
flesh.

2. In observing that which is materially the Will of God, not because it is his
Will, but the injunctions of men. As the word of God may be received, yet not
as his word, so the Will of God may be performed, yet not as his Will. It Is
materially done, but not formally obeyed: An action, and obedience in that
action are two things: as when man Commands the ceasing from all works of the
ordinary calling on the Sabbath, it is the same that God enjoins; the Cessation,
or attendance of his servants on the hearing the word, are conformable in the
matter of it to the Will of God; but it is only conformable in the obediential
part of the acts to the Will of man, when it is done only with respect to a
human precept. As God has a right to enact his laws without consulting his
Creature in the way of his government; So man is bound to obey those Laws,
without consulting whither they be agreeable to men's laws or no: If we act the
Will of God, because the Will of our superiors concurs with it, we obey not God
in that, but man; a human Will being the rule of our obedience; and not the
Divine: This is to vilify God, and make him inferior to man in our esteem, and
a valuing the rule of man above that of our Creator.

Since God is the highest perfection and infinitely good, whatsoever rule he
gives the Creature must be good, else it cannot proceed from God. A base thing
cannot be the product of an infinite excellency; and an unreasonable thing
cannot be the product of an infinite wisdom and goodness: Therefore as the
respecting Gods Will before the Will of man is excellent and worthy of a
Creature, and is an acknowledging the excellency, goodness and wisdom of God;
So the eying the Will of man before and above the Will of God, is, on the
contrary, a denial of all those in a lump, and a preferring the wisdom,
goodness and power of man in his Law above all those perfections of God in his.
Whatsoever men do that looks like moral virtue or abstinence from vices, not
out of obedience to the rule God has set, but because of custom, necessity,
example or imitation, they may in the doing of it be rather said to be Apes
than Christians.

3. In obeying the Will of man, when it is contrary to the Will of God. As the
Israelites willingly walked after the Commandment; Hos. 5.11.
Not of God, but of Jeroboam in the ^ase of the Calves: And made the Kings
heart glad with their lies. Hos. 7.3.
They cheered ^im with their ready obedience to his Command for Idolatry (which
was a lie in i^self, and a lie in them) against the Commandment of God and the
warnings of the Prophets; rather than cheer the heart of God with their
obedience to his worship instituted by him: Nay, and when God offered them, to
cure them their wound, their iniquity breaks out a fresh; they would neither
have him as a Lord to rule them, nor a Physician to cure them, Hos. 7.1. When I
would have healed Israel, then the iniquity of Ephraim was discovered. The
whole Persian Nation shrunk at once from a duty due by the light of nature to
the Deity, upon a decree that neither God or man should be petitioned to for
thirty days, but only their King. Daniel 6.
One only Daniel excepted against it, who preferred his homage to God, above
obedience to his Prince. An adulterous generation is many times made the rule
of men's professions, as is employed in those words of our Savior, Mark 8.38.
Whosoever shall be ashamed of me and my words in this Adulterous and sinful
Generation: Own him among his Disciples, and be ashamed of him among his
enemies: Thus men are said to deny God, Tit. 1.16. when they attend to Jewish
fables and the precepts of men rather than the word of God: When the decrees or
Canons of fallible men are valued at a higher rate, and preferred before the
writings of the holy ghost by his Apostles.

As Man naturally disowns the rule God sets him, and owns any other rule than
that of Gods prescribing, so

Thirdly, 3. He does this in order to the setting himself up as his own rule.
As tho our own Wills, and not Gods, were the true square and measure of
Goodness. We make an Idol of our own Wills: And as much as self is exalted, God
is deposed: The more we esteem our own Wills, the more we endeavor to
annihilate the Will of God: Account nothing of him, the more we account of our
selves: And endeavor to render our selves his superiors by exalting our own
Wills. No Prince but would look upon his Authority as invaded, his Royalty
derided, if a Subject should resolve to be a Law to himself, in opposition to
his known Will: True piety is to hate our selves, deny our selves, and cleave
solely to the service of God. To make our selves our own rule, and the object
of our chiefest love is Atheism. If self denial be the greatest part of
Godliness, the great Letter in the Alphabet of Religion; Self love is the great
Letter in the Alphabet of Practical Atheism. Self is the great Antichrist and
Anti-God in the World, that sets up it self above all that is called God: Self
love is the Captain of that black band, 2 Timothy 3.2. It sits in the Temple of
God and would be adored, as God: Self love begins; but denying the the power of
Godliness, which is the same with denying the ruling power of God, ends the
list: It Is so far from bending to the righteous Will of the Creator, that it
would have the eternal Will of God stoop to the humor and unrighteous Will of a
Creature: And this is the ground of the contention between the flesh and Spirit
in the heart of a renewed man; Flesh Wars for the Godhead of self, and Spirit
fights for the Godhead of God: The one would settle the throne of the Creator,
and the other maintain a Law of Covetosness, Ambition, Envy, Lust in the stead
of God.

The Evidence of this will appear in these propositions.

1. This is natural to man as he is corrupted. What was the venom of the sin of
Adam, is naturally derived with his nature to all his posterity. It was not the
eating a forbidden Apple, or the pleasing his Palate that Adam aimed at, or was
the chief object of his desire; but to live independently on his Creator, and
be a God to himself, Genesis 3.5. You shall be as Gods. That which was the matter
of the Devils Temptation, was the incentive of man's rebellion: A likeness to
God he aspired to in the Judgment of God himself, an infallible interpreter of
man's thoughts; Behold, man is become as one of us, to know good and evil, in
regard of self sufficiency and being a rule to himself. The Jews understand the
ambition of man to reach no further, than an equality with the Angelical
nature: But Jehovah here understands it in another sense: God had ordered man
by this prohibition not to eat of the fruit of the Tree of knowledge of good
and evil; not to attempt the knowledge of good and evil of himself, but to wait
upon the dictates of God; not to trust to his own Counsels, but to depend
wholly upon him for direction and guidance. Certainly he that would not hold
off his hand from so small a thing as an Apple, when he had his choice of the
fruit of the Garden, would not have denied himself any thing his Appetite had
desired, when that principle had prevailed upon him: He would not have stuck at
a greater matter to pleasure himself with the displeasing of God, when for so
small a thing he would incur the anger of his Creator.

Thus would he deifie his own understanding against the wisdom of God, and his
own appetite against the Will of God: This desire of equality with God, a
learned man thinks the Apostle intimates, Phil. 2.6. Who being in the form of
God, thought it not robbery to be equal with God: The Sons being in the form of
God, Dr. Jackson.
and thinking it no robbery to be equal with God, implies that the robbery of
sacrilege committed by our first Parents, for which the Son of God humbled
himself to the death of the Cross, was an attempt to be equal with God, and
depend no more upon Gods directions, but his own conduct, which could be no
less than an invasion of the throne of God, and endeavor to put himself into a
posture to be his Mate: Other sins, Adultery and Theft, etc. could not be
committed by him at that time, but he immediately puts forth his hand to usurp
the power of his Maker: This Treason is the old Adam in every man. The first
Adam contradicted the Will of God to set up himself: The second Adam humbled
himself, and did nothing but by the Command and Will of his Father. This
principle wherein the venom of the Old Adam lies, must be Crucified to make way
for the Throne of the humble and obedient principle of the New Adam or
quickening Spirit. Indeed sin in its owns nature is nothing else, but a willing
according to self, and contrary to the Will of God: Lusts are therefore called
the Wills of the flesh and of the mind. Ephesians. 2.3.
As the precepts of God are Gods Will: So the violations of these precepts is
man's Will: And thus man usurps a Godhead to himself, by giving that Honor to
his own Will which belongs to God; appropriating the right of rule to himself
and denying it to his Creator. That Servant that acts according to his own
Will, with a neglect of his Masters, refuses the duty of a Servant, and
invades the right of his Master: This Self-love and desire of Independency on
God has been the root of all sin in the World: The great controversy between
God and man has been, whether he or they shall be God; whether his Reason or
theirs, his Will or theirs shall be the guiding principle: As Grace is the
union of the Will of God and the Will of the Creature; so sin is the opposition
of the Will of self to the Will of God. Leaning to our own understanding, is
opposed as a natural, evil to trusting in the Lord, Pro. 3.5.
a supernatural grace. Men commonly love what is their own, their own
inventions, their own fancies; therefore the ways of a wicked man are called
the ways of his own heart; Eccl. 11.9.
and the ways of a superstitious man his own devices, Jer. 18.11. We will walk
after our own devices: We will be a law to our selves: And what the Psalmist
says of the tongue, our tongues are our own, who shall control us? is as
truly the language of men's hearts, our Wills are our own, who shall check us?

2. This is eviden in the dissatisfaction of men with their own Consciences
when they contradict the desires of self. Conscience is nothing but an actuated
or reflex knowledge of a superior power and an equitable law; a law impressed, and
a power above it impressing it. Conscience is not the lawgiver, but the
remembrancer to mind us of that law of nature imprinted upon our Souls, and
actuate the considerations of the duty and penalty, to apply the rule to our
acts, and pass Judgment upon matter of fact: It Is to give the charge, urge the
rule, enjoin the practice of those notions of Right, as part of our duty and
obedience.

But man is much displeased with the directions of Conscience, as he is out of
love with the accusations and condemning sentence of this officer of God: We
cannot naturally endure any quick and lively practical thoughts of God and his
Will, and distaste our own Consciences for putting us in mind of it: They
therefore like not to retain God in their knowledge, Romans 1.28.
that is, God in their own Consciences; they would blow it out as it is the
Candle of the Lord in them to direct them, and their acknowledgments of God, to
secure themselves against the practice of its principles: They would stop all
the avenues to any beam of light, and would not suffer a sparkle of Divine
knowledge to flutter in their minds, in order to set up another directing rule
suited to the fleshly appetite: And when they cannot stop the light of it from
glaring in their faces, they rebel against it, and cannot endure to abide in
its paths: Job. 24.13.
He speaks not of those which had the written word, or special Revelations; but
only a natural light or traditional, handed from Adam: Hence are all the
endeavors to still it when it begins to speak, by some carnal pleasures; as
Saul's evil Spirit with a fit of Music; or bribe it with some fits of a
glavering devotion, when it holds the Law of God in its commanding Authority
before the mind: They would wipe out all the impressions of it when it presses
the advancement of God above self, and entertain it with no better Complement,
than Ahab did Elijah, have thou found me O my Enemy?

If we are like to God in any thing of our natural fabric, it is in the superior
and more Spiritual part of our Souls: The resistance of that which is most like
to God, and instead of God in us, is a disowning of the Sovereign represented
by that Officer: He that would be without Conscience, would be without God,
whose Vicegerent it is, and make the sensitive part, which Conscience opposes,
his Lawgiver. Thus a man out of respect to sinful self, quarrels with his
natural self; and cannot comport himself in a friendly behavior to his
internal implanted principles: He hates to come under the rebukes of them, as
much as Adam hated to come into the presence of God, after he turned Traitor
against him: The bad entertainment Gods deputy has in us, reflects upon that
God whose cause it pleads: It Is upon no other account that men loath the upright
Language of their own reasons in those matters, and wish the eternal silence of
their own Consciences, but as they maintain the rights of God, and would hinder
the Idol of self from usurping his Godhead, and prerogative. Tho this power be
part of a man's self, rooted in his nature, as essential to him and inseparable
from him, as the best part of his being; yet he quarrels with it as it is Gods
Deputy, and stickling for the honor of God in his Soul, and quarrelling with
that sinful self he would cherish above God: We are not displeased with this
faculty barely as it exercises a self-reflection; but as it is Gods
Vicegerent and bears the mark of his Authority in it. In some cases this
self-reflecting act meets with good Entertainment, when it acts not in
contradiction to self, but suitable to natural affections: As suppose a man has
in his passion struck his Child, and caused thereby some great mischief to him,
the reflection of Conscience will not be unwelcome to him; will work some
tenderness in him, because it takes the part of self and of natural affection:
But in the more Spiritual concerns of God, it will be rated as a busy body.

3. Many, if not most actions, materially good in the world, are done more
because they are agreeable to self, than as they are honorable to God. As the
word of God may be heard not as his word, 1 These 2.13.
but as there may be pleasing Notions in it, or discourses against an opinion
or party we disaffect: So the Will of God may be performed, not as his Will,
but as it may gratify some selfish consideration, when we will please God so
far as it may not displease our selves, and serve him as our Master, so far as
his Command may be a Servant to our humor; When we consider not who it is that
Commands, but how short it comes of displeasing that sin which Rules in our
heart, pick and choose what is least burdensome to the flesh and distastful to
our lusts.

He that does the Will of God, not out of Conscience of that Will, but because
it is agreeable to himself, casts down the Will of God, and sets his own Will
in the place of it; takes the Crown from the head of God, and places it upon
the head of self: If things are done, not because they are Commanded by God,
but desirable to us; it is a disobedient obedience; a conformity to Gods Will in
regard of the matter, a conformity to our own Will in regard of the motive;
either as the things done are agreeable to natural and moral self, or sinful
self.

1. As they are agreeable to natural or moral self. When men will practice some
points of Religion, and walk in the track of some Divine precepts; not because
they are Divine, but because they are agreeable to their humor or constitution
of nature; from the sway of a natural bravery, the Byas of a secular interest,
not from an ingenuous sense of Gods Authority, or a voluntary submission to his
Will: As when a man will avoid excess in drinking, not because it is
dishonorable to God, but as it is a blemish to his own reputation, or an
impair of the health of his body: Does this deserve the name of an observance
of the Divine injunction, or rather an obedience to our selves? Or when a man
will be liberal in the distribution of his Charity, not with an eye to Gods
precept, but in compliance with his own natural compassion, or to pleasure the
generosity of his nature: The one is obedience to a man's own preservation, the
other an obedience to the interest or impulse of a moral Virtue. It Is not
respect to the rule of God, but the Authority of self; and at the best, is but
the performance of the material part of the Divine Rule, without any
concurrence of a Spiritual motive or a Spiritual manner. That only is a
maintaining the rights of God, when we pay an observance to his rule, without
examining the agreeableness of it to our secular interest, or consulting with
the humor of flesh and blood; when we will not decline his service, though we
find it cross, and has no affinity with the pleasure of our own nature: Such
an obedience as Abraham manifested in his readiness to sacrifice his Son: Such
an obedience as our Savior demands in cutting off the right hand. When we
observe any thing of divine order upon the account of its suitableness to our
natural Sentiments, we shall readily divide from him, when the interest of
nature turns it is point against the interest of Gods honor; we shall fall off
from him according to the change we find in our own humors: And can that be
valued as a setting up the rule of God, which must be deposed upon the mutable
interest of an inconstant mind? Esau had no regard to God in delaying the
execution of his resolution to shorten his brothers days; though he was awed
by the reverence of his Father to delay it; he considered perhaps, how justly
he might lie under the imputation of hastening crazy Isaacs death, by depriving
him of a beloved Son: But had the old man's head been laid, neither the contrary
command of God, nor the nearness of a fraternal relation could have bound his
hands from the act, no more than they did his heart from the resolution, Genesis
27.41. Esau hated Jacob because of the blessing, wherewith his father blessed
him; and Esau said in his heart the days of mourning for my father are at hand,
then will I slay my brother.

So many Children, that expect at the death of their Parents great Inheritances
or Portions, may be observant of them, not in regard of the rule fixed by God,
but to their own hopes, which they would not frustrate by a disobligement:
Whence is it that many men abstain from gross sins, but in love to their
reputation? Wickedness may be acted privately, which a man's one credit puts a
bar to the open commission of. The preserving his own esteem may divert him
from entering into a brothell house, to which he has set his mind before,
against a known precept of his Creator. As Pharaoh parted with the Israelites,
so do some men with their blemishing sins; not out of a sense of Gods rule, but
the smart of present Judgments, or fear of a future wrath: Our security then,
and reputation is set up in the place of God.

This also may be, and is in renewed men, who have the law written in their
hearts, that is, an habitual disposition to an agreement with the law of God;
when what is done is with a respect to this habitual inclination, without eying
the divine precept, which is appointed to be their rule; This also is to set up
a creature, as renewed self is, instead of the Creator, and that Law of his in
his word, which ought to be the rule of our actions: Thus it is when men choose
a moral life, not so much out of respect to the law of nature, as it is the law
of God, but as it is a law become one with their souls and constitutions: There
is more of self in this, than consideration of God; For if it were the latter,
the revealed law of God would upon the same reason be received as well as his
natural law: From this principle of self, morality comes by some to be advanced
above Evangelical dictates.

2. As they are agreeable to sinful self. Not that the commands of God are
suited to bolster up the corruptions of men, no more than the law can be said
to excite or revive sin. Romans 7.8, 9.
But it is like a scandal taken, not given; an occasion taken by the
tumultuousness of our depraved nature. The Pharisees were devout in long
Prayers, not from a sense of duty, or a care of Gods honor; but to satisfy
their ambition, and rake together fuel for their covetuousness; Math. 23.14.
You devour Widows Houses, and for a pretense makes long Prayers.
that they might have the greater esteem and richer offerings, to free by their
prayers the souls of deceased persons from Purgatory; an opinion that some
think the Jewish Synagogue had then entertained, Gerrard in loc.
since some of their Doctors have defended such a notion. Men may observe some
Precepts of God to have a better convenience to break others. Jehu was ordered
to cut off the house of Ahab: The service he undertook was in it self
acceptable, but corrupt nature misacted that which holiness and righteousness
commanded: God appointed it to magnify his Justice, and check the Idolatry
that had been supported by that family: Jehu acted it to satisfy his revenge
and ambition; he did it to fulfill his lust, not the will of God who enjoined
him: Jehu applauds it as zeal, and God abhors it as murder, and therefore would
avenge the blood of Jezreel on the house of Jehu, Hos. 1.4. Such kind of
services are not paid to God for his own sake, but to our selves for our lusts
sake.

4. This is evident in neglecting to take Gods direction upon emergent
occasions. This follows the Text, [none did seek God]. When we consult not with
him, but trust more to our own Will and Counsel, we make our selves our own
Governors and Lords, independent upon him: As though we could be our own
Counselors, and manage our Concerns without his leave and assistance; as
though our works were in our own hands and not in the hands of God, Eccles. 9.1.
that we can by our own strength and sagacity direct them to a successful end
without him. If we must acquaint our selves with God before we decree a thing;
Job 22.28.
then to decree a thing without acquainting God with it, is to prefer our
purblind wisdom before the infinite Wisdom of God; to resolve without
consulting God, is to depose God, and deifie self, our own wit and strength. We
would rather like Lot follow our own humor and stay in Sodom, than observe the
Angels order to go out of it.

5. As we account the actions of others to be good or evil, as they suit with
or spurn against our fancies and humors. Virtue is a crime, and vice a virtue,
as it is contrary or concurrent with our humors: Little Reason have many men to
blame the actions of others, but because they are not agreeable, to what they
affect and desire: We would have all men take directions from us, and move
according to our beck: Hence that common Speech in the world; such an one is an
honest friend, why? because he is of their humor, and lackies according to
their wills: Thus we make self the measure and square of good and evil in the
rest of mankind, and judge of it by our own fancies, and not by the will of
God, the proper rule of Judgment.

Well then let us Consider.

Is not this very common, are we not naturally more willing to displease God
than displease our selves, when it comes to a point that we must do one or
other? Is not our own Counsel of more value with us than Conformity to the will
of the Creator? Do not our Judgments often run Counter to the Judgment of God?
Have his Laws a greater respect from us, than our own humors. Do we scruple
the staining his honor when it comes in competition with our own? Are not the
Lives of most men a pleasing themselves, without a repentance that ever they
displeased God? Is not this to undeifie God, to deifie our selves, and disown
the propriety he has in us by the right of Creation and Beneficence? We order
our own ways by our own humors, as though we were the Authors of our own
being, and had given our selves life and understanding. This is to destroy the
order that God has placed between our wills and his own, and a lifting up of
the foot above the head; it is the deformity of the Creature: The honor of every
rational Creature consists in the service of the first cause of his being; as
the welfare of every Creature consists in the orders and proportionable motion
of its members, according to the Law of it is Creation.

He that moves and acts according to a law of his own, offers a manifest wrong
to God, the highest wisdom and chiefest good; disturbs the order of the world;
nulls the design of the righteousness and holiness of God: The Law of God is
the rule of that order he would have observed in the world: He that makes
another law his rule, thrusts out the order of the Creator, and establishes the
disorder of the Creature.

But this will yet be more evident in the fourth thing.

4. Man would make himself the rule of God, and give Laws to his Creator. We
are willing God should be our benefactor, but not our ruler; we are content to
admire his excellency and pay him a worship, provided he will walk by our rule.

Decay of Christian piety p. 169. somewhat changed.
[This commits a riot upon his nature. To think him to be what we our selves
would have him and wish him to be, Psalm. 50.21. We would amplify his Mercy
and contract his Justice: We would have his power enlarged to supply our wants,
and straightned when it goes about to revenge our crimes: We would have him
wise to defeat our enemies, but not to disappoint our unworthy projects: We
would have him all eye to regard our indigence, and blind, not to discern our
guilt: We would have him true to his promises, regardless of his precepts, and
false to his threatenings. We would new mint the nature of God according to our
models, and shape a God according to our fancies, as he made us at first
according to his own Image:] Instead of obeying him, we would have him obey us:
Instead of owning and admiring his perfections, we would have him strip himself
of his infinite excellency, and cloth himself with a nature agreeable to our
own. This is not only to set up self as the Law of God, but to make our own
Imaginations the model of the nature of God.]

Corrupted man takes a pleasure to accuse or suspect the actions of God: We
would not have him act conveniently to his nature; but act what does gratify
us, and abstain from what distasts us. Man is never well, but when he is
impeaching one or other perfection of Gods Nature, and undermining his Glory;
as if all his Attributes must stand Indicted at the bar of our purblind Reason:
This Weed shoots up in the exercise of Grace: Peter intended the refusal of our
Saviors washing his feet, as an act of humility, but Christ understands it to
be a prescribing a law to himself, a correcting his love, John 13.8, 9.

This is evidenced.

1. In the strivings against his Law. How many men imply by their Lives, that
they would have God deposed from his Government, and some unrighteous being,
step in to his Throne; as if God had or should change his Laws of Holiness into
Laws of Licentiousness; as if he should abrogate his old Eternal Precepts and
enact contrary ones in their stead? What is the Language of such practices, but
that they would be Gods Lawgivers and not his Subjects? that he should deal
with them according to their own wills, and not according to his righteousness?
that they could make a more holy, wise and righteous Law than the Law of God?
that their imaginations, and not Gods righteousness, should be the rule of his
doing good to them? Jer. 9.31. They have forsaken my Law and walked after the
imaginations of their own heart.

When an act is known to be a sin, and the Law that forbids it acknowledged to
be the Law of God, and after this a we persist in that which is contrary to it,
we tax his wisdom as if he did not understand, what was convenient for us, we
would teach God knowledge Job. 21^
; it is an implicit wish that God had laid aside the holiness of his nature,
and framed a Law to pleasure our lusts. When God calls for weeping and mourning
and girding with sackcloth upon approaching Judgments, then the corrupt heart
is for joy and gladness, eating of Flesh and drinking of Wine, because to
morrow they should die Isa. (...) 13.
: As if God had mistaken himself when he ordered them so much sorrow, when
their lives were so near an end; and had lost his understanding when he ordered
such a precept: Disobedience is therefore called contention, Romans 2.8.
Cententious and obey not the truth: Contention against God, whose truth it is
that they disobey; a dispute with him, which has more of wisdom in it self and
convenience for them, his truth or their imaginations. The more the love,
goodness and holiness of God appears in any command, the more are we naturally
averse from it, and cast an imputation on him, as if he were foolish, unjust,
cruel, and that we could have advised and directed him better. The goodness of
God is eminent to us in appointing a day for his own worship, wherein we might
converse with him and he with us, and our souls be refresht with spiritual
Communications from him; and we rather use it for the ease of our bodies, than
the advancement of our souls; as if God were mistaken and injured his Creature,
when he urged the spiritual part of duty. Every disobedience to the Law is an
implicit giving Law to him, and a charge against him that he might have
provided better for his Creature.

2. In disapproving the methods of Gods government of the world. If the
Counsels of Heaven roll not about according to their schemes, instead of
adoring the unsearchable depths of his judgments, they call him to the bar, and
accuse him, because they are not fitted to their narrow Vessels; as if a
Nut-shell could contain an Ocean. As corrupt reason esteems the highest truths,
foolishness; so it counts the most righteous ways, unequal: Thus we commence a
suit against God, as though he had not acted righteously and wisely, but must
give an account of his proceedings at our tribunal. This is to make our selves
Gods superiors, and presume to instruct him better in the government of the
world; As though God hindered himself and the world, in not making us of his
Privy Counsel, and not ordering his affairs according to the contrivances of
our dim understandings.

Is not this manifest in our immoderate complaints of Gods dealings with his
Church, as though there were a coldness in Gods affections to his Church, and a
glowing heat toward it only in us? Hence are those importunate desires for
things which are not established by any promise, as though we would overruled
and over-perswade God to comply with our humor. We have an ambition to be Gods
Tutors and direct him in his Counsels: Who has been his Counselor, says the
Apostle? Romans 11.34.
Who ought not to be his Counselor, says corrupt nature? Men will find fault
with God in what he suffers to be done according to their own minds, when they
feel the bitter fruit of it. When Cain had killed his brother, and his
Conscience rackt him, how sawcily and discontedly does he answer God, Genesis 4.9.
Am I my brothers keeper? Since thou do own thy self the Rector of the world,
thou should have preserved his person from my fury; since thou do accept
his Sacrifice before my Offering, preservation was due as well as acceptance.
If this temper be found on earth, no wonder it is lodged in hell. That
deplorable person under the sensible stroke of Gods Sovereign justice, would
oppose his Nay, to Gods will, Luke 16.30. ( And he said, nay, Father Abraham,
but if one went to them from the dead, they will repent): He would presume to
prescribe more effectual means than Moses and the Prophets, to inform men of
the danger they incurred by their sensuality: David was displeased, it is said,
2 Samuel 6.8. When the Lord had made a breach upon Vzzah; not with Vzzah, who was
the object of his pity, but with God who was the inflicter of that punishment.

When any of our friends have been struck with a Rod against our Sentiments and
wishes, have not our hearts been apt to swell in complaints against God, as
though he disregarded the goodness of such a person, did not see with our eyes,
and measure him by our esteem of him? As if he should have asked our Counsel,
before he had resolved, and managed himself according to our will, rather than
his own. If he be patient to the wicked, we are apt to tax his holiness, and
accuse him as an enemy to his own Law. If he inflict severity upon the
righteous, we are ready to suspect his goodness, and charge him to be an enemy
to his affectionate Creature. If he spare the Nimrods of the World, we are
ready to ask where is the God of Judgment? Mal 2.17.
If he afflict the Pillars of the Earth, we are ready to question where is the
God of Mercy? It Is impossible, since the depraved nature of man, and the
various interests and passions in the world, that infinite power and wisdom
can act righteously for the good of the Universe, but he will shake some
corrupt interest or other upon the earth; so various are the inclinations of
men, and such a Weathercock Judgment has every man in himself, that the
divine method he applauds this day, upon a change of his interest he will cavil
at the next: It Is impossible for the just orders of God to please the same
person many weeks, scarce many minutes together: God must cease to be God or to
be a holy, if he should manage the concerns of the world according to the
fancies of men.

How unreasonable is it thus to impose Laws upon God? Must God revoke his own
orders? Govern according to the dictates of his Creature? Must God, who has
only power and wisdom to sway the Scepter, become the obedient Subject of every
man's humor, and manage every thing to serve the design of a simple Creature?
This is not to be God, but to set the Creature in his Throne: Though this be
not formally done, yet that it is interpretatively and practically done, is
every hours experience.

3. In impatience in our particular concerns. It Is ordinary with man to charge
God in his complaints in the time of affliction. Therefore it is the
commendation the Holy Ghost gives to Job, Job. 1.22. That in all this, that is,
in those many waves that rolled over him, he did not charge God foolishly, he
never spoke nor thought any thing unworthy of the Majesty and righteousness of
God: Yet afterward we find him warping; he nicknames the affliction to be Gods
oppression of him, and no act of his goodness, Job. 10.3. Is it good for thee,
that thou should oppress? He seems to charge God with injustice, for
punishing him when he was not wicked, for which he appeals to God; thou know
that I am not wicked, v. 7. and that God acted not like a Creator, v. 8.

If our projects are disappointed, what fretfulness against Gods management are
our hearts rackt with? How do uncomely passions bubble upon us,
interpretatively at least wishing that the arms of his power had been bound,
and the eye of his omniscience been hoodwinkt, that we might have been left to
our own liberty and designs? And this oftentimes when we have more reason to
bless him, than repine at him: The Israelites murmured more against God in the
Wilderness, with Manna in their mouths, than they did at Pharaoh in the
Brickilns, with their Garlike and Onyons between their Teeth. Tho we repine at
Instruments in our afflictions, yet God counts it a reflection upon himself:
The Israelites speaking against Moses, was in Gods interpretation a Rebellion
against himself. Numb. 16.41 compared with 17, 10.
And Rebellion is always a desire of imposing Laws and Conditions upon those
against whom the Rebellion is raised. The sottish dealings of the Vine-dressers
in Franconia with the Statue of St. Urban, the Protector of the Vines upon his
own day, is an Emblem of our dealing with God: If it be a clear day and portend
a prosperous Vintage, they honor the Statue and drink healths to it; if it be
a rainy day, and presage a scantiness, they daub it with dirt in indignation.
We cast out our mire and dirt against God when he acts cross to our wishes, and
flatter him when the wind of his Providence joins it self to the tide of our
interest.

Men set a high price upon themselves, and are angry God values them not at the
same rate; as if their Judgment concerning themselves, were more piercing than
his. This is to disannul Gods Judgment, and condemn him and count our selves
righteous, as it is Job. 40.8. This is the Epidemical disease of human nature;
they think they deserve Caresses instead of Rods, and upon crosses are more
ready to tear out the heart of God, than reflect humbly upon their own hearts.
When we accuse God, we applaud our selves, and make our selves his superiors,
intimating that we have acted more righteously to him than he to us, which is
the highest manner of imposing Laws upon him; as that Emperor accused the
Justice of God for snatching him out of the World too seen. Caelum suspiciens
vitam, etc. Vita Titi, ca. 10.
What an high piece of Practical Atheism is this, to desire that that infinite
wisdom should be guided by our folly, and asperse the righteousness of God
rather than blemish our own? Instead of silently submitting to his Will and
adoring his Wisdom, we declaim against him, as an unwise and unjust Governor:
We would invert his order, make him the Steward and our selves the proprietors
of what we are and have: we deny our selves to be sinners and our mercies to be
forfeited.

4. It Is evidenced, in Envying the gifts and prosperities of others. Envy has a
deep tincture of practical Atheism, and is a cause of Atheism. Because wicked
men flourish in the world, Solicitor nullos esse putare Deos.
We are unwilling to leave God to be the proprietor and do what he will with
his own, and as a Creator to do what he pleases with his Creatures: We assume a
liberty to direct God what Portions, when and how he should bestow upon his
Creatures: We would not let him choose his own favorites, and pitch upon his
own instruments for his Glory: As if God should have asked Counsel of us how he
should dispose of his benefits. We are unwilling to leave to his wisdom the
management of his own Judgments to the wicked, and the dispensation of his own
love to our selves. This temper is natural: It Is as ancient as the first age of
the world: Adam envyed God a felicity by himself, and would not spare a Tree
that he had reserved as a mark of his Sovereignty: The passion that God had
given Cain to employ against his sin, he turns against his Creator: He was
wroth with God Genesis 4.5.
and with Abel; but envy was at the root, because his Brothers Sacrifice was
accepted and his refused. How could he envy his accepted person, without
reflecting upon the accepter of his offering? Good men have not been free from
it. Job questions the goodness of God, that he should shine upon the Counsel of
the wicked, Job. 10.3. Jonah had too much of self in fearing to be counted a
false Prophet, when he came with absolute denunciations of wrath. Jonah 4.2.
And when he could not bring a volley of destroying Judgments upon the
Ninevites, he would shoot his fury against his Master, envying those poor
people the benefit, and God the honor of his mercy: And this after he had been
sent into the Whales belly to learn humiliation; which tho he exercised there,
yet those two great branches of self-pride and envy were not lopt off from him
in the belly of hell. And God was fain to take pains with him, and by a Gourd,
scarce makes him ashamed of his peevishness. Envy is not like to cease, till
all Atheism be Cashiered, and that is in Heaven.

This sin is an imitation of the Devil, whose first sin upon Earth was Envy, as
his first sin in Heaven was Pride. It Is a wishing that to our selves, which the
Devil asserted as his right, to give the Kingdoms of the World to whom he
pleased: Luke 4.6.
It Is an anger with God, because he has not given us a Patent for Government.
It utters the same Language in disparagement of God, as Absalom did in
reflection on his Father. If I were King in Israel, Justice should be better
managed: If I were Lord of the world, there should be more Wisdom to discern
the merits of men, and more righteousness in distributing to them their several
portions. Thus we impose Laws upon God, and would have the righteousness of his
Will submit to the corruptions of ours, and have him lower himself to gratify
our minds, rather than fulfill his own: We charge the Author of those gifts
with injustice, that he has not dealt equally; or with ignorance, that he has
mistook his mark. In the same breath that we censure him by our peevishness, we
would Guide him by our Wills.

This is an unreasonable part of Atheism. If all were in the same state and
condition, the order of the world would be impaired: Is God bound to have a
care of thee, and neglect all the world besides? Shall the Earth be forsaken
for thee? Job. 18.4.
Joseph had reason to be displeased with his Brothers, if they had muttered,
because he gave Benjamin a double portion, and the rest a single. It was unfit
that they, who had deserved no gift at all, should prescribe him rules how to
dispense his own doles; much more unworthy it is to deal so with God; yet this
is too rife.

5. It is evidenced, in corrupt matter or ends of Prayer and praise. When we
are importunate for those things, that we know not whither the righteousness,
holiness, and wisdom of God can grant, because he has not discovered his Will
in any promise to bestow them; we would then impose such conditions on God,
which he never oblidged himself to grant; when we pray for things not so much
to glorify God, which ought to be the end of Prayer, as to gratify our
selves. We acknowledge indeed by the act of petitioning, that there is a God;
but we would have him un-God himself to be at our beck, and debase himself to
serve our turns. When we desire those things, which are repugnant to those
attributes, whereby he does manage the Government of the world; When by some
superficial services we think we have gained indulgence to sins: Which seems to
be the thought of the Strumpet in her paying her vows, to wallowmore freely in
the mire of her sensual pleasures; Pro. 7.14.
I have peace offerings with me, this day I have paid my vows, I have made my
peace with God, and have entertainment for thee: Or when men desire God to
bless them in the Commission of some sin. As when Balack and Balaam offered
Sacrifices, that they might prosper in the Cursing of the Israelites, Numb.
25.1. etc.

So for a Man to pray to God to save him while he neglects the means of
Salvation appointed by God: Or to renew him when he slights the Word, the only
Instrument to that purpose: This is to impose Laws upon God, contrary to the
declared Will and wisdom of God, and to desire him to slight his own
institutions. When we come into the presence of God with lusts reeking in our
hearts, and leap from sin to duty, we would impose the Law of our corruption on
the holiness of God. While we pray the Will of God may be done, self-love
wishes its own will may be performed, as tho God should serve our humors, when
we will not obey his precepts. And when we make vows under any affliction, what
is it often but a secret conontrivance to bend and flatter him to our
conditions? We will serve him if he will restore us; we think thereby to
compound the business with him and bring him down to our terms.

6. It Is evidenced; In positive and bold interpretations of the Judgments of God
in the world. To interpret the Judgments of God to the disadvantage of the
sufferer; unless it be an unusual Judgment, and have a remarkable hand of God
in it, and the sin be rendered plainly legible in the affliction; is a
presumption of this nature. When men will Judge the Galileans, whose blood
Pilate mingled with the Sacrifices, greater sinners than others, and themselves
righteous, because no drops of it were dashed upon them. Or when Shimei, being
of the House of Saul, shall Judge according to his own interest and desires
David's flight upon Absoloms rebellion to be a punishment for invading the
rights of Saul's Family, and depriving him of the succession in the Kingdom, 2 Samuel 16.5.
as if he had been of Gods Privy Counsel when he decreed such acts of Justice
in the world.

Thus we would fasten our own Wills as a Law or motive upon God, and interpret
his acts according to the Motions of self. Is it not too ordinary when God
sends an affliction upon those that bear ill will to us, to Judge it to be a
righting of our cause, to be a fruit of Gods concern for us in revenging our
wrongs, as if we had heard the secrets of God, or as Eliphaz says, had turned
over the records of heaven, Job 15.8. This is a judgment according to
self-love, not a divine rule; and imposes Laws upon Heaven, implying a secret
wish, that God would take care only of them, make our concerns his own; not in
ways of kindness and justice, but according to our fancies: And this is common
in the profane World in those curses they so readily spit out upon any
affront; as if God were bound to draw his Arrows and shoot them into the heart
of all their offenders at their beck and pleasure.

7. It is evidenced. In mixing rules for the worship of God, with those which
have been ordered by him. Since men are most prone to live by sense; it is no
wonder that a sensible worship, which affects their outward sense, with some
kind of amazement, is dear to them, and spiritual worship, most loathsome.

Pompous rites have been the great Engine wherewith the Devil has deceived the
souls of men, and wrought them to a nauseating the simplicity of divine
worship, as unworthy the Majesty and excellency of God. 2 Cor. 11.3.
Thus the Jews would not understand the glory of the second Temple in the
presence of the Messiah, because it had not the pompous grandeur of that of
Solomon's erecting.

Hence in all Ages men have been forward to disfigure Gods models, and dress up
a brat of their own; as though God had been defective in providing for his own
honor in his institutions without the assistance of his Creature. This has
always been in the world: the old World had their imaginations, and the new
World has continued them. The Israelites in the midst of miracles, and under
the memory of a famous deliverance would erect a Calf. The Pharisees, that sat
in Moses Chair, would coin new Traditions and enjoin them to be as current as
the Law of God. Mat. 13.6.
Papists will be blending the Christian appointments with Pagan Ceremonies, to
please the carnal fancies of the common people. Altars have been multiplied,
under the knowledge of the Law of God. Hos. 8.12.
Interest is made the balance of the convenience of Gods injunctions. Jeroboam
fitted a worship to politic ends, and posted up Calves to prevent his subjects
revolting from his Scepter, which might be occasioned by their resort to
Jerusalem, and converse with the body of the people from whom they were
separated. 1 Kings 12.27.
Men will be putting in their own dictates with Gods Laws, and are unwilling he
should be the sole Governor of the World without their Counsel: They will not
suffer him to be Lord of that which is purely and solely his concern. How often
has the practice of the Primitive Church, the Custom wherein we are bred, the
Sentiments of our Ancestors been owned as a more authentic rule in matters of
Worship, than the mind of God delivered in his word? It Is natural by Creation
to worship God; and it is as natural by corruption for man to worship him in a
humane way, and not in a divine. Is not this to impose Laws upon God? To esteem
our selves wiser than he? To think him negligent of his own service, and that
our feeble brains can find out ways to accommodate his honor, better than
himself has done? Thus do men for the most part equal their own imaginations
to Gods oracles: As Solomon built a high place to Moloch and Chemoch, upon the
Mount of Olives, to face on the East part Jerusalem and the Temple: 1 Kings
11.7*
This is not only to impose Laws on God, but also to make self the Standard of
them.

8. It Is evidenced, in suting interpretations of Scripture to their own minds
and humors. Like the Lacedaemonians, that dressed the Images of their Gods
according to the fashion of their own Country: We would wring Scripture to
s^rve our own designs; and Judge the Law of God by the law of sin; and make the
Serpentine seed in us to be the interpreter of Divine Oracles. This is like
Belshazar; to drink healths out of the sacred Vessels. As God is the Author of
his Law and Word, so he is the best interpreter of it; the Scripture having an
impress of divine Wisdom, Holiness, and Goodness, must be regarded according to
that impress, with a submission and meekness of Spirit and Reverence of God in
it. But when in our enquiries into the word, we enquire not of God, but consult
flesh and blood, the temper of the times wherein we live, or the satisfaction
of a party we side withal, and impose glosses upon it according to our own
fancies; it is to put Laws upon God and make self the rule of him. He that
interprets the law, to bolster up some eager appetite against the Will of the
lawgiver, ascribes to himself as great an authority as he that enacted it.

9. In falling off from God after some fair compliances, when his Will grateth
upon us and crosses ours. They will walk with him as far as he pleases them,
and leave him upon the first distaste, as tho God must observe their humors more
than they his Will. Amos must be suspended from Prophesying, because the Land
could not bear his words, and his discourses condemned their unworthy practices
against God. Amos. 7.10. etc.
The Young man came not to receive directions from our Savior, but expected a
Confirmation of his own rules, rather than an imposition of new. Mark 10.17, 22.
He rather cares for Commendations than instructions, and upon the
disappointment turns his back; He was sad, that Christ would not suffer him to
be rich and a Christian together, and leaves him because his Command was not
suitable to the Law of his Covetousness. Some truths that are at a further
distance from us, we can hear gladly. But when the Conscience begins to smart
under others, if God will not observe our Wills, we will with Herod be a Law to
our selves. Mark 6.2^.27.


More instances might be observed.

Ingratitude is a setting up self, and an imposing Laws on God. It Is as much as
to say God did no more than he was obliged to do; as if the Mercies we have,
were an Act of Duty in God and not of bounty. Insatiable desires after wealth.
Hence are those speeches, Jam. 4.13. We will go into such a City and buy and
sell, etc. to get gain. As tho they had the Command of God, and God must
Lacquey after their Wills. When our hearts are not contented with any supply
of our wants, but are craving an overplus for our lust: When we are unsatisfied
in the midst of plenty, and still like the Grave, cry give, give.

Incorrigibleness under affliction, etc.

Secondly, 2. The second main thing. As Man would be a Law to himself; So he
would be his own end and happiness in opposition to God.

Here four things shall be discoursed on.

1. Man would make himself his own End and Happiness. 2. He would make any
thing his End and Happiness rather than God. 3. He would make himself the End
of all Creatures. 4. He would make himself the End of God.
First, 1. Man would make himself his own End and Happiness. As God ought to be
esteemed the first cause, in point of our dependence on him, so he ought to be
our last end, in point of our enjoyment of him. When we therefore trust in our
selves, we refuse him as the first cause; and when we act for our selves and
expect a blessedness from our selves, we refuse him as the Chiefest good, and
last End, which is an undeniable piece of Atheism. For man is a Creature of a
higher rank than others in the world; and was not made as Animals, Plants, and
other works of the Divine power, materially to glorify God; but a rational
Creature, intentionally to Honor God by obedience to his Rule, dependence on
his goodness and zeal for his glory. It Is therefore as much a slighting of God,
for man, a Creature, to set himself up as his own End, as to regard himself as
his own Law.

For the discovery of this, observe that there is a threefold self-love.

1. Natural, which is common to us by the Law of nature with other Creatures,
Inanimate, as well as Animate; and so closely twisted with the nature of every
Creature, that it cannot be dissolved, but with the dissolution of nature it
self. It consisted not with the wisdom and goodness of God to Create an
unnatural nature, or to Command any thing unnatural: Nor does he; for when he
Commands us to Sacrifice out Selves, and dearest lives for himself, it is not
without a promise of a more noble state and being, in exchange for what we
lose. This self-love is not only commendable, but necessary, as a Rule to
measure that duty we owe to our Neighbor, whom we cannot love as our selves,
if we do not first love our selves: God having planted this self-love in our
nature, makes this natural principle the measure of our affection to all
Mankind of the same blood with our selves.

2. Carnal self-love, when a man loves himself above God, in opposition to God,
with a contempt of God; when our thoughts, affections, designs, Center only in
our own fleshly interest; and rifle God of his honor, to make a present of it
to our selves: Thus the natural self-love, in it self good, becomes Criminal by
the excess, when it would be superior and not subordinate to God.

3. A Gracious self-love: When we love our selves for higher ends than the
nature of a Creature, as a Creature dictates, Viz. in subserviency to the Glory
of God. This is a reduction of the revolted Creature, to his true and happy
order. A Christian is therefore said to be Created in Christ to good works.
Ephesians. 1, 10.
As all Creatures were Created, not only for themselves, but for the honor of
God; so the Grace of the new Creation carries a man to answer this end, and to
order all his operations to the Honor of God, and his well pleasing.

The first is from nature, the second from sin, the third from Grace. The first
is implanted by Creation, the second the fruit of Corruption, and the third is
by the powerful operation of Grace.

This Carnal self-love is set up in the stead of God as our last end; like the
Sea, which all the little and great streams of our actions run to, and rest in.

And this is,

1. Natural. It sticks as close to us as our Souls; it is as natural as sin;
the foundation of all the evil in the world: As self-abhorrency is the first
stone that is laid in Conversion: So an inordinate self-love was the first in
let to all iniquity: As Grace is a rising from self to Center in God; so is sin
a shrinking from God, into the mire of a Carnal selfishness: Since every
Creature is nearest to it self and next to God, it cannot fall from God, but
must immediately sink into self. M^r^, Dial. 2. 17. pa. 274.
And therefore all sins are well said to be branches, or modi^^^ations of this
fundamental passion. What is wrath, but a defense and strengthening self,
against the attempts of some real or imaginary evil? Whence springs envy, but
from a self love, grieved at its own wants in the midst of another enjoyment,
able to supply it? What is impatience, but a regret, that self is not provided
for at the rate of our wish, and that it has met with a shock against supposed
merit? What is pride, but a sense of selfworth, a desire to have self of a
higher Elevation than others? What is drunkenness, but a seeking a satisfaction
for sensual self in the spoils of reason? No sin is committed as sin, but as it
pretends a self-satisfaction. Sin indeed may well be termed a man's self,
because it is, since the loss of original righteousness, the form that
overspreads every part of our Souls. the understanding assents to nothing
false, but under the Notion of true, and the Will embraces nothing evil but
under the Notion of good; but the rule whereby we measure the truth and
goodness of proposed objects, is not the unerring word, but the inclinations of
self, the gratifying of which is the aim of our whole lives.

Sin and self are all one: What is called a living to sin in one place, Romans 6.
is called a living to self in another: 1 Cor. 5.15.
That they that live should not live unto themselves. And upon this account it
is that both the Hebrew word, (...) and the Greek word, (...), used in
Scripture to express sin, properly signify to miss the mark, and swerve from
that white to which all our actions should be directed, viz. the glory of God.
When we fell to loving our selves, we fell from loving God: And therefore when
the Psalmist says, Psalm. 14.2. there were none that sought God, viz. as the
last end; he presently adds, they are all gone aside, viz. from their true
mark, and therefore become filthy.

2. Since it is natural, It Is also universal. Psa. 14.1.
The not seeking God is as universal as our ignorance of him. No Man in a state
of nature, but has it predominant; no renewed Man on this side Heaven, but
has it partially: The one has it flourishing, the other has it struggling. If
to aim at the glory of God as the chief end, and not to live to our selves, be
the greatest mark of the restoration of the Divine Image, 1 Cor. 5.15.
and a conformity to Christ, who glorified not himself, Heb. 1.5.
but the Father: Joh. 17.4.
then every man wallowing in the mire of Corrupt nature, pays a homage to self,
as a renewed Man is byast by the honor of God.

The Holy Ghost excepts none from this Crime, Phil. 2.21. All seek their own.
It Is rare for them to look above or beyond themselves: Whatsoever may be the
immediate subject of their thoughts and enquiries, yet the utmost end and
stage, is their profit, honor or pleasure: Whatever it be, that immediately
possesses the Mind and Will, self sits like a Queen, and sways the Scepter,
and orders things at that rate, that God is Excluded, and can find no room in
all his thoughts, Psa. 10.4. The wicked through the pride of his Countenance
will not seek after God, God is not in all his thoughts. The whole little World
of Man is so overflowed with a Deluge of self, that the Dove, the Glory of the
Creator, can find no Place where to set its Foot; and if ever it gain the
favor of Admittance, it is to disguise and be a Vassal to some carnal Project;
as the Glory of God was a Mask for the murdering his Servants.

It Is from the Power of this Principle, that the difficulty of Conversion
arises. As there is no greater pleasure to a believing Soul, than the giving
it self up to God; and no stronger desire in him, than to have a fixed and
unchangeable Will to serve the designs of his Honor: So there is no greater
torment to a wicked Man, than to part with his carnal Ends, and lay down the
Dagon of self at the feet of the Ark. Self-Love, and Self-Opinion in the
Pharisees, way-layd all the entertainment of Truth, John 5.44. They sought
Honor one of another, and not the Honor which comes from God. It Is of so
large an Extent, and so insinuating Nature, that it winds it self into the
exercise of moral Virtues, mixeth with our Charity, Matt. 6.2. and finds
nourishment in the Ashes of Martyrdom, 1 Cor. 13.3.

This making our selves our End, will appear in a few things.

1. In frequent self Applauses, and inward overweening Reflections. Nothing
more ordinary in the Natures of Men, than a dotage on their own Perfections,
Acquisitions, or Actions in the World: Most think of themselves above what they
ought to think, Romans 12.3, 4. Few think of themselves so meanly as they ought
to think. This sticks as close to us as our Skin. And as Humility is the Beauty
of Grace, this is the filthiest Soil of Nature: Our thoughts run more
delightfully upon the track of our own Perfections, than the excellency of God.
And when we find any thing of a seeming worth, that may make us glitter in the
eyes of the World; how cheerfully do we grasp and embrace our selves? When the
grosser Prophanesses of Men have been discarded, and the Floods of them damm'd
up; the Head of Corruption, whence they sprang, will swell the higher within,
in self-applauding speculations of their own Reformation, without
acknowledgements of their own weaknesses, and desires of Divine Assistance to
make a further Progress. I thank God I am not like this Publican. Luke 18.11.
A self-reflection, with a contempt rather than compassion to his Neighbor, is
frequent in every Pharisee. The vapors of self-affections, in our clouded
understandings, like those in the Air in misty mornings, alter the appearance
of things, and make them look bigger than they are. This is thought by some to
be the Sin of the fallen Angels, who reflecting upon their own natural
Excellency superior to other Creatures, would find a Blessedness in their own
Nature, as God did in his; and make themselves the last end of their Actions.
It Is from this Principle we are naturally so ready to compare our selves,
rather with those that are below us, than with those that are above us; and
often think those that are above us, inferior to us, and secretly glory that we
are become none of the meanest and lowest in natural or moral Excellencies.

How far were the gracious Penmen of the Scripture from this, who when
possessed and directed by the Spirit of God, and filled with a Sense of him;
instead of applauding themselves, publish upon Record their own faults to all
the Eyes of the World? And if Peter, as some think, dictated the Gospel which
Mark wrote as his Amanuensis; it is observable, that his Crime in denying his
Master, is aggravated in that Gospel in some Circumstances, and less spoken of
his Repentance, than in the other Evangelists: When he thought thereon, he
wept. Mark 14.72.
But in the other, He went out and wept bitterly. Matt. 26 75.


Luke 22.62.
This is one part of Atheism and Self-Idolatry, to magnify our selves with the
Forgetfulness, and to the injury of our Creator.

2. In ascribing the glory of what we do or have, to our selves, to our own
Wisdom, Power, Virtue, etc. How flaunting is Nebuchadnezzar, at the Prospect of
Babylon, which he had exalted to be the Head of so great an Empire, Dan. 4.30?
Is not this great Babylon that I have built? For, etc. He struts upon the
Battlements of his Palace, as if there were no God but himself in the World,
while his eye could not but see the Heavens above him to be none of his own
framing; attributing his Acquisitions to his own Arm, and referring them to his
own Honor, for his own delight; not for the Honor of God, as a Creature
ought; nor for the advantage of his Subjects, as the Duty of a Prince: He
regards Babylon as his Heaven, and himself as his Idol, as if he were all, and
God nothing. An Example of this we have in the present Age. But it is often
observed, that God vindicates his own Honor, brings the most heroical men to
contempt and unfortunate ends, as a punishment of their Pride, as he did here,
Dan. 4.31. While the Word was in the Kings Mouth, there fell a Voice from
Heaven, etc. Sandersons Sermons.
This was Herod's Crime, to suffer others to do it: He had discovered his
Eloquence actively, and made himself his own end passively, in approving the
flatteries of the people; and offered not with one hand to God the glory, he
received from his people with the other. Acts 12.22, 23.
Samosatenus is reported to put down the Hymns which were sung for the glory
of God and Christ, and caused Songs to be sung in the Temple for his own Honor.

When any thing succeeds well, we are ready to attribute it to our own
Prudence, and Industry: If we meet with a Cross, we fret against the Stars and
Fortune, and second Causes, and sometimes against God; as they curse God as
well as their King, Esa. 8.21. not acknowledging any defect in themselves. The
Psalmist by his Repetition of Not unto us, not unto us, but to thy Name give
Glory, Psalm. 115.1. implies the naturality of this temper, and the difficulty
to cleanse our Hearts from those Self-reflections. If it be Angelical to refuse
an undue Glory stolen from Gods Throne, Revela. 22.8, 9. it is Diabolical to
accept and cherish it. To seek our own Glory is not Glory, Pro. 25.27. It Is
vile, and the dishonor of a Creature, who by the Law of his Creation is
referred to another end. So much as we sacrifice to our own credit, to the
dexterity of our hands, or the sagacity of our wit, we detract from God.

3. In desires to have self-pleasing Doctrines. When we cannot endure to hear
any thing that crosses the Flesh; though the wise man tells us, it is better to
hear the Rebuke of the Wise, than the Song of Fools, Eccles. 7.5. If Hanani the
Seer reprove King Asa for not relying on the Lord; his passion shall be armed
for self against the Prophet, and arrest him a Prisoner, 2 Cron. 16.10. If
Micaiah declare to Ahab the Evil that shall befall him, Amon the Governor
shall receive Orders to clap him up in a Dungeon. Fire does not sooner seize
upon combustible matter, than Fury will be kindled, if self be but pincht. This
interest of lustful self barred the heart of Herodias against the entertainment
of the Truth, and caused her savagely to dip her hands in the blood of the
Baptist, to make him a Sacrifice to that inward Idol Mark 6.18, 19, 28.
.

4. In being highly concerned for Injuries done to our selves, and little or
not at all concerned for Injuries done to God. How will the blood rise in us,
when our Honor and Reputation is invaded, and scarce reflect upon the
Dishonor God suffers in our sight and hearing. Violent Passions will transform
us into Bonarges in the one Case, and our unconcernedness render us Gallios in
the other. We shall extenuate that which concerns God, and aggravate that which
concerns our selves. Nothing but the Death of Jonathan, a first born and a
generous Son, will satisfy his Father Saul, when the Authority of his Edict
was broken by his tasting of Honey; though he had recompensed his Crime
committed in Ignorance, by the Purchase of a Gallant Victory. But when the
Authority of God was violated in saving the Amalekites Cattle, against the
Command of a greater Sovereign than himself; he can daub the business, and
excuse it with a Design of sacrificing. He was not so earnest in hindering the
people from the breach of Gods Command, as he was in vindicating the Honor of
his own: 1 Samuel 15.21.
He could hardly admit of an excuse to salve his own Honor; but in the
Concerns of Gods Honor, pretend Piety, to cloak his Avarice.

And it is often seen, when the violation of Gods Authority, and the stain of
our own Reputation are coupled together; we are more troubled for what
disgraces us, than for what dishonours God: When Saul had thus transgrest, he
is desirous that Samuel would turn again to preserve his own honor before the
Elders, rather than grieved that he had broken the Command of God, v. 30.

5. In trusting in our selves. When we consult with our own Wit and Wisdom,
more than inquire of God, and ask leave of him: As the Assyrian, Isa. 10.13. By
the Strength of my hands I have done it, and by my Wisdom, for I am prudent.
When we attempt things in the strengh of our own heads and parts, and trust in
our own Industry, without application to God, for Direction, Blessing and
Success, we affect the privilege of the Deity, and make Gods of our selves.
The same language in reality with Ajax in Sophocles: Others think to overcome
with the assistance of the Gods, but I hope to gain Honor without them.
Dependence and Trust is an act due from the Creature only to God. Hence God
aggravates the crime of the Jews in trusting in Egypt, Isa. 31.3. the Egyptians
are men and not Gods. Confidence in our selves is a defection from God, Jer.
17.5. And when we depart from and cast off God to depend upon our selves, which
is but an arm of flesh, we choose the arm of flesh for our God; We rob God of
that confidence, we ought to place in him, and that adoration which is due to
him, and build it upon another foundation: Not that we are to neglect the
reason and parts God has given us, or spend more time in prayer than in
consulting about our own affairs; but to mix our own intentions in business,
with Ejaculations to heaven, and take God a long with us in every motion: But
certainly it is an Idolizing of self, when we are more diligent in our
attendance on our own wit, than fervent in our recourses to God.

6. The power of sinful self, above the efficacy of the notion of God, is
evident in our workings for carnal self against the light of our own
Consciences. When men of sublime reason, and clear natural wisdom, are
voluntary slaves to their own lusts, row against the stream of their own
Consciences, serve carnal self with a disgraceful and disturbing drudgery,
making it their God, sacrificing natural self, all Sentiments of virtue, and
the quiet of their lives, to the pleasure, honor, and satisfaction of carnal
self: This is a prostituting God in his Deputy Conscience, to carnal
affections, when their eyes are shut against the inlightnings of it, and their
ears deaf to its voice, but open to the least breath and whisper of self: A
debt that the Creature owes Supremely to God.

Much more might be said, but let us see what Atheism lurks in this, and how it
intrencheth upon God.

1. It Is a usurping God's prerogative. It Is Gods prerogative to be his own end,
and act for his own glory; because there is nothing Superior to him in
Excellency and Goodness to act for: He had not his Being from any thing without
himself, whereby he should be obliged to act for any thing but himself. To make
our selves then our last End, is to corrival God in his being, the Supreme
Good, and Blessedness to himself: As if we were our own Principle, the Author
of our own Being, and were not obliged to a higher Power than our selves, for
what we are and have. To direct the Lines of all our Motions to our selves, is
to imply that they first issued only from our selves. When we are Rivals to God
in his chief end, we own or desire to be Rivals to him in the principle of his
being: This is to set our selves in the place of God. All things have something
without them, and above them as their end: All inferior Creatures act for some
Superior order in the rank of Creation; the lesser animals are designed for the
greater, and all for man: Man therefore for something nobler than himself. To
make our selves therefore our own end, is to deny any Superior, to whom we are
to direct our actions. God alone being the Supreme being, can be his own
ultimate end: For if there were any thing higher and better than God, the
purity and righteousness of his own Nature would cause him to act for and
toward that as his chiefest mark: This is the highest Sacrilege, to alienate
the proper good and rights of God, and employ them for our own use; to steal
from him his own honor, and put it into our own Cabinets; like those birds
that ravished the Sacrifice from the Altar and carried it to their own nests
Sabunde tit. 140.
: When we love only our selves, and act for no other end but our selves, we
invest our selves with the Dominion which is the right of God, and take the
Crown from his head: For as the Crown belongs to the King; so to love his own
Will, to Will by his own Will and for himself, is the property of God; because
he has no other Will, no other End above him to be the rule and scope of his
actions.

When therefore we are by self-love transformed wholy into our selves, we
make our selves our own foundation, without God and against God; when we
mind our own glory and praise, we would have a Royal State equal with God,
who Created all things for himself. Pro. 16.4.
What can man do more for God than he naturally does for himself, since he does
all those things for himself which he should do for God? We own our selves to
be our own Creators and Benefactors, and fling off all Sentiments of gratitude
to him.

2. It is a vilifying of God. When we make our selves our End, it is plain
language that God is not our happiness: We post-pone God to our selves, as if
he were not an object so excellent and fit for our love as our selves are:
(for it is irrational to make that our end, which is not God, and not the
chiefest good) It Is to deny him to be better than we, to make him not to be so
good as our selves, and so fit to be our chiefest good as our selves are; that
he has not deserved any such acknowledgment at our hands by all that he has
done for us: We assert our selves his superiors by such kind of acting, tho we
are infinitely more inferior to God than any Creature can be to us. Man cannot
dishonor God more than by referring that to his own glory, which God made for
his own praise, upon account whereof he only has a right to glory and praise
and none else. He thus changes the glory of the incorruptible God into a
Corruptible Image; Romans 1.23.
a perishing fame and reputation, which extends but little beyond the limits of
his own habitation; or if it does, survives but a few years, and perishes at
last with the age wherein he lived.

3. It Is as much as in us lies a destroying of God. By this temper we destroy
that God that made us, because we destroy his intention and his honor. God
cannot outlive his Will and his Glory: Because he cannot have any other Rule
but his own Will, or any other end but his own Honor. The setting up self as
our end, puts a nullity upon the true Deity; by paying to our selves that
respect and honor which is due to God, we make the true God as no God.
Whosoever makes himself a King of his Princes rights and Territories,
manifests an intent to throw him out of his Government: To choose our selves as
our end is to undeifie God, since to be the last end of a rational Creature is
a right inseparable from the nature of the Deity; and therefore not to set God,
but self always before us, is to acknowledge no being but our selves to be God.

Secondly, 2. The second thing, Man would make any thing his End and happiness
rather than God. An end is so necessary in all our actions, that he deserves
not the name of a rational Creature, that proposes not one to himself. This is
the distinction between rational Creatures and others; they act with a formal
intention, whereas other Creatures are directed to their end by a natural
instinct, and moved by nature to what the others should be moved by reason:
When a Man therefore Acts for that end, which was not intended him by the Law
of his Creation, nor is suited to the noble faculties of his Soul; He acts
contrary to God, overturns his order, and merits no better a title than that of
an Atheist.

A Man may be said two ways to make a thing his last end and chief good.

1. Formally. When he actually Judges this or that thing to be his chiefest
good, and orders all things to it. So Man does not formally Judge sin to be
good, or any object which is the incentive of sin to be his last end: This
cannot be while he has the exercise of his rational faculties.

2. Vertually and implicitly. When he loves any thing against the Command of
God, and preferrs in the stream of his actions the enjoyment of that, before
the fruition of God; and lays out more strength and expends more time in the
gaining that, than answering the true end of his Creation: When he acts so as
if something below God could make him happy without God, or that God could not
make him happy without the addition of something else. Thus the Glutton makes a
God of his dainties; the ambitious Man of his Honor; the incontinent Man of
his lust; and the Covetous Man of his wealth; and Consequently esteems them as
his chiefest good, and the most noble end, to which he directs his thoughts:
Thus he vilifies and lessens the true God, which can make him happy, in a
multitude of false Gods, that can only render him miserable. He that loves
pleasure more than God, says in his heart there is no God but his pleasure. He
that loves his belly more than God, says in his heart there is no God but his
belly: Their happiness is not accounted to lie in that God that made the World,
but in the pleasure or profit they make their God.

In this, tho a Created object be the immediate and subordinate term to which
we turn, yet principally and ultimately, the affection to it terminates in
self: Nothing is naturally entertained by us, but as it affects our sense or
mingles with some promise of advantage to us.

This is seen,

1. In the fewer thoughts we have of God than of any thing else. Did we
apprehend God to be our chiefest good and highest end, should we grudge him the
pains of a few days thoughts upon him? Men in their Travells are frequently
thinking upon their intended stage: But our thoughts run upon new acquisitions
to increase our wealth, rear up our Families, Revenge our injuries and support
our reputation: Trifles possess us; but God is not in all our thoughts, Psa.
10.4.
seldom the sole object of them. We have durable thoughts of transitory
things, and flitting thoughts of a durable and Eternal good. The Covenant of
grace engages the whole heart to God, and bars any thing else from engrossing
it: But what strangers are God and the Souls of most men? Though we have the
knowledge of him by Creation, yet he is for the most part an unknown God in the
Relations wherein he stands to us, because a God undelighted in: Hence it is,
as one obeserves, Jackson vol. book 1. cap. 14. pa. 48.
that because we observe not the ways of Gods wisdom, conceive not of him in
his vast perfections, nor are stricken with an admiration of his goodness, that
we have fewer good sacred Poems, than of any other kind. The wits of Men hang
the wing when they come to exercise their reasons and fancies about God. Parts
and strength are given us, as well as Corn and Wine to the Isralites for the
service of God; but those are Consecrated to some Cursed Baal. Hos. 2.8.
Like Venus in the Poet, we forsake Heaven to follow some Adonis.

2. In the greedy pursuit of the World. Quod quisque prae caeteris petit,
summum judicat bonum. B^et. lib. 3. pa. 24.
When we pursue worldly wealth or worldly reputation with more vehemence than
the riches of grace, or the favor of God. When we have a foolish imagination,
that our happiness consists in them, we prefer Earth before Heaven, broken
Cisterns which can hold no water, before an ever Springing Fountain of glory
and bliss: And, as tho there were a defect in God, cannot be content with him
as our portion, without an addition of something inferior to him: When we make
it our hopes and say to the wedge thou art my Confidence; and rejoice more
because it is great, and because our hand has gotten much, than in the
privilege of Communion with God and the promise of an everlasting fruition of
him. Job. 31.24.25.
This is so gross, that Job joins it with the Idolatry of the Sun and Moon,
which he purges himself of, ver. 26. And the Apostle when he mentions
Covetousness or Covetous men, passes it not over without the title of Idolatry
to the vice, and Idolater to the person: Col. 3.5. Ephesians. 5.5.
In that it is a preferring Clay and Dirt as an end more desirable than the
original of all goodness, in regard of affection and dependence.

3. In a strong addictedness to sensual pleasures, Phil. 3.19. Who make their
belly their God; subjecting the truths of God to the maintenance of their
Luxury. In debasing the higher faculties to project for the satisfaction of the
sensitive appetite as their chief happiness, whereby many render themselves no
better than a rout of sublimated brutes among men, and gross Atheists to God.
When men's thoughts run also upon inventing new methods to satisfy their
bestial appetite, forsaking the pleasures which are to be had in God, which are
the delights of Angels for the satisfaction of brutes: This is an open and
unquestionable refusal of God for our end, when our rest is in them, as if they
were the chief good, and not God.

4. In paying a service upon any success in the World, to Instruments more than
to God the Sovereign Author. When they Sacrifice to their Net, and burn
incense to their Drag. Hab. 1.16.
Not that the Assyrian did offer a Sacrifice to his arms, but ascribed to them,
what was due only to God, and appropriated the Victory to his forces and arms.
The Prophet alludes to those that worshipped their Warlike Instruments,
whereby they had attained great Victories; and those Artificers who worshipped
the Tools by which they had purchased great wealth, in the stead of God;
preferring them as the causes of their happiness before God who governs the
world.

And are not our affections, upon the receiving of good things, more closely
fixed to the Instruments of Conveyance, than to the chief benefactor, from
whose Coffers they are taken? Do we not more delight in them and hug them, with
a greater indearedness; as if all our happiness depended on them, and God were
no more than a bare spectator? Just as if when a Man were warmed by a beam, he
should adore that and not admire the Sun, that darts it out upon him.

5. In paying a respect to Man more than God. When in a public attendance on
his service, we will not laugh, or be garish, because Men see us: But our
hearts shall be in a ridiculous posture, playing with Feathers and trifling
fancies, tho God see us; as tho our happiness consisted in the pleasing of Men,
and our misery in a respect to God: There is no fool that says in his heart
there is no God; but he sets up something in his heart as a God.

This is.

1. A debasing of God. 1. In setting up a Creature. It speaks God less amiable
than the Creature, short of those perfections, which some silly sordid thing
which has engrossed their affections, is possessed with: As if the cause of
all being could be transcended by his Creature, and a vile lust could equal,
yea, surmount the Loveliness of God: It Is to say to God as the rich to the poor,
James 2.3. Stand thou there or sit here under my footstool: It Is to sink him
below the mire of the world, to order him to come down from his glorious
throne, and take his place below a contemptible Creature, which in regard of
its infinite distance is not to be compared with him. It strips God of the love
that is due to him by the right of his nature and the greatness of his Dignity;
and of the trust that is due to him, as the first cause and the chiefest good,
as tho he were too feeble and mean to be our blessedness. This is intolerable,
to make that which is Gods footstool, the Earth, to climb up into his throne;
to set that in our heart which God has made even below our selves and put
under our feet; to make that which we trample upon, to dispose of the right God
has to our hearts; Neremberg de adorat. p. 30.
It Is worse than if a Queen should fall in love with the little Image of the
Prince in the Palace, and slight the beauty of his person; and as if people
should adore the footsteps of a King in the dirt, and turn their backs upon
his presence.

2. It does more debase him to set up a sin, a lust, a carnal affection, as our
chief end. To steal away the Honor due to God, and appropriate it to that
which is no work of his hands, to that which is loathsome in his sight, has
disturbed his rest, and wrung out his just breath to kindle a Hell for its
Eternal lodging, a God dishonouring and a Soul Murdering lust, is worse than to
prefer Barabbas before Christ. The baser the thing, the worse is the injury to
him with whom we would associate it. If it were some generous principle, a
thing useful to the world, that we place in an equality with, or a superiority
above him; tho it were a vile usage, yet it were not altogether so Criminal:
But to gratify some unworthy appetite, with the displeasure of the Creator,
something below the rational nature of Man, much more infinitely below the
excellent Majesty of God, is a more unworthy usage of him. To advance one of
the most virtuous Nobles in a Kingdom as a mark of our service and subjection,
is not so dishonorable to a despised Prince, as to take a Scabby Beggar, or a
rotten Carcass to place in his throne. Creeping things, abominable beasts, the
Egyptian Idols, Cats and Crocodiles, were greater abominations, and a greater
despite done to God, than the Image of Jealousy at the gate of the Altar. Ezekiel.
8.5, 6, 10.


And let not any excuse themselves, that it is but one lust or one Creature which
is preferred as the end: Is not he an Idolater that worships the Sun or Moon,
one Idol, as well as he that worships the whole host of Heaven?

The inordinacy of the heart to one lust may imply a stronger contempt of him,
than if a Legion of lusts did possess the heart. It argues a greater disesteem,
when he shall be slighted for a single vanity. The depth of Esaus profaneness
in contemning his birth right, and God in it, is aggravated by his selling it
for one morsel of meat, Heb. 12.16.
and that none of the daintiest, none of the costliest, a mess of pottage;
implying, had he parted with it at a greater rate, it had been more tolerable,
and his profaneness more excusable. And it is reckoned as a high aggravation of
the Corruption of the Israelite Judges, Amos 2.6. That they sold the poor for a
pair of shoos; That is, that they would betray the cause of the poor for a
bribe of no greater value, than might purchase them a pair of shoos. To place
any one thing as our chief end, tho never so light, does not excuse: He that
will not stick to break with God for a trifle, a small pleasure, will leap the
hedge upon a greater temptation.

Nay, and if wealth, riches, friends, and the best thing in the world, our own
lives be preferred before God, as our chief happiness and end but one moment,
it is an infinite wrong; because the infinite goodness and excellency of God is
denied: As tho the Creature or lust we love, or our own life which we prefer in
that short moment before him, had a goodness in it self, superior to, and more
desirable than the Blessedness in God: And though it should be but one Minute,
and a Man in all the Periods of his days both before and after that Failure,
should actually and intentionally prefer God before all other things; yet he
does him an infinite wrong, because God in every moment is infinitely good, and
absolutely desirable, and can never cease to be good, and cannot have the least
shadow or change in him and his Perfections.

2. It Is a denying of God.

Job. 31.26, 27, 28. If I beheld the Sun when it shined, and the Moon walking
in its Brightness, and my Heart has been secretly enticed, or my Mouth has
kissed my Hand; this also were Iniquity to be punished by the Judge; for I should
have denied the Lord above. This Denial of God is not only the act of an open
Idolater, but the consequent of a secret confidence, and immoderate joy in
worldly Goods: This Denial of God is to be referred to v. 24.25. When a man
says to Gold, thou art my confidence, and rejoices because his wealth is
great; he denies that God which is Superior to all those, and the proper Object
of Trust: Both Idolatries are coupled here together; that which has Wealth,
and that which has those glorious Creatures in Heaven for its Object: And
though some may think it a light Sin, yet the Crime being of deeper guilt, a
denial of God, deserves a severer punishment, and falls under the Sentence of
the just Judge of all the Earth; under that Notion; which Job intimates in
those words; this also were an Iniquity to be punished by the Judge.

The kissing the hand, to the Sun, Moon or any Idol, was an external Sign of
Religious Worship among those and other Nations: This is far less than an
inward hearty Confidence, and an affectionate Trust: If the motion of the hand
be, much more is the affection of the heart to an excrementitious Creature, or
a brutish Pleasure is a Denial of God, and a kind of an Abjuring of him, siince
the Supreme Affection of the Soul is undoubtedly and solely the Right of the
Sovereign Creator, and not to be given in common to others, as the outward
gesture may in a way of civil respect. Nothing that is an Honor peculiar to
God, can be given to a Creature, without a plain exclusion of God to be God; it
being a disowning the rectitude and excellency of his Nature. If God should
command a Creature such a Love, and such a Confidence in any thing inferior to
him; He would deny himself his own Glory; He would deny himself to be the most
excellent Being. Can the Romanists be free from this, when they call the Cross
Spem unicam, and say to the Virgin, In te Domina speravi, as Bonaventure, etc.

Good reason therefore have Worldlings and Sensualists, persons of immoderate
fondness to any thing in the world, to reflect upon themselves; since though
they own the Being of a God, they are guilty of so great disrespect to him,
that cannot be excused from the title of an unworthy Atheism: And those that
are renewed by the Spirit of God, may here see ground of a daily Humiliation
for the frequent and too common Excursions of their Souls in Creature
Confidences and Affections, whereby they fall under the charge of an act of
practical Atheism, though they may be free from an habit of it.

3. The third thing is, Man would make himself the end of all Creatures. Man
would fit in the Seat of God, and set his heart as the heart of God, as the
Lord says of Tyrus Ezekiel. 28.2. What is the consequence of this; but to be
esteemed the chief Good, and end of other Creatures? A thing, that the heart of
God cannot but be set upon, it being an inseparable Right of the Deity; who
must deny himself, if he deny this affection of the Heart.

Since it is the nature of Man derived from his Root, to desire to be equal
with God; it follows that he desires no Creature should be equal with him, but
subservient to his ends and his glory. He that would make himself God, would
have the Honor proper to God: He that thinks himself worthy of his own supreme
affection, thinks himself worthy to be the Object of the supreme affection of
others: Whosoever counts himself the chiefest Good and last End, would have the
same place in the thoughts of others. Nothing is more natural to Man, than a
desire to have his own Judgment, the Rule and Measure of the Judgments and
Opinions of the rest of Mankind. He that sets himself in the Place of the
Prince, does by that act challenge all the Prerogatives and Dues belonging to
the Prince; and apprehending himself fit to be a King, apprehends himself also
worthy of the Homage and Fealty of the Subjects. He that loves himself chiefly,
and all other things and persons for himself, would make himself the end of all
Creatures. It has not been once or twice only in the World, that some vain
Princes have assumed to themselves the title of Gods, and caused Divine
Adorations to be given to them, and Altars to smoke with Sacrifices for their
Honor: What has been practiced by one, is by Nature seminally in all. We
would have all pay an Obedience to us, and give to us the Esteem that is due to
God.

This is evident,

1. In Pride. When we entertain an high Opinion of our selves, and act for our
own Reputes, we dispossess God from our own hearts; and while we would have our
Fame to be in every man's mouth, and be admired in the hearts of men, we would
chase God out of the hearts of others, and deny his Glory a Residence any where
else; that our Glory should reside more in their minds than the Glory of God;
that their thoughts should be filled with our Achievements, more than the
Works and Excellency of God, with our Image and not with the Divine. Pride
would paramount God in the affections of others, and justle God out of their
Souls; and by the same reason that man does thus in the Place where he lives,
he would do so in the whole world, and press the whole Creation from the
Service of their true Lord, to his own Service. Every proud man would be
counted by others as he counts himself; the highest, chiefest piece of Goodness;
and be adored by others, as much as he adores and admires himself. No proud man
in his self-love, and self-admiration, thinks himself in an Error; and if he be
worthy of his own admiration, he thinks himself worthy of the highest esteem of
others; that they should value him above themselves, and value themselves only
for him. What did Nebuchadnezzar intend, by setting up a Golden Image, and
commanding all his Subjects to worship it, upon the highest Penalty he could
inflict; but that all should aim only at the pleasing his Humor?

2. In using the Creatures contrary to the End God has appointed. God created
the World and all things in it, as steps whereby men might ascend to a Prospect
of him, and the acknowledgment of his Glory; and we would use them to dishonor
God, and gratify our selves: He appointed them to supply our necessities, and
support our rational delights; and we use them to cherish our sinful lusts. We
wring groans from the Creature in diverting them from their true scope, to one
of our own fixing, when we use them not in his service, but purely for our own,
and turn those things he created for himself to be instruments of Rebellion
against him to serve our turns; and hereby endeavor to defeat the ends of God
in them, to establish our own ends by them: This is a high dishonor to God, a
Sacrilegious undermining of his Glory; Sabunde Tit. 200. P. 352.
to reduce what God has made to serve our own glory, and our own pleasure: It
perverts the whole Order of the World, and directs it to another end than what
God has constituted; to another intention contrary to the intention of God;
and thus Man makes himself a God by his own Authority. As all things were made
by God, so they are for God: but while we aspire to the end of the Creation, we
deny and envy God the honor of being Creator. We cannot make our selves the
chief end of the Creatures against Gods Order, but we imply thereby, that we
were their first Principle: For if we lived under a sense of the Creator of
them while we enjoy them for our use, we should return the glory to the right
Owner.

This is Diabolical; though the Devil for his first affecting an Authority in
Heaven, has been hurled down from the State of an Angel of Light, into that of
Darkness, Vileness and Misery, to be the most accursed Creature living; yet he
still aspires to mate God, contrary to the knowledge of the impossibility of
success in it: Neither the terrors he feels, nor the future torments he does
expect, do a jot abate his Ambition to be Competitor with his Creator. How
often has he since his first sin, arrogated to himself the Honor of a God
from the blind world, and attempted to make the Son of God by a particular
Worship, count him as the chiefest Good and Benefactor of the World? Mat. 4.9.
Since all men by Nature are the Devils Children, the Serpents Seed, they have
something of this Venom in their Natures, as well as others of his qualities.
We see that there may be, and is a prodigious Atheism lurking under the Belief
of a God. The Devil knows there is a God, but acts like an Atheist, and so do
his Children.

4. Man would make himself the end of God. This necessarily follows upon the
former: Whosoever makes himself his own Law and his own End in the place of
God, would make God the Subject in making himself the Sovereign: He that steps
into the Throne of a Prince, sets the Prince at his Footstool; and while he
assumes the Princes Prerogative, demands a Subjection from him. The Order of
the Creation, has been inverted by the entrance of Sin. Pascal Pens.. 30. P.
294.
God implanted an affection in Man with a double aspect, the one to pitch upon
God, the other to respect our selves; but with this proviso, that our affection
to God should be infinite, in regard of the Object and Center in him, as the
chiefest Happiness and highest End: Our affections to our selves should be
finite, and refer ultimately to God as the Original of our Being: But Sin has
turned Man's affections wholly to himself: Whereas he should love God first, and
himself in order to God; he now loves himself first, and God in order to
himself: Love to God is lost, and Love to self has usurpt the Throne. As God
by Creation put all thing under the feet of Man, Psalm. 8.6.
reserving the Heart for himself; Man by Corruption has dispossessed God of
his Heart, and put him under his own feet. We often intend our selves, when we
pretend the Honor of God, and make God and Religion a Stale to some designs we
have in hand; our Creator a Tool for our own ends.

This is evident,

1. In our loving God, because of some self-pleasing benefits distributed by
him. There is in Men, a kind of natural love to God; but it is but a secondary
one, because God gives them the good things of this world, spreads their Table,
fills their Cup, stuffs their Coffers, and does them some good turns by
unexpected Providence: This is not an affection to God for the unbounded
Excellency of his own Nature, but for his beneficence, as he opens his hand for
them; an affection to themselves, and those Creatures, their Gold, their
honor, which their hearts are most fixed upon; without a strong Spiritual
Inclination that God should be glorified by them in the use of those Mercies.
It Is rather a disowning of God, than any love to him; because it postpones God
to those things they love him for. This would appear to be no love, if God
should cease to be their Benefactor, and deal with them as a Judge; if he
should change his outward smiles into afflicting frowns; and not only shut his
hand, but strip them of what he sent them. The Motive of their love being
expired, the affection raised by it, must cease for want of fuel to feed it:
So that God is beholden to sordid Creatures, of no value, (but as they are his
Creatures) for most of the Love the Sons of Men pretend to him. The Devil spoke
truth of most men, though not of Job, when he said, Job. 1.10. They love not
God for naught; but while he makes a hedge about them and their Families,
whilst he blesses the works of their hands, and increases their honor in
the Land. It Is like Peter's sharp reproof of his Master, when he spoke of the
ill usage, even to death, he was to meet with at Jerusalem; This shall not be
unto thee: It was as much out of love to himself, as zeal for his Masters
Interest, knowing his Master could not be in such a Storm without some drops
lighting upon himself. All the Apostacies of men in the world are Witnesses to
this: They fawn whilst they may have a prosperous Profession, but will not
bear one chip of the Cross for the Interest of God: They would partake of his
Blessings, but not endure the prick of a Lance for him: As those that admired
the Miracles of our Savior, and shrunk at his Sufferings. A time of trial
discovers these Mercenary Souls to be more Lovers of themselves than their
Maker. This is a pretended love of friendship to God, but a real love to a
Lust, only to gain by God: A good man's temper is contrary: Quench Hell, burn
Heaven said a holy Man, I will love and fear my God.

2. It Is evident; in abstinence from some sins; not because they offend God,
but because they are against the Interest of some other beloved Corruption, or
a Bar to something men hunt after in the World. When temperance is cherished,
not to honor God, but preserve a crazy Carcass: Prodigality forsaken, out of a
humor of Avarice: Uncleaness forsaken, not out of a hatred of Lust, but love to
their money: Declining a Denial of the Interest and Truth of God, not out of
affection to them, but an ambitious Zeal for their own Reputation. There is a
kind of Conversion from Sin, when God is not made the Term of it, Jer. 4.1. If
thou will return oh Israel, return unto me says the Lord. Trap on Genesis pa. 148.
When we forbear Sin as Dogs do the Meat they love; they forbear not out of a
hatred of the Carrion, but fear of the Cudgel: These are as wicked in their
abstaining from Sin, as others are in their furious committing it. Nothing of
the Honor of God and the End of his appointments is indeed in all this, but
the conveniences self gathers from them. Again, many of the motives the
generality of the world uses to their Friends and Relations to draw them from
Vices, are drawn from self, and used to prop up natural or sinful self in them:
Come, reform your self, take other courses, you will smut your Reputation and
be despicable; you will destroy your Estate and commence a Beggar; your Family
will be undone, and you may rott in a Prison: Not laying close to them the Duty
they owe to God, the Dishonor which accrues to him by their unworthy courses,
and the ingratitude to the God of their mercies: Not that the other motives are
to be laid aside and slighted: Mint and Cummin may be tithed, but the weightier
concerns are not to be omitted: But this shows that self is the Byas, not only
of men in their own course, but in their dealings with others: What should be
subordinate to the Honor of God, and the Duty we owe to him, is made superior.

3. It Is evident, In performing Duties merely for a selfish Interest: Making
our selves the End of Religious Actions, paying a Homage to that, while we
pretend to render it to God, Zach. 7.5. Did you at all fast unto me, even unto
me? Things ordained by God may fall in with carnal ends affected by our selves;
and then Religion is not kept up by any interest of God in the Conscience, but
the interest of self in the Heart: We then sanctify not the Name of God in the
Duty, but gratify our selves: God may be the Object, self is the End; and a
Heavenly Object is made subservient to a Carnal Design. Hypocrisy passes a
Complement on God, and is called Flattery, Psalm. 78.36. They did flatter him
with their lips, etc. They gave him a parcel of good words for their own
preservation. Flattery in the old Notion among the Heathens, is a Vice more
peculiar to serve our own turn and purvey for the Belly: They knew they could
not subsist without God, and therefore gave him a parcel of good words, that he
might spare them, and make Provision for them. Israel is an empty Vine, Hos.
10.1.
a Vine say some, with large Branches and few Clusters, but brings forth Fruit
to himself; while they professed Love to God with their lips: It was, that God
should promote their covetous designs, and preserve their Wealth and Grandeur:
Ezekiel. 33.31.
In which respect, an Hypocrite may be well termed a Religious Atheist, an
Atheist maskt with Religion. The chief Arguments which prevail with many men to
perform some Duties and appear Religious, are the same that Hamor and Shechem
used to the people of their City to submit to Circumcision, viz. the engrossing
of more Wealth, Genesis 34.21, 22. If every Male among us be circumcised, as they
are circumcised, shall not their Cattle and their Substance, and every Beast of
theirs be ours?

This is seen,

1. In unweildiness to Religious Duties, where self is not concerned. With what
lively thoughts will many approach to God, when a Revenue may be brought in to
support their own ends? But when the Concerns of God only are in it, the Duty
is not the Delight, but the Clogg; such feeble Devotions that warm not the
Soul, unless there be something of self to give strength and heat to them. Jonah
was sick of his work, and run from God, because he thought he should get no
honor by his Message; Gods Mercy would discredit his Prophecy. Johuah 4.2.
Thoughts of disadvantage, cut the very sinews of service. You may as well
persuade a Merchant to venture all his Estate upon the inconstant Waves without
hopes of Gain, as prevail with a natural man to be serious in Duty, without
expectation of some warm Advantage. What profit should we have if we pray to
him? is the natural Question, Job. 21.15. What profit shall I have if I be
cleansed from my Sin? Job. 35.3. I shall have more good by my sin than by my
service. It Is for God that I dance before the Ark, says David, therefore I
will be more vile, 2 Samuel 6.2. It Is for self that I pray says a natural Man,
therefore I will be more Warm and quick. Ordinances of God are observed only as
a point of interest, and Prayer is often most fervent, when it is least Godly,
and most selfish: Carnal Ends and Affections, will pour out lively Expressions.
If there be no delight in the means that lead to God, there is no delight in
God himself: Because Love is appetitus unionis, a desire of Union; and where
the Object is desirable, the means that brings us to it would be delightful
too.

2. In calling upon God only in a time of necessity. How officious will men be
in affliction, to that God whom they neglect in their Prosperity? When he slew
them, then they sought him, and they returned and inquired after God, and they
remembered that God was their Rock, Psalm. 78.34. They remembered him under the
Scourge, and forgate him under his Smiles: They visit the Throne of Grace,
knock loud at Heavens Gates, and give God no rest for their early and
importunate Devotions when under Distress: But when their desires are answered,
and the Rod removed; they stand aloof from him, and rest upon their own bottom,
as Jer. 2.31. We are Lords, we will come no more unto thee. When we have need
of him, he shall find us Clients at his Gate; and when we have served our turn,
he hears no more of us: Like Noah's Dove sent out of the Ark, that returned to
him when she found no rest on the Earth, but came not back when she found a
footing else where. How often do men apply themselves to God, when they have
some business for him to do for them? And then too, they are loath to put it
solely into his hand, to manage it for his own honor; but they presume to be
his Directors, that he may manage it for their glory. Self spurrs men on to the
Throne of Grace; they desire to be furnished with some Mercy they want, or to
have the Clouds of some Judgments which they fear, blown over: This is not
affection to God, but to our selves: As the Romans worshipped a Quartane Ague
as a Goddess, and Timorem and Pallorem, Fear and Paleness, as Gods; not out of
any affection they had to the Disease or the Passion, but for fear to receive
any hurt by them.

Again, when we have gained the Mercy we need, how little do we warm our Souls
with the consideration of that God that gave it, or lay out the Mercy in his
service? We are importunate to have him our friend in our necessities, and are
ungratefully careless of him, and his injuries, he suffers by us or others: When
he has discharged us from the Rock where we stuck, we leave him, as having no
more need of him, and able to do well enough without him: As if we were petty
Gods our selves, and only wanted a lift from him at first: This is not to
glorify God as God, but as our Servant; not an honoring of God, but a self
seeking: He would hardly beg at Gods door, if he could pleasure himself
without him.

3. In begging his Assistance to our own Projects. When we lay the Plot of our
own Affairs, and then come to God, not for Counsel but Blessing; Self only
shall give us counsel how to act; but because we believe there is a God that
governs the world, we will desire him to contribute success. God is not
consulted with, till the Counsel of self be fixed; then God must be the
Executor of our Will: Self must be the Principal, and God the Instrument to
hatch what we have contrived. It Is worse when we beg of God to favor some
sinful Aim; the Psalmist implies this, Psalm. 66.18. If I regard Iniquity in my
heart, the Lord will not hear me. Iniquity regarded as the aim in Prayer,
renders the Prayer succesless, and the Suppliant an Atheist, in debasing God to
back his Lust by his holy Providence.

The Disciples had determined Revenge; and because they could not act it
without their Master, they would have him be their Second in their vindictive
passion, Luke 9.55. Call for fire from Heaven.

We scarce seek God, till we have modeled the whole Contrivance in our own
Brains, and resolved upon the Methods of Performance; as though there were not
a fullness of Wisdom in God to guide us in our resolves, as well as Power to
breath Success upon them.

4. In impatience upon the refusal of our desires. How often do men's Spirits
rise against God, when he steps not in with the Assistance they want? If the
glory of God swayed more with them than their private interest, they would let
God be Judge of his own glory, and rather magnify his Wisdom, than complain of
his want of Goodness: Selfish hearts will charge God with neglect of them, if
he be not as quick in their supplies as they are in their desires; like those
in Isa. 58.3. Wherefore have we fasted say they, and thou see not; wherefore
have we afflicted our Souls and thou take no knowledge? When we aim at Gods
glory in our importunities, we shall fall down in humble Submissions when he
denies us; whereas self rises up in bold Expostulations, as if God were our
Servant, and had neglected the service he owed us, not to come at our call. We
overvalue the satisfactions of self above the honor of God. Besides, if what
we desire be a sin, our impatience at a refusal is more intolerable: It Is an
anger, that God will not lay aside his holiness to serve our corruption.

5. In the actual aims men have in their Duties. In Prayer for temporal things,
when we desire Health for our own ease, Wealth for our own sensuality, Strength
for our revenge, Children for the increase of our Family, Gifts for our
applause, as Simon Magus did the Holy Ghost, or; when some of those ends are
aimed at: This is to desire God not to serve himself of us, but to be a Servant
to our worldly interest, our vain glory, the greatning of our names, etc. In
spiritual mercies begged for; When pardon of sin is desired only for our own
security from eternal Vengeance; Sanctification desired only to make us fit for
everlasting blessedness; Peace of Conscience only that we may lead our lives
more comfortably in the world; when we have not actual intentions for the glory
of God, or when our thoughts of Gods honor are overtopt by the aims of self
advantage: Not but that as God has pressed us to those things by motives drawn
from the Blessedness derived to our selves by them, so we may desire them with
a resepect to our selves; but this respect must be contained within the due
banks, in subordination to the glory of God, not above it, nor in an equal
balance with it. Gurnall. Part. 3. Page 337.
That which is nourishing or medicinal in the first or second degree, is in the
fourth or fifth degree mere destructive poison.

Let us consider it seriously; though a Duty be heavenly, does not some base
end smut us in it?

[1.] How is it with our Confessions of Sin? Are they not more to procure our
Pardon, than to shame our selves before God, or to be freed from the chains
that hinder us from bringing him the glory for which we were created; or more
to partake of his benefits, than to honor him in acknowledging the rights of
his Justice? Do we not bewail sin as it has ruined us, not as it opposed the
Holiness of God? Do we not shuffle with God, and confess one sin, while we
reserve another; as if we would allure God by declaring our dislike of one, to
give us liberty to commit Wantoness with another; not to abhor our selves, but
to daub with God?

2. Is it any better in our private and Family Worship? Are not such Assemblies
frequented by some, where some upon whom they have a dependence may eye them,
and have a better opinion of them, and affection to them? If God were the sole
end of our hearts; would they not be as glowing under the sole eye of God, as
our tongues or carriages are seemingly serious under the eye of man? Are not
Family duties performed by some that their voices may be heard, and their
reputation supported among Godly Neighbors?

[3.] Is not the Charity of many men tainted with this end self? Mat. 6.1.
as the Pharisees were, while they set the miserable Object before them, but
not the Lord; bestowing Alms, not so much upon the necessities of the people,
as the friendship we owe them for some particular respects: Or casting our
bread upon those Waters which stream down in the sight of the world, that our
Doles may be visible to them and commended by them: Or when we think to oblige
God to pardon our transgressions; as if we merited it and Heaven too at his
hands, by bestowing a few pence upon indigent persons. And

[4.] Is it not the same with the Reproofs of men? Is not Heat and Anger
carried out with full Sail when our worldly interest is prejudiced, and
becalmed in the concerns of God? Do not many Masters reprove their Servants
with more vehemence for the neglect of their Trade and Business, than the
neglect of Divine Duties; and that upon Religious Arguments, pretending the
honor of God that they may mind their own interest? But when they are
negligent in what they owe to God, no noise is made, they pass without rebuke.
Is not this to make God and Religion a Stale to their own ends? It Is a part of
Atheism, not to regard the injuries done to God, as Tiberius Dei injuria Deo
curae.
; Let Gods wrongs be looked to or cared for by himself.

[5.] Is it not thus in our seeming Zeal for Religion? As Demetrius, and the
Craftsmen at Ephesus cried up aloud the greatness of Diana of the Ephesians;
not out of any true zeal they had for her, but their gain, which was increased
by the confluence of her Worshippers, and the Sale of her own Shrines, Acts
19.24.28.

4. In making use of the Name of God to countenance our Sin. When we set up an
opinion that is a Friend to our lusts, and then dig deep into the Scripture to
find Crutches to support it, and authorize our practices: When men will thank
God for what they have got by unlawful means, Fathering the fruit of their
cheating craft, and the simplicity of their Chapmen upon God: Crediting their
Cousenage by his Name, as men do brass money, with a thin plate of silver, and
the stamp and image of the Prince. The Jews urge the Law of God for the
crucifying his Son, John 19.7. We have a Law, and by that Law he is to dye: And
would make him a Party in their private Revenge. Sanaerson's S. Part. 2. P. 158.
Thus often when we have faultered in some actions, we wipe our mouths, as if
we sought God more than our own interest, prostituting the sacred Name and
Honor of God, either to hatch or defend some unworthy lust against his Word.

Is not all this a high degree of Atheism?

1. It Is a vilifying God, an abuse of the highest good: Other sins subject the
Creature and outward things to them; but acting in Religious services for self,
subjects not only the highest concernments of men's Souls, but the Creator
himself to the Creature: Nay, to make God contribute to that which is the
pleasure of the Devil: A greater slight, than to cast the gifts of a Prince to
a Herd of nasty Swine. It were more excusable to serve our selves of God upon
the higher accounts, such that materially conduce to his glory; but it is an
intolerable wrong, to make Him and his Ordinances Caterers for our own bellies,
as they did Hos. ^8.13. Vid. Cocc. in locum.
: They sacrificed the (...) of which the Offerer might eat; not out of any
reference to God, but love to their Gluttony; not to please him, but feast
themselves. The Belly was truly made the God, when God was served only in order
to the Belly: As though the blessed God had his Being, and his Ordinances were
enjoined to pleasure their foolish and wanton Appetites: As though the Work of
God were only to patronize unrighteous ends, and be as bad as themselves, and
become a Pander to their corrupt affections.

2. Because it is a vilifying of God, It is an undeifying or dethroning God.
It Is an acting, as if we were the Lords, and God our Vassal: A setting up those
secular ends in the place of God, who ought to be our ultimate end in every
action; to whom a glory is as due, as his mercy to us is utterly unmerited by
us. He that thinks to cheat, and put the Fool upon God by his pretenses, does
not heartily believe there is such a Being. He could not have the Notion of a
God, without that of Omniscience and Justice; an eye to see the cheat, and an
Arm to punish it: The Notion of the one would direct him in the manner of his
Services, and the Sense of the other would scare him from the cherishing his
unworthy ends. He that serves God with a sole respect to himself, is prepared
for any Idolatry; his Religion shall warp with the times and his interest; he
shall deny the true God for an Idol, when his worldly interest shall advise him
to it; and pay the same Reverence to the basest Image, which he pretends now to
pay to God: As the Israelites were as real for Idolatry under their basest
Princes, as they were Pretenders to the true Religion under those that were
Pious.

Before I come to the use of this, give me leave to evince this practical
Atheism by two other Considerations.

1. Unworthy Imaginations of God.

The Fool has said in his heart there is no God: That is, he is not such a God
as you report him to be: This is meant by their being corrupt, in the 2. v.
corrupt being taken for playing the Idolaters, Exodus 32.7. We cannot comprehend
God; if we could, we should cease to be finite; and because we cannot
comprehend him, we erect strange Images of him in our fancies and affections.
And since guilt came upon us, because we cannot root out the Notions of God, we
would debase the Majesty and Nature of God, that we may have some ease in our
Consciences, and lie down with some comfort in the sparks of our own kindling.

This is universal in men by Nature. God is not in all his thoughts: Psalm. 10.4.
Not in any of his thoughts according to the excellency of his Nature, and
greatness of his Majesty. As the Heathen did not glorify God as God, so neither
do they conceive of God as God: They are all infected with some one or other
ill opinion of him, thinking him not so holy, powerful, just, good as he is,
and as the natural force of a human understanding might arrive to. We join a
new Notion of God in our vain fancies, and represent him not as he is, but as
we would have him to be, fit for our own use, and suited to our own pleasure:
We set that active power of imagination on work, and there comes out a God, (a
Calf) whom we own for a Notion of God.

Adam cast him into so narrow a mould, as to think that himself, who had newly
sprouted up by his Almighty power, was fit to be his Corrival in knowledge, and
had vain hopes to grasp as much as infiniteness: If he in his first declining
begun to have such a conceit, it is no doubt but we have as bad under a mass of
Corruption. When holy Agur speaks of God, he cries out that he had not the
understanding of a Man, nor the knowledge of the holy: Pro. 30.2.3.
He did not think rationally of God as Man might by his strength at his first
Creation. There are as many Carved Images of God as there are minds of Men, and
as monstrous shapes as those Corruptions, into which they would transform him.

Hence sprang,

1. Idolatry. Vain Imaginations first set afloat and kept up this in the world.
Romans 1.2^.23.
Vain Imaginations of the God whose glory they changed into the Image of
corruptible Man: They had set up vain Images of him in their fancy, before they
set up Idolatrous representations of him in their Temples; The likening him to
those Idols of Wood and Stone, and various metals, were the fruit of an Idea
Erected in their own minds; This is a mighty debasing the Divine nature, and
rendering him no better, than that base and stupid matter they make the visible
object of their adoration; equalling him with those base Creatures they think
worthy to be the representations of him. Yet how far did this Crime spread it
self in all Corners of the world, not only among the more barbarous and
Ignorant, but the more polisht and Civilized Nations? Judea only, where God had
placed the Ark of his presence, being free from it, in some intervals of time
only after some sweeping Judgment. And tho they vomited up their Idols
undersome sharp scourge, they licked them up again after the Heavens were
cleared over their Heads: The whole book of Judges makes mention of it. And tho
an Evangelical light has chased that Idolatry away from a great part of the
world; yet the Principle remaining, Coyns more Spiritual Idols in the heart,
which are brought before God in acts of Worship.

2. Hence all superstition received its rise and growth. When we Mint a God
according to our own Complexion, like to us in mutable and various passions,
soon angry and soon appeased, it is no wonder that we invent ways of pleasing him
after we have offended him; and think to expiate the sin of our Souls, by some
Melancholy devotions and self Chastisements. Superstition is nothing else but
an unscriptural and unrevealed dread of God. (...).
When they imagined him a rigorous and severe Master, they cast about for ways
to mitigate him whom they thought so hard to be pleased: A very mean thought of
him, as if a slight and pompous Devotion could as easily bribe and flatter him
out of his rigors, as a few good words or baubling rattles could please and
quiet little Children; And whatsoever pleased us, could please a God infinitely
above us. Such narrow conceits had the Philistines, when they thought to still
the anger of the God of Israel, whom they thought they possessed in the Ark,
with the present of a few Golden mice. 1 Samuel 6.3, 4.
All the Superstition this day living in the world is built upon this
foundation: So natural it is to Man to pull God down to his own Imaginations,
rather than raise his Imaginations up to God. Hence does arise also the
diffidence of his mercy, tho they repent; measuring God by the contracted
Models of their own Spirits; as tho his nature were as difficult to Pardon
their offenses against him, as they are to remit wrongs done to themselves.

3. Hence Springs all Presumption, the Common disease of the world. All the
wickedness in the World, which is nothing else but presuming upon God, rises
from the ill interpretations of the goodness of God, breaking out upon them in
the works of Creation and Providence: The Corruption of Man's nature engendered
by those Notions of goodness a monstrous birth of vain imaginations. Not of
themselves primarily, but of God, whence arose all that folly and darkness in
their minds and conversations, Romans 1.20.21. They glorified him not as God, but
according to themselves, imagined him good that themselves might be bad;
fancyed him so indulgent, as to neglect his own honor for their sensuality.
How does the unclean person represent him to his own thoughts, but as a Goat;
the Murderer as a Tiger; the sensual person as a Swine; while they fancy a God
indulgent to their Crimes without their repentance? As the Image on the Seal is
stamped upon the wax, so the thoughts of the heart are Printed upon the actions.
Gods Patience is apprehended to be an approbation of their Vices, and from the
Consideration of his forbearance, they fashion a God that they believe will
smile upon their Crimes: They imagine a God that plays with them; and tho he
threatens, does it only to scare, but means not as he speaks: A God they fancy
like themselves, that would do as they would do, not be angry for what they
count a light offense, Psalm. 50.21. Thou thoughtest I was such a one as thy
self: That God and they were exactly alike as two Tallies. Gurnal part 2. p.
245. 246.
[Our wilful misapprehensions of God are the cause of our misbehaviour in all
his worship: Our slovenly and lazy services tell him to his face what slight
thoughts and apprehensions we have of him]

Compare these two together.

Superstition arises from terrifying misapprehensions of God: Presumption from
self pleasing thoughts: One represents him only rigorous, and the other
careless: One makes us over officious in serving him by our own rules; and the
other over bold in offending him, according to our humors. The want of a true
Notion of Gods Justice makes some Men slight him: And the want of a true
apprehension of his goodness makes others too servile in their approaches to
him: One makes us careless of duties, and the other makes us look on them
rather as Physic than food; an unsupportable penance, than a desirable
privilege. In this Case, Hell is the principle of Duty performed to Heaven.
The superstitious Man believes God has scarce mercy to Pardon; the
presumptuous Man believes he has no such perfection as Justice to punish. The
one makes him insignificant to what he desires, kindness and goodness; the
other renders him insignificant to what he fears, his vindictive Justice: What
between the Idolater, the superstitious, the presumptuous person, God should
look like no God in the world.

These unworthy imaginations of God are likewise,

A vilifying of him: Debasing the Creator, to be a Creature of their own
fancies; putting their own stamp upon him; and fashioning him not according to
that beautiful Image he impressed upon them by Creation; but the defaced Image
they inherit by their fall, and which is worse, the Image of the Devil which
spread it self over them at their revolt and apostasy. Were it possible to see
a Picture of God, according to the fancies of Men, it would be the most
Monstrous being, such a God that never was, nor ever can be.

We honor God when we have worthy opinions of him suitable to his nature; when
we conceive of him as a being of unbounded loveliness and perfection: We
detract from him when we ascribe to him such qualities as would be a horrible
disgrace to a wise and good Man: As Injustice and Impurity. Thus Men debase God
when they invert his order, and would Create him according to their Image, as
he first Created them according to his own: And think him not worthy to be a
God, unless he fully answer the mould they would cast him into, and be what is
unworthy of his nature: Men do not conceive of God as he would have them; but
he must be what they would have him, one of their own shaping.

1. This is worse than Idolatry. The grossest Idolater commits not a Crime so
heinous, by changing his glory into the Image of Creeping things and senseless
Creatures, as the imagining God to be as one of our sinful selves, and likening
him to those filthy Images, we erect in our fancies: One makes him an earthly
God, like an earthly Creature; the other fancies him an unjust and impure God,
like a wicked Creature: One sets up an Image of him in the Earth, which is his
footstool; the other sets up an Image of him in the heart, which ought to be
his throne.

2. It Is worse than absolute Atheism, or a denial of God. Dignius credimus non
esse, quodcunque non ita fuerit, ut esse deberet, was the opinion of
Tertullian. Tertul. cont. Maxim. lib. 1. cap. 2.
It Is more Commendable to think him not to be, than to think him such a one as
is inconsistent with his nature. Better to deny his Existence, than deny his
perfection. No wise Man but would rather have his memory rot, than be accounted
infamous; and would be more obliged to him that should deny that ever he had a
Being in the world, than to say he did indeed live, but he was a Sot, a
debaucht Person, and a man not to be trusted. When we apprehend God deceitful
in his promises, unrighteous in his threatenings, unwilling to pardon upon
repentance, or resolved to pardon notwithstanding impenitency: These are things
either unworthy of the Nature of God, or contrary to that Revelation he has
given of himself. Better for a man never to have been born, than be for ever
miserable; so better to be thought no God, than represented impotent or
negligent, unjust or deceitful; which are more contrary to the Nature of God,
than Hell can be to the greatest Criminal. In this sense perhaps the Apostle
affirms the Gentiles, Ephesians. 2.12. to be such as are without God in the World; as
being more Atheists in adoring God under such Notions, as they commonly did,
than if they had acknowledged no God at all.

2. This is evident by our natural desire to be distant from him, and
unwillingness to have any acquaintance with him. Sin set us first at a distance
from God; and every new act of gross Sin estrangeth us more from him, and
indisposeth us more for him: It makes us both afraid and ashamed to be near
him. Sensual men were of this frame that Job discourses of, Job. 21.7, 8, 9,
and 14, and 15. verses: Where grace reigns, the nearer to God, the more
vigorous the motion; The nearer any thing approaches to us, that is the Object
of our desires, the more eagerly do we press forward to it: But our blood
rises at the approaches of any thing to which we have an aversion: We have
naturally a loathing of Gods coming to us or our return to him: We seek not
after him as our happiness; and when he offers himself, we like it nor, but put
a disgrace upon him in choosing other things before him. God and we are
naturally at as great a distance, as Light and Darkness, Life and Death, Heaven
and Hell. The stronger impression of God any thing has, the more we fly from
it. The glory of God in reflection upon Moses his face scared the Israelites;
they who had desired God to speak to them by Moses, when they saw a signal
impression of God upon his Countenance, were afraid to come near him, as they
were before unwilling to come near to God Exodus 34.30.
: Not that the blessed God is in his own Nature a frightful Object; but our own
guilt renders him so to us, and our selves indisposed to converse with him. As
the light of the Sun is as irksome to a distempered eye, as it is in its own
Nature desirable to a sound one. The Saints themselves have had so much
frailty, that they have cried out, that they were undone, if they had any more
than ordinary discoveries of God made unto them; as if they wished him more
remote from them. Vileness cannot endure the splendour of Majesty, nor Guilt the
glory of a Judge.

We have naturally, (1.) No desire of remembrance of him, (2.) or converse with
him, (3.) or thorough return to him, (4.) or close imitation of him: As if
there were not any such Being as God in the world; or as if we wished there
were none at all; so feeble and spiritless are our thoughts of the Being of a
God.

(1.) No desire for the remembrance of him. How delightful are other things in
our minds? How burdensome the Memorials of God, from whom we have our Being?
With what pleasure do we contemplate the Nature of Creatures; even of Flies and
Toads; while our minds tire in the search of him, who has bestowed upon us our
knowing and meditating Faculties? Though God shows himself to us in every
Creature; in the meanest Weed, as well as the highest Heavens; and is more
apparent in them to our reasons than themselves can be to our sense; yet though
we see them, we will not behold God in them: We will view them to please our
sense, to improve our reason in their natural perfections; but pass by the
consideration of Gods perfections so visibly beaming from them. Thus we play
the Beasts and Atheists in the very exercise of reason, and neglect our Creator
to gratify our sense; as though the pleasure of that were more desirable than
the knowledge of God: The desire of our Souls is not toward his Name and the
Remembrance of him, Isa. 26.8.
when we set not our selves in a posture to feast our Souls with deep and
serious meditations of him; have a thought of him, only by the by and away, as
if we were afraid of too intimate acquaintance with him.

Are not the thoughts of God rather our Invaders, than our Guests; seldom
invited to reside and take up their home in our hearts? Have we not when they
have broke in upon us, bid them depart from us, Job. 22.17.
and warned them to come no more upon our ground; sent them packing as soon as
we could, and were glad when they were gone? And when they have departed, have
we not often been afraid they should return again upon us; and therefore looked
about for other inmates, things not good; or if good, infinitely below God, to
possess the room of our hearts before any thoughts of him should appear again?
Have we not often been glad of excuses to shake off present thoughts of him;
and when we have wanted real ones, found out pretenses to keep God and our
hearts at a distance? Is not this a part of Atheism to be so unwilling to
employ our faculties about the giver of them, to refuse to exercise them in a
way of a grateful remembrance of him; as though they were none of his gift, but
our own acquisition; as though the God that truly gave them, had no right to
them; and he that thinks on us every day in a way of Providence, were not
worthy to be thought on by us in a way of special Remembrance?

Do not the best, that love the remembrance of him, and abhor this natural
aversness, find, that when they would think of God, many things tempt them and
turn them to think elsewhere? Do they not find their apprehensions too feeble,
their motions too dull, and the impressions too slight? This natural Atheism is
spread over humane nature.

(2.) No desire of converse with him. The word remember in the command for
keeping holy the Sabbath Day, including all the duties of the Day, and the
choicest of our lives; implies our natural unwillingness to them, and
forgetfulness of them: Gods pressing this Command with more reasons than the
rest, manifests that man has no heart for Spiritual Duties. No spiritual duty,
which sets us immediately Face to Face with God; but in the attempts of it, we
find naturally a resistance, from some powerful Principle; so that every one
may subscribe to the speech of the Apostle, that when we would do good, evil is
present with them. No reason of this can be rendered, but the natural temper of
our Souls, and an affecting a distance from God under any consideration: For
though our guilt first made the breach, yet this aversion to a converse with
him steps up without any actual reflections upon our guilt, which may render
God terrible to us as an offended Judge: Are we not often also in our
attendance upon him, more pleased with the modes of Worship which gratify our
fancy, than to have our Souls inwardly delighted with the Object of Worship,
himself?

This is a part of our natural Atheism. To cast such duties off by total
neglect, or in part, by affecting a coldness in them; is to cast off the Fear
of the Lord. Job. 15.4.
Not to call upon God, and not to know him, are one and the same thing. Jer.
10.25. Either we think there is no such Being in the world, or that he is so
slight a one, that he deserves not the respect he calls for; or so impotent and
poor, that he cannot supply what our necessities require.

(3.) No desire of a thorough return to him. The first man fled from him after
his defection, though he had no refuge to fly to, but the grace of his Creator.
Cain went from his presence, would be a Fugitive from God, rather than a
Suppliant to him; when by Faith in, and application of the promised Redeemer,
he might have escaped the wrath to come for his Brothers blood, and mitigated
the sorrows he was justly sentenced to bear in the World. Nothing will separate
prodigal Man from commoning with Swine, and make him return to his Father, but
an empty Trough: Have we but husks to feed on, we shall never think of a
Fathers presence. It were well if our sores and indigence would drive us to
him; but when our strength is devoured, we will not return to the Lord our God,
nor seek him for all this. Hos. 7.10.
Not his drawn Sword as a God of Judgment, nor his mighty Power as a Lord, nor
his open Arms as the Lord their God, could move them to turn their eyes and
their hearts toward him. The more he invites us to partake of his grace, the
further we run from him to provoke his wrath: The louder God called them by his
Prophets, the closer they stuck to their Baal. Hos. 11.2.
We turn our backs when he stretches out his hand, stop our ears when he lifts
up his voice: We fly from him when he courts us, and shelter our selves in any
bush from his merciful hand, that would lay hold upon us; nor will we set our
faces toward him, till our way be hedged up with thorns, and not a gap left to
creep out any by-way. Hos. 2.6.7.
Whosoever is brought to a return, puts the Holy Ghost to the pain of striving;
he is not easily brought to a spiritual subjection to God, nor persuaded to a
Surrender at a Summons, but sweetly over power'd by storm, and victoriously
drawn into the Arms of God: God stands ready, but the heart stands off; Grace
is full of entreaties, and the Soul full of excuses: Divine love offers, and
Carnal self-love rejects: Nothing so pleases us, as when we are furthest from
him; as if any thing were more amiable, any thing more desirable than himself.

(4.) No desire of any close imitation of him. When our Savior was to come as
a Refiners fire to purify the Sons of Levi, the cry is, who shall abide the
day of his coming? Mal. 3.2, 3. Since we are alienated from the Life of God, we
desire no more naturally to live the Life of God, than a Toad or any other
Animal desires to live the Life of a Man: No heart that knows God, but has a
holy ambition to imitate him. No Soul that refuses him for a Copy, but is
ignorant of his Excellency: Of this temper is all Mankind naturally. Man in
Corruption is as loath to be like God in Holiness; as Adam after his Creation
was desirous to be like God in Knowledge; his Posterity are like their Father,
who soon turned his back upon his original Copy.

What can be worse than this? Can the denial of his Being be a greater injury
than this contempt of him; as if he had not goodness to deserve our
remembrance, nor amiableness fit for our converse; as if he were not a Lord fit
for our subjection, nor had a Holiness that deserved our imitation?

For the use of this. It serves,

1. For Information.

1. It gives us occasion to admire the wonderful Patience and Mercy of God. How
many Millions of practical Atheists breath every day in his Air, and live upon
his Bounty, who deserve to be Inhabitants in Hell, rather than Possessors of
the Earth? An infinite Holiness is offended, an infinite Justice is provoked;
yet an infinite Patience forbears the Punishment, and an infinite Goodness
relieves our wants: The more we had merited his Justice and forfeited his
Favor, the more is his affection inhanc'd, which makes his hand so liberal to
us.

At the first invasion of his rights, he mitigates the terror of the threatening
which was set to defend his Law, with the grace of a Promise to relieve and
recover his rebellious Creature: Genesis 3.15.
Who would have looked for any thing but tearing Thunders, sweeping Judgments,
to raze up the foundations of the apostate world? But oh, how great are his
Bowels to his aspiring Competitors? Have we not experimented his Contrivances
for our good, though we have refused him for our happiness? Has he not opened
his Arms, when we spurned with our Feet; held out his alluring mercy, when we
have brandisht against him a rebellious sword? Has he not entreated us while we
have invaded him, as if he were unwilling to lose us, who are ambitious to
destroy our selves? Has he yet denied us the care of his Providence, while we
have denied him the rights of his Honor, and would appropriate them to our
selves? Has the Sun forborne shining upon us, though we have shot our Arrows
against him? Have not our Beings been supported by his Goodness, while we have
endeavored to climb up to his Throne; and his mercies continued to charm us,
while we have used them as weapons to injure him? Our own necessities might
excite us to own him as our happiness, but he adds his invitations to the voice
of our wants. Has he not promised a Kingdom to those that would strip him of
his Crown, and proclaimed Pardon upon Repentance to those that would take away
his Glory? And has so twisted together his own end which is his Honor, and
man's true end, which is his Salvation, that a man cannot truly mind himself and
his own Salvation, but he must mind Gods glory; and cannot be intent upon Gods
honor, but by the same act he promotes himself and his own happiness; So loath
is God to give any just occasion of dissatisfaction to his Creature, as well as
dishonor himself. All those wonders of his mercy are inhanc'd by the
hainousness of our Atheism; a multitude of gracious thoughts from him above the
multitude of contempts from us. Psalm. 106.^
What Rebels in actual Arms against their Prince aiming at his Life, ever
found that favor from him, to have all their necessaries richly afforded them,
without which they would starve, and without which they would be unable to
manage their attempts, as we have received from God? Had not God had riches of
goodness, forbearance and long suffering, and infinite riches too; the despite
the world has done him in refusing him as their Rule, Happiness, and End would
have emptied him long ago. Romans 2.4.


2. It brings in a Justification of the exercise of his Justice. If it gives us
occasion loudly to praise his Patience; it also stops our mouths from accusing
any acts of his Vengeance. What can be too sharp a recompense for the despising
and disgracing so great a Being? The highest contempt merits the greatest
anger; and when we will not own him for our happiness, it is equal we should
feel the misery of separation from him. If he that is guilty of Treason
deserves to lose his Life; what punishment can be thought great enough for him
that is so disingenious as to prefer himself before a God so infinitely good,
and so foolish as to invade the rights of one infinitely powerful? It Is no
injustice for a Creature, to be for ever left to himself, to see what advantage
he can make of that self he was so busily employed to set up in the place of
his Creator. The Soul of Man deserves an infinite punishment for despising an
infinite good: And it is not unequitable, that that self which Man makes his
Rule and Happiness above God, should become his Torment and Misery by the
Righteousness of that God whom he despised.

3. Hence arises a necessity of a new state and frame of Soul, to alter an
Atheistical Nature. We forget God: Think of him with reluctance: Have no
respect to God in our course and acts: This cannot be our original state. God
being infinitely good, never let man come out of his hands with this actual
unwillingness to acknowledge and serve him: He never intended to dethrone
himself for the work of his hands, or that the Creature should have any other
end than that of his Creator: As the Apostle says in the Case of the Galatians
Error, Gal. 5.8. This persuasion came not of him that called you; so this frame
comes not from him that created you: How much therefore do we need a restoring
Principle in us? Instead of ordering our selves according to the Will of God,
we are desirous to fulfill the Wills of the Flesh Ephesians. 2.3.
: There is a necessity of some other principle in us to make us fulfill the Will
of God, since we were created for God, not for the Flesh.

We can no more be voluntarily serviceable to God, while our serpentine nature,
and Devilish habits remain in us; than we can suppose the Devil can be willing
to glorify God, while the nature he contracted by his fall abides powerfully
in him. Our Nature and Will must be changed, that our actions may regard God as
our End, that we may delightfully meditate on him, and draw the motives of our
obedience from him. Since this Atheism is seated in Nature, the change must be
in our Nature: Since our first aspirings to the rights of God, were the fruits
of the Serpents breath which tainted our Nature; there must be a removal of
this taint, whereby our Natures may be on the side of God against Satan, as
they were before on the side of Satan against God. There must be a supernatural
Principle before we can live a supernatural Life, i. e. live to God, since we
are naturally alienated from the Life of God: The aversion of our Natures from
God, is as strong as our inclination to evil; we are disgusted with one, and
pressed with the other; we have no will, no heart, to come to God in any
service. This Nature must be broken in pieces and new molded, before we can
make God our Rule and our End: While men's deeds are evil, they cannot comply
with God Joh. 3.19, 20.
; much less while their natures are evil: Till this be done, all the service a
man performs rises from some evil imagination of the heart, which is evil,
only evil, and that continually Genesis 6.5.
, from wrong Notions of God, wrong Notions of Duty, or corrupt Motives. All the
pretenses of Devotion to God, are but the Adoration of some golden Image.
Prayers to God for the ends of self, are like those of the Devil to our
Savior, when he asked leave to go into the Herd of Swine: The Object was right,
Christ; the end was the destruction of the Swine, and the satisfaction of their
malice to the Owners: There is a necessity then that depraved ends should be
removed, that that which was Gods end in our framing, may be our end in our
acting, viz. his glory, which cannot be without a change of Nature. We can
never honor him supreamly whom we do not supreamly love: Till this be, we
cannot glorify God as God, though we do things by his Command and Order; no
more, than when God employed the Devil in afflicting Job Job. 1.
: His performance cannot be said to be good, because his end was not the same
with Gods; he acted out of Malice, what God commanded out of Soveraignity, and
for gracious designs: Had God employed an Holy Angel in his design upon Job,
the Action had been good in the Affliction; because his Nature was holy, and
therefore his ends holy; but bad in the Devil, because his ends were base and
unworthy.

4. We may gather from hence, the difficulty of Conversion, and Mortification
to follow thereupon. What is the reason men receive no more impression from the
Voice of God and the Light of his Truth, than a dead man in the Grave does from
the roaring Thunder, or a blind Mole from the Light of the Sun? It Is because
our Atheism is as great as the deadness of the one, or the blindness of the
other. The Principle in the heart is strong to shut the door both of the
thoughts and affections against God. If a Friend oblige us, we shall act for
him as for our selves: We are won by entreaties, soft words overcome us; but
our hearts are as deaf as the hardest Rock, at the call of God: Neither the
joys of Heaven proposed by him can allure us, nor the flasht terrors of Hell
affright us to him; as if we conceived God unable to bestow the one, or execute
the other: The true reason is, God and self contest for the Deity: The Law of
Sin is, God must be at the footstool; the Law of God is, Sin must be utterly
deposed: Now it is difficult to leave a Law beloved, for a Law long ago
discarded. The mind of man will hunt after any thing; the will of man embrace
any thing; upon the proposal of mean Objects the Spirit of man spreads its
wings, flies to catch them, becomes one with them: But attempt to bring it
under the Power of God; the wings flag, the Creature looks liveless, as though
there were no spring of motion in it: It Is as much crucified to God, as the
holy Apostle was to the world: The sin of the heart discovers its strength, the
more God discovers the holiness of his Will. Romans 7.9, 10, 11, 12.
The love of Sin has been predominant in our Nature, has quasht a love to God,
if not extinguished it

Hence also is the difficulty of Mortification. This is a work tending to the
honor of God, the abasing of that inordinatley aspiring humor in our selves.
If the Nature of Man be inclined to Sin, as it is, it must needs be bent
against any thing that opposes it. It Is impossible to strike any true blow at
any Lust, till the true Sense of God be re-entertained in the Soil where it
ought to grow. Who can be naturally willing to crucify what is incorporated
with him, his flesh? what is dearest to him, himself? Is it an easy thing for
man, the Competitor with God, to turn his Arms against himself; that self
should overthrow its own Empire; lay aside all its pretensions to, and designs
for a Godhead; to hew off its own members, and subdue its own affections? It Is
the Nature of Man to cover his sin, to hide it in his bosom Job. 13.33. If I
cover my Transgression, as Adam.
; not to destroy it; and as unwillingly part with his carnal affections, as the
Legion of Devils were with the man that had been long possessed: And when he is
forced and fired from one, he will endeavor to espouse some other Lust, as
those Devils desired to possess Swine, when they were chased from their
possession of that man.

5. Here we see the reason of unbelief. That which has most of God in it,
meets with most aversion from us: That which has least of God, finds better
and stronger inclinations in us. What is the reason, that the heart of Man is
more unwilling to embrace the Gospel, than acknowledge the equity of the Law?
Because there is more of Gods Nature and perfection evident in the Gospel than
in the Law: Besides there is more reliance on God, and distance from self
commanded in the Gospel. The Law puts a man upon his own strength, the Gospel
takes him off from his own bottom: The Law acknowledges him to have a power in
himself, and to act for his own reward; the Gospel strips him of all his proud
and towering thoughts 2 Cor. 10.5.
, brings him to his due place, the foot of God; orders him to deny himself as
his own Rule, Righteousness and End; and henceforth not to live to himself. 2
Cor. 5.15.
This is the true reason why men are more against the Gospel than against the
Law; because it does more deify God, and debase Man. Hence it is easier to
reduce men to some Moral Virtue, than to Faith; to make men blush at their
outward Vices, but not at the inward impurity of their Natures. Hence it is
observed; that those that asserted, that all happiness did arise from something
in a man's self, as the Stoics and Epicureans did; and that a wise man was
equal with God; were greater Enemies to the truths of the Gospel than others,
Acts 17.18. because it lays the Ax to the root of their principal Opinion.
Takes the one from their self-sufficiency, and the other from their
self-gratification: It opposes the brutish principle of the one, which placed
happiness in the pleasures of the body, and the more noble principle of the
other, which placed happiness in the virtue of the mind: The one was for a
sensual, the other for a moral self; both disowned by the Doctrine of the Gospel.

6. It informs us consequently, who can be the Author of Grace and Conversion,
and every other good Work. No practical Atheist ever yet turned to God, but was
turned by God; and not to acknowledge it to God, is a part of this Atheism,
since it is a robbing God of the honor of one of his most glorious Works. If
this practical Atheism be natural to man ever since the first taint of Nature
in Paradise, what can be expected from it but a resisting of the work of God,
and setting up all the forces of Nature against the operations of Grace, till a
day of power dawn and clear up upon the Soul Psalm. 110.3.
: Not all the Angels in Heaven, or men upon Earth, can be imagined to be able
to persuade a Man to fall out with himself. Nothing can turn the Tide of
Nature, but a Power above Nature. God took away the sanctifying Spirit from
man, as a Penalty for the first sin: Who can regain it but by his Will and
Pleasure? Who can restore it but he that removed it? Since every man has the
same fundamental Atheism in him by Nature, and would be a Rule to himself and
his own End; he is so far from dethroning himself, that all the strength of his
corrupted Nature is alarmed up to stand to their Arms, upon any attempt God
makes to regain the Fort. The Will is so strong against God, that it is like
many wills twisted together, Ephesians. 2.3. Wills of the Flesh, we translate it the
desires of the flesh: Like many Threads twisted in a Cable, never to be snapt
asunder by a human Arm; a Power and Will above ours, can only untwist so many
Wills in a knot. Man cannot rise to an acknowledgement of God without God: Hell
may as well become Heaven, the Devil be changed into an Angel of Light. The
Devil cannot but desire happiness; he knows the misery into which he is fallen;
he cannot be desirous of that punishment he knows is reserved for him. Why does
he not sanctify God and glorify his Creator, wherein there is abundantly more
pleasure than in his malicious course? Why does he not petition to recover his
ancient standing? He will not; there are Chains of Darkness upon his faculties;
he will not be otherwise than he is: His desire to be God of the World sways
him against his own interest; and out of love to his malice, he will not sin at
a less rate to make a diminution of his punishment. Man, if God utterly
refuses to work upon him, is no better; and to maintain his Atheism, would
venture a Hell. How is it possible for a man to turn himself to that God,
against whom he has a quarrel in his Nature; the most rooted and settled habit
in him being to set himself in the place of God? An Atheist by Nature, can no
more alter his own temper, and engrave in himself the Divine Nature, than a
Rock can carve it self into the Statue of a man, or a Serpent that is an Enemy
to Man, could or would raise it self to the Nobility of the humane Nature. That
Soul that by Nature would strip God of his Rights, cannot without a Divine
Power be made conformable to him, and acknowledge sincerely and cordially the
Rights and Glory of God.

7. We may here see the reason why there can be no justification by the best
and strongest works of Nature. Can that which has Atheism at the root,
justify either the action or person? What strength can those works have, which
have neither Gods Law for their Rule, nor his Glory for their End; that are not
wrought by any spiritual strength from him, nor tend with any spiritual
affection to him? Can these be a foundation for the most holy God to pronounce
a Creature righteous? They will justify his Justice in condemning, but cannot
sway his Justice to an Absolution. Every natural man in his works, picks and
chooses; he owns the Will of God no further than he can wring it to suit the law
of his Members; and minds not the honor of God, but as it justles not with his
own glory and secular ends. Can he be righteous that prefers his own Will and
his own Honor, before the Will and Honor of the Creator? However men's actions
may be beneficial to others, what reason has God to esteem them, wherein there
is no respect to him but themselves; whereby they dethrone him in their
thoughts, while they seem to own him in their religious works? Every day
reproves us with something different from the Rule: Thousands of wanderings
offer themselves to our eyes. Can Justification be expected from that which in
it self is matter of despair?

8. See here the cause of all the apostasy in the World. Practical Atheism was
never conquered in such: They are still alienated from the Life of God, and
will not live to God, as he lives to himself and his own honor. Ephesians. 4.17, 18.
They loath his Rule, and distaste his Glory; are loath to step out of
themselves to promote the ends of another; find not the satisfaction in him as
they do in themselves: They will be Judges of what is good for them and
righteous in it self, rather than admit of God to judge for them. When men draw
back from Truth to Error; it is to such opinions which may serve more to foment
and cherish their Ambition, Covetousness, or some beloved Lust that dispates
with God for precedence, and is designed to be served before him, John
12.42.43. They love the praise of men more than the praise of God. A preferring
man before God, was the reason they would not confess Christ, and God in him.

9. This shows us the excellency of the Gospel and Christian Religion. It sets
man in his due place, and gives to God what the Excellency of his Nature
requires It lays man in the dust from whence he was taken, and sets God upon
that Throne where he ought to si^ Man by Nature would annihilate God and deisie
himself; the Gospel glorifies God and annihilates Man. In our first revolt we
would be like him in knowledge; in the means he has provided for our recovery,
he designs to make us like him in Grace: The Gospel shows our selves to be an
Object of Humiliation, and God to be a glorious Object for our Imitation. The
Light of Nature tells us there is a God; the Gospel gives us a more magnificent
report of him: The light of Nature condemns gross Atheism, and that of the
Gospel condemns and conquers spiritual Atheism in the hearts of men.

Use 2. Of Exhortation

1. Let us labor to be sensible of this Atheism in our Nature, and be humbled
for it. How should we lie in the Dust, and go bowing under the humbling
thoughts of it all our days? Shall we not be sensible of that whereby we spill
the blood of our Souls, and give a stabb to the heart of our own Salvation?
Shall we be worse than any Creature, not to bewail that which tends to our
destruction? He that does not lament it, cannot challenge the Character of a
Christian, has nothing of the divine Life and Love planted (...) his Soul. Not
a man but shall one day be sensible, when the Eternal God shall call him out to
Examination, and charge his Conscience to discover every Crime, which will then
own the Authority whereby it acted; when the heart shall be torn open, and the
secrets of it brought to public view; and the World and Man himself shall see
what a viperous Brood of corrupt Principles and Ends nested in his Heart. Let
us therefore be truly sensible of it, till the consideration draw tears from
our Eyes, and sorrow from our Souls: Let us urge the thoughts of it upon our
hearts, till the Core of that Pride be eaten out, and our Stubborness changed
into Humility: Till our Heads become Waters, and our Eyes Fountains of tears,
and be a spring of Prayer to God to change the heart, and mortify the Atheism
in it; and consider what a sad thing it is to be a practical Atheist: And who
is not so by Nature?

1. Let us be sensible of it in our selves. Have any of our hearts been a Soil
wherein the Fear and Reverence of God has naturally grown? Have we a desire to
know him, or a will to embrace him? Do we delight in his Will, and love the
remembrance of his Name? Are our respects to him as God, equal to the
speculative knowledge we have of his Nature? Is the heart wherein he has
stamped his Image, reserved for his Residence? Is not the world more affected
than the Creator of the world; as though that could contribute to us a greater
happiness than the Author of it? Have not Creatures as much of our love, fear,
trust; nay, more than God that framed both them and us? Have we not too often
relied upon our own strength, and made a Calf of our own wisdom, and said of
God as the Israelites of Moses, As for this Moses we wot not what is become of
him, Exodus 32.1. and given oftener the glory of our good success to our Dragg
and our Net, to our Craft and our Industry, than to the wisdom and blessing of
God? Are we then free from this sort of Atheism Lawson body of Divinity pa.
153. 154.
? It Is as impossible to have two Gods at one time in one heart, as to have two
Kings at one time in full power in one Kingdom. Have there not been frequent
neglects of God? Have we not been deaf whilst he has knocked at our doors;
slept when he has sounded in our Ears, as if there had been no such Being as a
God in the world? How many struglings have been against our approaches to him?
Has not folly often been committed with vain imaginations starting up in the
time of Religious Service, which we would scarce vouchsafe a look to at another
time, and in another business, but would have thrust them away with
indignation? Had they stepped in to interrupt our worldly Affairs, they would
have been troublesome Intruders, but while we are with God they are acceptable
Guests. How unwilling have our hearts been to fortify themselves with strong
and influencing considerations of God, before we addressed to him? Is it not too
often that our lifelesness in Prayer proceeds from this Atheism; a neglect of
seeing what Arguments and Pleas may be drawn from the didine perfections, to
second our suit in hand, and quicken our hearts in the service? Whence are
those indispositions to any spiritual duty, but because we have not due
thoughts of the Majesty, Holiness, Goodness and Excellency of God? Is there any
duty which leads to a more particular inquiry after him, or a more clear vision
of him; but our hearts have been ready to rise up and call it cursed rather
than blessed? Are not our minds bemisted with an ignorance of him, our wills
drawn by aversion from him, our affections rising in distaste of him? More
willing to know any thing than his Nature, and more industrious to do any thing
than his Will? Do we not all fall under some one or other of these
considerations? Is it not fit then that we should have a sense of them? It Is to
be bewailed by us, that so little of God is in our hearts, when so many
evidences of the love of God are in the Creatures; that God should be so little
our end, who has been so much our Benefactor; that he should be so litte in
our thoughts, who sparkles in every thing which presents it self to our eyes.

2. Let us be sensible of it in others. We ought to have a just execration of
the too open iniquity in the midst of us; and imitate holy David, whose tears
plentifully gusht out, because men kept not Gods Law. Psa. 119.136.
And is it not a time to exercise this pious lamentation? Has the wicked
Atheism of any age been greater, or can you find worse in Hell, than we may
hear of and behold on Earth? How is the excellent Majesty of God, adored by the
Angels in Heaven; despised and reproached by men on Earth; as if his name were
published to be matter of their sport? What a gasping thing is a natural sense
of God among men in the World? Is not the Law of God, accompanied with such
dreadful threatenings and curses, made light of; as if men would place their
honor in being above or beyond any sense of that glorious Majesty? How many
wallow in Pleasures, as if they had been made men, only to turn brutes, and
their Souls given them only for Salt to keep their bodies from putrefying? It Is
as well a part of Atheism not to be sensible of the abuses of Gods name and
Laws by others, as to violate them our selves: What is the language of a stupid
senselesness of them, but that there is no God in the world, whose glory is
worth a vindication and deserves our regards?

That we may be sensible of the unworthiness of neglecting God as our Rule and
end; consider,

1. The Unreasonableness of it as it concerns God.

1. First, It Is a high contempt of God. It Is an inverting the order of things; a
making God the highest, to become the lowest, and self the lowest, to become
the highest: To be guided by every base Companion, some idle vanity, some
carnal interest, is to acknowledge an excellency abounding in them which is
wanting in God: An equity in their orders and none in Gods precepts: A goodness
in their promises and a falsity in Gods: As if infinite excellency were a mere
vanity, and to act for God, were the debasement of our reason; to act for self
or some pitiful Creature, or sordid lust, were the glory and advancement of it.
To prefer any one sin before the honor of God, is as if that sin had been our
Creator and Benefactor, as if it were the original cause of our being and
support. Do not men pay as great a homage to that as they do to God? Do not
their minds eagerly pursue it? Are not the revolvings of it in their fancies as
delightful to them, as the remembrance of God to a holy Soul? Do any obey the
Commands of God with more readiness, than they do the orders of their base
affections? Did Peter leap more readily into the Sea to meet his Master, than
many into the jaws of Hell to meet their Dalilah's? How cheerfully did the
Israelites part with their Ornaments for the sake of an Idol, who would not
have spared a moiety for the honor of their Deliverer? Exodus 32.3. All the
people brake off the golden earrings.
If to make God our end is the principal duty in nature, then to make ourselves
or any thing else our end, is the greatest vice in the rank of evils.

Secondly, It Is a contempt of God as the most amiable object. God is infinitely
excellent and desirable, Zach. 9.17. How great is his goodness and how great is
his beauty? There is nothing in him but what may ravish our affections; none
that knows him but finds attractives to keep them with him: He has nothing in
him which can be a proper object of contempt, no defects or shadow of evil;
there is infinite excellency to charm us and infinite goodness to allure us;
the Author of our beings, the Benefactor of our lives: Why then should Man,
which is his Image, be so base as to slight the beautiful original which stamped
it on him? He is the most lovely object, therefore to be studied, therefore to
be honored, therefore to be followed: In regard of his perfection he has the
highest right to our thoughts. All other beings were eminently contained in his
essence, and were produced by his infinite power: The Creature has nothing but
what it has from God: And is it not unworthy to prefer the Copy before the
original, to fall in love with a Picture instead of the beauty it represents?
The Creature which we advance to be our rule and end, can no more report to us
the true amiableness of God, than a few Colors mixed and suited together upon a
piece of cloth, can the moral and intellectual loveliness of the Soul of Man.
To contemn God one moment is more base, than if all Creatures were contemned,
by us for ever; because the excellency of Creatures is to God, like that of a
drop to the Sea, or a spark to the glory of unconceivable millions of Suns. As
much as the excellency of God is above our conceptions, so much does the
debasing of him admit of unexpressible aggravations.

2. Consider the ingratitude in it. That we should resist that God with our
hearts, who made us the work of his hands, and count him as nothing, from whom
we derive all the good that we are or have: There is no contempt of Man but
steps in here to aggravate our slighting of God; Because there is no relation
one man can stand in to another, wherein God does not more highly appear to
man. If we abhor the unworthy carriage of a Child to a tender Father, a Servant
to an indulgent Master, a Man to his obliging Friend; why do men daily act that
toward God, which they cannot speak of without abhorrency, if acted by another
against man? I God a being less to be regarded than man, and more worthy of
contempt than a Creature? [ Reynolds.
It would be strange if a benefactor should live in the same Town, in the same
house with us and we never exchange a word with him; yet this is our case, who
have the works of God in our eyes, the goodness of God in our being, the mercy
of God in our daily food] yet think so little of him, converse so little with
him, serve every thing before him, and prefer every thing above him? Whence
have we our mercies but from his hand. Who, besides him, maintains our breath
this moment? Would he call for our Spirits this moment, they must depart from
us to attend his Command. There is not a moment wherein our unworthy carriage
is not aggravated, because there is not a moment wherein he is not our
guardian, and gives us not tastes of a fresh bounty. And it is no light
aggravation of our Crime, that we injure him, without whose bounty in giving us
our being, we had not been capable of casting contempt upon him: That he that
has the greatest stamp of his Image, Man, should deserve the Character of the
worst of his Rebels: That he who has only reason by the gift of God to Judge
of the equity of the Laws of God, should swel against them as grievous, and the
Government of the Lawgiver as burdensome. Can it lessen the crime to use the
principle wherein we excel the beasts to the disadvantage of God, who endowed
us with that principle above the beasts?

1. It Is a debasing of God beyond what the Devil does at present. He is more
excusable in his present state of acting, than man is in his present refusing
God for his Rule and End. He strives against a God that exercises upon him a
vindictive Justice: We debase a God that loads us with his daily mercies. The
despairing Devils are excluded from any mercy or divine patience: But we are
not only under the long suffering of his patience, but the large expressions of
his bounty. He would not be governed by him when he was only his bountiful
Creator. We refuse to be guided by him after he has given us the blessing of
Creation from his own hand, and the more obliging blessings of Redemption by
the hand and blood of his Son.

It cannot be imagined that the Devils and the damned should ever make God
their end, since he has assured them he will not be their happiness; and shut
up all his perfections from their experimental notice, but those of his power
to preserve them and his Justice, to punish them: They have no grant from God
of ever having a heart to comply with his Will, or ever having the honor to be
actively employed for his glory. They have some plea for their present contempt
of God; not in regard of his nature, for he is infinitely amiable, excellent
and lovely; but in regard of his administration toward them: But what plea can
Man have for his Practical Atheism, who lives by his power, is sustained by his
bounty, and solicited by his Spirit? What an ungrateful thing is it to put off
the nature of Man for that of Devils; and dishonor God under mercy, as the
Devils do under his wrathful anger?

2. It Is an ungrateful contempt of God, who cannot be injurious to us. He
cannot do us wrong, because he cannot be unjust, Genesis 18.25. Shall not the
Judge of all the Earth do right? His nature does as much abhor unrighteousnes,
as love a Communicative goodness: He never Commanded any thing, but what was
highly conducible to the happiness of man. Infinite goodness can no more injure
man, than it can dishonor it self: It lays out it self in additions of
kindness, and whiles we debase him, he continues to benefit us: And is it not
an unparalleld ingratitude to turn our backs upon an object so lovely, an
object so loving in the midst of varieties of allurements from him? God did
Create intellectual Creatures, Angels and Men, that he might Communicate more
of himself and his own goodness and holiness to man, than Creatures of a lower
rank were capable of. What do we do by rejecting him as our Rule and End, but
cross, as much as in us lies, Gods end in our Creation, and shut our Souls
against the Communications of those perfections he was so willing to bestow? We
use him as if he intended us the greatest wrong, when it is impossible for him to
do any to any of his Creatures.

3. Consider the misery which will attend such a temper if it continue
predominant. Those that thrust God away as their happiness and end, can expect
no other, but to be thrust away by him as to any relief and Compassion. A
distance from God here can look for nothing, but a remoteness from God
hereafter. When the Devil, a Creature of vast Endowments, would advance himself
above God, and instruct man to commit the same sin he is Cursed above all
Creatures. Genesis 3.14.
When we will not acknowledge him a God of all glory, we shall be separated
from him as a God of all comfort: All they that are afar off shall perish, Psa.
73.27. This is the spring of all woe. What the Prodigal suffered, was because
he would leave his Father and live of himself. Whosoever is ambitious to be his
own Heaven; will it last find his Soul to become its own Hell. As it loved all
things for it self, so it shall be grieved with all things for it self. As it
would be its own God against the right of God, it shall then be its own
tormenter by the Justice of God.

2. Duty, Watch against this Atheism and be daily employed in the mortification
of it. In every action we should make the inquiry, what is the rule I observe?
Is it Gods Will or my own? Whether do my intentions tend, to set up God or
self? As much as we destroy this, we abate the power of sin: These two things
are the head of the Serpent in us, which we must be bruising by the power of
the Cross. Sin is nothing else but a turning from God and centring in self, and
most in the inferior part of self: If we bend our force against those two
self-Will, and Self Ends, we shall intercept Atheism at the Spring head, take
away that which does constitute and animate all sin: The sparks must vanish, if
the fire be quenched which affords them fuel. They are but two short things to
ask in every undertaking: Is God my Rule in regard of his Will? Is God my End
in regard of his glory? All sin lies in the neglect of these, all grace lies in
the practice of them.

Without some degree of the mortification of these, we cannot make profitable
and comfortable approaches to God. When we come with Idols in our hearts, we
shall be answered according to the multitude and the baseness of them too.
Ezekiel. 14.4.
What expectation of a good look from him can we have, when we come before him
with undeifying thoughts of him; a Petition in our mouths and a Sword in our
hearts to stab his honor?

To this purpose,

1. Be often in the views of the excellencies of God. When we have no
intercourse with God by delightful Meditations, we begin to be estranged from
him, and prepare our selves to live without God in the world. Strangness is the
Mother and Nurse of disaffection: We slight men sometimes because we know them
not. The very beasts delight in the Company of men, when being tamed and
familiar, they become acquainted with their disposition. A daily converse with
God would discover so much of loveliness in his nature, so much of sweetness in
his ways, that our injurious thoughts of God would wear off, and we should
count it our honor to contemn our selves and magnify him. By this means a
slavish fear which is both a dishonor to God and a torment to the Soul, 1 John
4.18.
and the root of Atheism, will be cast out, and an ingenious fear of him
wrought in the heart. Exercised thoughts on him would issue out in affections
to him, which would engage our hearts to make him both our rule and our end.
This course would stifle any temptations to gross Atheism, wherewith good Souls
are sometimes haunted, by confirming us more in the belief of a God; and
discourage any attempts, to a deliberate practical Atheism: We are not like to
espouse any principle which is confuted by the delightful converse we daily
have with him. The more we thus enter into the presence Chamber of God, the
more we cling about him with our affections; the more vigorous and lively will
the true Notion of God grow up in us, and be able to prevent any thing which
may dishonor him and debase our Souls.

Let us therefore consider him as the only happiness: Set up the true God in
our understandings; possess our hearts with a deep sense of his desirable
excellency above all other things. This is the main thing we are to do in order
to our great business: All the directions in the world with the neglect of
this, will be insignificant Ciphers. The neglect of this is Common, and is the
basis of all the mischiefs which happen to the Souls of men.

2. To this purpose, Prize and study the Scripture. We can have no delight in
Meditation on him, unless we know him; and we cannot know him but by the means
of his own Revelation: When the Revelation is despised, the Revealer will be of
little esteem. Men do not throw off God from being their rule, till they throw
off Scripture from being their guide; and God must needs be cast off from being
an end, when the Scripture is rejected from being a Rule: Those that do not
care to know his Will, that love to be ignorant of his nature, can never be
affected to his honor. Let therefore the subtilties of reason vail to the
Doctrine of faith, and the humor of the Will to the Command of the word.

3. Take heed of sensual pleasures, And be very watchful and cautious in the
use of those comforts God allows us. Job was afraid when his Sons feasted, that
they should Curse God in their hearts. Job. 1.4.
It was not without cause that the Apostle Peter joined sobriety with
watchfulness and Prayer, 1 Pet. 4.7. The end of all things is at hand, be ye
therefore sober and watch unto Prayer. A moderate use of worldly comforts.
Prayer is the great acknowledgment of God, and too much sensuality is a
hindrance of this, and a step to Atheism. Belshazzars lifting himself up
against the Lord, and not glorifying of God, is charged upon his sensuality,
Dan. 5.23. Nothing is more apt to quench the Notions of God, and root out the
Conscience of him, than an addictedness to sensual pleasures. Therefore take
heed of that snare.

4. Take heed of sins against knowledge. The more sins against knowledge are
committed, the more careless we are, and the more careless we shall be of God
and his honor. We shall more fear his judicial power, and the more we fear
that, the more we shall disaffect that God in whose hand vengeance is, and to
whom it does belong. Atheism in conversation proceeds to Atheism in affection,
and that will endeavor to sink into Atheism in opinion and Judgment.

The Sum of the Whole.

And now consider in the whole what has been spoken.

1. Man would set himself up as his own Rule. He disowns the Rule of God, is
unwilling to have any acquaintance with the Rule God sets him, negligent in
using the means for the knowledge of his Will; and Endeavors to shake it off
when any notices of it breaks in upon him. When he cannot expel it, he has no
pleasure in the Consideration of it, and the heart swells against it. When the
Notions of the Will of God are entertained, it is on some other Consideration,
or with wavering and unsettled affections. Many times men design to improve
some lust by his truth. This unwillingness respects Truth as it is most Spiritual
and holy; as it most relates and leads to God; as it is most contrary to self.
He is guilty of Contempt of the Will of God, which is seen in every
presumptuous breach of his Law. In the natural aversions to the declaration of
his Will and mind which way soever he turns. In slighting that part of his Will
which is most for his honor. In the awkwardness of the heart, when it is to
pay God a service. A constraint in the first engagement, slightness in the
service, in regard of the matter; in regard of the frame, without a natural
vigor. Many distractions, much weariness, in deserting the Rule of God, when
our expectations are not answered upon our service, in breaking promises with
God.

Man naturally owns any other Rule, rather than that of Gods prescribing. The
Rule of Satan; the Will of Man; In complying more with the dictates of Men than
the Will of God; In observing that which is materially so, not because it is
his Will, but the injunctions of Men. In obeying the Will of Man when it is
contrary to the Will of God. This Man does in order to the setting up himself.
This is natural to Man as he is corrupted. Men are disatisfied with their own
Consciences when they contradict the desires of self. Most actions in the world
are done, more because they are agreeable to self, than as they are honorable
to God: As they are agreeable to natural and moral self or sinful self. It Is
evident in neglects of taking Gods directions upon emergent occasions. In
counting the actions of others to be good or bad, as they suit with or spurn
against our fancies and humors. Man would make himself the Rule of God, and
give laws to his Creator: In striving against his Law: Disapproving of his
Methods of Government in the world; in impatience in our particular concerns;
envying the gifts and prosperity of others: Corrupt matter or ends of Prayer or
praise: Bold interpretations of the Judgments of God in the world. Mixing Rules
in the Worship of God with those which have been ordained by him. Suting
interpretations of Scripture with our own minds and humors. Falling off from
God after some fair compliances, when his Will grates upon us and crosses ours.

2. Man would be his own end. This is natural and universal. This is seen in
frequent self applauses and inward overweening reflections. In ascribing the
glory of what we do or have to our selves. In desire of self pleasing
Doctrines. In being highly concerned in injuries done to our selves, and little
or not at all concerned for injuries done to God. In trusting in our selves. In
workings for Carnal self against the light of our own Consciences, this is a
usurping Gods prerogative, vilifying God, destroying God. Man would make any
thing his end or happiness rather than God. This appears in the fewer thoughts
we have of him than of any thing else. In the greedy pursuit of the world. In
the strong addictedness to sensual pleasures. In paying a service upon any
success in the world to instruments more than to God. This is a debasing God in
setting up a Creature; But more in setting up a base lust: It Is a denying of
God. Man would make himself the end of all Creatures. In pride; using the
Creatures contrary to the end God has appointed. This is to dishonor God; And
it is Diabolical. Man would make himself the end of God. In loving God, because
of some self pleasing benefits distributed by him. In abstinence from some
sins, because they are against the interest of some other beloved Corruption.
In performing duties merely for a selfish interest which is evident in
unwealdiness in Religious duties where self is not concerned. In calling upon
God only in a time of necessity. In begging his assistance to our own projects,
after we have by our own Craft laid the Plot. In impatience upon a refusal of
our desires. In selfish aims we have in our duties. This is a vilifying God, a
dethroning him. In unworthy imaginations of God, universal in Man by nature.
Hence spring Idolatry, Superstition, Presumption, the common disease of the
world. This is a vilifying God; worse than Idolatry, worse than absolute
Atheism. Natural desires to be distant from him. No desires for the remembrance
of him. No desires of converse with him. No desires of a through return to him.
No desire of any close imitation of him.

A DISCOURSE UPON GODS BEING A SPIRIT.
JOHN 4.24. God is a Spirit, and they that Worship him, must worship him in
Spirit, and in truth.


THE words are part of the Dialogue between our Savior, Amiraut. Paraph. sur
Jean.
and the Samaritan Woman. Christ intending to return from Judea to Galilee,
passed through the Country of Samaria, a place inhabited not by Jews, but a
mixed Company of several Nations, and some remainders of the posterity of
Israel, who escaped the Captivity and were returned from Assyria; and being
weary with his Journey, arrived about the sixth hour or noon (according to the
Jews reckoning the time of the day) at a Well that Jacob had dug, which was
of great account among the Inhabitants for the Antiquity of it, as well as the
usefulness of it, in supplying their necessities: He being thirsty, and having
none to furnish him wherewith to draw water, at last comes a Woman from the
City, whom he desires to give him some water to drink. The Woman perceiving him
by his Language or Habit to be a Jew, wonders at the question, since the hatred
the Jews bore the Samaritans was so great, that they would not vouchsafe to
have any Commerce with them, not only in Religious, but Civil affairs, and
Common Offices belonging to Mankind. Hence our Savior takes occasion to
publish to her the Doctrine of the Gospel; and excuses her rude Answer by her
Ignorance of him: And tells her, that if she had asked him a greater matter,
even that which concerned her Eternal Salvation, he would readily have granted
it, notwithstanding the rooted hatred between the Jews and Samaritans; and
bestowed a water of a greater virtue, the water of life. ver. 10. Or living
water.
The Woman is no less astonished at his reply, than she was at his first
demand. It was strange to hear a Man speak of giving living water, to one of
whom he had begged the water of that Spring, and had no Vessel to draw any to
quench his own thirst. She therefore demands whence he could have this water
that he speaks of, ver. 11.
since she conceived him not greater than Jacob, who had dug that Well and
drunk of it. Our Savior desirous to make a progress in that work, he had begun,
extols the Water he spoke of, above this of the Well, from its particular
virtue, fully to refresh those that drank of it, and be as a Cooling and
Comforting Fountain within them, of more efficacy than that without. ver. 13.14.
The Woman conceiving a good opinion of our Savior, desires to partake of this
Water, to save her pains in coming daily to the Well, not apprehending the
Spirituality of Christ's discourse to her: ver. 15.
Christ finding her to take some pleasure in his Discourse, partly to bring her
to a sense of her sin, before he did Communicate the excellency of his grace,
bids her return back to the City and bring her Husband with her to him: ver. 16.
She freely acknowledges that she had no Husband, whether having some check of
Conscience at present for the unclean life she led, or loath to lose so much
time in the gaining this water so much desired by her: ver. 17.
Our Savior takes an occasion from this to lay open her sin before her, and to
make her sensible of her own wicked life and the prophetic excellency of
himself; and tells her, she had had five Husbands to whom she had been false,
and by whom she was divorced, and the person she now dwelt with was not her
lawful Husband, and in living with him she violated the Rights of Marriage, and
increased guilt upon her Conscience. ver. 18.
The Woman being affected with this discourse, and knowing him to be stranger,
that could not be certified of those things but in an extraordinary way, begins
to have a high esteem of him as a Prophet. (...) 19.
And upon this opinion she esteems him able to decide a question which had been
Canvast between them and the Jews about the place of Worship. ^^r. 20.
Their Fathers Worshipping in that Mountain, and the Jews affirming Jerusalem
to be a place of worship: She pleads the Antiquity of the worship in this
place: Abraham having built an Altar there, Genesis 12.7. and Jacob upon his
return from Syria. And surely had the place been capable of an exception, such
persons as they and so well acquainted with the Will of God, would not have
pitched upon that place to Celebrate their worship.

Antiquity has too too often bewitched the minds of Men, and drawn them from
the revealed Will of God. Men are more willing to imitate the outward actions
of their famous Ancestors, than conform themselves to the revealed Will of
their Creator. The Samaritans would imitate the Patriarchs in the place of
worship, but not in the faith of the worshippers.

Christ answers her, that this question would quickly be resolved by a new
state of the Church which was near at hand, and neither Jerusalem which had now
the precedence, nor that Mountain should be of any more value in that concern
than any other place in the world: ver. 21.
But yet to make her sensible of her sin, and that of her Countrymen, tells
her, that their Worship in that Mountain was not according to the Will of God,
he having long after the Altars built in this place fixed Jerusalem as the
place of Sacrifices; besides, they had not the knowledge of that God which
ought to be worshipped by them, but the Jews had the true object of Worship and
the true manner of worship according to the declaration God had made of himself
to them. ver. ^^.
But all that service shall vanish, the vail of the Temple shall be rent in
twain, and that Carnal worship give place to one more Spiritual; shadows shall
fly before substance, and truth advance it self above figures, and the worship
of God shall be with the strength of the Spirit; such a worship, and such
worshippers does the Father seek: ver. 23.
For God is a Spirit, and those that Worship him must Worship him in Spirit and
in truth. The design of our Savior is to declare, that God is not taken with
external worship invented by men, no nor Commanded by himself; and upon that
this reason, because he is a Spiritual essence, infinitely above gross and
Corporeal matter, and is not taken with that pomp which is a pleasure to our
Earthly imaginations.

(...). Some translate it just as the words lie. Spirit is God: Vulgar lat.
Illyrc. Clav.
But it is not unusual both in the old and new Testament languages, to put the
predicate before the subject, as Psalm. 5.9. Their throat is an open Sepulcher,
in the Hebrew a Sepulcher open their throat. So Psa. 111.3. His work is
honorable and glorious. Heb. Honor and glory his work: And there wants not
one example in the same Evangelist, Joh. 1.1. And the word was God. Greek and
God was the word: In all, the predicate or what is ascribed, is put before the
subject to which it is ascribed.

One tells us, and he an head of a party, that has made a disturbance in the
Church of God, E^^^^^p. Institut. lib. 4. cap. 3.
that this place is not aptly brought to prove God to be a Spirit: And the
reason of Christ runs not thus, God is of a Spiritual Essence, and therefore
must be worshipped with a Spiritual worship; for the Essence of God is not the
Foundation of his worship, but his Will; for then we were not to worship him
with a Corporal worship, because he is not a body; but with an invisible and
Eternal worship because he is invisible and eternal.

But the nature of God is the foundation of worship, the Will of God is the
Rule of worship; the matter and manner is to be performed according to the Will
of God. But is the nature of the object of worship to be excluded? No, as the
object is, so ought our Devotion to be, Spiritual as he is Spiritual. God in
his Commands for worship respected the discovery of his own nature; in the Law
he respected the discovery of his mercy and justice, and therefore Commanded a
worship by Sacrifices; a Spiritual worship without those institutions would not
have declared those Attributes, which was Gods end to display to the world in
Christ: And tho the nature of God is to be respected in worship, yet the
obligations of the Creature are to be considered. God is a Spirit therefore
must have a Spiritual worship: The Creature has a body as well as a Soul, and
both from God; and therefore ought to worship God with the one as well as the
other, since one as well as the other is freely bestowed upon him.

The Spirituality of God was the foundation of the change from the Judaical
carnal worship to a more Spiritual and Evangelical.

[God is a Spirit.]

That is, he has nothing Corporeal, no mixture of matter, not a visible
substance, a bodily form. Melancton.
He is a Spirit, not a bare Spiritual substance: But an understanding willing
Spirit, holy, wise, good and just. Before Christ spoke of the Father, ver. 23.
the first person in the Trinity: Now he speaks of God Essentially: The word
Father is personal, the word God essential. So that our Savior would render a
reason, not from any one person in the blessed Trinity, but from the Divine
nature, why we should worship in Spirit, and therefore makes use of the word
God, the being a Spirit being Common to the other persons with the Father.

This is the reason of the proposition, verse 23. Of a Spiritual Worship. Every
nature delights in that which is like it, and distasts that which is most
different from it. If God were Corporeal, he might be pleased with the victims
of beasts, and the beautiful Magnificence of Temples, and the noise of Music:
But being a Spirit, he cannot be gratified with carnal things: He demands
something better and greater than all those, that Soul which he made, that Soul
which he has endowed, a Spirit of a frame suitable to his nature. He indeed
appointed Sacrifices and a Temple, as shadows of those things which were to be
most acceptable to him in the Messiah, but they were imposed only till the time
of Reformation. Heb. 9.10.


[Must Worship him.]

Not they may, or it would be more agreeable to God to have such a manner of
worship: But they must. It Is not exclusive of bodily worship; for this were to
exclude all public worship in societies, which cannot be performed without
reverential postures of the body. Terniti.
The Gestures of the body are helps to worship and declarations of Spiritual
acts. We can scarcely worship God with our Spirits without some tincture upon
the outward-man. But he excludes all acts merely Corporeal, all resting upon an
external service and devotion, which was the Crime of the Pharisees, and the
general persuasion of the Jews as well as Heathens, who used the outward
Ceremonies, not as signs of better things, but as if they did of themselves
please God, and render the worshippers accepted with him, without any suitable
frame of the inward man: Amirald in loc.
It is as if he had said, now you must separate your selves from all carnal
modes to which the service of God is now tied, and render a worship chiefly
consisting in the affectionate motions of the heart, and accommodated more
exactly to the condition of the object, who is a Spirit.

[In Spirit and Truth]

Amirald. in loc.
The Evangelical Service now required, has the advantage of the former; that was
a Shadow and Figure, this the Body and Truth. Muscul.
Spirit, say some, is here opposed to the legal Ceremonies; Truth, to
hypocritical services; or Chemnit:
rather truth is opposed to shadows, and an opinion of worth in the outward
action; it is principally opposed to external Rites, because our Savior says,
v. 23. The hour comes, and ^o^ is, etc. Had it been opposed to Hypocrisy,
Christ had said no new thing: For God always required Truth in the inward
parts, and all true Worshippers had served him with a sincere Conscience and
single Heart. The old Patriarks did worship God in Spirit and Truth, as taken
for sincerity: Such a Worship was always, and is perpetually due to God;
because he always was, and eternally will be a Spirit. Mus^al.
And it is said, the Father seeks such to worship him; not shall seek: He
always sought it; it always was performed to him by one or other in the world:
And the Prophets had always rebuked them, for resting upon their outward
Solemnities, Isa. 58.7. and Micah. 6.8. But a Worship without legal Rites was
proper to an Evangelical State and the times of the Gospel; God having then
exhibited Christ, and brought into the world the substance of those shadows,
and the end of those institutions: There was no more need to continue them,
when the true reason of them was ceased. All Laws do naturally expire, when the
true reason upon which they were first framed, is changed.

Or by Spirit may be meant, such a Worship as is kindled in the heart by the
breath of the holy Ghost. Since we are dead in sin, a spiritual light and flame
in the heart suitable to the nature of the object of our worship, cannot be
raised in us without the operation of a supernatural Grace: And though the
Fathers could not worship God without the Spirit; yet in the Gospel Times,
there being a fuller effusion of the Spirit, the Evangelical State is called
the administration of the Spirit, and the newness of the Spirit, 2 Cor. 3.8.
in opposition to the legal Economy, entitled the oldness of the Letter. Romans
7.6.
The Evangelical State is more suited to the Nature of God than any other: Such
a Worship God must have, whereby he is acknowledged to be the true Sanctifier
and Quickner of the Soul. The nearer God does approach to us, and the more full
his manifestations are; the more spiritual is the Worship we return to God. The
Gospel pares off the rugged parts of the Law, and Heaven shall remove what is
material in the Gospel, and change the Ordinances of Worship into that of a
Spiritual Praise.

In the words there is, 1. A Proposition [God is a Spirit.] The Foundation of
all Religion. 2. An Inference [they that worship him, etc.]


As God, a Worship belongs to him; as a Spirit, a spiritual Worship is due to
him, in the inference we have.

1. The manner of Worship [in Spirit and Truth] 2. The necessity of such a
Worship [must]
The Proposition declares the Nature of God; the Inference, the Duty of Man.

The Observations lie plain.

Ob. 1. God is a pure spiritual Being. [He is a Spirit]

2. The Worship due from the Creature to God, must be agreeable to the Nature
of God, and purely spiritual.

3. The Evangelical State is suited to the Nature of God.

For the first,

D. God is a pure spiritual Being.

It Is the Observation of one, Episcop. insti. tut. l. 4. c. 3.
that the plain assertion of Gods being a Spirit, is found but once in the
whole Bible, and that is in this place; which may well be wondered at; because
God is so often described with hands, feet, eyes and ears in the form and
figure of a Man. The spiritual Nature of God, is deducible from many places;
but not any where, as I remember, asserted totidem verbis, but in this Text:
Some allege that place, 2 Cor. 3.17. the Lord is that Spirit, for the proof of
it; but that seems to have a different sense: In the Text the Nature of God is
described; in that place, the operations of God in the Gospel. [ Amyrald in loc.
It Is not the Ministry of Moses, or that old Covenant, which communicates to
you that Spirit it speaks of; but it is the Lord Jesus, and the Doctrine of the
Gospel delivered by him, whereby this Spirit and Liberty is dispensed to you:
He opposes here the Liberty of the Gospel to the Servitude of the Law] It Is
from Christ, that a Divine Virtue diffuseth it self by the Gospel; it is by him,
not by the Law, that we partake of that Spirit.

Suarez. de Deo vol. 1. P. 9. Col. 2.
The Spirituality of God, is as evident as his Being. If we grant that God is,
we must necessarily grant that he cannot be corporeal; because a Body is of an
imperfect Nature. It will appear incredible to any that acknowledge God the
first Being and Creator of all things, that he should be a massy heavy Body,
and have Eyes and Ears, Feet and hands as we have.

For the explication of it.

1. Spirit is taken various ways in Scripture. It signifies sometimes an aereal
substance, as Psalm. 11.6. A horrible Tempest: Heb. A Spirit of Tempest:
Sometimes the breath, which is a thin substance, Genesis 6.17. All Flesh wherein
is the breath of Life: Heb. Spirit of Life. A thin substance, though it be
material and corporeal, is called Spirit: And in the bodies of living
Creatures, that which is the principle of their actions is called Spirits; the
animal and vital Spirits: And the finer parts extracted from Plants and
Minerals, we call Spirits: Those volatile parts separated from that gross
matter wherein they were immerst, because they come nearest to the nature of an
incorporeal substance: And from this notion of the word, it is translated to
signify those substances that are purely immaterial, as Angels, and the Souls
of Men. Angels are called Spirits, Psalm. 104.4. who makes his Angels Spirits
Heb. 1.14.
; And not only good Angels are so called, but evil Angels, Mark 1.27. Souls of
men are called Spirits, Eccl. 12. And the Soul of Christ is called so, John
19.30. whence God is called the God of the Spirits of all Flesh, Numb. 22.16.
and Spirit is opposed to Flesh, Isa. 31.3. the Egyptians are Flesh and not
Spirit. And our Savior gives us the notion of a Spirit to be something above
the nature of a Body, Luke 24.39. not having flesh and bones, extended parts,
loads of gross matter. It Is also taken for those things which are active and
efficacious; because activity, is of the nature of a Spirit. Caleb had another
Spirit, Number. 14.24. an active affection. The vehement motions of sin are called
Spirit, Hos. 4.12. the Spirit of Whoredoms, in that sense that Pro. 29.11. a
Fool utters all his mind, all his Spirit, he knows not how to restrain the
vehement motions of his mind. So that the notion of a Spirit is, that it is a
fine immaterial substance, an active being, that acts it self and other things.
A mere Body cannot act it self; as the Body of Man cannot move without the
Soul, no more than a Ship can move it self without Wind and Waves.

So God is called a Spirit, as being not a Body, not having the greatness,
figure, thickness or length of a Body, wholly separate from any thing of flesh
and matter. We find a Principle within us nobler than that of our Bodies; and
therefore we conceive the Nature of God, according to that which is more worthy
in us, and not according to that which is the vilest part of our Natures. God
is a most spiritual Spirit, more spiritual than all Angels, all Souls: Gerhard.
(...)
As he exceeds all in the nature of Being, so he exceeds all in the nature of
Spirit: He has nothing gross, heavy, material in his Essence.

2. When we say God is a Spirit, it is to be understood by way of Negation.
There are two ways of knowing or describing God: By way of affirmation,
affirming that of him in a way of eminency, which is excellent in the Creature;
as when we say God is wise, good: The other, by way of negation, when we remove
from God in our conceptions, what is tainted with imperfection in the Creature.
Gamacheus Tom. 1. q. 3. Cap. 1. P. 42.
The first ascribes to him whatsoever is excellent; the other separates from
him whatsoever is imperfect. The first is like a Limning, which adds one Color
to another to make a comely Picture; the other is like a Carving, which pares
and cuts away whatsoever is superfluous, to make a complete Statue. This way of
negation is more easy; we better understand what God is not, than what he is;
and most of our knowledge of God, is by this way: As when we say God is
infinite, immense, immutable, they are negatives: He has no limits, is
confined to no place, admits of no change. Coccei. sum. Theol. Cap. 8.
When we remove from him what is inconsistent with his Being, we do more
strongly assert his Being, and know more of him when we elevate him above all,
and above our own capacity. And when we say God is a Spirit, it is a negation;
he is not a Body; he consists not of various parts, extended one without and
beyond another: He is not a Spirit so as our Souls are, to be the form of any
Body: A Spirit, not as Angels and Souls are, but infinitely higher; we call him
so, because in regard of our weakness, we have not any other term of excellency
to express or conceive of him by: We transfer it to God in honor, because
Spirit is the highest excellency in our nature: Yet we must apprehend God above
any Spirit, since his Nature is so great, that he cannot be declared by human
speech, perceived by human sense, or conceived by human understanding.

The second thing, That God is a Spirit.

These. Sedan. Part. 2. P. 1^^^
Some among the Heathens imagined God to have a Body; some thought him to have a
Body of Air, some a Heavenly Body, some a human Body: Vossius Idolol. lib. 2.
cap. 1. Forbes Instrument l. 1. c. 36.
And many of them ascribed bodies to their Gods; but bodies without blood,
without corruption; bodies made up of the finest and thinnest Atoms; such
bodies, which if compared with ours, were as no bodies. The Saddures also, who
denied all Spirits, and yet acknowledged a God, must conclude him to be a Body
and no Spirit. Some among Christians have been of that opinion. Tertullian is
charged by some, and excused by others: And some Monks of Egypt were so fierce
for this Error, that they attempted to kill one Theophilus a Bishop, for not
being of that Judgment.

(...)
But the wiser Heathens were of another mind, and esteemed it an unholy thing to
have such imaginations of God. Plutarch. incorporalis ratio divinus spiritus.
Seneca.
And some Christians have thought God only to be free from any thing of body,
because he is omnipresent, immutable, he is only incorporeal and spiritual; all
things else, even the Angels are clothed with bodies, though of a neater matter
and a more active frame than ours; a pure spiritual Nature they allowed to no
Being but God. Scripture and Reason meet together to assert the spirituality of
God. Had God had the Lineaments of a Body, the Gentiles had not fallen under
that accusation of changing his Glory into that of a Corruptible Man Romans 1.23.
.

This is signified by the name God gives himself, Exodus 3.14. I am that I am, a
simple, pure, uncompounded Being, without any created mixture; as infinitely
above the being of Creatures, as above the conceptions of Creatures, Job.
37.23. Touching the Almighty, we cannot find him out. He is so much a Spirit,
that he is the Father of Spirits, Heb. 12.9. The Almighty Father is not of a
Nature inferior to his Children: The Soul is a Spirit, it could not else exert
actions without the assistance of the body, as the act of Understanding it
self, and its own nature, the act of willing and willing things against the
incitements and interest of the Body: It could not else conceive of God, Angels
and immaterial substances: It could not else be so active, as with one glance
to fetch a compass from Earth to Heaven, and by a sudden motion, to elevate the
understanding from an earthly thought, to the thinking of things as high as the
highest Heavens. If we have this opinion of our Souls which in the nobleness of
their acts surmount the Body, without which the Body is but a dull unactive
piece of clay; we must needs have a higher conception of God, than to clogg him
with any matter, though of a finer temper than ours: We must conceive of him by
the perfections of our Souls, without the vileness of our Bodies. If God made
Man according to his Image, we must raise our thoughts of God according to the
noblest part of that Image, and imagine the Exemplar or Copy, not to come
short, but to exceed the thing copyed by it. God were not the most excellent
substance, if he were not a Spirit: Spiritual substances are more excellent
than bodily; the Soul of Man more excellent than other Animals; Angels more
excellent than Men: They contain in their own nature, whatsoever dignity there
is in the inferior Creatures. God must have therefore an excellency above all
those, and therefore is entirely remote from the conditions of a Body.

Calov. Socin. Proflig. P. 129. 130.
It Is a gross conceit therefore to think that God is such a Spirit as the Air
is; for that is to be a body as the Air is, though it be a thin one; and if God
were no more a Spirit than that, or than Angels, he would not be the most
simple Being: Amirald Sup. Heb. 9. p. 146. etc.
Yet some think that the spiritual Deity was represented by the Air in the Ark
of the Testament. It was unlawful to represent him by any Image that God had
prohibited: Every thing about the Ark had a particular signification: The Gold
and other Ornaments about it signified something of Christ, but were unfit to
represent the Nature of God: A thing purely invisible and falling under nothing
of sense, could not represent him to the mind of Man: The Air in the Ark was
the fittest, it represented the invisibility of God, Air being imperceptible to
our eyes. Air diffuseth it self through all parts of the world, it glides
through secret passages into all Creatures, it fills the space between Heaven
and Earth; there is no place wherein God is not present.

To evidence this,

1. If God were not a Spirit, he could not be Creator. All multitude begins in,
and is reduced to unity. As above multitude there is an absolute unity; So
above mixed Creatures, there is an absolute simplicity: You cannot conceive
number without conceiving the beginning of it in that which was not number,
viz. a unite: You cannot conceive any mixture, but you must conceive some
simple thing to be the Original and Basis of it. The works of Art done by
rational Creatures, have their Foundation in something Spiritual. Every
Artificer, Watch-maker, Carpenter has a model in his own mind of the work he
designs to frame: The material and outward Fabric is squared according to an
inward and Spiritual Idea. A Spiritual Idea speaks a Spiritual faculty as the
subject of it. God could not have an Idea of that vast number of Creatures he
brought into being; if he had not had a Spiritual Nature. Amiral. moral Tom. 1.
pa. 282.
The wisdom whereby the world was Created could never be the fruit of a
Corporeal nature; such natures are not capable of understanding and
comprehending the things which are within the compass of their nature, much
less of produ- them: And therefore beasts which have only Corporeal faculties,
move to objects by the force of their sense, and have no knowledge of things as
they are comprehended by the understanding of Man. All acts of wisdom speak an
intelligent and Spiritual agent: The effects of wisdom, goodness, power are so
great and admirable, that they bespeak him a more perfect and eminent being,
than can possibly be beheld under a bodily shape. Can a Coporeal substance put
Wisdom in the inward parts, and give understanding to the heart? Job. 38.16.


2. If God were not a pure Spirit, he could not be one. If God had a body,
consisting of distinct members, as ours; or all of one nature, as the water and
air are, yet he were then capable of division, and therefore could not be
entirely one. Either those parts would be finite or infinite; if finite, they
are not parts of God; for to be God and finite is a contradiction: If infinite,
then there are as many infinites, as distinct members, and therefore as many
Deities: Suppose this body had all parts of the same nature as air and water
has, every little part of air is as much air as the greatest, and every little
part of water is as much water as the Ocean; so every little part of God would
be as much God as the whole; as many particular Deities to make up God, as
little Atoms to compose a body: What can be more absurd? If God had a body
like a human body, and were compounded of body and Soul, of substance and
quality, he could not be the most perfect unity; he would be made up of
distinct parts, and those of a distinct nature, as the members of a human body
are: Where there is the greatest unity, there must be the greatest simplicity;
but God is one: As he is free from any change, so he is void of any multitude,
Deuteronomy. 6.4. The Lord our God is one Lord.

3. If God had a body as we have, he would not be invisible. Every material
thing is not visible: The Air is a body yet invisible, but it is sensible; the
cooling quality of it is felt by us at every breath, and we know it by our
touch, which is the most material sense. Every body, that has Members like to
bodies, is visible: But God is invisible. Daille. in Tim
The Apostle reckons it amongst his other perfections, 1 Timothy 1.17. Now unto
the King, Eternal, Immortal, Invisible: He is invisible to our sense, which
beholds nothing but material and colored things; and incomprehensible to our
understanding that conceives nothing but what is finite. God is therefore a
Spirit incapable of being seen, and infinitely incapable of being understood.
If he be invisible, he is also Spiritual. If he had a body, and hid it from our
eyes, he might be said not to be seen, but could not be said to be invisible.
When we say a thing is visible, we understand that it has such qualities which
are the objects of sense, tho we may never see that, which is in its own nature
is to be seen. God has no such qualities as fall under the perception of our
sense. His works are visible to us, but not his Godhead. Romans 1.20.
The nature of a human body is to be seen and handled, Christ gives us such a
description of it, Luke 24.39. Handle me and see, for a Spirit has not flesh
and bones as you see me have: But man has been so far from seeing God, that it
is impossible he can see him, 1 Timothy 6.16. There is such a disproportion
between an infinite object and a finite sense and understanding, that it is
utterly impossible either to behold or comprehend him. But if God had a body
more luminous and glorious than that of the Sun, he would be as well visible to
us as the Sun, tho the immensity of that light would dazzle our eyes, and forbid
any close inspection into him by the virtue of our sense: We have seen the
shape and figure of the Sun, but no man has ever seen the shape of God. Joh.
5.37.
If God had a body he were visible, tho he might not perfectly and fully be
seen by us. Goulart. de Dieu pa. 94.
As we see the Heavens, tho we see not the extension, latitude and greatness of
them. Tho God has manifested himself in a bodily shape, Genesis 18.1. And
elsewhere, Jehovah appeared to Abraham: Yet the substance of God was not seen,
no more than the substance of Angels was seen in their Apparitions to men. A
body was formed to be made visible by them, and such actions done in that body,
that spoke the person that did them, to be of a higher eminency than a bare
Corporeal Creature: Sometimes a representation is made to the inward sense and
imagination, as to Michaiah, 1 King. 22.19.
and to Isa. 6. chap. 1. But they saw not the essence of God, but some Images
and figures of him proportioned to their sense or imagination. The Essence of
God no man ever saw, nor can see. Joh. 1.18.

Goulart. de Dieu p. 95. 96.
Nor does it follow, that God has a body, because Jacob is said to see God Face
to Face, Genesis 32.30. And Moses had the like privilege, Deuteronomy. 34.10. This only
signifies a fuller and clearer manifestation of God, by some representations
offered to the bodily sense, or rather to the inward Spirit: For God tells
Moses he could not see his Face, Exodus 33.20. And that none ever saw the
similitude of God, Deuteronomy. 4.15. Were God a Corporeal substance he might in some
measure be seen by Corporeal eyes.

4. If God were not a Spirit, he could not be infinite. All bodies are of a
finite nature: Every body is material, and every material thing is terminated.
The Sun, a vast body, has a bounded greatness: The Heavens of a mighty bulk,
yet have their limits. If God had a body he must consist of parts, those parts
would be bounded and limited, and whatsoever is limited is of a finite virtue,
and therefore below an infinite nature. Reason therefore tells us, that the
most excellent nature, as God is, cannot be of a Corporeal condition; because
of the limitation and other actions which belong to every body. God is
infinite, for the Heaven of Heavens cannot contain him, 2 Chronicles. 2.6. The
largest Heavens, and those imaginary spaces beyond the world, are no bounds to
him. He has an essence beyond the bounds of the world, and cannot be included
in the vastness of the Heavens. If God be infinite, then he can have no parts
in him; if he had, they must be finite, or infinite: Finite parts can never
make up an infinite being. A vessel of Gold of a pound weight cannot be made of
the quantity of an ounce. Infinite parts they cannot be, because then every
part would be equal to the whole, as infinite as the whole, which is
contradictory. We see in all things every part is less than the whole bulk that
is composed of it: As every Member of a Man is less than the whole body of Man:
If all the parts were finite, then God in his Essence were finite; and a finite
God is not more excellent than a Creature: So that if God were not a Spirit, he
could not be infinite.

5. If God were not a Spirit, he could not be an independent being. Whatsoever
is compounded of many parts, depends either essentially or integrally upon
those parts; as the essence of a man depends upon the conjunction and union of
his two main parts, his Soul, and Body; when they are separated the essence of
a Man cease; and the perfection of a man depends upon every Member of the
Body; So that if one be wanting the perfection of the whole is wanting: As if a
man has lost a limb, you call him not a perfect man; because that part is gone
upon which his perfection as an entire man did depend: If God therefore had a
body, the perfection of the Deity would depend upon every part of that body;
and the more parts he were compounded of, the more his dependency would be
multiplied according to the number of those parts of the body: For that which
is compounded of many parts is more dependent than that which is compounded of
fewer.

And because God would be a dependent being if he had a body, he could not be
the first being; for the compounding parts are in order of nature before that
which is compounded by them; as the soul and body are before the man which
results from the union of them. If God had parts and bodily Members as we have,
or any composition, the Essence of God would result from those parts, and those
parts be supposed to be before God. For that which is a part, is before that
whose part it is. As in Artificial things you may conceive it: All the parts of
a Watch or Clock, are in time before that Watch which is made by setting those
parts together. In natural things, you must suppose the Members of a Body
framed, before you can call it a Man: So that the parts of this body are before
that which is constituted by them. We can conceive no other of God, if he were
not a pure, entire, unmixed Spirit: If he had distinct parts, he would depend
upon them; those parts would be before him; his Essence would be the effect of
those distinct parts, and so he would not be absolutely and entirely the first
Being: But he is so, Isa. 44.6. I am the first, and I am the last. He is the
first; nothing is before him: Whereas if he had bodily parts, and those finite,
it would follow, God is made up of those parts which are not God; and that
which is not God, is in order of Nature before that which is God. So that we
see if God were not a Spirit, he could not be independent.

6. If God were not a Spirit, he were not immutable and unchangeable. His
immutability depends upon his simplicity. He is unchangeable in his Essence,
because he is a pure and unmixed spiritual Being. Whatsoever is compounded of
parts, may be divided into those parts, and resolved into those distinct parts
which make up and constitute the Nature. Whatsoever is compounded, is
changeable in its own nature, though it should never be changed. Adam who was
constituted of Body and Soul, had he stood in Innocence, had not died; there
had been no separation made between his Soul and Body whereof he was
constituted, and his Body had not resolved into those principles of Dust from
whence it was extracted. Yet in his own nature he was dissoluble into those
distinct parts whereof he was compounded: And so the glorified Saints in
Heaven, after the Resurrection, and the happy meeting of their Souls and Bodies
in a new Marriage knot, shall never be dissolved: yet in their own nature they
are mutable and dissoluble, and cannot be otherwise, because they are made up
of such distinct parts that may be separated in their own nature, unless
sustained by the grace of God: They are immutable by Will, the Will of God, not
by Nature. God is immutable by Nature as well as Will: As he has a necessary
Existence, so he has a necessary Unchangeableness, Mal. 3.6. I the Lord change
not. He is as unchangeable in his Essence, as in his Veracity and Faithfulness:
They are perfections belonging to his Nature. But if he were not a pure Spirit,
he could not be immutable by Nature.

7. If God were not a pure Spirit, He could not be omnipresent. He is in Heaven
above, and the Earth below: Deuteronomy. 4.39.
He fills Heaven and Earth. Jer. 23.24.
The Divine Essence is at once in Heaven and Earth; but it is impossible a Body
can be in two places at one and the same time. Since God is every where, he
must be spiritual. Had he a Body, he could not penetrate all things; he would
be circumscribed in place. He could not be every where but in parts, not in the
whole; one member in one place, and another in another; for to be confined to a
particlar place, is the property of a Body: But since he is diffused through
the whole World; higher than Heaven, deeper than Hell; longer than the Earth,
broader than the Sea; Job. 11.8.
he has not any corporeal matter. If he had a Body wherewith to fill Heaven
and Earth, there could be no Body besides his own: It Is the Nature of Bodies to
bound one another, and hinder the extending of one another. Two Bodies cannot
be in the same place in the same point of Earth, one excludes the other: And it
will follow hence, that we are nothing, no substances, mere illusions; there
could be no place for any Body else. Gamacheus Theol. Tom. 1. Quos. 3. C. 1.
If his Body were as bigg as the World; as it must be, if with that he filled
Heaven and Earth, there would not be room for him to move a hand or a foot, or
extend a finger; for there would be no place remaining for the motion.

8. If God were not a Spirit, he could not be the most perfect Being. The more
perfect any thing is in the rank of Creatures, the more spiritual and simple it
is, as Gold is the more pure and perfect that has least mixture of other
Metals. If God were not a Spirit, there would be Creatures of a more excellent
Nature than God; as Angels and Souls, which the Scripture calls Spirits, in
opposition to Bodies. There is more of perfection in the first notion of a
Spirit, than in the notion of a Body. God cannot be less perfect than his
Creatures, and contribute an excellency of being to them which he wants
himself. If Angels and Souls possess such an excellency, and God want that
excellency; he would be less than his Creatures, and the excellency of the
Effect, would exceed the excellency of the Cause. But every Creature, even the
highest Creature, is infinitely short of the perfection of God; for whatsoever
excellency they have, is finite and limited; it is but a spark from the Sun, a
drop from the Ocean; but God is unboundedly perfect in the highest manner,
without any limitation; and therefore above Spirits, Angels, the highest
Creatures that were made by him: An infinite sublimity, a pure act, to which
nothing can be added, from which nothing can be taken. In him there is light
and no darkness, 1 John 1.5.
spirituality without any matter, perfection without any shadow or taint of
imperfection: Light pierces into all things, preserves its own purity, and
admits of no mixture of any thing else with it.

Question. It may be said, If God be a Spirit, and it is impossible he can be
otherwise than a Spirit; how comes God so often to have such Members as we have
in our Bodies, ascribed to him; not only a Soul, but particular bodily parts;
as heart, arms, hands, eyes, ears, face and back-parts? And how is it that he
is never called a Spirit in plain words, but in this Text by our Savior?

Answ. It Is true, many parts of the Body, and natural affections of the human
nature, are reported of God in Scripture. Head, Dan. 7.9.
Eyes and Eyelids, Psalm. 11.4.
Apple of the Eye, Mouth, etc. our Affections also, Grief, Joy, Anger, etc. But
it is to be considered,

1. That this is in condescension to our weakness. God being desirous to make
himself known to Man, Loquitur lex secund. ling. filiorum. hominum, was the H.
saying.
whom he created for his Glory, humbles as it were his own Nature to such
representations, as may suit and assists the capacity of the Creature: Since by
the condition of our nature nothing erects a notion of it self in our
understanding, but as it is conducted in by our sense. God has served himself
of those things which are most exposed to our sense, most obvious to our
understandings, to give us some acquaintance with his own Nature, and those
things which otherwise we were not capable of having any notion of. As our
Souls are linkt with our Bodies, so our knowledge is linkt with our sense; that
we can scarce imagine any thing at first but under a corporeal form and figure,
till we come by great attention to the Object, to make by the help of reason, a
separation of the spiritual substance from the corporeal fancy, and consider it
in its own nature. We are not able to conceive a Spirit, without some kind of
resemblance to something below it; nor understand the actions of a Spirit,
without considering the operations of a human Body in its several Members. As
the Glories of another Life are signified to us by the pleasures of this; so
the Nature of God, by a gracious condescension to our capacities, is signified
to us by a likeness to our own. The more familiar the things are to us which
God uses to this purpose, the more proper they are to teach us what he intends
by them.

Answ. 2. All such representations are to signify the acts of God, as they
hear some likeness to those, which we perform by those members he ascribes to
himself. So that those members ascribed to him, rather note his visible
operations to us, than his invisible Nature; and signify that God does some
works like to those which men do, by the assistance of those Organs of their
Bodies. Amyral. de Trin. p. 218. 219.
So the wisdom of God is called his Eye, because he knows that with his mind,
which we see with our eyes. The efficiency of God is called his Hand and Arm;
because as we act with our hands, so does God with his Power. The divine
Efficacies are signified: By his eyes and ears, we understand his Omniscience;
by his face, the manifestation of his Favor; by his mouth the revelation of
his Will; by his nostrils, the acceptance of our Prayers; by his bowels, the
tenderness of his Compassion; by his heart, the sincerity of his Affections: by
his hand, the strength of his Power; by his feet, the ubiquity of his Presence.
And in this, he intends instruction and comfort: By his eyes he signifies his
watchfulness over us: By his ears, his readiness to hear the cries of the
oppressed: Psalm. 34.15.
By his Arm, his Power; an Arm to destroy his Enemies, and an Arm to relieve
his People. Isa. 51.9.
All those are attributed to God to signify divine actions, which he does
without bodily organs, as we do with them.

3. Consider also, that only those members which are the instruments of the
noblest actions, and under that consideration, are used by him to represent a
notion of him to our minds. Whatsoever is perfect and excellent, is ascribed to
him, but nothing that savours of imperfection. Episcop. institu. l. 4. 3. c. 3
The heart is ascribed to him, it being the principle of vital actions, to
signify the Life that he has in himself: Watchful and discerning eyes, not
sleepy and lazy ones: A mouth to reveal his Will, not to take in food. To eat
and sleep are never ascribed to him, nor those parts that belong to the
preparing or transmitting nourishment to the several parts of the body, as
stomach, liver, reins, nor bowels under that consideration, but as they are
significant of compassion; but only those parts are ascribed to him whereby we
acquire knowledge, as eyes and ears, the Organs of learning and wisdom: Or to
Communicate it to others, as the mouth, lips, tongue, as they are the
Instrmments of speaking, not of tasting: Or those parts which signify strength
and power, or whereby we perform the actions of Charity for the relief of
others: Taste, and touch, senses that extend no further than to Corporeal
things, and are the grossest of all the senses, are never ascribed to him.

It Is Zanchie^ observation Tom. 2. de natura Dei lib. 1. cap. 4. These. 9.
It were worth consideration, whither this describing God by the Members of an
human body were so much figuratively to be understood, as with respect to the
incarnation of our Savior, who was to assume the human nature and all the
Members of a human body.

Asaph speaking in the person of God, Psalm. 78.1. I will open my mouth in
Parables: In regard of God it is to be understood figuratively, but in regard
of Christ literally, to whom it is applied, Matt. 13.34.35. And that
Apparition, Isa. 6. which was the appearance of Jehovah, is applied to Christ,
John 12.40.41.

Amiraut. Meral. T^m. 1. pa. 293. 294.
After the report of the Creation, and the forming of man, we read of Gods
speaking to him, but not of Gods appearing to him in any visible shape: A voice
might be formed in the air to give man notice of his duty; some way of
info^^a^i^n he must have what positive Laws he was to observe, besides that Law
w^^ch w^^ ^^graven in his nature, which we call the Law of nature: And without
a voice the knowledge of the Divine Will could not be so conveniently
communicated to man: Tho God was heard in a voice, he was not seen in a shape:
But after the fall we several times read of his appearing in such a form. Tho
we read of his speaking before man's committing of sin, yet not of his walking,
which is more Corporeal, till afterward: Genesis 3.8.
[Tho God would not have man believe him to be Corporeal, yet he judged it
expedient to give some prenotices of that Divine incarnation which he had
promised. Amirald.
]

5. Therefore we must not conceive of the visible Deity according to the letter
of such expressions, but the true intent of them. Tho the Scripture speaks of
his eyes and arm, yet it denies them to be arms of flesh. Job. 10.4. 2 Chronicles.
32.8.
We must not conceive of God according to the Letter, but the design of the
Metaphor. When we hear things described by Metaphorical expressions for the
clearing them up to our fancy, we conceive not of them under that garb, but
remove the vail by an act of our reason: When Christ is called a Sun, a Vine,
Bread, is any so stupid as as to conceive him to be a Vine with material
branches and Clusters; or be of the same nature with a Loaf? But the things
designed by such Metaphors are obvious to the conception of a mean
understanding. If we would conceive God to have a body like a man, because he
describes himself so, we may conceit him to be like a Bird, because he is
mentioned with wings; Psalm. 36.7.
or like a Lion or Leopard, because he likens himself to them in the Acts of
his strength and fury. Hos. 13.7.8.
He is called a rock, a horn, fire, to note his strength and wrath: If any be
so stupid as to think God to be really such, they would make him not only a
man, but worse than a Monster.

Maimon. More Nevoc. par. 1. cap. 27.
Onkelos, the Chalde Paraphrast upon parts of the Scripture, was so tender of
expressing the Notion of any Corporeity in God, that when he meets with any
expressions of that nature, he translates them according to the true intent of
them; as when God is said to descend, Genesis 11.5. which implies a local motion,
a motion from one place to another, he translates it, and God revealed himself.
We should conceive of God according to the design of the expressions: When we
read of his eyes, we should conceive his Omniscience; of his hand his power; of
his sitting, his immutability; of his Throne, his Majesty; and conceive of him
as surmounting, not only the grossness of bodies, but the Spiritual excellency
of the most dignified Creatures; something so perfect, great, spiritual, as
nothing can be conceived higher and purer.

Mores conjectura cabalistica pa. 122.
Christ, says one, is truly Deus figuratus; and for his sake, was it more
easily permitted to the Jews to think of God in the shape of a man.

Use. If God be a pure Spiritual being, then

1. Man is not the image of God, according to his external bodily form and
figure. The image of God in man consisted not in what is seen, but in what is
not seen; not in the conformation of the members, but rather in the Spiritual
faculties of the Soul; or most of all in the holy endowments of those
faculties, Ephesians. 4.24. That ye put on the new man which after God is Created in
righteousness and true holiness. Col. 3.1^.
The image which is restored by redeeming grace, was the image of God by
Original nature. The image of God cannot be in that part which is common to us
with beasts, but rather in that wherein we excel all living Creatures, in
reason, understanding, and an immortal Spirit. God expressly says, that none
saw a similitude of him Deuteronomy. 4.15, 16. which had not been true, if man in
regard of his body had been the image and similitude of God; for then a figure
of God had been seen every day, as often as we saw a man or beheld our selves.
Nor would the Apostles argument stand good, Acts 17.29. That the Godhead is not
like to stone graven by art, if we were not the offspring of God and bore the
stamp of his nature in our Spirits rather than our bodies. Petav. Theol. Dog.
Tom. 1. lib. 2. cap. 1. pa. 104.
It was a fancy of Eugubinus, that when God set upon the actual Creation of
man, he took a bodily form for an Exemplar of that which he would express in
his work, and therefore that the words of Moses Genesis 1.26.
are to be understood of the body of man; because there was in Man such a shape
which God had then assumed. To let alone Gods forming himself a body for that
work as a groundless fancy; Man can in no wise be said to be the image of God,
in regard of the substance of his body; but beasts may as well be said to be
made in the Image of God, whose bodies have the same Members as the body of Man
for the most part, and excel Men in the acuteness of the senses and swiftness
of their motion, agility of body, greatness of strength, and in some kind of
ingenuities also, wherein Man has been a Scholar to the brutes, and beholden
to their skill. The Soul comes nearest the nature of God, as being a Spiritual
substance; yet considered singly in regard of its Spiritual substance, cannot
well be said to be the image of God: A beast, because of its Corporeity, may as
well be called the image of a Man; for there is a greater similitude between
man and a brute in the rank of bodies, than there can be between God and the
highest Angels, in the rank of Spirits. If it does not consist in the substance
of the Soul, much less can it in any similitude of the body. This Image
consisted partly in the state of man, as he had dominion over the Creatures;
partly in the nature of man as he was an intelligent being, and thereby was
capable of having a grant of that Dominion; but principally in the conformity
of the Soul with God in the frame of his Spirit and the holiness of his
actions. Not at all in the figure and form of his body Physically, tho morally
there might be, as there was a rectitude in the body as an instrument to
conform to the holy motions of the soul, as the holiness of the soul sparkled
in the actions and members of the body. If man were like God because he has a
body, whatsoever has a body, has some resemblance to God, and may be said to
be in part his image: But the truth is, the essence of all Creatures cannot be
an image of the immense essence of God.

2. If God be a pure Spirit; It Is unreasonable to frame any Image or picture of
God. Jamblyc. protrept. cap. 21. Symb. 24.
Some Heathens have been wiser in this than some Christians: Pythagoras forbad
his Scholars to engrave any shape of him upon a Ring, because he was not to be
comprehended by sense, but conceived only in our minds; our hands are as unable
to fashion him as our eyes to see him. Austin de Civitat. Dei lib. 4. cap. 31.
out of Varro.
The ancient Romans worshipped their Gods 170. years before any material
representations of them; Tacitus.
and the Ancient Idolatrous Germans thought it a wicked thing to represent God
in a human shape. Yet some, and those no Romanists, labor to defend the making
Images of God in the resemblance of man; because he is so represented in
Scripture, he may be, Gerhard loc. Comun. vol. 4. Exegesis de natura Dei cap.
8. 1.
says one conceived so in our minds and figured so to our sense. If this were
a good reason, why may he not be pictured as a Lion, Horn, Eagle, Rock, since
he is under such Metaphors shadowed to us? The same ground there is for the one
as for the other: What tho man be a nobler Creature, God has no more the body
of a man, than that of an Eagle; and some perfections in other Creatures
represent some excellencies in his nature and actions, which cannot be figured
by a human shape, as strength by the Lion, swiftness and readiness by the wings
of the Bird. But God has absolutely prohibited the making any Image whatsoever
of him, and that with terrible threatenings, Exodus 20.5. I the Lord am a jealous
God visiting the iniquities of the Fathers upon their Children, and Deuteronomy. 5.8,
9. After God had given the Israelites the Commandment wherein he forbad them to
have any other Gods before him, he forbids all figuring of him by the hand of
man; Amiraut. Morale Christiene Tom. 1. p. 294.
not only Images, but any likness of him either by things in Heaven, in the
earth or in the water. How often does he discover his indignation by the
Prophets against them that offer to mould him in a Creature form? This law was
not to serve a particular dispensation or to endure a particular time, but it
was a declaration of his Will, invariable in all places and all times; being
founded upon the immutable nature of his being, and therefore agreeable to the
Law of nature; otherwise not chargeable upon the Heathens. And therefore when
God had declared his nature and his works in a stately and Majestic eloquence,
he demands of them, To whom they would liken him, or what likeness they would
compare unto him? Isa. 40.18. Where they could find any thing that would be a
lively image and resemblance of his infinite excellency? Founding it upon the
infiniteness of his nature, which necessarily implies the Spirituality of it.
God is infinitely above any Statue; and those that think to draw God by a
stroke of a pensil, or form him by the engravings of Art, are more stupid than
the Statues themselves.

To show the unreasonableness of it; Consider,

1. It Is impossible to fashion any image of God. If our more capacious Souls
cannot grasp his nature, our weaker sense cannot frame his image: It Is more
possible of the two, to comprehend him in our minds, than to frame him in an
image to our sense. He inhabits inaccessible light: As it is impossible for the
eye of man to see him, it is impossible for the art of man to paint him upon
walls, and carve him out of wood. None knows him but himself, none can describe
him but himself. Cocceius sum. Theol. cap. 9. pa. 47. 35.
Can we draw a figure of our own Souls, and express that part of our selves,
wherein we are most like to God? Can we extend this to any bodily figure and
divide it into parts? How can we deal so with the Original Copy, whence the
first draught of our Souls was taken, and which is infinitely more Spiritual
than Men or Angels? No Corporeal thing can represent a Spiritual substance;
there is no proportion in nature between them. God is a simple, infinite,
immense, eternal, invisible, incorruptible being: A Statue is a compounded,
finite, limited, temporal, visible and corruptible body. God is a living
Spirit; but a Statue, nor sees, nor hears, nor perceives any thing. But suppose
God had a body, it is impossible to mould an Image of it in the true glory of
that body: Can the Statue of an excellent Monarch represent the Majesty and air
of his Countenance, tho made by the skilfullest workman in the world? If God
had a body in some measure suited to his excellency, were it possible for Man to
make an exact Image of him, who cannot picture the light, heat, motion,
magnitude and dazzling property of the Sun? The excellency of any Corporeal
nature of the least Creature, the temper, instinct, artifice, are beyond the
power of a Carving tool; much more is God.

2. To make any Corporeal representations of God is unworthy of God. It Is a
disgrace to his nature. Whosoever thinks a Carnal corruptible Image to be fit
for a representation of God, renders God no better than a Carnal and Corporeal
being. It Is a kind of debasing an Angel, who is a Spiritual nature, to
represent him in a bodily shape, who is as far removed from any fleshliness as
Heaven from Earth; much more to degrade the glory of the Divine nature to the
lineaments of a man. The whole stock of Images is but a lie of God, Jer. 10, 8,
14. A Doctrine of vanities and falsehood: It represents him in a false garb to
the world, and sinks his glory into that of a corruptible Creature. Romans 1.25.
It impairs the reverence of God in the minds of men, and by degrees may debase
men's apprehensions of God, Romans 1.22.
and be a means to make them believe he is such a one as themselves; and that
not being free from the figure, he is not also free from the imperfections of
their bodies. Corporeal Images of God were the fruits of base imaginations of
him; and as they sprung from them, so they contribute to a greater corruption
of the notions of the Divine nature: The Heathens begun their first
representations of him by the Image of a corruptible Man, then of birds, till
they descended, not only to four footed beasts, but creeping things, even
Serpents, as the Apostle seems to intimate in his enumeration, Romans 1.23. It
had been more honorable to have continued in human representations of him,
than have sunk so low as beasts and Serpents, the baser Images; tho the first
had been infinitely unworthy of him, he being more above a man, though the
noblest Creature, than Man is above a Worm, a Toad, or the most despicable
creeping thing upon the Earth. To think we can make an Image of God of a piece
of Marble, or an Ingot of Gold, is a greater debasing of him, than it would be
of a great Prince, if you should represent him in the statue of a Frog. When
the Israelites represented God by a Calf, it is said, they sinned a great sin,
Exodus 32.31. And the sin of Jeroboam, who intended only a representation of God
by the Calves at Dan and Bethel, is called more emphatically, Hosea 10.15. (...)
the wickedness of your wickedness, the very skum and dreggs of wickedness. As
men debased God by this, so God debased men for this; he degraded the
Israelites into Captivity under the worst of their Enemies, and punished the
Heathens with spiritual Judgments, as uncleaness through the lusts of their own
hearts, Romans 1.24. which is repeated again in other expressions, v. 26, 27. as
a meet recompense for their disgracing the spiritual nature of God. Had God
been like to Man, they had not offended in it: But I mention this, to show a
probable reason of those base lusts which are in the midst of us, that have
scarce been exceeded by any Nation, viz. the unworthy and unspiritual conceits
of God, which are as much a debasing of him as material Images were when they
were more rife in the world; and may be as well the cause of those spiritual
Judgments upon men, as the worshipping molten and carved Images were the cause
of the same upon the Heathen.

3. Yet this is natural to Man. Wherein we may see the contrariety of Man to
God. Though God be a Spirit, yet there is nothing Man is more prone to, than to
represent him under a corporeal form. The most famous Guides of the Heathen
world have fashioned him, not only according to the more honorable Images of
men, but beastialized him in the form of a Brute. The Egyptians, whose Country
was the School of Learning to Greece, were notoriously guilty of this
brutishness in worshipping an Ox for an Image of their God; and the Philistines
their Dagon in a figure composed of the Image of a Woman and a Fish: Daille
super Cor. 1.10. Ser. 3.
Such representations were ancient in the Oriental parts. The Gods of Laban
that he accuses Jacob of stealing from him, are supposed to be little figures
of men. Genesis 31.30.34.
Such was the Israelites Golden-Calf; their worship was not terminated on the
Image, but they worshipped the true God under that representation: They could
not be so brutish as to call a Calf their Deliverer, and give so him great a
Title, ( these be thy Gods oh Israel, which brought thee up out of the land of
Egypt, Exodus 32.4.) or that which they knew belonged to the true God, the God
of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob. Genesis 3.16, 17.
They knew the Calf to be formed of their Earrings; but they had consecrated
it to God as a representation of him: Though they chose the form of the
Egyptian Idol; yet they knew that Apis, Osiris and Isis the Gods the Egyptians
adored in that figure, had not wrought their Redemption from Bondage, but would
have used their force, had they been possessed of any, to have kept them under
the Yoke, rather than have freed them from it: The Feast also which they
celebrated before that Image, is called by Aaron the Feast of the Lord, Exodus
32.5. a Feast to Jehovah, the incommunicable name of the Creator of the world:
It Is therefore evident, that both the Priest and the People pretended to serve
the true God, not any false Divinity of Egypt: That God who had rescued them
from Egypt with a mighty hand, divided the Red Sea before them, destroyed their
Enemies, conducted them, fed them by miracle, spoken to them from Mount Sinai,
and amazed them by his Thundrings and Lightnings when he instructed them by his
Law; a God they could not so soon forget. And with this representing God by
that Image, they are charged by the Psalmist, Psalm. 106.19, 20. they made a
Calf in Horeb, and changed their glory into the similitude of an Ox that eats
Grass: They changed their glory, that is, God the glory of Israel; so that they
took this figure for the Image of the true God of Israel, their own God; not
the God of any other Nation in the world. Jeroboam intended no other by his
Calves, but Symbols of the presence of the true God, instead of the Ark and the
Propitiatory which remained among the Jews. We see the inclination of our
Natures in the practice of the Israelites; a People chosen out of the whole
world to bear up Gods name, and preserve his glory: And in that the Images of
God were so soon set up in the Christian Church; and to this day, the picture
of God in the shape of an old man, is visible in the Temples of the Romanists.

It Is prone to the Nature of Man.

4. To represent God by a corporeal Image, and to worship him in and by that
Image, is Idolatry. Though the Israelites did not acknowledge the Calf to be
God, nor intended a worship to any of the Egyptian Deities by it; but
worshipped that God in it, who had so lately and miraculously delivered them
from a cruel Servitude; and could not in natural reason judge him to be clothed
with a bodily shape, much less to be like an Ox that eats grass; yet the
Apostle brings no less a charge against them, than that of Idolatry, 1 Cor.
10.7. he calls them Idolaters, who before that Calf kept a Feast to Jehovah,
citing Exodus 32.5. Suppose we could make such an Image of God as might
perfectly represent him; yet since God has prohibited it, shall we be wiser
than God? He has sufficiently manifested himself in his Works without Images:
He is seen in the Creatures; more particularly in the Heavens, which declare
his Glory. His Works are more excellent representations of him, as being the
works of his own hands, than any thing that is the Product of the Art of Man.
His Glory sparkles in the Heavens, Sun, Moon and Stars, as being magnificent
pieces of his Wisdom and Power; yet the kissing the hand to the Sun or the
Heavens, as representatives of the Excellency and Majesty of God, is Idolatry
in Scripture account, and a denial of God; Job. 31.26 27, 28. Chin. Predict.
Part. 2. P. 252.
a prostituting the glory of God to a Creature: Lawson. Body Divin. P. 161
Either the worship is terminated on the Image it self, and then it is
confessed by all to be Idolatry, because it is a giving that worship to a
Creature which is the sole right of God; or not terminated in the Image, but in
the Object represented by it; it is then a foolish thing; we may as well
terminate our worship on the true Object without, as with an Image. An erected
Statue is no sign or symbol of Gods special presence, as the Ark, Tabernacle,
Temple were. It is no part of divine institution; has no Authority of a Command
to support it; no Cordial of a promise to encourage it; and the Image being
infinitely distant from, and below the Majesty and Spirituality of God, cannot
constitute one object of worship with him. To put a Religious Character upon
any Image formed by the corrupt imagination of Man, as a representation of the
invisible and spiritual Deity; is to think the Godhead to be like silver and
gold, or stone graven by art and man's device. Acts 17.29.


3. This Doctrine will direct us in our conceptions of God, as a pure perfect
Spirit, than which nothing can be imagined more perfect, more pure, more
spiritual.

1. We cannot have an adequate or suitable conception of God: He dwells in
inaccessible light; inaccessible to the acuteness of our fancy, as well as the
weakness of our sense. If we could have thoughts of him, as high and excellent
as his Nature; our conceptions must be as infinite as his Nature. All our
imaginations of him cannot represent him, because every created species is
finite; it cannot therefore represent to us a full and substantial notion of an
infinite Being. We cannot speak or think worthily enough of him, who is greater
than our words, vaster than our understandings. Whatsoever we speak or think of
God, is handed first to us by the notice we have of some perfection in the
Creature, and explains to us some particular excellency of God, rather than the
fullness of his Essence. No Creature, nor all Creatures together, can furnish us
with such a magnificent notion of God, as can give us a clear view of him. Yet
God in his word is pleased to step below his own excellency, and point us to
those excellencies in his works, whereby we may ascend to the knowledge of
those excellencies which are in his Nature. But the Creatures, whence we draw
our lessons being finite, and our understandings being finite, it is utterly
impossile to have a notion of God commensurate to the immensity and
spirituality of his Being. [ Amyraut Moral. Tom. 1. P. 289.
God is not like to visible Creatures, nor is there any proportion between him
and the most spiritual]. We cannot have a full notion of a spiritual Nature;
much less can we have of God, who is a Spirit above Spirits. No Spirit can
clearly represent him: The Angels that are great Spirits, are bounded in their
extent, finite in their being, and of a mutable Nature.

Yet though we cannot have a suitable conception of God, we must not content our
selves without any conception of him. It Is our sin not to endeavor after a
true notion of him: It Is our sin to rest in a mean and low notion of him, when
our reason tells us we are capable of having higher: But if we ascend as high
as we can, though we shall then come short of a suitable notion of him; this is
not our sin, but our weakness. God is infinitely superior to the choicest
conceptions; not only of a sinner, but of a Creature. If all conceptions of God
below the true nature of God were sin, there is not a holy Angel in Heaven free
from sin; because tho they are the most capacious Creatures, yet they cannot
have such a Notion of an infinite being as is fully suitable to his nature,
unless they were infinite as he himself is.

2. But however, we must by no means conceive of God, under a human or
Corporeal shape. Since we cannot have conceptions honorable enough for his
nature, we must take heed we entertain not any which may debase his nature: Tho
we cannot comprehend him as he is, we must be careful not to fancy him to be
what he is not. It Is a vain thing to conceive him with human lineaments: We
must think higher of him, than to ascribe to him so mean a shape: We deny his
Spirituality when we fancy him under such a form: He is Spiritual, and between
that which is Spiritual and that which is Corporeal, there is no resemblance.
Episco. institu. li. 4. 2. c. 10.
Indeed Daniel saw God in a human form, Daniel. 7.9. The Ancient of days did
sit, whose garment was white as snow, and the hairs of his head like pure Wool;
he is described as coming to Judgment; it is not meant of Christ probably,
because Christ ver. 13. is called the Son of Man coming near to the Ancient of
days. This is not the proper shape of God, for no man has seen his shape. It
was a vision wherein such representations were made, as were accomodated to the
inward sense of Daniel; Daniel saw him in a rapture or ecstasy, wherein outward
senses are of no use: God is described, not as he is in himself, of a human
form, but in regard of his fitness to Judge: White notes the purity and
simplicity of the Divine nature: Ancient of days in regard of his eternity;
white hair in regard of his prudence and wisdom, which is more eminent in age
than youth, and more fit to discern causes and to distinguish between right and
wrong. Visions are riddles and must not be understood in a litteral sense. We
are to watch against such determinate conceptions of God. Vain imaginations do
easily infest us; Tinder will not sooner take fire than our natures kindle into
wrong Notions of the Divine Majesty. We are very apt to fashion a God like our
selves: We must therefore look upon such representations of God, as
accommodated to our weakness: And no more think them to be literal descriptions
of God, as he is in himself, than we will think the image of the Sun in the
water to be the true Sun in the Heavens. We may indeed conceive of Christ as
man, who has in Heaven the vestment of our nature, and is Deus figuratus, tho
we cannot conceive the Godhead under a human shape.

1. To have such a fancy is to disparage and wrong God. A Corporeal fancy of
God is as ridiculous in it self and as injurious to God, as a wooden Statue.
The capricios of our imagination are often more monstrous than the images which
are the works of art: It Is as irreligious to measure Gods essence by our line,
his perfections by our imperfections, as to measure his thoughts and actings by
the weakness and unworthiness of our own. This is to limit an infinite essence,
and pull him down to our scanty measures, and render that which is
unconceivably above us, equal with us. It Is impossible we can conceive God after
the manner of, we a body but must bring him down to the proportion of a body,
which is to diminish his glory, and stoop him below the dignity of his nature.
God is a pure Spirit, he has nothing of the nature and tincture of a body;
whosoever therefore conceives of him as having a bodily form, tho he fancy the
most beautiful and comely body, instead of owning his dignity, detracts from
the supereminent excellency of his nature and blessedness. When men fancy God
like themselves in their Corporeal nature, they will soon make a progress, and
ascribe to him their corrupt nature; and while they clothe him with their
bodies, invest him also in the infirmities of them. God is a jealous God, very
sensible of any disgrace, and will be as much incensed against an inward
Idolatry as an outward: That Exodus 20.4.
Command which forbad Corporeal images, would not indulge carnal imaginations,
since the nature of God is as much wronged by unworthy images erected in the
fancy as by statues carved out of stone or metals: One as well as the other is
a deserting of our true spouse and committing Adultery, one with a material
image, and the other with a carnal Notion of God. Since God humbles himself to
our apprehensions, we should not debase him in thinking him to be that in his
nature, which he makes only a resemblance of himself to us.

2. To have such fancies of God, will obstruct and pollute our worship of him.
How is it possible to give him a right worship, of whom we have so debasing a
Notion? We shall never think a corporeal Deity, worthy of a dedication of our
Spirits. The hating Instruction, and casting Gods word behind the back, is
charged upon the imagination they had, that God was such a one as themselves,
Psalm. 50.17.21. Many of the wiser Heathens did not judge their Statues to be
their Gods, or their Gods to be like their Statues; but suited them to their
politic designs; and judged them a good invention to keep people within the
bounds of Obedience and Devotion, by such visible figures of them, which might
imprint a reverence and fear of those Gods upon them: But these were false
measures: A despised and undervalued God, is not an Object of Petition or
Affection: Who would address seriously to a God he has low apprehensions of?
The more raised thoughts we have of him, the viler sense we shall have of our
selves: They would make us humble and self abhorrent in our supplications to
him, Job. 42.6. wherefore I abhor my self, etc.

3. Though we must not conceive of God, as of a human or Corporeal shape; yet
we cannot think of God, without some reflection upon our own being. We cannot
conceive him to be an intelligent being, but we must make some comparison
between him and our own understanding nature, to come to a knowledge of him.
Since we are enclosed in bodies, we apprehend nothing but what comes in by
sense, and what we in some sort measure by sensible Objects. And in the
consideration of those things, which we desire to abstract from sense, we are
fain to make use of the assistances of sense and visible things: And therefore
when we frame the highest notion, there will be some similitude of some
corporeal thing in our fancy; and though we would spiritualize our thoughts,
and aim at a more abstracted and raised understanding, yet there will be some
dreggs of matter sticking to our conceptions; yet we still judge by argument
and reasoning, what the thing is we think of under those material Images.
Nazianzen.
A corporeal Image will follow us, as the shadow does the body: While we are in
the body, and surrounded with fleshly matter, we cannot think of things without
some help from corporeal representations: Something of sense will interpose it
self in our purest conceptions of spiritual things; Amiraut Morale Tom. 1. P.
180, etc.
for the faculties which serve for contemplation, are either corporeal, as the
sense and fancy, or so allied to them, that nothing passes into them but by the
Organs of the body; so that there is a natural inclination to figure nothing
but under a corporeal notion, till by an attentive application of the mind and
reason to the object thought upon, we separate that which is bodily from that
which is spiritual, and by degrees ascend to that true notion of that we think
upon, and would have a due conception of in our mind. Therefore God tempers the
declaration of himself to our weakness, and the condition of our Natures: He
condescends to our littleness and narrowness, when he declares himself by the
similitude of bodily members. As the light of the Sun is tempered, and
diffuseth it self to our sense through the air and vapors, that our weak eyes
may not be too much dazzled with it: Without it we could not know or judge of
the Sun, because we could have no use of our sense, which we must have before
we can judge of it in our understanding: So we are not able to conceive of
spiritual Beings in the purity of their own nature, without such a temperament,
and such shadows to usher them into our minds. And therefore we find the Spirit
of God accommodates himself to our contracted and teddered capacities, and uses
such expressions of God, as are suited to us in this state of flesh wherein we
are: And therefore because we cannot apprehend God in the simplicity of his own
Being, and his undivided Essence, he draws the representations of himself from
several Creatures and several actions of those Creatures: As sometimes he is
said to be angry, to walk, to sit, to fly; not that we should rest in such
conceptions of him, but take our rise from this foundation, and such
perfections in the Creatures, to mount up to a knowledge of Gods nature by
those several steps, and conceive of him by those divided Excellencies, because
we cannot conceive of him in the purity of his own Essence. Lessius.
We cannot possibly think or speak of God, unless we transfer the names of
created perfections to him; yet we are to conceive of them in a higher manner
when we apply them to the Divine Nature, than when we consider them in the
several Creatures formally, exceeding those perfections and excellencies which
are in the Creature, and in a more excellent manner: Towerson on the
Commandments. P. 112.
[as one says, though we cannot comprehend God without the help of such
resemblances, yet we may without making an Image of him; so that inability of
ours excuses those apprehensions of him from any way offending against his
Divine Nature] These are not notions so much suited to the nature of God as the
weakness of man: They are helps to our meditations, but ought not to be formal
conceptions of him. We may assist our selves in our apprehensions of him, by
considering the subtilty and spirituality of Air; and considering the members
of a body, without thinking him to be air, or to have any corporeal member. Our
reason tells us, that whatsoever is a body, is limited and bounded; and the
notion of infiniteness and bodiliness, cannot agree and consist together: And
therefore what is offered by our fancy should be purified by our reason.

4. Therefore we are to elevate and refine all our notions of God, and
spiritualize our conceptions of him. Every man is to have a conception of God;
therefore he ought to have one of the highest elevation. Since we cannot have a
full notion of him, we should endeavor to make it as high and as pure as we
can. Though we cannot conceive of God, but some corporeal representations or
images in our minds will be conversant with us, as motes in the Air when we
look upon the Heavens; yet our conceptions may and must rise higher: As when we
see the draught of the Heavens and Earth in a Globe, or a Kingdom in a Map, it
helps our conceptions, but does not terminate them: We conceive them to be of a
vast extent, far beyond that short description of them: So we should endeavor
to refine every representation of God, to rise higher and higher, and have our
apprehensions still more purified; separating the perfect from the imperfect,
casting away the one, and greatning the other; conceive him to be a Spirit
diffused through all, containing all, perceiving all. All the perfections of
God are infinitely elevated above the excellencies of the Creatures; above
whatsoever can be conceived by the clearest and most piercing understanding.
The Nature of God as a Spirit, is infinitely superior to whatsoever we can
conceive perfect in the notion of a created Spirit. Whatsoever God is, he is
infinitely so: He is infinite Wisdom, infinite Goodness, infinite Knowledge,
infinite Power, infinite Spirit, infinitely distant from the weakness of
Creatures, infinitely mounted above the excellencies of Creatures: As easy to
be known that he is, as impossible to be comprehended what he is.

Conceive of him as excellent, without any imperfection: A Spirit without
parts; great without quantity; perfect without quality; every where without
place; Powerful without members; understanding without ignorance; wise without
reasoning; light without darkness; infinitely more excelling the beauty of all
Creatures, than the light in the Sun pure and unviolated exceeds the splendour
of the Sun dispersed and divided through a cloudy and misty Air: And when you
have risen to the highest, conceive him yet infinitely above all you can
conceive of Spirit; and acknowledge the infirmity of your own minds. And
whatsoever conception comes into your minds, say this is not God; God is more
than this: If I could conceive him, he were not God; for God is
incomprehensibly above whatsoever I can say, whatsoever I can think and
conceive of him.

4. Inference. If God be a Spirit, no corporeal thing can defile him. Some
bring an Argument against the Omnipresence of God, that it is a disparagement
to the Divine Essence to be every where, in nasty Cottages, as well as
beautiful Palaces and garnisht Temples. What place can defile a Spirit? Is
Light, which approaches to the nature of Spirit polluted by shining upon a
Dunghill, or a Sunbeam tainted by darting upon a Quag-mire? Does an Angel
contract any soil, by stepping into a nasty Prison to deliver Peter? What can
steam from the most noysom body, to pollute the spiritual nature of God? As he
is of purer eyes than to behold iniquity Heb. 1.13.
, so he is of a more spiritual substance, than to contract any physical
pollution from the places where he does diffuse himself. Did our Savior who
had a true body, derive any taint from the Lepers he touched, the diseases he
cured, or the Devils he expelled? God is a pure Spirit; plungeth himself into
no filth; is dashed with no spot by being present with all bodies. Bodies only
receive defilement from bodies.

5. Inference. If God be a Spirit, he is active and communicative. He is not
clogged with heavy and sluggish matter, which is cause of dullness and
inactivity. The more subtle thin, and approaching nearer the Nature of a Spirit
any thing is, the more diffusive it is. Air is a gliding substance; spreads it
self through all Regions; peirceth into all bodies; it fills the space between
Heaven and Earth; there is nothing but partakes of the virtue of it. Light,
which is an emblem of Spirit, insinuates it self into all places, refreshes
all things. As Spirits are fuller, so they are more overflowing, more piercing,
more operative than bodies. The Egyptian Horses were weak things, because they
were Flesh and not Spirit Isay 31.3.
: The Soul being a Spirit conveys more to the Body, than the Body can to it.
What cannot so great a Spirit do for us? What cannot so great a Spirit work in
us? God being a Spirit above all Spirits, can pierce into the Center of all
Spirits; make his way into the most secret recesses; stamp what he pleases:
It Is no more to him to turn our Spirits, than to make a Wilderness become
Waters, and speak a Chaos into a beautiful frame of Heaven and Earth: He can
act our souls with infinite more ease, than our souls can act our bodies; he
can fix in us what motions, frames, inclinations he pleases; he can come and
settle in our hearts with all his Treasures. It Is an encouragement to confide
in him, when we petition him for spiritual Blessings: As he is a Spirit, he is
possessed with spiritual Blessings. Ephesians. 1.3.
A Spirit delights to bestow things suitable to its Nature, do Bodies are to
communicate what is agreeable to theirs: As he is a Father of Spirits, we may
go to him for the Welfare of our Spirits; he being a Spirit, is as able to
repair our Spirits, as he was to create them.

As he is a Spirit, he is indefatigable in acting: The members of the body tire
and flagg; but whoever heard of a Soul wearied with being active? Whoever heard
of a weary Angel? In the purest Simplicity, there is the greatest Power, the
most efficacious Goodness, the most reaching Justice to affect the Spirit, that
can insinuate it self every where to punish wickedness without weariness, as
well as to comfort goodness. God is active, because he is Spirit; and if we be
like to God, the more spiritual we are, the more active we shall be.

6. Inference. God being a Spirit, is immortal. His being immortal, and being
invisible are joined together. 1 Timothy 1.17.
Spirits are in their nature incorruptible; they can only perish by that hand
that framed them. Every compounded thing is subject to mutation; but God being
a pure and simple Spirit, is without corruption, without any shadow of change.
James 1.17.
Where there is composition, there is some kind of repugnancy of one part
against the other; and where there is repugnancy, there is a capability of
dissolution. God in regard of his infinite spirituality, has nothing in his
own nature contrary to it; can have nothing in himself which is not himself.
The world perishes; friends change and are dissolved; bodies moulder, because
they are mutable. God is a Spirit in the highest excellency and glory of
Spirits; nothing is beyond him; nothing above him; no contrariety within him:
This is our comfort, if we devote our selves to him; this God is our God; this
Spirit is our Spirit; this is our all, our immutable, our incorruptible
support; a Spirit that cannot die and leave us.

7. Inference. If God be a Spirit, we see how we can only converse with him by
our Spirits. Bodies and Spirits are not suitable to one another: We can only
see, know, embrace a Spirit with our Spirits. He judges not of us by our
corporeal actions, nor our external devotions, by our masks and disguises: He
fixes his eye upon the frame of the heart, bends his ear to the groans of our
Spirits: He is not pleased with outward pomp: He is not a Body; therefore the
beauty of Temples, delicacy of Sacrifices, fumes of Incense are not grateful to
him; by those or any external action, we have no communion with him: A Spirit
when broken, is his delightful Sacrifice Psalm. 51.17.
; We must therefore have our Spirits fitted for him, be renewed in the spirit
of our minds Ephesians. 4.23.
, that we may be in a posture to live with him, and have an intercourse with
him. We can never be united to God, but in our Spirits: Bodies unite with
Bodies, Spirits with Spirits. The more spiritual any thing is, the more closely
does it unite. Air has the closest union, nothing meets together sooner than
that, when the parts are divided by the interposition of a body.

8. Inference. If God be a Spirit, he can only be the true satisfaction of our
Spirits. Spirit can only be filled with Spirit. Content flows from likeness and
sutableness: As we have a resemblance to God in regard of the spiritual nature
of our Soul, so we can have no satisfaction but in him. Spirit can no more be
really satisfied with that which is corporeal, than a beast can delight in the
company of an Angel. Corporeal things can no more fill a hungry Spirit, than
pure Spirit can feed an hungry Body. God the highest Spirit, can only reach out
a full content to our spirits. Man is Lord of the Creation; nothing below him
can be fit for his converse; nothing above him offers it self to his converse
but God. We have no correspondence with Angels: The influence they have upon
us, the protection they afford us, is secret and undiscerned; but God the
highest Spirit offers himself to us in his Son, in his Ordinances, is visible
in every Creature, presents himself to us in every providence; to him we must
seek; in him we must rest. God had no rest from the Creation, till he had made
Man; and Man can have no rest in the Creation, till he rests in God. Psalm 90.1.
God only is our dwelling place; our Souls should only long for him; our Souls
should only wait upon him. Psalm. 63.1.
The Spirit of Man never rises to its original glory, till it be carried up on
the wings of Faith and Love to its original Copy. The face of the Soul looks
most beautiful, when it is turned to the face of God the Father of Spirits;
when the derived Spirit is fixed upon the original Spirit, drawing from it Life
and Glory. Spirit is only the receptacle of Spirit. God as Spirit is our
Principle; we must therefore live upon him. God as Spirit, has some
resemblance to us as his Image; we must therefore only satisfy our selves in
him.

9. Inference. If God be a Spirit, we should take most care of that wherein we
are like to God. Spirit is nobler than Body; we must thererefore value our
Spirits above our Bodies: The Soul as Spirit, partakes more of the Divine
Nature, and deserves more of our choycest cares. If we have any love to this
Spirit, we should have a real affection to our own Spirits, as bearing a stamp
of the spiritual Divinity, the chiefest of all the works of God; as it is said
of Behemoth, Job. 40.19.. That which is most the Image of this immense Spirit,
should be our Darling: So David calls his Soul, Psalm. 35.17. Shall we take care
of that wherein we partake not of God, and not delight in the Jewel which has
his own Signature upon it? God was not only the Framer of Spirits, and the End
of Spirits; but the Copy and Exemplar of Spirits. God partakes of no
corporeity, he is pure Spirit. But how do we act, as if we were only matter and
body! We have but little kindness for this great Spirit as well as our own, if
we take no care of his immediate offspring, since he is not only Spirit, but
the Father of Spirits. Heb. 12.9.


10. Inference. If God be a Spirit, let us take heed of those sins which are
spiritual. Paul distinguishes between the filth of the Flesh, and that of the
Spirit 2 Cor. 7.1.
: By the one we defile the Body; by the other we defile the Spirit, which in
regard of its Nature is of kin to the Creator. To wrong one who is near of kin
to a Prince, is worse than to injure an inferior Subject. When we make our
Spirits, which are most like to God in their Nature, and framed according to
his Image, a stage to act vain imaginations, wicked desires, and unclean
affections, we wrong God in the excellency of his Work, and reflect upon the
nobleness of the Pattern; we wrong him in that part where he has stamped the
most signal Character of his own spiritual nature; we defile that whereby we
have only converse with him as a Spirit, which he has ordered more immediately
to represent him in this Nature, than all corporeal things in the world can,
and make that Spirit with whom we desire to be joined, unfit for such a knot.
Gods Spirituality is the root of his other perfections. We have already heard,
he could not be infinite, omnipresent, immutable without it. Spiritual sins are
the greatest root of bitterness within us: As grace in our Spirits renders us
more like to a spiritual God; so spiritual sins bring us into a conformity to a
degraded Devil. Ephesians. 2.2, 3.
Carnal sins change us from men to brutes, and spiritual sins divest us of the
Image of God for the Image of Satan. We should by no means make our Spirits a
Dunghill, which bear upon them the Character of the spiritual Nature of God,
and were made for his residence: Let us therefore behave our selves toward God
in all those ways which the spiritual nature of God requires us.

A DISCOURSE OF Spiritual Worship.
HAVING thus dispatched the first proposition, God is a Spirit; It will not be
amiss to handle the inference our Savior makes from that proposition, which is
the second observation propounded.

Doct. That the Worship due from us to God ought to be Spiritual and
Spiritually performed.

Spirit and Truth are understood variously. Either we are to Worship God,

1. Not by legal ceremonies. The Evangelical administration, being called
Spirit in opposition to the legal ordinances as carnal; and Truth in opposition
to them as typical. As the whole Judaical service is called flesh; so the whole
Evangelical service is called Spirit. Or Spirit may be opposed to the worship
at Jerusalem, as it was carnal; Truth, to the worship on the Mount Gerizim,
because it was false. They had not the true object of worship, nor the true
Medium of worship as those at Jerusalem had. Their worship should cease,
because it was false; and the Jewish worship should cease, because it was
carnal.

There is no need of a Candle, when the Sun spreads it beams in the Air; no
need of those Ceremonies, when the Sun of righteousness appeared: They only
served for Candles to instruct and direct men till the time of his coming. The
shadows are chased away by the displaying the substance, so that they can be of
no more use in the worship of God, since the end for which they were
instituted, is expired; and that discovered to us in the Gospel which the Jews
sought for in vain, among the baggage and stuff of their Ceremonies.

2. With a Spiritual and sincere frame. In Spirit, i. e. with Spirit; with the
inward operations of all the faculties of our Souls, and the cream and flower
of them: And the reason is, because there ought to be a worship suitable to the
nature of God. And as the worship was to be Spiritual, so the exercise of that
worship ought to be in a Spiritual manner. Lingend. Tom. 2. p. 777.
It shall be a worship in Truth, because the true God shall be adored without
those vain imaginations, and fantastic resemblances of him, Tailors Exemplar
Preface 30.
which were common among the blind Gentiles, and contrary to the glorious
nature of God, and unworthy ingredients in Religious services. It shall be a
worship in Spirit, without those carnal rites the degenerate Jews rested on:
Such a posture of Soul which is the life and ornament of every service God
looks for at your hands: There must be some proportion between the object
adored and the manner in which we adore it. It must not be a mere Corporeal
worship, because God is not a body; but it must rise from the Center of our
Soul, because God is a Spirit. If he were a body, a bodily worship might suit
him, Images might be fit to represent him; but being a Spirit, our bodily
services enter us not into communion with him. Being a Spirit we must banish
from our minds all carnal imaginations of him, and separate from our Wills all
cold and dissembled affections to him. We must not only have a loud voice, but
an elevated Soul; not only a bended knee, but a broken heart; not only a
supplicating tone, but a groaning Spirit; not only a ready ear for the word,
but a receiving heart; and this shall be of greater value with him, than the
most costly outward services offered at Gerizim or Jerusalem.

Our Savior certainly meant not by worshipping in Spirit, only the matter of
the Evangelical service, as opposed to the legal administration, without the
manner wherein it was to be performed. It Is true, God always sought a worship in
Spirit; he expected the heart of the worshipper should join with his instituted
rights of adoration in every exercise of them: But he expects such a carriage
more under the Gospel administration, because of the clearer discoveries of his
nature made in it, and the greater assistances conveyed by it.

I shall therefore, 1. Lay down some general propositions. 2. Show what this
Spiritual worship is. 3. Why we must offer to God a Spiritual service. 4. The
Use.


1. Some general propositions.

Proposition, 1. First. The right exercise of worship is founded upon and
rises from the Spirituality of God. Ames medul. lib. 2. cap. 4. 20.
The first ground of the worship we render to God, is the infinite excellency
of his nature, which is not only one attribute, but results from all: For God,
as God, is the object of worship; and the Notion of God consists not in
thinking him wise, good, just, but all those infinitely beyond any Conception.
And hence it follows that God is an object infinitely to beloved and honored.
His goodness is sometimes spoken of in Scripture as a motive of our homage.
Psalm. 130.4. There is forgiveness with thee that thou may be feared. Fear in
the Scripture dialect signifies the whole worship of God. Acts 10.35. But in
every Nation he that fears him is accepted of him. So 2 Kings 17.32, 33.
If God should act toward men according to the rigors of his Justice due to
them for the least of their Crimes, there could be no exercise of any affection
but that of despair, which could not engender a worship of God which ought to
be joined with love, not with hatred. The beneficence and patience of God and
his readiness to pardon men is the reason of the honor they return to him. And
this is so evident a motive, that generally the Idolatrous world rankt those
Creatures in the number of their Gods, which they perceived useful and neficial
to mankind; as the Sun and Moo^, the Egyptians the Ox, etc. And the more
beneficial any thing appeared to mankind, the higher station men gave it in the
rank of their deities, and bestowed a more peculiar and solemn worship upon it.
Men worshipped God to procure or continue his favor, which would not have been
acted by them, had they not conceived it a pleasing thing to him to be merciful
and gracious.

Sometimes his Justice is proposed to us as a motive of worship, Heb. 12.28,
29. Serve God with Reverence and Godly fear, for our God is a consuming fire;
which includes his holiness, whereby he does hate sin, as well as his wrath,
whereby he does punish it. Who but a mad and totally brutish person, or one
that was resolved to make war against heaven, could behold the effects of Gods
anger in the world, consider him in his Justice as a consuming fire, and
despise him, and rather be drawn out by that consideration to blasphemy and
despair, than to seek all ways to appease him? Now tho the infinite power of
God, his unspeakable wisdom, his incomprehensible goodness, the holiness of his
nature, the vigilance of his Providence, the bounty of his hand signify to
man, that he should love and honor him, and are the motives of worship; yet
the Spirituality of his nature is the rule of worship, and directs us to render
our duty to him with all the powers of our Soul. As his goodness beams out upon
us, worship is due in Justice to him; and as he is the most excellent nature,
veneration is due to him in the highest manner with the choicest affections.

So that indeed the Spirituality of God comes chiefly into consideration in
matter of worship: All his perfections are grounded upon this: He could not be
infinite, immutable, omniscient if he were a Corporeal being: Amirald dissert.
6. disp. 1. pa. 11.
We cannot give him a worship unless we Judge him worthy, excellent and
deserving a worship at our hands: And we cannot Judge him worthy of a worship,
unless we have some apprehensions and admirations of his infinite virtues: And
we cannot apprehend and admire those perfections, but as we see them as causes
shining in their effects. When we see therefore the frame of the world to be
the work of his power; the order of the world to be the fruit of his wisdom,
and the usefulness of the world to be the product of his goodness: We find the
motives and reasons of worship; and weighing that this power, wisdom, goodness,
infinitely transcend any corporeal nature; we find a rule of worship, that it
ought to be offered by us in a manner suitable to such a nature, as is
infinitely above any bodily Being. His being a Spirit declares what he is, his
other perfections declare what kind of Spirit he is. All Gods perfections
suppose him a Spirit; all center in this: His wisdom does not suppose him
merciful, or his mercy suppose him omniscient: There may be distinct notions of
those, but all suppose him to be of a spiritual nature. How cold and frozen
will our devotions be, if we consider not his omniscience, whereby he discerns
our hearts? How carnal will our services be, if we consider him not as a pure
Spirit? Amyraut de Relig.
In our offers to, and transactions with men, we deal not with them as mere
Animals, but as rational Creatures; and we debase their natures if we treat
them otherwise: And if we have not raised apprehensions of Gods spiritual
nature in our treating with him, but allow him only such frames as we think fit
enough for men; we debase his spirituality to the littleness of our own Being:
We must therefore possess our Souls with this, we shall else render him no
better than a fleshly service. We do not much concern our selves in those
things, of which we are either utterly ignorant, or have but slight
apprehensions of.

That is the first Proposition; The right exercise of worship is grounded upon
the spirituality of God.

Propos. 2. This spiritual worship of God is manifest by the light of Nature,
to be due to him. In reference to this, consider,

1. The outward means or matter of that worship which would be acceptable to
God, was not known by the light of Nature. The Law for a Worship, and for a
spiritual worship, by the faculties of our Souls was natural, and part of the
Law of Creation; though the determination of the particular acts, whereby God
would have this homage testified, was of positive institution, and depended not
upon the Law of Creation Though Adam in Innocence knew God was to be
worshipped; yet by Nature he did not know by what outward acts he was to pay
this respect, or at what time he was more solemnly to be exercised in it than
at another: This depended upon the directions God as the sovereign Governor
and Lawgiver should prescribe. You therefore find the positive institutions of
the Tree of the knowledge of Good and Evil, and the determination of the time
of worship, Genesis 2.3.17. Had there been any such notion in Adam naturally, as
strong as that other, that a worship was due to God, there would have been
found some relics of these modes universally consented to by Mankind, as well
as of the other: But though all Nations have by an universal consent concurred
in the acknowledgment of the Being of God, and his right to adoration, and the
obligation of the Creature to it; and that there ought to be some public rule
and polity in matters of Religion; (for no Nation has been in the world
without a worship, and without external acts and certain ceremonies to signify
that worship) yet their modes and rites have been as various as their climates,
unless in that common notion of sacrifices, not descending to them by nature,
but tradition from Adam; and the various ways of worship have been more
provoking than pleasing: Every Nation suited the kind of worship to their
particular ends and polities they designed to rule by. How God was, to be
worshipped, is more difficult to be discerned by Nature with its eyes out, than
with its eyes clear. King on Jonah. P. 63.
The pillars upon which the worship of God stands, cannot be discerned without
revelation, no more than blind Sampson could tell where the pillars of the
Philistians Theater stood, without one to conduct him. What Adam could not see
with his sound eyes, we cannot with our dim eyes; He must be told from Heaven,
what worship was fit for the God of Heaven. It Is not by Nature that we can have
such a full prospect of God as may content and quiet us; This is the noble
effect of Divine Revelation; He only knows himself, and can only make himself
known to us. It could not be supposed, that an infinite God should have no
perfections but what were visible in the works of his hands; and that these
perfections should not be infinitely greater, than as they were sensible in
their present effects: This had been to apprehend God a limited Being, meaner
than he is. Now it is impossible to honor God as we ought, unless we know him
as he is; and we could not know him as he is, without divine revelation from
himself; for none but God can acquaint us with his own nature: And therefore
the nations void of this conduct, heapt up modes of worship from their own
imaginations, unworthy of the Majesty of God, and below the nature of man: A
rational man would scarce have owned such for signs of honor, as the Scripture
mentions in the services of Baal and Dagon. Much less an infinitely wise and
glorious God: And when God had signified his mind to his own people, how
unwilling were they to rest satisfied with Gods determination, but would be
warping to their own inventions, and make Gods, and ways of worship to
themselves? Amos 5.26.
As in the matter of the Golden Calf, as was lately spoken of.

2. Tho the outward manner of worship acceptable to God, could not be known
without revelation, and those revelations might be various; yet the inward
manner of worship with our Spirits was manifest by nature. And not only
manifest by nature to Adam in Innocence, but after his fall, and the scales he
had brought upon his understanding by that fall. When God gave him his positive
institutions before the fall, or whatsoever additions God should have made, had
he persisted in that state; or when he appointed him after his fall to testify
his acknowledgment of him by Sacrifices, there needed no Command to him to make
those acknowledgments by those outward ways prescribed to him, with the
intention and prime affection of his Spirit: This nature would instruct him in
without revelation: For he could not possibly have any semblance of reason to
think, that the offering of beasts, or the presenting the first fruits of the
increase of the ground, as an acknowledgment of Gods Sovereignty over him and
his bounty to him, was sufficient without devoting to him that part wherein the
Image of his Creator did consist: He could not but discern by a reflection
upon his own being, that he was made for God as well as by God: [For it is a
natural principle, of which the Apostle speaks, Romans 11.36. For of him and
through him and to him are all things, etc.] That the whole, whereof he did
consist was due to God; and that his Body, the dreggy and dusty part of his
nature, was not fit to be brought alone before God, without that nobler
principle, which he had by Creation linkt with it. Nothing in the whole law of
nature, as it is informed of Religion, was clearer next to the being of God,
than this manner of worshipping God with the mind and Spirit. And as the
Gentiles never sunk so low into the mud of Idolatry, as to think the Images
they worshipped were really their Gods, but the representations, or habitations
of their Gods; so they never deserted this principle in the Notion of it, that
God was to be honored with the best they were, and the best they had: As they
never denied the being of a God in the Notion, tho they did in the practice; so
they never rejected this principle in Notion, tho they did, and now most men
do, in the inward observation of it: It was a maxim among them that God was
men's, animus, mind and Spirit, and therefore was to be honored with the mind
and Spirit: That religion did not consist in the Ceremonies of the body, but
the work of the Soul; Whence, the speech of one of them; Menander. Grot. de
veritat relig. lib. 4. 12.
Sacrifice to the Gods not so much clothed with purple garments as a pure
heart: And of another. God regards not the multitude of the Sacrifices, but the
disposition of the Sacrificer. It Is not fit we should deny God the Cream and
Flower, Jamblick
and give him the flotten part and the stalks. And with what Reverence and
intention of mind they thought their worship was to be performed, is evident by
the Priests crying out often, hoc age, Mind this, let your Spirits be intent
upon it.

This could not but result

(1.) From the knowledge of our selves. It Is a natural principle, God has made
us and not we our selves, Psalm. 100.1, 2. Man knows himself to be a rational
Creature: As a Creature he was to serve his Creator, and as a rational Creature
with the best part of that rational nature he derived from him. By the same act
of reason that he knows himself to be a Creature, he knows himself to have a
Creator: That this Creator is more excellent than himself, and that an honor
is due from him to the Creator for framing of him; and therefore this honor
was to be offered to him by the most excellent part which was framed by him.
Man cannot consider himself as a thinking, understanding being; but he must
know that he must give God the honor of his thoughts, and worship him with
those faculties whereby he Thinks, Wills, and Acts. Amiraut. Mor. Tom. 1. pa.
309. 310.
He must know his faculties were given him to act, and to act for the glory of
that God who gave him his Soul and the faculties of it; and he could not in
reason think they must be only active in his own service, and the service of
the Creature, and idle and unprofitable in the service of his Creator. With the
same Powers of our Soul whereby we contemplate God, we must also worship God:
We cannot think of him but with our Minds, nor love him but with our Will; and
we cannot worship him without the acts of thinking and loving, and therefore
cannot worship him without the exercise of our inward faculties: How is it
possible then for any man that knows his own nature, to think that extended
hands, bended knees and lifted up eyes were sufficient acts of worship, without
a quickened and active Spirit?

(2) From the knowledge of God. As there was a knowledge of God by nature, so
the same nature did dictate to Man that God was to be glorified as God: The
Apostle implies the inference in the charge he brings against them for
neglecting it. We should speak of God as he is, said one Bias.
; Romans 1.21.
and the same reason would inform them that they were to act toward God as he
is. The excellency of the Object required a worship according to the dignity of
his Nature; which could not be answered but by the most serious inward
affection, as well as outward decency; and a want of this, cannot but be judged
to be unbecoming the Majesty of the Creator of the world, and the excellency of
Religion. No Nation, no person did ever assert, that the vilest part of man was
enough for the most excellent Being, as God is: That a bodily service could be
a sufficient acknowledgment of the greatness of God, or a sufficient return for
the bounty of God. Amyraut Ib.
Man could not but know that he was to act in Religion, conformably to the
Object of Religion, and to the excellency of his own Soul: The notion of a God
was sufficient to fill the mind of man with admiration and reverence, and the
first conclusion from it would be to honor God, and that he have all the
affection placed on him, that so infinite and spiritual a Being did deserve:
The progress then would be, that this excellent Being was to be honored with
the motions of the Understanding and Will; with the purest and most spiritual
powers in the nature of man; because he was a spiritual Being, and had nothing
of matter mingled with him. Such a brutish imagination, to suppose that blood
and fumes, beasts and incense could please a Deity without a spiritual frame,
cannot be supposed to befall any but those that had lost their reason in the
rubbish of sense. Mere rational nature could never conclude, that so excellent
a Spirit would be put off with a mere animal service; an attendance of matter
and body without Spirit, when they themselves of an inferior nature, would be
loath to sit down contented with an outside service from those that belong to
them: So that this instruction of our Savior, that God is to be worshipped in
Spirit and Truth, is conformable to the sentiments of nature, and drawn from
the most undeniable principles of it. The excellency of Gods nature, and the
excellent constitution of human faculties, concur naturally to support this
persuasion: This was as natural to be known by men, as the necessity of Justice
and Temperance for the support of human societies and bodies. It Is to be feared
that if there be not among us such brutish apprehensions, there are such
brutish dealings with God in our services against the light of nature; when we
place all our worship of God in outward attendances and drooping countenances,
with unbelieving frames and formal devotions; when Prayer is muttered over in
private slightly, as a Parrot learns lessons by rote, not understanding what it
speaks, or to what end it speaks it; not glorifying God in Thought and Spirit,
with Understanding and Will.

3. Spiritual Worship therefore was always required by God, and always offered
to him by one or other. Man had a perpetual obligation upon him to such a
worship from the nature of God, and what is founded upon the nature of God is
unvariable. This and that particular mode of worship may wax old as a Garment,
and as a Vesture may be folded up and changed, as the expression is of the
Heavens Heb. 1.11, 12.
: But God endures for ever; his spirituality fails not, therefore a worship of
him in Spirit must run through all ways and rites of Worship. God must cease to
be Spirit, before any service but that which is spiritual, can be accepted by
him. The light of Nature is the light of God; the light of nature being
unchangeable, what was dictated by that, was always and will always be required
by God. The worship of God being perpetually due from the Creature, the
worshipping him as God is as perpetually his right. Though the outward
expressions of this Honor were different, one way in Paradise (for a worship
was then due, since a solemn time for that worship was appointed) another under
the Law, another under the Gospel; the Angels also worship God in Heaven, and
fall down before his Throne; yet though they differ in rites, they agree in
this necessary ingredient: All rites though of a different shape, must be
offered to him, not as Carcasses, but animated with the affections of the Soul.
Abels Sacrifice had not been so excellent in Gods esteem, without those
gracious habits and affections working in his Soul Heb. 11.4.
. Faith works by Love; his heart was on fire as well as his Sacrifice. Cain
rested upon his Present, perhaps thought he had obliged God; he depended upon
the outward Ceremony, but sought not for the inward purity: It was an offering
brought to the Lord Genesis 4.5.
; he had the right object but not the right manner, Genesis 4.7. If thou do
well, shall thou not be accepted? And in the Command afterward to Abraham,
Walk before me, and be thou perfect, was the direction in all our religious
acts and walkings with God. A sincere act of the Mind and Will, looking above
and beyond all Symbolls; extending the Soul to a pitch far above the Body, and
seeing the day of Christ through the vail of the Ceremonies, was required by
God: And though Moses by Gods order had instituted a multitude of carnal
Ordinances, Sacrifices, Washings, Oblations of sensible things, and recomended
to the people the diligent observation of those Statutes by the allurements of
promises, and denouncing of threatenings; as if there were nothing else to be
regarded, and the true workings of Grace were to be buried under a heap of
Ceremonies; yet sometimes he does point them to the inward worship, and by the
Command of God, requires of them the Circumcision of the Heart, Deuteronomy. 10.16.
the turning to God with all their heart, and all their Soul, Deuteronomy. 30.10.
whereby they might recollect, that it was the engagement of the Heart, and the
worship of the Spirit that was most agreeable to God; and that he took not any
pleasure in their observance of Ceremonies, without true Piety within, and the
true purity of their thoughts.

4. It Is therefore as much every man's duty to worship God in Spirit, as it is
their duty to worship him. Worship is so due to him as God, as that he that
denies it, disowns his Deity: And spiritual worship is so due, that he that
waves it denies his spirituality. It Is a debt of Justice we owe to God to
worship him, and it is as much a debt of Justice to worship him according to
his Nature. Worship is nothing else but a rendering to God the honor that is
due to him; and therefore the right posture of our Spirits in it, is as much or
more due, than the material worship in the modes of his own prescribing; that
is grounded both upon his Nature, and upon his Command; this only upon his
Command; that is perpetually due, whereas the Channel wherein outward worship
runs may be dried up, and the River diverted another way: Such a worship
wherein the mind thinks of God, feels a sense of God, has the Spirit
consecrated to God, the Heart glowing with affections to God: It Is else a
mocking God with a feather. A rational Nature must worship God with that
wherein the Glory of God does most sparkle in him. God is most visible in the
frame of the Soul, it is there his Image glitters: He has given us a Jewel as
well as a Case, and the Jewel as well as the Case we must return to him: The
Spirit is Gods gift, and must return to him Eccl. 12.7.
: It must return to him in every service morally, as well as it must return to
him at last physically. It Is not fit we should serve our Maker only with that
which is the Brute in us, and withold from him that which does constitue us
reasonable Creatures; we must give him our bodies, but a living Sacrifice Romans
12.1.
. If the Spirit be absent from God when the Body is before him, we present a
dead Sacrifice; It Is morally dead in the duty, though it be naturally alive in
the posture and action. It Is not an indifferent thing whether we shall worship
God or no, nor is it an indifferent thing whether we shall worship him without
Spirits or no: As the excellency of man's knowledge consists in knowing things
as they are in Truth; so the excellency of the Will in willing things as they
are in goodness. As it is the excellency of Man to know God as God; so it is no
less his excellency, as well as his duty, to honor God as God. As the
obligation we have to the Power of God for our Being, binds us to a worship of
him; so the obligation we have to his bounty for fashioning us according to his
own Image, binds us to an exercise of that part wherein his Image does consist.
God has made all things for himself, Pro. 16.4. that is, for the evidence of
his own goodness and wisdom: We are therefore to render him a glory according
to the the excellency of his nature, discovered in the frame of our own. It Is as
much our sin not to glorify God as God, as not to attempt the glorifying of
him at all: It Is our sin not to worship God as God, as well as to omit the
testifying any respect at all to him. As the divine nature is the object of
worship, so the Divine perfections are to be honored in worship: We do not
honor God if we honor him not as he is; we honor him not as a Spirit, if we
think him not worthy of the ardors and ravishing admirations of our Spirits. If
we think the Devotions of the body are sufficient for him, we contract him into
the condition of our own being; and not only deny him to be a Spiritual nature,
but dash out all those perfections which he could not be possessed of, were he
not a Spirit.

5. The Ceremonial law was abolisht to promote the Spirituality of Divine
worship. That service was gross, carnal, calculated for an infant and sensitive
Church: It consisted in rudiments, the Circumcision of the flesh, the blood and
smoke of Sacrifices, the steams of incense, observation of days, distinction of
meats, Corporal purifications; every leaf of the law is clogged with some rite
to be particularly observed by them: The Spirituality of worship lay veild
under a thick clo^ld, that the people could not behold the glory of the Gospel,
which lay covered under those shadows, 2 Cor. 3.13. They could not steadfastly
look to the ^^d of that which is abolished: They understood not the Glory and
Spiritual intent of the law and therefore came short of that Spiritual frame in
the worship of God, which was their duty. And therefore in opposition to this
administration, the worship of God under the Gospel is called by our Savior in
the Text, a worship in Spirit; more Spiritual for the matter, more Spiritual
for the motives, and more Spiritual for the manner and frames of worship.

(1.) This legal service is called flesh in Scripture, in opposition to the
Gospel which is called Spirit. The ordinances of the Law, tho of Divine
institution, are dignified by the Apostle with no better a title than Carnal
ordinances, Heb. 9.10.
and a Carnal Command: Heb. 7.16.
But the Gospel is called the Ministration of the Spirit, as being attended
with a special and Spiritual efficacy on the minds of men. 2 Cor. 3.8.
And when the degenerate Galatians, after having tasted of the pure streams of
the Gospel, turned about to drink of the thicker streams of the Law, the
Apostle tells them, that they begun in the Spirit and would now be made perfect
in the flesh. Gal. 3.3.
They would leave the righteousness of faith for a justification by works. The
moral law which is in its own nature Spiritual, Romans 7.14.
in regard of the abuse of it, in expectation of justification by the outward
works of it, is called flesh: Much more may the Ceremonial administration,
which was never intended to run parallel with the moral, nor had any foundation
in nature as the other had.

That whole Economy consisted in sensible and material things which only
touched the flesh; It Is called the letter and the oldness of the Letter; Romans
7.6.
as Letters which are but empty sounds of themselves, but put together and
formed into words, signify something to the mind of the hearer or reader: An
old Letter, a thing of no efficacy upon the Spirit, but as a law written upon
paper. The Gospel has an efficacious Spirit attending it strongly working upon
the mind and Will; and moulding the Soul into a Spiritual frame for God,
according to the Doctrine of the Gospel; the one is old and decays, the other is
new and increases daily.

And as the law it self is called flesh, so the observers of it and resters in
it are called Israel after the flesh, 1 Cor. 10.18.
And the Evangelical worshipper is called a Jew after the Spirit. Romans 2.29.
They were Israel after the flesh as born of Jacob, not Israel after the Spirit
as born of God; and therefore the Apostle calls them Israel and not Israel.
Romans 9.6.
Israel after a carnal birth, not Israel after a Spiritual: Israel in the
Circumcision of the flesh, not Israel by a regeneration of the heart.

(2.) The legal Ceremonies were not a fit means to bring the heart into a
Spiritual frame. They had a Spiritual intent; the Rock and Manna prefigured the
Salvation and Spiritual nourishment by the Redeemer. 1 Cor. 10.3, 4.
The Sacrifices were to point them to the Justice of God in the punishment of
sin, and the mercy of God in substituting them in their steads, as types of the
Redeemer and the ransom by his blood. The Circumcision of the flesh was to
instruct them in the Circumcision of the heart: They were flesh in regard of
their matter, weakness and cloudiness: Spiritual in regard of their intent and
signification: They did instruct, but not efficaciously work strong Spiritual
affections in the Soul of the worshipper. They were weak and beggarly elements;
Gal 4.9.
had neither wealth to enrich nor strength to nourish the Soul: They could not
perfect the Comers to them, or put them into a frame agreeable to the nature of
God, Heb. 10.1. Heb. 9.9.
nor purge the Conscience from those dead and dull dispositions which were by
nature in them: Heb. 9.14.
Being Carnal they could not have an efficacy to purify the Conscience of the
offerer and work Spiritual effects: Had they continued without the exhibition
of Christ, they could never have wrought any change in us or purchased any
favor for us. Burges vind. pa. 256.
At the best they were but shadows, and came unexpressibly short of the
efficacy of that person and state whose shadows they were. The shadow of a man
is too weak to perform what the man himself can do, because it wants the life,
Spirit and activity of the substance: The whole pomp and scene was suited more
to the sensitive than the intellectual nature; and like pictures pleased the
fancy of Children, rather than improved their reason. The Jewish state, was a
state of Childhood, Gal. 5.2.
and that administration a Pedagogy. Gal. 4.24.
The Law was a Schoolmaster fitted for their weak and Childish Capacity, and
could no more Spiritualize the heart, than the teachings in a Primer-School can
enable the mind, and make it fit for affairs of State: And because they could
not better the Spirit, they were instituted only for a time, as elements
delivered to an infant age, which naturally lives a life of sense, rather than
a life of reason. It was also a servile state, which does rather debase than
elevate the mind; rather Carnalize than Spiritualize the heart: Besides, it is a
sense of mercy that both melts and elevates the heart into a Spiritual frame:
Psa. 130.4.
There is forgiveness with thee that thou may be feared: And they had in that
state but some glimmerings of mercy in the daily bloody intimations of Justice:
There was no Sacrifice for some sins, but a cutting off without the least hints
of pardon; and in the yearly remembrance of sin, there was as much to shiver
them with fear, as to possess than with hopes: And such a state which always
held them under the Conscience of sin, could not produce a free Spirit, which
was necessary for a worship of God according to his nature.

(3.) In their use they rather hindered than furthered a Spiritual worship. In
their own nature they did not tend to the obstructing a Spiritual worship; for
then they had been contrary to the nature of Religion, and the end of God who
appointed them: Nor did God cover the Evangelical Doctrine under the clouds of
the legal administration, to hinder the people of Israel from perceiving it;
but because they were not yet capable to bear the splendour of it, had it been
clearly set before them. The shining of the face of Moses was too dazzling for
their weak eyes, and therefore there was a necessity of a veil, not for the
things themselves, but the weakness of their eyes. 2 Cor. 3.13.14.
The carnal affections of that people sunk down into the things themselves;
stuck in the outward pomp, and pierced not through the vail to the Spiritual
intent of them. And by the use of them without rational conceptions they
besotted their minds and became senseless of those Spiritual motions required
of them. Hence came all their expectations of a Carnal Messiah; the veil of
Ceremonies was so thick and the film upon their eyes so condensed, that they
could not look through the veil to the Spirit of Christ. They beheld not the
Heavenly Canaan for the beauty of the earthly, nor minded the regeneration of
the Spirit, while they rested upon the purifications of the flesh: The
prevalency of sense and sensitive affections diverted their minds from
enquiring into the intent of them. Sense and matter are often cloggs to the
mind, and sensible objects are the same often to Spiritual motions. Our Souls
are never more raised, than when they are abstracted from the entanglements of
them. A pompous worship made up of many sensible objects, weakens the
Spirituality of Religion: Those that are most zealous for outward, are usually
most cold and indifferent in inward observances: And those that overdo in
carnal modes, usually underdo in Spiritual affections.

This was the Jewish state. Illyric. de velam. Mosi^ pa. 221. etc.
The nature of the Ceremonies being pompous and earthly by their show and
beauty, meeting with their weakness and Childish affections, filled their eyes
with an outward luster; allured their minds, and detained them from seeking
things higher and more Spiritual: The kernel of those rites lay concealed in a
thick shell, the Spiritual glory was little seen, and the Spiritual sweetness
little tasted: Unless the Scripture be diligently searched, it seems to
transfer the worship of God from true faith and the Spiritual motions of the
heart, and stake it down to outward observances, and the opus operatum.
Besides, the voice of the Law did only declare Sacrifices, and invited the
Worshipper to them, with a promise of the atonement of Sin, turning away the
wrath of God. It never plainly acquainted them, that those things were Types
and Shadows of something future, that they were only outward purifications of
the Flesh: It never plainly told them at the time of appointing them, that
those Sacrifices could not abolish Sin, and reconcile them to God. Indeed we
see more of them since their death and dissection, in that one Epistle to the
Hebrews, than can be discerned in the five Books of Moses. Besides, Man
naturally affects a carnal Life, and therefore affects a carnal Worship; He
designs the gratifying his sense, and would have a Religion of the same nature.
Most men have no mind to busy their reasons about the things of sense, and are
naturally unwilling to raise them up to those things which are allied to the
spiritual nature of God; and therefore the more spiritual any Ordinance is, the
more averse is the heart of man to it. There is a simplicity of the Gospel from
which our minds are easily corrupted by things that pleasure the sense, as Eve
was by the curiosity of her eye, and the liquorishness of her Palate 2 Cor.
11.3.
From this Principle has sprung all the Idolatry in the world. The Jews knew
they had a God who had delivered them, but they would have a sensible God to go
before them Exodus 32.1.
: And the Papacy at this day, is a Witness of the truth of this natural
Corruption.

4. Upon these accounts therefore God never testified himself well pleased with
that kind of Worship. He was not displeased with them as they were his own
institution, and ordained for the representing (though in an obscure manner)
the glorious things of the Gospel; nor was he offended with those peoples
observance of them: For since he had commanded them, it was their duty to
perform them, and their sin to neglect them: But he was displeased with them as
they were practiced by them, with Souls as morally carnal in the practices, as
the Ceremonies were materially carnal in their substance. It was not their
disobedience to observe them; but it was a disobedience, and a contempt of the
end of the institution to rest upon them; to be warm in them, and cold in
morals: They fed upon the Bone, and neglected the Marrow; pleased themselves
with the Shell, and sought not for the Kernel: They joined not with them the
internal Worship of God, Fear of him, with Faith in the promised Seed, which
lay veiled under those Coverings, Hos. 6.6. I desired Mercy, and not Sacrifice;
and the Knowledge of God, more than burnt Offerings: And therefore he seems
sometimes weary of his own institutions, and calls them not his own, but their
Sacrifices, their Feasts, Isa. 1.11, 14. They were his by appointment, theirs
by abuse: The Institution was from his goodness and condescension, therefore
his; the corruption of them was from the vice of their Nature; therefore
theirs. He often blamed them for their carnality in them; showed his dislike of
placing all their Religion in them; gives the Sacrificers upon that account, no
better a title, than that of the Princes of Sodom and Gomorrah Isa. 1.10.
: And compares the Sacrifices themselves to the cutting off a Dog's Neck,
Swines Blood, and the Murder of a Man. Isa. 66.3.
And indeed God never valued them, or expressed any delight in them: He despised
the Feasts of the Wicked, Amos 5.21. and had no esteem for the material
Offerings of the Godly, Psalm. 50.13. Will I eat the flesh of Bulls, or drink
the blood of Goats? which he speaks to his Saints and People, before he comes
to reprove the Wicked; which he begins v. 16. But to the Wicked, God said, etc.
So slightly he esteemed them, that he seems to disown them to be any part of
his Command when he brought his People out of the Land of Egypt, Jer. 7.21. I
spoke not to your Fathers, nor commanded them concerning burnt Offerings and
Sacrifices. He did not value and regard them, in comparison of that inward
frame which he had required by the moral Law; that being given before the Law
of Ceremonies, obliged them in the first place, to an observance of those
Precepts. They seemed to be below the Nature of God, and could not of
themselves please him. None could in reason persuade themselves, that the death
of a Beast, was a proportionable Offering for the sin of a Man, or ever was
intended for the expiation of Transgression. In the same rank are all our
bodily services under the Gospel: A loud voice without Spirit; bended bulrushes
without inward affections, are no more delightful to God, than the Sacrifices
of Animals: It Is but a change of one Brute for another of a higher species; a
mere Brute, for that part of man which has an agreement with Brutes: Such a
service is a mere animal service, and not spiritual.

5. And therefore God never intended that sort of Worship to be durable, and
had often mentioned the change of it for one more spiritual. It was not good or
evil in it self; whatsoever goodness it had, was solely derived to it by
institution, and therefore it was mutable: It had no conformity with the
spiritual nature of God who was to be worshipped, nor with the rational nature
of man who was to worship: And therefore he often speaks of taking away the
New Mons, and Feasts, and Sacrifices and all the ceremonial Worship, as things
he took no pleasure in; to have a Worship more suited to his excellent Nature:
But he never speaks of removing the Gospel Administration, and the worship
prescribed there, as being more agreeable to the nature and perfections of God,
and displaying them more illustriously to the World.

The Apostle tells us, it was to be disannul'd because of its weakness Heb.
7.18.
: A determinate time was fixed for its duration, till the accomplishment of the
truth figured under that Pedagogy Gal. 4.2.
. Some of the modes of that worship being only typical, must naturally expire
and be insignificant in their use, upon the finishing of that by the Redeemer,
which they did prefigure: And other parts of it, though God suffered them so
long because of the weakness of the Worshipper; yet because it became not God
to be always worshipped in that manner, he would reject them, and introduce
another more spiritual and elevated. Incense and a pure Offering should be
offered every where unto his Name. Mal. 1.11.


Pascal. Pen. 142.
He often told them he would make a new Covenant by the Messiah, and the old
should be rejected; that the former things should not be remembered, and the
things of old no more considered, when he should do a new thing in the Earth
Isa. 43.18.19.
: Even the Ark of the Covenant, the Symbol of his presence, and the glory of
the Lord in that Nation should not any more be remembered and visited Jer. 3.16.
; That the Temple and Sacrifices should be rejected, and others established;
That the Order of the Aaronical Priesthood should be abolisht, and that of
Melchisedeck set up in the stead of it in the Person of the Messiah to endure
for ever Psalm. 110.
: That Jerusalem should be changed; a new Heaven and Earth created; a Worship
more conformable to Heaven, more advantageous to Earth. God had proceeded in
the removal of some parts of it, before the time of taking down the whole
furniture of this house: The Pot of Manna was lost; Vrim and Thumim ceased; the
glory of the Temple was diminished; and the ignorant people wept at the sight
of the one, without raising their Faith and Hope in the consideration of the
other, which was promised to be filled with a spiritual glory. And as soon as
ever the Gospel was spread in the World, God thundered out his judgments upon
that place in which he had fixed all those legal Observances, so that the Jews
in the Letter and Flesh, could never practice the main part of their worship,
since they were expelled from that place where it was only to be celebrated.
It Is one thousand six hundred years since they have been deprived of their
Altar, which was the foundation of all the Levitical-worship, and have wandered
in the world without a Sacrifice, a Prince or Priest, an Ephod or Teraphim.
Hos. 3.4.


And God fully put an end to it in the Command he gave to the Apostles; and in
them to us in the presence of Moses and Elias, to hear his Son only, Matthew.
17.5. Behold a voice out of the Cloud, which said, this is my beloved Son in
whom I am well pleased, hear him. And at the death of our Savior, testified it
to that whole Nation and the World, by the rending in twain the vail of the
Temple.

The whole frame of that service, which was carnal, and by reason of the
corruption of Man, weakened, is nulled; and a spiritual worship is made known to
the world, that we might now serve God in a more spiritual manner, and with
more spiritual frames.

6. Proposition, The Service and worship the Gospel settles, is spiritual, and
the performance of it more spiritual. Spirituality is the Genius of the Gospel,
as Carnality was of the Law; the Gospel is therefore called Spirit: We are
abstracted from the employments of Sense, and brought nearer to a Heavenly
State. The Jews had Angels Bread poured upon them; we have Angels Service
prescribed to us; the Praises of God; Communion with God in Spirit, through his
Son Jesus Christ, and stronger foundations for spiritual affections. It Is
called a reasonable service, Romans 12.1.
it is suited to a rational nature, tho it finds no friendship from the Corruption
of reason. It prescribes a service fit for the reasonable faculties of the
Soul, and advances them while it employs them. The word reasonable may be
translated, word service, V. Hammond in loc.
as well as reasonable service; an Evangelical service in opposition to a Law
service. All Evangelical service is reasonable, and all truly reasonable
service is Evangelical.

The matter of the worship is Spiritual; it consists in love of God, faith in
God, recourse to his goodness, Meditation on him and Communion with him. It
lays aside the Ceremonial, Spiritualizeth the moral: The Commands that
concerned our duty to God, as well as those that concerned our duty to our
Neighbor, were reduced by Christ to their Spiritual intention.

The Motives are Spiritual; it is a state of more grace as well as of more truth,
John 1.17.
supported by Spiritual promises, beaming out in Spiritual privileges; heaven
comes down in it to Earth, to Spiritualize Earth for Heaven.

The manner of worship is more Spiritual; higher flights of the Soul, stronger
ardours of affections, sincerer aims at his glory; mists are removed from our
minds, Cloggs from the Soul, more of love than fear; faith in Christ kindles
the affections and works by them.

The assistances to Spiritual worship are greater. The Spirit does not drop,
but is plentifully poured out. It does not light sometimes upon, but dwells in
the heart. Christ suited the Gospel to a Spiritual heart, and the Spirit
changes a carnal heart to make it fit for a Spiritual Gospel. He blows upon
the Garden and causes the spices to flow forth. And often makes the Soul in
worship like the Chariots of Aminadab in a quick and nimble motion: Our blessed
Lord and Savior by his death discovered to us the nature of God; and after his
ascension sent his Spirit to fit us for the worship of God and converse with
him.

One Spiritual Evangelical believing breath is more delightful to God, than
millions of Altars made up of the richest pearls, and smoking with the
costliest oblations, because it is Spiritual: And a mite of Spirit is of more
worth than the greatest weight of flesh. One holy Angel is more excellent than
a whole world of mere bodies.

7. Proposition. Yet the worship of God with our bodies is not to be rejected
upon the account that God requires a Spiritual worship. Tho we must perform the
weightier duties of the Law, yet we are not to omit and leave undone the
lighter precepts. Since both the Magnalia and minutula legis, the greater, and
the lesser duties of the Law, have the stamp of Divine authority upon them.

As God under the Ceremonial Law did not Command the worship of the body, and
the observation of outward rites without the engagement of the Spirit; so
neither does he Command that of the Spirit, without the peculiar attendance of
the body.

The Schwelk sendians denied bodily worship. And the indecent postures of many
in public attendance, intimate no great care either of Composing their bodies
or Spirits. A morally discomposed body intimates a tainted heart.

Our Bodies as well as our Spirits are to be presented to God. Romans 12.1.
Our bodies in lieu of the Sacrifices of Beasts, as in the Judaical
institutions; body for the whole man; a living Sacrifice, not to be slain, as
the Beasts were, but living a new life, in a holy posture, with Crucified
affections: This is the inference the Apostle makes of the privileges of
Justification, Adoption, Coheirship with Christ, which he had before discoursed
of; Privileges conferred upon the person and not upon a part of man.

1. Bodily worship is due to God. He has a right to an Adoration by our bodies
as they are his by Creation; his right is not diminisht but increased by the
blessing of Redemption, 1 Cor. 6.20. For you are bought with a price, therefore
glorify God in your bodies and your Spirits, which are Gods. The Body as well
as the Spirit is redeemed, since our Savior suffered Crucifixion in his body,
as well as Agonies in his Soul: Body is not taken here for the whole man, as it
may be in Romans 12. But for the material part of our nature, it being
distinguished from the Spirit: If we are to render to God an obedience with our
bodies, we are to render him such Acts of worship with our bodies, as they are
capable of. As God is the Father of Spirits, so he is the God of all flesh:
Therefore the flesh he has framed of the Earth, as well as the noble portion
he has breathed into us, cannot be denied him without apalpable in justice:
The service of the body we must not deny to God, unless we will deny him to be
the author of it, and the exercise of his providential care about it. The
mercies of God are renewed every day upon our bodies as well as our Souls, and
therefore they ought to express a fealty to God for his bounty everyday; [
Sherman's Greek in the Temple pa. 61.62.
both are from God, both should be for God. Man consists of Body and Soul, the
service of Man is the service of both. The body is to be Sanctified as well as
the Soul, and therefore to be offered to God as well as the Soul. Both are to
be glorified, both are to glorify: As our Saviors Divinity was manifested in
his body, so should our Spirituality in ours. To give God the service of the
body and not of the Soul, is hypocrisy; to give God the service of the Spirit
and not of the body, is sacrilege; to give him neither, Atheism.] If the only
part of man that is visible were exempted from the service of God, there could
be no visible Testimonies of piety given upon any occasion: Since not a moiety
of man, but the whole is Gods Creature, he ought to pay a homage with the whole
and not only with a moiety of himself.

2. Worship in societies is due to God, but this cannot be without some bodily
expressions. The law of nature does as much direct men to combine together in
public societies for the acknowledgment of God, as in Civil Communities for
self preservation and order, And the notice of a society for Religion is more
Ancient than the mention of Civil associations for Politic Government, Genesis
4.26. Then began men to call upon the name of the Lord, viz. In the time of
Seth. No question but Adam had worshipped God before as well as Abel, and a
Family-Religion had been preserved; but as mankind increased in distinct
Families, they knit together in Companies to solemnize the worship of God.
Stillingfleet's Irenicum cap. 1. 1. pa. 23.
Hence as some think, those that incorporated together for such ends, were
called the Sons of God: Sons by profession, tho not Sons by Adoption: As those
of Corinth were Saints by profession, tho in such a Corrupted Church they could
not be all so by regeneration; yet Saints, as being of a Christian society and
calling upon the name of Christ, that is, worshipping God in Christ, tho they
might not be all Saints in Spirit and Practice. So Cain and Abel met together
to worship, Gen, 4.3. at the end of the days, at a set time. God settled a
public worship among the Jews, instituted Synagogues for their Convening
together, whence called the Synagogues of God. Psa. 74.8.
The Sabbath was instituted to acknowledge God a Common Benefactor. Public
worship keeps up the Memorials of God in a world prone to Atheism, and a sense
of God in a heart prone to forgetfulness. The Angels sung in Company, not
singly at the Birth of Christ, Luke 2.13.
and praised God not only with a simple elevation of their Spiritual nature,
but audibly by forming a voice in the air: Affections are more lively, Spirits
more raised in public than private; God will Credit his own ordinance. Fire
increases by laying together many Coals on one place; so is devotion inflamed
by the union of many hearts and by a joint presence: Nor can the approach of
the last day of Judgment, or particular Judgments upon a Nation give a Writ of
ease from such assemblies. Heb. 10.25. Not forsaking the assembling our selves
together, but so much the more as you see the day approaching: Whether it be
understood of the day of Judgment, or the day of the Jewish destruction and the
Christian persecution, the Apostle uses it as an argument to quicken them to
the observance, not to encourage them to a neglect. Since therefore natural
light informs us, and Divine institution Commands us, publicly to acknowledge
our selves the Servants of God, it implies the service of the body: Such
acknowledgments cannot be without visible Testimonies, and outward exercises of
devotion, as well as inward affections. This promotes Gods honor, checks
others profaneness, allures men to the same expressions of duty. And tho there
may be hypocrisy and an outward garb without an inward frame; yet better a
moiety of worship, than none at all; better acknowledge Gods right in one than
disown it in both.

3. Jesus Christ the most Spiritual worshipper worshipped God with his body. He
Prayed orally, and kneeled, Father if it be thy Will, etc. Luke 22.41, 42.
He blessed with his mouth, Father I thank thee. Mat. 11.26.
He lifted up his eyes as well as elevated his Spirit, when he praised his
Father for mercy received, or begged for the blessings his Disciples wanted.
John 11.41. John 12.1.
The strength of the Spirit must have vent at the outward members. The holy men
of God have employed the body in significant expressions of worship: Abraham in
falling on his face, Paul in kneeling, employing their Tongues, lifting up
their hands. Tho Jacob was bedrid, yet he would not worship God without some
devout expression of Reverence; it is in one place leaning upon his staff; Heb.
11.21.
in another bowing himself upon his beds head: Genesis 47.31.
The reason of the diversity is in the Heb. word, which without vowels may be
red Mittah a bed, or Matteh a staff; howsoever, both signify a Testimony of
adoration by a reverent gesture of the body. Indeed in Angels and separated
Souls a worship is performed purely by the Spirit; but whiles the Soul is in
conjunction with the body, it can hardly perform a serious act of worship,
without some tincture upon the outward man and reverential composure of the
body: Fire cannot be in the clothes, but it will be felt by the members; nor
flames be pent up in the Soul without bursting out in the body: The heart can
no more restrain it self from breaking out, than Joseph could enclose his
affections, without expressing them in tears to his Brethren. Genesis 45.1, 2.
We Believe, and therefore speak. 2 Cor. 4.13.


To conclude; God has appointed some parts of worship which cannot be
performed without the body, as Sacraments; we have need of them because we are
not wholly spiritual and incorporeal Creatures.

The Religion, which consists in externals only, is not for an intellectual
nature: A worship purely intellectual is too sublime for a nature allied to
sense and depending much upon it: The Christian mode of worship is proportioned
to both; It makes the sense to assist the mind, and elevates the spirit above
the sense: Bodily worship helps the spiritual: The members of the body reflect
back upon the heart, the voice bars distractions, the tongue sets the heart on
fire in good as well as in evil. It Is as much against the light of nature to
serve God without external significations, as to serve him only with them
without the intention of the mind. As the invisible God declares himself to men
by visible works and signs, so should we declare our invisible frames by
visible expressions: God has given us a soul and body in conjunction, and we
are to serve him in the same manner he has framed us.

2. The second thing I am to show, is, what Spiritual worship is. In general,
the whole Spirit is to be employed: The name of God is not sanctified but by
the engagement of our Souls.

Worship is an Act of the understanding, applying it self to the knowledge of
the excellency of God and actual thoughts of his Majesty, recognizing him as
the supreme Lord and Governor of the world, which is natural knowledge;
beholding the glory of his Attributes in the Redeemer, which is Evangelical
knowledge: This is the sole act of the Spirit of Man. The same reason is for
all our worship as for our thanksgiving: This must be done with understanding,
Psalm. 47.7. Sing ye praise with understanding, with a knowledge and sense of
his greatness, goodness and Wisdom. It Is also an act of the Will, whereby the
Soul adores and reverenceth his Majesty, is ravished with his amiableness,
embraces his goodness, enters it self into an intimate Communion with this
most lovely object, and pitcheth all his affections upon him.

We must worship God understandingly; it is not else a reasonable service: The
nature of God and the Law of God abhor a blind offering; we must worship him
heartily, else we offer him a dead Sacrifice: A reasonable service is that
wherein the mind does truly act something with God. All Spiritual acts must be
acts of reason, otherwise they are not human acts, because they want that
principle which is constitutive of man, and does difference him from other
Creatures: Acts done only by sense are the acts of a brute; acts done by reason
are the acts of a man; That which is only an act of sense, cannot be an act of
Religion: The sense without the conduct of reason is not the subject of
Religious acts, for then beasts were capable of Religion as well as Men: There
cannot be Religion where there is not reason; and there cannot be the exercise
of Religion, where there is not an exercise of the rational faculties. Nothing
can be a Christian act, that is not a human act: Besides, all worship must be
for some end; the worship of God must be for God; it is by the exercise of our
rational faculties, that we only can intend an end: An Ignorant and Carnal
worship is a brutish worship.

Particularly,

1. Spiritual Worship is a Worship from a spiritual Nature. Not only Physically
spiritual, so our Souls are in their frame; but morally spiritual, by a
renewing principle. The heart must be first cast into the Mould of the Gospel,
before it can perform a Worship required by the Gospel. Adam living in
Paradise, might perform a spiritual worship; but Adam fallen from his
rectitude, could not: We being Heirs of his Nature, are Heirs of his Impotence:
Restoration to a spiritual Life, must precede any act of spiritual Worship. As
no work can be good, so no worship can be spiritual, till we are created in
Christ Ephesians. 2.10.
. Christ is our Life Col. 3.4.
. As no natural action can be performed without life in the root or heart, so
no spiritual act without Christ in the Soul: Our being in Christ, is as
necessary to every spiritual act, as the union of our Soul with our Body, is
necessary to natural action. Nothing can exceed the limits of its nature; for
then it should exceed it self in acting, and do that which it has no principle
to do. A Beast cannot act like a Man, without partaking of the nature of a
Man; nor a Man act like an Angel, without partaking of the Angelical nature:
How can we perform spiritual acts, without a spiritual principle. Whatsoever
worship proceeds from the corrupted nature, cannot deserve the title of
spiritual worship, because it springs not from a spiritual habit. If those that
are evil cannot speak good things, those that are carnal cannot offer a
spiritual service. Poison is the fruit of a Vipers nature, Mat. 12.34. Oh,
Generation of Vipers, how can you being evil speak good things? For out of the
abundance of the heart the mouth speaks. As the root is, so is the fruit. If
the Soul be habitually carnal, the worship cannot be actually spiritual: There
may be an intention of Spirit, but there is no spiritual principle as a root of
that intention. A heart may be sensibly united with a duty, when it is not
spiritually united with Christ in it. Carnal motives, and carnal ends may fix
the mind in an act of worship, as the sense of some pressing affliction may
enlarge a man's mind in Prayer. Whatsoever is agreeable to the nature of God,
must have a stamp of Christ upon it; a stamp of his grace in performance, as
well as of his mediation in the acceptance. The Apostle lived not, but Christ
lived in him Gal. 2.20.
; the Soul worships not, but Christ in him: Not that Christ performs the act of
Worship; but enables us spiritually to worship, after he enables us spiritually
to live. As God counts not any Soul living but in Christ, so he counts not any
a spiritual Worshipper but in Christ. The goodness and fatness of the fruit
comes from the fatness of the Olive wherein we are engrafted: We must find
healing in Christ's wings, before God can find spirituality in our services. All
worship issuing from a dead nature, is but a dead service: A living action
cannot be performed, without being knit to a living root.

2. Spiritual Worship is done by the influence, and with the assistance of the
Spirit of God. A Heart may be spiritual, when a particular act of Worship may
not be spiritual. The Spirit may dwell in the Heart, when he may suspend his
influence on the act. Our worship is then spiritual, when the fire that kindles
our affections comes from Heaven, as that fire upon the Altar wherewith the
Sacrifices were consumed. God tastes a sweetness in no service, but as it is
dressed up by the hand of the Mediator, and has the Air of his own Spirit in it:
They are but natural acts, without a supernatural assistance: Without an actual
influence, we cannot act from spiritual motives, nor for spiritual ends, nor in
a spiritual manner. We cannot mortify a Lust without the Spirit Romans 8.13.
, nor quicken a service without the Spirit. Whatsoever corruption is killed, is
slain by his Power; whatsoever duty is spiritualized, is refined by his Breath.
He quickens our dead bodies in our Resurection Romans 8.11.
; He renews our dead Souls in our Regeneration; He quickens our carnal services
in our adorations: The choicest acts of worship are but infirmities, without
his auxiliary help Romans 8.26.
. We are Loggs, unable to move our selves, till he raise our faculties to a
pitch agreeable to God; puts his hand to the duty, and lifts that up and us
with it. Never any great act was performed by the Apostles to God, or for God,
but they are said to be filled with the Holy Ghost. Christ could not have been
conceived immaculate as that holy thing, without the Spirits overshadowing the
Virgin; nor any spiritual act conceived in our heart, without the Spirits
moving upon us, to bring forth a living Religion from us. The acts of worship
are said to be in the Spirit, Supplication in the Spirit Ephesians. 6.18.
; not only with the strength and affection of our own Spirits, but with the
mighty operation of the Holy Ghost, if Jude may be the Interpreter Jude 20.
. The Holy Ghost exciting us; impelling us, and firing our Souls by his divine
flame; raising up the affections, and making the Soul cry with a holy
importunity Abba Father. To render our worship spiritual, we should, before
every engagement in it, implore the actual presence of the Spirit, without
which we are not able to send forth one spiritual breath or groan; but be
Wind-bound like a Ship without a Gale, and our worship be no better than
carnal. How does the Spouse solicit the Spirit with an awake oh North Wind,
and come thou South Wind, etc. Cant. 4.16.


3. Spiritual Worship is done with Sincerity: When the heart stands right to
God, and the Soul performs what it pretends to perform: When we serve God with
our Spirits, as the Apostle, Romans 1.9. God is my Witness, whom I serve with my
Spirit in the Gospel of his Son: This is not meant of the Holy Ghost; for the
Apostle would never have called the Spirit of God, his own Spirit; but with my
Spirit, that is a sincere frame of heart. A Carnal-worship, whether under the
Law or Gospel, is when we are busied about external rites, without an inward
compliance of Soul. God demands the heart; Pro. 23.26.
my Son give me thy heart; not give me thy tongue, or thy lips, or thy hands;
these may be given without the heart, but the heart can never be bestowed
without these as its attendants. A heap of services can be no more welcome to
God, without our Spirits, than all Jacobs Sons could be to Joseph, without the
Benjamin he desired to see. God is not taken with the Cabinet, but the Jewel:
He first respected Abels Faith and Sincerity, and then his Sacrifice; he
disrespected Cains Infidelity and Hypocrisy, and then his Offering. Moulin.
Sermons Decad. 4. Ser. 4. P. 80.
[For this cause he rejected the Offerings of the Jews, the Prayers of the
Pharisees, and the Alms of Ananias and Sapphira, because their hearts and their
duties were at a distance from one another. In all spiritual Sacrifices, our
Spirits are Gods portion. Under the Law, the Reins were to be consumed by the
Fire on the Altar, because the secret intentions of the heart were signified by
them, Psalm. 7.9. The Lord tries the Heart and the Reins. It was an ill Omen
among the Heathen, if a Victim wanted a heart. The Widows Mites with her heart
in them, were more esteemed than the richer Offerings without it.] Not the
quantity of service, but the will in it, is of account with this infinite
Spirit. All that was to be brought for the framing of the Tabernacle, was to be
offered willingly with the heart. Exodus 25.7.
The more of Will, the more of Spirituality and Acceptableness to God, Psalm.
119.108. Accept the Free-will-offering of my lips. Sincerity is the Salt which
seasons every Sacrifice. The heart is most like to the object of worship: The
heart in the body is the spring of all vital actions; and a spiritual Soul is
the spring of all spiritual actions. How can we imagine God can delight in the
mere service of the Body, any more than we can delight in converse with a
Carcass?

Without the heart it is no worship: It Is a Stage Play; an acting a part without
being that person really which is acted by us: A Hypocrite in the notion of the
word, is a Stage Player. We may as well say a man may believe with his body, as
worship God only with his body. Faith, is a great ingredient in Worship; and it
is with the heart Man believes unto Righteousness. Romans 10.10.
We may be truly said to worship God, though we want perfection; but we cannot
be said to worship him, if we want sincerity: A Statue upon a Tomb, with eyes
and hands lifted up, offers as good and true a service; it wants only a voice,
the gestures and postures are the same; nay, the service is better; it is not a
mockery; it represents all that it can be framed to: But to worship without our
Spirits, is a presenting God with a Picture, an Echo, Voice and nothing else;
a Complement; a mere Lie; a compassing him about with Lies Hos. 11.12.
. Without the heart, the tongue is a Liar, and the greatest Zeal, dissembling
with him. To present the Spirit, is to present with that which can never
naturally dye; to present him only the Body, is to present him that which is
every day crumbling to dust, and will at last lie rotting in the Grave: To
offer him a few Rags easily torn; a Skin for a Sacrifice, a thing unworthy the
Majesty of God; a fixed eye and elevated hands, with a sleepy Heart and earthly
Soul are pitiful things for an ever blessed and glorious Spirit: Nay, it is so
far from being spiritual, that it is Blasphemy; To pretend to be a Jew
outwardly, without being so inwardly, is in the Judgment of Christ to blaspheme
Revel. 2.9.
. And is not the same title to be given with as much reason to those that
pretend a worship and perform none? Such a one is not a spiritual Worshipper,
but a blaspheming Devil in Samuel's Mantle.

4. Spiritual Worship is performed with an unitedness of heart. The heart is
not only now and then with God, but united to fear or worship his name. Psalm.
86.11.
A spiritual duty must have the engagement of the Spirit, and the thoughts tied
up to the spiritual Object: The union of all the parts of the heart together
with the body, is the life of the body; and the moral union of our hearts, is
the life of any duty. A heart quickly flitting from God, makes not God his
treasure; he slights the worship, and therein affronts the Object of Worship.
All our thoughts ought to be ravished with God; bound up in him as in a bundle
of life: But when we start from him to gaze after every feather, and run after
every bubble; we disown a full and affecting excellency, and a satisfying
sweetness in him. When our thoughts run from God, it is a testimony we have no
spiritual affection to God: Affection would stake down the thoughts to the
Object affected: It Is but a Mouth-love, as the Prophet phraseth it Ezekiel. 33.31.
: But their hearts go after their Covetousness: Covetous Objects pipe, and the
heart danceth after them; and thoughts of God are shifted off, to receive a
multitude of other imaginations: The heart and the service stayed a while
together, and then took leave of one another. The Psalmist Psalm. 39.18.
still found his heart with God when he awaked; still with God in spiritual
affections, and fixed meditations. A carnal heart is seldom with God, either in
or out of worship: If God should knock at the heart in any duty, it would be
found not at home, but straying abroad. Our worship is spiritual, when the door
of the heart is shut against all Intruders, as our Savior commands in
Closet-duties Mat. 6.6.
: It was not his meaning, to command the shutting the Closet-door, and leave
the Heart-door open for every thought that would be apt to haunt us. Worldly
affections are to be laid aside, if we would have our worship spiritual. This
was meant by the Jewish custom of wiping or washing off the dust of their feet,
before their entrance into the Temple; and of not bringing money in their
girdles. To be spiritual in worship, is to have our Souls gathered and bound up
wholly in themselves, and offered to God. Our Loins must be girt, as the
fashion was in the Eastern Countries, where they wore long Garments, that they
might not waver with the Wind, and be blown between their legs, to obstruct
them in their travel: Our faculties must not hang loose about us. He is a
carnal Worshipper, that gives God but a piece of his heart, as well as he that
denies him the whole of it; that has some thoughts pitched upon God in
worship, and as many willingly upon the World. David sought God, not with a
moity of his heart, but with his whole heart; with his entire frame Psalm.
119.10.
: He brought not half his heart, and left the other in the possession of
another Master. It was a good lesson Pythagoras gave his Scholars (...)
Jamblich l. 1. c. 518. p. 87.
, Not to make the Observance of God a work by the by. If those Guests be
invited, or entertained kindly, or if they come unexpected, the spirituality of
that worship is lost; the Soul kicks down what it wrought before: But if they
be Brow-beaten by us, and our grief, rather than our pleasure; they divert our
spiritual intention from the work in hand, but hinder not Gods acceptance of it
as spiritual; because they are not the acts of our Will, but offenses to our
Wills.

5. Spiritual Worship is performed with a spiritual activity and sensibleness
of God. With an active Understanding to meditate on his excellency; and an
active Will to embrace him when he drops upon the Soul. If we understand the
amiableness of God, our affections will be ravished; if we understand the
immensity of his goodness, our Spirits will be enlarged. We are to act with the
highest intention, suitable to the greatness of that God with whom we have to
do, Psalm. 150.2. Praise him according to his excellent greatness: Not that we
can worship him equally, but in some proportion, the frame of the heart is to
be suited to the excellency of the Object: Our spiritual strength is to be put
out to the utmost, as Creatures that act naturally do: The Sun shines, and the
Fire burns to the utmost of their natural power. This is so necessary, that
David a spiritual Worshipper prays for it before he sets upon acts of
adoration, Psalm. 80.18. quicken us, that we may call upon thy Name: As he was
loath to have a drowzy faculty, he was loath to h^^ a drowzy instrument, and
would willingly have them as lively as himself, Psalm. 57.8. Awake up my glory;
awake Psaltery and Harp; I my self will awake early: How would this Divine Soul
serve himself up to God, and be turned into nothing but a holy flame? Our Souls
must be boiling hot when we serve the Lord Romans 12.11. (...)
. The heart does no less burn when it Spiritually comes to God, than when God
does Spiritually approach to it. Luke 24.32.
A Nabals heart, one as cold as a stone, cannot offer up a Spiritual service.

Whatsoever is enjoined us as our duty, ought to be performed with the greatest
intensness of our Spirit. As it is our duty to pray, so it is our duty to pray
with the most fervent importunity. It Is our duty to love God, but with the
purest and most sublime affections: Every Command of God requires the whole
strength of the Creature to be employed in it. That love to God, wherein all
our duty to God is summed up, is to be with all our strength, with all our
might, etc. Lady Falklands life pa. 130.
Tho in the Covenant of grace he has mitigated the severity of the Law, and
requires not from us such an elevation of our affections as was possible in the
state of innocence, yet God requires of us the utmost moral industry to raise
our affections to a pitch, at least equal to what they are in other things:
What strength of affections we naturally have, ought to be as much and more
excited in acts of worship than upon other occasions and our ordinary works. As
there was an inactivity of Soul in worship and a quickness to sin, when sin had
the dominion; so when the Soul is Spiritualized, the temper is changed; there
is an inactivity to sin and an ardor in duty: The more the Soul is dead to sin
the more it is alive to God, Romans 6.11
and the more lively too in all that concerns God and his honor. For grace
being a new strength added to our natural, determines the affections to new
objects and excites them to a greater vigor. And as the hatred of sin is more
sharp, the love to every thing that destroys the dominion of it, is more
strong. And acts of worship may be reckoned as the chiefest batteries against
the power of this inbred enemy. When the Spirit is in the Soul, like the Rivers
of waters flowing out of the belly, the Soul has the activity of a River, and
makes have to be swallowed up in God, as the streams of the River in the Sea.
Christ makes his people Kings and Priests to God; Revel. 1.6.
first Kings, then Priests: Gives first a Royal temper of heart, that they may
offer Spiritual Sacrifices as Priests: Kings and Priests to God acting with a
magnificent Spirit in all their motions to him: We cannot be Spiritual Priests,
till we be Spiritual Kings. The Spirit appeared in the likeness of fire, and
where he resides, Communicates like fire purity and activity.

Dullness is against the light of nature. I do not remember that the Heathen
ever offered a Snail to any of their false Deities, nor an Ass, but to Priapus
their unclean Idol; but the Persians Sacrificed to the Sun a Horse, a swift and
generous Creature. God provided against those in the Law, Commanding an Asses
Firstling, the offspring of a sluggish Creature, to be Redeemed, or his neck
broke; but by no means to be offered to him. Exodus 13.13
God is a Spirit infinitely active, and therefore frozen and benumbed frames
are unsuitable to him: He rides upon a Cherub and flies, he comes upon the wings
of the wind, he rides upon a swift cloud; Isa. 19.1.
and therefore demands of us not a dull reason, but an active Spirit: God is a
living God, therefore must have a lively service. Christ is life, and slothful
adorations are not fit to be offered up in the name of life. The worship of God
is called wrestling in Scripture, and Paul was a striver in the service of his
Master, Col. 1.29.
in an agony. (...)
Angels worship God Spiritually with their wings on; and when God Commands them
to worship Christ, the next Scripture quoted is, that he makes them flames of
fire. Heb. 1.7.


If it be thus, how may we charge our selves? What Paul said of the sensual
Widow, 1 Timothy 5.6.
that she is dead while she lives, we may say often of our Selves, we are dead
while we worship. Our hearts are in duty as the Jews were in deliverances; as
those in a dream; Psa. 126.1.
by which unexpectedness, God showed the greatness of his care and mercy; and
we attend him as men in a dream whereby we discover our negligence and folly.
This activity does not consist in outward acts. The body may be hot and the
heart may be faint; but in an inward stirring, meltings, flights. In the
highest raptures the body is most insensible. Strong Spiritual affections are
abstracted from outward sense.

6. Spiritual worship is performed with acting Spiritual habits. When all the
living springs of Grace are opened, as the Fountains of the deep were in the
deluge, the Soul and all that is within it, all the Spiritual impresses of God
upon it, erect themselves to bless his holy name. Psa. 103.1.


This is necessary to make a worship Spiritual. As natural agents are
determined to act suitable to their proper nature; So rational agents, are to
act conformable to a rational being: When there is a conformity between the act
and the nature whence it flows, it is a good act in its kind; if it be rational,
it is a good rational act, because suitable to its principle: As a Man endowed
with reason must act suitable to that endowment, and exercise his reason in his
acting; So a Christian endued with Grace must act suitable to that nature, and
exercise his Grace in his acting. Acts done by a natural inclination are no
more human acts, than the natural acts of a beast may be said to be human; Tho
they are the acts of a Man as he is the efficient cause of them, yet they are
not human acts, because they arise not from that principle of Reason which
denominates him a man. So acts of worship performed by a bare exercise of
reason, are not Christian and Spiritual acts, because they come not from the
principle which constitutes him a Christian; Reason is not the principle, for
then all rational Creatures would be Christians: They ought therefore to be
acts of a higher principle; Exercises of that Grace whereby Christians are what
they are: Not but that rational acts in worship are due to God; for worship is
due from us as men; and we are settled in that rank of being by our reason.
Grace does not exclude reason, but ennobles it, and calls it up to another
form: But we must not rest in a bare rational worship, but exert that principle
whereby we are Christians. To worship God with our reason, is to worship him as
Men: To worship God with our grace, is to worship him as Christians, and so
Spiritually: But to worship him only with our bodies, is no better than Brutes.

Our desires of the word are to issue from the regenerate principle, 1 Pet.
2.2. As new born babes desire the sincere milk of the word: It seems to be not
a comparison but a restriction. All worship must have the same spring, and be
the exercise of that principle; otherwise we can have no Communion with God.
Friends that have the same habitual dispositions, have a fundamental fitness
for an agreeable converse with one another; but if the temper wherein their
likeness consists, be languishing, and the string out of tune, there is not an
actual fitness; and the present indisposition breaks the converse, and renders
the Company troublesome. Tho we may have the habitual graces which compose in
us a resemblance to God, yet for want of acting those suitable dispositions, we
render our selves unfit for his converse, and make the worship, which is
fundamentally Spiritual, to become actually carnal. As the Will cannot
naturally act to any object, but by the exercise of its affections: So the
heart cannot Spiritually act toward God, but by the exercise of graces. This
is Gods Music: Ephesians. 5.19. Singing and making melody to God in your hearts.
Singing and all other acts of worship are outward, but the Spiritual melody is
by grace in the heart. Col. 3.16. This renders it a Spiritual worship; for it
is an effect of the fullness of the Spirit in the Soul, as v. 19. But be filled
with the Spirit: The overflowing of the Spirit in the heart, setting the Soul
of a beliver thus on work to make a Spiritual melody to God, shows that
something higher than bare reason is put in tune in the heart. Then is the
fruit of the Garden pleasant to Christ, when the holy Spirit, the North and
South wind blow upon the spices, and strike out the fragrancy of them. Cant.
4.16.
Since God is the Author of graces, and bestows them to have a glory from them,
they are best employed about him and his service. It Is fit he should have the
Cream of his own gifts. Without the exercise of grace we perform but a work of
nature, and offer him a few dry bones without marrow.

The whole set of graces must be one way or other exercised. If any treble be
wanting in a Lute, there will be a great defect in the Music. If any one
Spiritual string be dull, the Spiritual harmony of worship will be spoiled. And
therefore,

1. First, Faith must be acted in worship. A confidence in God. A natural
worship cannot be performed without a natural confidence in the goodness of
God. Whosoever comes to him, must regard him as a Rewarder and a faithful
Creator. Heb. 11.6.
A Spiritual worship cannot be performed without an Evangelical confidence in
him as a gracious Redeemer. To think him a Tyrant meditating revenge, damps the
Soul; to regard him as a gracious King full of tender bowels, Spirits the
affections to him. The mercy of God is the proper object of trust; Psalm. 33.18.
The eye of the Lord is upon them that fear him, upon them that hope in his
mercy. The worship of God in the old Testament is most described by fear: In
the new Testamen by faith. Fear, or the worship of God and hope in his mercy
are linkt together; when they go hand in hand, the accepting eye of God is upon
us: When we do not trust, we do not worship. Zeph. 3.2.
Those of Judah had the Temple worship among them, especially in Josiah's time,
Zeph. 3.2. the time of that Prophecy; yet it was accounted no worship, because
no trust in the Worshippers. Interest in God, cannot be improved without an
exercise of Faith. The Gospel worship is prophesied of, to be a confidence in
God, as in a Husband more than in a Lord, Hos. 2.16. Thou shall call me Ishi,
and shall call me no more Baali: Thou shall call me, that is, thou shall
worship me, Worship being often comprehended under Invocation. More confidence
is to be exercised in a Husband or Father, than in a Lord or Master.

If a Man have not Faith, he is without Christ; and though a Man be in Christ
by the habit of Faith, ^e performs a duty out of Christ without an act of
Faith: Without the habit of Faith, our persons are out of Christ; and without
the exercise of Faith, the duties are out of Christ. As the want of Faith in a
person is the death of the Soul; so the want of Faith in a Service, is the
death of the Offering. Though a man were at the cost of an Ox; yet to kill it
without bringing it to the door of the Tabernacle, was not a Sacrifice, but a
Murder. Levit. 17.3, 4.
The Tabernacle was a Type of Christ; and a look to him is necessary in every
spiritual Sacrifice. As there must be Faith to make any act, an act of
obedience; so there must be Faith to make any act of worship, spiritual. That
service is not spiritual, that is not vital; and it cannot be vital, without
the exercise of a vital Principle: All spiritual life is hid in Christ, and
drawn from him by Faith Gal. 2.20.
. Faith as it has relation to Christ, makes every act of worship, a living
act, and consequently a spiritual act. Habitual unbelief, cuts us off from the
Body of Christ, Romans 11.20. Because of unbelief they were broken off; and a
want of actuated belief, breaks us off from a present communion with Christ in
Spirit. As unbelief in us hinders Christ from doing any mighty work, so
unbelief in us hinders us from doing any mighty spiritual duty.

So that the exercise of Faith, and a confidence in God, is necessary to every
duty.

2. Love must be acted to render a worship spiritual. Though God commanded love
in the Old Testament; yet the manner of giving the Law, bespoke more of Fear
than Love. The dispensation of the Law, was with Fire, Thunder, etc. proper to
raise horror, and benum the Spirit; which effect it had upon the Israelites,
when they desired that God would speak no more to them. Grace is the Genius of
the Gospel, proper to excite the affection of Love. The Law was given by the
disposition of Angels, with signs to amaze; the Gospel was ushered in with the
songs of Angels, composed of peace and good will, calculated to ravish the
Soul. Instead of the terrible voice of the Law, do this and live: The
comfortable voice of the Gospel is Grace, Grace: Upon this account, the
principle of the Old testament was Fear; and the Worship often expressed by the
Fear of God. The principle of the New Testament is Love. The Mount Sinai
gendreth to Bondage Gal. 4.44.
; Mount Sion, from whence the Gospel or Evangelical Law goes forth, gendreth to
Liberty; and therefore the Spirit of Bondage unto Fear, as the Property of the
Law is opposed to the State of Adoption; the principle of Love, as the property
of the Gospel Romans 8.15.
: And therefore the worship of God under the Gospel, or New Testament, is
oftener expressed by Love than Fear; as proceeding from higher principles, and
acting nobler passions. In this State, we are to serve him without fear; Luke
1.74.
without a Bondage-fear; not without a fear of unworthy treating him; with a
fear of his goodness as it is prophesied of Hos. 9.9.
: Goodness is not the object of terror, but reverence. God in the Law, had more
the garb of a Judge; in the Gospel, of a Father. The name of a Father is
sweeter, and bespeaks more of affection. As their services were with a feeling
of the thunders of the Law in their Consciences; so is our worship to be with a
sense of Gospel Grace in our Spirits: Spiritual worship is that therefore,
which is exercised with a spiritual and heavenly affection, proper to the
Gospel. The heart should be enlarged, according to the liberty the Gospel gives
of drawing near to God as a Father: As he gives us the nobler relation of
Children, we are to act the nobler qualities of Children. Love should act
according to its nature, which is desire of Union; desire of a moral union by
Affections, as well as a mystical union by Faith; as flame aspires to reach
flame, and become one with it. In every act of worship, we should endeavor to
be united to God, and become one Spirit with him: This Grace does spiritualize
Worship: In that one word Love, God has wrapped up all the devotion he requires
of us: It Is the total sum of the first Table, Thou shall love the Lord thy God.
It Is to be acted in every thing we do: But in Worship, our hearts should more
solemnly rise up and acknowledge him amiable and lovely, since the Law is
stripped of its cursing power, and made sweet in the blood of the Redeemer. Love
is a thing acceptable of it self; but nothing acceptable without it. The gifts
of one man to another are spiritualized by it. We would not value a Present,
without the affection of the Donor: Every man would lay claim to the love of
others, though he would not to their Possessions. Love is Gods right in every
service, and the noblest thing we can bestow upon him in our adorations of him.
Gods gifts to us are not so estimable, without his love; not our services
valuable by him, without the exercise of a choice affection. Hezekiah regarded
not his deliverance, without the love of the Deliverer; In love to my Soul thou
have delivered me Isa. 38.17.
: So does God say, in love to my honor thou have worshipped me.

So that Love must be acted, to render our worship spiritual.

3. A spiritual sensibleness of our own weakness, is necessary to make our
worship spiritual. Affections to God cannot be without relentings in our
selves. When the eye is spiritually fixed upon a spiritual God, the heart will
mourn, that the worship is no more spiritually suitable. The more we act love
upon God, as amiable and gracious, the more we should exercise grief in our
selves, as we are vile and offending. Spiritual worship is a melting worship,
as well as an elevating worship; It exalts God, and debaseth the Creature. The
Publican was more spiritual in his humble address to God, when the Pharisee was
wholly carnal with his swelling language. A spiritual love in worship will make
us grieve, that we have given him so little, and could give him no more. It Is a
part of spiritual duty to bewail our carnality mixed with it; as we receive
mercies spiritually, when we receive them with a sense of Gods goodness and our
own vileness, in the same manner we render a spiritual worship.

4. Spiritual desires for God render the service spiritual. When the Soul
follows hard after him Psalm. 63.8.
; pursues after God as a God of infinite and communicative goodness, with sighs
and groans unutterable. A spiritual Soul seems to be transformed into hunger,
and thirst, and becomes nothing but desire. A carnal Worshipper is taken with
the beauty and magnificence of the Temple; a spiritual Worshipper desires to
see the glory of God in the Sanctuary Psalm. 63.2.
; He pants after God: As he came to worship, to find God, he boyls up in
desires for God, and is loath to go from it without God, the living God, Psalm.
42.2. He would see the Vrim and the Thummim; the unusual sparkling of the
stones upon the Highpriests Breast Plate. That deserves not the title of
spiritual worship, when the Soul makes no longing inquiries; saw you him whom
my Soul loves? A spiritual worship is, when our desires are chiefly for God in
the worship: As David desires to dwell in the House of the Lord; but his desire
is not terminated there, but to behold the beauty of the Lord Psalm. 27.4.
, and taste the ravishing sweetness of his presence. No doubt but Elijah's
desires for the enjoyment of God, while he was mounting to Heaven, were as
fiery as the Chariot wherein he was carried. Unutterable groans acted in
worship, are the fruit of the Spirit, and certainly render it a spiritual
service Romans 8.26.
. Strong appetites are agreeable to God, and prepare us to eat the fruit of
worship. A spiritual Paul presses forward to know Christ, and the power of his
Resurrection; and a spiritual Worshipper actually aspires in every duty to know
God, and the power of his Grace. To desire worship as an end, is carnal; to
desire it as a means, and act desires in it for communion with God in it, is
spiritual, and the fruit of a spiritual life.

5. Thankfulness, and admiration are to be exercised in spiritual services.
This is a worship of Spirits. Praise is the adoration of the blessed Angels
Isa. 6.3.
, and of glorified Spirits, Rev. 4.11. Thou art worthy oh Lord, to receive
Glory, and Honor, and Power: And, Rev. 5.13.14. they worship him, ascribing
Blessing, Honor, Glory and Power to him that sits upon the Throne, and to the
Lamb for ever and ever. Other acts of worship are confined to this Life, and
leave us as soon as we have set our foot in Heaven; There, no notes but this of
Praise are warbled out: The Power, Wisdom, Love and Grace in the dispensation
of the Gospel, seat themselves in the thoughts and tongues of blessed Souls.
Can a worship on Earth be spiritual, that has no mixture of an eternal
heavenly duty with it? The worship of God in Innocence, had been chiefly an
admiration of him in the works of Creation; and should not our Evangelical
worship be an admiration of him in the works of Redemption, which is a
restoration to a better State? After the petitioning for pardoning Grace Hos.
14.2.
, there is a rendering the Calves or Heifers of our lips, alluding to the
Heifers used in Eucharistical Sacrifices. The Praise of God is the choicest
Sacrifice and Worship, under a dispensation of redeeming Grace; This is the
prime and eternal part of worship under the Gospel. The Psalmist, Psalm 149.
and 150. speaking of the Gospel times, spurrs on to this kind of worship; Sing
to the Lord a new Song; Let the Children of Zion be joyful i^ ^^^ir King; Let
the Saints be joyful in glory, and sing aloud upon their beds; Let the high
praises of God be in their mouths: He begins and ends both Psalms with praise
ye the Lord. That cannot be a spiritual and evangelical worship, that has
nothing of the praise of God in the heart. The consideration of Gods adorable
perfections discovered in the Gospel, will make us come to him with more
seriousness; beg blessings of him with more confidence; fly to him with a
winged Faith and Love, and more spiritually glorify him in our attendances upon
him.

7. Spiritual Worship is performed with delight. The Evangelical worship is
prophetically signified by keeping the Feast of Tabernacles; Zach. 14.16.
they shall go up from year to year, to worship the King the Lord of Hosts, and
to keep the Feast of Tabernacles: Why that Feast, when there were other Feasts
observed by the Jews? That was a Feast celebrated with the greatest joy;
typical of the gladness which was to be under the exhibition of the Messiah,
and a thankful comemmoration of the Redemption wrought by him. It was to be
celebrated five days after the solemn day of Atonement, Levit. 23.34. compared
with v. 27. wherein there was one of the solemnest types of the Sacrifice of
the death of Christ. In this Feast they commemorated their exchange of Egypt
for Canaan; the Manna wherewith they were fed; the Water out of the Rock
wherewith they were refresht: In remembrance of this, they poured water on the
ground, pronouncing those words in Isaiah, they shall draw waters out of the
Wells of Salvation, which our Savior referrs to himself, John 7.37. inviting
them to him, to drink, upon the last day, the great day of the Feast of
Tabernacles, wherein this solemn Ceremony was observed. Since we are freed by
the death of the Redeemer from the Curses of the Law, God requires of us a Joy
in spiritual privileges. A sad frame in worship, gives the lie to all
Gospel-liberty; to the Purchase of the Redeemers Death; the Triumphs of his
Resurrection: It Is a carriage, as if we were under the influences of the legal
Fire and Lightning, and an entering a Protest against the Freedom of the Gospel.
The Evangelical worship is a Spiritual worship; and Praise, Joy and Delight are
prophesied of, as great ingredients in attendance on Gospel Ordinances, Isa.
12.3, 4, 5. What was occasion of terror in the worship of God under the Law, is
the occasion of delight in the worship of God under the Gospel. The Justice and
Holiness of God so terrible in the Law, becomes comfortable under the Gospel,
since they have feasted themselves on the active and passive obedience of the
Redeemer. The approach is to God as gracious, not to God as unpacified; as a
Son to a Father, not as a Criminal to a Judge. Under the Law God was
represented as a Judge, remembering their Sin in their Sacrifices, and
representing the punishment they had merited; in the Gospel as a Father,
accepting the Atonement, and publishing the Reconciliation wrought by the
Redeemer. Delight in God, is a Gospel frame; therefore the more joyful, the
more spiritual: The Sabbath is to be a delight; not only in regard of the Day,
but in regard of the Duties of it Isa. 58.13.
; in regard of the marvelous work he wrought on it; raising up our blessed
Redeemer on that day, whereby a foundation was laid for the rendering our
persons and services acceptable to God, Psalm. 118.24. This is the day which the
Lord has made, we will be glad and rejoice in it. A lumpish frame becomes not
a day and a duty, that has so noble and spiritual a mark upon it.

The Angels in the first act of worship after the Creation, were highly joyful,
Job. 38.7. They shouted for joy, etc.

The Saints have particularly acted this in their Worship. David would not
content himself with an approach to the Altar, without going to God as his
exceeding joy, Psalm. 43.4. My triumphant joy: When he danced before the Ark, he
seems to be transformed into delight and pleasure, 2 Samuel 6.14, 16. He had as
much delight in Worship, as others had in their Harvest and Vintage. And those
that took joyfully the spoiling of their Goods, would as joyfully attend upon
the Communications of God. Where there is a fullness of the Spirit, there is a
waking melody to God in the heart Ephesians. 5.18.19.
; and where there is an acting of love, (as there is in all spiritual services)
the proper fruit of it is joy in a near approach to the Object of the Souls
affection. Love is appetitus unionis: The more love, the more delight in the
approachings of God to the Soul, or the outgoings of the Soul to God. As the
Object of Worship is amiable in a spiritual eye, so the ^^^hs tending to a
communion with this Object are delightful in the exercise: Where there is no
delight in a duty, there is no delight in the object of the duty; The more of
grace, the more of pleasure in the actings of it: As the more of nature there
is in any natural Agent, the more of pleasure in the Act; So the more heavenly
the Worship, the more spiritual. Delight is the frame and temper of Glory. A
heart filled up to the brim with joy, is a heart filled up to the brim with the
Spirit: Joy is the fruit of the Holy Ghost. Gal. 5.22.


1. Not the joy of Gods dispensation flowing from God, but a gracious active
joy streaming to God. There is a joy, when the Comforts of God are dropped into
the Soul, as Oil upon the Wheel; which indeed makes the faculties move with
more speed and activity in his service, like the Chariots of Aminadab: And a
Soul may serve God in the strength of this taste, and its delight terminated in
the sensible comfort. This is not the joy I mean, but such a joy that has God
for its Object, delighting in him as the term, in worship as the way to him:
The first is Gods dispensation, the other is our duty; The first is an act of
Gods favor to us, the second a sprout of habitual grace in us. The Comforts we
have from God, may elevate our duties; but the grace we have within, does
spiritualize our duties.

2. Nor is every delight an argument of a spiritual service. All the the
requisites to worship must be taken in. A man may invent a worship, and delight
in it; as Micah in the adoration of his Idol, when he was glad he had got both
an Ephod and a Levite Judges 17.
. As a man may have a contentment in Sin, so he may have a contentment in
Worship; not because it is a worship of God, but the worship of his own
invention, agreeable to his own humor and design, as Isa. 58.2. it is said, they
delighted in approaching to God, but it was for carnal ends. Novelty ingenders
Complacency; but it must be a worship wherein God will delight; and that must
be a worship according to his own Rule and infinite Wisdom, and not our shallow
fancies.

God requires a cheerfulness in his service, especially under the Gospel, where
he sits upon a Throne of Grace; discovers himself in his amiableness, and acts
the Covenant of Grace, and the sweet relation of a Father. The Priests of old
were not to fully themselves with any sorrow, when they were in the exercise of
their functions. God put a bar to the natural affections of Aaron and his Sons,
when Nadab and Abihu had been cut off by a severe hand of God Lev. 10.6.
. Every true Christian in a higher order of Priesthood, is a person dedicated
to joy and peace, offering himself a lively Sacrifice of praise and
thanksgiving: And there is no Christian duty, but is to be set off and seasoned
with cheerfulness: He that loves a cheerful Giver in acts of Charity, requires
no less a cheerful Spirit in acts of Worship: As this is an ingredient in
worship, so it is the means to make your Spirits intent in worship. When the
heart triumphs in the consideration of Divine excellency and goodness, it will
be angry at any thing that offers to jogg and disturb it.

8. Spiritual worship is to be performed, though with a delight in God; yet
with a deep reverence of God. The Gospel in advancing the spirituality of
worship, takes off the terror, but not the reverence of God; which is nothing
else in its own nature, but a due and high esteem of the excellency of a thing
according to the nature of it: And therefore the Gospel presenting us with more
illustrious notices of the glorious nature of God, is so far from indulging any
disesteem of him, that it requires of us a greater reverence suitable to the
hight of its discovery, above what could be spelled in the Book of Creation:
The Gospel worship is therefore expressed by trembling, Hos. 11.10. They shall
walk after the Lord; he shall roar like a Lion; when he shall roar, then the
Children shall tremble from the West. When the Lion of the Tribe of Judah shall
lift up his powerful voice in the Gospel, the Western Gentiles shall run
trembling to walk after the Lord. God has always attended his greatest
manifestations with remarkable Characters of Majesty, to create a reverence in
his Creature: He caused the wind to March before him; to cut the Mountain, when
he manifested himself to Elijah, 1 Kings 19.11. A Wind and a Cloud of Fire,
before that magnificent Vision to Ezekiel, Ezekiel. 1.4, 5. Thunders and
Lightnings before the giving the Law, Exodus 19.18. And a mighty wind before the
giving the Spirit, Acts 2. God requires of us an aw of him in the very act of
performance. The Angels are pure, and cannot fear him as Sinners, but in
reverence they cover their Faces when they stand before him Isa. 6.2.
: His power should make us reverence him, as we are Creatures; His Justice as
we are Sinners; His goodness as we are restored Creatures. Daille Sur. 3. Jean.
P. 150.
[God is clothed with unspeakable Majesty; the glory of his face shines
brighter than the Lights of Heaven in their beauty. Before him the Angels
tremble, and the Heavens melt; we ought not therefore to come before him with
the Sacrifice of Fools, nor tender a duty to him, without falling low upon our
faces, and bowing the knees of our hearts in token of reverence.] Not a slavish
fear, like that of Devils; but a Godly fear, like that of Saints Heb. 12.28
, joined with a sense of an unmovable Kingdom becomth us: And this the Apostle
calls a grace necessary to make our service acceptable: And therefore the grace
necessary to make it spiritual, since nothing finds admission to God, but what
is of a spiritual nature. The consideration of his glorious nature, should
imprint an awful respect upon our Souls to him: His goodness should make his
Majesty more adorable to us, as his Majesty makes his goodness more admirable
in his condescensions to us. As God is a Spirit, our worship must be spiritual;
and being he is the supreme Spirit, our worship must be reverential: We must
observe the State he takes upon him in his Ordinances; He is in Heaven, we upon
the Earth; we must not therefore be hasty to utter any thing before God,
Eccles. 5.7. Consider him a Spirit in the highest Heavens, and our selves
Spirits dwelling in a dreggy Earth. Loose and garish frames debase him to our
own quality: Slight postures of Spirit, intimate him to be a slight and mean
Being: Our being in Covenant with him, must not lower our awful apprehensions
of him: As he is the Lord thy God, it is a gloririous and fearful Name, or
wonderful Deuteronomy. 28.58.
: Though he lay by his Justice to Believers, he does not lay by his Majesty:
When we have a confidence in him, because he is the Lord our God; we must have
awful thoughts of his Majesty, because his name is glorious. God is terrible
from his Holy-places, in regard of the great things he does for his Israel
Psalm. 68.35.
: We should behave our selves with that inward honor and respect of him, as if
he were present to our bodily eyes: The higher apprehensions we have of his
Majesty, the greater aw will be upon our hearts in his presence, and the
greater spirituality in our acts. We should manage our hearts so, as if we had
a view of God in his heavenly glory.

9. Spiritual Worship is to be performed with humility in our Spirits. This is
to follow upon the reverence of God. As we are to have high thoughts of God,
that we may not debase him; we must have low thoughts of our selves, not to
vaunt before him. When we have right notions of the Divine Majesty; we shall be
as Worms in our own thoughts, and creep as Worms into his presence: We can
never consider him in his Glory, but we have a fit opportunity to reflect upon
our selves, and consider how basely we revolted from him, and how graciously we
are restored by him. As the Gospel affords us greater discoveries of Gods
nature, and so enhaunceth our reverence of him; so it helps us to a fuller
understanding of our own vileness and weakness, and therefore is proper to
engender Humility: The more spiritual and evangelical therefore any service is,
the more humble it is. That is a spiritual service, that does most manifest the
glory of God; and this cannot be manifested by us, without manifesting our own
emptiness and nothingness. The Heathens were sensible of the necessity of
Humility by the Light of Nature Plutarch Moral. P. 344.
; after the Name of God signified by (...) inscribed on the Temple at Delphos,
followed (...) whereby was insinuated, that when we have to do with God, who is
the only Ens, we should behave our selves with a sense of our own infirmity,
and infinite distance from him. As a person, so a duty leavened with Pride,
has nothing of sincerity, and therefore nothing of spirituality in it, Hab.
2.4. His Soul which is lifted up, is not upright in him. The Elders that were
crowned by God to be Kings and Priests, to offer spiritual Sacrifices; uncrown
themselves in their worship of him, and cast down their Ornaments at his feet
Revel. 4.1^. compared with 5. and the 1^.
: The Greek word to worship (...) signifies to creep like a Dog upon his belly
before his Master; to lie low. How deep should our sense be of the privilege
of Gods admitting us to his worship, and affording us such a mercy under our
deserts of wrath? How mean should be our thoughts, both of our persons and
performances? How patiently should we wait upon God for the success of worship?
How did Abraham the Father of the Faithful, equal himself to the Earth, when he
supplicated the God of Heaven, and devote himself to him under the title of
very Dust and Ashes Genesis 18.27.
? Isaiah did but behold an Evangelical Apparition of God and the Angels
worshipping him, and presently reflects upon his own uncleaness Isa 6.5.
. Gods presence both requires and causes Humility. How lowly is David in his
own opinion, after a magnificent duty performed by himself and his people? 1 Chronicles. 29.14. Who am I? And what is my people, that we should be able to offer
so willingly? The more spiritual the Soul is in its carriage to God, the more
humble it is; and the more gracious God is in his communications to the Soul,
the lower it lies.

God commanded not the fiercer Creatures to be offered to him in Sacrifices,
but Lambs and Kids, meek and lowly Creatures; none that had stings in their
tails, or venom in their tongues Caudam aculeatam vel linguam nigram Alexand.
ab Alex. l. 3. c. 12.
. The meek Lamb was the daily Sacrifice: The Doves were to be offered by Pairs:
God would not have Honey mixed with any Sacrifice, Levit. 2.11. That breeds
Choler, and Choler Pride; but Oil, he commanded to be used; that supples and
mollifies the parts. Swelling Pride, and boiling Passions render our services
carnal; they cannot be spiritual, without an humble sweetness and an innocent
sincerity: One grain of this transcends the most costly Sacrifices. A Contrite
Heart puts a gloss upon Worship Psalm. 51.16, 17
. The departure of men and Angels from God, began in Pride; Our approaches and
return to him must begin in Humility: And therefore all those Graces which are
bottomed on Humility, must be acted in worship, as Faith, and a sense of our
own indigence. Our blessed Savior, the most spiritual Worshipper, prostrated
himself in the Garden with the greatest lowliness, and offered himself upon the
Cross a Sacrifice with the greatest humility. Melted Souls in worship, have the
most spiritual conformity to the person of Christ in the state of humiliation,
and his design in that state: As worship without it is not suitable to God, so
neither is it advantageous for us. A time of worship, is a time of Gods
Communication. The Vessel must be melted to receive the Mould it is designed
for: Softened wax is fittest to receive a stamp, and a spiritually melted Soul
fittest to receive a spiritual impression. We cannot perform duty in an
evangelical and spiritual strain, without the meltingness and meaness in our
selves which the Gospel requires.

10. Spiritual worship is to be performed with Holiness. God is a holy Spirit;
a likeness to God must attend the worshipping of God as he is: Holiness is
always in season; It becomes his house for ever Psalm. 91.5.
. We can never serve the living God, till we have Consciences purged from dead
works, Heb. 9.14. Dead works in our Consciences, are unsuitable to God, an
eternal living Spirit. The more mortified the heart, the more quickened the
service. Nothing can please an infinite Purity, but that which is pure: Since
God is in his Glory, in his Ordinances; we must not be in our Filthiness. The
Holiness of his Spirit does sparkle in his Ordinances; The holiness of our
Spirits ought also to sparkle in our observance of them. The Holiness of God is
most celebrated in the worship of Angels Isa. 6.3. Revel. 4.8.
: Spiritual worship ought to be like Angelical: That cannot be with Souls
totally impure. As there must be perfect holiness to make a worship perfectly
spiritual; so there must be some degree of holiness to make it in any measure
spiritual. God would have all the Utensils of the Sanctuary employed about his
service to be holy: The Inwards of the Sacrifice were to be rinsed thrice As
the Jewish Doctors observe on Lev. 1.9.
. The Crop and Feathers of sacrificed Doves, was to be hung Eastward toward
the entrance of the Temple, at a distance from the Holy of Holies where the
presence of God was most eminent Lev. 1.16.
. When Aaron was to go into the Holy of Holies, he was to sanctify himself in
an extraordinary manner Lev. 16.4.
. The Priests were to be bare footed in the Temple, in the exercise of their
Office; shoes always were to be put off upon holy ground: Look to thy foot when
thou go to the House of God, says the wise man, Eccles. 5.1. Strip the
affections, the feet of the Soul, of all the dirt contracted; discard all
earthly and base thoughts from the heart A Beast was not to touch the Mount
Sinai, without losing his Life: Nor can we come near the Throne with brutish
affections, without losing the life and fruit of the worship. An unholy Soul
degrades himself from a Spirit to a Brute, and the worship from spiritual to
brutish. If any unmortified sin be found in the Life, as it was in the comers
to the Temple, It taints and pollutes the Worship Isa. 1.15.
. All worship is an acknowledgment of the excellency of God as he is holy: Jer.
7.9, 10.
Hence it is called a sanctifying Gods Name: How can any person sanctify Gods
Name, that has not a holy resemblance to his Nature? If he be not holy as he
is holy, he cannot worship him according to his excellency in Spirit and in
Truth: No worship is spiritual wherein we have not a communion with God. But
what intercourse can there be between a holy God, and an impure Creature;
between Light and Darkness? We have no fellowship with him in any service,
unless we walk in the Light, in service and out of service, as he is Light 1
John 1.7.
. The Heathen thought not their Sacrifices agreeable to God, without washing
their hands, whereby they signified the preparation of their hearts, before
they made the Oblation: Clean hands without a pure heart, signify nothing: The
frame of our hearts must answer the purity of the outward Symbols. Psalm. 26.6.
I will wash my hands in Innocence, so will I compass thine Altar, oh Lord: He
would observe the appointed Ceremonies, but not without cleansing his heart as
well as his hands. Vain Man is apt to rest upon outward acts and rites of
worship: But this must always be practiced: The words are in the present Tense,
I wash, I compass. Purity in worship ought to be our continual Care. If we
would perform a spiritual service, wherein we would have communion with God, it
must be in Holiness: If we would walk with Christ, it must be in white Revel.
3.4.
; alluding to the white Garments the Priests put on, when they went to perform
their service: As without this we cannot see God in Heaven, so neither can we
see the beauty of God in his own Ordinances.

11. Spiritual worship is performed with spiritual ends, with raised aims at
the glory of God. No duty can be spiritual that has a carnal aim: Where God is
the sole Object, he ought to be the principal End: In all our actions he is to
be our End, as he is the principle of our Being; much more in Religious Acts,
as he is the Object of our worship. The worship of God in Scripture, is expressed
by the seeking of him Heb. 11.6,
; Him, not our selves; all is to be referred to God. As we are not to live to
our selves, that being the sign of a carnal state; so we are not to worship for
our selves, Romans 14.7, 8. As all actions are denominated good from their end,
as well as their object; so upon the same account they are denominated
spiritual. The end spiritualizeth our natural actions; much more our religious:
Then are our faculties devoted to him when they center in him. If the intention
be evil, there is nothing but darkness in the whole service, Luke 11.34. The
first institution of the Sabbath, the solemn day for worship, was to
contemplate the glory of God in his stupendous works of Creation, and render
him a homage for them, Revel. 4.11. Thou art worthy oh Lord, to receive Honor,
Glory and Power; for thou have created all things, and for thy pleasure they
are and were created. No worship can be returned, without a glorifying of God;
and we cannot actually glorify him, without direct aims at the promoting his
honor. As we have immediately to do with God, so we are immediately to mind
the praise of God. As we are not to content our selves with habitual grace, but
be rich in the exercise of it in worship; so we are not to acquiesce in
habitual aims at the glory of God, without the actual outflowings of our hearts
in those aims.

It Is natural for Man to worship God for self: Self-righteousness is the rooted
aim of Man in his worship since his revolt from God, and being sensible it is
not to be found in his natural actions, he speaks for it in his moral and
religious. By the first Pride we flung God off from being our Sovereign, and
from being our end; since, a Pharisaical Spirit struts it in nature, not only
to do things to be seen of men, but to be admired by God, Isa. 58.3. Wherefore
have we fasted and thou take no knowledge? This is to have God worship them,
instead of being worshipped by them. Cain's carriage after his Sacrifice,
testified some base end in his worship; he came not to God as a Subject to a
Sovereign, but as if he had been the Sovereign, and God the Subject; and when
his design is not answered, and his desire not gratified, he proves more a
Rebel to God, and a Murderer of his Brother. Such base scents will rise up in
our worship from the body of death which cleaves to us, and mix themselves with
our services, as Weeds with the Fish in the Net. David therefore, after his
People had offered willingly to the Temple, beggs of God, that their hearts
might be prepared to him 1 Cron. 29.18.
; that their hearts might stand right to God, without any squinting to
self ends.

Some present themselves to God, as poor men offer a present to a great person;
not to honor him, but to gain for themselves a reward richer than their gift.
What profit is it that we have kept his Ordinance, etc? Mal. 3.14. Some worship
him, intending thereby to make him amends for the wrong they have done him;
wipe off their scores, and satisfy their debts; as though a spiritual wrong
could be recompensed with a bodily service, and an infinite Spirit be outwitted
and appeased by a carnal flattery. Self is the Spirit of Carnality: To pretend
a homage to God, and intend only the advantage of self, is rather to mock him,
than worship him. When we believe that we ought to be satisfied, rather than
God glorified; we set God below our selves, imagine that he should submit his
own honor to our advantage: We make our selves more glorious than God, as
though we were not made for him, but he has a Being only for us; this is to
have a very low esteem of the Majesty of God. Whatsoever any man aims at in
worship above the glory of God, that he forms as an Idol to himself instead of
God, and sets up a Golden-Image: God counts not this as a Worship. The
Offerings made in the Wilderness for forty years together, God esteemed as not
offered to him, Amos 5.25. Have you offered to me Sacrifices and Offerings in
the Wilderness forty years, oh House of Israel? They did it not to God, but to
themselves; for their own security, and the attainment of the possession of the
promised Land. A spiritual Worshipper performs not worship for some hopes of
carnal advantage; he uses ordinances as means to bring God and his Soul
together; to be more fitted to honor God in the world, in his particular
place: When he has been inflamed and humble in any address or duty, he gives
God the glory; his heart suits the doxology at the end of the Lords-prayer,
ascribes the Kingdom, Power and Glory to God alone; and if any viper of Pride
starts out upon him, he endeavors presently to shake it off. That which was
the first end of our framing, ought to be the chief end of our acting toward
God: But when men have the same ends in worship as Brutes, the satisfaction of
a sensitive part; the service is no more than brutish. The acting for a
sensitive end, is unworthy of the Majesty of God to whom we address, and
unbecoming a rational Creature. The acting for a sensitive end, is not a
rational, much less can it be a spiritual service; though the Act may be good
in it self, yet not good in the Agent, because he wants a due end: We are then
spiritual, when we have the same end in our redeemed services, as God had in
his redeeming love, viz. his own Glory.

12. Spiritual service is offered to God in the name of Christ. Those are only
spiritual Sacrifices, that are offered up to God by Jesus Christ 1 Pet. 2.5.
, that are the fruits of the Sanctification of the Spirit, and offered in the
mediation of the Son: As the Altar sanctifies the gift, so does Christ
spiritualize our services for Gods acceptance; as the Fire upon the Altar
separated the airy and finer parts of the sacrifice from the terrene and
earthly: This is the Golden Altar upon which the Prayers of the Saints are
offered up before the Throne Revel. 8.3.
. As all that we have from God streams through his blood: so all that we give
to God ascends by virtue of his merits. All the blessings God gave to the
Israelites came out of Sion Psalm. 134.3. The Lord bless thee out of Sion.
, that is, from the Gospel hid under the Law; all the duties we present to God
are to be presented in Sion, in an evangelical manner: All our worship must be
bottomed on Christ. God has intended that we should honor the Son as we
honor the Father: As we honor the Father by offering our service only to him,
so we are to honor the Son by offering it only in his name: In him alone God
is well pleased, because in him alone he finds our services spiritual and
worthy of acceptance: We must therefore take fast hold of him with our
Spirits, and the faster we hold him, the more spiritual is our worship. To do
any thing in the name of Christ, is not to believe the worship shall be
accepted for it self, but to have our eye fixed upon Christ for the acceptance
of it, and not to rest upon the work done as carnal people are apt to do. The
Creatures present their acknowledgments to God by Man; and man can only present
his by Christ. It was utterly unlawful after the building of the Temple, to
sacrifice any where else: The Temple being a type of Christ, it is utterly
unlawful for us to present our services in any other name than his.

This is the way to be spiritual. If we consider God out of Christ, we can have
no other notions but those of horror and bondage. We behold him a Spirit, but
environed with Justice and Wrath for Sinners: But the consideration of him in
Christ, vails his Justice; draws forth his Mercy; represents him more a Father
than a Judge. In Christ the aspect of Justice is changed, and by that the
temper of the Creature; so that in and by this Mediator, we can have a
spiritual boldness, and access to God with confidence Ephesians. 3.12.
; whereby the Spirit is kept from benummedness, and distraction; and our Souls
quickened and refined. The thoughts kept upon Christ in a duty of worship,
quickly elevates the Soul, and spiritualizeth the whole service. Sin makes our
services black, and the blood of Christ makes both our persons and services
white.

To conclude this Head.

God is a Spirit infinitely happy, therefore we must approach to him with
cheerfulness; He is a Spirit of infinite Majesty, therefore we must come before
him with reverence; He is a Spirit infinitely high, therefore we must offer up
our Sacrifices with the deepest humility; He is a Spirit infinitely holy,
therefore we must address with purity; He is a Spirit infinitely glorious, we
must therefore acknowledge his excellency in all that we do, and in our
measures contribute to his glory, by having the highest aims in his worship; He
is a Spirit infinitely provoked by us, therefore we must offer up our worship
in the name of a pacifying Mediator and Intercessour.

3. The third general, is why a spiritual worship is due to God, and to be
offered to him. We must consider the Object of Worship, and the Subject of
worship; the Worshipper and the Worshipped. God is a spiritual Being; Man is a
reasonable Creature. The nature of God informs us, what is fit to be presented
to him; our own nature informs us, what is fit to be presented by us.

Reason 1. The best we have is to be presented to God in worship. For

1. Since God is the most excellent Being, he is to be served by us with the
most excellent thing we have, and with the choicest veneration. God is so
incomprehensibly excellent, that we cannot render him what he deserves; We must
render him what we are able to offer; the best of our affiections; the flower
of our strength; the Cream and Top of our Spirits. By the same reason that we
are bound to give to God the best worship, we must offer it to him in the best
manner. We cannot give to God any thing too good for so blessed a Being: God
being a great King, slight services become not his Majesty Mal. 1.13, 14.
: It Is unbecoming the Majesty of God, and the reason of a Creature, to give him
a trivial thing: It Is unworthy to bestow the best of our strength on our Lust,
and the worst and weakest in the service of God. An infinite Spirit, should
have affections as near to infinite as we can: As he is a Spirit without
bounds, so he should have a service without limits: When we have given him all,
we cannot serve him according to the excellency of his nature Josh. 24.19.
; and shall we give him less than all? His infinite excellency and our
dependence on him as Creatures, demands the choicest adoration: Our Spirits
being the noblest part of our nature, are as due to him, as the service of our
bodies which are the vilest: To serve him with the worst only, is to diminish
his honor.

2. Under the Law, God commanded the best to be offered him. He would have the
Males, the best of the kind; the fat, the best of the Creature Exodus 29.13. The
inward fat not the of-fails.
: He commanded them to offer him the Firstlings of the flock; not the
Firstlings of the Womb, but the Firstlings of the Year: The Jewish Cattle
having two breeding times, in the beginning of the Spring, and the beginning of
September; The latter breed was the weaker which Jacob knew Genesis 30.
, when he laid the Rods before the Cattle when they were strong in the Spring,
and witheld them when they were feeble in the Autumn. One reason (as the Jews
say) why God accepted not the offering of Cain was, because he brought the
meanest, not the best of the fruit; and therefore it is said, only that he
brought of the fruit of the Ground, Genesis 4.3. not the first of the fruit, or
the best of the fruit; as Abel who brought the Firstling of his Flock, and the
Fat thereof, v. 4.

3. And this the Heathen practiced by the light of Nature. They for the most
part offered Males, as being more worthy; and burnt the Male, not the Female
Frank incense, as it is divided into those two kinds: They offered the best,
when they offered their Children to Molock. Nothing more excellent than Man,
and nothing dearer to Parents than their Children, which are parts of
themselves. When the Israelites would have a Golden-Calf for a representation
of God, they would dedicate their Jewels, and strip their Wives and Children of
their richest Ornaments, to show their devotion. Shall men serve their dumb
Idols with the best of their substance, and the strength of their Souls; and
shall the living God have a duller service from us, than Idols had from them?
God requires no such hard, but delightful worship from us, our spirits.

4. All Creatures serve Man, by the providential order of God, with the best
they have. As we by Gods appointment receive from Creatures the best they can
give, ought we not with a free will render to God the best we can offer? The
Beasts give us their best Fat; the Trees their best Fruit; the Sun its best
Light; the Fountains their best Streams: Shall God order us the best from
Creatures, and we put him off with the worst from our selves?

5. God has given us the choicest thing he had. A Redeemer that was the Power
of God, and the Wisdom of God: The best he had in Heaven, his own Son, and in
himself, a Sacrifice for us, that we might be enabled to present our selves a
Sacrifice to Him. And Christ offered himself for us, the best he had, and that
with the strength of the Deity through the Eternal Spirit; and shall we grudge
God the best part of our selves? As God would have a worship from his Creature,
so it must be with the best part of his Creature. If we have given our selves
to the Lord 2 Cor. 8.5.
, we can worship with no less than our selves. What is the Man without his
Spirit? If we are to worship God with all that we have received from him, we
must worship him with the best part we have received from him: It Is but a small
glory we can give him with the best, and shall we deprive him of his right by
giving him the worst? As what we are, is from God; so what we are, ought to be
for God. Creation is the foundation of worship, Psalm. 100.2, 3. Serve the Lord
with gladness: Know ye that the Lord he is God; it is he that has made us: He
has ennobled us with spiritual affections; where is it fittest for us to
employ them, but upon him? and at what time, but when we come solemnly to
converse with him? Is it Justice to deny him the honor of his best gift to us?
Our Souls are more his gift to us, than any thing in the World: Other things
are so given that they are often taken from us, but our Spirits are the most
durable gift. Rational faculties cannot be removed without a dissolution of
nature.

Well then Amyraut. Mor. Tom. 2. P. 311.
; As he is God, he is to be honored with all the propensions and ardor that
the infiniteness and excellency of such a Being requires, and the incomparable
obligations he has laid upon us in this state deserve at our hands: In all our
worship therefore, our minds ought to be filled with the highest admiration,
love and reverence. Since our end was to glorify God, we answer not our end,
and honor him not, unless we give him the choicest we have.

Reason 2. We cannot else act toward God according to the nature of rational
Creatures. Spiritual worship is due to God, because of his nature; and due from
us, because of our nature. As we are to adore God, so we are to adore him as
men: The nature of a rational Creature makes this impression upon him: He
cannot view his own nature without having this duty striking upon his mind. As
he knows by inspection into himself, that there was a God that made him; so,
that he is made to be in subjection to God; subjection to him in his Spirit as
well as his Body, and ought morally to testify this natural dependence on him:
His constitution informs him, that he has a capacity to converse with God;
that he cannot converse with him, but by those inward faculties: If it could be
managed by his Body without his Spirit, Beasts might as well converse with God
as Men. It can never be a reasonable service as it ought to be Romans 12.1.
, unless the reasonable faculties be employed in the management of it: It must
be a worship prodigiously lame, without the concurrence of the chiefest part of
Man with it. As we are to act conformably to the nature of the object, so also
to the nature of our own faculties. Our faculties in the very gift of them to
us were destined to be exercised; about what? What? All other things but the
Author of them: It Is a conceit cannot enter into the heart of a rational
Creature, that he should act as such a Creature in other things, and as a stone
in things relating to the Donor of them; as a man, with his mind about him in
the affairs of the world, as a Beast without reason in his acts toward God. If
a man did not employ his reason in other things, he would be an unprofitable
Creature in the world: If he do not employ his spiritual faculties in worship,
he denies them the proper end and use for which they were given him; it is a
practical denial that God has given him a Soul, and that God has any right to
the exercise of it. If there were no worship appointed by God in the world, the
natural inclination of man to some kind of Religion would be in vain; and if
our inward faculties were not employed in the duties of Religion, they would be
in vain: The true end of God in the endowment of us with them would be defeated
by us, as much as lies in us, if we did not serve him with that which we have
from him solely at his own cost. As no man can with reason conclude, that the
Rest commanded on the Sabbath and the Sanctification of it, was only a rest of
the body; that had been performed by the Beasts as well as Men; but some higher
end was aimed at for the rational Creature: So no man can think that the
Command for worship, terminated only in the presence of the Body; that God
should give the Command to Man as a reasonable Creature, and expect no other
service from him than that of a Brute.

God did not require a worship from man, for any want he had, or any essential
honor that could accrue to him; but that men might testify their gratitude to
him, and dependence on him. It Is the most horrid ingratitude, not to have
lively and deep sentiments of gratitude after such obligations, and not to make
those due acknowledgments that are proper for a rational Creature. Religion is
the highest and choicest act of a reasonable Creature: No Creature under Heaven
is capable of it that wants reason. As it is a violation of reason not to
worship God, so it is no less a violation of reason not to worship him with the
Heart and Spirit: It is a high dishonor to God, and defeats him not only of
the service due to him from Man, but that which is due to him from all the
Creatures. Every Creature, as it is an effect of Gods Power and Wisdom, does
passively worship God; that is, it does afford matter of adoration to man that
has, reason to collect it and return it where it is due: Without the exercise
of the Soul we can no more hand it to God, than without such an exercise we can
gather it from the Creature: So that by this neglect, the Creatures are
restrained from answering their chief end; they cannot pay any service to God
without man; nor can man without the employment of his rational faculties,
render a homage to God, any more than beasts can. This engagement of our inward
power stands firm and unviolable, let the modes of worship be what they will,
or the changes of them by the Sovereign Authority of God never so frequent;
this could not expire or be changed, as long as the nature of Man endured. As
Man had not been capable of a Command for Worship, unless he had been endued
with spiritual faculties; so he is not active in a true practice of Worship,
unless they be employed by him in it. The constitution of Man makes this manner
of worship perpetually obligatory; and the oblation can never cease, till man
cease to be a Creature furnished with such faculties: In our worship therefore,
if we would act like rational Creatures, we should extend all the powers of our
Souls to the utmost pitch, and essay to have apprehensions of God, equal to the
excellency of his Nature, which though we may attempt, we can never attain.

Reason 3. Without this engagement of our Spirits, no act is an act of worship.
True worship being an acknowledgment of God and the perfections of his Nature,
results only from the Soul, that being only capable of knowing God and those
perfections, which are the object and motive of worship: The posture of the
body, is but to testify the inward temper and affection of the mind: If
therefore it testifies what it is not, it is a lie and no worship: The cringes a
Beast may be taught to make to an Altar, may as well be called Worship; since a
man thinks as little of that God he pretends to honor, as the beast does of
the Altar to which he bows. Worship is a reverent remembrance of God, and
giving some honor to him with the intention of the Soul: It cannot justly have
the name of Worship, that wants the essential part of it: It Is an ascribing to
God the glory of his Nature, an owning subjection and obedience to him as our
sovereign Lord: This is as impossible to be performed without the Spirit, as
that there can be life and motion in a body without a Soul: It Is a drawing near
to God, not in regard of his essential presence; so all things are near to God;
but in an acknowledgement of his excellency, which is an act of the Spirit;
without this, the worst of men in a place of worship, are as near to God as the
best. The necessity of the conjunction of our Soul, arises from the nature of
worship; which being the most serious thing we can be employed in, the highest
converse with the highest object, requires the choicest temper of Spirit in the
performance. That cannot be an act of worship, which is not an act of Piety and
Virtue; but there is no act of virtue done by the members of the Body, without
the concurrence of the Powers of the Soul. We may as well call the presence of
a dead Carcass in a place of worship, an act of Religion, as the presence of a
living body without an intent Spirit: The separation of the Soul from one is
natural, the other moral; that renders the body lifeless, but this renders the
act loathsome to God: As the being of the Soul gives life to the Body, so the
operation of the Soul gives life to the actions: As he cannot be a man that
wants the form of a man, a rational Soul; so that cannot be a worship that
wants an essential part, the act of the Spirit: God will not vouchsafe any acts
of man so noble a title, without the requisite qualifications, Hos. 5.6. They
shall go with their Flocks and their Herds, to seek the Lord, etc. A multitude
of Lambs and Bullocks for Sacrifice, to appease Gods Anger: God would not give
it the title of worship, though instituted by himself, when it wanted the
qualities of such a service: The Spirit of Whoredom was in the midst of them,
v. 4. In the judgment of our Savior, it is a vain worship, when the Traditions
of Men are taught for the Doctrins of God Mat. 15.9.
; and no less vain must it be, when the Bodies of Men are presented to supply
the place of their Spirits. As an omission of duty is a contempt of Gods
Sovereign Authority, so the omission of the manner of it, is a contempt of it,
and of his amiable excellency; and that which is a contempt and mockery, can
lay no just claim to the title of Worship.

Reason 4. There is in worship, an approach of God to Man. It was instituted to
this purpose, that God might give out his blessings to Man: And ought not our
Spirits to be prepared and ready to receive his communications? We are in such
acts, more peculiarly in his presence. In the Israelites hearing the Law, it is
said God was to come among them Exodus 19.10, 11.
: Then, men are said to stand before the Lord Deuteronomy. 10.8.
: God before whom I stand, that is, whom I worship: And therefore when Cain
forsook the worship of God settled in his Fathers Family, Kings 1.17.
he is said to go out from the presence of the Lord, Genesis 4.16. God is
essentially present in the world; graciously present in his Church. The name of
the Evangelical City is, Jehovah Shammah Ezekiel. 48.35.
, the Lord is there. God is more graciously present in the Evangelical
institutions, than in the Legal: He loves the Gates of Zion, more than all the
dwellings of Jacob Psalm. 87.2.
: His Evangelical Law and Worship which was to go forth from Zion, as the other
did from Sinai, Mic. 4.2. God delights to approach to Men, and converse with
them in the worship instituted in the Gospel, more than in all the dwellings of
Jacob. If God be graciously present, ought not we to be spiritually present? A
liveless Carcass service, becomes not so high and delectable a presence as
this: It Is to thrust him from us, not invite him to us: It Is to practice in the
Ordinances, what the Prophet predicts concerning men's usage of our Savior,
Isa. 53.2. There is no form, no comeliness, nor beauty that we should desire
him. A slightness in worship, reflects upon the excellency of the object of
worship. God and his worship are so linkt together, that whosoever thinks the
one not worth his inward care, esteems the other not worth his inward
affection. How unworthy a slight is it of God, who profers the opening his
Treasure; the reimpressing his Image; conferring his blessings; admits us into
his presence, when he has no need for us, who has millions of Angels to
attend him in his Court, and celebrate his Praise? He that worships not God
with his Spirit, regards not Gods presence in his Ordinances, and slights the
great end of God in them, and that perfection he may attain by them. We can
only expect, what God has promised to give, when we tender to him what he has
commanded us to present. If we put off God with a Shell, he will put us off
with a Husk. How can we expect his heart, when we do not give him ours; or hope
for the blessing needful for us, when we render not the glory due to him? It
cannot be an advantageous worship, without spiritual graces; for those are
uniting, and Union is the ground of all Communion.

Reason 5. To have a spiritual worship is Gods end in the restoration of the
Creature; both in Redemption by his Son, and Sanctification by his Spirit. A
fitness for spiritual Offerings, was the end of the coming of Christ Mal. 3.3.
; He should purge them, as Gold and Silver by Fire, a Spirit burning up their
dross, melting them into a holy compliance with and submission to God: To what
purpose? That they may offer to the Lord an Offering in Righteousness; a pure
Offering from a purified Spirit: He came to bring us to God 1 Pet. 3.18.
in such a Garb, as that we might be fit to converse with him: Can we be thus,
without a fixedness of our Spirits on him?

The offering of spiritual Sacrifices, is the end of making any a spiritual
Habitation, and a holy Priesthood Pet. 2.5.
. We can no more be Worshippers of God, without a Worshippers nature, than a
man can be a man without humane nature. As man was at first created for the
honor and worship of God; so the design of restoring that Image which was
defaced by Sin, tends to the same end. We are not brought to God by Christ, nor
are our services presented to him, if they be without our Spirits: Would any
man that undertakes to bring another to a Prince, introduce him in a slovenly
and sordid habit, such a garb that he knows hateful to him? Or bring the
Clothes or Skin of a Man stuffed with straw, instead of the Person? To come with
our Skins before God without our Spirits, is contrary to the design of God, in
Redemption and Regeneration.

If a carnal worship would have pleased God, a carnal heart would have served
his turn, without the expense of his Spirit in Sanctification: He bestows upon
man a spiritual nature, that he may return to him a spiritual service: He
enlightens the Understanding, that he may have a rational service; and new
moulds the Will, that he may have a voluntary service. As it is the Milk of the
Word wherewith he feeds us, so it is the service of the Word wherewith we must
glorify him. So much as there is of confusedness in our understanding, so much
of starting and levity in our Wills; so much of slipperiness and skipping in
our affections; so much is abated of the due qualities of the worship of God;
and so much we fall short of the end of Redemption and Sanctification.

Reason 6. A spiritual worship is to be offered to God, because no worship but
that can be acceptable. We can never be secured of acceptance without it; He
being a Spirit, nothing but the worship in Spirit can be suitable to him: What
is unsuitable, cannot be acceptable: There must be something in us, to make our
services capable of being presented by Christ for an actual acceptance. No
service is acceptable to God by Jesus Christ, but as it is a spiritual
Sacrifice, and offered by a spiritual heart, 1 Pet. 2.5. The Sacrifice is first
spiritual, before it be acceptable to God by Christ: When it is an offering in
righteousness, it is then, and only then pleasant to the Lord, Mal. 3.3, 4. No
Prince would accept a gift that is unsuitable to his Majesty, and below the
condition of the person that presents it: Would he be pleased with a bottle of
water for drink, from one that has his Cellar full of wine? How unacceptable
must that be, that is unsuitable to the Divine Majesty? And what can be more
unsuitable, than a withdrawing the operations of our Souls from him, in the
oblation of our Bodies? We as little glorify God as God, when we give him only
a corporeal worship; as the Heathen did, when they represented him in a
corporeal shape Romans 1.21.
; one as well as the other denies his spiritual nature: This is worse, for had
it been lawful to represent God to the eye, it could not have been done, but by
a bodily figure suited to the sense; but since it is necessary to worship him,
it cannot be by a corporeal attendance, without the operation of the Spirit. A
spiritual frame is more pleasing to God, than the highest exterior adornments;
than the greatest gifts, and the highest Prophetical illuminations. The glory
of the second Temple exceeded the glory of the first Hag. 2.8, 9.
: As God accounts the spiritual glory of Ordinances most beneficial for us, so
our spiritual attendance upon Ordinances is most pleasing to him; He that
offers the greatest services without it, offers but flesh, Hos. 8.13. They
sacrifice Flesh for the Sacrifices of my Offerings, but the Lord accepts them
not. Spiritual frames are the Soul of Religious services; all other carriages
without them, are contemptible to this Spirit: We can never lay claim to that
promise of God, none shall seek my face in vain: We affect a vain seeking of
him, when we want a due temper of Spirit for him: And vain Spirits shall have
vain returns: It Is more contrary to the nature of Gods Holiness to have
communion with such, than it is contrary to the nature of Light to have
communion with Darkness.

To make use of this.

Use 1. First it serves for information.

1. If spiritual worship be required by God; How sad is it for them that are so
far from giving God a spiritual worship, that they render him no worship at
all? I speak not of the neglect of public, but of private; when men present
not a devotion to God from one years end to the other. The speech of our
Savior, that we must worship God in Spirit and Truth, implies that a worship
is due to him from every one: That is the common impression upon the
Consciences of all men in the world, if they have not by some constant course
in gross sins, hardened their Souls, and stifled those natural sentiments. There
was never a Nation in the world, without some kind of Religion; and no Religion
was ever without some modes, to testify a devotion: The Heathens had their
Sacrifices and Purifications; and the Jews by Gods order had their rites,
whereby they were to express their Allegiance to God.

Consider,

1. Worship is a duty incumbent upon all men. It Is a homage Mankind ows to God,
under the relation wherein he stands obliged to him: It Is a prime and immutable
justice to own our Allegiance to him. It Is as unchangeable a truth that God is
to be worshipped, as that God is: He is to be worshipped as God; as Creator;
and therefore by all, since he is the Creator of all, the Lord of all, and all
are his Creatures, and all are his Subjects. Worship is founded upon Creation,
Psalm. 100.2, 3. It Is due to God for himself and his own essential excellency,
and therefore due from all: It Is due upon the account of man's nature: The human
rational nature is the same in all. Whatsoever is due to God upon the account
of man's nature, and the natural obligations he has laid upon man, is due from
all men, because they all enjoy the benefits which are proper to their nature.

Man in no state was exempted, nor can be exempted from it: In Paradise he had
his Sabbath and Sacraments; Man therefore dissolves the obligation of a
reasonable nature, by neglecting the worship of God.

Religion is in the first place to be minded. As soon as Noah came out of the
Ark, he contrived not a Habitation for himself, but an Altar for the Lord, to
acknowledge him the Author of his preservation from the Deluge Genesis 8.20.
: And wheresoever Abraham came, his first business was to erect an Altar, and
pay his arrears of gratitude to God, before he ran upon the score for new
mercies Genesis 12.7. Genesis 13.4.18.
; He left a testimony of worship where ever he came.

2. Wholly therefore to neglect it, is a high degree of Atheism. He that calls
not upon God, says in his heart there is no God; and seems to have the
sentiments of natural Conscience, as to God, stifled in him Psalm. 14.1, 4
: It must arise from a conceit that there is no God, or that we are equal to
him, adoration not being due from persons of an equal state; or that God is
unable, or unwilling to take notice of the adoring acts of his Creatures: What
is any of these but an undeifying the supreme Majesty? When we lay aside all
thoughts of paying any homage to him, we are in a fair way opinionatively to
deny him, as much as we practically disown him. Where there is no knowledge of
God, that is, no acknowledgment of God, a gap is opened to all licentiousness
Hos. 4.1, 2.
: And that by degrees brawns the Conscience, and raseth out the sense of God.
Those forsake God that forget his holy Mountain Isa. 65.11.
; They do not practically own him as the Creator of their Souls or bodies. It Is
the sin of Cain, who turning his back upon worship, is said to go out from the
presence of the Lord Genesis 4.16.
. Not to worship him with our Spirits, is against his Law of Creation: Not to
worship him at all, is against his act of Creation: Not to worship him in truth
is Hypocrisy: Not to worship him at all is Atheism, whereby we render our
selves worse than the worms in the Earth, or a toad in a Ditch.

3. To perform a worship to a false God, or to the true God in a false manner,
seems to be less a sin, than to live in perpetual neglects of it. Though it be
directed to a false Object instead of God; yet it is under the notion of a God,
and so is an acknowledgement of such a Being as God in the world; whereas the
total neglect of any worship, is a practical denying of the existence of any
supreme Majesty.

Whosoever constantly omits a public and private worship, transgresses against
an universally received dictate; For all Nations have agreed in the common
notion of worshipping God, though they have disagreed in the several modes and
rites whereby they would testify that adoration. By a worship of God, though
superstitious, a veneration and reverence of such a being is maintained in the
world; whereas by a total neglect of worship, he is vertually disowned and
discarded, if not from his existence, yet from his Providence and Government of
the world: All the mercies we breath in are denied to flow from him. A foolish
worship owns Religion, though it bespatters it. As if a stranger coming into a
Country mistakes a Subject for the Prince, and pays that reverence to the
Subject, which is due to the Prince, though he mistakes the object, yet he owns
an Authority; or if he pays any respect to the true Prince of that Country
after the mode of his own, though appearing ridiculous in the place where he
is, he owns the Authority of the Prince; whereas the omission of all respect
would be a contempt of Majesty: And therefore the Judgments of God have been
more signal upon the Sacrilegious Contemners of worship among the Heathens,
than upon those that were diligent and devout in their false worship; and they
generally owned the blessings received, to the preservation of a sense, and
worship of a deity among them. Though such a worship be not acceptable to God,
and every man is bound to offer to God a devotion agreeable to his own mind;
yet it is commendable, not as worship, but as it speaks an acknowledgment of
such a Being as God in his power in Creation, and his beneficence in his
Providence.

Well then, omissions of worship are to be avoided. Let no man execute that
upon himself, which God will pronounce at last as the greatest misery, and bid
God depart from him, who will at last be loath to hear God bid him depart from
him. Though man has natural sentiments that God is to be worshipped; yet
having an hostility in his nature, he is apt to neglect, or give it him in a
slight manner: He therefore sets a particular mark and notice of attention upon
the fourth Command, Remember thou keep holy the Sabath-day. Corrupt nature is
apt to neglect the worship of God, and flagg in it: This Command therefore
which concerns his worship, he fortifies with several reasons.

Nor let any neglect worship, because they cannot find their hearts spiritual
in it. The further we are from God, the more carnal shall we be. No man can
expect heat by a distance from the Sun beams, or other means of warmth. Though
God commanded a circumcised heart in the Jewish services; yet he did not
warrant a neglect of the outward testimonies of Religion he had then appointed:
He expected according to his Command, that they should offer the Sacrifices,
and practice the legal Purifications he had commanded; he would have them
diligently observed, though he had declared that he imposed them only for a
time. And our Savior ordered the practice of those positive rites as long as
the law remained unrepealed, as in the Case of the Leper Mark 14.4.
. It Is an injustice to refuse the offering our selves to God according to the
manner he has in his Wisdom prescribed and required.

If spiritual worship be required by God; then

2. It informs us, that diligence in outward worship is not to be rested in.
Daille melange. des Sermon: Ser. 2.
Men may attend all their days on worship, with a juiceless heart and
unquickned frame, and think to compensate the neglect of the manner, with
abundance of the matter of service. Outward expressions are but the badges and
liveries of service, not the service it self. As the strength of Sin lies in
the inward frame of the heart, so the strength of worship in the inward
complexion and temper of the Soul. What do a thousand services avail, without
cutting the throat of our carnal affections? What are loud Prayers, but as
sounding Brass and tinkling Cymbals, without Divine Charity? A Pharisaical
diligence in outward forms without inward Spirit, had no better a title
vouchsafed by our Savior, than that of hypocritical. God desires not
Sacrifices, nor delights in burnt Offerings: Shadows are not to be offered
instead of Substance. God required the heart of man for it self; but commanded
outward Ceremonies, as subservient to inward worship, and goads and spurs unto
it: They were never appointed as the substance of Religion, but auxiliaries to
it. What value had the Offering of the human nature of Christ been of, if he
had not had a divine nature to qualify him to be the Priest? And what is the
oblation of our Bodies, without a Priestly act of the Spirit in the
presentation of it? Could the Israelites have called themselves Worshippers of
God according to his Order, if they had brought a thousand Lambs that had died
in a Ditch, or been killed at home? They were to be brought living to the
Altar; the blood shed at the foot of it: A thousand Sacrifices killed without,
had not been so valuable as one brought alive to the place of Offering: One
sound Sacrifice is better than a thousand rotten ones. As God took no pleasure
in the blood of Beasts without its relation to the Antitype; So he takes no
pleasure in the outward rites of worship, without Faith in the Redeemer. To
offer a Body with a sapless Spirit, is a Sacrilege of the same nature with
that of the Israelites when they offered dead Beasts. A man without spiritual
worship is dead whiles he worships, though by his diligence in the externals of
it he may like the Angel of the Church of Sardis, have a name to live Revel.
3.1.
. What security can we expect from a multitude of dead services? What weak
shields are they against the holy eye and revenging wrath of God? What man, but
one out of his wits, would solicit a dead man to be his Advocate or Champion?

Diligence in outward worship is not to be rested in.

Use 2. Shall be for Examination: Let us try our selves concerning the manner
of our worship. We are now in the end of the world, and the dreggs of time;
wherein the Apostle predicts, there may be much of a form, and little of the
power of Godliness 2 Timothy 3.1, 5.
: And therefore it stands us in hand to search into our selves, whether it be
not thus with us? Whether there be as much reverence in our Spirits, as there
may be devotion in our countenances and outward carriages.

1. How therefore are our hearts prepared to worship? Is our diligence greater,
to put our hearts in an adoring posture, than our bodies in a decent garb? Or
are we content to have a muddy Heart, so we may have a dressed Carcass? To have a
Spirit a Cage of unclean Birds, while we wipe the filth from the outside of the
Platter, is no better than a Pharisaical devotion, and deserves no better a
name, than that of a whited Sepulcher.

Do we take opportunities to excite and quicken our Spirits to the performance,
and cry aloud with David, awake, awake my glory? Are not our hearts asleep when
Christ knocks; when we hear the voice of God, seek my face; Do we answer him
with warm resolutions, thy face Lord we will seek Psalm. 27.8.
? Do we comply with spiritual motions, and strike whiles the Iron is hot? Is
there not more of reluctance, than readiness? Is there a quick rising of the
Soul in reverence to the motion, as Eglon to Ehud; or a sullen hanging the head
at the first approach of it? Or if our hearts seem to be engaged, and on fire;
What are the motives that quicken that fire? Is it only the blast of a natural
Conscience; fear of Hell; desires of Heaven as abstracted from God? Or is it an
affection to God; an obedient will to please him; longings to enjoy him, as a
holy and sanctifying God in his Ordinances, as well as a blessed and glorified
God in Heaven?

What do we expect in our approaches from him? That which may make divine
impressions upon us, and more exactly conform us to the divine nature? Or do we
design nothing but an empty formality, a rolling eye, and a filling the Air
with a few words, without any openings of heart to receive the incomes, which
according to the nature of the duty might be conveyed to us? Can this be a
spiritual worship? The Soul then closely waits upon him, when its expectation
is only from him, Psalm. 62.6. Are our hearts seasoned with a sense of sin; a
sight of our spiritual wants; raised notions of God; glowing affections to Him;
strong appetite after a spiritual fullness? Do we rouse up our sleepy Spirits,
and make a Covenant with all that is within us to attend upon him? So much as
we want of this, so much we come short of a spiritual worship: In Psalm. 57.7.
My heart is fixed, oh God, my heart is fixed. David would fix his heart, before
he would engage in a praising act of worship: He appeals to God about it, and
that with doubling the expression, as being certain of an inward preparedness:
Can we make the same appeals in a fixation of Spirit?

2. How are our hearts fixed upon him, How do they cleave to him in the duty?
Do we resign our Spirits to God, and make them an entire Holocaust, a whole
burnt-offering in his worship? Or do we not willingly admit carnal thoughts to
mix themselves with spiritual duties, and fasten our minds to the Creature,
under pretenses of directing them to the Creator? Do we not pass a mere
complement on God, by some superficial act of devotion; while some covetous,
envious, ambitious, voluptuous imagination may possess our minds? Do we not
invert Gods Order, and worship a Lust instead of God with our Spirits, that
should not have the least service, either from our Souls or Bodies, but with a
spiritual disdain be sacrificed to the just indignation of God? How often do we
fight against his Will, while we cry hail Master; instead of crucifying our own
thoughts, crucifying the Lord of our Lives; Our outward carriage plausible, and
our inward stark naught? Do we not often regard iniquity more than God in our
hearts, in a time of worship? Roll some filthy imagination as a sweet morsel
under our tongues, and taste more sweetness in that, than in God? Do not our
Spirits smell rank of Earth, while we offer to Heaven, and have we not hearts
full of thick Clay, as their hands were full of blood Isa. 1.15.
? When we sacrifice, do we not wrap up our Souls in communion with some sordid
fancy, when we should entwine our Spirits about an amiable God? While we have
some fear of him, may we not have a love to something else above him? This is
to worship, or swear by the Lord, and by Malchom Zeph. 1.5.
. How often does an Apish-fancy render a service inwardly ridiculous, under a
grave outward posture; skipping to the Shop, Warehouse, Compting-house in the
space of a short Prayer? And we are before God as a Babel, a confusion of
internal languages; and this in those parts of worship which are in the right
use most agreeable to God; profitable for our selves; ruinous to the Kingdom of
Sin and Satan, and means to bring us into a closer communion with the Divine
Majesty: Can this be a spiritual worship?

3. How do we act our graces in worship? Though the Instrument be strung, if
the str^ngs be not wound up, what melody can be the issue? All readiness and
alacrity discover a strength of nature, and a readiness in Spirituals,
discovers a spirituality in the heart. As unaffecting thoughts of God are not
spiritual thoughts; so unaffecting addresses to God, are not spiritual
addresses. Well t^en, what awakenings, and elevations of Faith and Love have
we? What strong outflowings of our Souls to him? What indignation against Sin?
What admirations of redeeming Grace? How low have we brought our corruptions to
the footstool of Christ, to be made his conquered Enemies? How straightly have
we claspt ou^ Faith about the Cross and Throne of Christ, to become his
intimate Spouse? Do we in hearing hang upon the lips of Christ; in prayer take
hold of God, and will not let him go; in confessions rent the Caul of our
hearts, and indite our Souls before him with a deep humility? Do we act more by
a soaring love than a drooping fear? So far as our Spitits are servile, so far
they are legal and carnal; so much as they are free and spontaneous, so much
they are evangelical and spiritual. As men under the Law are subject to the
constraint of Bondage Heb. 2.15.
all their lifetime, in all their worship: so under the Gospel they are under
a constraint of love 2 Cor. 5.14
: How then are believing affections exercised, which are always accompanied with
holy fear, a fear of his goodness that admits us into his presence, and a fear
to offend him in our act of worship? So much as we have of forced or feeble
affection, so much we have of carnality.

4. How do we find our hearts after worship? By an after carriage, we may judge
of the spirituality of it.

1. How are we as to inward strength? When a worship is spiritually performed,
grace is more strengthened, corruption more mortified: The Soul, like Sampson
after his awakening, goes out with a renewed strength: As the inward man is
renewed day by day, that is, every day; so it is renewed in every worship.
Every shower makes the grass and fruit grow in good ground where the root is
good, and the weeds where the ground is naught: The more prepared the heart is
to obedience in other duties after worship, the more evidence there is that it
has been spiritual in the exercise of it. It Is the end of God in every
dispensation, as in that of John Baptist, To make ready a People prepared for
the Lord Luke 1 17.
. When the heart is by worship prepared for fresh acts of obedience, and has a
more exact watchfulness against the encroachments of Sin. As carnal men after
worship sprout up in spiritual wickedness; so do spiritual Worshippers in
spiritual graces: Spiritual fruits, are a sign of a spiritual frame. When men
are more prone to sin after duty, it is a sign there was but little communion
with God in it, and a greater strength of sin, because such an act is contrary
to the end of worship, which is the subduing of Sin. It Is a sign the Physic
has wrought well, when the stomach has a better appetite to its appointed
food; and worship has been well performed, when we have a stronger inclination
to other acts well pleasing to God, and a more sensible distaste of those
temptations we too much relisht before. It Is a sign of a good Concoction, when
there is a greater strength in the vitals of Religion, a more eager desire to
know God. When Moses had been praying to God, and prevailed with him; he puts
up a higher request, to behold his Glory Exodus 33.13, 18.
. When the appetite stands strong to fuller discoveries of God, it is a sign
there has been a spiritual converse with him.

2. How is it especially as to humility? The Pharisees worship was without
dispute, carnal; and we find them not more humble after all their devotions,
but overgrown with more weeds of spiritual pride; they performed them as their
righteousness. What men dare plead before God in his day, they plead before him
in their hearts, in their day; but this men will do at the day of Judgment, we
have prophesied in thy Name, etc. Mat. 7.21. They show what tincture their
services left upon their Spirits: That which excludes them from any acceptance
at the last day, excludes them from any estimation of being spiritual in this
day. The carnal Worshippers charge God with Injustice in not rewarding them,
and claim an acceptance as a compensation due to them, Isa. 58.3. Wherefore
have we afflicted our Souls, and thou take no knowledge? A spiritual
Worshipper looks upon his duties with shame, as well as he does upon his sins
with confusion, and implores the mercy of God for the one as well as the other.
In the 143 Psalm v. 2. the Prophet David after his supplications, begs of God
not to enter into Judgment with him, and acknowledges any answer that God
should give him, as a fruit of his faithfulness to his promise, and not the
merit of his worship. Psalm. 143.2.
In thy Faithfulness answer me, etc. Whatsoever springs from a gracious
Principle, and is the breath of the Spirit, leaves a man more humble; whereas
that which proceeds from a stock of nature, has the true blood of nature
running in the veins of it, viz. that pride which is naturally derived from
Acam. The breathing of the Divine Spirit is in every thing to conform us to our
Redeemer; that being the main work of his Office, is his work in every
particular Christian-act influenced by him. Now Jesus Christ in all his actions
was an exact Pattern of Humility. After the institution and celebration of the
Supper, a special act of worship in the Church; though he had a sense of all
the Authority his Father had given him, yet he humbles himself to wash his
Disciples feet John 13.2, 3, 4
: And after his sublime Prayer, John 17. He humbles himself to the death, and
offers himself to his Murderers, because of his Fathers pleasure, John 18.1.
When he had spoken those words, he w^nt over the Brook Kedron into the Garden.
What is the end of God in appointing worship, is the end of a spiritual heart
in offering it; not his own exaltation but Gods glory: Glorifying the name of
God, is the fruit of that Evangelical-worship the Gentiles were in time to give
to God, Psalm. 86.9. All Nations which thou have made, shall come and worship
before thee oh Lord, and shall glorify thy Name. Let us examine then what
debasing our selves there is in a sense of our own vileness, and distance from
so glorious a Spirit. Self-denial is the heart of all Gospel Grace. Evangelical
Spiritual-worship cannot be without the ingredient of the main Evangelical
Principle.

3. What delight is there after it? What pleasure is there, and what is the
Object of that pleasure? Is it Communion the we have had with God, or a Fluency
in our selves: Is it something which has touched our hearts, or tickled our
fancies? As the strength of sin is known by the delightful thoughts of it after
the commission; so is the spirituality of duty, by the object of our delightful
remembrance after the performance. It was a sign David was spiritual in the
worship of God in the Tabernacle, when he enjoyed it, because he longed for the
spiritual part of it, when he was exiled from it: His desires were not only for
Liberty to revisit the Tabernacle, but to see the power and glory of God in the
Sanctuary, as he had seen it before Psalm. 63.2.
: His desires for it could not have been so ardent, if his reflection upon what
had past, had not been delightful; nor could his Soul be poured out in him for
the want of such opportunities, if the remembrance of the converse he had had
with God, had not been accompanied with a delightful relish Psalm. 42.4.
.

Let us examine what delight we find in our spirits after worship.

Use 3. Is of comfort. And it is very comfortable to consider, that the smallest
worship with the Heart and Spirit, flowing from a principle of grace, is more
acceptable than the most pompous veneration; yea, if the oblation were as
precious as the whole Circuit of Heaven and Earth without it. That God that
values a Cup of Cold water given to any as his Disciple, will value a sincere
service above a costly Sacrifice. God has his eye upon them that honor his
nature; He would not seek such to worship him, if he did not intend to accept
such a worship from them: When we therefore invoke him, and praise him, which
are the prime parts of Religion; he will receive it as a sweet favor from us,
and overlook infirmities mixed with the graces.

The great matter of discomfort, and that which makes us question the
spirituality of worship, is the many starts of our Spirits, and rovings to
other things.

For answer to which,

1. It Is to be confessed, that these starts are natural to us. Who is free from
them? We bear in our own bosoms a nest of turbulent thoughts, which like busy
Gnatts will be buzzing about us, while we are in our most inward and spiritual
converses. Many wild beasts lurk in a man's heart, as in a close and covert
wood, and scarce discover themselves, but at our solemn worship.

No duty so holy, No worship so spiritual, that can wholly privilege us from
them: They will jogg us in our most weighty employments, that, as God said to
Cain, sin lies at the door, and enters in, and makes a riot in our Souls. As it
is said of wicked men, they cannot sleep for multitude of thoughts Eccles. 5.12.
; so it may be of many a good man; he cannot worship for multitude of thoughts:
There will be starts, and more in our Religious, than natural employments; it is
natural to man: Some therefore think, the Bells tied to Aarons Garments between
the Pomegranates, were to warn the People, and recall their fugitive minds to
the present service when they heard the sound of them, upon the least motion of
the High priest. The Sacrifice of Abraham, the Father of the Faithful, was not
exempt from the Fouls pecking at it. Genesis 15.11.
Zechariah himself was drowsy in the midst of his Visions, which being more
amazing, might cause a heavenly intentness*, Zech. 4.1. The Angel that talked
with me, came again and awaked me, as a man is awaked out of sleep. He had been
rouzed up before, but he was ready to drop down again; his heart was gone, till
the Angel jogged him. We may complain of such imaginations, as Jerem. does of
the Enemies of the Jews Lam. 4.19.
. Our Persecutors are swifter than Eagles; they light upon us with as much
speed, as Eagles upon a Carcass; they pursue us upon the Mountain of Divine
institutions, and they lay wait for us in the Wilderness, in our retired
addresses to God.

And this will be so while,

1. There is natural corruption in us. There are in a Godly man two contrary
principles, Flesh and Spirit, which endeavor to hinder one another acts, and
are always stirring upon the offensive or defensive part Gal. 5.17.
. There is a body of death continually exhaling its noysom vapors; It Is a body
of death in our worship, as well as in our natures; it snaps our resolutions
asunder Romans 7.19.
; it hinders us in the doing good, and contradicts our wills in the stirring up
evil: This corruption being seated in all the faculties, and a constant
Domestic in them, has the greater opportunity to trouble us, since it is by
those faculties that we spiritually transact with God; and it stirs more in the
time of religious exercises, though it be in part mortified: As a wounded Beast
though tired, will rage and strive to its utmost, when the Enemy is about to
fetch a blow at it. All duties of worship tend to the wounding of corruption;
and it is no wonder to feel the striving of sin, to defend it self, and offend
us when we have our Arms in our hands to mortify it, that the blow may be
diverted which is directed against it.

The Apostles had aspiring thoughts; and being persuaded of an earthly Kingdom,
expected a Grandeur in it: And though we find some appearance of it at other
times; as when they were casting out Devils, and gave an account of it to their
Master, he gives them a kind of a check Luke 10.20
, intimating that there was some kind of evil in their rejoicing upon that
account: Yet this never swelled so high, as to break out into a quarrel who
should be greatest, Luke 22.24
until they had the most solemn Ordinance, the Lords Supper to quell it*. Our
corruption is like Lime, which discovers not its fire by any smoke or heat,
till you cast water, the Enemy of fire, upon it: Neither does our natural
corruption rage so much, as when we are using means to quench and destroy it.

2. While there is a Devil, and we in his Precinct, As he accuses us to God,
so he disturbs us in our selves: He is a bold Spirit, and loves to intrude
himself when we are conversing with God: We read, that when the Angels
presented themselves before God, Satan comes among them Job. 1.6.
. Motions from Satan will thrust themselves in with our most raised and
Angelical frames; He loves to take off the edge of our Spirits from God; He
acts but after the old rate; He from the first envied God an obedience from
man, and envied man the felicity of communion with God; He is unwilling God
should have the honor of worship, and that we should have the fruit of it; He
has himself lost it, and therefore is unwilling we should enjoy it; and being
subtle, he knows how to make impressions upon us suitable to our inbred
corruptions, and assault us in the weakest part: He knows all the avenues to
get within us, (as he did in the temptation of Eve) and being a Spirit, he
wants not a power to dart them immediately upon our fancy; And being a Spirit,
and therefore active and nimble, he can shoot those darts faster than our
weakness can beat them off: He is diligent also, and watches for his Prey, and
seeks to devour our services as well as our Souls, and snatch our best morsels
from us: We know he mixed himself with our Saviors retirements in the
Wilderness, and endeavored to Fly-blow his holy converse with his Father in
the preparation to his mediatory work.

Satan is Gods Ape, and imitates the Spirit in the Office of a Remembrancer: As
the Spirit brings good thoughts and divine promises to mind, to quicken our
worship; so the Devil brings evil things to mind, and endeavors to fasten them
in our Souls to disturb us: And though all the foolish starts we have in
worship are not purely his issue; yet being of kin to him, he claps his hands,
and sets them on like so many Mastives to tear the service in pieces.

And both those distractions which arise from our own corruption, and from
Satan, are most rise in worship, when we are under some pressing affliction.
This seems to be David's Case, Psalm. 86. when in v. 11. He prays God to unite
his heart to fear and worship his Name; he seems to be under some affliction,
or fear of his Enemies; Oh free me from those distractions of Spirit, and those
passions which arise in my Soul, upon considering the designs of my enemies
against me, and press upon me in my addresses to thee, and attendances on thee.
Job also in his affliction complains, Job. 17.11. That his purposes were broken
off: He could not make an even thread of thoughts and resolutions; they were
frequently snapt saunder, like rotten Yarn when one is winding it up.

Good Men and spiritual Worshippers have lain under this trouble: Though they
are a sign of weakness of grace, or some obstructions in the acting of strong
grace; yet they are not always evidences of a want of grace: What arises from
our own corruption, is to be matter of humiliation and resistance; what arises
from Satan, should edge our minds to a noble conquest of them. If the Apostle
did comfort himself with his disapproving of what rose from the natural spring
of sin within him, with his consent to the Law, and dissent from his Lust; and
charges it not upon himself, but upon the sin that dwelt in him, with which he
had broken off the former League, and was resolved never to enter into Amity
with it: By the same reason we may comfort our selves, if such thoughts are
undelighted in, and alienate not our hearts from the worship of God by all
their busy intrusions to interrupt us.

2. These distractions (not allowed) may be occasions by an holy improvement to
make our hearts more spiritual after worship, though they disturb us in it: By
answering those ends for which we may suppose God permits them to invade us.
And that is,

1. When they are occasions to humble us.

(1.) For our carriage in the particular worship. There is nothing so dangerous
as spiritual pride; It deprived Devils and Men of the presence of God, and will
hinder us of the influence of God. If we had had raised and uninterrupted
motions in worship, we should be apt to be lifted up; and the Devil stands
ready to tempt us to self-confidence. You know how it was with Paul 2 Cor. 12.
from v. 1. to v. 7.
; His buffetings were occasions to render him more spiritual than his raptures,
because more humble. God suffers those wanderings, starts and distractions to
prevent our spiritual pride, which is as a Worm at the root of spiritual
worship, and mind us of the dusty frame of our Spirits, how easily they are
blown away: As he sends sickness to put us in mind of the shortness of our
breath, and the easiness to lose it. God would make us ashamed of our selves in
his presence; that we may own, that what is good in any duty, is merely from
his Grace and Spirit, and not from our selves. That with Paul we may cry out,
by Grace we are what we are, and by Grace we do what we do: We may be hereby
made sensible, that God can always find something in our exactest worship, as a
ground of denying us the successful fruit of it. If we cannot stand upon our
duties for Salvation, what can we bottom upon in our selves? If therefore they
are occasions to make us out of love with any righteousness of our own, to make
us break our hearts for them, because we cannot keep them out; If we mourn for
them as our sins, and count them our great afflictions; we have attained that
brokeness which is a choice ingredient in a spiritual Sacrifice: Though we have
been disturbed by them, yet we are not robbed of the success; we may behold an
answer of our worship in our humiliation, in spite of all of them.

(2.) For the baseness of our Nature. These unsteady motions help us to discern
that heap of vermin that breeds in our nature. Would any man think he had such
an averseness to his Creator and Benefactor; such an unsutableness to him; such
an estrangedness from him, were it not for his inspection into his distracted
frames? God suffers this to hang over us as a Rod of Correction, to discover
and fetch out the folly of our hearts. Could we imagine our natures so highly
contrary to that God who is so infinitely amiable, so desirable an Object; or
that there should be so much folly and madness in the heart, as to draw back
from God in those services, which God has appointed as pipes through which to
communicate his grace, to convey himself, his love and goodness to the
Creature? If therefore we have a deep sense of, and strong reflections upon our
base nature, and bewail that mass of aversness which lies there, and that
fullness of irreverence toward the God of our mercies, the Object of our
worship; it is a blessed improvement of our wanderings and diversions. Certainly
if any Israelite had brought a lame and rotten Lamb to be sacrificed to God,
and afterward had bewailed it, and laid open his heart to God in a sensible and
humble confession of it; That Repentance had been a better Sacrifice, and more
acceptable in the sight of God; than if he had brought a sound and a living
Offering.

(2.) When they are occasions to make us prize duties of worship: When we
argue, as rationally we may, that they are of singular use; since our corrupt
hearts and a malicious Devil does chiefly endeavor to hinder us from them: And
that we find we have not those gadding thoughts when we are upon worldly
business, or upon any sinful design which may dishonor God and wound our
Souls: This is a sign Sin and Satan dislike worship; for he is too subtle a
Spirit to oppose that which would further his Kingdom. As it is an argument the
Scripture is the Word of God, because the wickedness of the world does so much
oppose it; so it is a ground to believe the profitableness and excellency of
worship, because Satan and our own unruly hearts do so much interrupt us in it:
If therefore we make this use of our cross steps in worship, to have a greater
value for such duties, more affections to them and desires to be frequent in
them: Our hearts are growing spiritual, under the weights that would depress
them to carnality.

(3.) When we take a rise from hence, to have heavenly admirations of the
graciousness of God. That he should pity and pardon so many slight addresses to
him, and give any gracious returns to us. Though men have foolish rangings
every day, and in every duty; yet free grace is so tender as not to punish
them, Genesis 8.21. And the Lord smelt a sweet savor; and the Lord said in his
heart, I will not curse the Ground for man's sake, for the imagination of man's
heart is evil from his youth. It Is observable, that this was just after a
Sacrifice which Noah offered to God, v. 20. But probably not without
infirmities common to human nature, which may be grounded upon the reason God
gives; that though he had destroyed the Earth before, because of the evil of
man's imaginations, Genesis 6.5. He still found evil imaginations; He does not say
in the heart of Cham, or others of Noah's Family; but in man's heart, including
Noah also; who had both the Judgments of God upon the former world, and the
mercy of God in his own preservation before his eyes; yet God sawevil
imaginations rooted in the nature of Man; and though it were so, yet he would
be merciful: If therefore we can, after finding our hearts so vagrant in
worship, have real frames of thankfulness that God has spared us; and be
hightned in our admirations at Gods giving us any fruit of such a distracted
worship; we take advantage from them, to be raised into an Evangelical frame,
which consists in the humble acknowledgments of the grace of God. When David
takes a review of those tumultuous passions which had rufled his mind, and
possessed him with unbelieving notions of God in the persons of his Prophets
Psalm. 116.11.
; how high does his Soul mount in astonishment and thankfulness to God for his
mercy verse 12.
? Notwithstanding his distrust, God did graciously perform his promise, and
answer his desire; Then it is what shall I render to the Lord? His heart was
more affected for it, because it had been so passionate in former distrusts.
It Is indeed a ground of wondering at the patience of the Spirit of God, that he
should guide our hearts when they are so apt to start out; as it is the
patience of a Master to guide the hand of his Scholar, while he mixes his
writing with many blots. It Is not one or two infirmities the Spirit helps us
in, and helps over, but many Romans 8.26.
. It Is a sign of a spiritual heart, when he can take a rise to bless God for
the renewing and blowing up his affections, in the midst of so many incursions
from Satan to the contrary, and the readiness of the heart too much to comply
with them.

(4.) When we take occasion from thence to prize the mediation of Christ. The
more distractions jogg us, the more need we should see of going out to a
Savior by Faith. One part of our Saviors Office is to stand between us and
the infirmities of our worship: As he is an Advocate, he presents our services,
and pleads for them and us 1 John. 2.1.
; for the sins of our duties, as well as for our other sins. Jesus Christ is an
High Priest, appointed by God to take away the iniquities of our holy things,
which was typified by Aarons Plate upon his Mitre Exodus 28.36, 38.
. Were there no imperfections, were there no creeping up of those Froggs into
our minds, we should think our worship might merit acceptance with God upon its
own account: But if we behold our own weakness, that not a tear, a groan, a
sigh is so pure, but must have Christ to make it entertainable; that there is
no worship without those blemishes; and upon this, throw all our services into
the Arms of Christ for acceptance, and solicit him to put his merits in the
front, to make our ciphers appear valuable; it is a spiritual act, the design of
God in the Gospel being to advance the honor and mediation of his Son. That is
a spiritual and evangelical act, which answers the evangelical design. The
design of Satan and our own corruption is defeated, when those interruptions
make us run swifter, and take faster hold on the High Priest who is to present
our worship to God, and our own Souls receive comfort thereby. Christ had
temptations offered to him by the Devil in his Wilderness retirement; that from
an experimental knowledge, he might be able more compassionatly to succor us
Heb. 2.18.
; we have such assaults in our retired worship especially, that we may be able
more highly to value him and his mediation.

3. Let us not therefore be discouraged by those interruptions and starts of
our hearts.

(1.) If we find in our selves a strong resistance of them. The Flesh will be
lusting; that cannot be hindered; yet if we do not fulfill the lusts of it, rise
up at its command and go about its work, we may be said to walk in the Spirit
Gal. 5.16, 17.
: We walk in the Spirit, if we fulfill not the lusts of the Flesh, though there
be a lusting of the Flesh against the Spirit: So we worship in the Spirit,
though there be carnal thoughts arising, if we do not fulfill them; though the
stirring of them discovers some contrariety in us to God, yet the resistance
manifests, that there is a principle of contrariety in us to them; that as
there is something of Flesh that lusts against the Spirit, so there is
something of Spirit in worship which lusts against the Flesh: We must take heed
of omitting worship, because of such in-rodes; and lying down in the mire of a
total neglect. If our Spirits are made more lively and vigorous against them;
If those cold vapors which have risen from our hearts, make us like a Spring
in the midst of the cold Earth, more warm: There is in this case more reason
for us to bless God, than to be discouraged. God looks upon it as the disease,
not the wilfulness of our nature; as the weakness of the Flesh, not the
willingness of the Spirit. If we would shut the door upon them, it seems they
are unwelcome company: Men do not use to lock their doors upon those they love;
If they break in and disturb us with their impertinencies, we need not be
discomforted, unless we give them a share in our affections, and turn our back
upon God to entertain them: If their presence makes us sad, their flight would
make us joyful.

(2.) If we find our selves excited to a stricter watch over our hearts against
them. As Travelers will be careful when they come to places where they have
been robbed before, that they be not so easily surprised again. We should not
only lament when we have had such foolish imaginations in worship breaking in
upon us, but also bless God that we have had no more, since we have hearts so
fruitful of weeds. We should give God the glory when we find our hearts
preserved from these intruders, and not boast of our selves, but return him our
praise for the watch and guard he kept over us to preserve us from such Thieves.

Let us not be discomforted; for as the greatness of our sins, upon our turning
to God is no hinderance to our justification, because it does not depend upon
our conversion as the meritorious cause, but upon the infinite value of our
Saviors satisfaction, which reaches the greatest sins as well as the least; so
the multitude of our bewailed distractions in worship are not a hinderance to
our acceptance, because of the uncontrollable power of Christ's intercession.

Use 3. Is for exhortation. Since Spiritual worship is due to God, and the
Father seeks such to worship him, how much should we endeavor to satisfy the
desire and order of God, and act conformable to the Law of our Creation and the
love of Redemption? Our end must be the same in worship which was Gods end in
Creation and Redemption; to glorify his name, set forth his perfections, and
be rendered fit as Creatures and Redeemed ones to partake of that grace which is
the fruit of worship. An Evangelical dispensation requires a Spiritual homage;
to neglect therefore either the matter or manner of Gospel duties, is to put a
slight upon Gospel privileges. The manner of duty is ever of more value than
the matter; the Scarlet dye is more precious than the cloth tinctured with it.
God respects more the diposition of the Sacrificer than the multitude of the
Sacrifices (...) (...) Abstinentia.
. The Solemn feasts appointed by God, were but Dung, as managed by the Jews,
M^^. 2.3. The heart is often welcome without the body, but the body never
gra^^ful without the heart; The inward acts of the Spirit require nothing from
without to constitute them good in themselves; but the outward acts of devotion
require inward acts to render them savory to God. As the goodness of outward
acts consists not in the acts themselves, so the acceptableness of them results
not from the acts themselves, but from the inward frame animating and quickening
those acts, as blood and Spirits running through the veins of a duty to make it
a living service in the sight of God. Imperfections in worship hinder not Gods
acceptance of it, if the heart Spirited by Grace be there to make it a sweet
Savor. The stench of burning flesh and fat in the legal Sacrifices might
render them noisome to the outward senses; but God smelt a sweet savor in
them, as they respected Christ. When the heart and Spirit are offered up to
God, it may be a savory duty, though attended with unsavory imperfections. But
a thousand Sacrifices without a stamp of faith, a thousand Spiritual duties
with an habitual carnality, are no better than stench with God.

The heart must be purged, as well as the Temple was by our Savior, of the
Thieves that would rob God of his due worship. Antiquity had some Temples,
wherein it was a crime to bring any gold; therefore those that came to worship
laid their gold aside, before they went into the Temple. We should lay aside
our worldly and trading thoughts before we address to worship, Isa. 26.9. With
my Spirit within me will I seek thee early. Let not our minds be gadding
abroad, and exiled from God and themselves. It will be thus when the desire of
our Soul is to his name and the remembrance of him, ver. 8. When he has given
so great and admirable a gift, as that of his Son, in whom are all things
necessary to Salvation, Righteousness, Peace, and pardon of sin, we should
manage the remembrance of his name in worship with the closest unitedness of
heart, and the most Spiritual affections. The motion of the Spirit is the first
act in Religion, to this we are obliged in every act: The Devil requires the
Spirit of his votaries; should God have a less dedication than the Devil?

Motives to back this exhortation.

1. Not to give God our Spirit is a great sin. It Is a mockery of God, not
worship; contempt, not adoration, whatever our outward fervency or
protestations may be N^n valet pr^testatio c^ntra jactum is a rule in the civil
law.
. Every alienation of our hearts from him is a real scorn put upon him: The
acts of the Soul are real, and more the acts of the man than the acts of the
body; because they are the acts of the choicest part of man, and of that which
is the first spring of all bodily motions; it is the (...) the Inrenal speech
whereby we must speak with God: To give him therefore, only an external form of
worship without the life of it, is a taking his name in vain: We mock him, when
we mind not what we are speaking to him, or what he is speaking to us; when the
motions of our hearts are contrary to the motions of our tongues; when we do
any thing before him slovenly, impudently or rashly. As in a Lutinisi, it is
absurd to sing one Tune and play another; so it is a foul thing, to tell God
one thing with our lips, and think another thing with our hearts; it is a sin
like that the Apostle charge the Heathens with, Romans 1.28. they like not to
retain God in their knowledge; their stomachs are sick while they are upon any
duty, and never leave working, till they have thrown up all the spiritual part
of Worship, and rid themselves of the thoughts of God, which are as unwelcome
and troublesome Guests to them: When men behave themselves in the sight of God,
as if God were not God; they do not only defame him, but deny him, and violate
the unchangeable perfections of the Divine Nature.

(1.) It Is against the Majesty of God. When we have not awful thoughts of that
great Majesty to whom we address; when our Souls cleave not to him, when we
petition him in Prayer, or when he gives out his Orders to us in his Word. It Is
a contempt of the Majesty of a Prince, if whiles he is speaking to us, we
listen not to him with reverence and attention, but turn our backs on him, to
play with one of his Hounds, or talk with a Beggar; or while we speak to him,
to rake in a Dunghill. Solomon advises us to keep our foot when we go to the
House of God Eccles. 5.1.
. Our affections should be steady, and not slip away again; why? v. 2. because
God is in Heaven, etc. He is a God of Majesty; earthly durty frames are
unsuitable to the God of Heaven; low Spirits are unsuitable to the most High. We
would not bring our mean Servants, or durty Dogs into a Princes Presence
Chamber; yet we bring not only our worldly, but our profane affections into
Gods presence: We give in this case, those services to God, which our Governor
would think unworthy of him Mal. 1.8.
. The more excellent and glorious God is, the greater contempt of him it is to
suffer such foolish affections to be Competitors with him for our hearts: It Is
a scorn put upon him to converse with a Creature while we are dealing with him;
but a greater to converse in our thoughts and fancies with some sordid lust,
which is most hateful to him: And the more aggravation it attracts, in that we
are to apprehend him the most glorious Object sitting upon his Throne in time
of worship, and our selves standing as vile Creatures before him, supplicating
for our lives, and the conveyances of grace and mercy to our Souls: As if a
grand Mutineer, instead of humbly begging the pardon of his offended Prince,
should present his Petition not only scribled and blotted, but besmeared with
some loathsome excrement. It Is unbecoming the Majesty both of God, and the
worship it self, to present him with a Picture instead of Substance, and bring
a world of nasty affections in our hearts, and ridiculous toys in our heads
before him, and worship with indisposed and heedless Souls.

Malac. 1.14. He is a great King, therefore address to him with fear and
reverence.

(2.) It Is against the Life of God. Is a dead worship proportioned to a living
God? The separation of heavenly affections from our Souls before God, makes
them as much a Carcass in his sight, as the divorce of the Soul makes the Body
a Carcass; When the affections are separated, worship is no longer worship, but
a dead offering, a liveless bulk; for the essence and spirit of worship is
departed: Though the Soul be present with the Body in a way of information, yet
it is not present in a way of affection, and this is the worst; for it is not
the separation of the Soul from informing, that does separate a man from God,
but the removal of our affections from him. If a man pretend an application to
God, and sleep and snore all the time; without question such a one did not
worship: In a careless worship, the heart is morally dead while the eyes are
open: The heart of the Spouse Cant. 5.2.
waked whiles her eyes slept, and our hearts on the contrary sleep while our
eyes wake.

Our blessed Savior has died to purge our Consciences from dead works and
frames, that we may serve the living God Heb. 9.14.
; to serve God as a God of Life David's Soul cried and fainted for God under
this consideration Psalm. 42.2.
: But to present our Bodies without our Spirits, is such a usage of God, that
implies he is a dead Image, not worthy of any but a dead and heartless service:
Like one of those Idols the Psalmist speaks of Psalm. 115.5.
, that have eyes and see not, ears and hear not, no life in it: Though it be
not an objective Idolatry, because the worship is directed to the true God; yet
I may call it a subjective Idolatry, in regard of the frame, fit only to be
presented to some senseless stock. We intimate God to be no better than an Idol,
and to have no more knowledge of us and insight into us, than an Idol can have:
If we did believe him to be the living God, we durst not come before him with
services so unsuitable to him, and reproaches of him.

(3.) It Is against the infiniteness of God. We should worship God with those
boundless affections which bear upon them a Shadow or Image of his
Infiniteness; such are the desires of the Soul which know no limits, but start
out beyond whatsoever enjoyment the heart of man possesses. No creeping
Creature was to be offered to God in Sacrifice; but such as had legs to run,
or wings to fly: For us to come before God with a light creeping frame, is to
worship him with the lowest finite affections; as though any thing though never
so mean or torn, might satisfy an infinite Being; as though a poor shallow
Creature could give enough to God without giving him the heart, when indeed we
cannot give him a worship proportionable to his infiniteness, did our hearts
swell as large as Heaven in our desires for him in every act of our duties.

(4.) It Is against the spirituality of God. God being a Spirit, calls for a
worship in Spirit; to withold this from him, implies him to be some gross
corporeal matter: As a Spirit, he looks for the heart; a wrestling heart in
Prayer; a trembling heart in the Word Isa. 66.2.
: To bring nothing but the Body when we come to a spiritual God to beg
spiritual benefits, to wait for spiritual communications, which can only be
dispensed to us in a spiritual manner, is unsuitable to the spiritual nature of
God: A mere carnal service implicitly denies his spirituality, which requires
of us higher engagements than mere corporeal ones.

Worship should be rational, not an imaginative service, wherein is required
the activity of our noblest faculties; and our fancy ought to have no share in
it, but in subserviency to the more spiritual part of our Soul.

(5.) It Is against the supremacy of God. As God is one, and the only Sovereign;
so our hearts should be one, cleaving wholly to him, and undivided from him: In
pretending to deal with him, we acknowledge his Deity and Sovereignty; but in
with holding our choicest faculties and affections from him, and the starting
of our minds to vain Objects, we intimate their equality with God, and their
right as well as his to our hearts and affections: It Is as if a Princess should
commit Adultery with some base Scullion, while she is before her Husband; which
would be a plain denial of his sole right to her. It intimates that other
things are superior to God; they are true Sovereigns that ingross our hearts.
If a man were addressing himself to a Prince, and should in an instant turn his
back upon him, upon a beck or nod from some inconsiderable person; is it not an
evidence, that that person that invited him away, has a greater sovereignty
over him, than that Prince to whom he was applying himself? And do we not
discard Gods absolute dominion over us, when at the least beck of a corrupt
inclination, we can dispose of our hearts to it, and alienate them from God? As
they in Ezekiel. 33.32. left the service of God for the service of their
covetousness; which evidenced that they owned the authority of sin more than
the authority of God: This is not to serve God as our Lord and absolute Master,
but to make God serve our turn, and submit his Soveraignity to the Supremacy of
some unworthy affection. The Creature is preferred before the Creator, when the
heart runs most upon it in time of religious worship, and our own carnal
interest swallows up the affections that are due to God: It Is an an Idol set up
in the heart Ezekiel. 14.4.
in his solemn presence, and attracts that devotion to it self, which we only
owe to our Sovereign Lord; and the more base and contemptible that is to which
the Spirit is devoted, the more contempt there is of Gods dominion. Judas his
kiss with a hail Master, was no act of worship, or an owning his Masters
authority; but a designing the satisfaction of his Covetousness in the
betraying of him.

(6.) It Is against the Wisdom of God. God as a God of order, has put earthly
things in subordination to heavenly; and we by this unworthy carriage invert
this order, and put heavenly things in subordination to earthly; in placing
mean and low things in our hearts, and bringing them so placed into Gods
presence, which his Wisdom at the Creation put under our feet. A service
without spiritual affections, is a sacrifice of Fools, Eccles. 5.1. which have
lost their Brains and Understandings: A foolish Spirit is very unsuitable to an
infinitely wise God: Well may God say of such a one, as Achish of David who
seemed mad; Why have you brought this Fellow to play the Madman in my
presence? Shall this Fellow come into my House? 1 Samuel 21.15.

(7.) It Is against the Omnisciency of God. To carry it fair without and
impertinently within, is as though God had not an all-seeing eye that could
pierce into the heart, and understand every motion of the inward faculties; As
though God were easily cheated with an outward fawning service, like an
Apothecaries box with a gilded title, that may be full of Cobwebs within: What
is such a carriage, but a design to deceive God; when with Herod we pretend to
worship Christ, and intend to murder all the motions of Christ in our Souls? A
heedless Spirit, an estrangement of our Souls, a giving the Rains to them to
run out from the presence of God to see every Reed shaken with the Wind, is to
deny him to be the Searcher of hearts, and the Discerner of secret thoughts; as
though he could not look through us to the darkness and remoteness of our
minds, but were an ignorant God, who might be put off with the worst as well as
the best in our Flock. If we did really believe there were a God of infinite
Knowledge, who saw our frames, and whether we came dressed with Wedding-garments
suitable to the duties we are about to perform; should we be so garish, and put
him off with such trivial stuff, without any reverence of his Majesty?

(8.) It Is against the Holiness of God. To alienate our Spirits, is to offend
him while we pretend to worship him; Though we may be mighty officious in the
external part, yet our base and carnal affections make all our worship but as a
heap of Dung; and who would not look upon it as an affront, to lay Dung before
a Prince's Throne? Pro. 21.27. The Sacrifice of the Wicked, is an abomination:
How much more when he brings it with a wicked mind? A putrified Carcass under
the Law, had not been so great an affront to the Holiness of God, as a frothy
unmelted heart, and a wanton fancy in a time of worship. God is so holy, that
if we could offer the worship of Angels, and the quintessence of our Souls in
his service, it would be beneath his infinite purity: How unworthy then are
they of him, when they are presented not only without the sense of our
uncleaness, but sullied with the fumes and exhalations of our corrupt
affections, which are as so many Plague spots upon our duties, contrary to the
unspotted purity of the Divine Nature? Is not this an unworthy conceit of God,
and injurious to his infinite Holiness?

(9.) It Is against the Love and Kindness of God. It Is a condescension in God to
admit a piece of Earth to offer up a duty to him, when he has miriads of
Angels to attend him in his Court and celebrate his Praise: To admit Man to be
an Attendant on him and a Partner with Angels, is a high favor. It Is not a
single mercy, but a heap of mercies to be admitted into the presence of God,
Psalm. 5.7. I will come into thy house in the multitude of thy mercies. When the
blessed God is so kind as to give us access to his Majesty, do we not
undervalue his kindness when we deal uncivilly with him, and deny him the
choicest part of our selves? It Is a contempt of his Sovereignty, as our Spirits
are due to him by nature; a contempt of his Goodness, as our Spirits are due to
him by gratitude: How abusive a carriage is it to make use of his mercy to
encourage our impudence, that should excite our fear and reverence? How
unworthy would it be for an indigent Debtor to bring to his indulgent Creditor,
an empty Purse instead of Payment? When God holds out his Golden Scepter to
encourage our approaches to him; stands ready to give us the pardon of sin and
full felicity, the best things he has; Is it a fit requital of his kindness,
to give him a formal outside only, a shadow of Religion; to have the heart
overswayed with other thoughts and affections; as if all his profers were so
contemptible, as to deserve only a slight at our hands? It Is a contempt of the
love and kindness of God.

(10.) It Is against the Sufficiency and Fullness of God. When we give God our
Bodies and the Creature our Spirits, it intimates a conceit, that there is more
content to be had in the Creature than in God blessed for ever; that the waters
in the Cistern are sweeter than those in the Fountain: Is not this a practical
giving God the Lie, and denying those promises wherein he has declared the
satisfaction he can give to the Spirit, as he is the God of the Spirits of all
Flesh?

If we did imagine the excellency and loveliness of God were worthy to be the
ultimate Object of our affections, the heart would attend more closely upon
him, and be terminated in him; did we believe God to be all sufficient, full of
grace and goodness, a tender Father, not willing to forsake his own; willing,
as well as able to supply their wants; the heart would not so lamely attend
upon him, and would not upon every impertinency be diverted from him. There is
much of a wrong notion of God, and a predominancy of the world above him in the
heart, when we can more savourly relish the thoughts of low inferior things
than heavenly, and let our Spirits upon every trifling occasion be fugitives
from him: It Is a testimony that we make not God our chiefest good. If
apprehensions of his excellency did possess our Souls, they would be fastened on
him, glued to him; we should not listen to that rabble of foolish thoughts that
steal our hearts so often from him. Were our breathings after God as strong as
the pantings of the Heart after the water Brooks, we should be like that
Creature; not diverted in our Course by every Puddle. Were God the predominant
satisfactory Object in our eye, he would carry our whole Soul along with him.

When our Spirits readily retreat from God in worship upon every giddy motion,
it is a kind of repentance that ever we did come near him, and implies, that
there is a fuller satisfaction, and more attractive excellency in that which
does so easily divert us, than in that God to whose worship we did pretend to
address our selves: It Is as if, when we were petitioning a Prince, we should
immediately turn about, and make request to one of his Guard; as though so mean
a person were more able to give us the boon we want, than the Sovereign is.

2. Consideration by way of motive. To have our Spirits off from God in
worship, is a bad sign. It was not so in Innocence. The heart of Adam could
cleave to God; the Law of God was engraven upon him; he could apply himself to
the fulfilling of it without any twinkling; there was no folly and vanity in
his mind, no independency in his thoughts, no duty was his burden; for there
was in him a proneness to, and delight in all the duties of worship: It Is the
Fall has distempered us; and the more unwieldiness there is in our Spirits,
the more carnal our affections are in worship, the more evidence there is of
the strength of that revolted state.

(1.) It argues much corruption in the heart. As by the eructations of the
Stomach, we may judge of the windiness and foulness of it; so by the inordinate
motions of our minds and hearts, we may judge of the weakness of its
complexion. A strength of sin is evidenced by the eruptions and ebullitions of
it in worship, when they are more sudden, numerous, and vigorous than the
motions of grace. When the heart is apt like tinder to catch fire from Satan,
it is a sign of much combustible matter suitable to his temptation. Were not
corruption strong, the Soul could not turn so easily from God when it is in his
presence, and has an advantageous opportunity to create a fear and aw of God
in it: Such base fruit could not sprout up so suddenly, were there not much sap
and juice in the root of sin.

What communion with a living root can be evidenced without exercises of an
inward life? That Spirit which is a Well of living waters in a gracious heart,
will be especially springing up when it is before God.

(2.) It shows much affection to earthly things, and little to heavenly. There
must needs be an inordinate affection to earthly things, when upon every slight
solicitation we can part with God, and turn the back upon a service glorious
for him, and advantageous for our selves, to wedd our hearts to some idle fancy
that signifies nothing. How can we be said to entertain God in our affections,
when we give him not the precedence in our understandings, but let every trifle
justle the sense of God out of our minds? Were our hearts fully determined to
spiritual things, such vanities could not seat themselves in our
understandings, and divide our Spirits from God. Were our hearts balanced with
a love to God, the world could never steal our hearts so much from his worship,
but his worship would draw our hearts to it.

It shows a base neutrality in the greatest concernments; a halting between God
and Baal; a contrariety between Affection and Conscience, when natural
Conscience presses a man to duties of worship, and his other affections pull
him back, draw him to carnal objects, and make him slight that whereby he may
honor God. God argues the profaneness of the Jews hearts from the wickedness
they brought into his house, and acted there, Jer. 23.11. Yea, in my house,
that is, my worship, I found their wickedness, says the Lord. Carnality in
worship is a kind of an Idolatrous frame; when the heart is renewed, Idols are
cast to the Moles and the Batts Isa. 2.20.

(3.) It shows much hypocrisy to have our Spirits off from God. The mouth
speaks, and the carriage pretends what the heart does not think; there is a
dissent of the heart from the pretense of the body.

Instability is a sure sign of Hypocrisy. Double thoughts argue a double
heart. The Wicked are compared to Chaff Psalm. 1.4.
, for the uncertain and various motions of their minds, by the least wind of
fancy. The least motion of a carnal Object diverts the Spirit from God, as the
scent of Carrion does the Raven from the flight it was set upon.

The People of God are called Gods Spouse, and God calls himself their Husband;
whereby is noted, the most intimate union of the Soul with God, and that there
ought to be the highest love and affection to him, and faithfulness in his
worship; but when the heart does start from him in worship, it is a sign of the
unstedfastness of it with God, and a disrelish of any communion with him; It is
as God complains of the Israelites, a going a whoreing after our own
imaginations.

As grace respects God as the object of worship, so it looks most upon God in
approaching to him. Where there is a likeness and love, there is a desire of
converse and intimacy; if there be no spiritual entwining about God in our
worship, it is a sign there is no likeness to him, no true sense of him, no
renewed image of God in us: Every living Image will move strongly to join it
self with its original Copy, and be glad with Jacob, to sit steadily in those
Chariots that shall convey him to his beloved Joseph.

Motion 3. Consider the danger of a carnal worship

(1.) We lose the comfort of worship. The Soul is a great Gainer when it offers
a spiritual worship, and as great a loser when it is unfaithful with God.
Treachery and perfidiousness hinder commerce among men; so does Hypocrisy in
its own nature, communion with God. God never promised any thing to the Carcass
but to the Spirit of worship. God has no obligation upon him by any word of
his, to reward us with himself, when we perform it not to himself: When we give
an outside worship, we have only the outside of an ordinance: We can expect no
kernel, when we give God only the shell: He that only licks the outside of the
Glass, can never be refreshed with the rich Cordial enclosed within. A cold and
lazy formality, will make God to withdraw the light of his countenance, and not
shine with any delightful communications upon our Souls; but if we come before
him with a liveliness of affections, and steadiness of heart; he will draw the
vail, and cause his glory to display it self before us. An humble praying
Christian, and a warm affectionate Christian in worship, will soon find a God
who is delighted with such frames, and cannot long withold himself from the
Soul: When our hearts are enflamed with love to him in worship, it is a
preparation to some act of love on his part whereby he intends further to
gratify us. When John was in the Spirit on the Lords day, that is in spiritual
employment, and meditation and other duties, he had that great Revelation of
what should happen to the Church in all ages Rev, 1.10.
; His being in the Spirit, intimates his ordinary course on that day, and not
any extraordinary act in him, though it was followed with an extraordinary
discovery of God to him; When he was thus engaged, he heard a voice behind him.

God does not require of us spirituality in worship to advantage himself, but
that we might be prepared to be advantaged by him. If we have a clear and well
disposed eye, it is not a benefit to the Sun, but fits us to receive benefits
from his Beams. Worship is an act that perfects our own Souls; they are then
most widened by spiritual frames, to receive the influence of divine blessings,
as an eye most opened receives the fruit of the Suns light, better than the eye
that is shut. The communications of God are more or less, according as our
spiritual frames are more or less in our worship: God will not give his
blessings to unsuitable hearts. What a nasty Vessel is a carnal heart for a
spiritual communication? The chief end of every duty enjoined by God, is to
have communion with him; and therefore it is called, a drawing near to God:
It Is impossible therefore, that the outward part of any duty can answer the end
of God in his institution. It Is not a bodily appearance or gesture whereby men
can have communion with God, but by the impressions of the heart, and
reflections of the heart upon God: Without this, all the rich streams of grace
will run besides us, and the growth of the Soul be hindered and impaired. A
diligent hand makes rich, says the wise man; a diligent heart in spiritual
worship, brings in rich incomes to the humble and spiritual Soul.

(2.) It renders the worship not only unacceptable, but abominable to God. It
makes our Gold to become Dross; it soyls our duties, and bespotts our Souls. A
carnal and unsteady frame shows an indifferency of Spirit at best; and luke
warmness is as ungrateful to God, as heavy and nauseous meat is to the stomach,
he spues them out of his mouth Rev. 3.16.
. As our gracious God does overlook infirmities where intentions are good, and
endeavors serious and strong; so he loathes the services where the frames are
stark naught, Psalm. 66.118. If I regard iniquity in my heart, the Lord will not
hear my Prayer. Luke warm and indifferrent services stink in the Nostrils of
God. The heart seems to loath God when it starts from him upon every occasion,
when it is unwilling to employ it self about, and stick close to him: And can
God be pleased with such a frame? The more of the Heart and Spirit is in any
service, the more real goodness there is in it, and the more savoury it is to
God; the less of the Heart and Spirit, the less of goodness, and the more
nauseous to God, who loves Righteousness and Truth in the inward parts Psalm.
51.6.
. And therefore infinite Goodness and Holiness cannot but hate worship
presented to him with deceitful, carnal and flitting affections: They must be
more nauseous to God, than a putrified Carcass can be to Man: They are the
prophanings of that which should be the habitation of the Spirit: They make the
Spirit, the seat of duty, a filthy dunghill; and are as loathsome to God, as
Mony-changers in the Temple were to our Savior.

We see the evil of carnal frames, and the necessity and benefit of spiritual
frames: For further help in this last, let us practice these following
directions.

Direction 1. Keep up spiritual frames out of worship. To avoid low affections,
we must keep our hearts as much as we can in a settled elevation. If we admit
unworthy dispositions at one time, we shall not easily be rid of them at
another Fitzherbert Pol. in relig. part. 2. cap. 19. 12.
: As he that would not be bitten with Gnats in the Night, must keep his windows
shut in the Day; when they are once entered it is not easy to expel them: In
which respect, one advises, to be such out of worship as we would be in
worship. If we mix spiritual affections with our worldly employments, worldly
affections will not mingle themselves so easily with our heavenly engagements.
If our hearts be spiritual in our outward calling, they will scarce be carnal
in our religious service. If we walk in the Spirit, we shall not fulfill the
lusts of the Flesh Gal. 5.16.
. A spiritual walk in the day, will hinder carnal lustings in worship. The Fire
was to be kept alive upon the Altar when Sacrifices were not offered, from
morning till night, from night till morning, as well as in the very time of
Sacrifice. A spiritual life and vigor out of worship, would render it at its
season sweet and easy, and preserve a spontaneity and preparedness to it, and
make it both natural and pleasant to us.

Any thing that does unhinge and discompose our Spirits, is inconsistent with
religious services, which are to be performed with the greatest sedateness and
gravity. All irregular passions disturb the serenity of the Spirit, and open
the door for Satan Ephesians. 4.26.27.
. Says the Apostle, Let not the Sun go down upon your wrath, neither give
place to the Devil. Where wrath breaks the Lock, the Devil will quickly be over
the Threshold; and though they be allayed, yet they leave the heart sometime
after, like the Sea rolling and swelling after the storm is ceased.

Mixture with ill company leaves a tincture upon us in worship. Ephraims
allying himself with the Gentiles, bred an indifferency in Religion. Hos. 7.8.
Ephraim has mixed himself with the People. Ephraim is a Cake not turned: It
will make our hearts, and consequently our services half Dough, as well as half
baked: These and the like make the holy Spirit withdraw himself, and then the
Soul lies like a wind-bound Vessel and can make no way. When the Sun departs
from us, it carries its Beams away with it; then does Darkness spread it self
over the Earth, and the Beasts of the Forests creep out Psalm. 1^4.2^.
When the Spirit withdraws a while from a good man, it carries away, (though
not habitual, yet) much of the exciting and assisting grace; and then carnal
dispositions perk up themselves from the bosom of natural corruption. To be
spiritual in worship, we must bar the door at other times against that which is
contrary to it: As he that would not be infected with a contagious disease,
carries some Preservative about with him, and inures himself to good scents.

To this end, be much in secret ejaculations to God; these are the purest
slights of the Soul, that have more of fervor and less of carnality; they
preserve a liveliness in the Spirit, and make it more fit to perform solemn
stated worship with greater freedom and activity: A constant use of this would
make our whole lives, lives of worship. As frequent sinful acts strengthen
habits of sin; so frequent religious acts strengthen habits of grace.

Direction 2. Excite and exercise particularly a love to God, and dependence on
him.

Love is a commanding affection, a uniting graces; it draws all the faculties
of the Soul to one Center. The Soul that loves God, when it has to do with
him, is bound to the beloved Object; It can mind nothing else during such
impressions. When the affection is set to the worship of God, every thing the
Soul has will be bestowed upon it: As David's disposition was to the Temple, 1 Chronicles. 29.3. Carnal frames like the Fouls, will be lighting upon the Sacrifice;
but not when it is enflamed: Though the scent of the flesh invite them, yet the
heat of the fire drives them to their distance. A flaming love will singe the
Flies that endeavor to interrupt and disturb us. The happiness of Heaven
consists in a full attraction of the Soul to God, by his glorious influence
upon it; There will be such a diffusion of his goodness throughout the Souls of
the Blessed, as will unite the affections perfectly to him: These affections
which are scattered here, will be there gathered into one flame, moving to him
and centring in him: Therefore the more of a heavenly frame possesses our
affections here, the more settled and uniform will our hearts be in all their
motions to God, and operations about him.

Excite a dependence on him, Pro. 16.3. Commit thy works to the Lord, and thy
thoughts shall be established. Let us go out in Gods strength and not in our
own; vain is the help of man in any thing, and vain is the help of the heart:
It Is through God only we can do valiantly in spiritual concerns as well as
temporal; the want of this makes but slight impressions upon the Spirit.

Direction 3. Nourish right conceptions of the Majesty of God in your minds.
Let us consider, that we are drawing to God; the most amiable Object, the best
of Beings, worthy of infinite honor, and highly meriting the highest
affections we can give; a God that made the world by a word; that upholds the
great frame of Heaven and Earth; a Majesty above the conceptions of Angels; who
uses not his power to strike us to our deserved punishment, but his love and
bounty to allure us; a God that gave all the Creatures to serve us, and can in
a trice make them as much our Enemies as he has now made them our Servants.
Let us view him in his greatness, and in his goodness, that our hearts may have
a true value of the worship of so great a Majesty, and count it the most worthy
employment with all diligence to attend upon him. When we have a fear of God,
it will make our worship serious; when we have a joy in God, it will make our
worship durable. Our affections will be raised, when we represent God in the
most reverential, endearing and obliging circumstances. We honor the Majesty
of God, when we consider him with due reverence according to the greatness and
perfection of his works; and in this reverence of his Majesty does worship
chiefly consist. Low thoughts of God will make low frames in us before him: If
we thought God an infinite glorious Spirit, how would our hearts be lower than
our knees in his presence? How humbly, how believingly pleading is the
Psalmist, when he considers God to be without comparison in the Heavens; to
whom none of the Sons of the Mighty can be likened; when there was none like to
him in strength or faithfulness round about Psalm. 89.6, 7, 8.
? We should have also deep impressions of the Omniscience of God; and remember
we have to deal with a God that searches the heart and tries the reins; to
whom the most secret temper is as visible, as the loudest words are Audible;
that though man judges by outward expressions, God judges by inward affections.
As the Law of God regulates the inward frames of the heart; so the eye of God
pitches upon the inward intentions of the Soul. If God were visibly present
with us, should we not approach to him with strong affections; summon our
Spirits to attend upon him; behave our selves modestly before him? Let us
consider, he is as really present with us, as if he were visible to us; let us
therefore preserve a strong sense of the presence of God. No man but one out of
his wits, when he were in the presence of a Prince, and making a Speech to him;
would break off at every Period, and run after the catching of Butter-flyes.
Remember in all worship you are before the Lord, to whom all things are open
and naked.

Direction 4. Let us take heed of inordinate desires after the world. As the
world steals away a man's heart from the Word, so it does from all other
worship; It chokes the Word Mat. 13.27.
; it stifles all the spiritual breathings after God in every duty: The edge of
the Soul is blunted by it, and made too dull for such sublime exercises. The
Apostles rule in Prayer, when he joins sobriety with watching unto Prayer, 1
Pet. 4.7.
is of concern in all worship, sobriety in the pursuit and use of all wordly
things. A man drunk with worldly fumes cannot watch, cannot be heavenly,
affectionate, spiritual in service. There is a magnetic force in the Earth, to
hinder our flights to Heaven: Birds, when they take their first flights from
the Earth, have more flutterings of their wings, than when they are mounted
further in the Air, and got more without the Sphere of the Earths
attractiveness; the motion of their wings is more steady, that you can scarce
perceive them stir; they move like a Ship with a full Gale. The world is a clog
upon the Soul, and a bar to spiritual frames: It Is as hard to elevate the heart
to God in the midst of a hurry of worldly affairs, as it is difficult to
meditate when we are near a great noise of waters falling from a Precipice, or
in the midst of a Volly of Muskets. Thick claiy affections bemire the heart,
and make it unfit for such high flights it is to take in worship: Therefore get
your hearts clear from worldly thoughts and desires, if you would be more
spiritual in worship.

5. Let us be deeply sensible of our present wants, and the supplies we may
meet with in worship. Cold affections to the things we would have, will grow
cooler: Weakness of desire for the communications in worship, will freez our
hearts at the time of worship, and make way for vain and foolish diversions. A
Beggar that is ready to perish, and knows he is next door to ruin, will not
slightly and dully began Alms; and will not be diverted from his importunity by
every slight call, or the moving of an Atom in the Air. Is it Pardon we would
have? Let us apprehend the blackness of sin with the aggravations of it as it
respects God; Let us be deeply sensible of the want of pardon and worth of
mercy, and get our affections into such a frame, as a condemned man would do:
Let us consider, that as we are now at the Throne of Gods grace, we shall
shortly be at the Bar of Gods Justice; and if the Soul should be forlorn there,
how fixedly and earnestly would it plead for mercy? Let us endeavor to stir up
the same affections now, which we have seen some dying men have, and which we
suppose despairing Souls would have done at Gods Tribunal. Guliel. Paris.
Rhetor. Divin. cap. 26. p. 350. Col. 1.
We must be sensible that the life or death of our Souls depends upon worship.
Would we not be ashamed to be ridiculous in our carriage while we are eating;
and shall we not be ashamed to be cold or garish before God, when the Salvation
of our Souls as well as the Honor of God is concerned? If we did see the heaps
of sins, the eternity of punishment due to them; If we did see an angry and
offended Judge; If we did see the riches of mercy, the glorious outgoings of
God in the Sanctuary, the blessed Doles he gives out to men when they
spiritually attend upon him; both the one and the other would make us perform
our duties humbly, sincerely, earnestly, and affectionately, and wait upon him
with our whole Souls, to have misery averted and mercy bestowed. Let our sense
of this be encourag^d by the consideration of our Savior presenting his
merits: With what affection does he present his merits, his blood shed upon the
Cross now in Heaven? And shall our hearts be cold and frozen, flitting and
unsteady, when his affections are so much concerned? Christ does not present
any Man's case and duties without a sense of hi^ wants, and shall we have none
of our own?

Let me add this; let us affect our hearts with a sense of what supplies we
ha^^ met with in former worship: The delightful remembrance of what conver^^ we
have had with God in former worship, would spiritualize our hearts for the
present worship. Had Peter had a view of Christ's glory in the Mount, fresh in
his thoughts, he would not so easily have turned his back upon his Master: Nor
would the Israelites have been at leisure for their Idolatry, had they
preserved the sense of the Majesty of God discovered in his late Thunders from
Mount Sinai.

6. If any thing intrudes that may choke the Worship, cast it speedily out. We
cannot hinder Satan and our own Corruption from presenting Coolers to us, but
we may hinder the success of them: We cannot hinder the Gnats from buzzing
about us when we are in our business, but we may prevent them from settling upon
us. A man that is running on a considerable Errand, will shun all unnecessary
discourse that may make him forget or loyter in his business. What though there
may be something offered that is good in it self; yet if it has a tendency to
despoil God of his honor, and our selves of the spiritual intentness in
worship, send it away. Those that weed a Field of Corn, examine not the nature
and particular virtues of the Weeds; but consider only how they choke the Corn,
to which the native juice of the Soil is designed. Consider what you are about;
and if any thing interpose that may divert you, or cool your affections in your
present worship, cast it out.

7. As to private worship, let us lay hold of the most melting oportunities and
frames.

When we find our hearts in a more than ordinary spiritual frame, let us look
upon it as a Call from God to attend him: Such impressions and motions are Gods
Voice, inviting us into communion with him in some particular act of worship,
and promising us some success in it. When the Psalmist had a secret motion to
seek Gods face, and complied with it Psalm. 27.8.
, the issue is the encouragement of his heart, which breaks out into an
exhortation to others to be of good courage, and wait on the Lord, v. 13, 14.
Wait on the Lord, be of good courage and he shall strengthen thy heart, wait I
say on the Lord.

Reynold's
One blow will do more on the Iron when it is hot, than a hundred when it is
cold: Melted Metals may be stamped with any impression; but once hardened, will
with difficulty be brought into the figure we intend.

8. Let us examine our selves at the end of every act of worship, and chide our
selves for any carnality we perceive in them. Let us take a review of them, and
examine the reason; why art thou so low and carnal oh my Soul? As David did of
his disquietedness, Psalm 42.5. Why art thou cast down oh my Soul, and why art
thou disquieted within me? If any unworthy frames have surprised us in worship,
let us seek them out after worship; call them to the bar; make an exact
scrutiny into the causes of them, that we may prevent their incursions another
time; let our pulses beat quick, by way of anger and indignation against them:
This would be a repairing what has been amiss; otherwise they may grow, and
clogg an after worship more than they did a former. Daily examination is an
Antidote against the temptations of the following day, and constant examination
of our selves after duty, is a Preservative against vain encroachments in
following duties; and upon the finding them out, let us apply the blood of
Christ by Faith for our Cure, and draw strength from the death of Christ for
the conquest of them, and let us also be humbled for them. God lifts up the
humble: When we are humbled for our carnal frames in one duty, we shall find
our selves by the Grace of God more elevated in the next.

A DISCOURSE UPON THE ETERNITY OF GOD.
Psalm 90.2. Before the Mountains were brought forth, or ever thou had formed
the Earth and the World; even from everlasting to everlasting, thou art God.


THE Title of this Psalm is a Prayer; The Author Moses. Some think not only
this, but the Ten following Psalms were composed by him. The Title wherewith he
is dignified, is The Man of God, as also in Deuteronomy. 33.1. One inspired by him, to
be his Interpreter, and deliver his Oracles; One particularly directed by him:
Coccei in Loc.
One who as a Servant, did diligently employ himself in his Masters business,
and acted for the Glory of God; Austin in Loc.
He was the Minister of the Old Testament, and the Prophet of the New.

There are two parts of this Psalm. Pareus in loc.


1. A complaint of the frailty of Man's Life in general, verse 3, 4, 5, 6. And
then a particular complaint of the condition of the Church, v. 8, 9, 10.

2. A Prayer, v. 12.

But before he speaks of the shortness of humane life, he fortifies them by the
consideration of the refuge they had, and should find in God, v. 1. Lord thou
have been our dwelling place in all Generations.

We have had no settled abode in the Earth, since the time of Abraham's being
called out from Vr of the Chaldees: We have had Canaan in a promise, we have it
not yet in possession; We have been exposed to the Cruelties of an oppressing
Enemy, and the incommodities of a desert Wilderness; we have wanted the fruits
of the Earth, but not the dews of Heaven. Thou have been our dwelling place in
all Generations. Abraham was under thy Conduct; Isaac and Jacob under thy Care:
Their Posterity were multiplied by thee, and that under their oppressions. Thou
have been our Shield against dangers, our security in the times of trouble:
When we were pursued to the Red Sea, it was not a Creature delivered us; and
when we feared the pinching of our Bowels in the Desert, it was no Creature
rained Manna upon us. Thou have been our dwelling place; Thou have kept open
house for us, sheltered us against storms, and preserved us from mischief, as a
house does an Inhabitant from wind and weather; and that not in one or two, but
in all Generations: Some think an allusion is here made to the Ark, to which
they were to have recourse in all emergencies. Our refuge and defense has not
been from created things; not from the Ark, but from the God of the Ark.

Observe,

1. God is a perpetual refuge and security to his People. His Providence is not
confined to one Generation; it is not one Age only that tastes of his bounty and
compassion: His eye never yet slept, nor has he suffered the little Ship of
his Church to be swallowed up, though it has been tossed upon the waves: He has
always been an Haven to preserve us, a House to secure us; He has always had
compassions to pity us, and power to protect us; He has had a Face to shine,
when the world has had an angry Countenance to frown; Theodoret in loc.
He brought Enoch home by an extraordinary translation from a brutish world;
and when he was resolved to reckon with men for their brutish lives, he lodged
Noah, the Phoenix of the world, in an Ark, and kept him alive as a spark in the
midst of many waters, whereby to rekindle a Church in the world: In all
Generations he is a dwelling place, to secure his people here, or entertain
them above.

His Providence is not wearied, nor his Care fainting: He never wanted Will to
relieve us, For he has been our refuge; Nor ever can want Power to support us;
for he is a God from everlasting to everlasting. The Church never wanted a
Pilot to steer her, and a Rock to shelter her, and dash in pieces the waves
which threaten her.

2. How worthy is it to remember former benefits, when we come to beg for new?
Never were the Records of Gods mercies so exactly revised, as when his people
have stood in need of new Editions of his Power. How necessary are our wants to
stir us up to pay the rent of thankfulness in arrear? He renders himself doubly
unworthy of the mercies he wants, that does not gratefully acknowledge the
mercies he has received. God scarce promised any deliverance to the
Israelites, and they in their distress scarce prayed for any deliverance, but
that from Egypt was mentioned on both sides; by God to encourage them, and by
them to acknowledge their confidence in him. The greater our dangers, the more
we should call to mind Gods former kindness. We are not only thankfully to
acknowledge the mercies bestowed upon our persons, or in our age, but those of
former times. Thou have been our dwelling place in all Generations.

Moses was not living in the former Generations, yet he appropriates the former
mercies to the present age. Mercies as well Generations proceed out of the
loins of those that have gone before. All Mankind are but one Adam; the whole
Church but one Body.

In the second verse he backs his former consideration.

1. By the greatness of his Power in forming the world.

2. By the boundlesness of his duration; From everlasting to everlasting. As
thou have been our dwelling place, and expended upon us the strength of thy
power, and riches of thy love; so we have no reason to doubt the continuance on
thy part, if we be not wanting on our parts; For the vast Mountains, and
fruitful Earth are the works of thy hands; and there is less power requisite
for our relief, than there was for their Creation; and though so much strength
has been upon various occasions manifested, yet thy Arm is not weakened; for
from everlasting to everlasting, thou art God (...) strong.
.

Amyrald in loc.
Thou have always been God, and no time can be assigned as the beginning of thy
Being: The mountains are not of so long a standing as thy self; they are the
effects of thy power, and therefore cannot be equal to thy duration; since they
are effects, they suppose a precedence of their cause. If we would look back,
we can reach no further than the beginning of the Creation, and account the
years from the first foundation of the world; but after that we must lose our
selves in the Abyss of Eternity; we have no Cue to guide our thoughts; we can
see no bounds in thy Eternity: But as for Man he traverseth the world a few
days, and by thy order pronounced concerning all men, returns to the Dust, and
moulders into the Grave.

By Mountains, some understand Angels, as being Creatures of a more elevated
Nature: By Earth, they understand humane Nature, the Earth being the habitation
of Men. There is no need to divert in this place, from the Letter to such a
sense. The description seems to be Poetical, and amounts to this; He neither
began with the beginning of Time, nor will expire with the End of it: (...)
Theodoret in loc.
He did not begin when he made himself known to our Fathers; but his Being did
precede the Creation of the World; before any created Being was formed, and any
time settled.

Before the Mountains were brought forth, Or before they were begotten or born;
The word being used in those senses in Scripture; before they stood up higher
than the rest of the earthly Mass God had created. It seems that Mountains were
not casually cast up by the force of the Deluge, softning the Ground, and
driving several parcels of it together, to grow up into a massy body, as the
Sea does the Sand in several places; but they were at first formed by God.

The Eternity of God is here described.

1. In his Priority [Before the world.]

2. In the extension of his duration. [From everlasting to everlasting thou art
God.] He was before the world, yet he neither began nor ends: He is not a
Temporary, but an Eternal God: It takes in both parts of Eternity, what was
before the Creation of the world, and what is after: Though the Eternity of God
be one permanent state without succession, yet the Spirit of God suiting
himself to the weakness of our conception, divides it into two parts, one past
before the foundation of the world, another to come after the destruction of
the world; as he did exist before all ages, and as he will exist after all ages.

Many Truths lie coucht in the verse.

1. The World has a beginning of being. It was not from Eternity, it was once
nothing; had it been of a very long duration, some Records would have remained
of some memorable actions done of a longer date than any extant.

2. The world owes its Being to the creating Power of God. [Thou had formed
it] out of nothing into being, Thou, that is God; it could not spring into
being of it self; it was nothing; it must have a Former.

3. God was in being before the world. The Cause must be before the Effect;
that Word which gives Being must be before that which receives Being.

4. This Being was from Eternity. [From Everlasting]

5. This Being shall endure to Eternity. [To Everlasting]

6. There is but one God, one Eternal. [From everlasting to everlasting, thou
art God.] None else but one has the Property of Eternity; the Gods of the
Heathen cannot lay claim to it.

Doct. God is of an eternal duration. The Eternity of God is the foundation of
the stability of the Covenant, the great comfort of a Christian. The design of
God in Scripture is to set forth his dealing with men in the way of a Covenant.
Genesis 1.1.
The Priority of God before all things begins the Bible: In the beginning God
created. His Covenant can have no foundation, but in his duration before and
after the world: Calv. in loc.
And Moses here mentions his Eternity; not only with respect to the Essence of
God, but to his faederal Providence: As he is the dwelling place of his People
in all Generations. The duration of God for ever, is more spoken of in
Scripture than his Eternity a part ante, though that is the foundation of all
the comfort we can take from his Immortality: If he had a beginning, he might
have an end; and so all our happiness, hope and being would expire with him;
but the Scripture sometimes takes notice of his being without beginning, as
well as without end. Psalm. 93.2.
Thou art from everlasting. Psalm. 41.13.
Blessed be God from everlasting to everlasting: Prove. 8.23.
I was set up from everlasting: If his Wisdom were from everlasting, himself
was from everlasting: Whether we understand it of Christ the Son of God, or of
the essential wisdom of God, it is all one to the present purpose. The Wisdom of
God supposes the Essence of God, as habits in Creatures suppose the being of
some power or faculty as their Subject. The Wisdom of God supposes Mind and
Understanding, Essence and Substance.

The notion of Eternity is difficult, as Austin said Confess. lib. 11. Confess.
14.
of Time; If no man will ask me the question what time is; I know well enough
what it is: But if any ask me what it is, I know not how to explain it: So may
I say of Eternity; it is easy in the word pronounced, but hardly understood,
and more hardly expressed; it is better expressed by negative than positive words.

Though we cannot comprehend Eternity, yet we may comprehend that there is an
Eternity; as, though we cannot comprehend the Essence of God what he is, yet we
may comprehend that he is; we may understand the notion of his Existence,
though we cannot understand the infiniteness of his Nature; Yet we may better
understand Eternity than Infiniteness; we can better conceive a time with the
addition of numberless days and years, than imagine a Being without bounds;
whence the Apostle joins his Eternity with his Power; Romans 1.20.
His eternal Power and Godhead; Because next to the Power of God apprehended
in the Creature, we come necessarily by reasoning to acknowledge the Eternity
of God. He that has an incomprehensible Power, must needs have an Eternity of
Nature: His Power is most sensible in the Creatures to the eye of Man, and his
Eternity easily from thence deducible by the reason of Man.

Eternity is a perpetual duration, which has neither beginning nor end: Time
has both. Those things we say are in time, that have beginning, grow up by
degrees, have succession of parts: Eternity is contrary to Time, and is
therefore a permanent and immutable state; a perfect possession of life without
any variation: It comprehends in it self all years, all ages, all periods of
ages; It never begins; it endures after every duration of time, and never
cease; it does as much outrun time, as it went before the beginning of it:
Time supposes something before it, but there can be nothing before Eternity;
it were not then Eternity. Time has a continual succession; the former time
passes away, and another succeeds; the last year is not this year, nor this
year the next. We must conceive of Eternity contrary to the notion of time; As
the nature of time consists in the succession of parts, so the Nature of
Eternity in an infinite immutable duration. Moulin. Cod. 1. Ser. 2. P. 52.
Eternity and Time differ as the Sea and Rivers; the Sea never changes place,
and is always one water; but the Rivers glide along, and are swallowed up in
the Sea; so is time by eternity.

A thing is said to be eternal, or everlasting rather, in Scripture.

1. When it is of a long duration, though it will have an end; When it has no
measures of time determined to it; so Circumcision is said to be in the Flesh
for an everlasting Covenant; Genesis 17.13.
not purely everlasting, but so long as that administration of the Covenant
should endure.

And so when a Servant would not leave his Master, but would have his ear
boared; it is said, he should be a Servant for ever, Deuteronomy. 15.17.
i. e. till the Jubilee, which was every fiftieth year: So the Meat Offering
they were to offer, is said to be Perpetual: Levit. 6.20.
Canaan is said to be given to Abraham for an everlasting possession: Genesis 17.8.
When as the Jews are expelled from Canaan, which is given a Prey to the
barbarous Nations. Indeed Circumcision was not everlasting; yet the substance
of the Covenant whereof this was a sign, viz. that God would be the God of
Believers, endures for ever; and that Circumcision of the heart which was
signified by Circumcision of the flesh, shall remain for ever in the Kingdom of
Glory: It was not so much the lasting of the sign, as of the thing signified by
it, and the Covenant sealed by it: The sign had its abolition, so that the
Apostle is so peremptory in it, that he asserts, that if any went about to
establish it, he excluded himself from a participiation of Christ. Gal. 5.2.
The Sacrifices were to be perpetual, in regard of the thing signified by them,
viz. the death of Christ, which was to endure in the efficacy of it: And the
Passover was to be for ever, Exodus 12.24.
in regard of the Redemption signified by it, which was to be of everlasting
remembrance. Canaan was to be an everlasting possession in regard of the glory
of Heaven typified, to be for ever conferred upon the spiritual Seed of Abraham.

2. When a thing has no end, though it has a beginning. So Angels, and Souls
are everlasting; though their being shall never cease, yet there was a time
when their being began; they were nothing before they were something, though
they shall never be nothing again, but shall live in endless happiness or
misery.

But that properly is eternal, that has neither beginning nor end; and thus
Eternity is a Property of God. In this Doctrine I shall show 1. How God is
eternal, or in what respects Eternity is his Property. 2. That he is eternal,
and must needs be so. 3. That Eternity is only proper to God, and not common to
him with any Creature. 4. The Use.


1. How God is eternal, or in what respects he is so. Eternity is a Negative
Attribute, and is a denying of God any measures of time, as Immensity is a
denying of him any bounds of place; As Immensity is the diffusion of his
Essence, so Eternity is the duration of his Essence: And when we say God is
eternal, we exclude from him all possibility of beginning and ending, all flux
and change: As the Essence of God cannot be bounded by any place, so it is not
to be limited by any time; as it is his Immensity to be every where, so it is
his Eternity to be always. Gasse^d.
As created things are said to be somewhere in regard of place, and to be
present, past or future, in regard of time; so the Creator in regard of place,
is everywhere; in regard of time, is semper: C^^llius de Deo cap, 18. p. 41.
His duration is as endless, as his Essence is boundless; He always was and
always will be, and will no more have an End than he had a Begininng; and this
is an excellency belonging to the Supreme Being: Lingend Tom. 2. p 496.
As his Essence comprehends all beings and exceeds them, and his Immensity
surmounts all places; so his Eternity comprehends all times, all durations, and
infinitely excels them.

1. God is without beginning.

In the beginning God created the World: God was then before the beginning of
it; Genesis 1.1.
and what point can be set wherein God began, if he were before the beginning
of created things? God was without beginning, though all other things had time
and beginning from him. As Unity is before all Numbers, so is God before all
his Creatures. Abraham called upon the name of the everlasting God; Genesis 21.33.
(...)
The eternal God: It Is opposed to the Heathen Gods, which were but of
Yesterday, new coined, and so new; but the Eternal God, was before the world
was made: In that sense it is to be understood, Romans 16.26.
The Mystery which was kept secret since the world began, but now is made
manifest; and by the Scriptures of the Prophets according to the Command of the
everlasting God, made known to all Nations for the Obedience of Faith. The
Gospel is not preached by the Command of a new and temporary God, but of that
God that was before all Ages; though the manifestation of it be in time, yet
the purpose and resolve of it was from Eternity.

If there were Decrees before the foundation of the World, there was a Decreer
before the foundation of the World: Before the foundation of the world he loved
Christ as a Mediator: John 1^.24.
A fore-ordination of him was before the foundation of the world; a Choice of
men, and therefore a Chooser before the foundation of the world; a Grace given
in Christ before the world began, Ephesians. 1.4.
and therefore a Donor of that Grace. 2 Timothy 1.9.
From those places says Crellius, it appears that God was before the
foundation of the world, but they do not assert an absolute Eternity; Coccei
Sum. p. 48. Theol. Gerhard Exeges. cap. 86.4. p. 266.
But to be before all Creatures, is equivalent to his Being from Eternity. Time
began with the foundation of the world, but God being before time, could have
no beginning in time: Before the beginning of the Creation, and the beginning
of Time, there could be nothing but Eternity; nothing but what was uncreated,
that is nothing but what was without beginning. To be in time, is, to have a
beginning; to be before all time, is never to have a beginning, but always to
be: For as between the Creator and Creatures there is no Medium, so between
Time and Eternity, there is no Medium. It Is as easily deduced, that he that was
before all Creatures is Eternal, as he that made all Creatures is God: If he
had a beginning, he must have it from another, or from himself; if from
another, that from whom he received his Being would be better than he, so more
a God than he. He cannot be God, that is not Supreme; he cannot be Supreme that
owes his Being to the Power of another: He would not be said only to have
Immortality as he is, 1 Timothy 6.16.
if he had it dependent upon another; nor could he have a beginning from
himself; if he had given beginning to himself, then he was once nothing, there
was a time when he was not; if he was not, how could he be the Cause of
himself? It Is impossible for any, to give a Beginning and Being to it self: If
it acts, it must exist; and so exist, before it existed: A thing would exist as
a Cause, before it existed as an Effect. He that is not, cannot be the Cause
that he is; If therefore God does exist, and has not his Being from another,
he must exist from Eternity: Therefore when we say God is of and from himself,
we mean not that God gave Being to himself; but it is negatively to to be
understood, that he has no cause of Existence without himself.

Whatsoever Number of Millions of Millions of Years we can imagine before the
Creation of the World, yet God was infinitely before those; he is therefore
called the Ancient of Days, Dan. 7.9.
as being before all days and time, and eminently containing in himself all
times and ages: Though indeed God cannot properly be called ancient, that will
testify that he is decaying, and shortly will not be; no more than he can be
called young, which would signify that he was not long before. All created
things are new and fresh; but no Creature can find out any beginning of God:
It Is impossible there should be any beginning of him.

2. God is without end. He always was, always is, and always will be what he
is; He remains always the same in Being; so far from any change, that no shadow
of it can touch him: James 1.17.
He will continue in being, as long as he has already enjoyed it; and if we
could add never so many Millions of years together, we are still as far from an
end, as from a beginning; for the Lord shall endure for ever: Psalm. 9.7.
As it is impossible he should not be, being from all Eternity; so it is
impossible that he should not be to all Eternity. The Scripture is most
plentiful in testimonies of this Eternity of God, a part post, or after the
Creation of the world: He is said to live for ever. Rev. 4.9, 10.
The Earth shall perish, but God shall endure for ever, and his years shall
have no end. Plants and Animals grow up from small beginnings; Psalm. 102.27.
arrive to their full growth and decline again, and have always remarkable
alterations in their nature; But there is no declination in God by all the
revolutions of time: Hence some think the incorruptibility of the Deity was
signified by the Shittim, or Cedar wood, whereof the Ark was made, it being of
an incorruptible nature Exodus 25.10.
.

That which had no beginning of duration can never have an end, or any
interruptions in it. Since God never depended upon any, what should make him
cease to be what eternally he has been, or put a stop to the continuance of
his perfections? He cannot will his own destruction, that is against universal
nature in all things to cease from being, if they can preserve themselves. He
cannot desert his own Being, because he cannot but love himself as the best and
chiefest good. The reason that any thing decays, is either its own native
weakness, or a superior Power of something contrary to it: Crellius de Deo cap.
18. p. 41.
There is no weakness in the nature of God that can introduce any Corruption,
because he is infinitely simple without any mixture; Nor can he be overpowred
by any thing else; a weaker cannot hurt him, and a stronger than he there
cannot be; Nor can he be outwitted or circumvented, because of his infinite
Wisdom: As he received his Being from none, so he cannot be deprived of it by
any; As he does necessarily exist, so he does necessarily always exist: This
indeed is the Property of God; nothing so proper to him, as always to be.
Whatsoever perfections any Being has, if it be not eternal, it is not divine.
God only is immortal; 1 Timothy 6.16. Daille in loc.
he only is so by a necessity of nature: Angels, Souls and Bodies too, after
the Resurrection shall be immortal; not by nature but grant; they are subject
to return to nothing, if that word that raised them from nothing should speak
them into nothing again: It Is as easy with God to strip them of it, as to
invest them with it; nay, it is impossible but that they should perish, if God
should withdraw his Power from preserving them, which he exerted in creating
them: But God is immoveably fixed in his own Being; that as none gave him his
Life, so none can deprive him of his Life, or the least particle of it; not a
jot of the happiness and life, which God infinitely possesses, can be lost: It
will be as durable to everlasting, as it has been possessed from everlasting.

3. There is no succession in God. God is without succession or change; It Is a
part of Eternity; From everlasting to everlasting he is God, i. e. the same.
God does not only always remain in Being, but he always remains the same in
that Being, Psalm. 102.27.
Thou art the same. The Being of Creatures is successive; the Being of God is
permanent, and remains entire with all its perfections unchanged in an infinite
duration: Indeed the first notion of Eternity is to be without beginning and
end, which notes to us the duration of a Being in regard of its Existence; but
to have no succession, nothing first or last, notes rather the perfection of a
Being in regard of its Essence.

The Creatures are in a perpetual Flux; something is acquired, or something
lost every day. A Man is the same in regard of Existence when he is a Man, as
he was when he was a Child; but there is a new succession of quantities and
qualities in him; every day he acquires something till he comes to his
maturity; every day he loses something till he comes to his Period. A Man is
not the same at night that he was in the morning; something is expired, and
something is added; every day there is a change in his age, a change in his
substance, a change in his accidents: But God has his whole Being in one and
the same point, or moment of Eternity; He receives nothing as an Addition to
what he was before; He loses nothing of what he was before; He is always the
same excellency and perfection in the same infiniteness as ever; His years do
not fail, Heb. 1.12.
his years do not come and go as others do; there is not this day, to morrow or
yesterday with him: As nothing is past or future with him in regard of
Knowledge, but all things are present; so nothing is past or future in regard
of his Essence; He is not in his Essence this day what he was not before, or
will be the next day and year what he is not now; Lessius de perfect. divin.
lib. 4. cap. 1.
All his perfections are most perfect in him every moment, before all ages,
after all ages; As he has his whole Essence undivided in every place, as well
as in an immense space; so he has all his Being in one moment of time, as well
as in infinite intervalls of time. Gamacheus in Aquin. part. 1. Qu. 10. cap. 1.
Some illustrate the difference between Eternity and Time, by the similitude of
a Tree, or a Rock standing upon the side of a River, or Shore of the Sea; the
Tree stands always the same and unmoved, while the waters of the River glide
along at the foot; The Flux is in the River, but the Tree acquires nothing but
a diverse respect and relation of presence to the various parts of the River as
they flow; The waters of the River press on, and push forward one another, and
what the River had this minute, it has not the same the next: So are all
sublunary things in a continual Flux. And though the Angels have no substantial
change, yet they have an accidental; for the actions of the Angels this day,
are not the same individual actions which they performed yesterday: But in God
there is no change, He always remains the same.

Gassend. Tom. 1. Physic. 1. l. 2. c. 7. p. 223.
Of a Creature it may be said, he was, or he is, or he shall be; Of God it
cannot be said, but only he is; He is what he always was, and he is what he
always will be; whereas a Creature is what he was not, and will be what he is
not now; As it may be said of the flame of a Candle, it is flame; but it is not
the same individual flame as was before, nor is it the same that will be
presently after; there is a continual dissolution of it into Air, and a
continual supply for the generation of more; While it continues, it may be said
there is a flame; yet not entirely one, but in a succession of parts: So, of a
Man it may be said, he is in a succession of parts; but he is not the same that
he was, and will not be the same that he is: But God is the same without any
succession of parts and of time; of him it may be said, He is; He is no more
now than he was, and he shall be no more hereafter than he is. Daille Melange
de Sermon p. 252.
God possesses a firm and absolute Being, always constant to himself; He sees
all things sliding under him in a continual variation; He beholds the
revolutions in the world without any change of his most glorious and immovable
nature: All other things pass from one state to another; from their Original,
to their Eclipse and destruction: But God possesses his Being in one
indivisible point, having neither beginning, end nor middle,

1. There is no succession in the Knowledge of God. The variety of successions
and changes in the world, make not succession or new Objects in the Divine
Mind; for all things are present to him from Eternity in regard of his
Knowledge, though they are not actually present in the world in regard of their
Existence: He does not know one thing now, and another anon; He sees all things
at once; known unto God are all things from the beginning of the world: Acts
15.18.
But in their true order of succession, as they lie in the eternal Council of
God, to be brought forth in time. Though there be a succession and order of
things as they are wrought, yet there is no succession in God in regard of his
knowledge of them. God knows the things that shall be wrought, and the order of
them in their being brought upon the Stage of the World; yet both the things
and the order he knows by one act. Though all things be present with God, yet
they are present in him in the order of their appearance in the world, and not
so present with him as if they should be wrought at once. The Death of Christ
was to precede his Resurrection in order of time; there is a succession in
this; both at once are known by God, yet the act of his knowledge is not
exercised about Christ as dying, and rising at the same time; so that there is
succession in things, when there is no succession in Gods knowledge of them.
Since God knows time, he knows all things as they are in time; He does not know
all things to be at once, though he knows at once what is, has been and will
be. All things are past, present, and to come in regard of their Existence; but
there is not past, present and to come in regard of Gods Knowledge of them;
Parsiensis.
because he sees and knows not by any other, but by himself; He is his own
Light by which he sees, his own Glass wherein he sees; beholding himself, he
beholds all things.

2. There is no succession in the Decrees of God. He does not decree this now,
which he decreed not before; for as his works were known from the beginning of
the world, so his works were decreed from the beginning of the world; as they
are known at once, so they are decreed at once; there is a succession in the
execution of them, first grace, then glory; but the purpose of God for the
bestowing of both, was in one and the same moment of Eternity. Ephesians. 1.4.
He chose us in him before the foundation of the world, that we should be holy.
The choice of Christ, and the choice of some in him to be holy, and to be
happy, were before the foundation of the world. It Is by the eternal Counsel of
God, all things appear in time; they appear in their order according to the
Counsel and Will of God from Eternity. The Redemption of the world is after the
Creation of the world; but the Decree whereby the world was created, and
whereby it was redeemed, was from Eternity.

4. God is his own Eternity. He is not eternal by grant, and the disposal of
any other, but by Nature and Essence. Calov. Socinian.
The Eternity of God, is nothing else but the Duration of God; and the Duration
of God, is nothing else but his Existence enduring. Existentia durans.
If Eternity were any thing distinct from God, and not of the Essence of God;
then there would be something which was not God, necessary to perfect God. As
Immortality is the great perfection of a rational Creature, so Eternity is the
choice perfection of God, yea, the gloss and luster of all others. Every
perfection would be imperfect, if it were not always a perfection.

God is essentially whatsoever he is; and there is nothing in God but his
Essence: Duration or Continuance in being in Creatures, differs from their
being; for they might exist but for one instant; in which case they may be said
to have being, but not duration, because all duration includes prius, et
posterius. All Creatures may cease from being, if it be the pleasure of God;
they are not therefore durable by their Essence, and therefore are not their
own duration, no more than they are their own Existence. And though some
Creatures, as Angels, and Souls may be called everlasting, as a perpetual life
is communicated to them by God; yet they can never be called their own
Eternity; because such a Duration is not simply necessary, nor essential to
them, but accidental, depending upon the pleasure of another; there is nothing
in their nature that can hinder them from loosing it, if God, from whom they
received it, should design to take it away: But as God is his own necessity of
existing, so he is his own duration in existing: Gassend.
As he does necessarily exist by himself, so he will always necessarily exist
by himself.

5. Hence all the perfections of God are eternal. In regard of the Divine
Eternity, all things in God are eternal, his Power, Mercy, Wisdom, Justice,
Knowledge. God himself were not eternal, if any of his perfections which are
essential to him were not eternal also; He had not else been a perfect God from
all eternity, and so his whole self had not been eternal. If any thing
belonging to the nature of a thing be wanting, it cannot be said to be that
thing which it ought to be. If any thing requisite to the Nature of God had
been wanting one moment, he could not have been said to be an eternal God.

The second Thing, God is Eternal. The Spirit of God in Scripture condescends
to our Capacities in signifying the Eternity of God by days and years, which
are terms belonging to time, whereby we measure it: Psalm. 102.27.
But we must no more conceive that God is bounded, or measured by time, and
has succession of days because of those expressions, than we can conclude him.
to have a Body, because Members are ascribed to him in Scripture, to help our
conceptions of his glorious nature and operations.

Though years are ascribed to him; yet they are such as cannot be numbered,
cannot be finished, since there is no proportion between the duration of God,
and the years of Men. The number of his years cannot be searched out; for he
makes small the drops of water; they pour down Rain according to the vapor
thereof. Job. 36.26, 27
The numbers of the drops of Rain which have fallen in all parts of the Earth
since the Creation of the world, if subtracted from the number of the years of
God, would be found a small quantity, a mere nothing to the years of God. As
all the Nations in the world compared with God, are but as the drop of a
Bucket, worse than nothing, than vanity; Isa. 40.15.
So all the Ages of the world, if compared with God, amount not to so much as
the One hundred thousandth part of a Minute: The Minutes from the Creation may
be numbered, but the years of the duration of God being infinite, are without
measure.

As one day is to the Life of Man, so are a Thousand years to the Life of God:
Psalm. 90.5. Amyrald Trin. p. 44.
The Holy Ghost expresses himself to the capacity of Man, to give us some
Notion of an infinite Duration, by a resemblance suited to the capacity of Man.
If a Thousand years be but as a day to the Life of God; then as a year is to
the Life of Man, so are Three hundred sixty five thousand years to the Life of
God: And as Seventy years are to the Life of Man, so are twenty five Millions
four Hundred and fifty Thousand years to the Life of God: Yet still, since
there is no proportion between Time and Eternity, we must dart our thoughts
beyond all those; Daille Vent. Sermons, Ser. 1. sur. 102. Psalm. 27. p. 21.
For years and days measure only the duration of created things, and of those
only that are material and corporeal, subject to the motion of the Heavens,
which makes days and years.

Sometimes this Eternity is expressed by parts, as looking backward and forward;
by the differences of time, past, present and to come, Revel. 1.8. Revel. 4.8.
Crellius weakens this argument De Deo. cap. 18. p. 42.
which was, and is, and is to come. Though this might be spoken of any thing in
being, though but for an hour; it was the last minute, it is now, and it will
be the next minute; yet the Holy Ghost would declare something proper to God,
as including all parts of time; He always was, is now, and always shall be; It
might always be said of him he was, and it may always be said of him he will
be: There is no time when he began, no time when he shall cease. It cannot be
said of a Creature he always was, he always is what he was, and he always will
be what he is: But God always is what he was, and always will be what he is; so
that it is a very significant expression of the Eternity of God, as can be
suited to our capacities.

1. His Eternity is evident, by the Name God gives himself. Exodus 3.14.
And God said unto Moses, I am that I am; thus shall thou say to the Children
of Israel, I am has sent me unto you. This is the Name whereby he is
distinguished from all Creatures; I am, is his proper Name; This description
being in the Present Tense, shows that his Essence knows no past, nor future:
If it were he was, it would intimate he were not now what he once was; If it
were he will be, it would intimate he were not yet what he will be. But I am; I
am the only Being, the root of all Beings, he is therefore at the greatest
distance from not Being, and that is eternal. So that is signifies his
Eternity, as well as his Perfection and Immutability: As I am speaks the want
of no blessedness, so it speaks the want of no duration; and therefore the
French where ever they find this word Jehovah in the Scripture, which we
translate Lord, and Lord eternal, render it the Eternal. I am always, and
immutably the same. The Eternity, of God is opposed to the Volubility of Time,
which is extended into past, present and to come. Our time is but a small Drop,
as a Sand to all the Atoms and small particles of which the world is made; but
God is an unbounded Sea of Being; I am that I am, i. e. an infinite Life. I
have not that now, which I had not formerly; I shall not afterward have that
which I have not now; I am that in every moment which I was, and will be in all
moments of time; Nothing can be added to me, nothing can be detracted from me:
There is nothing superior to him, which can detract from him; nothing desirable
that can be added to him. These. Salmur. p. 1. p. 145. These. 14.
Now if there were any beginning and end of God, any succession in him, he
could not be I am; For in regard of what was past he would not be, in regard of
what was to come he is not yet: Plutarch de (...) 1. p. 392.
And upon this account, a Heathen argues well, of all Creatures it may be said
they were, or they will be, but of God it cannot be said any thing else but
Est, God is, because he fills an eternal duration: A Creature cannot be said to
be, if it be not yet, nor if it be not now, but has been. Peter. in Exo. 3.
Disput. 13.


God only can be called I am; all Creatures have more of not being than being;
for every Creature was nothing from Eternity, before it was made something in
time; and if it be corruptible in its whole nature, it will be nothing to
Eternity after it has been something in time; and if it be not corruptible in
its nature, as the Angels; or in every part of its nature, as Man in regard of
his Soul; yet it has not properly a Being, because it is dependent upon the
pleasure of God, to continue it, or deprive it of it; and while it is, it is
mutable, and all mutability is a mixture of not being: If God therefore be
properly I am, i. e. Being, it follows that he always was; for if he were not
always, he must as was argued before, be produced by some other, or by himself;
By another he could not, then he had not been God but a Creature; nor by
himself; for then as producing, he must be before himself, as produced; he had
been before he was: And he always will be, for being I am, having all being in
himself, and the Fountain of all being to every thing else, how can he ever
have his Name changed to I am not?

2. God has Life in himself, John 5.26. The Father has Life in himself; He is
the living God, therefore steadfast for ever: Dan. 6.26.
He has Life by his Essence, not by Participation; He is a Sun to give Light
and Life to all Creatures, but receives not Light or Life from any thing; and
therefore he has an unlimited Life, not a drop of life but a fountain, not a
spark of a limited life but a life transcending all bounds: He has life in
himself: All Creatures have their life in him and from him. He that has life
in himself does necessarily exist, and could never be made to exist; for then
he had not life in himself, but in that which made him to exist, and gave him
life; What does necessarily exist therefore, exists from Eternity; what has
being of it self, could never be produced in time, could not want being one
moment, because it has being from its Essence without influence of any
efficient cause. Petav. Theol. Dogm. Tom. 1. lib. 1. c. 6. 6, 7.
When God pronounced his Name, I am that I am, Angels and Men were in being;
the world had been created above two thousand four hundred years; Moses to whom
he then speaks, was in being; yet, God only is, because he only has the
fountain of being in himself, but all that they were, was a rivulet from him;
He has from nothing else, that he does subsist; every thing else has its
subsistence from him as their root, as the Beam from the Sun, as the Rivers and
Fountains from the Sea. All life is seated in God, as in its proper Throne; in
its most perfect Purity. God is Life; it is in him originally, radically,
therefore eternally: He is a pure act, nothing but vigor and act; He has by
his nature that life, which others have by his grant; whence the Apostle says,
1 Timothy 6.16.
not only that he is immortal, but he has immortality in a full possession;
see-simple, not depending upon the Will of another, but containing all things
within himself. He that has life in himself, and is from himself, cannot but
be: He always was, because he received his being from no other, and none can
take away that being which was not given by another. Amyrald de Trinit. p. 48.
If there were any space before he did exist, then there was something which
made him to exist; Life would not then be in him, but in that which produced
him into being; He could not then be God, but that other which gave him being,
would be God. And to say, God sprung into being by chance, when we see nothing
in the world that is brought forth by chance, but has some cause of its
existence, would be vain; for since God is a Being, Chance which is nothing,
could not bring forth something; and by the same reason that he sprung up by
chance, he might totally vanish by chance. What a strange notion of a God would
this be, Such a God that had no life in himself, but from chance?

Since he has life in himself, and that there was no cause of his existence;
he can have no cause of his limitation, and can no more be determined to a
time, than he can to a place. What has life in it self, has life without
bounds, and can never desert it, nor be deprived of it: So that he lives
necessarily, and it is absolutely impossible that he should not live; whereas
all other things live, and move, and have their being in him Acts 17.28.
; and as they live by his Will, so they can return to nothing at his Word.

3. If God were not eternal, he were not immutable in his nature. It Is contrary
to the nature of immutability to be without eternity; for whatsoever begins, is
changed in its passing from not being to being: It began to be what it was not,
and if it ends, it cease to be what it was; It cannot therefore be said to be
God, If there were either beginning or ending, or succession in it, Mal. 3.6. I
am the Lord, I change not, Job. 37.23. (Touching the Almighty, we cannot find
him out.) God argues here says Calvin, from his unchangeable nature as
Jehovah, to his immutability in his purpose: Had he not been eternal, there had
been the greatest change from nothing to something: A change of Essence, is
greater than a change of purpose. God is a Sun glittering always in the same
glory; No growing up in Youth; no passing on to Age: If he were not without
succession, standing in one point of Eternity, there would be a change from
past to present, from present to future. The Eternity of God is a Shield
against all kind of mutability. If any thing sprang up in the Essence of God
that was not there before, he could not be said to be either an eternal, or an
unchanged Substance.

4. God could not be an infinitely perfect Being, if he were not eternal. A
finite duration is inconsistent with infinite perfection. Whatsoever is
contracted within the limits of time, cannot swallow up all perfections in it
self. God has an unsearchable perfection. Job. 11.7.
Can thou by searching find out God; can thou find out the Almighty unto
perfection? He cannot be found out, He is infinite, because he is
incomprehensible: Incomprehensibility arises from an infinite perfection,
which cannot be fathomed by the short line of Man's Understanding: His Essence
in regard of its diffusion, and in regard of its duration, is incomprehensible
as well as his action: If God therefore had beginning, he could not be
infinite; if not infinite, he did not possess the highest perfection, because a
perfection might be conceived beyond it; If his Being could fail, he were not
perfect: Can that deserve the name of the highest perfection, which is capable
of corruption and dissolution? To be finite and limited, is the greatest
imperfection, for it consists in a denial of being. He could not be the most
blessed Being, if he were not always so, and should not for ever remain to be
so; and whatsoever perfections he had, would be sowred by the thoughts, that in
time they would cease; and so could not be pure perfections, because not
permanent; But He is blessed from everlasting to everlasting. Psalm. 41.13.
Had he a beginning, he could not have all perfection without limitation; he
would have been limited by that which gave him beginning; that which gave him
being would be God, and not himself, and so more perfect than he: But since God
is the most sovereign perfection, than which nothing can be imagined perfecter
by the most capacious understanding, He is certainly eternal; being infinite,
nothing can be added to him, nothing detracted from him.

5. God could not be Omnipotent, Almighty, if he were not Eternal. The title of
Almighty, agrees not with a nature that had a beginning; whatsoever has a
beginning was once nothing, and when it was nothing could act nothing. Where
there is no being, there is no power; Neither does the title of Almighty agree
with a perishing nature: He can do nothing to purpose, that cannot preserve
himself against the outward force and violence of Enemies, or against the
inward causes of corruption and dissoluon. No account is to be made of Man,
because his breath is in his Nostrils Isa. 2.22.
; Could a better account be made of God, if he were of the like condition? He
could not properly be almighty, that were not always mighty: If he be
omnipotent, nothing can impair him; He that has all power, can have no hurt:
Voet. Natural. Theol. p. 310.
If he does whatsoever he pleases, nothing can make him miserable, since
misery consists in those things which happen against our will. The Almightiness
and Eternity of God are linkt together: Rev. 1.8.
I am Alpha and Omega, the Beginning and Ending says the Lord, which was, and
which is, and which is to come, the Almighty: Rev. 1.8.
Almighty because Eternal, and Eternal because Almighty.

6. God would not be the first Cause of all if he were not Eternal; But he is
the first, and the last; the first cause of all things, the last end of all
things Rev. 1.8. Ficin. de Immort. l. 2. cap. 5.
: That which is the first cannot begin to be, it were not then the first; it
cannot cease to be: Whatsoever is dissolved, is dissolved into that whereof it
does consist, which was before it, and then it was not the first. Coccei Sum
Theol. cap. 8
The world might not have been, it was once nothing; it must have some cause to
call it out of nothing; Nothing has no power to make it self something, there
is a superior Cause, by whosoever Will and Power it comes into Being, and so gives
all the Creatures their distinct forms.

This Power cannot but be eternal; it must be before the world; the Founder
must be before the Foundation; Crellins de Deo cap. 18. p. 43.
and his Existence must be from Eternity, or we must say nothing did exist from
Eternity: And if there were no being from Eternity, there could not now be any
being in time: What we see, and what we are, must arise from it self or some
other; it cannot from it self: If any thing made it self, it had a power to
make it self; it then had an active power before it had a being; It was
something in regard of Power, and was nothing in regard of Existence at the
same time: Suppose it had a Power to produce it self, this power must be
conferred upon it by another; and so the power of producing it self, was not
from it self, but from another; But if the power of being was from it self, why
did it not produce it self before? Why was it one moment out of being? Petav.
Theol. Dogmat. Tom. 1. l. 1. c. 10.11.
If there be any existence of things, it is necessary that that which was the
first Cause, should exist from Eternity. Whatsoever was the immediate Cause of
the world, yet the first and chief Cause wherein we must rest, must have
nothing before it; if it had any thing before it, it were not the first; He
therefore that is the first Cause must be without beginning, nothing must be
before him; If he had a beginning from some other, he could not be the first
Principle and Author of all things; If he be the first Cause of all things, he
must give himself a beginning, or be from Eternity: He could not give himself a
beginning; whatsoever begins in time was nothing before, and when it was
nothing it could do nothing; it could not give it self any thing, for then it
gave what it had not, and did what it could not: If he made himself in time,
why did he not make himself before? What hindered him? It was either because he
could not, or because he would not; if he could not, he always wanted power,
and always would, unless it were bestowed upon him, and then he could not be
said to be from himself? If he would not make himself before, then he might
have made himself when he would: How had he the power of willing and nilling
without a Being? Nothing cannot will or nill; Nothing has no faculties: So
that it is necessary to grant some eternal Being, or run into inextricable
Labyrinths and Mazes. If we deny some eternal being, we must deny all being;
our own being, the being of every thing about us; unconceivable absurdities
will arise.

So then if God were the Cause of all things, He did exist before all things,
and that from Eternity.

The third thing is, Eternity is only proper to God, and not communicable. Bapt.
It Is as great a madness to ascribe Eternity to the Creature, as to deprive the
Lord of the Creature of Eternity. It Is so proper to God, that when the Apostle
would prove the Deity of Christ, he proves it by his immutability and eternity,
as well as his creating power: Heb. 1.10, 11, 12.
Thou art the same, and thy years shall not fail. The Argument had not
strength, if Eternity belonged essentially to any but God; and therefore he is
said only to have Immortality 1 Timothy 6.16.
: All other things receive their being from him, and can be deprived of their
being by him: All things depend on him, he of none: All other things are like
Clothes, which would consume if God preserved them not. Immortality is
appropriated to God, i. e. an independent Immortality. Angels and Souls have an
Immortality, but by donation from God, not by their own Essence; dependent upon
their Creator, not necessary in their own nature: God might have annihilated
them after he had created them; so that their duration cannot properly be
called an Eternity, it being extrinsical to them, and depending upon the will
of their Creator, by whom they may be extinguished: It is not an absolute and
necessary, but a precarious Immortality. Whatsoever is not God, is temporary:
Whatsoever is eternal, is God.

It Is a contradiction to say a Creature can be eternal; as nothing eternal is
created, so nothing created is eternal. What is distinct from the nature of God
cannot be eternal, Eternity being the Essence of God. Every Creature in the
notion of a Creature speaks a dependence on some Cause, and therefore cannot be
eternal. Lessius de Perfect. l. 4. c. 2.
As it is repugnant to the nature of God not to be eternal, so it is repugnant
to the nature of a Creature to be eternal; for then a Creature would be equal
to the Creator, and the Creator or the Cause would not be before the Creature
or Effect.

It would be all one to admit many Gods, as many Eternals; and all one to say
God can be created, as to say a Creature can be uncreated, which is to be
eternal.

1. Creation is a producing something from nothing. What was once nothing,
cannot therefore be eternal; not being was eternal; therefore its being could
not be eternal, for it should be then before it was, and would be something
when it was nothing. It Is the nature of a Creature to be nothing, before it was
created; what was nothing before it was, cannot be equal with God in an
Eternity of Duration.

2. There is no Creature but is mutable, therefore not eternal. As it had a
change from nothing to something, so it may be changed from being to not being.
If the Creature were not mutable it would be most perfect, and so would not be
a Creature but God; for God only is most perfect: It Is as much the Essence of a
Creature to be mutable, as it is the Essence of God to be immutable: Mutability
and Eternity are utterly inconsistent.

3. No Creature is infinite, therefore not eternal. To be infinite in Duration
is all one, as to be infinite in Essence: Lessius de Perfect. l. 4. c. 2.
It Is as reasonable to conceive a Creature immense, filling all places at once,
as eternal, extended to all ages; because neither can be without infiniteness,
which is the Property of the Deity. A Creature may as well be without bounds of
place, as limitations of time.

4. No effect of an intellectual free Agent, can be equal in duration to its
Cause. The Productions of natural Agents are as ancient often as themselves;
the Sun produces a Beam as old in time as its self; But who ever heard of a
piece of wise Workmanship as old as the wise Artificer? God produced a
Creature, not necessarily and naturally, as the Sun does a Beam, but freely, as
an intelligent Agent. The Sun was not necessary; it might be or not be,
according to the pleasure of God. Crellius de Deo cap. 18. p. 43.
A free act of the Will is necessary, to precede in order of time as the Cause
of such effects as are purely voluntary. Those Causes that act as soon as they
exist, act naturally, necessarily, not freely, and cannot cease from acting.

But suppose a Creature might have existed by the Will of God from Eternity;
yet, as some think, it could not be said absolutely, and in its own nature to
be eternal; because Eternity was not of the Essence of it. The Creature could
not be its own Duration; for though it were from Eternity, it might not have
been from Eternity, because its Existence depended upon the free Will of God,
who might have chose, whether he would have created it or no.

God only is eternal, the first and the last, the beginning and the end; who,
as he subsisted before any Creature had a being, so he will eternally subsist
if all Creatures were reduced to nothing.

IV. Use.

1. Information.

1. If God be of an eternal duration, then Christ is God: Eternity is the
Property of God, but it is ascribed to Christ; He is before all things, Col.
1.17.
i. e. all created things: He is therefore no Creature; and if no Creature,
eternal. All things were created by him, both in Heaven and in Earth, Angels as
well as Men, Col. 1.16.
whether they be Thrones or Dominions: If all things were his Creatures, then
he is no Creature; if he were, all things were not created by him, or he must
create himself.

He has no difference of time; for he is the same yesterday, to day, and for
ever; Heb. 13.8. Rev. 1.8. He which is, and which was, and which is to come.
The same, with the Name of God, I am, which signifies his Eternity; He is no
more to day than he was yesterday, nor will be any other to morrow than he is
to day; And therefore Melchisedeck whose Descent, Birth and Death, Father and
Mother, Beginning and End of days are not upon Record, was a Type of the
Existence of Christ without difference of time. Heb. 7.3.
Having neither beginning of Days nor end of Life, but made like the Son of
God. The suppression of his Birth and Death, was intended by the Holy Ghost as
a Type of the excellency of Christ's person in regard of his Eternity, and the
duration of his Charge in regard of his Priesthood. As there was an appearance
of an Eternity in the suppression of the Race of Melchisedeck, so there is a
true Eternity in the Son of God. How could the Eternity of the Son of God be
expressed by any resemblance so well, as by such a suppression of the Beginning
and End of this great Person, different from the custom of the Spirit of God in
the Old Testament, who often records the Generations and Ends of holy Men; and
why might not this, which was a kind of a shadow of Eternity, be a
representation of the true Eternity of Christ, as well as the restoration of
Isaac to his Father without death, is said to be a figure of the Resurrection
of Christ after a real death? Mestraezat. in loc.
Melchisedeck is only mentioned once (without any record of his extraction) in
his appearance to Abraham after his victory, as if he came from Heaven only for
that action, and instantly disappeared again, as if he had been an eternal
person.

And Christ himself hints his own eternity, John 16.28.
I came forth from the Father and am come into the world, again I leave the
world and go to the Father. He goes to the Father as he came from the Father;
He goes to the Father for everlasting, so he came from the Father from
everlasting; there is the same duration in coming forth from the Father, as in
returning to the Father. But more plainly; John 17.5.
He speaks of a Glory that he had with the Father before the world was, when
there was no Creature in being; this is an actual glory, and not only in
Decree: For a decreed glory Believers had, and why may not every one of them
say the same words, Father glorify me with that glory which I had with thee
before the world was, if it were only a glory in decree? Nay, it may be said of
every man, he was before the world was, because he was so in decree. Christ
speaks of something peculiar to him, a Glory in actual possession before the
world was; glorify me, embrace, honor me as thy Son, whereas I have now been
in the eyes of the world handled disgracefully as a Servant: If it were only in
decree, why is not the like expression used of others in Scripture as well as
of Christ? Why did he not use the same words for his Disciples that were then
with him, who had a glory in decree? His Eternity is also mentioned in the
Old Testament: Prove. 8.22.
The Lord possessed me in the beginning of his way before his works of old. If
he were the work of God, he existed before himself, if he existed before all
the works of God; it is so not properly meant of the essential wisdom of God,
since the discourse runs in the name of a Person; and several passages there
are which belong not so much to the essential wisdom of God, as v. 13. The evil
way, and the froward mouth do I hate; which belongs rather to the holiness of
God, than to the essential wisdom of God; besides it is distinguished from
Jehovah, as possessed by him, and rejoicing before him. Yet plainer, Mica 5, 2.
Out of thee i. e. Bethlehem shall he come forth to be Ruler in Israel, whose
goings forth have been from of old, from everlasting (...) from the ways of
Eternity. There are two goings forth of Christ described, one from Bethlehem in
the days of his incarnation, and another from Eternity. The Holy Ghost adds
after his prediction of his incarnation, his going out from everlasting, that
none should doubt of his Deity: If this going out from everlasting were only in
the purpose of God, it might be said of David, and of every Creature: And in
Isa. 9.6. He is particularly called the Everlasting, or Eternal Father; Not the
Father in the Trinity, but a Father to us; yet eternal, the Father of Eternity.
As he is the mighty God, so he is the everlasting Father: Can such a title be
ascribed to any, whose being depends upon the Will of another, and may be dashed
out at the pleasure of a Superior?

As the Eternity of God is the ground of all Religion, so the Eternity of
Christ is the ground of the Christian Religion: Could our Sins be perfectly
expiated, had he not an eternal Divinity to answer for the offenses committed
against an eternal God? Temporary sufferings had been of little validity,
without an infiniteness and eternity in his person to add weight to his passion.

2. If God be eternal, he knows all things as present. Petav.
All things are present to him in his Eternity; for this is the notion of
Eternity, to be without succession. If Eternity be one indivisible point, and
is not diffused into preceding and succeeding parts, then that which is known
in it or by it, is perceived without any succession; For knowledge is as the
substance of the person knowing; if that has various actions and distinct from
it self, then it understands things in differences of time as time presents
them to view: But, since Gods Being depends not upon the revolutions of time,
so neither does his Knowledge; it exceeds all motions of years and days,
comprehends infinite spaces of past and future. God considers all things in his
Eternity in one simple knowledge, as if they were now acted before him: Acts
15.18.
Known unto God are all his works from the beginning of the world (...) a
seculo; from eternity. Gods Knowledge is coeternal with him: If he knows that
in time which he did not know from eternity, he would not be eternally perfect,
since knowledge is the perfection of an intelligent nature.

3. How bold and foolish is it for a mortal Creature, to censure the Counsels
and Actions of an eternal God, or be too curious in his inquisitions? It Is by
the consideration of the unsearchable number of the years of God that Elihu
checks too bold enquiries: Who has enjoined him his way, Job. 36.26. compared
with the 23.
or who can say, thou have wrought iniquity? Behold, God is great and we know
him not, neither can the number of his years be searched out. Eternity sets God
above our Enquiries and Censures. Infants of a day old are not able to
understand the acts of wise and gray Heads: Shall we, that are of so short a
being and understanding as yesterday, presume to measure the motions of
Eternity by our scanty Intellects? We that cannot foresee an unexpected
accident which falls in to blast a well laid design, and run a Ship many
Leagues back from the intended Harbor; We cannot understand the reason of
things we see done in time, the motions of the Sea, the generation of Rain, the
nature of Light, the Sympathies and Antipathies of the Creatures; and shall we
dare to censure the actions of an eternal God so infinitely beyond our reach?
The Counsels of a boundless Being are not to be scanned by the Brain of a silly
Worm, that has breathed but a few minutes in the world: Since Eternity cannot
be comprehended in time, it is not to be judged by a Creature of time, Let us
remember to magnify his works which we behold, because he is eternal, which is
the exhortation of Elihu, backed by this Doctrine of Gods Eternity; Job. 36.24.
and not accuse any work of him who is the Ancient of days, or presume to
direct him, of whose Eternity we come infinitely short: When ever therefore any
unworthy notion of the Counsels and Works of God is suggested to us by Satan,
or our own corrupt hearts; let us look backward to Gods eternal and our own
short duration, and silence our selves with the same Question wherewith God put
a stop to the reasoning of Job; Job. 38.4.
Where wast thou, when I laid the foundations of the Earth? and reprove our
selves for our curiosity; since we are of so short a standing, and were nothing
when the eternal God laid the first Stone of the World.

4. What a folly and boldness is there in Sin, since an eternal God is offended
thereby? All Sin is aggravated by Gods Eternity: The blackness of the Heathen
Idolatry was in changing the glory of the incorruptible God, Romans 1.23
erecting resemblances of him contrary to his immortal nature; as if the
eternal God, whose life is as unlimited as Eternity, were like those Creatures
whose beings are measured by the short Ell of Time, which are of a corruptible
nature, and daily passing on to Corruption: They could not really deprive God
of his Glory and Immortality, but they did in Estimation. There is in the
nature of every sin a tendency to reduce God to a not Being. He that thinks
unworthily of God, or acts unworthily toward him, does (as much as in him
lies) fully and destroy these two perfections of his, Immutability and
Eternity: It Is a carriage, as if he were as contemptible as a Creature that
were but of yesterday, and shall not remain in being to morrow. He that would
put an end to Gods glory by darkning it, would put an end to Gods life by
destroying it. He that should love a Beast with as great an affection as he
loves a Man, contemns a rational nature; and he that loves a perishing thing
with the same affection he should love an everlasting God, contemns his
Eternity; He debaseth the duration of God below that of the World: The low
valuation of God speaks him in his esteem, no better than withering Grass, or a
Gourd, which lasts for a night; and the Creature which possesses his affection,
to be a Good that lasts for ever. How foolish then is every sin, that tends to
destroy a Being that cannot destroy or desert himself; a Being, without whose
Eternity the Sinner himself could not have had the capacity of a being to
affront him? How base is that, which would not let the works of God remain in
their established posture? How much more base in not enduring the fountain and
glory of all Beings, that would not only put an end to the Beauty of the world,
but the Eternity of God?

5. How dreadful is it to lie under the stroke of an eternal God? His Eternity
is as great a terror to him that hates him, as it is a comfort to him that
loves him; because he is the living God, an everlasting King, the Nations shall
not be able to abide his indignation. Jer. 10.10.
Though God be least in their thoughts, and is made light of in the world; yet
the thoughts of Gods Eternity, when he comes to judge the world, shall make the
Slighters of him tremble: That the Judge and Punisher lives for ever, is the
greatest grievance to a Soul in misery, and adds an unconceivable weight to it,
above what the infiniteness of Gods executive Power could do without that
duration: His Eternity makes the punishment more dreadful than his Power; his
Power makes it sharp, but his Eternity renders it perpetual; ever to endure, is
the sting at the end of every lash.

And how sad is it, to think that God lays his Eternity to pawn for the
punishment of obstinate Sinners, and engages it by an Oath, that he will whet
his glittering Sword, that his hand shall take hold of Judgment, that he will
render Vengeance to his Enemies, and a Reward to them that hate him, a reward
proportioned to the greatness of their offenses, and the glory of an eternal
God? Deuteronomy. 32.40.41.
I lift up my hand to Heaven, and say, I live for ever, i. e. as surely as I
live for ever, I will whet my glittering Sword. As none can convey good with a
perpetuity, so none can convey evil with such a lastingness as God. It Is a
great loss to lose a Ship richly fraught in the bottom of the Sea, never to be
cast upon the Shore; But how much greater is it, to lose eternally a Sovereign
God, which we were capable of eternally enjoying, and undergo an evil as
durable as that God we slighted, and were in a possibility of avoiding? The
miseries of men after this Life are not eased, but sharpened by the Life and
Eternity of God.

The Second Use is of Comfort. What foundation of comfort can we have in any of
Gods Attributes, were it not for his Infiniteness and Eternity; though he be
merciful, good, wise, faithful,? What support could there be, if they were
perfections belonging to a corruptible God? What hopes of a Resurrection to
Happiness can we have, or of the duration of it; if that God that promised it
were not immortal to continue it, as well as powerful to effect it? His Power
were not Almighty, if his duration were not Eternal.

1. If God be eternal, his Covenant will be so. It Is founded upon the Eternity
of God; the Oath whereby he confirms it, is by his Life: Since there is none
greater than himself, he swears by himself, Heb. 6.13.
or by his own Life, which he engages together with his Eternity for the full
performance; so that if he lives for ever, the Covenant shall not be
disanull'd, it is an immutable Counsel: Heb. 6.16.17.
The immutability of his Counsel follows the immutability of his Nature.
Immutability and Eternity go hand in hand together. The promise of eternal Life
is as ancient as God himself in regard of the purpose of the promise, or in
regard of the promise made to Christ for us. Tit. 1.2.
Eternal life which God promised before the world began. As it has an
anteeternity, so it has a post-eternity; Therefore the Gospel which is the new
Covenant published, is termed the everlasting Gospel; Rev. 14.6
which can no more be altered and perish, than God can change and vanish into
nothing: He can as little morally deny his truth, as he can naturally desert
his life. The Covenant is there represented in a Green Color, to note its
perpetual Verdure: The Rainbow, the Emblem of the Covenant, about the Throne,
was like to an Emrald, a Stone of a green color; Rev. 4.3.
whereas the natural Rainbow has many colors; this but one, to signify its
Eternity.

2. If God be eternal, he being our God in Covenant, is an eternal Good and
Possession. This God is our God for ever and ever; Psalm. 48.14.
He is a dwelling place in all Generations. We shall traverse the world a
while, and then arrive at the blessings Jacob wished for Joseph; Genesis 49.26.
The blessings of the everlasting hills. If an Estate of a thousand Pound per
Annum render a man's life comfortable for a short term, how much more may the
Soul be swallowed up with joy in the enjoyment of the Creator, whose years
never fail, who lives for ever to be enjoyed, and can keep us in life for ever
to enjoy him? Death indeed will seize upon us by Gods irreversible order, but
the immortal Creator will make him disgorge his morsel, and land us in a
glorious immortality; our Souls at their Dissolution, and our Bodies at the
Resurrection, after which they shall remain for ever, and employ the extent of
that boundless Eternity in the fruitition of the Sovereign and Eternal God: For
it is impossible that the Believer, who is united to the immortal God that is
from everlasting to everlasting, can ever perish; for being in conjunction with
him who is an ever flowing Fountain of Life, he cannot suffer him to remain in
the jaws of Death. While God is eternal, and always the same; it is not possible
that those that partake of his spiritual life, should not also partake of his
eternal. It Is from the consideration of the endlesness of the years of God that
the Church comforts her self, that her Children shall continue, and their Seed
be established for ever. Psalm. 102.27.28.
And from the eternity of God, Habbacue, chap. 1.12. concludes the eternity of
Believers, Art not thou from everlasting O Lord my God, my holy One? We shall
not dye O Lord. After they are retired from this world, they shall live for
ever with God without any change by the multitude of those imaginable years and
ages that shall run for ever. It Is that God that has neither beginning nor
end, that is our God; who has not only immortality in himself, but immortality
to give out to others. As he has abundance of Spirit to quicken them Mal. 2.15.
, so he has abundance of Immortality to continue them. It Is only in the
consideration of this a man can with wisdom say, Soul take thy ease, thou have
Goods laid up for many years; to say it of any other possession, is the
greatest folly in the judgment of our Savior. Luke 12.19, 20.
Mortality shall be swallowed up of Immortality: Rivers of pleasure shall be
for evermore. Death is a word never spoken there by any, never heard by any in
that possession of Eternity; it is for ever put out as one of Christ's conquered
enemies.

The happiness depends upon the presence of God, with whom Believers shall be
for ever present. Happiness cannot perish as long as God lives: He is the first
and the last; the first of all delights, nothing before him; the last of all
pleasures, nothing beyond him: A Paradise of delights in every Point without a
flaming Sword.

2. The enjoyment of God will be as fresh and glorious after many ages, as it
was at first. God is eternal, and Eternity knows no change; there will then be
the fullest possession without any decay in the Object enjoyed. There can be
nothing past, nothing future; time neither adds to it nor detracts from it;
That infinite fullness of perfection which flourishes in him now, will flourish
eternally, without any discoloring of it in the least by those innumerable
ages that shall run to Eternity, much less any despoyling him of them. He is
the same in his endless Duration. Psalm. 102.27.
As God is, so will the Eternity of him be, without succession, without
division: The fullness of joy will be always present; without past to be thought
of with regret for being gone; without future to be expected with tormenting
desires. When we enjoy God, we enjoy him in his Eternity without any flux; an
entire possession of all together, without the passing away of pleasures that
may be wished to return, or expectation of future joys which might be desired
to hasten. Time is fluid, but Eternity is stable, and after many ages, the joys
will be as savory and satisfying, as if they had been but that moment first
tasted by our hungry appetites. When the glory of the Lord shall rise upon you,
it shall be so far from ever setting, that after millions of years are expired,
as numerous as the Sands on the Seashore, the Sun, in the light of whose
Countenance you shall live, shall be as bright as at the first appearance: He
will be so far from ceasing to flow, that he will flow as strong, as full as at
the first communication of himself in glory to the Creature. God therefore as
sitting upon his Throne of Grace, and acting according to his Covenant, is like
a Jasper-stone, which is of a green color, a color always delightful; Rev.
4.3.
Because God is always vigorous, and flourishing; a pure act of life, sparkling
new and fresh rays of life and light to the Creature, flourishing with a
perpetual Spring, and contententing the most capacious desire; forming your
interest, pleasure and satisfaction, with an infinite variety, without any
change or succession: He will have variety to increase delights, and eternity
to perpetuate them; This will be the fruit of the enjoyment of an infinite, an
eternal God: He is not a Cistern but a Fountain, wherein water is always living
and never putrifies.

4. If God be eternal, Here is a strong ground of comfort against all the
distresses of the Church, and the threats of the Churches Enemies. Gods abiding
for ever, is the Plea Jeremy makes for his return to his forsaken Church.
Lament. 5.19.20.
Thou O Lord, remainest for ever, thy Throne from Generation to Generation. The
Church is weak; created things are easily cut off; What prop is there, but that
God that lives for ever? What though Jerusalem lost its Bulwarks, the Temple
were defaced, the Land wasted; yet the God of Jerusalem sits upon an eternal
Throne, and from everlasting to everlasting there is no diminution of his
Power. The Prophet intimates in this complaint, that it is not agreeable to
Gods Eternity to forget his People, to whom he has from Eternity bore good
will. In the greatest confusions, the Churches eyes are to be fixed upon the
Eternity of Gods Throne, where he sits as Governor of the world: No Creature
can take any comfort in this perfection, but the Church; other Creatures depend
upon God, but the Church is united to him.

The first discovery of the Name I am, which signifies the Divine Eternity as
well as Immutability, was for the comfort of the oppressed Israelites in Egypt
Exodus 3.14, 15.
; It was then published from the secret place of the Almighty, as the only
strong Cordial to refresh them: It has not yet, it shall not ever lose its
virtue in any of the miseries that have, or shall successively befall the
Church. It Is a comfort as durable as the God whose name it is: He is still, I
am, and the same to the Church, as he was then to his Israel. His spiritual
Israel have a greater right to the glories of it, than the carnal Israel could
have. No oppression can be greater than theirs; what was a comfort suited to
that distress, has the same sutableness to every other oppression. It was not
a temporary name, but a name for ever; his memorial to all Generations, v. 15.
and reaches to the Church of the Gentiles, with whom he treats as the God of
Abraham, ratifying that Covenant by the Messiah, which he made with Abraham the
Father of the Faithful.

The Churches enemies are not to be feared; they may spring as the grass, but
soon after do wither by their own inward principles of decay, or are cut down
by the hand of God. Psalm. 92.7, 8, 9.
They may be instruments of the anger of God, but they shall be scattered as
the workers of inquity by the hand of the Lord, that is high for evermore, v.
8. and is engaged by his promise, to preserve a Church in the World. They may
threaten, but their breath may vanish, as soon as their threatenings are
pronounced: for they carry their breath in no surer a place than their own
Nostrils, upon which the eternal God can put his hand, and sink them with all
their rage. Do the Prophets and instructors of the Church, live for ever? Zach.
1.5.
No. Shall then the Adversaries and Disturbers of the Church live for ever?
They shall vanish as a shadow, their being depends upon the eternal God of the
faithful, and the everlasting Judge of the wicked. He that inhabits Eternity,
is above them that inhabit Mortality, and must, whither they will or no, say to
Corruption, thou art my Father, and to the Worm, thou art my Mother, and my
Sister. Job 17.14.
When they will act with a confidence, as if they were living Gods, he will not
be mated, but evidence himself to be a living God above them. Why then should
mortal men be feared in their frowns, when an immortal God has promised
protection in his word, and lives for ever to perform it?

5. Hence follows another comfort; since God is eternal, he has as much power,
as will to be as good as his word. His promises are established upon his
eternity, and this perfection is a main ground of trust; Isa. 26.4.
Trust in the Lord for ever: for in the Lord Jehovah is everlasting strength.
(...) His name is doubled, that name, Iah, and Jehovah, which was always the
strength of his people; and not a single one, but the strength or rock of
Eternities; not a failing but an eternal truth and power; that as his strength
is eternal, so our trust in him should imitate his Eternity in its perpetuity;
and therefore in the despondency of his people, as if God had forgot his
promises, and made no account of them, or his word, and were weary of doing
good, he calls them to reflect on what they had heard of his Eternity, which is
attended with immutability, who has an infiniteness of power to perform his
will, and an infiniteness of understanding to judge of the right seasons of it.
Isa. 40.27.28.
His Wisdom, Will, Truth, have alway's been, and will to Eternity be the same.
He wants not life, any more then love, for ever to help us; since his word is
past, he will never fail us; since his life continues, he can never be out of a
capacity to relieve us: and therefore when ever we foolishly charge him by our
distrustful thoughts, we forget his love, which made the promise, and his
eternal life, which can accomplish it. As his word is the bottom of our trust,
and his truth is the assurance of his sincerity, so his Eternity is the
assurance of his ability to perform. His word stands for ever. Isa. 40.8.
A man may be my friend this day, and be in another world to morrow; and though
he be never so sincere in his word, yet death snaps his life asunder, and
forbids the execution. But as God cannot die, so he cannot lie; because he is
the Eternity of Israel. 1 Samuel 15.29.
The strength of Israel will not lie, nor repent, (...) perpetuity or eternity
of Israel. Eternity implies immutability; we could have no ground for our
hopes, if we knew him not to be longer lived than our selves. The Psalmist
beats off our hands from trust in men, because their breath goes forth, they
return to their earth, and in that day their thoughts perish. Psalm. 146.3, 4.
And if the God of Jacob were like them, what happiness could we have in making
him our help? As his Sovereignty in giving precepts had not been a strong
ground of Obedience, without considering him as an eternal Lawgiver, who could
maintain his rights; So his kindness in making the promises, had not been a
strong ground of confidence, without considering him as an Eternal promiser,
whose thoughts, and whose life can never perish. Crellius de, Deo cap. 18. p.
44. 45.
And this may be one reason, why the Holy Ghost mentions so often the
post-eternity of God, and so little his ante-eternity: because that is the
strongest foundation of our faith, and hope, which respects chiefly, that which
is future, and not that which is past; yet indeed no assurance of his
after-Eternity can be had, if his ante-Eternity be not certain. If he had a
beginning, he may have an end; And if he had a change in his nature, he might
have in his Counsels; But since all the resolves of God are as himself is,
eternal, and all the promises of God are the fruits of his Counsel, therefore
they cannot be changed: If he should change them for the better, he would not
have been eternally Wise, to know what was best; If for the worse, he had not
been eternally good or just. Men may break their promises, because they are
made without foresight; but God that inhabits Eternity, foreknows all things,
that shall be done under the Sun, as if they had been then acting before him;
and nothing can intervene, or work a change in his resolves; because the least
circumstances were eternally foreseen by him. Though there may be variations,
and changes to our sight, the wind may rack about, and every hour new, and
cross accidents happen; yet the eternal God, who is eternally true to his word,
Sits at the Helm, and the Winds and the Waves obey him. And though he should
defer his promise a thousand years, yet he is not slack: For he defers it but a
day to his eternity; 2 Pet. 3.8, 9.
And who would not with comfort stay a day in expectation of a considerable
advantage?

3. Use is for Exhortation.

1. To something which concerns us in our selves.

2. To something which concerns us with respect to God.

1. To something which concerns us in our selves.

1. Let us be deeply affected with our sins long since committed. Though they
are past with us, they are in regard of Gods eternity present with him; there
is no succession in Eternity, as there is in time: All things are before God at
once; our sins are before him, as if committed this moment, though committed
long ago. As he is what he is in regard of duration, so he knows what he knows
in regard of knowledge. As he is not more than he was, nor shall not be any
more than he is, so he always knew what he knows, and shall not cease to know,
what he now know's. As himself, so his knowledge is one indivisible point of
eternity. He knows nothing, but what he did know from eternity; he shall know
no more for the future, than he now knows. Our sins being present with him in
his eternity, should be present with us in our regard of remembrance of them,
and sorrow for them. What though many years are lapsed, much time run out, and
our iniquities almost blotted out of our memory? yet since a thousand years are
in Gods sight, and in regard of his eternity but as a day; Psalm. 90.4
A thousand years in thy sight are but as yesterday, when it is past, and as a
watch in the night; They are before him. For suppose a man were as old as the
World, above five thousand six hundred years; the sins committed five thousand
years ago, are according to that rule, but as if they were committed five days
ago; so that sixty two years, are but as an hour and a half, and the sins
committed forty years since, are as if they were committed but this present
hour. But if we will go further, and consider them but as a watch of the Night,
about three hours (for the Night consisting of twelve hours, was divided into
set Watches) then a thousand years are but as three hours in the sight of God;
and then sins committed sixty years ago, are but as if they were committed
within this five minutes.

Let none of us set light by the iniquities committed many years ago, and
imagine that length of time can wipe out their guilt; No, let us consider them
in relation to Gods eternity, and excite an inward remorse, as if they had been
but the birth of this moment.

2. Let the consideration of Gods Eternity abate our pride. This is the design
of the Verses following the Text, The Eternity of God being so sufficient to
make us understand our own nothingness, which ought to be one great end of man,
especially as fallen. The eternity of God should make us as much disesteem our
selves, as the excellency of God made Job abhor himself. Job. 42.5, 6.
His excellency should humble us under a sense of our vanity, and his eternity
under a sense of the shortness of our duration. If man compares himself with
other Creatures, he may be too sensible of his greatness, but if he compares
himself with God, he cannot but be sensible of his baseness.

1. In regard of our impotence, to comprehend this Eternity of God. How little
do we know? How little can we know of Gods Eternity? We cannot fully conceive
it, much less express it; we have but a brutish understanding in all those
things, as Agur said of himself. Prove. 30.7.


Charrontrois. vent Livr. 1. chp. 5. p. 17. etc.
What is Infinite and Eternal cannot be comprehended by finite and temporary
Creatures; If it could, it would not be infinite and eternal: For to know a
thing, is to know the Extent, and cause of it; It Is repugnant to Eternity to be
known, because it has no limits, no causes; the most soaring understanding
cannot have a proportionable understanding of it. What disproportion is there
between a drop of water, and the Sea in their greatness and motion? Yet by a
drop, we may arrive to a knowledge of the nature of the Sea, which is a Mass of
drops joined together. But the longest duration of times cannot make us know,
what Eternity is: Becuse there is no proportion between time and Eternity. The
years of God are as numberless, as his thoughts, Psalm. 40.5.
and our minds as far from reckoning the one, as the other. If our
understandings are too gross, to comprehend the Majesty of his infinite works,
they are much more too short to comprehend the infiniteness of his Eternity.

2. In regard of the vast disproportion of our duration to this duration of God.

1. We have more of not being than being. We were nothing from an unbegun
Eternity, and we might have been nothing to an endless Eternity, had not God
called us into being; and if he please, we may be nothing by as short an
annihilating word, as we were something by a Creating word. As it is the
prerogative of God, to be, I am that I am; so it is the property of a Creature,
to be, I am not what I am; I am not by my self what I am, but by the Indulgence
of another. I was nothing formerly, I may be nothing again, unless he that is,
I am, make me to subsist what I now am. Nothing is as much the title of the
Creature, as Being is the title of God. Nothing is so holy as God, because
nothing has being as God. 1 Samuel 2.2.
There is none holy as the Lord, for there is none besides thee. Man's life is
an Image, a dream, which are next to nothing; and if compared with God, worse
than nothing; a nullity as well as a vanity: Because with God only is the
fountain of life. Psalm. 36.9.
The Creature is but a drop of life from him, dependent on him. A drop of water
is a nothing, if compared with the vast conflux of waters, and numberless drops
in the Ocean.

How unworthy is it for dust and ashes kneaded together in time, to strut
against the Father of Eternity? Much more unworthy for that which is nothing,
worse than nothing, to quarrel with that which is only being, and equal himself
with him, that Inhabits Eternity.

2. What being we have, had a beginning. After an unaccountable Eternity was
run out, in the very dregs of time, a few years ago we were created, and made
of the basest and vilest dross of the world, the slime and dust of the Earth;
made of that, wherewith Birds build their nests; made of that, which Creeping
things make their habitation, and beasts trample upon; How monstrous is pride
in such a Creature, to aspire, as if he were the Father of Eternity, and as
Eternal as God, and so his own Eternity?

3. What being we have, is but of a short duration in regard of our life in
this World. Our life is in a constant change, and flux, we remain not the same
an entire day; youth quickly succeeds Childhood, and age as speedily treads
upon the heels of youth; there is a continual defluxion of minutes, as there is
of sands in a glass. He is as a Watch wound up at the beginning of his life,
and from that time is running down, till he comes to the bottom; some part of
our lives is cut off every day, every minute. Life is but a moment, what is
past cannot be recalled; what is future cannot be ensured: If we enjoy this
moment, we have lost that which is past, and shall presently lose this by the
next that is to come.

The short duration of men is set out in Scripture by such Creatures, as soon
disappear. A worm, Job. 25.6.
that can scarce out live a winter. Grass, that withers by the summer Sun. Life
is a flower soon withering, Job. 14.2.
a vapor soon vanishing, James 4.14.
a smoke soon disappearing. Psalm. 102.3.
The strongest man is but compacted dust, the fabric must moulder, the highest
Mountain falls and comes to naught. Time gives place to Eternity, we live now,
and die to morrow. Not a Man since the world began, ever lived a day in Gods
sight: For no man ever lived a thousand years. The longest day of any man's life
never amounted to twenty four hours in the account of divine Eternity: A life
of so many hundred years, with the addition he dyed, makes up the greatest part
of the History of the Patriarchs. Genesis 5.
And since the life of man has been curtaild, if any be in the world eighty
years, he scarce properly lives sixty of them, since the fourth part of time is
at least consumed in sleep.

A greater difference there is between the duration of God, and that of a
Creature, than between the life of one for a minute, and the life of one that
should live as many years as the whole globe of Heaven and Earth, if changed
into papers, could contain figures: And this life, tho but of a short duration
according to the period God has determined, is easily cut off; the treasure of
life is deposited in a brittle vessel: A small stone hitting against
Nebuchadnezzars Statue, will tumble it down into a poor and nasty grave: A
Grape stone, the bone of a fish, a small fly in the throat, a moist damp are
enough to destroy an Earthly Eternity, and reduce it to nothing.

What a Nothing then is our shortness, if compared with Gods Eternity? Our
frailty, with Gods duration? How humble then should perishing Creatures be
before an Eternal God, with whom our days are as a hands breadth, and our age
as nothing? Psalm. 39 5.
The Angels that have been of as long a duration as Heaven and Earth, tremble
before him; the Heavens melt at his presence; and shall we that are but of
yesterday, approach a Divine Eternity with unhumbled Souls, and offer the
Calves of our lips with the pride of Devils, and stand upon our terms with him,
without falling upon our faces, with a sense that we are but dust and ashes,
and Creatures of time? How easily is it to reason out man's humility, but how
hard is it to reason man into it?

3. Let the consideration of Gods Eternity take off our love and confidence
from the world, and the things thereof. The Eternity of God reproaches a
pursuit of the world, as preferring a momentary pleasure before an everlasting
God; as tho a temporal world could be a better supply, than a God whose years
never fail. Alas! what is this Earth, men are so greedy of, and will get, tho
by blood and sweat? What is this whole Earth, if we had the entire possession
of it, if compared with the vast Heavens, the seat of Angels and blessed
Spirits? It Is but as an Atome to the greatest Mountain, or as a drop of dew to
the immense Ocean. How foolish is it, to prefer a drop before the Sea, or an
Atome before the world? The Earth is but a point to the Sun; the Sun with its
whole Orb, but a little part of the Heavens, if compared with the whole
Fabric. If a man had the possession of all those, there could be no comparison
between those that have had a beginning, and shall have an end, and God who is
without either of them. Yet, how many are there, that make nothing of the
divine Eternity, and imagine an Eternity of nothing?

1. The world has been but a of short standing. It Is not yet six thousand years
since the foundations of it were laid; and therefore it cannot have a boundless
excellency, as that God, who has been from everlasting, does possess. If Adam
had lived to this day, and been as absolute Lord of his posterity, as he was of
the other Creatures, had it been a competent object to take up his heart; had
he not been a mad man, to have preferred this little created pleasure before an
everlasting uncreated God? A thing that had a dependent Beginning, before that
which had an independent Eternity?

2. The beauties of the world are transitory and perishing. The whole world is
nothing else but a fluid thing, the Fashion of it is a Pageantry, passing away;
1 Cor. 7.31.
tho the glories of it might be conceived greater than they are, yet they are
not consistent, but transient; There cannot be an entire enjoyment of them;
because they grow up, and expire every moment, and slipaway between our
fingers, while we are using them. Have we not heard of Gods dispersing the
greatest Empires like Chaff before a whirlwind, or as smoke out of a Chimny;
Hos. 13.3.
which tho it appears as a compacted cloud, as if it would choke the Sun, is
quickly scattered into several parts of the Air, and becomes invisible? Nettles
have often been heirs to stately Palaces, as God threatens Israel. Hos. 9.6.
We cannot promise our selves over night any thing the next day. A Kingdom with
the glory of a throne may be cut off in a morning; Hos. 10.15.
The new wine may be taken from the mouth, when the Vintage is ripe; the
devouring locust may snatch away both the hopes of that, and the harvest: Joel
1.15.
they are therefore things which are not, and Nothing cannot be a fit object
for confidence or affection. Prove. 23.5.
Will thou set thy eyes upon that which is not? for riches certainly make
themselves wings. They are not properly beings; because they are not stable,
but flitting; They are not; because they may not be the next moment to us, what
they are this; they are but Cisterns, not Springs, and broken Cisterns, not
sound and stable; no solidity in their substance, nor stability in their
duration. What a foolish thing is it then, to prefer a transient felicity, a
mere nullity before an eternal God? What a senseless thing would it be in a
man, to prefer the Map of a Kingdom, which the hand of a Child can tear in
pieces, before the Kingdom shadowed by it? How much more inexcusable is it to
value things, that are so far from being Eternal, that they are not so much as
duskie resemblances of an Eternity? Were the things of the world more glorious
than they are, yet they are but as a counterfeit Sun in a Cloud, which comes
short of the true Sun in the heavens both in glory and duration; and to esteem
them before God, is unconceivably baser, than if a man should Value a
parti-colour'd bubble in the Air, before a durable rock of Diamonds. The
comforts of this world are as Candles, that will end in a Snuff; whereas the
felicity that flows from an eternal God, is like Sun, that shines more and more
to a perfect day.

3. They cannot therefore be fit for a soul, which was made to have an interest
in Gods Eternity. The soul being of a perpetual nature, was made for the
fruition of an Eternal good; without such a good it can never be perfect.
Perfection, that noble thing, rises not from any thing in this world, nor is a
title due to a Soul while in this world; it is then they are said to be made
perfect, when they arrive at that entire conjunction with the eternal God in
another life. Heb. 12.23.
The soul cannot be enobled by an acquaintance with these things, or
established by adependence on them, they cannot confer, what a rational nature
should desire, or supply it with what it wants.

The soul has a resemblance to God in a post-Eternity: Why should it be drawn
aside by the blandishments of earthly things, to neglect its true
establishment, and lacquey after the Body, which is but the shadow of the Soul,
and was made to follow it, and serve it? But while it busieth it self
altogether in the concerns of a perishing body, and seeks satisfaction in
things that glide away, it becomes rather a body than soul, descends below its
nature, reproacheth that God, who has imprinted upon it an image of his own
Eternity, and loses the comfort of the everlastingness of its Creator. How
shall the whole world, if our lives were as durable as that, be an happy
Eternity to us, who have Souls, that shall survive all the delights of it,
which must fry in those flames, that shall fire the whole frame of nature at
the general conflagration of the world? 2 Pet. 3.10.


4. Therefore let us provide for an happy interest in the Eternity of God. Man
is made for an eternal state. The Soul has such a perfection in its nature,
that it is fit for Eternity, and cannot display all its operations but in
Eternity: To an Eternity it must go, and live as long as God himself lives.
Things of a short duration are not proportioned to a Soul made for an eternal
continuance; to see that it be a comfortable Eternity, is worth all our care.
Man is a forecasting Creature, and considers not only the present, but the
future too, in his provisions for his family; and shall he disgrace his nature,
in casting off all consideration of a future Eternity? Get possession therefore
of the eternal God: A portion in this life is the lot of those, who shall be
for ever miserable. Psalm. 17.14.
But God, an everlasting portion, is the lot of them that are designed for
happiness. Psalm. 73.26.
God is my portion for ever.

Time is short. 1 Cor. 7.29.
The whole time for which God designed this building of the world is of a
little compass; it is a Stage erected for rational Creatures to act their parts
upon for a few thousand years; the greatest part of which time is run out; and
then shall time like a rivulet fall into the Sea of Eternity, from whence it
sprung. As Time is but a slip of Eternity, so it will end in Eternity; our
advantages consist in the present instant; what is past, never promised a
return, and cannot be fetched back by all our vows: What is future, we cannot
promise our selves to enjoy; we may be snatched away before it comes. Every
minute that passes, speaks the fewer remaining, till the time of death. And as
we are every hour further from our beginning, we are nearer our end. The Child
born this day grows up, to grow nothing at last. In all Ages, there is but a
step between us and Death, as David said of himself. 1 Samuel 20.3.
The little time that remains for the Devil till the day of Judgment, envenoms
his wrath; he rages, because his time is short. Rev. 13.1^.
The little time that remains between this moment and our death, should quicken
our diligence to inherit the endless and unchangeable Eternity of God.

5. Often meditate on the Eternity of God. The Holiness, Power and Eternity of
God, are the fundamental Articles of all Religion, upon which the whole body of
it leans; His Holiness for conformity to him, his Power and Eternity for the
support of Faith and Hope. The strong and incessant Cries of the four Beasts,
representing that Christian Church, are, holy, holy, holy, Lord God Almighty,
which was, and is, and is to come. Revel. 4.8.
Though his Power is intimated, yet the chiefest are his Holiness, three times
expressed; and his Eternity which is repeated, v. 9. who lives for ever and ever.
This ought to be the constant practice in the Church of the Gentiles, which
this Book chiefly respects: The meditation of his converting Grace manifested
to Paul, ravished the Apostles heart, but not without the triumphant
consideration of his Immortality and Eternity, which are the principal parts of
the Doxology. 1 Timothy 1.15.16, 17.
Now unto the King Eternal, immortal, invisible, only wise God, be honor and
glory for ever and ever. It could be no great transport to the Spirit, to
consider him glorious without considering him immortal: The unconfinedness of
his perfections in regard of time, presents the Soul with matter of the
greatest complacency. The happiness of our Souls depends upon his other
Attributes, but the perpetuity of it upon his Eternity. Is it a comfort to view
his immense Wisdom; his overflowing Goodness; his tender Mercy; his unerring
Truth? What comfort were there in any of those, if it were a Wisdom that could
be bafled; a Goodness that could be dampt; a Mercy that can expire, and a Truth
that can perish with the Subject of it? Without Eternity, what were all his
other Perfections, but as glorious, yet withering Flowers; a great, but a
decaying Beauty? By a frequent meditation of Gods Eternity, we should become
more sensible of our own vanity and the worlds triflingness: How nothing should
our selves; How nothing would all other things appear in our eyes? How coldly
should we desire them? How feebly should we place any trust in them? Should we
not think our selves worthy of contempt to dote upon a perishing glory, to
expect support from an Arm of Flesh, when there is an eternal Beauty to ravish
us, an eternal Arm to protect us? Asaph, when he considered God a Portion for
ever, thought nothing of the Glories of the Earth, or the Beauties of the
created Heavens worth his appetite or complacency, but God. Psalm. 73.25, 26
Besides, an elevated frame of heart at the consideration of Gods Eternity,
would batter down the strong holds and engines of any temptation: A slight
temptation will not know where to find and catch hold of a Soul high and hid in
a meditation of it; and if it does, there will not be wanting from hence
preservatives to resist and conquer it. What transitory pleasures will not the
thoughts of Gods Eternity stifle? When this work busieth a Soul, it is too great
to suffer it to descend, to listen to a sleeveless errand from Hell or the
World. The wanton allurements of the Flesh will be put off with indignation.
The profers of the world will be ridiculous when they are cast into the
Balance with the Eternity of God, which sticking in our thoughts, we shall not
be so easy a Prey for the Fowlers Ginn.

Let us therefore often meditate upon this, but not in a bare speculation
without engaging our affections, and making every notion of the Divine Eternity
end a in suitable impression upon our hearts: This would be much like the
Disciples gazing upon the Heavens at the ascension of their Master, while they
forgot the practice of his Orders: Acts 1.11.
We may else find something of the nature of God, and lose our selves, not only
in Eternity but to Eternity.

2. And hence the second part of the Exhortation is, to something which
concerns us with a respect to God.

1. If God be eternal, How worthy is he of our choicest affections, and
strongest desires of communion with him? Is not every thing to be valued
according to the greatness of its Being? How then should we love him, who is
not only lovely in his nature, but eternally lovely; having from everlasting
all those perfections centred in himself, which appear in time? If every thing
be lovely, by how much the more it partakes of the nature of God who is the
chief Good, how much more infinitely lovely is God, who is superior to all
other goods, and eternally so? Not a God of a few minutes, months, years or
millions of years; not of the dreggs of time or the top of time, but of
Eternity; above time, unconceivably immense beyond time: The loving him
infinitely, perpetually, is an act of homage due to him for his eternal
excellency: We may give him the one, since our Souls are immortal, though we
cannot the other, because they are finite: Since he encloseth in himself all
the excellencies of Heaven and Earth for ever, he should have an affection, not
only of time in this wo^^^, but of eternity in the future; and if we did not
owe him a love for what we are by him, we owe him a love for what he is in
himself; and more for what he is, than for what he is to us: He is more worthy
of our affections because he is the eternal God, than because he is our
Creator; because he is more excellent in his nature than in his transient
actions: The beams of his goodness to us, are to direct our thoughts and
affections to him; but his own eternal excellency, ought to be the ground and
foundation of our affections to him. And truly, since nothing but God is
eternal, nothing but God is worth the loving; and we do but a just right to our
love, to pitch it upon that which can always possess us and be possessed by us;
upon an Object that cannot deceive our affection, and put it out of countenance
by a dissolution

And if our happiness consists in being like to God, we should imitate him in
loving him as he loves himself, and as long as he loves himself: God cannot do
more to himself than love himself; he can make no addition to his Essence, nor
diminution from it. What should we do less to an eternal Being, than to bestow
affections upon him, like his own to himself; since we can find nothing so
durable as himself, for which we should love it?

2. He only is worthy of our best Service. The Ancient of days is to be served
before all that are younger than himself; Our best obedience is due to him as a
God of unconfined excellency: Every thing that is excellent deserves a
veneration suitable to its excellency. As God is infinite, he has right to a
boundless service; as he is eternal, he has right to a perpetual service: As
Service is a debt of Justice upon the account of the excellency of his nature,
so a perpetual service is as much a debt of justice upon the account of his
Eternity. If God be infinite and eternal, he merits an honor and comportment
from his Creatures suited to the unlimited perfection of his Nature, and the
duration of his Being. How worthy is the Psalmists resolution? I will sing unto
the Lord as long as I live, I will sing praise to my God while I have any
being: Psalm. 104.33.
It Is the use he makes of the endless duration of the Glory of God, and will
extend to all other service as well as praise. To serve other things, or to
serve our selves, is too vast a service upon that which is nothing. In devoting
our selves to God, we serve him that is, that was, so as that he never began;
Is to come, so as that he never shall end; By whom all things are what they
are; who has both eternal knowledge to remember our service, and eternal
goodness to reward It.

A DISCOURSE UPON THE IMMUTABILITY OF GOD.
Psalm 102.26, 27. They shall perish, but thou shall endure; yea, all of them
shall wax old as a Garment; as a Vesture shall thou change them, and they shall
be changed: But thou art the same, and thy years shall have no end.


THIS Psalm contains a Complaint of a People pressed with a great Calamity;
some think of the Jewish Church in Babylon, others think the Psalmist does here
personate Mankind lying under a state of corruption, because he wishes for the
coming of the Messiah, to accomplish that Redemption promised by God and needed
by them. Indeed the title of the Psalm is a Prayer of the Afflicted, when he is
overwhelmed, and pours out his complaint before the Lord: Whether afflicted
with the sense of corruption, or with the sense of oppression. And the
Redemption by the Messiah, which the ancient Church looked upon as the fountain
of their Deliverance from a sinful or a servile Bondage, is in this Psalm
spoken of: A set time appointed for the discovery of his mercy to Sion, v. 13.
An appearance in glory to build up Sion, v. 16. The loosing of the Prisoner by
Redemption, and them that are appointed to Death, v. 20. The calling of the
Gentiles, v. 22. And the latter part of the Psalm, wherein are the verse I have
read, are applied to Christ, Heb. 1. Whatsoever the design of the Psalm might
be, many things are intermingled that concern the Kingdom of the Messiah, and
Redemption by Christ.

Some make three parts of the Psalm,

1. A Petition plainly delivered, v. 1.2. Hear my Prayer oh Lord, and let my
cry come unto thee, etc.

2. The Petition strongly and argumentatively enforced and pleaded, v. 3. from
the misery of the Petitioner in himself, and his reproach from his Enemies.

3. An acting of Faith in the expectation of an Answer in the general
Redemption promised, v. 12, 13. But thou oh Lord shall endure for ever; thou
shall arise and have mercy upon Sion; The Heathen shall fear thy Name.

The first part is the Petition pleaded; the second part is the Petition
answered in an assurance, that there should in time be a full deliverance.
Pareus.
The design of the Penman, is to confirm the Church in the truth of the Divine
Promises; that though the foundations of the World should be ripped up, and the
Heavens clatter together, and the whole Fabric of them be unpinn'd and fall to
pieces, the firmest parts of it dissolved; yet the Church should continue in
its stability, because it stands not upon the changeableness of Creatures, but
is built upon the immutable Rock of the truth God, which is as little subject
to change as his Essence:

They shall perish, thou shall change them. As he had before ascribed to God
the foundation of Heaven and Earth verse 25.
, so he ascribes to God here the destruction of them: Both the beginning and
end of the World are here ascertained. There is nothing indeed from the present
appearance of things that can demonstrate the cessation of the world; The
Heaven and Earth stand firm; the motions of the heavenly Bodies are the same,
their beauty is not decayed: Individuals corrupt, but the Species and Kinds
remain: The Successions of the Year observe their due order; but the Sin of Man
renders the change of the present appearance of the world necessary, to
accomplish the design of God for the glory of his Elect. The Heavens do not
naturally perish, as some fancied an old age of the world, wherein it must
necessarily decay as the Bodies of Animals do; or that the parts of the Heavens
are broken off by their rubbing one against another in their motion, and
falling to the Earth, are the Seeds of those things that grow among us. Plin.
Hist. lib. 2. cap. 3.


The Earth and Heavens. He names here the most stable parts of the world, and
the most beautiful parts of the Creation; those that are freest from
corruptibility and change, to illustrate thereby the Immutability of God; that
though the Heavens and Earth have a Prerogative of fixedness above other parts
of the world, and the Creatures that reside below; the Heavens remain the same
as they were created, and the Center of the Earth retains its fixedness, and
are as beautiful and fresh in their age as they were in their youth many years
ago, notwithstanding the change of the Elements; Fire and Water being often
turned into Air, so that there may remain but little of that Air which was
first created by reason of the continual transmutation; yet this firmness of
the Earth and Heavens, is not to be regarded in comparison of the
unmoveableness and fixedness of the Being of God: As their beauty comes short
of the glory of his Being, so does their firmness come short of his stability.

Some by Heavens and Earth, understand the Creatures which reside in the Earth,
and those which are in the Air, which is called Heaven often in Scripture; but
the ruin and fall of these being seen every day, had been no fit illustration
of the unchangeableness of God.

They shall perish, they shall be changed.

1. They may perish, say some; they have it not from themselves that they do
not perish, but from thee, who did endue them with an incorruptible nature;
They shall perish if thou speak the word; Thou can with as much ease
destroy them as thou did create them: But the Psalmist speaks not of their
possibility, but the certainty of their perishing.

2. They shall perish in their qualities and motion, not in their substance,
say others: They shall cease from that motion which is designed properly for
the generation and corruption of things in the Earth; but in regard of their
substance and beauty they shall remain: As when the strings or Wheels of a
Clock or Watch are taken off, the material parts remain; though the motion of
it, and the use for discovering the time of the day cease. Coccei. in loc.
To perish, does not signify always a falling into nothing, an annihilation, by
which both the matter and the form are destroyed; but a ceasing of the present
apearance of them; a ceasing to be what they now are, as a man is said to
perish when he dies, whereas the better part of man does not cease to be: The
figure of the Body moulders away, and the matter of it returns to Dust; but the
Soul being immortal cease not to act, when the Body by reason of the absence
of the Soul is incapable of acting. So the Heavens shall perish; the appearance
they now have shall vanish, and a more glorious and incorruptible frame be
erected by the power and goodness of God. The dissolution of Heaven and Earth
is meant by the word [perish]; the raising a new frame is signified by the word
[changed]; as if the Spirit of God would prevent any wrong meaning of the word
[perish] by alleviating the sense of that, by another which signifies only a
mutation and change; as when we change a Habit and Garment, we quit the old to
receive the new.

[As a Garment, as a Vesture.] Thou shall change them Septuag.
, (...) Thou shall fold them up. The Heavens are compared to a Curtain Psalm.
104.2.
, and shall in due time be folded up as Clothes and Curtains are. As a Garment
encompasseth the whole body, so do the Heavens encircle the Earth. Estius in
Heb. 1.
Some say, as a Garment is folded up to be laid aside, that when there is need
it may be taken again for use; so shall thou fold up the Heavens like a
Garment, that when they are repaired, thou may again stretch them out about
the Earth; Thou shall fold them up, so that what did appear shall not now
appear. It may be illustrated by the metaphor of a Scrole or Book, which the
Spirit of God uses, Isa. 34.4. Rev. 6.14. The Heavens departed as a Scrole
when it is rouled together. When a Book is rouled up or shut, nothing can be
read in it till it be opened again; so the Face of the Heavens, wherein the
Stars are as Letters declaring the Glory of God, shall be shut or rouled
together, so that nothing shall appear, till by its renovation it be opened
again: As a Garment it shall be changed, not to be used in the same fashion and
for the same use again. It seems indeed to be for the worse; an old Garment is
not changed but into rags, to be put to other uses, and afterward thrown upon
the Dunghill: But Similitudes are not to be pressed too far; and this will not
agree with the new Heavens and new Earth, physically so, as well as
metaphorically so. It Is not likely the Heavens will be put to a worse use than
God designed them for in Creation: However a change as a Garment, speaks not a
total corruption, but an alteration of qualities; as a Garment not to be used
in the same fashion, as before. We may observe,

1. That (...) probable, the world shall not be annihilated but refined. It
shall lose its present form and fashion, but not its foundation: Indeed as God
raised it from nothing, so he can reduce it into nothing; yet it does not
appear that God will annihilate it, and utterly destroy both the matter and
form of it; part shall be consumed, and part purified, 2 Pet. 3.12, 13. The
Heavens shall be on fire and dissolved, nevertheless we according to his
promise look for a new Heaven and a new Earth. They shall be melted down as
Gold by the Artificer, to be refined from its Dross, and wrought into a more
beautiful fashion, that they may serve the design of God for those that shall
reside therein; a new world wherein Righteousness shall dwell: The Apostle
opposing it thereby, to the old world wherein wickedness did reside. The
Heavens are to be purged, as the Vessels that held the Sin-offering were to be
purified by the fire of the Sanctuary.

God indeed will take down this Scaffold which he has built to publish his
Glory. As every Individual has a certain term of its duration; so an end is
appointed for the universal nature of Heaven and Earth, Isa. 51.6. The Heavens
shall vanish like Smoke, which disappears. As Smoke is resolved and attenuated
into Air, not annihilated; So shall the world assume a new face, and have a
greater clearness and splendour: As the Bodies of Men dissolved into Dust, shall
have more glorious qualities at their Resurrection: As a Vessel of Gold is
melted down to remove the batterings in it, and receive a more comely Form by
the Skill of the Workman.

(1.) The world was not destroyed by the Deluge: It was rather washed by water,
than consumed; So it shall be rather refined by the last fire, than lie under
an irrecoverable ruin.

(2.) It Is not likely God would liken the everlastingness of his Covenant, and
the perpetuity of his spiritual Israel, to the duration of the ordinances of
the Heavens, (as he does in Jer. 21.35, 36.) if they were wholly to depart from
before him*. Though that place may only tend to an assurance of a Church in the
world while the world endures; yet it would be but small comfort, if the
happiness of Believers should endure no longer than the Heavens and Earth, if
they were to have a total period.

(3.) Besides, the Bodies of the Saints must have place for their support to
move in, and glorious objects suited to these glorious senses which shall be
restored to them; Not in any carnal way, which our Savior rejects, when he
says there is no eating, or drinking, or marrying, etc. in the other world;
but whereby they may glorify God; though how or in what manner their senses
shall be used, would be rashness to determine; only something is necessary for
the corporeal state of men, that there may be an employment for their Senses as
well as their Souls.

(4.) Again, How could the Creature, the world or any part of it be said to be
delivered from the bondage of Corruption, Romans 8.21.
into the glorious liberty of the Sons of God; if the whole Frame of Heaven and
Earth were to be annihilated, Romans 8.21? The Apostle says also that the
Creature waits with an earnest expectation for this manifestation of the Sons
of God, v. 19. which would have no foundation, if the whole frame should be
reduced to nothing. What joyful expectation can there be in any of a total
ruin? How should the Creature be capable of partaking in this glorious liberty
of the Sons of God? H^per. in Heb. 1.
As the World for the sin of man lost its first dignity, and was cursed after
the fall, and the beauty bestowed upon it by creation defaced; So it shall
recover that ancient glory, when he shall be fully restored by the Resurrection
to that dignity he lost by his first sin. As Man shall be freed from his
corruptibility to receive that glory which is prepared for him; so shall the
Creatures be freed from that imperfection or corruptibility, those stains and
spots upon the face of them, to receive a new glory suited to their nature and
answerable to the design of God, when the glorious liberty of the Saints shall
be accomplished. Mestraezat sur. Heb. 1.
As when a Princes Nuptials are solemnized, the whole Country eccho's with joy;
So the inanimate Creatures, when the time of the Marriage of the Lamb is come,
shall have a delight and pleasure from that renovation. The Apostle sets forth
the whole world as a person groaning, and the Scripture is frequent in such
Metaphors; as when the Creatures are said to wait upon God, and to be troubled
Psalm. 104.27, 29.
; the Hills are said to leap, and the Mountains to rejoice: The Creature is
said to groan, as the Heavens are said to declare the glory of God, passively,
naturally, not rationally. It Is not likely Angels are here meant, though they
cannot but desire it; since they are affected with the dishonor and reproach
God has in the world, they cannot but long for the restoration of his honor
in the restoration of the Creature to its true end: And indeed the Angels are
employed to serve man in this sinful state, and cannot but in holiness wish the
Creature freed from his corruption: Nor is it meant of the new Creatures which
have the first fruits of the Spirit, those he brings in afterward, groaning
and waiting for the Adoption Verse 23.
; where he distinguishes the rational Creature from the Creature he had spoken
of before: If he had meant the believing Creature by that Creature that desired
the liberty of the Sons of God; what need had there been of that additional
distinction, and not only they, but we also who have the first fruits of the
Spirit, groan within our selves? Whereby it seems he means some Creatures below
rational Creatures, since neither Angels nor blessed Souls can be said to
travail in pain, with that distress as a Woman in travail has, as the word
signifies, who perform the work joyfully which God sets them upon Mestraezat
fur. Heb. 1.
. If the Creatures be subject to vanity by the sin of man, they shall also
partake of a happiness by the restoration of man. The E^^^h has born Thorns
and Thistles, and venomous Beasts; The Air has had its Tempests and infectious
Qualities; The Water has caused its Floods and Deluges. The Creature has been
abused to luxury and intemperance, and been tyrannized over by Man, contrary to
the end of its creation: It Is convenient that some time should be allotted for
the Creature's attaining its true end, and that it may partake of the peace of
Man, as it has done of the fruits of his sin; otherwise it would seem that sin
had prevailed more than grace, and would have had more power to deface than
grace to restore and things into their due order.

5. Again, upon what account should the Psalmist exhort the Heavens to rejoice,
and the Earth to be glad, when God comes to judge the world with Righteousness
Psalm. 96.11, 12, 13.
; if they should be annihilated and sunk for ever into nothing? It would seem,
says Daille, to be an impertinent figure, if the Judge of the world brought to
them a total destruction; an entire ruin could not be matter of triumph to
Creatures, who naturally have that instinct or inclination put into them by
their Creator to preserve themselves, and to affect their own preservation.

6. Again, The Lord is to rejoice in his works, Psalm. 104.31. The Glory of the
Lord shall endure for ever; the Lord shall rejoice in his works; not has, but
shall rejoice in his works: In the works of Creation; which the Psalmist had
enumerated, and which is the whole scope of the Psalm: And he intimates that it
is part of the glory of the Lord which endures for ever, that is, his
manifestative glory, to rejoice in his works: The Glory of the Lord must be
understood with reference to the Creation he had spoken of before. How short
was that joy God had in his works after he had sent them beautified out of his
hand? How soon did he repent, not only that he had made Man, but was grieved at
the heart also, that he made the other Creatures which Man's sin had
disordered? What joy can God have in them, Genesis 6.7.
since the Curse upon the entrance of sin into the world remains upon them? If
they are to be annihilated upon the full restoration of his Holiness, what time
will God have to rejoice in the other works of Creation? It Is the joy of God to
see all his works in their due order; every one pointing to their true end;
marching together in their excellency, according to his first intendment in
their Creation. Did God create the World to perform its end only for one day;
scarce so much, if Adam fell the very first day of his Creation? What would
have been their end, if Adam had been confirmed in a state of happiness as the
Angels were; It Is likely will be answered and performed upon the complete
restoration of Man to that happy state from whence he fell. What Artificer
compiles a work by his skill, but to rejoice in it? And shall God have no joy
from the works of his hands. Since God can only rejoice in goodness, the
Creatures must have that goodness restored to them which God pronounced them to
have at the first Creation, and which he ordained them for, before he can again
rejoice in his works: The goodness of the Creatures is the glory and joy of God.

Inference 1. We may infer from hence, what a base and vile thing Sin is, which
lays the foundation of the worlds change. Sin brings it to a decrepit age: Sin
overturned the whole work of God Genesis 3.17.
; so that to render it useful to its proper end, there is a necessity of a kind
of a new creating it: This causes God to fire the Earth for a purification of
it from that infection and contagion brought upon it by the apostasy and
corruption of Man: It has served sinful man, and therefore must undergo a
purging Flame to be fit to serve the holy and righteous Creator. As Sin is so
riveted in the body of man, that there is need of a change by death to raze it
out; so has the Curse for sin got so deep into the bowels of the world, that
there is need of a change by fire to refine it for its Masters use. Let us look
upon Sin with no other notion than as the Object of Gods hatred, the cause of
his grief in the Creatures, and the Spring of the pain and ruin of the World.

2. How foolish a thing is it to set our hearts upon that which shall perish,
and be no more what it is now? The Heavens and Earth, the solidest and firmest
parts of the Creation shall not continue in the posture they are; they must
perish and undergo a refining change: How feeble and weak are the other parts
of the Creation, the little Creatures walking upon and fluttering about the
world, that are perishing and dying every day; and we scarce see them clothed
with life and beauty this day, but they wither and are despoyl'd of all the
next; and are such frail things fit Objects for our everlasting Spirits and
Affections? Though the daily employment of the Heavens is the declaration of
the glory of God Psalm. 19.1.
, yet neither this, nor their harmony, order, beauty, amazing greatness and
glory of them, shall preserve them from a dissolution and melting at the
presence of the Lord: Though they have remained in the same posture from the
Creation till this day, and are of so great antiquity; yet they must bow down
to a change before the Will and Word of their Creator; and shall we rest upon
that which shall vanish like Smoke? Shall we take any Creature for our support
like Ice, that will crack under our feet, and must by the order of their Lord
Creator deceive our hopes? Perishing things can be no support to the Soul; If
we would have rest, we must run to God and rest in God. How contemptible should
that be to us, whose fashion shall pass away, which shall not endure long in
its present form and appearance; contemptible as a rest, not contemptible as
the work of God; contemptible as an end, not contemptible as a means to attain
our end? If these must be changed, how unworthy are other things to be the
Center of our Souls, that change in our very using of them, and slide away in
our very enjoyment of them?

Thou art the same. The Essence of God with all the perfections of his nature
are pronounced the same, without any variation from Eternity to Eternity: So
that the Text does not only assert the eternal duration of God, but his
Immutability in that duration: his Eternity is signified in that expression
thou shall endure; his Immutability in this, thou art the same. (...) ^eb
To endure, argues indeed his Immutability as well as Eternity; For what
endures, is not changed, and what is changed, does not endure: But thou art the
same (...) ^^om (...)
does more fully signify it: He could not be the same if he could be changed
into any other thing than what he is; The Psalmist therefore puts, not thou
have been or shall be, but thou art the same without any alteration; thou art
the same, that is, the same God, the same in Essence and Nature, the same in
Will and Purpose: Thou do change all other things as thou please; but thou
art immutable in every respect, and receivest no shadow of change, though never
so light and small. (...), above all change Theodor.
The Psalmist here alludes to the name Jehovah, I am; and does not only ascribe
Immutability to God, but exclude every thing else from partaking in that
perfection: All things else are tottering; God sees all other things in
continual motion under his feet, like Water passing away and no more seen,
while he remains fixed and immovable: His Wisdom and Power, his Knowledge and
Will are always the same. His Essence can receive no alteration, neither by it
self nor by any external Cause; whereas other things either naturally decline
to destruction, pass from one term to another till they come to their period;
or shall at the last day be wrapped up, after God has completed his Will in
them and by them; as a man does a Garment he intends to repair and transform to
another use.

So that in the Text God as immutable, is opposed to all Creatures as perishing
and changeable.

Doct. God is unchangeable in his Essence, Nature and Perfections. Immutability
and Eternity are linkt together; and indeed true Eternity is true Immutability,
whence Eternity is defined the Possession of an immutable Life. Yet
Immutability differs from Eternity in our conception: Immutability respects the
Essence or Existence of a thing, Eternity respects the duration of a Being in
that State; or rather, Gamacheus.
Immutability is the State it self, Eternity is the measure of that State. A
thing is said to be changed, when it is otherwise now in regard of Nature,
State, Will, or any Quality than it was before; when either something is added
to it or taken from it; when it either loses or acquires: But now it is the
essential property of God, not to have any accession to, or diminution of his
Essence or Attributes, but to remain entirely the same: He wants nothing; He
loses nothing, but does uniformly exist by himself, without any new nature, new
thoughts, new will, new purpose or new place.

Amyraut sur Heb. 9. p. 153.
This unchangeableness of God was anciently represented by the figure of a Cube,
a piece of Metal or Wood framed apiece; when every side is exactly of the
same equality, cast it which way you will, it will always be in the same
posture, because it is equal to it self in all its dimensions: He was therefore
said to be the Center of all things, and other things the Circumference; the
Center is never moved while the Circumference is; it remains immovable in the
midst of the Circle: There is no variableness nor shadow of turning with him.
James 1.17.
The Moon has her Spots, so has the Sun; there is a mixture of Light and
Darkness; it has its changes; sometimes it is in the increase, sometimes in
the wane; it is always either gaining or losing, and by the turnings and
motions, either of the Heavenly-bodies or of the Earth, it is in its Eclipse, by
the interposition of the Earth between that and the Sun. The Sun also has its
diurnal and annual motion; it rises and sets, and puts on a different Face: It
does not always shine with a noonday light; it is sometimes veiled with Clouds
and Vapors; it is always going from one Tropic to another, whereby it makes
various shadows on the Earth, and produces the various seasons of the year;
it is not always in our Hemisphere, nor does it always shine with an equal force
and brightness in it: Such shadows and variations have no place in the eternal
Father of Lights; He has not the least spot or diminution of Brightness;
nothing can cloud him or eclipse him. For the better understanding this
Perfection of God,

I shall Premise three things.

1. The Immutability of God is a Perfection. Immutability considered in it self
without relation to other things, is not a Perfection. It Is the greatest misery
and imperfection of the evil Angels, that they are immutable in malice against
God: But as God is infinite in Essence, infinitely good, wise, holy; so it is a
Perfection necessary to his Nature, that he should be immutably all this; all
excellency, goodness, wisdom, immutably all that heis; without this he would be
an imperfect Being. Are not the Angels in Heaven, who are confirmed in a holy
and happy state, more perfect than when they were in a possibility of
committing evil and becoming miserable? Are not the Saints in Heaven, whose
Wills by Grace do unalterably cleave to God and goodness, more perfect than if
they were as Adam in Paradise, capable of losing their Felicity as well as
preserving it? We count a Rock in regard of its stability, more excellent than
the Dust of the Ground, or a Feather that is tossed about with every Wind; Is
it not also the perfection of the Body to have a constant tenor of health, and
the glory of a man not to warp aside from what is just and right, by the
persuasions of any temptations?

2. Immutability is a Glory belonging to all the Attributes of God. It Is not a
single perfection of the Divine Nature, nor is it limited to particular Objects
thus and thus disposed. Mercy and Justice have their distinct objects, and
distinct acts; Mercy is conversant about a Penitent, Justice conversant about
an obstinate Sinner. In our notion and conception of the Divine Perfections,
his Perfections are different; The Wisdom of God is not his Power, nor his
Power his Holiness; but Immutability is the Center wherein they all unite:
There is not one Perfection but may be said to be, and truly is immutable; none
of them will appear so glorious without this Beam, this Sun of Immutability,
which renders them highly excellent without the least shadow of imperfection:
How cloudy would his Blessedness be, if it were changeable? How dim his Wisdom,
if it might be obscured? How feeble his Power, if it were capable to be sickly
and languish? How would Mercy lose much of its luster, if it could change into
wrath; and Justice much of its dread, if it could be turned into Mercy, while
the object of Justice remains unfit for Mercy, and one that has need of Mercy
continues only fit for the Divine Fury? But unchangeableness is a Thread that
runs through the whole Web; It Is the enamel of all the rest; none of them
without it could look with a triumphant aspect: His Power is unchangeable; Isa.
26.4.
In the Lord Jehovah is everlasting strength; his Mercy and his Holiness endure
for ever; He never could, nor ever can look upon iniquity Hab. 1.13.
: He is a Rock in the righteousness of his ways, the truth of his word, the
holiness of his proceedings and the rectitude of his nature: All are expressed,
Deuteronomy. 32.4. He is a Rock, his work is perfect, for all his ways are Judgment; A
God of Truth and without Iniquity, just and right is he. All that we consider
in God is unchangeable; for his Essence and his Properties are the same, and
therefore what is necessarily belonging to the Essence of God, belongs also to
every perfection of the nature of God; none of them can receive any addition or
diminution: From the unchangeableness of his nature, the Apostle, James 1.17.
infers the unchangeableness of his Holiness; and himself in Mal. 3.6. the
unchangeableness of his Counsel.

3. Unchangeableness does necessarily pertain to the Nature of God. It Is of the
same necessity with the rectitude of his Nature; He can no more be changeable
in his Essence, than he can be unrighteous in his Actions. God is a necessary
Being; He is necessarily what he is, and therefore is unchangeably what he is.
Mutability belongs to contingency. If any perfection of his nature could be
separated from him, he would cease to be God: What did not possess the whole
Nature of God, could not have the Essence of God; It Is reciprocated with the
Nature of God. Whatsoever is immutable by Nature, is God, whatsoever is God, is
immutable by Nature. Some Creatures are immutable by his Grace and Power:
Archbol^ Sermon.
God is holy, happy, wise, good by his Essence; Angels and Men are made holy,
wise, happy, strong and good by Qualities and Graces: The Holiness, Happiness
and Wisdom of Saints and Angels, as they had a beginning, so they are capable
of increase and diminution, and of an end also; for their standing is not from
themselves, or from the nature of created strength, holiness or wisdom, which
in themselves are apt to fail and finally to decay; but from the stability and
confirmation they have by the Gift and Grace of God: The Heaven and Earth shall
be changed, and after that renewal and reparation, they shall not be changed.
Our Bodies after the Resurrection shall not be changed, but for ever be made
conformable to the glorious Body of Christ Phil. 3.21.
; but this is by the powerful Grace of God: So that indeed those things may be
said afterward rather to be unchanged than unchangeable, because they are not
so by nature, but by sovereign dispensation. As Creatures have not necessary
Beings, so they have not necessary Immutability. Necessity of being, and
therefore Immutability of being belongs by nature only to God; otherwise if
there were any change in God, he would be sometimes what he was not, and would
cease to be what he was; which is against the nature, and indeed against the
natural notion of a Deity. Let us see then,

1. In what regards God is immutable.

2. Prove that God is immutable.

3. That this is proper to God, and incommunicable to any Creature.

4. Some propositions to clear the unchangeableness of God from any thing that
seems contrary to it.

5. The Use.

First in what respects God is unchangeable.

1. God is unchangeable in his Essence. He is unalterably fixed in his Being,
that not a Particle of it can be lost from it, not a Mite added to it. If a Man
continue in being as long as Methuselah, Nine hundred and Sixty nine years; yet
there is not a day, nay an hour, wherein there is not some alteration in his
substance; though no substantial part is wanting, yet there is an addition to
him by his Food, a diminution of something by his Labor; He is always making
some acquisition, or suffering some loss: But in God there can be no
alteration, by the accession of any thing to make his substance greater or
better, or by diminution to make it less or worse. He who has no being from
another, cannot but be always what he is: God is the first Being, an
independent Being; He was not produced of himself, or of any other, but by
nature always has been; and therefore cannot by himself, or by any other
bechanged from what he is in his own nature. That which is not, may as well
assume to it self a Being, as he who has and is all Being, have the least
change from what he is. Again, because he is a Spirit, he is not subject to
those mutations which are found incorporeal and bodily Natures; Because he is
an absolutely simple Spirit, not having the least particle of composition; he
is not capable of those changes which may be in created Spirits.

1. If his Essence were mutable. God would not truly be; It could not be truly
said by himself, I am that I am, Exodus 3.14.
if he were such a Thing or Being at this time, and a different Being at
another time. Whatsoever is changed, properly is not, because it does not
remain to be what it was: That which is changed was something, is something,
and will be something; a Being remains to that thing which is changed; yet
though it may be said such a thing is, yet it may be also said such a thing is
not, because it is not what it was in its first being; it is not now what it
was, it is now what it was not; it is another thing than it was, it was another
thing than it is; it will be another thing than what it is or was: It Is indeed
a Being, but a different Being from what it was before. But if God were
changed, it could not be said of him that he is, but it might also be said of
him that he is not; or if he were changeable or could be changed, it might be
said of him he is, but he will not be what he is; or he may not be what he is,
but there will be or may be some difference in his Being, and so God would not
be I am that I am; for though he would not cease utterly to be, yet he would
cease to be what he was before.

2. Again, If his Essence were mutable, he could not be perfectly blessed, and
fully rejoice in himself. If he changed for the better, he could not have an
infinite pleasure in what he was before the change, because he was not
infinitely blessed; and the pleasure of that state could not be of a higher
kind than the state it self, or at least the apprehension of a happiness in it:
If he changed for the worse, he could not have a pleasure in it after the
change; for according to the diminution of his state, would be the decrease of
his pleasure: His pleasure could not be infinite before the change, if he
changed for the better; it could not be infinite after the change, if he
changed for the worse: If he changed for the better, he would not have had an
infinite Goodness of being before; and not having an infinite Goodness of
Being, he would have a finite Goodness of Being; for there is no medium between
finite and infinite: Then though the change were for the better, yet being
finite before, something would be still wanting to make him infinitely blessed;
because being finite, he could not change to that which is infinite; for finite
and infinite are extremes so distant, that they can never pass into one
another; that is, that that which is finite should become infinite, or that
which is infinite should become finite: So that supposing him mutable, his
Essence in no state of change, could furnish him with an infinite peace and
blessedness.

3. Again, If Gods Essence be changed, he either increases or diminishes Hugo
Victorin. in Petavio.
: Whatsoever is changed, does either gain by receiving some thing larger and
greater than it had in it self before, or gains nothing by being changed. If
the former, then it receives more than it self, more than it had in it self
before. The Divine Nature cannot be increased; for whatsoever receives any
thing than what it had in it self before, must necessarily receive it from
another, because nothing can give to it self that which it has not: But God
cannot receive from another what he has not already, because whatsoever other
things possess, is derived from him, and therefore contained in him, as the
Fountain contains the Virtue in it self which it conveys to the Streams; so
that God cannot gain any thing: If a thing that is changed gain nothing by that
change, it loses something of what it had before in it self; and this loss
must be by it self or some other. God cannot receive any loss from any thing in
himself; he cannot will his own diminution; that is repugnant to every Nature:
He may as well will his own destruction as his own decrease; Every decrease is
a partial destruction: But it is impossible for God to dye any kind of Death,
to have any resemblance of death, for he is immortal, and only has Immortality
1 Timothy 6.16.
, therefore impossible to be diminisht in any particle of his Essence; nor can
he be diminisht by any thing in his own Nature, because his infinite simplicity
admits of nothing distinct from himself, or contrary to himself. All decreases
come from something contrary to the nature of that thing which does decrease:
Whatsoever is made less than it self, was not truly unum, one and simple,
because that which divides it self in separation was not the same in
conjunction. Nor can he be diminisht by any other without himself; because
nothing is superior to God, nothing stronger than God which can oppress him:
But whatsoever is changed, is weaker than that which changes it, Victorinus in
Petavio.
and sinks under a Power it cannot succesfully resist; Weakness belongs not to
the Deity. Nor lastly, can God change from a State wherein he is, to another
State equal to the former, as men in some cases may do; for in passing from one
state to another equal to it, something must be parted with which he had
before, that some other thing may accrue to him as a recompense for that loss,
to make him equal to what he was: This recompense then he had not before,
though he had something equal to it: And in this case it could not be said by
God I am that I am, but I am equal to what I was; for in this case there would
be a diminution and increase which (as was showed) can not be in God.

4. Again, God is of himself, from no other Austin. Fulgen in Petavio.
: Natures, which are made by God, may increase, because they began to be; they
may decrease, because they were made of nothing, and so tend to nothing; the
condition of their original leads them to defect, and the Power of their
Creator brings them to increase. But God has no original, he has no defect,
because he was not made of nothing; He has no increase, because he had no
beginning: He was before all things, and therefore depends upon no other thing
which by its own change can bring any change upon him. Petav. Tom. 1. p. 173.
That which is from it self cannot be changed, because it has nothing before
it, nothing more excellent than it self; But that which is from another as its
first cause and chief good, may be changed by that which was its efficient
cause and last end.

2. God is immutable in regard of Knowledge. God has known from all Eternity
all that which he can know, so that nothing is hid from him; He knows not at
present any more than he has known from Eternity, and that which he knows now,
he always knows; All things are open and naked before him, Heb. 4.13. A man is
said to be changed in regard of knowledge, when he knows that now which he did
not know before, or knows that to be false now which he thought true before, or
has something for the Object of his Understanding now, which he had not
before: But

1. This would be repugnant to the Wisdom and Omniscience which belongs to the
Notion of a Deity. That cannot be God, that is not infinitely wise; that cannot
be infinitely wise, that is either ignorant of, or mistaken in his apprehension
of any one thing. If God be changed in knowledge, it must be for want of
wisdom; all change of this nature in Creatures, implies this defect preceding
or accompanying it: Such a thought of God, would have been unworthy of him that
is only wise; that has no Mate for Wisdom 1 Timothy 1.17.
; none wise besides himself: If he knew that thing this day which 1 Timothy 1.17.
he knew not before, he would not be an only wise Being; for a Being that did
know every thing at once, might be conceived, and so a wiser Being be
apprehended by the mind of man. If God understood a thing at one time, which he
did not at another, he would be changed from Ignorance to Knowledge; As if he
could not do that this day which he could do to morrow, he would be changed
from Impotence to Power: He could not be always Omniscient, because there might
be yet something still to come which he yet knows not, though he may know all
things that are past. What way soever you suppose a change, you must suppose a
present or a past Ignorance; If he be changed in his knowledge for the
perfection of his understanding, he was ignorant before; If his understanding
be impaired by the change, he is ignorant after it.

2. If God were changeable in his Knowledge, it would make him unfit to be an
Object of Trust to any rational Creature. His Revelations would want the due
ground for entertainment, if his Understanding were changeable; for that might
be revealed as truth now which might prove false heareafter, and that as false
now which hereafter might prove true; and so God would be an unfit Object of
Obedience in regard of his Precepts, and an unfit Object of confidence in
regard of his Promises: For if he be changeable in Knowledge, he is defective
in Knowledge, and might promise that now which he would know afterward was
unfit to be promised, and therefore unfit to be performed: It would make him an
incompetent Object of dread, in regard of his threatenings; for he might
threaten that now, which he might know hereafter were not fit or just to be
inflicted. A changeable mind and understanding cannot make a due and right
judgment of things to be done, and things to be avoided. No wise man would
judge it reasonable to trust a weak and flitting person.

God must needs be unchangeable in his Knowledge: But, as the Schoolmen say,
that as the Sun always shines, so God always knows; as the Sun never cease to
shine, so God never cease to know: Nothing can be hid from the vast compass
of his Understanding, no more than any thing can shelter it self without the
Verge of his Power. This farther appears in that

1. God knows by his own Essence. He does not know as we do, by habits,
qualities, species, whereby we may be mistaken at one time and rectified at
another: He has not an Understanding distinct from his Essence as we have; but
being the most simple Being, his Understanding is his Essence; and as from the
infiniteness of his Essence we conclude the infiniteness of his Understanding,
so from the unchangeableness of his Essence, we may justly conclude the
unchangeableness of his Knowledge. Since therefore God is without all
composition, and his Understanding is not distinct from his Essence; what he
knows, he knows by his Essence; and there can then be no more mutability in his
Knowledge, than there can be in his Essence; and if there were any in that, he
could not be God, because he would have the property of a Creature: If his
Understanding then be his Essence, his Knowledge is as necessary, as
unchangeable as his Essence: As his Essence eminently contains all perfections
in it self, so his Understanding comprehends all things past, present and
future, in it self: If his Understanding and his Essence were not one and the
same, he were not simple but compounded; if compounded, he would consist of
parts; if he consisted of parts, he would not be an independent Being, and so
would not be God.

2. God knows all things by one intuitive act. As there is no succession in his
Being, so that he is one thing now and another thing hereafter; so there is no
succession in his Knowledge: He knows things that are successive, before their
existence and succession, by one single act of intuition; by one cast of his
eye all things future are present to him in regard of his Eternity and
Omnipresence: So that though there is a change and variation in the things
known, yet his Knowledge of them and their several changes in nature, is
invariable and unalterable. As imagine a Creature that could see with his eye at
one glance the whole compass of the Heavens, by sending out beams from his eye
without receiving any species from them, he would see the whole Heavens
uniformly; this part now in the East, then in the West, without any change in
his eye; for he sees every part and every motion together; and though that
great Body varies and whirls about, and is in continual agitation; his eye
remains steadfast, suffers no change, beholds all their motions at once and by
one glance. Suarez. vol. 1. pa. 137.
God knows all things from Eternity, and therefore perpetually knows them; the
reason is because the Divine Knowledge is infinite Psalm. 145.5. His
understanding is infinite.
and therefore comprehends all knowable Truths at once. An eternal Knowledge
comprehends in it self all Time, and beholds past and present in the same
manner, and therefore his Knowledge is immutable: By one simple Knowledge he
considers the infinite spaces of past and future.

3. Gods knowledge and Will is the cause of all things and their successions.
Austin. Bradwardine.
There can be no pretense of any changeableness of knowledge in God, but in
this case, before things come to pass, he knows that they will come to pass;
after they are come to pass, he knows that they are past and slide away. This
would be something if the succession of things were the cause of the divine
Knowledge, as it is of our knowledge; but on the contrary, the divine Knowledge
and Will is the cause of the succession of them: God does not know Creatures
because they are, but they are because he knows them. All his works were known
to him from the beginnig of the world. Acts 15.18.
All his works were not known to him, if the events of all those works were not
also known to him; If they were not known to him how should he make them? he
could not do any thing ignorantly: He made them then after he knew them, and
did not know them after he made them: His Knowledge of them made a change in
them, their existence made no change in his Knowledge: He knew them when they
were to be Created, in the same manner that he knew them after they were
Created; before they were brought into act, as well as after they were brought
into act; before they were made, they were, and were not; they were in the
Knowledge of God, when they were not in their own nature: God did not receive
his knowledge from their existence, but his Knowledge and Will acted upon them
to bring them into being.

4. Therefore the distinction of past and future makes no change in the
Knowledge of God. When a thing is past, God has no more distinct knowledge of
it after it is past, than he had when it was to come; all things were all in
their Circumstances of past, present and to come, seen by his Understanding, as
they were determined by his Will. Gamch 1. pa. Aquin. Qu. 9. cap. 1. Pa. 73.
Besides, to know a day to be past or future, is only to know the state of that
day in it self, and to know its relation, to that which follows and that which
went before: This day wherein we are, if we consider it in the state wherein it
was yesterday, it was to come, it was future; but if we consider it in that
state wherein it will be to morrow, we understand it as past. This in man
cannot be said to be a different knowledge of the thing it self, but only of
the circumstance attending a thing, and the different relation of it. As I see
the Sun this day, I know it was up yesterday, I know it will be up to morrow;
my knowledge of the Sun is the same; if there be any change it is in the Sun
not in my knowledge, only I apply my knowledge to such particular
circumstances. How much more must the knowledge of those things in God be
unchangeable, who knows all those states, conditions and circumstances most
perfectly from Eternity, wherein there is no succession, no past or future, and
therefore will know them for ever? He always beholds the same thing; he sees
indeed succession in things, and he sees a thing to be past which before was
future: As from Eternity he saw Adam as existing in such a time; In the first
time he saw that he would be, in the following time he saw that he had been:
But this he knew from Eternity, this he knew in the same manner; tho there was
a variation in Adam, yet there was no variation in Gods knowledge of him in all
his states; though Adam was not present to himself, yet in all his states he
was present to Gods Eternity.

5. Consider, that the knowledge of God, in regard of the manner of it as well
as the objects, is incomprehensible to a finite Creature. So that tho we cannot
arrive to a full understanding of the manner of Gods Knowledge, yet we must
conceive so of it, as to remove all imperfection from him in it: And since it
is an imperfection to be changeable, we must remove that from God; the
Knowledge of God about things past, present, and future, must be unconceivably
above ours: His understanding is infinite, Psalm. 147.5. There is no number of
it; it can no more be calculated or drawn into an account by us, than infinite
spaces which have no bounds and limits can be measured by us. We can no more
arrive, even in Heaven, to a comprehensive understanding of the manner of his
Knowledge, than of the infinite glory of his Essence; we may as well comprehend
one as the other. This we must conclude, that God being not a Body, does not
see one thing with eyes and another thing with mind, as we do; but being a
Spirit, he sees and knows only with Mind, and his Mind is himself, and is as
unchangeable as himself; and therefore as he is not now another thing than what
he was, so he knows not any thing now in another manner than as he knew it from
Eternity: He sees all things in the Glass of his own Essence; as therefore the
Glass does not vary, so neither does his Vision.

3. God is unchangeable in regard of his Will and Purpose. A change in Purpose
is, when a man determins to do that now which before he determined not to do,
or to do the contrary; when a man hates that thing which he loved, or begins to
love that which he before hated: When the Will is changed, a man begins to will
that which he willed not before, and cease to will that which he willed
before: But whatsoever God has decreed, is immutable; whatsoever God has
promised, shall be accomplished; The Word that goes forth of his Mouth shall not
return to him void, but it shall accomplish that which he pleases Isa. 55.11.
Isa. 46.11.
; whatsoever he purposes, he will do Numb. 23.19.
; His Decrees are therefore called Mountains of Brass Zach. 6.1.
; Brass, as having substance and solidity; Mountains, as being immovable, not
only by any Creature but by himself, because they stand upon the Basis of
infallible Wisdom, and are supported by uncontrollable Power. From this
Immutability of his Will published to Man, there could be no release from the
severity of the Law, without satisfaction made by the death of a Mediator,
since it was the unalterable Will of God that death should be the wages of Sin;
and from this immutable Will it was, that the length of Time from the first
promise of the Redeemer to his mission, and the daily provocations of men
altered not his purpose for the accomplishment of it in the fullness of that
time he had resolved upon; Nor did the wickedness of former Ages hinder the
addition of several promises as Buttresses to the first.

To make this out, consider,

1. The Will of God is the same with his Essence. If God had a Will distinct
from his Essence, he would not be the most simple Being. God has not a faculty
of Will distinct from himself: As his Understanding is nothing else but Deus
intelligens, God understanding; so his Will is nothing else but Deus volens,
God willing; being therefore the Essence of God, though it is considered
according to our weakness as a faculty, it is as his Understanding and Wisdom,
eternal and immutable, and can no more be changed than his Essence; The
Immutability of the Divine Counsel depends upon that of his Essence: He is the
Lord Jehovah, therefore he is true to his Word, Mal. 3.6. Isa. 43.13. Yea,
before the Day I am He, and there is none that can deliver out of my hand. He
is the same, immutable in his Essence, therefore irresistible in his Power.

2. There is a concurrence of Gods Will and Understanding in every thing. As
his Knowledge is eternal, so is his Purpose. Things created had not been known
to be, had not God resolved them to be the act of his Will; the existence of
any thing supposes an Act of his Will. Again, as God knows all things by one
simple vision of his Understanding, so he wills all things by one act of
volition; therefore the Purpose of God in the Scripture is not expressed by
Counsels in the Plural Number, but Counsel, showing that all the purposes of
God are not various, but as one Will, branching it self out into may acts
toward the Creature; but all knit in one Root, all links of one Chain.
Whatsoever is eternal, is immutable: As his Knowledge is eternal, and therefore
immutable, so is his Will; He wills or nills nothing to be in Time, but what he
willed and nilled from Eternity; if he willed in Time that to be, that he
willed not from Eternity, then he would know that in Time which he knew not
from Eternity: For God knows nothing future, but as his Will orders it to be
future and in time to be brought into being.

3. There can be no Reason for any change in the Will of God. When men change
in their minds, it must be for want of foresight, because they could not
foresee all the Rubbs and Bars which might suddenly offer themselves; which if
they had foreseen, they would not have taken such measures; hence men often
will that which they afterward wish they had not willed, when they come to
understand it clearer, and see that to be injurious to them which they thought
to be good for them; or else the change proceeds from a natural instability
without any just cause, and an easiness to be drawn into that which is
unrighteous; or else it proceeds from a want of power, when men take new
Counsels, because they are invincibly hindered from executing the old. But none
of those can be in God.

1. It cannot be for want of foresight. What can be wanting to an infinite
Understanding? How can any unknown event defeat his Purpose; since nothing
happens in the world but what he wills to effect, or wills to permit; and
therefore all future events are present with him? Besides, it does not consist
with Gods Wisdom to resolve any thing, but upon the highest reason; and what is
the highest and infinite reason, cannot but be unalterable in it self; for
there can be no Reason and Wisdom higher than the highest. All Gods purposes
are not bare acts of Will, but acts of Counsel, Ephesians. 1.11. He works all things
according to the Counsel of his own Will; and he does not say so much that his
Will, as that his Counsel shall stand Isa. 46.10. It stands because it is
Counsel: And the Immutability of a Promise is called the Immutability of his
Counsel, Heb 6.17. as being introduced and settled by the most perfect Wisdom,
and therefore to be carried on to a full and complete execution: His Purpose
then cannot be changed for want of foresight; for this would be a charge of
weakness.

2. Nor can it proceed from a natural Instability of his Will, or an easiness
to be drawn to that which is unrighteous: If his Will should not adhere to his
Counsel, it is because it is not fit to be followed, or because it will not
follow it; If not fit to be followed, it is a reflection upon his Wisdom; if it
be established and he will not follow it, there is a contrariety in God, as
there is in a fallen Creature, Will against Wisdom: That cannot be in God,
which he hates in a Creature, viz. the disorder of faculties, and being out of
their due place. The Righteousness of God is like a great Mountain, Psalm. 36.6.
The rectitude of his Nature is as immovable in it self, as all the great
Mountains in the World are by the strength of Man. He is not as a Man, that he
should repent or lie, Numb. 23.19. who often changes, out of a perversity of
Will, as well as want of wisdom to foresee, or want of ability to perform. His
eternal Purpose must either be righteous or unrighteous; if righteous and holy,
he would become unholy by the change; if not righteous nor holy, then he was
unrighteous before the change; which way soever it falls, it would reflect upon
the Righteousness of God, which is a blasphemous imagination. Maxim. Tyrius
dissert. 3.30.
If God did change his Purpose, it must be either for the better, then the
Counsel of God was bad before; or for the worse, then he was not wise and good
before.

3. Nor can it be for want of strength. Who has power to control him? Not all
the combined devices and endeavors of men can make the Counsel of God to
totter, Prove. 19.21. There are many devices in a man's heart, nevertheless the
Counsel of the Lord, that shall stand; that, and that only shall stand: Man
has a power to devise and imagine, but no power to effect and execute of
himself. God wants no more Power to effect what he will, than he wants
Understanding to know what is fit.

Well then, since God wanted not Wisdom to frame his Decrees, nor Holiness to
regulate them, nor Power to effect them; what should make him change them?
Since there can be no reason superior to His; no event unforeseen by him; no
Holiness comparable to His; no Unrighteousness found in Him; no Power equal to
His to put a rub in his way.

4. Though the Will of God be immutable, yet it is not to be understood so, as
that the things themselves so willed, are immutable; Nor will the immutability
of the things willed by him, follow upon the unchangeableness of his Will in
willing them; though God be firm in willing them, yet he does not will that
they should always be. God did not perpetually will the doing those things which
he once decreed to be done: He decreed that Christ should suffer, but he did
not decree that Christ should always suffer; so he willed the Mosaical Rites for
a time, but he did not will that they should always continue; He willed that
they should endure only for a time, and when the time came for their ceasing,
God had been mutable if he had not put an end to them, because his Will had
fixed such a Period: So that the changing of those things which he had once
appointed to be practiced, is so far from charging God with changeablness, that
God would be mutable if he did not take them away, since he decreed as well
their abolition at such a time, as their continuance till such a time; so that
the removal of them was pursuant to his unchangeable Will and Decree. If God
had decreed that such Laws should always continue, and afterward changed that
Decree, and resolved the abrogation of them; then indeed God had been mutable;
He had rescinded one Decree by another; He had then seen an error in his first
resolve, and there must be some weakness in the reason and wisdom whereon it
was grounded: Turretin. de satisfac. p. 266.
But it was not so here; for the change of those Laws is so far from slurring
God with any mutability, that the very change of them is no other than the
Issue of his eternal Decree; for from Eternity he purposed in himself to change
this or that dispensation, though he did decree to bring such a dispensation
into the world: The Decree it self was eternal and immutable, but the thing
decreed was temporary and mutable. As a Decree from Eternity does not make the
thing decreed to be eternal; so neither does the immutability of the Decree,
render the thing so decreed to be immutable: As for Example, God decreed from
all Eternity to create the World; the Eternity of this Decree did not make the
world to be in being and actually created from Eternity; so God decreed
immutably that the world so created should continue for such a time; The Decree
is immutable if the world perish at that time, and would not be immutable if
the world did endure beyond that time that God has fixed for the duration of
it: As when a Prince orders a man's remaining in Prison for so many days; if he
be prevailed with to give him a Delivery before those days, or to continue him
in custody for the same Crime after those days, his Order is changed; But if he
orders the delivery of him just at that time, till which he had before decreed
that he should continue in Prison, the Purpose and Order of the Prince remains
firm, and the change in the state of the Prisoner, is the fruit of that firm
and fixed resolution: So that we must distinguish between the Person decreeing,
the Decree it self, and the Thing decreed. The Person decreeing, viz. God is in
himself immutable, and the Decree is immutable; but the Thing decreed may be
mutable; and if it were not changed according to the first purpose, it would
argue the Decree it self to be changed; For whiles a Man wills that this may be
done now, and another thing done afterward; the same Will remains, and though
there be a change in the Effects, there is no change in the Will.

5. The Immutability of Gods Will does not infringe the Liberty of it. The
Liberty of Gods Will consists with the necessity of continuing his Purpose. God
is necessarily good, immutably good; yet he is freely so, and would not be
otherwise than what he is. God was free in his first Purpose; and purposing
this or that by an infallible and unerring Wisdom, it would be a weakness to
change the Purpose: But indeed the Liberty of Gods Will does not seem so much
to consist in an indifferency to this or that, as in an independency on any
thing without himself: His Will was free, because it did not depend upon the
Objects about which his Will was conversant. To be immutably good, is no point
of Imperfection, but the height of Perfection.

4. As God is unchangeable in regard of Essence, Knowledge, Purpose; so he is
unchangeable in regard of Place. He cannot be changed in Time, because he is
Eternity; so he cannot be changed in Place, because he has Vbiquity: He is
eternal, therefore cannot be changed in time; He is omnipresent, therefore
cannot be changed in Place: He does not begin to be in one Place wherein he was
not before, or cease to be in a Place wherein he was before. He that fills
every place in Heaven and Earth, cannot change Place; He cannot leave one to
possess another, that is equally in regard of his Essence in all; He fills
Heaven and Earth, Jer. 23.24. The Heavens that are not subject to those changes
to which sublunary Bodies are subject, that are not diminisht in quantity or
quality; yet they are always changing place in regard of their motion; no part
of them does always continue in the same point: But God has no change of his
Nature, because he is most inward in every thing; He is substantially in all
Spaces, real and imaginary; There is no part of the world which he does not
fill; no place can be imagined wherein he does not exist. Suppose a Million of
worlds above and about this, encircling one another; his Essence would be in
every part and point of those Worlds; Because it is indivisible, it cannot be
divided; nor can it be contained within those created limits of Millions of
worlds, when the most soaring and best coining fancy has run through all
Creatures, to the highest Sphere of the Heavens, and imagined one world after
another, till it can fancy no more: None of these, nor all of these can contain
God; for the Heaven of Heavens cannot contain him, 1 Kings 8.27. He is higher
than Heaven, deeper than Hell, Job. 11.8.
and possesses infinite imaginary spaces beyond created limits. He who has no
cause of being, can have no limits of being: Gamache^^. ut supra
And though by Creation he began to be in the world; yet he did not begin to be
where the world is, but was in the same imaginary space from all Eternity; for
he was always in himself by his own eternal Vbi.

Therefore observe, that when God is said to draw near to us, when we draw near
to him James 4.8.
; it is not by local motion or change of place, but by special and spiritual
influences, by exciting and supporting grace. As we ordinarily say, the Sun is
come into the House when yet it remains in its place and order in the Heavens,
because the Beams pierce through the Windows and enlighten the Room: So when
God is said to come down or descend Genesis 11.5. Exodus 34.5.
; it is not by a change of place, but a change of outward acts, when he puts
forth himself in ways of fresh Mercy or new Judgments, in the effluxes of his
Love or the flames of his Wrath. When good men feel the warm Beams of his Grace
refreshing them, or wicked men feel the hot Coals of his Anger scorching them.
Gods drawing near to us, is not so much his coming to us, but his drawing us to
him: The Ancients as Dionysius, expressed it by this similitude.
As when Watermen pull a Rope that is in one end fastened to the Shore, and
the other end to the Vessel; the Shore is immovable, yet it seems to the eye
to come to them, but they really move to the Shore. God is an immovable Rock;
we are floating and uncertain Creatures; while he seems to approach to us, he
does really make us to approach to him: He comes not to us by any change of
place himself, but draws us to him by a change of Mind, Will and Affections in
us.

2. The second thing propounded, is the reasons to prove God immutable. Plato
calls God (...) lib. 1. de Be.
The Heathens acknowledged God to be so; Plato and the Pythagorians called God,
or the Stable good Principle, (...), Idem: The evil Principle, (...), another
thing, changeable; one thing one time, and another thing another time.

Daniel 6.26. He is the living God and steadfast for ever. Stabilisque manens
dat cuncta moveri. Boet. Consolat. lib. 3.


1. The Name Jehovah signifies this Attribute, Exodus 3.14. I am that I am, I am
has sent me to you. It signifies his Immutability as well as Eternity. I am
signifies his Eternity; that or the same that I am, his Immutability: Trap. on
Exodus
As it respects the Essence of God, it signifies his unchangeable Being from
Eternity to Eternity; Amyrald. de Trinitat. p. 433.
As it respects the Creature, it signifies his constancy in his Counsels and
Promises, which spring from no other cause but the unchangeableness of his
Nature. The reason why Men stand not to their Covenant, is because they are not
always the same: I am, that is, I am the same, before the Creation of the
World, and since the creation of the World; before the entrance of Sin, and
since the entrance of Sin; before their going into Egypt, and whiles they
remain in Egypt. Spanhe. Synta. part. 1. p. 39.
The very Name Jehovah, bears according to the Grammatical Order, a mark of
Gods Unchangeableness; It never has any thing added to it, nor any thing taken
from it; It has no Plural Number, no Affixes, a Custom peculiar to the Eastern
Languages; It never changes its letters as other words do. Petav. Theol.
Dogmat. Tom. 1. cap 6. 6.7, 8.
That only is a true being, which has not only an eternal Existence, but
stability in it: That is not truly a Being that never remains in the same
state. All things that are changed, cease to be what they were, and begin to be
what they were not, and therefore cannot have the title truly applied to them
they are; they are indeed, but like a River in a continual Flux, that no man
ever sees the same; let his eye be fixed upon one place of it, the water he
sees, slides away, and that which he saw not, succeeds in its place; let him
take his eye off but for the least moment, and fix it there again, and he sees
not the same that he saw before. All sensible things are in a perpetual stream;
that which is sometimes this and sometimes that, is not, because it is not
always the same; whatsoever is changed, is something now which it was not
always: But of God it is said I am, which could not be if he were changeable;
for it may be said of him he is not, as well he is, because he is not what he
was; If we say not of him, he was, nor he will be, but only he is; whence
should any change arrive? He must invincibly remain the same, of whose Nature,
Perfections, Knowledge and Will, it cannot be said it was, as if it were not
now in him; or it shall be, as if it were not yet in him; But he is, because he
does not only exist, but does always exist the same. I am, that is, I receive
from no other what I am in my self: He depends upon no other in his Essence,
Knowledge, Purposes, and therefore has no changing Power over him.

2. If God were changeable, He could not be the most perfect Being. God is the
most perfect Being, and possesses in himself infinite and essential Goodness,
Mat. 5.48. Your heavenly Father is perfect: If he could change from that
Perfection, he were not the highest Exemplar and Copy for us to write after. If
God does change, it must be either to a greater Perfection than he had before,
or to a less, mutatio perfectiva vel amissiva; If he changes to acquire a
Perfection he had not, then he was not before the most excellent Being
necessarily; He was not what he might be; there was a defect in him, and a
privation of that which is better than what he had and was; and then he was not
always the best, and so was not always God; and being not always God, could never
be God; for to begin to be God is against the Notion of God: Not to a less
perfection than he had; that were to change to imperfection, and to lose a
perfection which he possessed before, and cease to be the best Being; for he
would lose some good which he had, and acquire some evil which he was free from
before: So that the sovereign Perfection of God, is an invincible Bar to any
change in him; For which way soever you cast it for a change, his supreme
Excellency is impaired and nulled by it: For in all change, there is something
from which a thing is changed, and something to which it is changed; so that on
the one part there is a loss of what it had, and on the other part there is an
acquisition of what it had not: If to the better, he was not perfect, and so
was not God; if to the worse, he will not be perfect, and so be no longer God
after that change.

If God be changed, his change must be voluntary or necessary; if voluntary, he
then intends the change for the better, and chose it to acquire a Perfection by
it: The Will must be carried out to any thing under the notion of some Goodness
in that which it desires. Since Good is the Object of the desire and will of
the Creature, Evil cannot be the Object of the desire and will of the Creator.
And if he should be changed for the worse when he did really intend the better,
it would speak a defect of Wisdom, and a mistake of that for good which was
evil and imperfect in it self; and if it be for the better, it must be a motion
or change for something without himself; that which he desires is not
possessed by himself but by some other: There is then some good without him and
above him, which is the end in this change; for nothing acts but for some end,
and that end is within it self or without it self; If the end for which God
changes be without himself, then there is something better than himself:
Besides, if he were voluntarily changed for the better, why did he not change
before? If it were for want of Power, he had the imperfection of weakness; If
for want of knowledge of what was the best Good, he had the imperfection of
Wisdom, he was ignorant of his own Happiness; If he had both Wisdom to know it
and Power to effect it, it must be for want of Will; He then wanted that love
to himself and his own Glory, which is necessary in the supreme Being:
Voluntarily he could not be changed for the worse, he could not be such an
Enemy to his own Glory, there is nothing but would hinder its own Imperfection
and becoming worse: Necessarily he could not be changed, for that necessity
must arise from himself, and then the difficulties spoken of before will
recurr; or it must arise from another; He cannot be bettered by another,
because nothing has any good but what it has received from the hands of his
bounty, and that without loss to himself; nor made worse; if any thing made him
worse, it would be Sin, but that cannot touch his Essence or obscure his Glory,
but in the design and nature of the Sin it self, Job. 35.6, 7. If thou sinnest,
what do thou against him? Or if thy Transgressions be multiplied, what do
thou unto him? If thou be righteous what give thou him; or what receives he
at thy hand? He has no addition by the Service of Man, no more than the Sun
has of Light by a multitude of Torches kindled on the Earth; nor any more
impair by the Sins of Men, than the Light of the Sun has by men's shooting
Arrows against it.

Gamach. in prim. part. Aquin. quest. 9. cap. 1. part. 72.
3. God were not the most simple Being, if he were not immutable. There is in
every thing that is mutable, a Composition, either essential or accidental; and
in all changes, something of the thing changed remains, and something of it
cease and is done away; as for example, in an accidental change, If a white
Wall be made black, it loses its white Color; but the Wall it self which was
the Subject of that Color, remains and loses nothing of its substance:
Likewise in a substantial change, as when Wood is burnt, the substantial part
of Wood is lost, the earthy part is changed into Ashes, the airy part ascends
in Smoke, the watery part is changed into Air by the Fire: There is not an
annihilation of it, but a resolution of it into those parts whereof it was
compounded; and this change does evidence, that it was compounded of several
parts distinct from one another. If there were any change in God, it is by
separating something from him or adding something to him; if by separating
something from him, then he was compounded of something distinct from himself;
for if it were not distinct from himself, it could not be separated from him
without loss of his Being; if by adding any thing to him, then it is a
compounding of him, either substantially or accidentally.

Mutability is absolutely inconsistent with Simplicity, whether the change come
from an internal or external Principle. If a change be wrought by something
without, it supposes either contrary or various parts in the thing so changed,
whereof it does consist; If it be wrought by any thing within, it supposes
that the thing so changed does consist of one part that does change it, and
another part that is changed, and so it would not be a simple Being. If God
could be changed by any thing within himself, all in God would not be God; his
Essence would depend upon some parts, whereof some would be superior to others:
If one part were able to change or destroy another, that which does change
would be God, that which is changed would not be God; so God would be made up
of a Deity and a non-Deity, and part of God would depend upon God; part would
be dependent, and part would be independent; part would be mutable part,
immutable: So that Mutability is against the notion of Gods Independency as
well as his Simplicity. Ficinus Zachar. mitylen in Peta. Tom. 1 p. 169.
God is the most simple Being; for that which is first in Nature, having
nothing beyond it, cannot by any means be thought to be compounded; for
whatsoever is so, depends upon the parts whereof it is compounded, and so is
not the first Being: Now God being infinitely simple, has nothing in himself
which is not himself, and therefore cannot will any change in himself, he being
his own Essence and Existence.

4. God were not eternal if he were mutable. In all change there is something
that perishes, either substantially or accidentally. All change is a kind of
death, or imitation of death; that which was, dies, and begins to be what it
was not. The Soul of Man, though it cease not to be and exist; yet when it
cease to be in quality what it was, is said to die. Adam died when he changed
from Integrity to Corruption, though both his Soul and Body were in being Genesis
2.17.
; and the Soul of a regenerate Man is said to die to Sin, when it is changed
from Sin to Grace Romans 6.1^.
. In all change there is a resemblance of death: So the Notion of Mutability is
against the Eternity of God. If any thing be acquired by a change, then that
which is acquired was not from Eternity, and so he was not wholly eternal; If
any thing be lost which was from Eternity, he is not wholly everlasting: If he
did decrease by the change, something in him which had no beginning would have
an end; if he did increase by that change, something in him would have a
beginning that might have no end. Austin in Pet. Tom. 1. p. 201.
What is changed does not remain, and what does not remain is not eternal.
Though God always remains in regard of Existence, he would be immortal and live
always; yet if he should suffer any change, he could not properly be eternal,
because he would not always be the same, and would not in every part be eternal;
For all change is finished in Time, one moment preceding, another moment
following; but that which is before Time cannot be changed by Time. God cannot
be eternally what he was, that is, he cannot have a true Eternity, if he had a
new Knowledge, a new Purpose, a new Essence; if he were sometimes this and
sometimes that, sometimes know this and sometimes know that, sometimes purpose
this and afterward has a new purpose; he would be partly temporary and partly
eternal, not truly and universally eternal: He that has any thing of newness,
has not properly and truly an entire Eternity. Again, by the same reason that
God could in the least cease to be what he was, he might also cease wholly to
be; and no reason can be rendered, why God might not cease wholly to be, as well
as cease to be entirely and uniformly what he was: All changeableness implies a
corruptibility.

5. If God were changeable, He were not Infinite and Almighty. All change ends
in addition or diminution; if any thing be added, he was not infinite before;
if any thing be diminisht, he is not infinite after. All change implies bounds
and limits to that which is changed; but God is infinite, His Greatness is
unsearcheable Psalm. 145.3. (...) ^ end, ^^term.
: We can add Number to Number without any end, and can conceive an infinite
Number; Yet the Greatness of God is beyond all our Conceptions: But if there
could be any change in his Greatness for the better, it would not be
unsearchable before that change; if for the worse, it would not be unsearchable
after that change: Whatsoever has limits and is changeable, is conceivable and
searchable; But God is not only not known, but impossible in his own Nature to
be known and searched out, and therefore impossible to have any diminution in
his Nature. All that which is changed arrives to something which it was not
before, or cease in part to be what it was before.

He would not also be Almighty. What is Omnipotent cannot be made worse; for to
be made worse, is in part to be corrupted: If he be made better, he was not
Almighty before, something of Power was wanting to him: If there should be any
change, it must proceed from himself or from another; if from himself, it would
be an inability to preserve himself in the perfection of his Nature; if from
another, he would be inferior in Strength, Knowledge and Power to that which
changes him, either in his Nature, Knowledge or Will; in both an inability; an
inability in him to continue the same, or an inability in him to resist the
Power of another.

6. The World could not be ordered and governed, but by some Principle or Being
which were immutable. Principles are always more fixed and stable, than things
which proceed from those Principles; and this is true both in Morals and
Naturals. Principles in Conscience, whereby men are governed, remain firmly
engraven in their Minds. The Root lies firmly in the Earth, while Branches are
shaken with the Wind. The Heavens, the cause of Generation, are more firm and
stable than those things which are wrought by their influence. All things in
the world are moved by some Power and Virtue which is stable; and unless it
were so, no Order would be observed in motion, no Motion could be regularly
continued. He could not be a full satisfaction to the infinite desire of the
Souls of his People. Nothing can truly satisfy the Soul of Man but Rest; and
nothing can give it rest, but that which is perfect and immutably perfect; for
else it would be subject to those agitations and variations, which the Being it
depends upon is subject to.

The Principle of all things must be immutable ^^herby Ath^^masux. p. 3.8.
Ger^^d. loc. com.
; which is described by some by a Unity, the Principle of Number, wherein there
is a resemblance of Gods Unchangeableness. A Unite is not variable, it
continues in its own Nature immutably an Unite; It never varies from it self,
it cannot be changed from it self, but is as it were so omnipotent toward
others, that it changes all Numbers: If you add any Number, it is the beginning
of that Number, but the Unite is not increased by it; a new Number arises from
that Addition, but the Unite still remains the same, and adds value to other
Figures, but receives none from them.

3. The third thing to speak to is,

That Immutability is proper to God, and incommunicable to any Creature.
Mutability is natural to every Creature as a Creature, and Immutability is the
sole perfection of God: He only is infinite Wisdom, able to foreknow future
Events; He only is infinitely powerful, able to call forth all means to effect;
So that wanting neither Wisdom to contrive, nor Strength to execute, he cannot
alter his Counsel: None being above him, nothing in him contrary to him, and
being defective in no Blessedness and Perfection, he cannot vary in his Essence
and Nature. Had not Immutability as well as Eternity been a Property folely
pertaining to the Divine Nature, as well as creative Power and eternal
Duration; the Apostles Argument to prove Christ to be God from this perpetual
sameness, had come short of any convincing strength. These words of the Text he
applies to Christ, Heb 1.10, 11, 12. They shall be changed, but thou art the
same. There had been no strength in the reason, if Immutability by Nature did
belong to any Creature.

The changeablness of all Creatures is evident;

1. Of corporeal Creatures, it is evident to sense. All Plants and Animals, as
they have their duration bounded in certain limits; so while they do exist,
they proceed from their rise to their fall; they pass through many sensible
alterations, from one degree of growth to another, from buds to blossoms, from
blossoms to flowers and fruits; they come to their pitch that Nature has set
them, and return back to the state from whence they sprung; there is not a day
but they make some acquisition, or suffer some loss; they dye and spring up
every day; nothing in them more certain than their inconstancy: The Creature is
subject to vanity. Rom 8.^^
The heavenly Bodies are changing their place; the Sun every day is running his
Race, and stays not in the same Point; and though they are not changed in their
Essence, yet they are in their Place: Some indeed say there is a continual
generation of Light in the Sun, as there is a loss of Light by the casting out
its Beams, as in a Fountain there is a flowing out of the Streams, and a
continual generation of supply: And though these heavenly Bodies have kept
their standing and motion from the time of their Creation; yet both the Suns
standing still in Joshuah's time, and its going back in Hezekiah's time, show
that they are changeable at the pleasure of God.

But in Man, the change is perpetually visible; every day there is a change
from Ignorance to Knowledge, from one Will to another, from Passion to Passion,
sometimes sad and sometimes cheerful, sometimes craving this and presently
nauseating it; his Body changes from health to sickness, or from weakness to
strength; some alteration there is either in Body or Mind. Man who is the
noblest Creature, the subordinate end of the Creation of other things, cannot
assure himself of a consistency and fixedness in any thing the short space of a
day, no not of a minute; all his Months are Months of vanity Job 7.3.
; whence the Psalmist calls Man at the best estate, altogether vanity, a mere
heap of vanity: Psalm. 35.
As he contains in his Nature the Nature of all Creatures, so he inherits in
his Nature the Vanity of all Creatures: A little World, the Center of the World
and of the Vanity of the World; yea, lighter than Vanity Psalm. 62.9.
; more moveable than a Feather; tossed between Passion and Passion, daily
changing his end, and changing the means; An Image of nothing.

2. Spiritual Natures, as Angels, They change not in their Being, but that is
from the indulgence of God: They change not in their Goodness, but that is not
from their Nature, but Divine Grace in their Confirmation; but they change in
their Knowledge, they know more by Christ than they did by Creation 1 Timothy 3.16.
; They have an addition of Knowledge every day, by the providential
dispensations of God to his Church Ephesians. 3.1^.
; and the increase of their Astonishment and Love, is according to the increase
of their Knowledge and Insight: They cannot have a new discovery, without new
admirations of what is discovered to them; There is a change in their joy, when
there is a change in a Sinner Luke 15.1^.
: They were changed in their Essence, when they were made such glorious Spirits
of nothing; Some of them were changed in their Will, when of holy they became
impure: The good Angels were changed in their Understandings, when the Glories
of God in Christ were presented to their view; and all can be changed in their
Essence again; and as they were made of nothing, so by the Power of God may be
reduced to nothing again. So glorified Souls shall have an unchanged operation
about God, for they shall behold his Face without any grief or fear of loss,
without vagrant thoughts; but they can never be unchangeable in their Nature,
because they can never pass from finite to infinite.

No Creature can be unchangeable in its Nature.

1. Because every Creature rose from nothing. As they rose from nothing, so
they tend to nothing, unless they are preserved by God: The Notion of a
Creature speaks changeableness; because to be a Creature, is to be made
something of nothing, and therefore Creation is a change of nothing into
something: The Being of a Creature begins from change, and therefore the
Essence of a Creature is subject to change: God only is uncreated, and
therefore unchangeable: If he were made, he could not be immutable; for the
very making is a change of not Being into Being. All Creatures were made good
as they were the fruits of Gods Goodness and Power; but must needs be mutable,
because they were the extracts of nothing.

2. Because every Creature depends purely upon the Will of God. They depend not
upon themselves, but upon another for their Being: As they received their Being
from the Word of his Mouth and the Arm of his Power, so by the same Word they
can be canceled into nothing, and return into as little significancy as when
they were nothing: He that created them by a Word, can by a Word destroy them,
Psalm 104.29. If God should take away their Breath, they dye and return into
their Dust. As it was in the power of the Creator that things might be, before
they actually were; so it is in the power of the Creator that things after they
are, may cease to be what they are; and they are in their own Nature as
reducible to nothing, as they were producible by the power of God from nothing;
for there needs no more than an Act of Gods Will to null them, as there needed
only an Act of Gods Will to make them. Creatures are all subject to a higher
Cause: They are all reputed as nothing: He does according to his Will in the
Armies of Heaven, and among the Inhabitants of the Earth, and none can stay his
Hand, or say unto him what do thou? Dan. 4.35.
But God is unchangeable, because he is the highest Good; none above him, all
below him; all dependent on him, himself upon none.

3. No Creature is absolutely perfect. No Creature can be so perfect or can
ever be, but something by the infinite Power of God may be added to it; for
whatsoever is finite may receive greater additions, and therefore a change. No
Creature you can imagine, but in your thoughts you may fancy him capable of
greater perfections than you know he has, or than really he has: The
perfections of all Creatures are searchable; the perfection of God is only
unsearchable Job. 11.6.
, and therefore he only immutable.

God only is always the same: Time makes no addition to him, nor diminishes
any thing of him; His Nature and Essence, his Wisdom and Will have always been
the same from Eternity, and shall be the same to Eternity without any variation.

4. The fourth thing propounded, is some Propositions to clear this
Unchangeableness of God, from any thing that seems contrary to it.

First, There was no change in God when he began to create the World in Time.
The Creation was a real change, But the change was not subjectively in God, but
in the Creature; the Creature began to be what it was not before. Creation is
considered as active or passive Gamach. in part. 1. Aquin. Qu. 9. cap. 1. p. 72.
; active Creation is the Will and Power of God to create; this is from
Eternity, because God willed from Eternity to create in Time; This never had
beginning, for God never began in time to understand any thing, to will any
thing, or to be able to do any thing; but he always understood, and always willed
those things which he determined from Eternity to produce in Time. The Decree
of God may be taken for the Act decreeing, that is eternal and the same; or for
the Object decreed, that is in Time: So that there may be a change in the
Object, but not in the Will whereby the Object does exsist.

1. There was no change in God by the Act of Creation, because there was no new
Will in him. There was no new Act of his Will which was not before. The
Creation begun in Time, but the Will of creating was from Eternity. The Work
was new, but the Decree whence that new work sprung, was as ancient as the
Ancient of days: When the time of creating came, God was not made ex nolente
volens, as we are; for whatsoever God willed to be now done, he willed from
Eternity to be done; but he willed also that it should not be done till such an
instant of time, and that it should not exist before such a time. If God had
willed the Creation of the World only at that time when the World was produced
and not before, then indeed God had been changeable: But though God spoke that
word, which he had not spoke before, whereby the World was brought into act;
yet he did not will that Will he willed not before. God did not create by a new
Counsel or new Will, but by that which was from Eternity, Ephesians. 1.9. All things
are wrought according to that purpose in himself, and according to the Counsel
of his Will, v 11. and as the holiness of the Elect is the fruit of his eternal
Will before the foundation of the World, v. 4. So likewise is the Existence of
things, and of those persons whom he did elect: As when an Artificer frames a
house or a Temple according to that Model he had in his mind some years before,
there is no change in the Model in his mind, the Artificer is the same, though
the work is produced by him sometime after he had framed that Copy of it in his
own mind; but there is a change of the thing produced by him according to that
Model. Or when a rich man intends four or five years hence if he lives, to
build an Hospital, Is there any change in his Will, when after the expiration
of that time he builds and endows it? Though it be after his Will, yet it is
the fruit of his precedent Will: So God from all Eternity did will and command
that the Creatures should exist in such a part of time; and by this eternal
Will, all things, whether past, present or to come, did, do and shall exist at
that point of time which that Will did appoint for them; Not as though God had
a new Will when things stood up in Being, but only that which was prepared in
his immutable Counsel and Will from Eternity, does then appear. There can be no
Instant fixed from Eternity, wherein it can be said, God did not will the
Creation of the World; For had the Will of God for the shortest Moment been
undetermined to the Creation of the World, and afterward resolved upon it,
there had been a moral change in God from not willing to willing; But this
there was not, for God executes nothing in Time which he had not ordained from
Eternity, and appointed all the means and circumstances whereby it should be
brought about. As the Determination of our Savior to suffer was not a new
Will, but an eternal Counsel, and wrought no change in God. Acts 2.23.


2. There is no change in God by the act of Creation, because there was no new
Power in God. Had God had a Will at the time of the Creation which he had not
before, there had been a moral change in him; so had there been in him a Power
only to create then and not before, there had been a physical change in him
from weakness to ability. There can be no more new Power in God, than there can
be a new Will in God; for his Will is his Power, and what he wills to effect,
that he does effect: As he was unchangeably Holy, so he was unchangeably
Almighty, which was, and is, and is to come Rev. 4.8.
; which was Almighty, and is Almighty, and ever will be Almighty. The Work
therefore makes no change in God, but there is a change in the thing wrought by
that Power of God. Suppose you had a Seal engraven upon some Metal a Hundred
years old, or as old as the Creation; and you should this day, so many Ages
after the engraveing of it, make an impression of that Seal upon Wax; would you
say the Engravement upon the Seal were changed, because it produced that stamp
upon the Wax now, which it did not before? No, the change is purely in the Wax,
which receives a new figure or form by the impression; not in the Seal, that
was capable of imprinting the same long before. God was the same from Eternity
as he was when he made a Signature of himself upon the Creatures by Creation,
and is no more changed by stamping them into several forms, than the Seal is
changed by making impression upon the Wax: As when a house is enlightened by the
Sun, or that which was cold is heated by it; there is a change in the house
from darkness to light, from coldness to heat; but is there any change in the
light and heat of the Sun? There is a change in the thing enlightened or warmed
by that light and heat which remains fixed and constant in the Sun, which was
as capable in it self to produce the same effects before, as at that instant
when it works them: So when God is the Author of a new Work, he is not changed;
because he works it by an eternal Will and an eternal Power.

3. Nor is there any new relation acquired by God by the Creation of the World.
There was a new relation acquired by the Creature; as when a Man sins, he has
another relation to God than he had before; he has relation to God, as a
Criminal to a Judge; But there is no change in God, but in the Malefactor. The
Being of Men makes no more change in God than the Sins of Men. As a Tree is now
on our right hand, and by our turning about it is on our left hand, sometimes
before us sometime behind us, according to our motion near it or about it, and
the turning of the Body; There is no change in the Tree, which remains firm and
fixed in the Earth; but the change is wholly in the posture of the Body,
whereby the Tree may be said to be before us or behind us, or on the right hand
or on the left hand. Petav. Theo. Dogmat. Tom. 1. lib.
God gained no new relation of Lord or Creator by the Creation; for though he
had created nothing to rule over, yet he had the Power to create and rule
though he did not create and rule: As a Man may be called a skillful Writer,
though he does not write, because he is able to do it when he pleases; or a Man
skilful in Physic is called a Physician, though he does not practice that
Skill, or discover his Art in the distribution of Medicines; because he may do
it when he pleases, it depends upon his own will to show his Art when he has a
mind to it: So the Name Creator and Lord, belongs to God from Eternity, because
he could create and rule, though he did not create and rule: But howsoever, if
there were any such change of relation, that God may be called Creator and
Lord, after the Creation and not before; it is not a change in Essence, nor in
Knowledge, nor in Will; God gains no perfection nor diminution by it, his
Knowledge is not increased by it; He is no more by it than he was, and will be,
if all those things ceased; and therefore Austin illustrates it by this
similitude; as a piece of Money when it is given as the price of a thing, or
deposited only as a pledge for the security of a thing borrowed; the Coin is
the same and is not changed, though the relation it had as a pledge and as a
price be different from one another: so that suppose any new relation be added,
yet there is nothing happens to the Nature of God which may infer any change.

2. The second Proposition. There was no change in the Divine Nature of the
Son, when he assumed Human Nature. There was an Union of the two Natures, but
no change of the Deity in to the Humanity, or of the Humanity into the Deity;
both preserved their peculiar Properties: The Humanity was changed by a
Communication of excellent Gifts from the Divine Nature; not by being brought
into an Equality with it, for that was impossible that a Creature should become
equal to the Creator; He took the Form of a Servant, but he lost not the Form
of God, he despoiled not himself of the Perfections of the Deity; He was indeed
emptied, and became of no reputation Phil. 2.7.
, but he did not cease to be God, though he was reputed to be only a Man, and a
very mean one too: The Glory of his Divinity was not extinguished nor diminisht,
though it was obscured and darkened under the vail of our infirmities; but there
was no more change in the hiding of it, than there is in the Body of the Sun
when it is shadowed by the interposition of a Cloud; His blood while it was
pouring out from his Veins was the blood of God Acts 20.28.
; and therefore when he was bowing the Head of his Humanity upon the Cross, he
had the Nature and Perfections of God; for had he ceased to be God, he had been
a mere Creature, and his sufferings would have been of as little value and
satisfaction as the sufferings of a Creature.

He could not have been a sufficient Mediator, had he ceased to be God; and he
had ceased to be God, had he lost any one Perfection proper to the Divine
Nature; and losing none, he lost not this of unchangeableness, which is none of
the meanest belonging to the Deity: Why by his Union with the Human Nature
should he lose this, any more than he lost his Omniscience, which he discovered
by his knowledge of the thoughts of Men; or his Mercy, which he manifested to
the height in the time of his suffering? That is truly a change, when a thing
cease to be what it was before; This was not in Christ, He assumed our Nature
without laying aside his own. Zanch. de Immutab. Dei.
When the Soul is united to the Body, does it lose any of those perfections
that are proper to its Nature? Is there any change either in the substance or
qualities of it? Goulart de Immutab. de Dieu.
No, but it makes a change in the Body, and of a dull Lump it makes it a living
Mass, conveys vigor and strength to it; and by its power, quickens it to sense
and motion; So did the Divine Nature and Human remain entire; there was no
change of the one into the other, as Christ by a Miracle changed Water into
Wine, or Men by Art change Sand or Ashes into Glass: And when he prays for the
Glory he had with God before the World was John 17.5.
, he prays that a Glory he had in his Deity, might shine forth in his Person as
Mediator, and be evidenced in that height and splendour suitable to his Dignity
which had been so lately darkened by his abasement; that as he had appeared to
be the Son of Man in the infirmity of the Flesh, he might appear to be the Son
of God in the glory of his Person, that he might appear to be the Son of God
and the Son of Man in one Person.

Gamach. in part. 1. Aquin. qu. 9. cap. 1.
Again, there could be no change in this Union; for in a real change, something
is acquired which was not possessed before, neither formally nor eminently; But
the Divinity had from Eternity before the Incarnation, all the perfections of
the Human Nature eminently in a nobler manner than they are in themselves, and
therefore could not be changed by a real Union.

3. The third Proposition. Repentance and other Affections ascribed to God in
Scripture, argue no change in God. We often read of Gods repenting, repenting
of the Good he promised Jer. 18.10.
, and of the Evil he threatened Exodus 32.14. John 3.10.
, or of the Work he has wrought. Genesis 6.6.


We must observe therefore that

1. Repentance is not properly in God. He is a pure Spirit, and is not capable
of those Passions, which are signs of weakness and impotence, or subject to
those regrets, we are subject to: Where there is a proper repentance, there is
a want of foresight, an ignorance of what would succeed, or a defect in the
examination of the occurences, which might fall within consideration: All
repentance of a fact, is grounded upon a mistake in the event which was not
foreseen; or upon an after knowledge of the evil of the thing which was acted
by the person repenting: But God is so wise that he cannot err, so holy he
cannot do evil; and his certain prescience or foreknowledge, secures him
against any unexpected events: God does not act but upon clear and infallible
reason: And a change upon passion is accounted by all so great a weakness in
man, that none can entertain so unworthy a conceit of God. Where he is said to
repent, Genesis 6.6.
he is also said to grieve; now no proper grief can be imagined to be in God:
As repentance is inconsistent with infallible foresight, so is grief no less
inconsistent with undefiled blessedness: God is blessed for ever, Romans 9.8.
and therefore nothing can befall him that can stain that blessedness; his
blessedness would be impaired, and interrupted, while he is repenting, tho he
did soon rectify that which is the cause of his repentance: God is of one mind
and who can turn him? what his Soul desires that he does. Job. 23.13.


2. But God accommodates himself in the Scripture to our weak capacity. God
has no more of a proper repentance, than he has of a real body; tho he in
accommodation to our weakness ascribes to himself the members of our bodies to
set out to our understanding the greatness of his perfections, we must not
conclude him a body like us; so because he is said to have anger and
repentance, we must not conclude him to have passions like us: When we cannot
fully comprehend him as he is, he cloths himself with our nature in his
expressions that we may apprehend him as we are able, and by an inspection into
our selves, learn something of the nature of God; yet those human ways of
speaking ought to be understood in a manner agreeable to the infinite
excellency and Majesty of God; and are only designed to mark out something in
God which has a resemblance with something in us: As we cannot speak to God as
Gods, but as men; so we cannot understand him speaking to us as a God, unless
he condescend to speak to us like a man. God therefore frames his language to
our dullness, not to his own state; and informs us by our own phrases, what he
would have us learn of his nature; as Nurses talk broken language to young
Children. In all such expressions, therefore we must ascribe the perfection we
conceive in them to God, and lay the imperfection at the door of the Creature.

3. Therefore repentance in God is only a change of his outward conduct,
according to his infallible foresight and immutable Will. He changes the way of
his Providential proceeding according to the carriage of the Creature, without
changing his Will, which is the Rule of his Providence; when God speaks of his
repenting that he had made man; Genesis 6.6.
it is only his changing his conduct from a way of kindness to a way of severity,
and is a word suited to our capacities to signify his detestation of sin and
his resolution to punish it, after man had made himself quite another thing,
than God had made him; It repents me, that is, I am purposed to destroy the
world; as he that repents of his work throws it away: Mercer ir. loc.
As if a Potter cast away the vessel he had framed, it were a testimony, that
he repented that ever he took pains about it: So the destruction of them seems
to be a repentance in God that ever he made them; it is a change of events, not
of Counsels. Repentance in us is a grief for a former fact, and a changing of
our course in it: Grief is not in God, Petavius Theol. Dogma^.
but his repentance is a willing a thing should not be as it was, which Will
was fixed from Eternity; for God foreseeing Man would fall, and decreeing to
permit it, he could not be said to repent in time of what he did not repent
from Eternity; and therefore if there were no repentance in God from Eternity,
there could be none in time. But God is said to repent, when he changes the
disposition of affairs without himself; as men when they repent, alter the
course of their actions, so God alters things extra se or without himself, but
changes nothing of his own purpose within himself. It rather notes the action
he is about to do, than any thing in his own nature, or any change in his
eternal purpose. Gods repenting of his kindness is nothing but an inflicting of
punishment, which the Creature by the change of his carriage has merited: As
his repenting of the evil threatened is the witholding the punishment denounced,
when the Creature has humbly submitted to his Authority and acknowledged his
crime.

Or else we may understand those expressions of joy and grief and repentance to
signify thus much, Daille, in Sermon on 2 Pet. 3.9. pa. 60.
that the things declared to be the objects of joy and grief and repentance are
of that nature, that if God were capable of our passions, he would discover
himself in such cases as we do: As when the Prophets mention the joys and
applaudings of Heaven, Earth and the Sea, they only signify that the things
they speak of are so good, that if the Heavens, and the Sea had natures capable
of joy, they would express it upon that occasion in such a manner as we do: So
would God have joy at the obedience of men, and grief at the unworthy carriage
of men, and repent of his kindness, when men abuse it, and repent of his
punishment, when men reform under his rod, were the Majesty of his nature
capable of such affections.

4. Proposition. The not fulfilling of some predictions in Scripture, which
seem to imply a changeableness of the Divine Will, do not argue any change in
it. As when he reprieved Hezekiah from death, after a message sent by the
Prophet Isaiah, that he should die, 2 Kings 20.1, 5. Isa. 38.1.5.
and when he made an arrest of that Judgment he had threatened by Jonah against
Niniveh. Jon. 3.4, 10.


There is not indeed the same reason of promises and threatenings altogether,
for in promising the obligation lies upon God, and the right to demand, is in
the party that performs the condition of the promise: But in threatenings, the
obligation lies upon the sinner, and God's right to punish is declared thereby:
So that tho God does not punish, his Will is not changed; because his Will was
to declare the demerit of sin, and his right to punish upon the Commission of
it; tho he may not punish according to the strict letter of the threatening the
person sinning, but relax his own law for the honor of his attributes, and
transfer the punishment from the offender to a person substituted in his room;
this was the case in the first threatening against man, and the substituting a
surety in the place of the Malefactor.

But the answer to these cases is this, Rivet in Genes. exerci^^ 51. pa. 213.
that where we find predictions in Scripture declared, and yet not executed, we
must consider them, not as absolute but conditional, or as the Civil Law calls
it, an interlocutory Sentence. God declared what would follow by natural
causes, or by the demerit of man, not what he would absolutely himself do: And
in many of those predictions, tho the condition be not expressed, yet it is to be
understood; so the promises of God are to be understood with the condition of
perseverance in well doing; and threatenings with a clause of revocation annexed
to them, provided that men repent: And this God lays down as a general case,
always to be remembered as a rule for the interpreting his threatenings against a
Nation, and the same reason will hold in threatenings against a particular
person. Jer. 18.7.8, 9, 10. At what instant I shall speak concerning a Nation
and concerning a Kingdom, to pluck up and pull down and destroy it; If that
Nation against whom I have pronounced, turn from their evil, I will repent of
the evil that I thought to do unto them, and so when he speaks of planting a
Nation, if they do evil, he will repent of the good, etc. It Is a Universal rule
by which all particular cases of this nature are to be tried; so that when man's
repentance arrives, God remains firm in his first Will, always equal to
himself, and it is not he that changes, but man. For since the interposition of
the Mediator, with an eye to whom God governed the world after the fall, the
right of punishing was taken off if men repented, and mercy was to flow out, if
by a conversion men returned to their duty, Ezekiel. 18.20, 21. This I say is
grounded upon Gods entertaining the Mediator; for the Covenant of works
discovered no such thing as repentance or pardon. Now these general rules are
to be the interpreters of particular cases: So that predictions of good are not
to be counted absolute, if men return to evil; nor predictions of evil, if men
be thereby reduced to a repentance of their crimes.

So Niniveh shall be destroyed, that is, according to the general rule, unless
the inhabitants repent, which they did; they manifested a belief of the
threatening, and gave glory to God by giving credit to the Prophet: and they had
a notion of this rule God lays down in the other Prophets; for they had an
apprehension that upon their humbling themselves, they might escape the
threatened vengeance, and stop the shooting those Arrows that were ready in the
Bow. Sanders^n's Sermon par. 2. p. 157, 158.
Though Jonah proclaimed destruction, without declaring any hopes of an arrest
of Judgment; yet their natural Notion of God afforded some natural hopes of
relief, if they did their duty, and spurned not against the Prophet's message;
and therefore says one Sanders^n's Sermon par. 2. p. 157, 158.
[God did not always express this condition, because it was needless; his own
Rule revealed in Scripture was sufficient to some; and the natural Notion all
men had of Gods Goodness upon their Repentance, made it not absolutely
necessary to declare it: And besides says he, it is bootless; The expressing
it can do but little good; secure ones will repent never the sooner, but rather
presume upon their hopes of Gods forbearance, and linger out their Repentance
till it be too late: And to work men to Repentance, whom he has purposed to
spare, he threatens them with terrible Judgments; which by how much the more
terrible and peremptory they are, are likely to be more effectual for that end
God in his purpose designs them, viz. to humble them under a sense of their
demerit, and an acknowledgment of his righteous Justice; and therefore though
they be absolutely denounced, yet they are to be conditionally interpreted with
a reservation of Repentance: As for that Answer which one gives, that by forty
days was not meant forty Natural days, but forty Prophetical days, that is,
years, a day for a year; and that the City was destroyed forty years after by
the Medes: The expression of Gods repenting upon their Humiliation, puts a Bar
to that Interpretation: God repented, that is, he did not bring the punishment
upon them according to those days the Prophet had expressed; and therefore forty
natural days are to be understood; and if it were meant of forty years, and
they were destroyed at the end of that term, how could God be said to repent,
since according to that, the punishment threatened was according to the time
fixed brought upon them? And the destruction of it forty years after, will not
be easily evinced, if Jonah lived in the time of Jeroboam the second King of
Israel, as he did 2 Kings 14.2^
; And Niniveh was destroyed in the time of Josiah King of Judah. But the other
Answer is plain. God did not fulfill what he had threatened, because they
reformed what they had committed: When the threatening was made, they were a fit
Object for Justice; but when they repented, they were a fit Object for a
merciful Respite. To threaten when sins are high, is a part of Gods Justice;
not to execute when sins are revoked by Repentance, is a part of Gods Goodness.
And in the Case of Hezekiah 2 Kings 20.1, 5.
, Isaiah comes with a Message from God, that he should set his house in order,
for he shall dye; that is, the Disease was mortal, and no outward Applications
could in their own nature resist the Destemper. Behold, Isa. 38.1, 5.
I will add to thy days fifteen years; I will heal thee: It seems to me to be
one entire Message, because the latter part of it was so suddenly after the
other committed to Isaiah to be delivered to Hezekiah; for he was not gone out
of the Kings house, before he was ordered to return with the news of his
health, by an extraordinary indulgence of God against the power of Nature and
force of the Disease: Behold I will add to thy Life; noting it as an
extraordinary thing: He was in the second Court of the Kings House when this
word came to him 2 Kings 20.4.
; the Kings House having three Courts, so that he was not gone above half way
out of the Palace. God might send this message of Death, to prevent the Pride
Hezekiah might swell with for his deliverance from Senacherib: As Paul had a
Messenger of Satan to buffet him to prevent his lifting up 2 Cor. 12.7.
; and this good Man was subject to this sin, as we find afterward in the Case
of the Babylonish Ambassadors: And God delayed this other part of the Message
to humble him, and draw out his Prayer; and as soon as ever he found Hezekiah
in this temper, he sent Isaiah with a comfortable message of recovery: So that
the Will of God was to signify to him the mortality of his distemper, and
afterward to relieve him by a message of an extraordinary Recovery.

5. Proposition. God is not changed, when of loving to any Creatures he becomes
angry with them, or of angry he becomes appeased. The change in these cases is
in the Creature; according to the alteration in the Creature, it stands in a
various relatition to God: an innocent Creature is the Object of his Kindness,
an offending Creature is the Object of his Anger; there is a change in the
dispensations of God, as there is a change in the Creature making himself
capable of such dispensations. God always acts according to the immutable
nature of his Holiness, and can no more change in his Affections to good and
evil, than he can in his Essence. When the Devils, now fallen, stood as
glorious Angels, they were the Objects of Gods love, because holy: When they
fell, they were the objects of Gods hatred, because impure; the same reason
which made him love them while they were pure, made him hate them, when they
were criminal: The reason of his various dispensations to them was the same in
both, as considered in God, his immutable holiness; but as respecting the
Creature, different; the nature of the Creature was changed, but the Divine
holy nature of God remained the same; Psalm. 18.26.
With the pure thou will show thy self pure, and with the froward thou will
show thy self froward: He is a refreshing light to those that obey him, and a
consuming fire to those that resist him. Tho the same Angels were not always
loved; yet the same reason that moved him to love them, moved him to hate them.
It had argued a change in God, if he had loved them always, in whatsoever
posture they were toward him: It could not be counted love, but a weakness and
impotent fondness; the change is in the object not in the affection of God: For
the object loved before, is not beloved now, because that which was the motive
of love, is not now in it: So that the Creature having a different state from
what it had, falls under a different affection or dispensation.

It had been a mutable affection in God, to love that which was not worthy of
love, with the same love wherewith he loved that which had the greatest
resemblance to himself: Had God loved the fallen Angels in that state and for
that state, he had hated himself, because he had loved that which was contrary
to himself and the image of his own holiness, which made them appear before,
good in his sight. The Will of God is unchangeably set to love righteousness
and hate iniquity, and from this hatred to punish it: And if a righteous
Creature contracts the wrath of God, or a sinful Creature has the
Communications of Gods love; it must be by a change in themselves. Is the Sun
changed when it hardens one thing and softens another, according to the
disposition of the several subjects? Or when the Sun makes a flower more
fragrant, and a dead carcass more noisome? There are diverse effects, but the
reason of that diversity is not in the Sun, but in the subject; the Sun is the
same, and produces those different effects, by the same quality of heat: So if
an unholy Soul approach to God; God looks angrily upon him; If a holy Soul come
before him, the same immutable perfection in God draws out his kindness toward
him: As some think, the Sun would rather refresh than scorch us, if our bodies
were of the same nature and substance with that Luminary.

As the Will of God for Creating the world, was no new, but an Eternal Will,
tho it manifested it self in time; so the Will of God for the punishment of
sin, or the reconciliation of the sinner, was no new Will: Tho his wrath in
time break out in the effects of it upon sinners, and his love flows out in the
effects of it upon penitents. Christ by his death reconciling God to man, did
not alter the Will of God, but did what was consonant to his Eternal Will: He
came not to change his Will, but to execute his Will. Lo I come to do thy Will,
oh God. Heb. 10.7.
And the grace of God in Christ, was not a new grace, but an old grace in a new
appearance; the grace of God has appeared. Tit. 1.11.


6. Proposition, A change of Laws by God argues no change in God, when God
abrogates some Laws which he had settled in the Church and enacts others. I
spoke of this something the last day: I shall only add this. God commanded one
thing to the Jews, when the Church was in an infant state; and removed those
Laws, when the Church came to some growth. The Elements of the world were suited
to the state of Children. Gal. 4.3.
A Mother feeds not the Infant with the same diet as she does, when it is grown
up. Our Savior acquainted not his Disciples with some things at one time which
he did at another, because they were not able to bear them; Where was the
change, in Christ's Will, or in their growth from a state of weakness to that of
strength? A Physician prescribes not the same thing to a person in health, as
he does to one conflicting with a distemper; nor the same thing in the
beginning, as he does in the state or declination of the disease. The
Physicians Will and Skill are the same, but the capacity and necessity of the
Patient for this or that Medicine or method of proceeding, are not the same.

When God changed the Ceremonial Law, there was no change in the Divine Will,
but an execution of his Will; For when God commanded the observance of the Law,
he intended not the perpetuity of it; nay, in the Prophets he declares the
cessation of it; he decreed to command it, but he decreed to command it only
for such a time; so that the abrogation of it was no less an execution of his
Decree, than the establishment of it for a season was; The commanding of it was
pursuant to his Decree for the appointing of it, and the nulling of it was
pursuant to his Decree of continuing it only for such a season. So that in all
this there was no change in the Will of God.

The Counsel of God stands sure; what changes soever there are in the World,
are not in God or his Will, but in the events of things, and the different
relations of things to God: It Is in the Creature, not in the Creator. The Sun
always remains of the same hue, and is not discolored in it self, because it
shines green through a green Glass, and blew through a blew Glass; the
different colors come from the Glass, not from the Sun: The change is always in
the disposition of the Creature, not in the Nature of God or his Will.

5. Use.

1. For Information.

1. If God be unchangeable in his Nature, and Immutability be a Property of
God, Then Christ has a Divine Nature. This in the Psalm is applied to Christ
in the Hebrews, Heb. 1.11. where he joins the citation out of this Psalm with
that out of Psalm 45.6, 7. Thy Throne O God is for ever and ever; thou have
loved Righteousness and hated Iniquity, therefore God even thy God has
anointed thee with the Oil of Gladness above thy Fellows; and thou Lord in the
beginning have laid the Foundation of the Earth, etc. As the first must
necessarily be meant of Christ the Mediator, and therein he his distinguished
from God, as one anointed by him; so the other must be meant of Christ, whereby
he is made one with God in regard of the Creation and Dissolution of the World,
in regard of Eternity and Immutability. Both the Testimonies are linkt together
by the Copulative [and] and thou Lord, declaring thereby that they are both to
be understood of the same Person the Son of God: The design of the Chapter is
to prove Christ to be God; and such things are spoken of him as could not
belong to any Creature, no, not to the most excellent of the Angels: The same
Person that is said to be anointed above his Fellows, and is said to lay the
Foundation of the Earth and Heavens, is said to be the same, that is, the same
in himself: The Prerogative of sameness belongs to that Person as well as
Creation of Heaven and Earth.

The Socinians say it is spoken of God, and that God shall destroy the Heavens
by Christ; If so, Christ is not a mere Creature, not created when he was
incarnate; for the same Person that shall change the World, did create the
World; If God shall change the world by him, God also created the world by him;
He was then before the world was; for how could God create the world by one
that was not? That was not in Being till after the Creation of the world? The
Heavens shall be changed, but the Person who is to change the Heavens, is said
to be the same, or unchangeable in the Creation as well as the Dissolution of
of the world. This sameness referrs to the whole Sentence.

Placeus de deitate Christi.
The Psalm wherein the Text is, and whence this in the Hebrews is cited, is
properly meant of Christ, and Redemption by him, and the completing of it at
the last day, and not of the Babylonish captivity; That captivity was not so
deplorable, as the state the Psalmist describes: Daniel and his Companions
flourished in that Captivity; It could not reasonably be said of them, that
their days were consumed like Smoke, their heart withered like Grass; that they
forgot to eat their Bread as it is V. 3.4.
: Besides, he complains of shortness of Life V. 11.
; But none had any more reason to complain of that in the time of the
Captivity, than before and after it, than at any other time: Their Deliverance
would contribute nothing to the natural length of their lives. Besides, when
Sion should be built, the Heathen should fear the Name of the Lord, (that is,
worship God) and all the Kings of the Earth his Glory. V. 15.
The rearing the second Temple after the deliverance, did not proselyte the
Nations; nor did the Kings of the Earth worship the Glory of God; nor did God
appear in such Glory at the erecting the second Temple: The second Temple was
less glorious than the first, for it wanted some of the Ornaments which were
the Glory of the first; But it is said of this state, Ver. 16.
that when the Lord should build up Sion, he should appear in his Glory; his
proper Glory, and extraordinary Glory. Now that God who shall appear in Glory
and build up Sion, is the Son of God, the Redeemer of the World; He builds up
the Church, he causes the Nations to fear the Lord, and the Kings of the Earth
his Glory; He broke down the partition Wall, and opened a Door for the entrance
of the Gentiles; He struck the Chains from off the Prisoners, and loosed those
that were appointed to death by the Curse of the Law Ver. 20.
: And to this Person is ascribed the Creation of the World; and he is
pronounced to remain the same in the midst of an infinite number of changes in
inferior things: And it is likely the Psalmist considers not only the beginning
of Redemption, but the completing of it at the second coming of Christ; for he
complains of those evils, which shall be removed by his second coming, viz. The
shortness of life, persecutions and reproaches wherewith the Church is
afflicted in this world; and comforts not himself with those attributes which
are directly opposed to sin, as the mercy of God, the Covenant of God, but with
those that are opposed to mortality and calamities; as the unchangeableness and
Eternity of God; and from thence infers a perpetual establishment of believers.
Ver. 28.
The Children of thy Servants shall continue and their seed shall be
established before thee: So that the Psalm it self seems to aim in the whole
discourse at Christ, and asserts his Divinity, which the Apostle as an
interpreter does fully evidence; applying it to him, and manifesting his Deity
by his immutability as well as Eternity. Daile Melang des Sermons Part 2. Sect.
1. p. 8. 9. 10, etc.
While all other things lose their forms, and pass through multitudes of
variations, he constantly remains the same, and shall be the same, when all the
Empires of the world shall slide away, and a Period be put to the present
motions of the Creation: And as there was no change made in his being by the
Creation of things, so neither shall there be by the final alteration of
things; he shall see them finish, as he saw them rise up into being, and be the
same after their reign, as he was before their original; he is the first and
the last. Revel. 1.17.


2. Here is ground and encouragement for Worship. An Atheist will make another
use of this: If God be immutable, why should we worship him, why should we pray
to him; Good will come if he wills it, evil cannot be averted by all our
supplications, if he has ordered it to fall upon us?

But certainly since unchangeableness in knowing, and willing goodness is a
perfection, An adoration and admiration is due to God, upon the account of this
excellence. If he be God he is to be reverenced, and the more highly
reverenced, because he cannot but be God.

Again what comfort could it be to pray to a God, that like the Chamaeleon
changed colors every day, every moment? What encouragement could there be to
lift up our eyes to one that were of one mind this day and of another mind to
morrow? Who would put up a Petition to an Earthly Prince that were so mutable,
as to grant a Petition one day, and deny it another, and change his own act?
But if a Prince promise this or that thing upon such or such a condition, and
you know his promise to be as unchangeable as the Laws of the Medes and
Persians, would any Man reason thus? because it is unchangeable we will not
seek to him, we will not perform the condition, upon which the fruit of the
Proclamation is to be enjoyed. Who would not count such an inference
ridiculous? What blessings has not God promised upon the condition of seeking
him? Were he of an unrighteous nature, or changeable in his mind, this would be
a bar to our seeking him, and frustrate our hopes: But since it is otherwise,
is not this excellency of his nature the highest encouragement, to ask of him
the blessings he has promised, and a beam from Heaven to fire our zeal in
asking? If you desire things against his Will, which he has declared he will
not grant; Prayer then would be an act of disobedience and injury to him, as
well as an act of folly in it self; his unchangeableness then might stifle such
desires: But if we ask according to his Will and according to our reasonable
wants, what ground have we to make such a ridiculous argument? He has Willed
every thing that may be for our good, if we perform the condition he has
required; and has put it upon record, that we may know it and regulate our
desires and supplications according to it: If we will not seek him, his
immutability cannot be a bar, but our own folly is the cause; and by our
neglect we despoil him of this perfection as to us, and either imply that he is
not sincere, and means not as he speaks; or that he is as changeable as the
Wind, sometimes this thing sometimes that, and not at all to be confided in. If
we ask according to his revealed Will, the unchangeableness of his Nature will
assure us of the Grant; and what a presumption would it be in a Creature
dependent upon his Sovereign, to ask that which he knows he has declared his
Will against; since there is no good we can want, but he has promised to give,
upon our sincere and ardent desire for it?

God has decreed to give this or that to Man, but conditionally, and by the
means of enquiring after him, and asking for it: Ezekiel. 36.37. Mat. 7.7.
Ask and you shall receive, as much as to say, you shall not receive unless you
ask. When the highest promises are made, God expects they should be put in
suit: Our Savior joins the Promise and the Petition together; the Promise to
encourage the Petition, and the Petition to enjoy the Promise: He does not say
perhaps it shall be given, but it shall, that is, it certainly shall; your
heavenly Father is unchangeably willing to give you those things. We must
depend upon his Immutability for the thing, and submit to his Wisdom for the
time. Prayer is an acknowledgment of our dependence upon God, which dependence
could have no firm foundation without unchangeableness. Prayer does not desire
any change in God, but is offered to God that he would conferr those things
which he has immutably willed to communicate, but he willed them not without
Prayer as the means of bestowing them. The light of the Sun is ordered for our
comfort, for the discovery of visible things, for the ripening the fruits of
the Earth; but withal it is required that we use our faculty of seeing, that we
employ our industry in sowing and planting, and expose our fruits to the view
of the Sun, that they may receive the influence of it. If a man shuts his eyes,
and complains that the Sun is changed into darkness, it would be ridiculous;
the Sun is not changed, but we alter our selves; Nor is God changed in not
giving us the blessings he has promised, because he has promised in the way
of a due address to him, and opening our Souls to receive his influence; and to
this, his Immutability is the greatest encouragement.

3. This shows how contrary Man is to God in regard of his inconstancy. What an
infinite distance is there between the immutable God and mutable Man, and how
should we bewail this flittingness in our Nature?

There is a Mutability in us as Creatures, and a Creature cannot but be mutable
by Nature, otherwise it were not a Creature but God. The establishment of any
Creature is from Grace and Gift; Naturally we tend to nothing, as we come from
nothing: This Creature-mutability is not our sin, yet it should cause us to lie
down under a sense of our own nothingness, in the presence of the Creator. The
Angels as Creatures, though not corrupt, cover their faces before him: And the
Arguments God uses to humble Job, though a fallen Creature, are not from his
Corruption; for I do not remember that he taxed him with that; but from the
greatness of his Majesty and excellency of his Nature declared in his Works
Job. 38.39, 40.41.
And therefore Men that have no sense of God, and humility before him, forget
that they are Creatures as well as corrupt ones.

How great is the distance between God and us, in regard of our inconstancy in
good, which is not natural to us by Creation? For the mind and affections were
regular, and by the great Artificer were pointed to God as the Object of
Knowledge and Love. We have the same faculties of Understanding, Will and
Affection as Adam had in Innocence; but not with the same Light, the same Bias
and the same Ballast. Man by his fall, wounded his head and heart; the wound in
his head made him unstable in the Truth, and that in his heart unstedfast in
his Affections: He changed himself from the Image of God to that of the Devil,
from Innocence to Corruption; and from an ability to be steadfast, to a
perpetual Inconstancy: His Silver became Dross, and his Wine was mixed with
Water. Isa. 1.22.
He changed,

1. To inconstancy in Truth, opposed to the Immutability of Knowledge in God.
How are our Minds floating between Ignorance and Knowledge? Truth in us is like
those Ephemera, Creatures of a days continuance, springs up in the Morning and
expires at Night. How soon does that fly away from us, which we have had, not
only some weak flashes of, but which we have learned and have had some relish
of? The Devil stood not in the Truth, John 8.44.
and therefore manages his Engines to make us as unstable as himself: Our Minds
reel, and corrupt reasonings oversway us; like Spunges we suck up Water, and a
light compression makes us spout it out again. Truths are not engraven upon our
hearts, but writ as in Dust, defaced by the next puff of Wind; carried about
with every Wind of Doctrine, Ephesians. 4.14. Like a Ship without a Pilot and Sails,
at the courtesy of the next Storm; or like Clouds that are Tenants to the Wind
and Sun, moved by the Wind and melted by the Sun. The Galatians were no sooner
called into the Grace of God, but they were removed from it Gal. 1.6.
; Some have been reported to have menstruam fidem, kept an Opinion for a Month;
and many are like him that believed the Souls Immortality, no longer than he
had Plato's Book of that Subject in his hand Sedgwick Christ's Counsel p. 230.
: One likens such to Children; they play with Truths as Children do with
Babies, one while embrace them, and a little after throw them into the Dirt.
How soon do we forget what the Truth is delivered to us, and what it
represented us to be James 1.23.24.
? Is it not a thing to be bewailed, that Man should be such a Weathercock,
turned about with every Breath of Wind, and shifting Aspects as the Wind shifts
Points?

2. Inconstancy in Will, and Affections opposed to the Immutability of Will in
God. We waver between God and Baal; and while we are not only resolving, but
upon motion a little way, look back with a hankring after Sodom; Sometimes
lifted up with heavenly intentions, and presently cast down with earthly cares;
like a Ship that by an advancing Wave seems to aspire to Heaven, and the next
fall of the Waves makes it sink down to the Depths. We change Purposes oftener
than Fashions; and our Resolutions are like Letters in water, whereof no mark
remains: We will be as John to day to love Christ, and as Judas to morrow to
betray him, and by an unworthy levity, pass into the Camp of the Enemies of
God; resolved to be as holy as Angels in the Morning, when the Evening beholds
us as impure as Devils: How often do we hate what before we loved, and shun
what before we longed for? And our Resolutions are like Vessels of Crystal,
which break at the first knock, are dashed in pieces by the next Temptation.
Saul resolved not to persecute David any more, but you soon find him upon his
old game. Pharaoh more than once promised, and probably resolved to let Israel
go; but at the end of the storm his purposes vanish. Exodus 8.27, 32.
When an Affliction pincheth Men, they intend to change their course; and the
next news of ease changes their intentions: Like a Bow, not fully bent in their
inclinations, they cannot reach the Mark, but live many years between
resolutions of Obedience and affections to Rebellion Psalm. 78.17.
: And what promises men make to God are often the fruit of their Passion, their
Fear, not of their Will. The Israelites were startled at the terrors wherewith
the Law was delivered, and promised obedience Exodus 20.19.
, but a Month after forgot them, and make a Golden Calf, and in the sight of
Sinai call for, and dance before their Gods Exodus 32.
; Never people more unconstant. Peter who vowed an Allegiance to his Master,
and a Courage to stick to him, forswears him almost with the same breath. Those
that cry out with a zeal, the Lord he is God, shortly after return to the
service of their Idols. 1 Kings. 18.39.
That which seems to be our pleasure this day, is our vexation to morrow: A
Fear of a Judgment puts us into a religious pang, and a Love to our Lusts
reduces us to a rebellious inclination; As soon as the danger is over, the
Saint is forgotten: Salvation and Damnation present themselves to us, touch us
and engender some weak wishes, which are dissolved by the next allurements of a
carnal interest. No hold can be taken of our promises; no credit is to be given
to our resolutions.

3. Inconstancy in practice. How much beginning in the Spirit, and ending in
the Flesh; one day in the Sanctuary, another in the Stews; clear in the morning
as the Sun, and clouded before noon; in Heaven by an excellency of Gifts, in
Hell by a course of prophanness? Like a Flower, which some mention, that
changes its color three times a day; one part white, then purple, then yellow.
The Spirit lusts against the Flesh, and the Flesh quickly triumphs over the
Spirit. In a good man how often is there a Spiritual Lethargy? Tho he does not
openly defame God, yet he does not always glorify him: He does not forsake
the truth, but he does not always make the attainment of it, and settlement in
it his business. This levity discovers it self in religious duties, when I
would do good, evil is present with me. Romans 7.21.
Never more present, than when we have a mind to do good, and never more
present than when we have a mind to do the best and greatest good: How hard is
it to make our thoughts and affections keep their stand? place them upon a good
Object, and they will be frisking from it, as a Bird from one bough, one fruit
to another. We vary postures according to the various objects we meet with. The
course of the World is a very airy thing, suited to the uncertain motions of
that Prince of the power of the Air, which works in it. Ephesians. 2.2.


This ought to be bewailed by us. Tho we may stand fast in the truth, tho we
may spin our resolutions into a firm web, tho the Spirit may triumph over the
flesh in our practice, yet we ought to bewail it, because inconstancy is our
nature, and what fixedness we have in good is from grace. What we find
practiced by most men, is natural to all Lawrence of Faith p. 262.
: As face answers to face in a glass, so does heart to heart Pro. 27.19.
; a face in the glass is not more like a natural face, whose image it is, than
one man's heart is naturally like another.

1. It Is natural to those out of the Church. Nebuchadnezzar is so affected with
Daniels prophetic Spirit, that he would have none accounted the true God, but
the God of Daniel. Dan. 2.47.
How soon does this notion slip from him, and an image must be set up for all
to worship, upon pain of almost cruel painful death? Daniels God is quite
forgotten: The miraculous deliverance of the three Children for not worshipping
his Image, makes him settle a Decree to secure the Honor of God from the
reproach of his Subjects Dan. 3.29.
; yet a little while after, you have him strutting in his Palace, as if there
were no God but himself.

2. It Is natural to those in the Church. The Israelites were the only Church
God had in the World, and a notable Example of inconstancy. After the Miracles
of Egypt they murmured against God, when they saw Pharaoh marching with an
Army at their Heels. They desired food, and soon nauseated the Manna, they were
before fond of, when they came into Canaan: They sometimes worshipped God, and
sometimes Idols, not only the Idols of one Nation, but of all their Neighbors:
In which regard God calls this his Heritage a Speckled Bird Jer. 12.9.
; a Peacock says Hierom, inconstant, made up of varieties of Idolatrous
colors and Ceremonies.

This levity of Spirit is the root of all mischief; it scatters our thoughts in
the Service of God, it is the cause of all revolts and Apostacies from him, it
makes us unfit to receive the communications of God; whatsoever we hear is like
words writ in sand, ruffled out by the next gale; whatsoever is put into us is
like precious liquor in a palsy hand soon spilt: It breeds distrust of God,
when we have an uncertain judgment of him, we are not like to confide in him:
an uncertain judgment will be followed with a distrustful heart. In fine, where
it is prevalent, it is a certain sign of ungodliness; to be driven with the
wind like chafe, and to be ungodly is all one, in the judgment of the Holy
Ghost, Psalm. 1.4. the ungodly are like the chaff which the wind drives away,
which signifies not their destruction, but their disposition, for their
destruction is inferred from it, ver. 5. Therefore the ungodly shall not stand
in judgment.

How contrary is this to the unchangeable God, who is always the same, and
would have us the same, in our religious Promises and Resolutions for good?

4. If God be immutable, it is sad news to those that are resolved in
wickedness, or careless of returning to that duty he requires. Sinners must not
expect, that God will alter his will, make a breach upon his nature, and
violate his own Word to gratify their lusts: No, it is not reasonable God
should dishonor himself to secure them, and cease to be God, that they may
continue to be wicked, by changing his own nature, that they may be unchanged
in their vanity. God is the same, goodness is as amiable in his sight, and Sin
as abominable in his eyes now, as it was at the beginning of the world: Being
the same God, he is the same Enemy to the Wicked as the same Friend to the
Righteous; He is the same in Knowledge, and cannot forget sinful acts; He is
the same in Will, and cannot approve of unrighteous Practices: Goodness cannot
but be always the Object of his Love, and Wickedness cannot but be always the
Object of his Hatred: And as his aversion to Sin is always the same, so as he
has been in his Judgments upon Sinners, the same he will be still; for the
same perfection of Immutability belongs to his Justice for the punishment of
Sin, as to his Holiness for his disaffection to Sin. Though the Covenant of
Works was changeable by the crime of man violating it; yet it was unchangeable
in regard of Gods justice vindicating it, which is inflexible in the punishment
of the breaches of his Law. The Law had a preceptive part, and a minatory part;
When man changed the observation of the Precept, the righteous nature of God
could not null the execution of the threatening: He could not upon the account
of this perfection neglect his just word and countenance the unrighteous
transgression. Tho there were no more rational Creatures in being but Adam and
Eve, yet God subjected them to that death he had assured them of: and from this
immutability of his Will, arises the necessity of the suffering of the Son of
God, for the relief of the apostate Creature. His Will in the second Covenant
is as unc^a^^eable, as that in the first, only repentance is settled as the
condition of the second, which was not indulged in the first; and without
repentance the sinner must i^^vo^^bly p^rish or God must change his nature:
There must be a change in man, there can be n^^^e in God; his bow is bent his,
arrows are ready, if the wicked do not turn. Psalm. 7.11.
There is not an Atheist, an hypocrite, a profane person, that ever was upon
the Earth, but Gods Soul abhorred him as such, and the like he will abhor for
ever: While any therefore continue so, they may sooner expect the Heavens
should roll as they please, the Sun stand still at their order, the Stars
change their course at their beck, than that God should change his nature,
which is opposite to profaneness and vanity: Who has hardened himself against
him and has prospered? Job 9.4.


Use 2. Of comfort.

The immutability of a good God is a strong ground of consolation. Subjects
wish a good Prince to live for ever, as being loath to change him; but care not
how soon they are rid of an Oppressor. This unchangeableness of Gods Will,
shows him as ready to accept any that come to him as ever he was; so that we
may with confidence make our addresses to him, since he cannot change his
affections to goodness. The fear of change in a friend hinders a full reliance
upon him; An assurance of stability encourages hope and confidence. This
attribute is the strongest Prop for faith in all our addresses; it is not a
single perfection, but the glory of all those, that belong to his nature; for
he is unchangeable in his love, Jer. 31.3. in his truth, Psalm. 117.2. The more
solemn Revelation of himself in this name Jehovah, which signifies chiefly his
Eternity and immutability, was to support the Israelites faith, in expectation
of a deliverance from Egypt, that he had not retracted his purpose, and his
promise made to Abraham for giving Canaan to his posterity. Exodus 3.14, 15, 16,
17.
Herein is the basis and strength of all his promises; therefore says the
Psalmist, those that know thy name, will put their trust in thee; Psalm. 9.10.
Those that are Spiritually acquainted with thy name Jehovah, and have a true
sense of it upon their hearts, will put their trust in thee. His goodness could
not be distrusted, if his unchangeableness were well apprehended and
considered: All distrust would fly before it as darkness before the Sun; it
only gets advantage of us, when we are not well grounded in his name; and if
ever we trusted God, we have the same reason to trust him for ever. Isa. 26.4.
Trust in the Lord for ever; for in the Lord Jehovah is everlasting strength, or
as it is in the Hebrew, a Rock of Ages; that is, perpetually unchangeable. We
find the traces of Gods immutability in the Creatures; he has by his peremptory
decree set bounds to the Sea, hitherto shall thou come but no further, and here
shall thy proud waves be stayed. Job. 38.11.
Do we fear the Sea overflowing us in this Island? No, because of his fixed
decree: And is not his promise in his Word, as unchangeable as his Word
concerning inanimate things as good a ground to rest upon?

1. The Covenant stands unchangeable. Mutable Creatures break their Leagues and
Covenants, and snap them asunder like Sampsons Cords, when they are not
accommodated to their interests. But an unchangeable God keeps his; the
Mountains shall depart and the hills be removed, but my kindness shall not
depart from thee, nor shall the Covenant of my peace be removed. Isa. 54.10.
The Heaven and Earth shall sooner fall asunder, and the strongest and firmest
parts of the Creation crumble to dust sooner than one Iota of my Covenant shall
fail. It depends upon the unchangeableness of his Will and the unchangeableness
of his word, and therefore is called the immutability of his Counsel, Heb.
6.17. It Is the fruit of the everlasting purpose of God; whence the Apostle links
purpose and grace together. 2 Timothy 1.9.
A Covenant with a Nation may be changeable, because it may not be built upon
the Eternal purpose of God, to put his fear in the heart; but with respect to
the Creatures obedience. Thus God chose Jerusalem, as the place wherein he
would dwell for ever, Psalm. 132.14.
yet he threatens to depart from them, when they had broken Covenant with him,
and the glory of the Lord went up from the midst of the City to the Mountain on
the east side. Ezekiel. 11.33.
The Covenant of grace does not run I will be your God, if you will be my
people: But I will be their God, and they shall be my people. Hos. 2.19. etc. I
will betroth thee to me for ever, I will say thou art my people, and they shall
say, thou art my God. His everlasting purpose, is to write his Laws in the
hearts of the elect. He puts a condition to his Covenant of Grace, the
condition of faith, and he resolves to work that condition in the hearts of the
Elect; and therefore believers have two immutable pillars for their support,
stronger than those erected by Solomon at the porch of the Temple, 1 Kings
7.21. called Jakin and Boaz, to note the firmness of that building dedicated to
God; these are Election or the standing Counsel of God, and the Covenant of
grace: He will not revoke the Covenant and blot the names of his elect out of
the book of life.

2. Perseverance is ascertained. It consists not with the Majesty of God to
call a person effectually to himself to day, to make him sit for his Eternal
love, to give him faith, and take away that faith to morrow; his effectual call
is the the fruit of his Eternal Election, and that Counsel has no other
foundation, but his constant and unchangeable Will; a foundation that stands
sure, and therefore called the foundation of God, and not of the Creature; the
foundation of God stands sure, the Lord knows who are his. 2 Timothy 2.19.
It Is not founded upon our own natural strength, it may be then subject to
change, as all the products of nature are: The fallen Angels had Created Grace
in their innocence, but lost it by their fall. Turretin Ser. p. 322.
Were this the foundation of the Creature, it might soon be shaken; since man
after his revolt can ascribe nothing constant to himself, but his own
inconstancy: But the foundation is not in the infirmity of nature, but the
strength of grace, and of the grace of God who is immutable, who wants not
virtue to be able nor kindness to be willing to preserve his own foundation. To
what purpose does our Savior tell his Disciples, their names were written in
Heaven, Luke 10.20.
but to mark the infallible certainty of their Salvation, by an opposition to
those things which perish and have their names written in the Earth; Jer. 17.23.
or upon the sand, where they may be defaced? And why should Christ order his
Disciples to rejoice, that their names were written in Heaven, if God were
changeable to blot them out again? or why should the Apostle assure us, that
tho God had rejected the greatest part of the Jews, he had not therefore
rejected his people elected according to his purpose and immutable Counsel;
because there are none of the elect of God but will come to Salvation? For
says he, the Election has obtained it; Romans 11.7.
that is, all those that are of the Election have obtained it, and the others
are hardened: Where the Seal of Sanctification is stamped, it is a testimony of
Gods Election, and that foundation shall stand sure. The foundation of the Lord
stands sure having this Seal, the Lord knows who are his, that is the
foundation, the naming the name of Christ, or believing in Christ, and
departing from iniquity is the Seal. Cocceius.
As it is impossible, when God calls those things that are not, but that they
should spring up into being and appear before him: So it is impossible, but
that the seed of God by his Eternal purpose, should be brought to a Spiritual
life; and that calling cannot be retracted; for that gift and calling is
without repentance. Romans 11.29.
And when repentance is removed from God in regard of some works, the
immutability of those works is declared: And the reason of that immutability is
their pure dependence on the Eternal favor and unchangeable grace of God, Ephesians.
1.9, 11.
[purpos'd in himself] and not upon the mutability of the Creature. Hence their
happiness is not as Patents among men, quam diu been se gesserint, so long as
they behave themselves well, but they have a promise, that they shall behave
themselves so as never wholly to depart from God, Jer. 32.40. I will make an
everlasting Covenant with them, that I will not turn away from them to do them
good, but I will put my fear in their hearts, that they shall not depart from
me. God will not turn from them, to do them good, and promises that they shall
not turn from him for ever or forsake him: And the bottom of it is the
everlasting Covenant, and therefore believing and sealing, for security, are
linkt together. Ephesians. 1.13. And When God does inwardly teach us his Law, he puts
in a Will not depart from it, Psalm 119.102. I have not departed from thy
Judgments; what is the reason? For thou have taught me.

3. By this, Eternal Happiness is ensured. This is the Inference made from the
Eternity and Unchangeableness of God in the verse following the Text, verse 28.
The Children of thy Servants shall continue, and their Seed shall be
established before thee; This is the sole conclusion drawn from those
Perfections of God solemnly asserted before. The Children which the Prophets
and Apostles have begotten to thee, shall be totally delivered from the
relics of their Apostasy and the punishment due to them, and rendered
partakers of Immortality with thee, as Sons to dwell in their Fathers house for
ever. The Spirit begins a spiritual Life here, to fit for an immutable Life in
Glory hereafter; where Believers shall be placed upon a Throne that cannot be
shaken, and possess a Crown that shall not be taken off their heads for ever.

3. Use. Of Exhortation.

1. Let a sense of the changeableness and uncertainty of all other things
beside God, be upon us. There are as many changes as there are figures in the
world. The whole fashion of the world is a transient thing; every man may say
as Job, Job. 10.17.
Changes and War are against me. Lot chose the Plain of Sodom, because it was
the richer Soil; He was but a little time there before he was taken Prisoner,
and his substance made the Spoil of his Enemy; That is again restored; but a
while after, Fire from Heaven devours his Wealth, though his Person was secured
from the Judgment by a special Providence. We burn with a desire to settle our
selves; but mistake the way, and build Castles in the Air, which vanish like
bubbles of Soap in water.

And therefore,

1. Let not our thoughts dwell much upon them. Do but consider those Souls that
are in the possession of an unchangeable God, that behold his never fading
Glory! Would it not be a kind of Hell to them, to have their thoughts starting
out to these things, or find any desire in themselves to the changeable trifles
of the Earth? Nay, have we not reason to think, that they cover their faces
with shame, that ever they should have such a weakness of Spirit when they were
here below, as to spend more thoughts upon them than were necessary for this
present Life; much more that they should at any time value and court them above
an unchangeable Good? Do they not disdain themselves that they should ever
debase the immutable perfections of God, as to have neglecting thoughts of him
at any time, for the entertainment of such a mean and inconstant Rival?

2. Much less should we trust in them or rejoice in them. The best things are
mutable, and things of such a Nature are not fit Objects of confidence. Trust
not in Riches, they have their wanes as well as increases; they rise sometimes
like a Torrent and flow in upon men, but resemble also a Torrent in as sudden
a fall and departure, and leave nothing but slime behind them. Trust not in
Honor, all the Honor and Applause in the World, is no better than an
Inheritance of Wind, which the Pilot is not sure of, but shifts from one corner
to another, and stands not perpetually in the same point of the Heavens. How in
a few Ages did the house of David a great Monarch, and a man after Gods own
heart, descend to a mean condition, and all the glory of that house shut up in
the stock of a Carpenter? David's Sheep-hook was turned into a Scepter, and the
Scepter by the same hand of Providence turned into a Hatchet in Joseph his
Descendent.

Rejoice not immoderately in wisdom; That and Learning languish with Age. A
wound in the head may impair that which is the Glory of a Man. If an Organ be
out of frame, Folly may succeed, and all a man's Prudence be wound up in an
irrecoverable Dotage. Nebuchadnezzar was no Fool, yet by a sudden hand of God
he became not only a Fool or a mad Man, but a kind of Brute. Rejoice not in
strength; that decays, and a mighty Man may live to see his strong Arm
withered, and a Grass-hopper to become a Burden. Eccles. 12.5.
The strong men shall bow themselves, and the Grinders shall cease because they
are few. V. 3.
Nor rejoice in Children; they are like Birds upon a Tree, that make a little
chirping music, and presently fall into the Fowlers Net. Little did Job expect
such sad news as the loss of all his Progeny at a blow, when the Messenger
knocked at his Gate: And such changes happen oftentimes, when our expectations
of comfort and a contentment in them are at the highest. How often does a
string crack when the Musician has wound it up to a just height for a Tune,
and all his pains and delight marred in a Moment? Nay, all these things change
while we are using them, like Ice that melts between our fingers, and Flowers
that wither while we are smelling to them: The Apostle gave them a good title,
when he called them uncertain riches, and thought it a strong argument to
dissuade them from trusting in them. 1 Timothy 6.17.
The wealth of the Merchant depends upon the Winds and Waves; and the revenue
of the Husbandman upon the Clouds; and since they depend upon those things
which are used to express the most changeableness, they can be no fit Object
for trust. Besides, God sometimes kindles a Fire under all a man's Glory, which
does insensibly consume it Isa. 10.16.
; and while we have them, the fear of losing them renders us not very happy in
the fruition of them; we can scarce tell whether they are contentments or no,
because sorrow follows them so close at the heels. It Is not an unnecessary
exhortation for good men; the best men have been apt to place too much trust in
them. David thought himself immutable in his Prosperity; and such thoughts
could not be without some immoderate outlets of the heart to them, and
confidences in them: And Job promised himself to dye in his Nest, and multiply
his days as the Sand without any interruption Job. 29.18, 19. etc.
; but he was mistaken and disappointed.

Let me add this; trust not in men who are as inconstant as any thing else, and
often change their most ardent affections into implacable hatred: And though
their affections may not be changed, their Power to help you may. Hamans
Friends that depended on him one day, were crest-fallen the next, when their
Patron was to exchange his Chariot of State for an ignominious Gallows.

3. Prefer an immutable God before mutable Creatures. Is it not a horrible
thing to see what we are, and what we possess, daily crumbling to dust, and in
a continual flux from us; and not seek out something that is permanent, and
always abides the same, for our portion? In God, or Wisdom which is Christ,
there is substance, Pro. 8.21.
in which respect he is opposed to all the things in the world, that are but
shadows, that are shorter or longer according to the motion of the Sun; mutable
also, by every little body that intervenes. God is subject to no decay within,
to no force without; nothing in his own nature can change him from what he is,
and there is no Power above can hinder him from being what he will to the Soul:
He is an Ocean of all Perfection; He wants nothing without himself to render
him blessed, which may allure him to a change: His Creatures can want nothing
out of him to make them happy, whereby they may be enticed to prefer any thing
before him. If we enjoy other things, it is by Gods donation, who can as well
withdraw them as bestow them; and it is but a reasonable as well as a necessary
thing, to endeavor the enjoyment of the immutable Benefactor, rather than his
revocable Gifts.

If the Creatures had a sufficient virtue in themselves to ravish our thoughts
and engross our Souls; yet when we take a prospect of a fixed and unchangeable
Being, what beauty, what strength have any of those things to vie with him? How
can they bear up and maintain their interest against a lively thought and sense
of God? All the Glory of them would fly before him like that of the Stars
before the Sun: They were once nothing, they may be nothing again; as their own
nature brought them not out of nothing, so their Nature secures them not from
being reduced to nothing. What an unhappiness is it, to have our affections set
upon that which retains something of its non esse with its esse, its not being
with its being; that lives indeed, but in a continual Flux, and may lose that
pleasureableness to morrow which charms us to day?

2. This Doctrine will teach us Patience under such Providence as declare his
unchangeable Will. The rectitude of our Wills consists in conformity to the
Divine, as discovered in his Words and manifested in his Providence, which are
the effluxes of his immutable Will. The time of trial is appointed by his
immutable Will Dan. 1
; it is not in the Power of the Sufferer's Will to shorten it, nor in the Power
of the Enemies Will to lengthen it. Whatsoever does happen, has been decreed
by God, (Eccles. 6.10. That which has been is named already) therefore to
murmur or be discontented, is to contend with God, who is mightier than we to
maintain his own purposes. God does act all things conveniently for that
immutable end intended by himself, and according to the reason of his own
Divine Will, in the true point of time most proper for it and for us, not too
soon or too slow, because he is unchangeable in Knowledge and Wisdom. God does
not act any thing barely by an immutable Will, but by an immutable Wisdom, and
an unchangeable Rule of Goodness; and therefore we should not only acquiesce in
what he works, but have a complacency in it; and by having our Wills thus
knitting themselves with the immutable Will of God, we attain some degree of
likeness to him in his own Unchangeableness; When therefore God has manifested
his Will in opening his Decree to the world by his work of Providence, we must
cease all disputes against it, and with Aaron hold our peace, though the
affliction be very smart, Rev. 10.3.
All Flesh must be silent before God Zach. 2.13.
; For whatsoever is his Counsel, shall stand and cannot be recalled; all
struggling against it, is like a brittle Glass contending with a Rock; For if
he cut off and shut up, or gather together, then who can hinder him? Job.
11.10. Nothing can help us, if he has determined to afflict us; as nothing can
hurt us, if he has determined to secure us. The more clearly God has
evidenced this or that to be his Will, the more sinful is our struggling
against it. Pharaoh's sin was the greater in keeping Israel, by how much the
more Gods Miracles had been Demonstrations of his settled Will to deliver them.
Let nothing snatch our hearts to a contradiction to him, but let us fear and
give Glory to him, when the hour of Judgment which he has appointed is come
Revel. 14.7.
; that is, comply with the unchangeable will of his Precept, the more he
declares the immutable will of his Providence: We must not think, God must
disgrace his Nature and change his Proceedings for us: Better the Creature
should suffer, than God be impaired in any of his Perfections. If God changed
his Purpose, he would change his Nature. Patience is the way to perform the
immutable Will of God, and a means to attain a gracious Immutability for our
selves by receiving the Promise. Heb. 10.36. Ye have need of Patience, that
after ye have done the Will of God, ye might receive the Promise.

3. This Doctrine will teach us to imitate God in this perfection by striving
to be immovable in goodness. God never goes back from himself, he finds
nothing better than himself for which he should change; and can we find any
thing better than God, to allure our hearts to a change from him? The Sun never
declines from the Ecliptic line, nor should we from the paths of Holiness. A
steadfast obedience is encouraged by an unchangeable God to reward it, 1 Cor.
15.58. Be steadfast and immovable, always abounding in the work of the Lord,
knowing that your labor shall not be in vain in the Lord. Unstedfastness is
the note of an Hypocrite, Psalm. 78.37. stedfastness in that which is good, is
the mark of a Saint, it is the Character of a righteous person to keep the
truth, Isa. 26.2. And it is as positively said, that he that abides not in the
Doctrine of Christ, has not God, 2 Epist. John 9. but he that does, has both
the Father and the Son. So much of uncertainty, so much of nature; so much of
firmness in duty, so much of Grace. We can never honor God unless we finish
his work; as Christ did not glorify God but in finishing the work God gave him
to do. John 17.4.
The nearer the world comes to an end, the more is Gods immutability seen in
his promises and predictions, and the more must our unchangeableness be seen in
our obedience, Heb. 10.23, 25. Let us hold fast the profession of our faith
without wavering and so much the more as you see the day approaching. The
Christian Jews were to be the more tenacious of their faith, the nearer they
saw the day approaching, the day of Jerusalems destruction prophesied of by
Daniel, Dan. 9.26.
which accomplishment must be a great argument to establish the Christian Jews
in the profession of Christ to be the Messiah; because the destruction of the
City was not to be, before the cutting off the Messiah. Let us be therefore
constant in our profession and service of God, and not suffer our selves to be
driven from him by the ill usage, or flattered from him by the Caresses of the
world.

1. It Is reasonable. If God be unchangeable in doing us good, it is reason we
should be unchangeable in doing him service: If he assure us that he is our
God, our I am, he would also that we should be his people. His we are. If he
declare himself constant in his promises, he expects we should be so in our
obedience: As a spouse, we should be unchangeably faithful to him as a Husband:
As subjects, have an unchangeable allegiance to him as our Prince. He would not
have us faithful to him for an hour or a day, but to the death; Rev. 2.10.
And it is reason we should be his; and if we be his Children, imitate him in
his constancy of his holy purposes.

2. It Is our glory and interest. To be a reed shaken with every wind is no
commendation among men, and it is less a ground of praise with God. It was Jobs
glory, that he held fast his integrity; Job 1.22.
In all this Job sinned not; In all this, which whole Cities and Kingdoms would
have thought ground enough of high exclamations against God: And also against
the temptation of his Wife, he retained his integrity, Job. 2.9. Do thou
still retain thy integrity? The Devil, who by Gods permission stripped him of his
goods and health, yet could not strip him of his grace. As a Traveller, when
the wind and snow beats in his face, wraps his cloak more closely about him to
preserve that and himself. Better we had never made profession, than afterward
to abandon it; such a withering profession serves for no other use than to
aggravate the crime, if any of us fly like a coward or revolt like a Traitor:
What profit will it be to a Soldier, if he has withstood many assaults and
turn his back at last? If we would have God Crown us with an immutable glory,
we must Crown our beginnings with a happy perseverance, Rev. 2.10. Be faithful
to the Death and I will give thee a Crown of life: Not as tho this were the
cause to merit it, but a necessary condition to possess it: Constancy in good
is accompanied with an immutability of Glory.

3. By an unchangeable disposition to good we should begin the happiness of
Heaven upon Earth. This is the perfection of blessed Spirits, those that are
nearest to God as Angels and glorified Souls, they are immutable: Not indeed by
nature, but by grace; yet not only by a necessity of grace, but a liberty of
Will: Grace will not let them change; and that grace does animate their Wills
that they would not change; an immutable God fills their understandings and
affections and gives satisfaction to their desires. The Saints when they were
below, tried other things and found them deficient: But now they are so fully
satisfied with the beatifick vision, that if Satan should have entrance among
the Angels and Sons of God, it is not likely he should have any influence upon
them; he could not present to their understandings any thing, that could either
at the first glance or upon a deliberate view be preferrable to what they enjoy
and are fixed in.

Well then let us be immovable in the Knowledge and Love of God. It Is the
delight of God to see his Creatures resemble him in what they are able. Let not
our Affections to him be as Jonah's Goard, growing up in one Night and
withering the next. Let us not only fight a good Fight, but do so till we have
finished our course, and imitate God in an unchangeableness of holy purposes;
and to that purpose, examine our selves daily what fixedness we have arrived
unto; And to prevent any temptation to a revolt, let us often possess our minds
with thoughts of the immutability of Gods Nature and Will, which like Fire
under Water, will keep a good matter boiling up in us, and make it both retain
and increase its heat.

4. Let this Doctrine teach us to have recourse to God, and aim at a near
conjunction with him. When our Spirits begin to flag, and a cold aguish temper
is drawing upon us; let us go to him, who can only fix our hearts, and furnish
us with a Ballast to render them steadfast. As he is only immutable in his
Nature, so he is the only Principle of Immutability as well as Being in the
Creature. Without his Grace, we shall be as changeable in our appearances as a
Chamelion, and in our turnings as the Wind. When Peter trusted in himself, he
changed to the worse: It was his Masters recourse to God for him that preserved
in him a reducing Principle, which changed him again for the better and fixed
him in it. Luke 22.32.


It will be our Interest to be in conjunction with him, that moves not about
with the Heavens, nor is turned by the force of Nature, nor changed by the
accidents in the world; but sits in the Heavens, moving all things by his
powerful Arm, according to his infinite Skill: While we have him for our God,
we have his Immutability as well as any other Perfection of his Nature for our
advantage; The nearer we come to him, the more stability we shall have in our
selves; the further from him, the more liable to change. The Line that is
nearest to the place where it is first fixed, is least subject to motion; the
further it is stretched from it, the weaker it is, and more liable to be
shaken. Let us also affect those things which are nearest to him in this
perfection; the righteousness of Christ that shall never wear out, and the
graces of the Spirit that shall never burn out; By this means, what God is
infinitely by Nature, we shall come t^ be finitely immutable by Grace, as much
as the capacity of a Creature can contain.

GODS OMNIPRESENCE.
Jeremiah 23.24. Can any hide himself in secret places, that I shall not see
him, says the Lord? Do not I fill Heaven and Earth, says the Lord?


THE occasion of this Discourse begins verse. 16. where God admonishes the
people, not to hearken to the words of the false Prophets which spoke a Vision
of their own heart, and not out of the mouth of the Lord. They made the people
vain by their Insinuations of Peace, when God had proclaimed War and Calamity;
and uttered the Dreams of their Phansies, and not the Visions of the Lord; and
so turned the people from the expectation of the evil day which God had
threatened, ver. 17. They say still unto them, that despise me, The Lord has
said, Ye shall have peace: and they say unto every one that walks after the
Imagination of his own heart, No evil shall come upon you. And they invalidate
the Prophesies of those, whom God had sent, v. 18. Who has stood in the
Counsel of the Lord, and has perceived and heard his word? Who has marked his
word, and heard it? Who has stood in the Counsel of the Lord? Are they
acquainted with the Secrets of God more than we? Who have the word of the Lord,
if we have not? Or, it may be a continuation of Gods Admonition: Believe not
those Prophets; for who of them have been acquainted with the Secrets of God?
or by what means should they learn his Counsel? No, assure your selves, a
whirlwind of the Lord is gone forth in fury, even a grievous whirlwind, it
shall fall grievously upon the head of the wicked. v. 19. A whirlwind shall
come from Babylon, it is just at the door, and shall not be blown over, it shall
fall with a witness upon the wicked people, and the deceiving Prophets, and
sweep them together into Captivity. For v. 20. The anger of the Lord shall not
return, until he have executed, and till he have performed the thoughts of his
heart. My fury shall not be a childish fury that quickly languisheth, but shall
accomplish whatsoever I threaten; and burn so hot, as not to be cool, till I
have satisfied my vengeance; in the latter days ye shall consider it perfectly,
v. 20. when the storm shall beat upon you, you shall then know, that the
Calamities shall answer the words you have heard. When the Conqueror shall
waste your Grounds, demolish your Houses, and manacle your hands, then shall
you consider it, and have the wishes of Fools, that you had had your eyes in
your heads before; you shall then know the falsness of your Guides, and the
truth of may Prophets, and discern who stood in the Counsel of the Lord, and
subscribe to the Messages, I have sent you.

Some understand this not only of the Babylonish Captivity, but refer it to the
time of Christ, and the false Doctrine of men's own Righteousness in opposition
to the Righteousness of God; understanding this Verse to be partly a threatening
of Wrath, which shall end in an advantage to the Jews, who shall in the latter
time consider the falsness of their Notions about a legal Righteousness, and so
make it a promise; they shall then know the intent of the Scripture, and in the
latter days, the latter end of the World, when time shall be near the rouling
up, they shall reflect upon themselves; they shall look upon him whom they have
pierced; and till these latter days, they shall be hardened, and believe nothing
of Evangelical truths.

Now God denies that he sent those Prophets, v. 21. I have not sent these
Prophets, yet they ran; I have not spoken to them, yet they prophesyed. They
have intruded themselves without a Commission from me, whatsoever their Brags
are. The reason to prove it, is v. 22. If they had stood in my Counsel, if they
had been instructed, and inspired by me, they would have caused my people to
hear my words; they would have regulated themselves according to my word, and
have turned them from their evil way; i. e. endeavored to shake down their
false confidences of peace, and make them sensible of their false Notions of
me, and my ways. Now because those false Prophets could not be so impudent as
to boast, that they prophesied in the Name of God, when they had not Commission
from him, unless they had some secret Sentiment, that they and their intentions
were hid from the Knowledge and Eye of God; He adds, v. 23. Am I a God at hand,
and not a God a far off? Can any hide himself in secret places, that I shall
not see him? Have I not the power of seeing and knowing what they do, what they
design, what they think? Why should I not have such a power, since I fill
Heaven and Earth by my essence? Am I a God at hand, and not a God afar off? He
excludes here the Doctrine of those that excluded the Providence of God from
extending its self to the inferior things of the earth; which error was
ancient, as ancient as the time of Job, as appears by their opinion, That Gods
eyes were hood-winkt and mufled by the thickness of the Clouds, and could not
pierce through their dark and dense body: Job. 22.14.
Thick clouds are a covering to him, that he sees not.

Munster, Vatablus, Castalio Oecolamp.
Some refer it to time. Do you imagine me a God new framed like your Idols,
beginning a little time ago, and not existing before the foundation of the
World; yea, from Eternity? a God afar off, further than your acutest
understandings can reach? I am of a longer standing, and you ought to know my
Majesty. But it rather refers to place, than time. Do you think I do not behold
every thing in the earth, as well as in Heaven? Am I locked up within the walls
of my Palace, and cannot peep out to behold the things done in the World? or
that am I so linkt to pleasure in the place of my Glory, as earthly Kings are
in their Courts, that I have no mind, or leisure to take notice of the
carriages of men upon earth? God does not say, He was a far off, but only gives
an account of the inward thoughts of their minds, or at least, of the Language
expressed by their Actions.

The Interrogation carries in it a strong Affirmation, and assures us more of
Gods care, and the folly of men in not considering it. Am I a God at hand, and
not a God afar off? Can any hide himself in secret places? Heb. in Hiddenesses,
in the deepest Cells: What? are you besotted by your base Lusts, that you think
me a God careless, ignorant, blind, that I can see nothing, but as a purblind
man, what is very near my eye? Are you so out of your wits, that you imagine
you can deceive me? Do not all your behaviors speak such a Sentiment to lie
secret in your heart, though not formed into a full conception, yet testified
by your Actions? No, you are much mistaken, it is impossible but that I should
see and know all things, since I am present with all things, and am not at a
greater distance from the things on earth, than from the the things in Heaven;
for I fill all that vast Fabric which is divided into those two parts of
Heaven and Earth; and he that has such an infinite essence, cannot be distant,
cannot be ignorant, nothing can be far from his eyes, since every thing is so
near to his Essence.

So that it is an elegant Expression of the Omniscience of God, and a strong
Argument for it. He asserts, first the Universality of his Knowledge; but lest
they should mistake, and confine his presence only to Heaven; he adds, That he
fills Heaven and Earth. I do not see things so, as if I were in one place, and
the things seen in another, as it is with man; but whatsoever I see, I see not
without my self, because every corner of Heaven and Earth is filled by me. He
that fills all, must needs see and know all.

And indeed, men that question the knowledge of God, would be more convinced by
the Doctrine of his immediate presence with them. And this seems to be the
design and manner of Arguing in this place. Nothing is remote from my knowledge,
because nothing is distant from my presence.

I fill Heaven and Earth: he does not say, I am in Heaven and Earth, but I fill
Heaven and Earth, i. e. Tum persp^^^cia, tum eff^cacia, Gro^.
say some, with my Knowledge; others, with my Authority, or my Power. But,

1. The word filling cannot properly be referred to the act of understanding
and will. A presence by knowledge is to be granted, but to say such a presence
fills a a place, is an improper Speech. Knowledge is not enough to constitute a
presence.

A man at London knows there is such a City as Paris, and knows many things in
it; can he be concluded therefore to be present in Paris, or fill any place
there, or be present with the things he knows there? If I know any thing to be
distant from me, how can it be present with me? For by knowing it to be
distant, I know it not to be present. Besides, filling Heaven and Earth, is
distinguished here from Knowing or Seeing. His presence is rendered as an
Argument to prove his Knowledge. Now a Proposition, and the proof of that
Proposition, are distinct, and not the same.

It cannot be imagined, that God should prove idem per idem, as we say; for
what would be the import of the Speech then? I know all things, I see all
things, because I know and see all things Suarez.
. The Holy Ghost here accommodates himself to the Capacity of men; because we
know that a man sees and knows that which is done, where he is corporally
present; so he proves, that God knows all things that are done in the most
secret Caverns of the Heart, because he is every where in Heaven and Earth, as
light is every where in the air, and air every where in the World. Hence the
Schools use the term repletive for the presence of God.

2. Nor by filling of Heaven and Earth, is meant his Authority and Power. It
would be improperly said of a King, that in regard of the Government of his
Kingdom, is every where by his Authority, that he fills all the Cities and
Countries of his Dominions. [ I, do not I fill Amirald. de Trinitate. p. 57.
?] That [I] notes the Essence of God, as distinguished according to our
capacity, from the perfections pertaining to his Essence; and is in reason
better referred to the substance of God, than to those things we conceive as
Attributes in him. Besides, were it meant only of his Authority or Power, the
Argument would not run well. I see all things, because my Authority and Power
fills Heaven and Earth. Power does not always rightly infer knowledge, no, not
in a rational agent. Many things in a Kingdom are done by the Authority of the
King, that never arrive to the Knowledge of the King. Many things in us are done
by the Power of our souls, which yet we have not a distinct Knowledge of in our
understandings. There are many motions in sleep, by the virtue of the soul
informing the body, that we have not so much as a simple knowledge of in our
minds. Knowledge is not rightly inferred from power, or power from knowledge.

By filling Heaven and Earth is meant therefore, a filling it with his Essence.
No place can be imagined, that is deprived of the presence of God; and
therefore when the Scripture any where speaks of the presence of God, it joins
Heaven and Earth together: He so fills them, that there is no place without
him. We do not say a vessel is full, so long as there is any space to contain
more. Not a part of Heaven, nor a part of Earth, but the whole Heaven, the
whole Earth at one and the same time. If he were only in one part of Heaven, or
one part of Earth; nay, if there were any part of Heaven, or any part of Earth
void of him, he could not be said to fill them. I fill Heaven and Earth; not a
part of me fills one place, and another part of me fills another; but I, God,
fill Heaven and Earth; I am whole God filling the Heaven; and whole God,
filling the Earth. I fill Heaven, and yet fill Earth; I fill Earth, and yet
fill Heaven, and fill Heaven and Earth at one and the same time. God fills his
own works, a Heathen Philosopher says Seneca de Benefic. lib. 4. cap. 8. Ipse
opus suum implet.
.

Here is then a Description of Gods Presence.

1. By Power, Am I not a God afar off? a God in the extension of his Arm.

2. By Knowledge; Shall I not see them?

3. By Essence; as an undeniable ground for inferring the two former: I fill
Heaven and Earth.

Doct. God is Essentially every where present in Heaven and Earth.

If God be, he must be somewhere; that which is no where, is nothing. Since God
is, he is in the world; not in one part of it; for then he were circumscribed
by it: if in the world, and only there, though it be a great space, he were
also limited. Chrysostom.
Some therefore said, God was every where, and no where. No where, i. e. not
bounded by any place, nor receiving from any place any thing for his
preservation or sustainment. He is every where, because no creature either Body
or Spirit, can exclude the presence of his Essence; for he is not only near,
but in every thing; Acts. 17.28.
In him we live, and move, and have our being. Not absent from any thing, but
so present with them, that they live and move in him, and move more in God,
than in the air or earth wherein they are; nearer to us than our flesh to our
bones, than the air to our breath; he cannot be far from them that live, and
have every motion in him. The Apostle does not say, By him, but in him, to show
the inwardness of his Presence.

As Eternity is the perfection whereby he has neither beginning nor end;
Immutability is the perfection whereby he has neither increase, nor
diminution: so Immensity or Omnipresence is that whereby he has neither
bounds, nor limitation. As he is in all time, yet so as to be above time; so is
he in all places, yet so as to be above limitation by any place. It was a good
Expression of a Heathen to illustrate this, That God is a Sphere or Circle,
whose Center is every where, and Circumference no where. His meaning was, that
the Essence of God was indivisible; i. e. could not be divided. It cannot be
said, here and there the lines of it terminate; it is like a line drawn out in
infinite spaces, that no point can be conceived where its length and breadth
ends. The Sea is a vast mass of waters; yet to that it is said, Hitherto shall
thou go, and no further. But it cannot be said of Gods Essence, hitherto it
reaches and no further; here it is, and there it is not. It Is plain, that God
is thus immense, because he is infinite; we have Reason and Scripture to assent
to it, though we cannot conceive it. We know that God is eternal, though
Eternity is too great to be measured by the short line of a created
understanding. We cannot conceive the Vastness and Glory of the Heavens, much
less that which is so great, as to fill Heaven and Earth; yea, 1 King. 8.27.
not to be contained in the Heaven of Heavens.

Things are said to be present, or in a place.

1. Circumscriptive, as circumscribed. This belongs to things that have
quantity, as bodies that are encompassed by that place wherein they are; and a
body fills but one particular space wherein it is, and the space is
commensurate to every part of it, and every member has a distinct place. The
hand is not in the same particular space, that the foot or head is.

2. Definitive, which belongs to Angels and Spirits, which are said to be in a
point, yet so as that they cannot be said to be in another at the same time.

3. Repletive, filling all places; this belongs only to God: As he is not
measured by time, to he is not limited by place. A Body or Spirit, because
finite, fills but one space; God, because infinite, fills all, yet so as not to
be contained in them, as Wine and Water is in a Vessel. He is from the height
of the Heavens to the bottom of the Deeps, in every point of the World, and in
the whole Circle of it, yet not limited by it, but beyond it.

Now this has been acknowledged by the wisest in the world.

Some indeed had other Notions of God. The more ignorant sort of the Jews
confined him to the Temple Hierom. on Isa. 66.1.
. And God intimates, that they had such a thought when he asserts his presence
in Heaven and Earth, in opposition to the Temple they built as his House, and
the place of his Rest Hammond on Matthew. 6.7.
. And the Idolaters among them, thought their Gods might be at a distance from
them, which Elias intimates in the scoff he puts upon them 1 King. 18.17.
, Cry aloud, for he is a God, meaning Baal; either he is talking, or he is
pursuing, or he is in a journey; and they follow his advice, and cried louder,
v. 28. whereby it is evident, they looked not on it as a mock, but as a truth.
And the Syrians called the God of Israel the God of the hills, as though his
presence were fixed there, and not in the valleys 1 King. 20.23.
; and their own Gods in the Valleys, and not in the Mountains; they phansied
every God to have a particular Dominion, and presence in one place, and not in
another; and bounded the Territories of their Gods, as they did those of their
Princes. Med. Diatrib. vol. 1. p, 71, 72.
And some thought him tied to, and shut up in their Temples and Groves wherein
they worshipped him Dought Analec. excurs. 61. 113.
. Some of them thought God to be confined to Heaven, and therefore sacrificed
upon the highest Mountains, that the steam might ascend nearer Heaven, and
their Praises be heard better in those places which were nearest to the
Habitation of God. But the wiser Jews acknowledged it; and therefore called God
place (...) Grot. upon Mat. 5.16. Mares. contra Volk. lib. 1. cap. 27. p. 494
, whereby they denoted his immensity; he was not contained in any place, every
part of the World subsists by him: He was a place to himself, greater than any
thing made by him. And the wiser Heathens acknowledged it also.

Vide Minut. Fell. p. 20.
One calls God a mind passing through the universal nature of things; Another,
That he was an infinite and immense Air Plotia Enead 6. lib 5. cap 4.
; Another, That it is as natural to think God is every where, as to think that
God is: Hence they called God the Soul of the World; that as the Soul is in
every part of the Body, to quicken it, so is God in every part of the World, to
support it.

And there are some resemblances of this in the World, though no Creature can
fully resemble God in any one perfection; for then it would not be a Creature,
but God. But Air and Light are some weak resemblances of it: Air is in all the
spaces of the World, in the Pores of all Bodies, in the Bowels of the Earth,
and extends it self from the lowest Earth, to the highest Regions; and the
Heavens themselves are probably nothing else but a refined kind of Air; and
Light diffuseth it self through the whole Air, and every part of it is truly
Light, as every part of the Air is truly Air; and though they seem to be
mingled together, yet they are distinct things, and not of the same Essence; so
is the Essence of God in the whole World, not by diffusion as Air or Light; not
mixed with any Creature; but remaining distinct from the Essence of any Created
Being. Now when this has been owned by men instructed only in the School of
Nature, it is a greater shame to any acquainted with the Scripture to deny it.
For the understanding of this, there shall be some Propositions premised in
general.

1. This is Negatively to be understood. Our Knowledge of God is most by
withdrawing from him, or denying to him in our conceptions any weaknesses or
imperfections in the Creature. As the infiniteness of God, is a denial of
limitation of Being, so Immensity or Omnipresence is a denial of limitation of
place: And when we say, God is totus in every place, we must understand it
thus, That he is not every where by parts, as Bodies are, as Air and Light are;
He is every where, i. e. his Nature has no bounds, he is not tied to any
place, as the Creature is, who when he is present in one place, is absent from
another. As no place can be without God, so no place can compass and contain
him.

2. There is an influential Omnipresence of God.

1. Universal with all Creatures. He is present with all things by his
Authority, because all things are subject to him: By his power, because all
things are sustained by him: By his Knowledge, because all things are naked
before him. He is present in the World, as a King is in all parts of his
Kingdom Regally present: Providentially present with all, since his Care
extends to the meanest of his Creatures. His Power reaches all, and his
Knowledge pierces all.

As every thing in the World was Created by God, so every thing in the World is
preserved by God; and since Preservation is not wholly distinct from Creation,
it is necessary God should be present with every thing while he preserves it, as
well as present with it when he Created it. Psalm. 36.6.
Thou preservest man and Beast. Heb. 1.3.
He upholds all things by the word of his Power. There is a virtue sustaining
every Creature, that it may not fall back into that nothing from whence it was
elevated by the Power of God. All those natural Virtues we call the Principles
of Operation, are Fountains springing from his Goodness and Power; all things
are acted and managed by him, as well as preserved by him; and in this sense
God is present with all Creatures; for whatsoever acts another, is present with
that which it acts, by sending forth some virtue and influence, whereby it
acts: If free Agents do not only live, but move in him, and by him Acts 17.28.
, much more are the motions of other natural Agents, by a virtue communicated
to them, and upheld in them in the time of their acting: This vertual presence
of God, is evident to our sense, a presence we feel; his essential presence is
evident in our Reason: This influential presence may be compared to that of the
Sun, which though at so great a distance from the Earth, is present in the Air
and Earth by its Light, and within the Earth by its influence in concocting
those Metals which are in the Bowels of it, without being substantially either
of them. God is thus so intimate with every Creature, that there is not the
least particle of any Creature, but the marks of his Power and Goodness are
seen in it, and his Goodness does attend them, and is more swift in its
effluxes, than the breakings out of Light from the Sun, which yet are more
swift than can be declared; but to say he is in the World only by his Virtue,
is to acknowledge only the effects of his Power and Wisdom in the World, That
his Eye sees all, his Arm supports all, his Goodness nourishes all, but
Himself and his Essence at a distance from them Zanch.
; and so the Soul of man according to its measure would have in some kind a
more excellent manner of Presence in the body, than God according to the
Infiniteness of his Being with his Creatures; for that does not only
communicate Life to the Body, but is actually present with it, and spreads its
whole Essence through the Body and every Member of it: All grant, That God is
efficaciously in every Creek of the World; but some say he is only
substantially in Heaven.

2. Limited to such Subjects that are capacitated for this or that kind of
Presen^e. Yet it is an Omnipresence, because it is a Presence in all the
Subjects capacitated for it; thus there is a special Providential Presence of
God with some, in assisting them when he sets them on work as his Instruments
for some special Service in the World: As with Cyrus Isa. 4^.2.
, I will go before thee; and with Nebuchadnezzar, and Alexander, whom he
Protected and Directed to execute his Counsels in the World; such a presence
Judas and others Mat. 7.22.
that shall not enjoy his glorious Presence, had in the working of Miracles in
the world: In thy name we have done many wonderful works.
Besides Cajetan in Aquin Par. 1. Qu 8 Artic. 3.
as there is an effective Presence, of God with all Creatures, because he
produced them, and preserves them; so there is an objective Presence of God
with rational Creatures, because he offers himself to them, to be known and
loved by them: He is near to Wicked men in the offers of his Grace, Isa. 55.6.
call ye upon him while he is near; Besides, there is a gracious Presence of
God with his People in whom he dwells, and makes his abode, as in a Temple
Consecrated to him by the Graces of the Spirit. John 14.23.
We will come, i. e. the Father and the Son, and make our abode with him. He is
present with all by the Presence of his Divinity, but only in his Saints by a
Presence of a gracious Efficacy; he walks in the midst of the Golden
Candlesticks, and has Dignified the Congregation of his People with the Title
of Jehovah Sbammah, Ezekiel. 48.35.
The Lord is there: In Salem is his Tabernacle, and his dwelling place in Sion
Psalm. 76.2.
. As he filled the Tabernacle, so he does the Church with the Signs of his
Presence; this is not the Presence wherewith he fills Heaven and Earth. His
Spirit is not bestowed upon all, to reside in their hearts, enlighten their
minds, and bedew them with refreshing Comforts: When the Apostle speaks of Gods
being Above all, and through all; Ephesians. 4.6.
Above all in his Majesty, Through all in his Providence; he does not
appropriate that, as he does what follows, and in you all; in you all by a
special Grace; as God was specially present with Christ by the Grace of Union,
so he is specially present with his People by the Grace of Regeneration. So
there are several manifestations of his Presence; he has a Presence of Glory
in Heaven, whereby he Comforts the Saints; a Presence of Wrath in Hell, whereby
he Torments the Damned; in Heaven he is a God spreading his Beams of Light; in
Hell, a God distributing his Strokes of Justice; by the one he fills Heaven, by
the other he fills Hell; by his Providence and Essence he fills both Heaven and
Earth.

3. There is an Essential Presence of God in the World. He is not only every
where, by his Power upholding the Creatures, by his Wisdom understanding them,
but by his Essence containing them. That any thing is essentially present any
where, it has from God; God is therefore much more present every where, for he
cannot give that which he has not.

1. He is Essentially present in all places Ficin.
. It Is as reasonable to think the Essence of God to be every where, as to be
always; Immensity is as rational as Eternity; That indivisible Essence which
reaches through all times, may as well reach through all places: It Is more
excellent to be always, than to be every where; for to be always in duration is
Intrinsical; to be every where is Extrinsick; If the greater belongs to God,
why not the less? As all times are a Moment to his Eternity, so all places are
as a Point to his Essence; As he is larger than all time, so he is vaster than
all place: The Nations of the World are to him as the Dust of the Balance, or
Drop of a Bucket Isa. 40.15.
. The Nations are accounted as the small Dust; the Essence of God may well be
thought to be present every where with that which is no more than a grain of
Dust to him, and in all those Isles, which if put together, are a very little
thing in his hand: Therefore says a Learned Jew Maimonid.
, If a man were set in the highest Heavens, he would not be nearer to the
Essence of God than if he were in the Center of the Earth. Why may not the
Presence of God in the World be as noble as that of the Soul in the Body, which
is generally granted to be essentially in every part of the body of man, which
is but a little World, and animates every Member by its actual presence, though
it exerts not the same operation in every part Ficin.
? the World is less to the Creator, than the Body to the Soul; and needs more
the Presence of God, than the Body needs the presence of the Soul. That
glorious body of the Sun visits every part of the Habitable Earth in 24 hours
by its beams; which reaches the Troughs of the lowest Valleys, as well as the
Pinacles of the highest Mountains; must we not acknowledge in the Creator of
this Sun an infinite greater proportion of Presence? Is it not as easy with the
Essence of God to overspread the whole body of Heaven and Earth, as it is for
the Sun to pierce and diffuse its self through the whole Air between it and the
Earth, and send up its light also as far to the Regions above? Do we not see
something like it in Sounds and Voices? Is not the same Sound of a Trumpet, or
any other Musical Instrument, at the first breaking out of a Blast, in several
places within such a compass, at the same time? Does not every Ear that hears
it, receive alike the whole sound of it? And fragrant Odors scented in several
places at the same time, in the same manner; and the Organ proper for Smelling
takes in the same in every person within the compass of it: How far is the
noise of Thunder heard alike to every Ear, in places something distant from one
another? And do we daily find such a manner of presence in those things of so
low a concern, and not imagine a kind of Presence of God greater than all
those? Is the sound of Thunder, the Voice of God, as it is called, every where
in such a compass, and shall not the Essence of an Infinite God be much more
every where? Those that would confine the Essence of God only to Heaven, and
exclude it from the Earth, run into great inconveniences. It may be demanded,
whether he be in one part of the Heavens, or in the whole vast body of them? If
in one part of them, his Essence is bounded; if he moves from that part, he is
mutable, for he changes a place wherein he was, for another wherein he was not.
If he be always fixed in one part of the Heavens, such a notion would render
him little better than a living Statue Hornheck Soun. Part 1. p. 303.
: If he be in the whole Heaven, why cannot his Essence possess a greater space
than the whole Heavens which are so vast? How comes he to be confined within
the compass of that, since the whole Heaven compasses the Earth? If he be in
the whole Heaven, he is in places farther distant one from another, than any
part of the Earth can be from the Heavens; since the Earth is like a Center in
the midst of a Circle, it must be nearer to every part of the Circle, than some
parts of the Circle can be to one another: If therefore his Essence possesses
the whole Heavens, no reason can be rendered why he does not also possess the
Earth, since also the Earth is but a little point in comparison of the vastness
of the Heavens; If therefore he be in every part of the Heavens, why not in
every part of the Earth?

The Scripture is plain Psalm. 139.7.8, 9.
, Whither shall I go from thy Spirit? Or whither shall I fly from thy
Presence? If I ascend up to Heaven, thou art there; If I make my Bed in Hell,
behold thou art there; If I take the wings of the morning, and dwell in the
uttermost parts of the Sea, even there shall thy hand lead me, and thy right
hand shall uphold me. If he be in Heaven, Earth, Hell, Sea, he fills all places
with his Presence; his Presence is here asserted in places the most distant
from one another; all the places then between Heaven and Earth are possessed by
his Presence: It Is not meant of his Knowledge, for that the Psalmist had spoken
of before, ver. 2.3. Thou understandest my thoughts afar off, thou art
acquainted with all my ways. Besides, Thou art there, not thy wisdom or
knowledge; but Thou, thy Essence, not only thy Virtue. For having before spoken
of his Omniscience, he proves that such Knowledge could not be in God, unless he
were present in his Essence in all places, so as to be excluded from none: He
fills the depths of Hell, the extension of the Earth, and the heights of the
Heavens. When the Scripture mentions the Power of God only, it expresses it by
Hand or Arm; but when it mentions the Spirit of God, and does not intend the
Third Person in the Trinity, it signifies the Nature and Essence of God: And so
here, when he says, Whither shall I go from thy Spirit? he adds exegetically,
Whither shall I fly from thy Presence, or Heb. Face? and the Face of God in
Scripture signifies the Essence of God Exodus 33.20.23.
; Thou can not see my face, and my face shall not be seen; the effects of his
Power, Wisdom, Providence, are seen, which are his Back-parts, but not his
face: The effects of his Power and Wisdom are seen in the World, but his
Essence is invisible; and this the Psalmist elegantly expresses. Had I Wings
endued with as much quickness as the first Dawnings of the morning light, or
the first darts of any Sunbeam that spreads its self through the Hemisphere,
and passes many Miles in as short a space as I can think a Thought, I should
find thy presence in all places before me, and could not fly out of the
infinite compass of thy Essence.

2. He is Essentially present with all Creatures. If he be in all places, it
follows that he is with all Creatures in those places; as he is in Heaven, so
he is with all Angels; as he is in Hell, so is he with all Devils; as he is in
the Earth and Sea, he is with all Creatures inhabiting those Elements: As his
Essential Presence was the ground of the first Being of things by Creation, so
it is the ground of the continued Being of things by Conservation. As his
Essential Presence was the Original, so it is the support of the existence of
all the Creatures. What are all those magnificent expressions of his Creative
virtue, but Testimonies of his Essential Presence at the laying the Foundation
of the World Isa. 40.12,
? when he measured the Waters in the hollow of his hand, meted out Heaven with
the Span, and comprehended the Dust of the Earth in a Measure, and weighed the
Mountains in Scales, and the Hills in a Balance. He sets forth the Power and
Majesty of God in the Creation and Preservation of things, and every Expression
testifies his Presence with them: The Waters that were upon the face of the
Earth at first, were no more than a drop in the palm of a man's hand, which in
every part is touched by his hand. And thus he is equally present with the
blackest Devils, as well as the brightest Angels; with the lowest Dust, as well
as with the most sparkling Sun. He is equally present with the Damned and the
Blessed, as he is an Infinite Being, but not in regard of his Goodness and
Grace. He is equally present with the Good and the Bad, with the scoffing
Athenians, as well as the believing Apostles, in regard of his Essence, but not
in regard of the breathing of his Divine Virtues upon them to make them like
himself Act. 17.7.
: He is not far from every one of us; for in him we live, and move, and have
our Being: The Apostle includes all; he tells them they should seek the Lord;
the Lord that they were to seek, is God essentially considered: We are indeed
to seek the Perfections of God, that glitter in his works, but to the end that
they should direct us to the seeking of God himself in his own Nature and
Essence Amyrald. de Trinit.
: And therefore what follows, In him we live, is to be understood not of his
Power and Goodness, perfections of his Nature, distinguished according to our
manner of conception, from his Essence; but of the Essential Presence of God
with his Creatures. If he had meant it of his efficacy in preserving us, it had
not been any proof of his nearness to us. Who would go about to prove the body
or substance of the Sun to be near us because it does warm and enlighten us,
when our sense evidenceth the distance of it? We live in the beams of the Sun,
but we cannot be said to live in the Sun, which is so far distant from us. The
Expression seems to be more emphatical than to intend any less than his
Essential Presence: But we live in him not only as the efficient cause of our
Life, but as the foundation sustaining our lives and motions, as if he were
like Air, diffused round about us. And we move in him, as Austin says, as a
Sponge in the Sea, not containing him, but being contained by him: He
compasses all, is encompassed by none; he fills all, is comprehended by none.
The Creator contains the World, the World contains not the Creator: As the
hollow of the hand contains the water, the water in the hollow of the hand
contains not the hand; and therefore some have chose to say rather, That the
World is in God, it lives and moves in him, than that God is in the World: If
all things thus live and move in him, then he is present with every hing that
has Life, and Motion; and as long as the Devils and Damned have life, and
motion, and being, so long is he with them; for whatsoever lives and moves,
lives and moves in him.

But now this Essential Presence is

1. Without any mixture. I fill Heaven and Earth; not, I am mixed with Heaven
aad Earth; his Essence is not mixed with the Creatures; it remains entire in
its self. The Sponge retains the nature of a Sponge, though encompassed by the
Sea, and moving in it; and the Sea still retains its own nature. God is most
simple; his Essence therefore is not mixed with any thing. The Light of the Sun
is present with the air, but not mixed with it, it remains light, and the air
remains air; the light of the Sun is diffused through all the Hemisphere, it
pierces all transparent bodies, it seems to mix it self with all things, yet
remains unmixed and undivided; the light remains light, and the air remains
air; the air is not light though it be enlightened. Or, take this similitude;
When many Candles are lighted up in a Room, the light is all together, yet not
mixed with one another; every Candle has a particular light belonging to it,
which may be separated in a moment, by removing one Candle from another; but if
they were mixed, they could not be separated, at least so easily. God is not
formally one with the World, or with any Creature in the World by his Presence
in it: Nor can any Creature in the World, no, not the Soul of man, or an Angel,
come to be Essentially one with God, though God be Essentially present with it.

2. The Essential Presence is without any division of himself. I fill Heaven
and Earth, not part in Heaven, and part in Earth; I fill one as well as the
other: One part of his Essence is not in one place, and another part of his
Essence in another place, he would then be changeable; for that part of his
Essence which were now in this place, he might alter it to another, and place
that part of his Essence which were in another place, to this; but he is
undivided every where. As his Eternity is one indivisible point, though in our
conception we divide it into past, present and to come. So the whole World is
as a point to him, in regard of place as before was said; it is as a small Dust,
and grain of Dust: It Is impossible that one part of his Essence can be
separated from another, for he is not a Body, to have one part separable from
another. The light of the Sun cannot be cut into parts, it cannot be shut into
any place and kept there, it is entire in every place; shall not God who gives
the light that power, be much more present himself? whatsoever has parts is
finite, but God is infinite, therefore has no parts of his Essence. Besides,
if there were such a Division of his Being, he would not be the most simple and
uncompounded Being, but would be made up of various parts; he would not be a
Spirit, for parts are evidences of composition; and it could not be said that
God is here or there, but only a part of God here, and a part of God there. But
he fills Heaven and Earth, he is as much a God in the Earth beneath as in
Heaven above Deuteronomy. 4.39.
; entirely in all places, not by scraps and fragments of his Essence.

3. This Essential Presence is not by Multiplication. For that which is
infinite cannot multiply it self, or make it self more or greater than it was.

4. This Essential Presence is not by extension or diffusion. As a piece of
Gold may be beaten out to cover a large compass of ground; no, if God should
Create Millions of Worlds he would be in them all, not by stretching out his
Being, but by the Infiniteness of his Being; not by a new growth of his Being,
but by the same Essence he had from Eternity: Upon the same reasons mentioned
before, his Simplicity and Indivisibility.

5. But Totally. There is no space, not the least, wherein God is not wholly
according to his Essence, and wherein his whole Substance does not exist; not a
part of Heaven can be designed wherein the Creator is not wholly; as he is in
one part of Heaven, he is in every part of Heaven. Some kind of resemblance we
may have from the water of the Sea, which fills the great space of the World,
and is diffused through all; yet the Essence of Water is in every drop of Water
in the Sea, as much as the whole; and the same quality of Water, though it comes
short in quantity; and why shall we not allow God a nobler way of Presence
without diffusion, as is in that? Or take this resemblance, since God likens
himself to Light in the Scripture Psalm. 104.2. 1 John 1.5. God is Light, and in
him is no darkness at all.
, he covers himself with Light; A Crystal Globe hung up in the Air has
Light all about it, all within it, every part is pierced by it, wherever you
see the Crystal you see the Light; the Light in one part of the Crystal
cannot be distinguished from the Light in the other part; and the whole Essence
of Light is in every part; and shall not God be as much present with his
Creatures, as one Creature can be with another Bernard.
? God is totally every where by his own simple substance.

Proposition 4. God is present beyond the World. He is within and above all
places, though places should be infinite in number; as he was before and beyond
all Time, so he is above and beyond all place; being from Eternity before any
real time, he must also be without as well a within any real space; if God were
only confined to the World, he would be no more infinite in his Essence than
the World is in quantity; as a moment cannot be conceived from Eternity,
wherein God was not in Being, so a space cannot be conceived in the mind of
man, wherein God is not present; he is not contained in the World nor in the
Heavens. 1 Kings 8.27.
But will God indeed dwell on the Earth? Behold the Heaven of Heavens cannot
contain Thee. Solomon wonders that God should appoint a Temple to be erected to
him upon the Earth, when he is not contained in the vast Circuit of the
Heavens; his Essence is not straightened in the limits of any Created work, he is
not contained in the Heavens, i. e. in the manner that he is there; but he is
there in his Essence, and therefore cannot be contained there in his Essence.
If it should be meant only of his Power and Providence, it would conclude also
for his Essence; if his Power and Providence were infinite, his Essence must be
so too; for the infiniteness of his Essence is the ground of the infiniteness
of his Power: It can never enter into any thought, that a finite Essence can
have an infinite Power, and that an infinite Power can be without an infinite
Essence; it cannot be meant of his Providence, as if Solomon should say, the
Heaven of Heavens cannot contain thy Providence; for naming the Heaven of
Heavens, that which encircles and bounds the other parts of the World, he could
not suppose a Providence to be exercised where there was no object to exercise
it about; as no Creature is mentioned to be beyond the uttermost Heaven, which
he calls here the Heaven of Heavens: Besides, to understand it of his
Providence, does not consist with Solomon's admiration: He wonders that God,
that has so immense an Essence, should dwell in a Temple made with hands; he
could not so much wonder at his Providence in those things that immediately
concern his Worship. Solomon plainly asserts this of God, That he was so far
from being bounded within the rich Wall of the Temple, which with so much Cost
he had framed for the Glory of his Name, that the richer Palace of the Heaven
of Heavens could not contain him; it is true, it could not contain his Power and
Wisdom, because his Wisdom could contrive other kind of Worlds, and his Power
erect them: But does the meaning of that wise King reach no farther than this?
Will the Power and Wisdom of God reside on the Earth? He was too wise to ask
such a question, since every object that his eyes met with in the World
resolved him, That the Wisdom and Power of God dwelt upon the Earth, and
glittered in every thing he had Created; and Reason would assure him, That the
Power that had framed this World, was able to frame many more: But Solomon
considering the immensity of Gods Essence, wonders that God should order a
House to be built for him, as if he wanted Roofs, and Coverings, and
Habitation, as bodily Creatures do. Will God indeed dwell in a Temple, who has
an Essence so immense as not to be contained in the Heaven of Heavens? it is not
the Heaven of Heavens that can contain Him, his Substance. Here he asserts the
immensity of his Essence, and his Presence not only in the Heaven, but beyond
the Heavens; he that is not contained in the Heavens, as a man is in a Chamber,
is without, and above, and beyond the Heavens; it is not said they do not
contain him, but it is impossible they should contain him; they cannot contain
him. It Is impossible then but that he should be above them; he that is without
the compass of the World, is not bounded by the limits of the World; as his
Power is not limited by the things he has made, but can Create innumerable
Worlds, so can his Essence be in innumerable spaces; for as he has power
enough to make more Worlds, so he has Essence enough to fill them, and
therefore cannot be confined to what he has already Created; innumerable
Worlds cannot be a sufficient place to contain God, he can only be a sufficient
place to himself Petar.
; He that was before the World and place, and all things, was to himself a
World, a Place and every thing Maccor. loc. commun. cap. 19. p. 153.
: He is really out of the World in himself, as he was in himself before the
Creation of the World: As because God was before the Foundation of the World,
we conclude his Eternity; so because he is without the bounds of the World, we
conclude his Immensity, and from thence his Omnipresence. The World cannot be
said to contain him, since it was Created by him; it cannot contain him now,
who was contained by nothing before the World was: as there was no place to
contain him before the World was, there can be no place to contain him since
the World was.

God might create more Worlds circular and round as this, and those could not
be so contiguous, but some spaces would be left between; as take three round
Balls, lay them as close as you can to one another, there will be some spaces
between; none would say but God would be in these spaces, as well as in the
World he had created, though there were nothing real and positive in those
spaces: Why should we then exclude God from those imaginary spaces without the
World? God might also create many Worlds, and separate them by distances, that
they might not touch one another, but be at a great distance from one another;
and would not God fill them as well as he does this? if so, he must also fill
the spaces between them: For if he were in all those Worlds, and not in the
spaces between those Worlds, his Essence would be divided; there would be gaps
in it, his Essence would be cut into parts, and the distance between every part
of his Essence would be as great as the space between each World: The Essence
of God may be conceived then well enough to be in all those infinite spaces
where he can erect new Worlds.

I shall give one place more to prove both these Propositions, viz. That God is
Essentially in every part of the World, and Essentially above ours without the
World.

Isa. 66.1.
The Heaven is my Throne and the Earth is my Footstool. He is Essentially in
every part of the World; he is in Heaven and Earth at the same time; as a man
is upon his Throne and his Footstool. God describes himself in a Human Shape,
accommodated to our Capacity; as if he had his Head in Heaven and his Feet on
Earth; does not his Essence then fill all intermediate spaces between Heaven
and Earth? as when the head of a man is in the upper part of a Room, and his
Feet upon the floor, his body fills up the space between the Head and his Feet;
this is meant of the Essence of God, it is a Similitude drawn from Kings sitting
upon the Throne, and not their Power and Authority, but the Feet of their
persons are supported by the Footstool; so here it is not meant only of the
Perfections of God, but the Essence of God: Besides, God seems to tax them with
an erroneous conceit they had, as though his Essence were in the Temple, and not
in any part of the World; therefore God makes an Opposition between Heaven and
Earth, and the Temple; Where is the House that you built unto me? and where is
the place of my Rest? Had he understood it only of his Providence, it had not
been any thing against their mistake; for they granted his Providence to be not
only in the Temple, but in all parts of the World? Where is the House that you
Build to me; to Me, not to my Power or Providence, but think to include Me
within those Walls.

Again, It shows God to be above the Heavens, if the Heavens be his Throne; he
sits upon them, and is above them as Kings are above the Thrones on which they
sit; so it cannot be meant of his Providence, because no Creature being without
the Sphere of the Heavens, there is nothing of the Power and the Providence of
God visible there; for there is nothing for him to employ his Providence about.
For Providence supposes a Creature in actual being; It must be therefore meant
of his Essence, which is above the world, and in the world.

And the like proof you may see, Job 11.7, 8. It Is as high as heaven, what
can thou do? deeper than Hell, what can thou know? the measure thereof is
longer than the Earth, and broader than the Sea. Where he intends the
unsearchableness of Gods wisdom, but proves it by the infiniteness of his
Essence, Hebr. He is the height of the Heavens, he is the top of all the
Heavens; so that when you have begun at the lowest part, and traced him through
all the Creatures, you will find his Essence filling all the Creatures to be at
the top of the World, and infinitely beyond it.

5. Fifth Proposition. This is the property of God, incommunicable to any
Creature. As no Creature can be eternal and immutable, so no Creature can be
immense, because it cannot be infinite; nothing can be of an infinite nature,
and therefore nothing of an immense Presence but God: It cannot be communicated
to the Humane Nature of Christ, though in Union with the Divine Rivet. 110. Psalm.
p. 301. Col. 2.
; some indeed argue, that Christ in regard of his humane nature is every where,
because he sits at the right hand of God; and the right hand of God is every
where: His fitting at the right hand of God signifies his Exaltation, and
cannot with any reason be extended to such a kind of arguing; The Hearts of
Kings are in the hand of God; are the heart of Kings every where, because Gods
hand is every where? The Souls of the Righteous are in the hand of God, is the
Soul therefore of every Righteous man every where in the World? The right hand
of God is from Eternity, is the Humanity of Christ therefore from Eternity,
because it sits at the right hand of God? The right hand of God made the World,
did the Humanity of Christ therefore make Heaven and Earth? the Humanity of
Christ must then be confounded with his Divinity; be the same with it, not
united to it. All Creatures are distinct from their Creator, and cannot inherit
the Properties Essential to his Nature; as Eternity, Immensity, Immutability,
Omnipresence, Omniscience, no Angel, no Soul, no Creature can be in all places
at once; before they can be so, they must be Immense, and so must cease to be
Creatures, and commence God; this is impossible.

II Reasons to prove Gods Essential Presence.

1st Reason. Because he is infinite. As he is infinite, he is every where; as
he is Simple, his whole Essence is every where; for in regard of his
Infiniteness, he has no bounds; in regard of his Simplicity, he has no parts:
And therefore those that deny Gods Omnipresence, though they pretend to own him
Infinite, must really conceive him Finite.

1. God is Infinite in his Perfections. None can set bounds to terminate the
greatness and excellency of God Psalm. 145.3.
. His greatness is unsearchable, Sept. (...) there is no end, no limitation;
what has no end is infinite; his Power is infinite Job 5.9.
, which does great things and unsearchable, no end of those things he is able
to do; His Wisdom infinite Psalm. 147.5.
. He understands all things past, present, and to come; what is already made,
what is possible to be made; his duration infinite *. The number of his Years
cannot be searched out, Job 36.26.
(...). To make a finite thing of nothing, is an Argument of an infinite
Virtue; Infinite power can only extract something out of the Barren Womb of
nothing, but all things were drawn forth by the Word of God, the Heavens and
all the Host of them; the Sun, Moon, Stars, the rich embellishments of the
World appeared in Being, at the Breath of his Mouth Psalm. 33.6.
, the Author therefore must be infinite: And since nothing is the cause of God,
or of any Perfection in him; since he derives not his Being, or the least spark
of his glorious nature from any thing without him, he cannot be limited in any
part of his nature by any thing without him; and indeed the infiniteness of his
Power and his other Perfections is asserted by the Prophet, when he tells us
that the Nations are as a Drop of a Bucket, or the Dust of the Balance, and
less than nothing and Vanity Isa. 40.15.17.
, they are all so in regard of his Power, Wisdom, etc. Conceive what a little
thing a grain of Dust or Sand is to all the Dust that may be made by the
rubbish of a House, what a little thing the heap of the rubbish of a House is
to the vast heap of the rubbish of a whole City, such a one as London; how
little that also would be to the Dust of a whole Empire; how inconsiderable
that also to the Dust of one quarter of the World, Europe or Asia; how much
less that still to the Dust of the whole World; the whole World is composed of
an unconceivable number of Atoms, and the Sea of an unconceivable number of
Drops; Now what a little grain of Dust is in comparison of the Dust of the
whole World; a Drop of Water from the Sea, to all the Drops remaining in the
Sea, That is the whole World to God. Conceive it still less, a mere nothing,
yet is it all less than this, in comparison of God; there can be nothing more
magnificently expressive of the infiniteness of God to a humane conception,
than this expression of God himself in the Prophet.

In the Perfection of a Creature, something still may be thought greater to be
added to it; But God containing all Perfections in himself formally, if they be
mere Perfections; and eminently, if they be but Perfections in the Creature,
mixed with imperfection; nothing can be thought greater, and therefore every
one of them is infinite.

2. If his Perfections be Infinite, his Essence must be so. How God can have
infinite Perfections, and a finite Essence is unconceivable by a Humane or
Angelical understanding; an infinite Power, an infinite Wisdom, an infinite
Duration, must needs speak an infinite Essence; since the infiniteness of his
Attributes is grounded upon the infiniteness of his Essence: To own infinite
Perfections in a finite Subject, is contradictory. The manner of Acting by his
Power, and Knowing by his Wisdom, cannot exceed the manner of Being by his
Essence. His Perfections flow from his Essence, and the Principle must be of
the same rank with what flows from it; and if we conceive his Essence to be the
cause of his Perfections; it is utterly impossible that an infinite effect
should arise from a finite Cause; but indeed his Perfections are his Essence,
for though we conceive the Essence of God as the subject, and the Attributes of
God as faculties and qualities in that Subject according to our weak model, who
cannot conceive of an infinite God without some manner of likeness to our
selves; who find Understanding, and Will, and Power in us distinct from our
Substance; yet truly and really there is no distinction between his Essence and
Attributes; one is inseparable from the other; his Power and Wisdom are his
Essence; and therefore to maintain God Infinite in the one, and Finite in the
other, is to make a Monstrous God, and have an unreasonable notion of the
Deity; for there would be the greatest disproportion in his nature, since there
is no greater disproportion can possibly be between one thing and another, than
there is between finite and infinite: God must not only then be compounded, but
have parts of the greatest distance from one another in nature; but God being
the most Simple Being without the least composition, both must be equally
infinite: If then his Essence be not infinite, his Power and Wisdom cannot be
infinite, which is both against Scripture and Reason.

Again, how should his Essence be finite, and his Perfections be infinite;
since nothing out of himself gave them either the one or the other?

Amyrald de Trinitat p. 89.
Again, either the Essence can be infinite, or it cannot; if it cannot, there
must be some cause of that impossibility; that can be nothing without him;
because nothing without him can be as powerful as himself, much less too
powerful for him; nothing within him can be an Enemy to his highest Perfection;
since he is necessarily what he is, he must be necessarily the most perfect
Being, and therefore necessarily infinite; since to be something infinitely, is
a greater Perfection than to be something finitely Deus est actus parvus and
nullam habet potentiam passivam.
; if he can be infinite, he is infinite; otherwise he could be greater than he
is, and so more Blessed and more Perfect than he is, which is impossible; for
being the most perfect Being, to whom nothing can be added, he must needs be
infinite.

3. If therefore God have an Infinite Essence, he has an infinite Presence. An
infinite Essence cannot be contained in a finite place; as those things which
are finite have a bounded space, wherein they are; so that which is infinite
has an unbounded space; for as finiteness speaks limitedness; so infiniteness
speaks unboundedness; and if we grant to God an infinite duration, there is no
difficulty in acknowledging an infinite Presence: Indeed the infiniteness of
God is a property belonging to him in regard of time and place; he is bounded
by no place, and limited to no time.

Again, Infinite Essence may as well be every where, as infinite power reach
every thing; it may as well be present with every Being, as infinite power in
its working may be present with nothing to bring it into Being. Where God works
by his Power he is present in his Essence; because his Power and his Essence
cannot be separated; and therefore his Power, Wisdom, Goodness, cannot be any
where, where his Essence is not: His Essence cannot be severed from his Power,
nor his Power from his Essence; for the Power of God is nothing but God acting,
and the wisdom of God nothing, but God knowing. As the power of God is always,
so is his Essence; as the power of God is every where, so is his Essence;
whatsoever God is, he is always, and every where: To confine him to a place, is
to measure his Essence; as to confine his actions, is to limit his power; his
Essence being no less infinite than his Power and his Wisdom, can be no more
bounded than his Power and Wisdom; but they are not separable from his Essence,
yea they are his Essence; if God did not fill the whole World, he would be
determined to some place, and excluded from others; and so his substance would
have bounds and limits, and then something might be conceived greater than God;
for we may conceive that a Creature may be made by God of so vast a greatness
as to fill the whole World; for the power of God is able to make a body that
should take up the whole space between Heaven and Earth, and reach to every
corner of it; but nothing can be conceived by any Creature greater than God; he
exceeds all things, and is exceeded by none; God therefore cannot be included
in Heaven, nor included in the Earth; cannot be contained in either of them;
for if we should imagine them vaster than they are, yet still they would be
finite; and if his Essence were contained in them, it could be no more infinite
than the World which contains it; As water is not of a larger compass than the
Vessel which contains it. If the Essence of God were limited either in the
Heavens or Earth, it must needs be finite, as the Heaven and Earth are; But
there is no proportion between finite and infinite; God therefore cannot be
contained in them: If there were an infinite body, that must be every where;
certainly then an infinite Spirit must be every where: Unless we will account
him finite, we can render no reason why he should not be in one Creature as
well as in another; if he be in Heaven, which is his Creature, why can he not
be in the Earth, which is as well his Creature as the Heavens.

2. Reason. Because of the continual operation of God in the World. This was
one reason made the Heathen believe that there was an infinite Spirit in the
vast body of the World, acting in every thing, and producing those admirable
motions which we see every where in Nature: That cause which acts in the most
perfect manner, is also in the most perfect manner present with its effects.

God preserves all, and therefore is in all; the Apostle thought it a good
induction Acts 17.27.
; He is not far from us: for in him we live. For being as much as because,
shows that from his operation he concluded his real presence with all: It Is not
his virtue is not far from every one of us; but He, his Substance, himself; for
none that acknowledge a God, will deny the absence of the virtue of God from
any part of the World. He works in every thing, every thing lives and works in
him; therefore he is present with all Pont.
: or rather if things live, they are in God, who gives them life. If things
live, God is in them, and gives them life: If things move, God is in them, and
gives them motion: If things have any Being, God is in them, and gives them
Being; if God withdraws himself, they presently lose their Being; and therefore
some have compared the Creature to the impression of a Seal upon the water,
that cannot be preserved but by the Presence of the Seal. As his Presence was
actual with what he Created, so his Presence is actual with what he preserves,
since Creation and Preservation do so little differ; if God creates things by
his Essential Presence, by the same he supports them; If his substance cannot
be disjoined from his preserving Power, his power and wisdom cannot be
separated from his Essence; where there are the marks of the one, there is the
presence of the other; for it is by his Essence that he is powerful and wise;
no man can distinguish the one from the other in a simple Being: God does not
preserve and act things by a virtue diffused from him. N.B.
It may be demanded whether that virtue be distinct from God? if it be not,
it is then the Essence of God; if it be distinct, it is a Creature, and then it
may be ask't how that virtue which preserves other things, is preserved it
self? it must be ultimately resolved into the Essence of God, or else there
must be a running in infinitum: or else, Amyrald de Trinitat, p. 106. 107.
is that virtue of God a substance or not? Is it endued with understanding or
not? If it has understanding, how does it differ from God? If it wants
understanding, can any imagine that the support of the World, the guidance of
all Creatures, the wonders of Nature can be wrought, preserved, managed by a
virtue that has nothing of understanding in it? If it be not a substance, it
can much less be able to produce such excellent Operations, as the preserving
all the kinds of things in the World, and ordering them to perform such
excellent ends; this Virtue is therefore God himself, the infinite Power and
Wisdom of God; and therefore wheresoever the effects of these are seen in the
World, God is essentially present; some Creatures indeed act at a distance by a
virtue diffused; but such a manner of acting comes from a limitedness of
nature, that such a nature cannot be every where present, and extend its
substance to all parts; To act by a virtue, speaks the Subject finite, and it
is a part of indigence: Kings act in their Kingdoms by Ministers and
Messengers, because they cannot act otherwise; but God being infinitely
perfect, works all things in all immediately 1 Cor. 12.6.
; Illumination, Sanctification, Grace, etc. are the immediate Works of God in
the heart, and immediate Agents are present with what they do; it is an Argument
of the greater Perfection of a Being, to know things immediately, which are
done in several places, than to know them at the second hand by Instruments:
it is no less a Perfection to be every where, rather than to be tied to one
place of action; and to act in other places by Instruments, for want of a Power
to act immediately it self: God indeed acts by means and second causes in his
Providential Dispensations in the World, but this is not out of any Defect of
Power to Work all immediately himself; but he thereby accommodates his way of
acting to the nature of the Creature, and the Order of Things which he has
settled in the World; And when he Works by means, he acts with those means, in
those means, sustains their faculties and virtues in them, concurs with them by
his Power; so that Gods acting by means, does rather strengthen his Essential
Presence than weaken it; since there is a necessary dependence of the Creatures
upon the Creator in their Being and Acting; and what they are, they are by the
Power of God; what they act, they act in the Power of God, concurring with
them; they have their Motion in him as well as their Being; and where the Power
of God is, his Essence is, because they are inseparable; and so this
Omnipresence arises from the simplicity of the Nature of God; the more vast
any thing is, the less confined. All that will acknowledge God so great, as to
be able to work all things by his Will, without an Essential Presence, cannot
imagine him upon the same reason, so little as to be contained in, and bounded
by any place.

3. Reason. Because of his Supreme Perfection.

No Perfection is wanting to God; but an unbounded Essence is a Perfection; a
limited one is an Imperfection. Though it be a Perfection in a man to be Wise,
yet it is an Imperfection that his Wisdom cannot rule all the things that
concern him; though it be a Perfection to be present in a place where his affairs
lie, yet is it his Imperfection that he cannot be present every where, in the
midst of all his Concerns; if any man could be so, it would be universally
owned as a prime Perfection in him above others; Is that which would be a
Perfection in man, to be denied to God Amyrald de Trinitat p. 74. 75.
? as that which has life, is more perfect than that which has not life; and
that which has sense is more perfect than that which has only life, as the
Plants have; and what has reason, is more perfect than that which has only
life and sense, as the Beasts have; so what is every where, is more perfect
than that which is bounded in some narrow confines; if a Power of motion be
more excellent than to be Bedridden; and swiftness in a Creature, be a more
excellent endowment than to be slow and Snail like; Then to be every where
without motion, is unconceivably a greater excellency than to be every where
successively by motion. God sets forth his readiness to help his People and
punish his Enemies; or his Omnipresence, by swiftness, or flying upon the Wings
of the Wind Psalm 18.10.
: the Wind is in every part of the Air, where it blows; it cannot be said that
it is in this or that Point of the Air where you feel it, so as to exclude it
from another part of the Air where you are not; it seems to possess all at once.

If the Divine Essence had any bounds of place, it would be imperfect, as well
as if it had bounds of time; where any thing has limitation, it has some
defect in Being; and therefore if God were confined or concluded, he would be
as good as nothing in regard of Infiniteness: Whence should this restraint
arise? there is no Power above him to restrain him to a certain space; if so,
then he would not be God, but that power which restrained him would be God: Not
from his own nature, for the being every where, implies no contradiction to his
nature; if his own Nature determined him to a certain place, then if he removed
from that place, he would act against his Nature; to conceive any such thing of
God, is highly absurd. It cannot be thought God should voluntarily impose any
such restraint or confinement upon himself; this would be to deny himself a
Perfection he might have; if God have not this Perfection, it is either because
it is inconsistent with his nature; or, because he cannot have it; or, because
he will not. The former cannot be; for if he has impressed upon Air and Light a
resemblance of his Excellency, to diffuse themselves and fill so vast a space;
Is such an Excellency inconsistent with the Creator more than the Creature?
whatsoever Perfection the Creature has, is eminently in God Psalm 94.8, 9.
. Understand, O ye brutish among the people; and ye fools when will you be
wise? He that planted the ear, shall he not hear? he that formed the eye, shall
he not see? he that teaches man knowledge, shall not he know? By the same
reason he that has given such a Power to those Creatures, Air and Light, shall
not he be much more filling all spaces of the World? It Is so clear a Rule, that
the Psalmist fixes a folly and brutishness upon those that deny it; it is not
therefore inconsistent with his Nature, it were not then a Perfection, but an
Imperfection; but whatsoever is an Excellency in Creatures, cannot in a way of
eminency be an Imperfection in God; if it be then a Perfection, and God want
it, it is because he cannot have it; Where then is his Power? How can he be then
the Fountain of his own Being? If he will not, where is his love to his own
Nature and Glory? since no Creature would deny that to it self which it can
have, and is an Excellency to it; God therefore has not only a Power or
fitness to be every where, but he is actually every where.

4. Reason. Because of his Immutability.

If God did not fill all the spaces of Heaven and Earth, but only possess one,
yet it must be acknowledged that God has a Power to move himself to another:
It were absurd to fix God in a part of the Heavens, like a Star in an Orb,
without a power of motion to another place. If he be therefore Essentially in
Heaven, may he not be upon the Earth if he please, and transfer his Substance
from one place to another? to say he cannot, is to deny him a Perfection which
he has bestowed upon his Creatures; the Angels his Messengers are sometimes in
Heaven, sometimes on the Earth; the Eagles, meaner Creatures, are sometimes in
the Air out of Sight, sometimes upon the Earth. If he does move therefore and
recede from one place, and settle in another, does he not declare himself
mutable by changing places? by being where he was not before, and in not being
where he was before? He would not fill Heaven and Earth at once, but
successively; no man can be said to fill a Room, that moves from one part of a
Room to another; if therefore any in their imaginations, stake God to the
Heavens, they render him less than his Creatures; If they allow him a power of
motion from one place to another, they conceive him changeable; and in either
of them they own him no greater than a finite and limited Being; limited to
Heaven, if they fix him there; limited to that space to which they imagine him
to move.

5. Reason. Because of his Omnipotency.

The Almightiness of God is a Notion settled in the minds of all, That God can
do whatsoever he pleases, every thing that is not against the purity of his
Nature, and does not imply a contradiction in its self; he can therefore create
Millions of Worlds greater than this; and Millions of Heavens greater than this
Heaven he has already Created; if so, he is then in unconceivable spaces
beyond this World, for his Essence is not less and narrower than his Power; and
his Power is not to be thought of a further extent than his Essence; he cannot
be excluded therefore from those vast spaces where his Power may fix those
Worlds if he please; if so, it is no wonder that he should fill this World; and
there is no reason to exclude God from the narrow space of this World, that is
not contained in infinite spaces beyond the World. God is wheresoever he has a
Power to act, but he has a power to act every where in the World, every where
out of the World; he is therefore every where in the World, every where out of
the World. Before this World was made, he had a Power to make it in the space
where now it stands; Was he not then unlimitedly where the World now is, before
the World received a Being by his powerful Word? Why should he not then be in
every part of the World now? Can it be thought that God who was immense before,
should after he had Created the World, contract himself to the limits of one of
his Creatures, and tie himself to a particular place of his own Creation, and
be less after his Creation than he was before?

This might also be prosecuted by an Argument from his Eternity. What is
eternal in duration, is immense in essence; the same reason which renders him
eternal, renders him immense; That which proves him to be always, will prove
him to be every where.

The third thing is, Propositions for the further clearing this Doctrine from
any exceptions.

1. This truth is not weakened by the expressions in Scripture, where God is
said to dwell in Heaven, and in the Temple.

1. He is indeed said to sit in heaven Psalm. 2.4.
, and to dwell on high Psalm 113 5.
; but he is no where said to dwell only in the heavens, as confined to them.
It Is the Court of his Majestical presence, but not the Prison of his Essence.
For when we are told, that the heaven is his throne, we are told with the same
breath, that the earth is his footstool Isa. 66.^.
. He dwells on high in regard of the excellency of his nature; but he is in all
places in regard of the diffusion of his presence. The soul is essentially in
all parts of the body, but it does not exert the same operations in all; the
more noble discoveries of it are in the Head and Heart: In the Head, where it
exercises the chiefest senses for the enriching the understanding. In the
Heart, where it vitally resides, and communicates life and motion to the rest
of the body. It does not understand with the foot or toe, though it be in all
parts of the body it informs. And so God may be said to dwell in Heaven, in
regard of the more excellent and majestic representations of himself both to
the Creatures that inhabit the place, as Angels and blessed spirits; and also
in those marks of his greatness which he has planted there, those spiritual
natures which have a nobler stamp of God upon them, and those excellent bodies,
as Sun and Stars, which as so many Tapers light us to behold his glory Psalm.
19.1.
, and astonish the minds of men when they gaze upon them. It Is his Court, where
he has the most solemn Worship from his Creatures, all his Courtiers attending
there with a pure love, and glowing zeal. He reigns there in a special manner,
without any opposition to his government; it is therefore called his holy
dewlling place 2 Chronicles 3.27.
: The Earth has not that title, since sin cast a stain, and a ruining curse
upon it. The Earth is not his Throne, because his government is opposed. But
Heaven is none of Satan's precinct, and the Rule of God is uncontradicted by
the Inhabitants of it. It Is from thence also he has given the greatest
discoveries of himself: Thence he sends the Angels his Messengers, his Son upon
Redemption, his Spirit for Sanctification. From Heaven his gifts drop down upon
our heads, and his grace upon our hearts James 3.15.
. From thence the chiefest blessings of Earth descend. The motions of the
heavens fatten the earth; and the heavenly bodies are but stewards to the
earthly comforts for man by their influence. Heaven is the richest, vastest,
most steadfast and majestic part of the visible Creation. It Is there where he
will at last manifest himself to his people in a full conjunction of grace and
glory, and be for ever open to his people in uninterrupted expressions of
goodness, and discoveries of his presence, as a reward of their labor and
service. And in these respects it may peculiarly be called his Throne. And this
does no more hinder his essential presence in all parts of the earth, than it
does his gracious presence in all the hearts of his people. God is in heaven in
regard of the manifestation of his glory: in hell by the expressions of his
justice: in the earth by the discoveries of his Wisdom, Power, Patience and
Compassion: in his people by the monuments of his grace; and in all in regard
of his substance.

2. He is said also to dwell in the Ark and Temple. It Is called Psalm. 26.8. The
habitation of his house, and the place where his honor dwells; and to dwell in
Jerusalem as in his holy Mountain; The Mountain of the Lord of Hosts Zec. 8.3.
, in regard of publishing his Oracles, answering their prayers, manifesting
more of his goodness to the Israelites, than to any other Nation in the world,
erecting his true Worship among them, which was not settled in any part of the
world besides; and his worship is principally intended in that Psalm. The Ark
is the place where his honor dwells; the worship of God is called the glory of
God, They changed the glory of God into an image made like to corruptible man
Romans 1.23.
, i. e. they changed the worship of God into dolatry; and to that also does the
place in Zechary refer.

Now because he is said to dwell in heaven, is he essentially only there? Is he
not as essentially in the Temple and Ark, as he is in Heaven, since there are
as high expressions of his habitation there, as of his dwelling in heaven? If
he dwell only in heaven, how came he to dwell in the Temple? both are asserted
in Scripture, one as much as the other. If his dwelling in heaven did not
hinder his dwelling in the Ark, it could as little hinder the presence of his
essence on the earth. To dwell in heaven, and in one part of the earth at the
same time, is all one as to dwell in all parts of heaven, and all parts of
earth. If he were in Heaven, and in the Ark and Temple, it was the same essence
in both, though not the same kind of manifestation of himself. If by his dwelling
in heaven be meant his whole essence, why is it not also to be meant by his
dwelling in the Ark? It was not sure part of his essence that was in heaven,
and part of his essence that was on earth, his essence would then be divided;
and can it be imagined, that he should be in Heaven and the Ark at the same
time, and not in the spaces between? Could his essence be split into fragments,
and a gap made in it, that two distant spaces should be filled by him, and all
between be empty of him. So that Gods being said to dwell in Heaven, and in the
Temple, is so far from impairing the truth of this doctrine, that it more
confirms and evidences it.

2. Nor do the Expressions of God's coming to us, or departing from us, impair
this Doctrine of his Omnipresence.

God is said to hide his face from his People Psalm. 10.1.
; to be far from the Wicked; and the Gentiles are said to be afar off, viz.
from God Prove. 15.29.
and upon the manifestation of Christ made near; Ephesians 2.17.
These must not be understood of any distance or nearness of his Essence, for
that is equally near to all persons and things; but of some other special way
and manifestation of his Presence. Thus God is said to be in Believers by Love,
as they are in him 1 John 4.15.
; He that abides in love, abides in God, and God in him: He that loves is in
the thing beloved; and when two love one another, they are in one another; God
is in a Righteous man by a special grace, and far from the Wicked in regard of
such special Works; and God is said to be in a place by a special
manifestation, as when he was in the Bush Exodus 3.
; or manifesting his Glory upon Mount Sinai Exodus 24.16.
; The Glory of the Lord abode upon Mount Sinai: God is said to hide his face,
when he withdraws his comforting Presence, disturbs the repose of our hearts,
flasheth Terror into our Consciences, when he puts men under the smart of the
Cross, as though he had ordered his Mercy utterly to depart from them; or when he
does withdraw his special assisting Providence from us in our affairs; so he
departed from Saul, when he withdrew his direction and Protection from him in
the concerns of his Government 1 Samuel 16.14
; The Spirit of the Lord departed from Saul, i. e. the Spirit of Government.
God may be far from us in one respect, and near to us in another; far from us
in regard of Comfort, yet near to us in regard of Support, when his Essential
Presence continues the same; this is a necessary consequent upon the
infiniteness of God, the other is an act of the Will of God; so he was said to
forsake Christ, in regard of his obscuring his Glory from his Humane Nature,
and inflicting his Wrath; though he was near to him in regard of his Grace, and
preserved him from contracting any spot in his Sufferings. We do not say the
Sun is departed out of the Heavens when it is be-misted; it remains in the same
part of the Heavens, passes on its course, though its Beams do not reach us by
reason of the Bar between us and it: The Soul is in every part of the Body, in
regard of its Substance, and constantly in it, though it does not act so spritely
and vigorously at one time as at another in one and the same Member, and
discover it self so sensibly in its Operations; so all the various effects of
God toward the Sons of men, are but diverse Operations of one and the same
Essence: He is far from us, or near to us, as he is a Judge or a Benefactor;
when he comes to Punish, it notes not the approach of his Essence, but the
stroke of his Justice; when he comes to Benefit, it is not by a new access of
his Essence, but an efflux of his Grace; he departs from us when he leaves us
to the Frowns of his Justice; he comes to us when he encircles us in the Arms
of his Mercy; but he was equally present with us in both dispensations, in
regard of his Essence: And likewise God is said to come down Genesis 11.5.
, And the Lord came down to see the City; when he does some signal and
wonderful Works which attract the minds of men to the acknowledgment of a
Supreme Power and Providence in the World, who judged God absent and careless
before.

3. Nor is the Essential Presence of God with all Creatures any disparagement
to him. Since it was no disparagement to Create the Heaven and the Earth, it is
no disparagement to him to him to fill them; if he were Essentially present
with them when he created them, it is no dishonor to him to be Essential
present with them, to support them; if it were his Glory to Create them by his
Essence, when they were nothing; Can it be his disgrace to be present by his
Essence, since they are something, and something good, and very good in his Eye
Genesis 1.31.
? God saw every thing, and behold it was very good; or mighty good; all ordered
to declare his Goodness, Wisdom, Power, and to make him adorable to man, and
therefore took complacency in tehm: There is a Harmony in all things, a
Combination in them for those glorious Ends for which God Created them; and is
it a disgrace for God to be present with his own Harmonious composition? Is it
not a Musicians Glory to touch with his fingers the Trebble, the least and
tenderest string, as well as the strongest and greatest Base? Has not every
thing some Stamp of Gods own Being upon it, since he eminently contains in
himself the Perfections of all his Works? whatsoever has Being, has a
Foot-step of God upon it, who is all Being; every thing in the Earth is his
Footstool, having a mark of his Foot upon it; all declare the Being of God,
because they had their Being from God; and will God account it any
disparagement to him to be present with that which confirms his Being, and the
glorious Perfections of his nature to his intelligent Creatures? the meanest
things are not without their Virtues, which may boast Gods being the Creator of
them; and rank them in the midst of his Works of Wisdom as well as Power. Does
God debase himself to be present by his Essence, with the things he has made,
more than he does to know them by his Essence? Is not the least thing known by
him? How? not by a faculty or act distinct from his Essence; but by his Essence
it self: How is any thing disgraceful to the Essential Presence of God, that is
not disgraceful to his Knowledge by his Essence? Besides, would God make any
thing that should be an invincible reason to him to part with his own
infiniteness, by a contraction of his own Essence into a less compass than
before? it was Immense before, it had no bounds; and would God make a World
that he would be ashamed to be present with, and continue it to the diminution
and lessening of himself, rather than annihilate it to avoid the disparagement?
This were to impeach the Wisdom of God, and cast a blemish upon his infinite
Understanding, that he knows not the consequences of his Work, or is well
contented to be impaired in the immensity of his own Essence by it. No man
thinks it a dishonor to Light, a most excellent Creature, to be present with a
Toad or Serpent; and though there be an infinite disproportion between Light, a
Creature, and the Father of Lights the Creator: Yet Gassend.
God being a Spirit, knows how to be with Bodies as if they were not Bodies.
And being jealous of his own Honor, would not, could not do any thing that
might impair it.

4. Nor will it follow, That because God is Essentially every where, that every
thing is God. God is not every where by any conjunction, composition or mixture
with any thing on Earth; when Light is in every part of a Crystal Globe, and
encircles it close on every side, do they become one? No, the Crystal remains
what it is, and the Light retains its own nature: God is not in us as a part of
us, but as an efficient and preserving Cause; it is not by his Essential
Presence, but his efficacious Presence that he brings any person into a
likeness to his own Nature: God is so in his Essence with things, as to be
distinct from them as a Cause from the Effect; as a Creator different from the
Creature, preserving their Nature, not communicating his own; his Essence
touches all, is in conjunction with none; Finite and Infinite cannot be joined;
he is not far from us, therefore near to us; so near that we live and move in
him Acts 17.27.
; Nothing is God because it moves in him, any more than a Fish in the Sea, is
the Sea, or a part of the Sea, because it moves in it; Does a man that holds a
thing in the hollow of his hand, Amyrald de Trinit. p. 99. 100.
transform it by that action, and make it like his hand? The Soul and Body are
more straightly united, than the Essence of God is by his Presence with any
Creature: The Soul is in the Body as a form in matter, and from their Union
does arise a man; yet in this near conjunction, both Body and Soul remain
distinct; the Soul is not the Body, nor the Body the Soul; they both have
distinct natures and essences; the Body can never be changed into a Soul, nor
the Soul into a Body; no more can God into the Creature, or the Creature into
God. Fire is in heated Iron in every part of it, so that it seems to be nothing
but Fire; yet is not Fire and Iron the same thing. But such a kind of arguing
against Gods Omnipresence, that if God were Essentially present, every thing
would be God; would exclude him from Heaven as well as from Earth. By the same
reason, since they acknowledge God essentially in Heaven, the Heaven where he
is, should be changed into the nature of God; and by arguing against his
Presence in Earth, upon this ground they run such an inconvenience, that they
must own him to be no where, and that which is no where is nothing. Does the
Earth become God, because God is Essentially there, any more than the Heavens,
where God is acknowledged by all to be Essentially present?

Again, if where God is Essentially, that must be God, then if they place God
in a Point of the Heavens, not only that Point must be God, but all the World;
because if that point be God, because God is there, then the Point touched by
that Point must be God, and so consequently as far as there are any Points
touched by one another. We live and move in God, so we live and move in the
Air; we are no more God by that, than we are mere Air because we breathe in it,
and it enters into all the Pores of our Body: Nay, where there was a straiter
Union of the Divine Nature to the Humane in our Savior, yet the Nature of both
was distinct, and the Humanity was not changed into the Divinity, nor the
Divinity into the Humanity.

5. Nor does it follow, that because God is every where, therefore a Creature
may be worshipped without Idolatry. Some of the Heathens who acknowledged Gods
Omnipresence, abused it to the countenancing Idolatry; because God was resident
in every thing, they thought every thing might be Worshipped; and some have usd
it as an Argument against this Doctrine; the best Doctrines may by men's
corruption be drawn out into unreasonable and pernicious conclusions. Have you
not met with any, That from the Doctrine of Gods Free Mercy, and our Saviors
satisfactory Death, have drawn Poison to feed their Lusts, and consume their
Souls? a Poison composed by their own corruption, and not offered by those
Truths. The Apostle intimates to us, that some did, or at least were ready to
be more lavish in sinning, because God was abundant in Grace Romans 6.1, 2.15
Shall we Sin, because we are not under the Law but under Grace.
; Shall we continue in Sin, that Grace may abound? when he prevents an
Objection that he thought might be made by some: But as to this Case; since
though God be present in every thing, yet every thing retains its nature,
distinct from the Nature of God; therefore it is not to have a Worship due to
the Excellency of God: As long as any thing remains a Creature, it is only to
have the respect from us, which is due to it in the rank of Creatures. When a
Prince is present with his Guard, or if he should go Arm in Arm with a Peasant,
is therefore the Veneration and Honor due to the Prince, to be paid to the
Peasant, or any of his Guard? would the Presence of the Prince excuse it, or
would it not rather aggravate it? he acknowledged such a person equal to me, by
giving him my Rights, even in my Sight. Though God dwelt in the Temple, would not
the Israelites have been accounted guilty of Idolatry, had they Worshipped the
Images of the Cherubims, or the Ark, or the Altar, as objects of Worship, which
were erected only as means for his Service? Is there not as much reason to
think God was as Essentially present in the Temple, as in Heaven; since the
same Expressions are used of the one and the other? the Sanctuary is called the
Glorious High Throne Jer. 17.13.
; and he is said to dwell between the Cherubims Psalm. 80.1.
, i. e. the two Cherubims that were at the two ends of the Mercy Seat,
appointed by God as the two sides of his Throne in the Sanctuary, Exodus 25.18.
where he was to dwell, ver. 8. and meet and commune with his people, ver. 22.
Could this excuse Manasseh's Idolatry in bringing in a Carved Image into the
House of God 1 Chronicles. 33.7.
? had it been a good Answer to the Charge, God is present here, and therefore
every thing may be Worshipped as God? if he be only Essentially in Heaven,
would it not be Idolatry to direct a Worship to the Heavens, or any part of it
as a due object, because of the Presence of God there? Though we look up to the
Heavens, where we Pray and Worship God, yet Heaven is not the object of
Worship, the Soul abstracts God from the Creature.

6. Nor is God defiled by being present with those Creatures which seem filthy
to us. Nothing is filthy in the Eye of God as his Creature; he could never else
have pronounced all good; whatsoever is filthy to us, yet as it is a Creature,
it ows it self to the Power of God: His Essence is no more defild by being
present with it, than his Power by producing it: No Creature is foul in it
self, though it may seem so to us: Does not an Infant lie in a Womb of filthiness
and rottenness? yet is not the Power of God present with it, in working it
curiously in the lower parts of the Earth? are his eyes defiled by seeing the
Substance when it it is yet imperfect? or his hand defiled by writing every
Member in his Book Psalm. 139.15, 16.
? Have not the vilest and most noisome things, excellent Medicinal Virtues? How
are they endued with them? How are those qualities preserved in them? by any
thing without God, or no? every Artificer looks with Pleasure upon the work he
has wrought with Art and Skill; can his Essence be defiled by being present
with them, any more than it was in giving them such virtues, and preserving
them in them? God measures the Heaven and the Earth with his hand, is his hand
defiled by the evil influences of the Planets, or the Corporeal Impurities of
the Earth? nothing can be filthy in the Eye of God but Sin, since every thing
else owes its Being to him. What may appear deformed and unworthy to us, is not
so to the Creator; he sees Beauty where we see Deformity; finds goodness where
we behold what is nauseous to us. All Creatures being the effects of his Power,
may be the objects of his Presence; Can any place be more foul than Hell, if
you take it either for the Hell of the Damned, or for the Grave where there is
rottenness? yet there he is Psalm. 139.8.
. When Satan appeared before God, and God spoke with him Job 1.7.
, Could God contract any impurity by being present where that filthy Spirit
was, more impure than any corporeal, noysom, and defiling thing can be? No, God
is purity to himself in the midst of noysomness; a Heaven to himself in the
midst of Hell: Who ever heard of a Sunbeam stained by shining upon a Quag mire,
any more than sweetened by breaking into a Perfumed Room Shelford of the
Attributes p. 170.
? Though the Light shines upon pure and impure things, yet it mixes not its self
with either of them; so though God be present with Devils and Wicked men, yet
without any mixture; he is present with their essence to sustain it and support
it; not in their defection, wherein lies their defilement; and which is not a
Physical, but a Moral evil; Bodily filth can never touch an incorporeal
substance. Spirits are not present with us in the same manner that one body is
present with another; bodies can by a touch only, defile bodies; Is the Glory
of an Angel stained by being in a Coal-mine? or could the Angel that came into
the Lions Den, to deliver Daniel, be any more disturbed by the stench of the
place, Dan. 6.22.
than he could be scratcht by the Paws, or torn by the Teeth of the Beasts?
their Spiritual nature secures them against any infection when they are
ministering Spirits to Persecuted Believers in their nasty Prisons Acts 12.7.
. The Soul is straightly united with the Body, but it is not made white or black,
by the whiteness or blackness of its habitation; is it infected by the
corporeal impurities of the Body, while it continually dwells in a Sea of
filthy Pollution? If the Body be cast into a Common-shore, is the Soul defiled
by it? Can a Diseased body derive a Contagion to the Spirit that animates it?
Is it not often the purer by Grace, the more the body is infected by nature?
Hezekiah's Spirit was scarce ever more fervent with God, than when the Sore,
which some think to be a Plague Sore, was upon him Isa. 38.3.
; How can any Corporeal filth impair the purity of the Divine Essence? it may
as well be said, That God is not present in Battles and Fights for his People
Joshua 23.10.
, because he would not be disturbed by the noise of Canons and clashing of
Swords, as that he is not present in the World because of the ill scents: Let
us therefore conclude this with the Expression of a Learned man of our own Dr.
More.
; To deny the Omnipresence of God, because of ill scented places, is to measure
God rather by the nicety of Sense, than by the sagacity of Reason.

IV. USE.

I. Of Information.

1. Christ has a divine nature. As Eternity and Immutability, two
incommunicable properties of the Divine nature, are ascribed to Christ; so also
is this of Omnipresence or Immensity John 3.13.
. No man has ascended up to heaven, but he that came down from heaven, even
the Son of man which is in heaven. Not which was, but which is; He comes from
heaven by incarnation, and remains in heaven by his Divinity. He was, while he
spoke to Nicodemus, locally on earth, in regard of his humanity; but in heaven
according to his Deity, as well as upon earth in the union of his divine and
human nature. He descended upon earth, but he left not heaven; He was in the
World before he came in the flesh. John 1.10.
He was in the world, and the world was made by him. He was in the world, as
the light that enlightens every man that comes into the world. In the world as
God, before he was in the world as man. He was then in the world as man, while
he discoursed with Nicodemus; yet so, that he was also in heaven as God. No
creature but is bounded in place, either circumscribed as body, or determined
as Spirit to be in one space, so as not to be in another at the same time; to
leave a place where they were, and possess a place where they were not. But
Christ is so on earth, that at the same time he is in heaven; he is therefore
infinite. To be in heaven and earth at the same moment of time, is a property
solely belonging to the Deity, wherein no creature can be a partner with him.
He was in the world before he came to the world, and the world was made by him
John 1.10.
. His coming was not as the coming of Angels, that leave heaven, and begin to
be on earth, where they were not before; but such a presence as can be ascribed
only to God, who fills heaven and earth. Again, If all things were made by him,
then he was present with all things which were made: for where there is a
presence of power, there is also a presence of essence; and therefore he is
still present: for the right and power of Conservation, follows the power of
Creation. And according to this divine nature, he promises his presence with
his Church. Mat. 18.20.
There am I in the midst of them. And Mat. 28.20.
I am with you always, even to the end of the world, i. e. by his Divinity: for
he had before told them, Mat. 26.11.
that they were not to have him always with them, i. e. according to his
Humanity; but in his Divine nature he is present with, and walks in the midst
of the golden Candlesticks. If we understand it of a presence by his spirit in
the midst of the Church, does it invalidate his essential presence? No, he is
no less than the Spirit whom he sends; and therefore as little confined as the
Spirit is, who dwells in every believer: and this may also be inferred from
Joh. 10.30. My father and I are one; not one by consent, though that be included;
but one in power: for he speaks not of their consent, but of their joint power
in keeping his people. Where there is a Unity of Essence, there is a Unity of
Presence.

2. Here is a confirmation of the spiritual nature of God. If he were an
infinite body, he could not fill heaven and earth, but with the exclusion of
all creatures. Two bodies cannot be in the same space; they may be near one
another, but not in any of the same points together. A body bounded he has
not, for that would destroy his Immensity; he could not then fill heaven and
earth, because a body cannot be at one and the same time in two different
spaces; but God does not fill heaven at one time, and the earth at another, but
both at the same time. Besides, a limited body cannot be said to fill the whole
earth, but one particular space in the earth at a time. A body may fill the
earth with its virtue, as the Sun, but not with its substance. Nothing can be
every where with a corporeal weight and mass; but God being infinite, is not
tied to any part of the World, but penetrates all, and equally acts by his
infinite power in all.

3. Here is an argument for Providence. His presence is mentioned in the Text,
in order to his government of the affairs of the world. Is he every where, to
be unconcerned with every thing? Before the World had a being, God was present
with himself; since the World has a being, he is present with his creatures,
to exercise his Wisdom in the ordering, as he did his Power in the production
of them. As the Knowledge of God is not a bare contemplation of a thing, so his
Presence is not a bare inspection into a thing. Were it an idle careless
Presence, it were a Presence to no purpose, which cannot be imagined of God.
Infinite Power, Goodness, and Wisdom being every where present with his
Essence, are never without their exercise. He never manifests any of his
perfections, but the manifestation is full of some indulgence and benefit to
his Creatures. It cannot be supposed God should neglect those things, wherewith
he is constantly present in a way of efficiency and operation. He is not every
where, without acting every where. Cyri^.
Wherever his Essence is, there is a power and virtue worthy of God every where
dispensed. He governs by his presence, what he made by his power; and is
present as an Agent with all his works. His Power and Essence are together, to
preserve them while he pleases, as his Power and his Essence were together to
create them when he saw good to do it. Every creature has a stamp of God, and
his presence is necessary to keep the impression standing upon the creature. As
all things are his works, they are the objects of his cares; and the wisdom he
employed in framing them, will not suffer him to be careless of them. His
presence with them, engages him in honor not to be a negligent Governor. His
Immensity fits him for government; and where there is a fitness, there is an
exercise of government, where there are objects for the exercise of it. He is
worthy to have the Universal rule of the World, he can be present in all places
of his Empire, there is nothing can be done by any of his subjects, but in his
sight. As his Eternity renders him King always, so his Immensity renders him
King every where. If he were only present in heaven, it might occasion a
suspicion that he minded only the things of heaven, and had no concern for
things below that vast Body; but if he be present here, his Presence has a
tendency to the government of those things with which he is present. We are all
in him as Fish in the Sea; and he bears all creatures in the womb of his
Providence, and the arms of his Goodness. It Is most certain that his Presence
with his people is far from being an idle one; for when he promises to be with
them, he adds some special Cordial, as, I will be with thee, and bless thee.
Genesis 26.3. Jer. 15.20.
I am with thee, and I will strengthen thee: I will help thee, I will uphold
thee Isa. 41.10.14.
. Infinite goodness will never countenance a negligent Presence.

4. The Omnipotence of God i^ inferred from hence. If God be present every
where, he must needs know what is done every where. It Is for this end he
proclaims himself a God filling heaven and earth, in the Text. Can any hide
himself in secret places, that I shall not see him, says the Lord? I have
heard what the Prophets say, that prophecy lies in my Name: If I fill heaven
and earth, the most secret thing cannot be hid from my sight. An Intelligent
Being cannot be every where present, and more intimate in every thing, than it
can be in it self; but he must know what is done without, what is thought
within. Nothing can be obscure to him, who is in every part of the world, in
every part of his creatures. Not a thought can start up but in his sight, who
is present in the souls and minds of every thing. How easy is it with him, to
whose Essence the world is but a point, to know and observe every thing done in
this world, as any of us can know what is done in one point of place where we
are present? If Light were an understanding being, it would behold and know
every thing done, where it diffuseth it self. God is light (as light in a
Crystal glass, all within it, all without it) and is not ignorant of what
is done within and without; no ignorance can be fastened upon him who has an
Universal Presence.

Hence by the way we may take notice of the wonderful Patience of God, who
bears with so many provocations; not from a Principle of Ignorance, for he
bears with Sins that are committed near him, in his sight, Sins that he sees,
and cannot but see.

5. Hence may be inferred the Incomprehensibility of God. He that fills Heaven
and Earth, cannot be contained in any thing; he fills the Understandings of
Men, the Understandings of Angels, but is comprehended by neither; it is a
rashness to think to find out any bounds of God; there is no measuring of an
infinite Being, if it were to be measured it were not infinite; but because it
is infinite, it is not to be measured. God sits above the Cherubims Ezekiel. 10.1.
, above the fullness, above the brightness, not only of a humane, but a created
understanding: Nothing is more present than God, yet nothing more hid; he is
Light, and yet obscurity (...) Dyonisius called God.
; his Perfections are visible, yet unsearchable; We know there is an infinite
God, but it surpasses the compass of our minds; we know there is no Number so
great, but another may be added to it; but no man can put it in practice
without losing himself in a maze of Figures. What is the reason we comprehend
not many, nay most things in the World? partly from the Excellency of the
object, and partly from the Imperfection of our understandings. How can we then
comprehend God who exceeds all, and is exceeded by none; contains all, and is
contained by none; is above our understanding, as well as above our sense? as
considered in himself infinite; as considered in comparison with our
understandings, incomprehensible; who can with his eye measure the breadth,
length and depth of the Sea, and at one cast view every dimension of the
Heavens: God is greater, and we cannot know him Job 36.26.
; he fills the understanding as he fills Heaven and Earth; yet is above the
understanding as he is above Heaven and Earth: He is known by Faith, enjoyed by
love, but comprehended by no mind. God is not contained in that one Syllable,
God; by it we apprehend an excellent and unlimited nature; himself only
understands himself, and can unveil himself.

6. How wonderful is God, and how nothing are Creatures! Ascribe the Greatness
to our God Deuteronomy. 33.3.
; He is admirable in the consideration of his Power, in the extent of his
understanding, and no less wonderful in the immensity of his Essence; That as
Austin says, he is in the World, yet not confined to it; he is out of the
World, yet not debarred from it; he is above the World, yet not elevated by it;
he is below the World, yet not deprest by it; he is above all, equaled by
none; he is in all, not because he needs them, but they stand in need of him;
this as well as Eternity, makes a vast disproportion between God and the
Creature: The Creature is bounded by a little space, and no space is so great
as to bound the Creator. By this we may take a prospect of our own nothingness;
as in the consideration of Gods Holiness we are minded of our own impurity; and
in the thoughts of his Wisdom have a view of our own folly; and in the
meditation of his Power, have a sense of our weakness; so his Immensity should
make us according to our own nature, appear little in our own eyes. What
little, little, little things are we to God? less than an Atome in the Beams of
the Sun; poor drops to a God that fills Heaven and Earth, and yet dare we to
strut against him, and dash our selves against a Rock? If the consideration of
our selves in comparison with others, be apt to puff us up, the consideration
of our selves in comparison with God, will be sufficient to pull us down; if we
consider him in the greatness of his Essence, there is but little more
proportion between him and us, than between being and not being, than between a
Drop and the Ocean. How should we never think of God without a Holy Admiration
of his Greatness, and a deep sense of our own littleness! and as the Angels
cover their faces before him; with what awe should creeping Worms come into his
Sight! and since God fills Heaven and Earth with his Presence, we should fill
Heaven and Earth with his Glory; for this end he Created Angels to Praise him
in Heaven, and men to Worship him on Earth, that the Places he fills with his
Presence may be filled with his Praise: We should be swallowed up in
admirations of the Immensity of God, as men are at the first sight of the Sea,
when they behold a mass of Waters, without beholding the bounds and immense
depth of it.

7. How much is this Attribute of God forgotten or contemned! We pretend to
believe him to be present every where, and yet many live as if he were present
no where.

1. It Is commonly forgotten, or not believed. All the extravagancies of men may
be traced to the forgetfulness of this Attribute, as their Spring. The first
Speech Adam spoke in Paradise after his fall, testified his unbelief of this
Genesis 3.10.
; I heard thy Voice in the Garden, and I hid my self; his ear understood the
voice of God, but his mind did not conclude the Presence of God; he thought the
Trees could shelter him from him, whose eye was present in the minutest parts
of the Earth; he that thought after his Sin, that he could hide himself from
the Presence of his Justice, thought before that he could hide himself from the
Presence of his Knowledge; and being deceived in the one, he would try what
would be the fruit of the other: In both he forgets, if not denies this
Attribute; either corrupt notions of God, or a slight belief of what in general
men assent unto, gives Birth to every Sin. In all Transgressions there is
something of Atheism; either denying the Being of God, or a dash upon some
Perfection of God; a not believing his Holiness to hate it, his Truth that
threatens, his Justice to punish it, and his Presence to observe it. Though God
be not afar off in his Essence, he is afar off in the apprehension of the
Sinner Drexel Nicet. lib. 2. cap. 10.
. There is no wicked man, but if he be an Atheist, he is a Heretic; and to
gratify his Lust, will fancy himself to be out of the Presence of his Judge:
His reason tells him, God is present with him, his Lust presses him to embrace
the season of a sensual Pleasure; he will forsake his Reason, and prove a
Heretic, that he may be an undisturbed Sinner; and Sins doubly both in the
error of his mind, and the vileness of his practice; he will conceit God with
those in Job Job 22.14.
, Veiled with thick Clouds, and not able to pierce into the lower World; as if
his Presence and Cares were confined to Celestial things, and the Earth were
too low a Sphere for his Essence to reach, at least with any Credit. It Is
forgotten by good men, when they fear too much the designs of their Enemies;
Fear not, for I am with thee Isa. 43.5.
. If the Presence of God be enough to strengthen against fear, then the
prevailing of fear issues from our forgetfulness of it.

2. This Attribute of Gods Omnipresence is for the most part contemned. When
men will commit that in the presence of God which they would be afraid or
ashamed to do before the eye of man. Men do not practice that Modesty before
God, as before men. He that would restrain his tongue out of fear of men's eye,
will not restrain either tongue or hands out of fear of Gods; What is the
language of this, but that God is not present with us, or his presence ought to
be of less regard with us, and influence upon us, than that of a creature?
Drexel. Nice^. lib. 2. cap. 10.
Ask the Thief why he dares to steal? Will he not answer, No eye sees him? Ask
the Adulterer why he strips himself of his Chastity, and invades the Rights of
another? Will he not answer, Job 24.15.
No eye sees me? He disguiseth himself to be unseen by man, but slights the
all-seeing eye of God. If only a man know them, they are in terror of the
shadow of death, they are Planet-struck; but stand unshaken at the presence of
God. Job 24.17.
Is not this to account God as limited as man, as ignorant, as absenting, as if
God were something less than those things which restrains us? It Is a debasing
God below a creature. If we can forbear sin from an awe of the presence of man,
to whom we are equal in regard of Nature; or from the presence of a very mean
man, to whom we are superior in regard of condition; and not forbear it because
we are within the ken of God; We respect him not only as our inferior, but
inferior to the meanest man or child of his Creation, in whose sight we would
not commit the like action. It Is to represent him as a sleepy, negligent, or
careless God; as tho any thing might be concealed from him, before whom the
least fibers of the heart are anatomized and open, who sees as plainly midnight
as noonday sins. Heb 4.13.
Now this is a high aggravation of sin: To break a Kings Laws in his sight, is
more bold than to violate them behind his back; as it was Haman's offense when
he lay upon Esthers bed, to force the Queen before the Kings face. The least
iniquity receives a high tincture from this. And no sin can be little that is
an affront in the face of God, and casting the filth of the creature before the
eyes of his holiness. As if a Wife should commit Adultery before her Husbands
face, or a Slave dishonor his Master, and disobey his commands in his
presence. And has it not often been thus with us? Have we not been disloyal to
God in his sight, before his eyes, those pure eyes that cannot behold iniquity
without anger and grief? Isa 65.12.
Ye did evil before my eyes. Nathan charge this home upon David. 2 Samuel 12.^.
Thou have despised the commandment of the Lord, to do evil in his sight. And
David in his repentance, reflects upon himself for it, Psalm. 51.4.
Against thee, thee only have I sinned, and done this evil in thy sight. I
observed not thy presence, I neglected thee while thy eye was upon me. And this
consideration should sting our hearts in all our confessions of our Crimes. Men
will be afraid of the presence of others, whatsoever they think in their heart.
How unworthily do we deal with God, in not giving him so much as an
eye-service, which we do man?

8. How terrible should the thoughts of this Attribute be to sinners! How
foolish is it, to imagine any hiding place from the Incomprehensible God, Quo
fugis Encelade quas cunque accesseris oras, sub Jove semper eris.
who fills and contains all things, and is present in every point of the World!
When men have shut the door, and made all darkness within, to meditate or
commit a Crime, they cannot in the most intricate recesses be sheltred from the
presence of God. If they could separate themselves from their own shadows, they
could not avoid his company, or be obscured from his sight. Psalm. 139.12. The
darkness and light are both alike to him.
Hypocrites cannot disguise their sentiments from him, he is in the most secret
nook of their hearts. No thought is hid, no lust is secret, but the eye of God
beholds this, and that, and the other. He is present with our heart when we
imagine, with our hands when we act. We may exclude the Sun from peeping into
our solitudes, but not the eyes of God from beholding our actions. The eyes of
the Lord are in every place, beholding the evil and good Prove. 15.3.
. He lies in the depths of our souls, and sees afar off our designs before we
have conceived them. He is in the greatest darkness, as well as the clearest
light; in the closest thought of the mind, as well as the openest expressions.
Nothing can be hid from him, no not in the darkest Cells, or thickest Walls. He
compasses our path wherever we are, Psalm 139.3.
and is acquainted with all our ways. He is as much present with wicked men to
observe their sins, as he is to detest them. Where he is present in his
Essence, he is present in his Attributes: His Holiness to hate, and his Justice
to punish, if he please to speak the word. It Is strange men should not be
mindful of this, when their very sins themselves might put them in mind of his
presence. Whence ha^^ thou the power to act? who preserves thy being, whereby
thou art capable of committing that evil? Is it not his Essential presence that
sustains us, and his Arm that supports us? And where can any man fly from his
presence? Not the vast Regions of Heaven could shelter a sinning Angel from his
eye: How was Adam ferreted out of his hiding-places in Paradise? Nor can we
find the depths of the Sea a sufficient covering to us. If we were with Jonah
closeted up in the belly of a Whale; if we had the wings of the morning, as
quick a motion as the light at the dawning of the day, that does in an instant
surprise and overpower the regions of darkness; and could pass to the utmost
parts of the earth or hell, there we should find him, there his eye would be
upon us, there would his hand lay hold of us, and lead us as a Conqueror
triumphing over a captive Psalm. 139.8, 9, 10.
. Nay, if we could leap out of the compass of heaven and earth, we should find
as little reserves from him. He is without the World in those infinite spaces
which the mind of man can imagine. In regard of his Immensity, nothing in being
can be distant from him, wheresoever it is.

2d. Use is for Comfort. That God is present every where, is as much a Comfort
to a good man, as it is a Terror to a wicked one. He is every where for his
people, not only by a necessary perfection of his nature, but an immense
diffusion of his goodness. He is in all creatures as their preserver, in the
damned as their terror, in his people as their Protector. He fills hell with
his severity, heaven with his glory, his people with his grace. He is with his
people as light in darkness, a fountain in a garden, as Manna in the Ark. God
is in the World as a spring of preservation, in the Church as his Cabinet, a
spring of grace and consolation. A man is present sometimes in his field, but
more delightfully in his garden. A Vineyard, as it has more of cost, so more
of care, and a watchful presence of the Owner. Isa. 27.3. I the Lord do keep
it, viz. his Vineyard; I will water it every moment: lest any hurt it, I will
keep it night and day. As there is a presence of Essence, which is natural; so
there is a presence of Grace, which is foederal; A presence by Covenant, I will
not leave thee, I will be with thee; this later depends upon the former; for
take away the Immensity of God, and you leave no foundation for his universal
gracious presence with his people in all their emergencies, in all their
hearts. And therefore where he is present in his essence, he cannot be absent
in his grace from them that fear him. It Is from his filling heaven and earth he
proves his knowledge of the designs of the false prophets; and from the same
Topic may as well be inferred the employment of his power and grace for his
people.

1. The Omnipresence of God is a comfort in all violent temptations. No fiery
dart can be so present with us, as God is present both with that and the
marks-man. The most raging Devils cannot be so near us, as God is to us and
them. He is present with his people to relieve them, and present with the Devil
to manage him to his own holy purposes: So he was with Job, defeating his
enemies, and bringing him triumphantly out of those pressing trials. This
presence is such a terror, that whatsoever the Devil can despoil us of, he must
leave this untoucht. He might scratch the Apostle with a thorn, 2 Cor. 12.7, 9.
but he could not rifle him of the presence of divine grace, which God promised
him. He must prevail so far as to make God cease to be God, before he can make
him to be distant from us: and while this cannot be, the Devils and men can no
more hinder the emanations of God to the Soul, than a Child can cut off the
Rays of the Sun from imbellishing the Earth; it is no mean support for a good
man, at any time buffeted by a Messenger of Satan, to think God stands near him
and beholds how ill he is used. It would be a satisfaction to a Kings favorite
in the midst of the Violence some Enemies might use to him upon a Surprise, to
understand that the King who loves him, stands behind a Curtain, and through a
hole sees the injuries he suffers; and were the Devil as considering as he is
malicious, he could not but be in great fear at Gods being in the Generation of
the Righteous, as his Serpentine Seed is Prove. 3.6.
: There were they in great fear, for God is in the generation of the Righteous.

2. The Omnipresence of God is a comfort in sharp Afflictions. Good men have a
Comfort in this Presence in their nasty Prisons, oppressing Tribunals; in the
overflowing Waters or scorching Flames, he is still with them Isa. 43.2.
; and many times by his Presence keeps the Bush from Consuming, when it seems
to be all in a Flame: In afflictions God shows himself most present, when
Friends are most absent; When my Father and Mother forsake me, then the Lord
shall take me up Psalm. 27.10.
, then God will stoop and gather me into his Protection; or, Hebr. shall gather
me, alluding to those Tribes that were to bring up the Rear in the Israelites
March, to take care that none were left behind, and exposed to Famine or wild
Beasts, by reason of some Disease that disennabled them to keep pace with their
Brethren; He that is the Sanctuary of his People in all Calamities, is more
present with them to support them, than their Adversaries can be present with
them to afflict them Psalm. 46.2.
, A present help in the time of Trouble; He is present with all things for this
end; though his Presence be a necessary Presence, in regard of the Immensity of
his Nature; yet the end of this Presence, in regard that it is for the good of
his People, is a voluntary Presence. It Is for the good of man he is present in
the lower World, and principally for the good of his People, for whose sake he
keeps up the World 2 Chronicles. 16.9.
; His eyes run to and fro throughout the whole Earth, to show himself strong in
the behalf of them whose heart is perfect toward him. If he does not deliver
good men from Afflictions, he will be so present as to manage them in them, as
that his Glory shall issue from them, and their Grace be brightned by them
Chrysostom.
.

What a man was Paul when he was lodged in a Prison, or dragged to the Courts
of Judicature, when he was torn with Rods, or laden with Chains! then did he
show the greatest Miracles, made the Judge Tremble upon the Bench, and brake the
Heart, though not the Prison of the Jailer; so powerful is the Presence of God in
the pressures of his People. This Presence outweighs all other Comforts, and is
more valuable to a Christian than Barns of Corn, or Cellars of Wine can be to a
Covetous man Psalm. 4.7.
: It was this Presence was David's Cordial in the mutinying of his Soldiers 1 Samuel 30.6.
. What a Comfort is this in Exile, or a forced desertion of our Habitations!
Good men may be Banished from their Country, but never from the Presence of
their Protector; Ye cannot say of any corner of the Earth, or of any Dungeon in
a Prison, God is not here; if you were cast out of your Country 1000 Miles off,
you are not out of Gods Precinct; his Arm is there to cherish the good as well
as to drag out the wicked; it is the same God, the same Presence in every
Country, as well as the same Sun, Moon and Stars; and were not God every where,
yet he could not be meaner than his Creature, the Sun in the Firmament, which
visits every part of the habitable World in 24 hours.

2. The Omnipresence of God is a Comfort in all Duties of Worship. He is
present to observe, and present to accept our Petitions, and answer our Suits.
Good men have not only the Essential Presence, which is common to all, but his
gracious presence; not only the presence that flows from his nature, but that
which flows from his Promise; his Essential Presence makes no difference
between this and that man in regard of Spirituals, without this in conjunction
with it; his nature is the cause of the Presence of his Essence; his Will
engaged by his Truth, is the cause of the Presence of his Grace. He promised to
meet the Israelites in the place where he should set his name, and in all
places where he does Record it Exodus 20.4.
. In all places where I Record my Name, I will come unto thee, and I will Bless
thee; in every place where I shall manifest the special Presence of my
Divinity. In all places, hands may be lifted up, without doubting of his
ability to hear; he dwells in the contrite Hearts, wherever it is most in the
exercise of contrition; which is usually in times of special Worship Isa. 57.15.
, and that to revive and refresh them. Habitation notes a special Presence;
though he dwell in the highest Heavens in the sparklings of his Glory, he dwells
also in the lowest Hearts in the beams of his Grace; as none can expel him from
his Dwelling in Heaven; so none can reject him from his residence in the heart.
The Tabernacle had his peculiar Presence fixed to it Levit. 26.11.
; his Soul should not abhor them as they are washed by Christ, though they are
loathsome by Sin: In a greater dispensation there cannot be a less Presence,
since the Church under the New Testament, is called the Temple of the Lord,
wherein he will both dwell and walk 2 Cor. 6.6.
; Or. I will indwell in them; as if he should say, I will dwell in and in them;
I will dwell in them by Grace, and walk in them by exciting their Graces; he
will be more intimate with them than their own Souls, and converse with them as
the Living God, i. e. as a God that has Life in himself, and Life to convey to
them in their Converse with him; and show his Spiritual Glory among them in a
greater measure than in the Temple; since that was but a heap of Stones, and
the figure of the Christian Church, the mystical Body of his Son. His presence
is not less in the Substance than it was in the Shadow; this Presence of God in
his Ordinances, is the Glory of a Church; as the Presence of a King is the
Glory of a Court; the Defense of it too, as a Wall of Fire Zech. 2.5.
; alluding to the Fire Travelers in a Wilderness made to fright away wild
Beasts. It Is not the meaness of the place of Worship can exclude him; the
second Temple was not so magnificent as the first of Solomon's Erecting; and
the Jews seem to despond of so glorious a Presence of God in the second, as
they had in the first; because they thought it not so good for the
entertainment of him that inhabits Eternity; but God comforts them against this
conceit again and again Hag. 2.3.4.
; Be strong, Be strong, Be strong, I am with you; the meaness of the place
shall not hinder the grandeur of my Presence; no matter what the Room is, so it
be the Presence Chamber of the King, wherein he will favor our Suits; he can
every where slide into our Souls with a perpetual sweetness, since he is every
where, and so intimate with every one that fears him: If we should see God on
Earth in his amiableness, as Moses did, should we not be encouraged by his
Presence, to present our Requests to him, to Echo out our Praises of him? and
have we not as great a ground now to do it, since he is as really present with
us, as if he were visible to us? he is in the same room with us, as near to us
as our Souls to our Bodies; not a word but he hears, not a motion but he sees,
not a breath but he perceives; he is through all; he is in all.

4. The Omnipresence of God is a comfort in all special Services. God never
puts any upon a hard task, but he makes Promises to encourage them and assist
them; and the matter of the Promise is that of his Presence; so he did assure
the Prophets of Old when he set them difficult tasks; and strengthened Moses
against the Face of Pharaoh, by assuring him he would be with his Mouth Exodus
4.12.
; and when Christ put his Apostles upon a Contest with the whole World, to
Preach a Gospel that would be Foolishness to the Greeks, and a stumbling Block
to the Jews; he gives them a Cordial only composed of his Presence Math. 28.20.
, I will be with you; it is this presence scatters by its Light the darkness of
our Spirits; It Is this that is the cause of what is done for his Glory in the
World; it is this that mingles its self with all that is done for his Honor;
it is this from whence springs all the assistance of his Creatures, marked out
for special purposes.

5. This Presence is not without the special Presence of all his Attributes.
Where his Essence is, his Perfections are; because they are one with his
Essence; yea, they are his Essence, though they have their several degrees of
manifestation. As in the Covenant, he makes over himself as our God, not a part
of himself, but his whole Deity; so in promising of his Presence, he means not
a part of it but the whole, the Presence of all the Excellencies of his nature
to be manifested for our good. It Is not a piece of God is here, and another
parcel there; but God in his whole Essence and Perfections; in his Wisdom to
guide us, his Power to protect and support us, his Mercy to pity us, his
Fullness to refresh us, and his Goodness to relieve us: He is ready to sparkle
out in this or that Perfection, as the necessities of his People require, and
his own Wisdom directs for his own Honor: So that being not far from us in any
excellency of his nature, we can quickly have recourse to him upon any
emergency; so that if we are miserable, we have the presence of his Goodness;
if we want direction, we have the presence of his Wisdom; if we are weak, we
have the presence of his Power; and should we not rejoice in it, as a man does
in the Presence of a Powerful, Wealthy and Compassionate Friend?

3. USE of Exhortation.

1. Let us be much in the actual Thoughts of his Truth. How should we enrich
our understandings with the knowledge of the Excellency of God, whereof this is
none of the least; nor has less of Honey in its Bowels, though it be more
Terrible to the Wicked than the Presence of a Lion; it is this that makes all
other excellencies of the Divine Nature sweet: What would Grace, Wisdom, Power
signify at a distance from us? Let us frame in our minds a strong Idea of it;
it is this makes so great a difference between the actions of one man and
another; one maintains actual thoughts of it, another does not; though all
believe it as a Perfection pertaining to the infiniteness of his Essence.
David, or rather a greater than David, had God always before him; there was no
time, no occasion wherein he did not stir up some lively thoughts of him Psalm,
16.8.
. Let us have right notions of it; imagine not God as a great King, sitting
only in his Majesty in Heaven; acting all by his Servants and Ministers. This,
says one, Musculu^.
is a Childish and unworthy conceit of God, and may in time bring such a
conceiver by degrees to deny his Providence; the denial of this Perfection is
an Axe at the Root of Religion; if it be not deeply imprinted in the mind,
personal Religion grows faint and feeble; who would fear that God that is not
imagined to be a Witness of his actions? Who would worship a God at a distance
both from the Worship and Worshipper Drexel.
? Let us believe this Truth, but not with an idle Faith, as if we did not
believe it; Let us know, that as wheresoever the Fish moves, it is in the
Water; wheresoever the Bird moves, it is in the Air; so wheresoever we move, we
are in God: as there is not a moment but we are under his Mercy; so there is
not a moment that we are out of his Presence: Let us therefore look upon
nothing, without thinking who stands by, without reflecting upon him in whom it
Lives, Moves, and has its Being. When you view a man, you fix your eyes upon
his Body, but your mind upon that invisible part that acts every member by life
and motion, and makes them fit for your converse. Let us not bound our thoughts
to the Creatures we see, but pierce through the Creature to that boundless God
we do not see; we have continual remembrancers of his Presence, the Light
whereby we see, and the Air whereby we live, give us perpetual notices of it,
and some weak resemblance; why should we forget it? yea, what a shame is our
unmindfulness of it, when every cast of our Eye, every motion of our Lungs,
jogs us to remember it? Light is in every part of the Air, in every part of the
World, yet not mixed with any, both remain entire in their own substance. Let us
not be worse than some of the Heathens, who pressed this notion upon themselves
for the spiriting their actions with Virtue, That all places were full of God:
This was the means Basil used to prescribe, upon a Question was asked him, Omnia
Di^plena.
How shall we do to be serious? Mind Gods Presence. How shall we avoid
distractions in Service? Think of Gods Presence. How shall we resist
Temptations? Oppose to them the Presence of God.

1. This will be a Shield against all Temptations. God is present, is enough to
blunt the Weapons of Hell; this will secure us from a ready compliance with any
base and vile attractives, and curb that headstrong Principle in our nature,
that would join hands with them; the Thoughts of this would, like the powerful
Presence of God with the Israelites, take off the Wheels from the Chariots of
our sensitive Appetites, and make them perhaps, more slower, at least toward a
Temptation. How did Peter fling off the Temptation which had worsted him, upon
a look from Christ? the actuated faith of this would stifle the Darts of Satan;
and fire us with an anger against his solicitations, as strong as the Fire
that inflames the Darts. Moses his Sight of him that was Invisible, strengthened
him against the costly Pleasures and Luxuries of a Princes Court Heb. 11 27.
: We are utterly senseless of a Deity, if we are not moved with this Item from
our Consciences, God is Present. Had our first Parents actually considered the
nearness of God to them, when they were Tempted to Eat of the Forbidden Fruit,
they had not probably so easily been overcome by the Temptation: What Soldier
would be so base as to revolt under the Eye of a tender and obliging General?
Or what man so negligent of himself, as to Rob a House in the Sight of a Judge?
Let us consider, That God is as near to observe us, as the Devil to solicit
us, yea nearer; the Devil stands by us, but God is in us; we may have a Thought
the Devil knows not, but not a Thought but God is actually present with, as our
Souls are with the Thoughts they think; nor can any Creature attract our heart,
if our minds were fixed on that invisible Presence that contributes to that
excellency, and sustains it, and considered that no Creature could be so
present with us as the Creator is.

2. It will be a Spur to Holy Actions. What man would do an unworthy action, or
speak an unhandsom Word in the Presence of his Prince? the Eye of the General
inflames the Spirit of a Soldier. Why did David keep Gods Testimonies Psalm. 119
168,
? because he considered that all his ways were before him; because he was
persuaded his ways were present with God, Gods Precepts should be present with
him. The same was the cause of Jobs Integrity Job 31.4.
Does he not see my ways? to have God in our Eye is the way to be sincere Gen
17.^.
; walk before me as in my Sight, and be thou perfect. Communion with God
consists chiefly in an ordering our Ways as in the Presence of him that is
Invisible. This would make us spiritual, raised and watchful in all our
Passions, if we considered that God is present with us in our Shops, in our
Chambers, in our Walks, and in our Meetings, as present with us as with the
Angels in Heaven; who though they have a Presence of Glory above us, yet have not
a greater measure of his Essential Presence than we have: What an awe had Jacob
upon him when he considered God was present in Bethel Genesis 28.16, 17
! If God should appear visibly to us when we were alone, should we not be
reverent and serious before him? God is every where about us, he does encompass
us with his Presence; should not Gods seeing us, have the same influence upon
us, as our seeing God? He is not more essentially present if he should so
manifest himself to us, than when he does not; Who would appear besmeared in
the presence of a great person? or not be ashamed to be found in his Chamber in
a nasty posture, by some visitant? Would not a man blush to be catched about
some mean action, though it were not an immoral Crime? If this Truth were impressed
upon our Spirits, we should more blush to have our Souls daubed with some
loathsome Lust, swarms of Sin, like Egyptian Lice and Frogs, creeping about our
Heart in his Sight. If the most sensual man be ashamed to do a dishonest action
in the sight of a grave and holy man, one of great reputation for Wisdom and
Integrity; how much more should we lift up our selves in the ways of God, who
is Infinite and Immense, is every where, and infinitely superior to man, and
more to be regarded! We could not seriously think of his Presence, but there
would pass some intercourse between us; we should be putting up some Petition
upon the sense of our Indigence; or sending up our Praises to him upon the
sense of his Bounty. The actual thoughts of the Presence of God is the Life and
Spirit of all Religion; we could not have sluggish Spirits, and a careless
Watch, if we considered that his Eye is upon us all the day.

3. It will quell Distractions in Worship. The actual thoughts of this would
establish our thoughts, and pull them back when they begin to rove; The mind
could not boldly give God the slip, if it had lively thoughts of it; the
consideration of this would blow off all the Froth that lies on the top of our
Spirits. An eye taken up with the presence of one object, is not at leisure to
be filled with another: He that looks intently upon the Sun, shall have nothing
for a while but the Sun in his Eye. Oppose to every intruding Thought the Idea
of the Divine Omnipresence, and put it to silence by the awe of his Majesty.
When the Master is present, Scholars mind their Books, keep their Places, and
run not over the Forms to play with one another; The Masters Eye keeps an idle
Servant to his Work, that otherwise would be gazing at every Straw, and prating
to every Passenger. How soon would the remembrance of this, dash all
extravagant fancies out of Countenance, just as the News of the approach of a
Prince would make the Courtiers bustle up themselves, huddle up their vain
sports, and prepare themselves for a Reverent Behavior in his sight. We should
not dare to give God a piece of our heart, when we apprehended him present with
the whole; we should not dare to mock one that we knew were more inwards with
us than we are with our selves, and that beheld every motion of our mind, as
well as action of our body.

2. Let us endeavor for the more special and influential Presence of God. Let
the Essential Presence of God be the ground of our Awe, and his gracious
influential Presence the Object of our Desire. The Heathen thought themselves
secure if they had their little petty Houshold-Gods with them in their
Journeys; such seem to be the Images Rachel stole from her Father Genesis 31.19.
to company her Travel with their Blessings; she might not at that time have
cast off all respect to those Idols, in the acknowledgment of which she had
been Educated from her Infancy; and they seem to be kept by her, till God
called Jacob to Bethel, after the Rape of Dinah Genesis 35.4.
, when Jacob called for the strange Gods, and hid them under the Oak. The
^^^^cious Presence of God we should look after in our actions; as Travelers
that (...) a Charge of Money or Jewels, desire to keep themselves in Company
that may protect them from Highway men that would rifle them. Since we have
the concerns of the Eternal Happiness of our Souls upon our hands, we should
endeavor to have Gods Merciful and Powerful Presence with us in all our ways
Psalm. 14
; In all thy ways acknowledge him, and he shall direct thy Paths; acknowledge him
before any action, by imploring; acknowledge him after, by rendering him the
Glory; acknowledge his Presence before Worship, in Worship, after Worship: It Is
this Presence makes a kind of Heaven upon Earth, causes affliction to put off
the nature of misery. How much will the Presence of the Sun outshine the Stars
of lesser Comforts, and fully answer the want of them! The Ark of God going
before us, can only make all things successful: It was this led the Israelites
over Jordan, and settled them in Canaan. Without this we signify nothing, though
we live without this, we cannot be distinguished for ever from Devils; his
Essential Presence they have, and if we have no more we shall be no better.
It Is the enlivening, fructifying presence of the Sun, that revives the
languishing Earth; and this only can repair our ruined Soul. Let it be
therefore our desire, That as he fills Heaven and Earth by his Essence, he may
fill our Understandings and Wills by his Grace; that we may have another kind
of Presence with us, than Animals have in their brutish state, or Devils in
their Chains: His Essential Presence maintains our Beings, but his gracious
Presence confers and continues a Happiness.

A DISCOURSE UPON Gods Knowledge.
Psalm. 147.5. Great is our Lord, and of great Power: his Understanding is
Infinite.


IT IS uncertain who was the Author of this Psalm, and when it was Penned; some
think after the return from the Babylonish Captivity: It Is a Psalm of Praise,
and is made up of matter of Praise from the beginning to the end; Gods benefits
to the Church, his Providence over his Creatures; the Essential excellency of
his Nature.

The Psalmist doubles his Exhortation to Praise God, v. 1. Praise ye the Lord,
sing Praise to our God; to praise him from his Dominion as Lord, from his Grace
and Mercy as our God; from the Excellency of the Duty it self, it is good, it is
comely: some read it comely, some lovely or desirable, from the various
derivation of the Word.

Nothing does so much delight a gracious Soul, as an opportunity of Celebrating
the Perfections and Goodness of the Creator.

The highest Duties a Creature can render to the Creator are pleasant and
delight-lightful in themselves, it is comely. Praise is a Duty that affects the
whole Soul.

The Praise of God is a decent thing; the Excellency of Gods nature deserves
it, and the Benefits of Gods grace requires it.

It Is comely when done as it ought to be, with the Heart as well as with the
Voice: a Sinner Sings ill though his Voice be good; the Soul in it is to be
elevated above Earthly things.

The first matter of Praise, is Gods erecting and preserving his Church, v. 2.
The Lord does build up Jerusalem, he gathers together the outcasts of Israel:
The Walls of demolished Jerusalem are now re-edified; God has brought back the
Captivity of Jacob, and reduced his People from their Babylonish Exile, and
those that were dispersed into strange Regions, he has restored to their
Habitations. Or it may be Prophetic of the calling of the Gentiles, and the
gathering the outcasts of the Spiritual Israel, that were before as without
God in the World, and strangers to the Covenant of Promise. Let God be praised,
but especially for Building up his Church, and gathering the Gentiles, before
counted as outcasts Isa^ 11.12.
; he gathers them in this World to the Faith, and hereafter to Glory.

Obs. 1. From the two first Verses observe.

1. All People are under Gods Care: but he has a particular regard to his
Church. This is the Signet on his hand, as a Bracelet upon his arm; this is his
Garden which he delights to dress; if he prunes it, it is to purge it; if he
Digs about his Vine, and wounds the Branches, it is to make it more Beautiful
with new Clusters, and restore it to a fruitful Vigor.

2. All great deliverances are to be ascribed to God, as the principal Author,
whosoever are the Instruments. The Lord does build up Jerusalem, he gathers
together the out^^^s of Israel. This great deliverance from Babylon, is not to
be ascribed to Cyrus or Darius, or the rest of our favorers; it is the Lord
that does it; we had his Promise for it, we have now his Performance. Let us
not ascribe that which is the effect of his Truth, only to the good Will of
men; it is Gods act, not by Might, nor by Power, nor by Weapons of War, or
strength of Horses, but by the Spirit of the Lord. He sent Prophets to comfort
us while we were exiles; and now he has stretched out his own Arm to work our
deliverance, according to his Word; blind man looks so much upon Instruments,
that he hardly takes notice of God, either in Afflictions or Mercies, and this
is the cause that robs God of so much Prayer and Praise in the World.

Verse 3. He heals the broken in heart, and binds up their Wounds. He has now
restored those who had no hope but in his Word; he has dealt with them as a
tender and skilful Surgeon; he has applied his curing Plasters, and
dropped in his Sovereign Balsams; he has now furnished our fainting hearts with
refreshing Cordials, and comforted our Wounds with strengthening Ligatures.

How gracious is God, that restores Liberty to the Captives, and Righteousness
to the Penitent? man's misery is the fittest opportunity for God to make his
Mercy illustrious in it self, and most welcome to the Patient.

He proceeds verse 4. Wonder not that God calls together the outcasts, and
singles them out from every corner, for a return; why can he not do this, as
well as tell the number of the Stars, and call them all by their Names Ver. 4.
?

There are none of his People so despicable in the eye of man, but they are
known and regarded by God; though they are clouded in the World, yet they are the
Stars of the World; and shall God number the inanimate Stars in the Heavens,
and make no account of his living Stars on the Earth? no, wherever they are
dispersed, he will not forget them; however they are afflicted, he will not
despise them; the Stars are so numerous, that they are innumerable by man; some
are visible and known by men, others lie more hid and undiscovered in a
confused Light, as those in the Milkyway, man cannot see one of them distinctly.

God knows all his People. As he can do what is above the power of man to
perform, so he understands what is above the skill of man to discover; shall
man measure God by his scantiness? Proud man must not equal himself to God, nor
cut God as short as his own Line.

He tells the number of the Stars, and calls them all by their Names. He has
them all in his List; as Generals the Names of their Soldiers in their
Muster-Roll, for they are his Host, which he Marshals in the Heavens, as Isa.
40.26. where you have the like Expression; he knows them more distinctly than
man can know any thing, and so distinctly as to call them all by their Names:
He knows their Names, that is, their natural offices, influences, the different
degrees of heat and light, their order and motion; and all of them, the least
glimmering Star as well as the most glaring Planet; this man cannot do; Tell
the Stars if thou be able to number them, Genesis 15.5. says God to Abraham (whom
Josephus represents as a great Astronomer) yea they cannot be numbered, Jer.
33.22. and the uncertainty of the Opinions of men, evidenceth their ignorance
of their number; some reckoning 1022, others 1025, others 1098, others 7000,
besides those that by reason of their mixture of Light with one another, cannot
be distinctly discerned, and others perhaps so high, as not to be reached by
the eye of man. To impose Names on things, and Names according to their
Natures, is both an Argument of Power and Dominion, and of Wisdom and
Understanding: from the imposition of Names upon the Creatures by Adam, the
Knowledge of Adam is generally concluded; and it was also a fruit of that
Dominion God allowed him over the Creatures. Now he that Numbers and Names the
Stars that seem to lie confused among one another, as well as those that appear
to us in an unclouded Night, may well be supposed accurately to know his
People, though lurking in secret Caverns, and know those that are fit to be
Instruments of their deliverance; the one is as easy to him as the other; and
the Number of the one as distinctly known by him, as the Multitude of the other.

For great is our Lord, and of great Power, his Understanding is Infinite Ver.
5.
. He wants not Knowledge to know the objects, nor Power to effect his Will
concerning them. Of great Power (...)
. Much Power, plenteous in Power; so the word (...) is rendered Psalm. 5.15 (...)
. a multitude of Power, as well as a multitude of Mercy; a Power that exceeds
all Created Power and Understanding.

His Understanding is Infinite. You may not imagine how he can call all the
Stars by Name; the multitude of the visible being so great, and the multitude
of the invisible being greater; but you must know, that as God is Almighty, so
he is Omniscient; and as there is no end of his Power, so no account can
exactly be given of his Understanding; His Understanding is Infinite (...)
. No number or account of it; and so the same Words are rendered Joel 1.6. a
Nation strong, and without number: No end of his Understanding; Syriack, no
measure, no bounds. His Essence is Infinite, and so is his Power and
Understanding; and so vast is his Knowledge, that we can no more comprehend it,
than we can measure spaces that are without limits, or tell the minutes or
hours of Eternity. Who then can fathom that whereof there is no number, but
which exceeds all, so that there is no searching of it out (...)
? he knows Universals, he knows Particulars: We must not take understanding
here, as noting a faculty, but the use of the understanding in the knowledge of
things, and the Judgment in the consideration of them, and so it is often used.

In the Verse there is a description of God.

1. In his Essence, great is our Lord.

2. In his Power, of great Power.

3. In his Knowledge, his Understanding is Infinite; his Understanding is his
Eye, and his Power is his Arm. Of his Infinite Understanding, I am to Discourse.

Doctrine. God has an Infinite Knowledge and Understanding. All Knowledge.
Omnipresence which before we spoke of, respects his Essence; Omniscience,
respects his Understanding, according to our manner of Conception.

This is clear in Scripture; hence God is called a God of Knowledge, 1 Samuel 2.3.
The Lord is a God of Knowledge, Heb. Knowledges in the Plural Number, of all
kind of Knowledge; it is spoken there to quell man's Pride in his own reason and
parts; what is the Knowledge of man but a spark to the whole Element of Fire, a
grain of Dust, and worse than nothing, in comparison of the Knowledge of God, as
his Essence is in comparison of the Essence of God? All kind of Knowledge. He
knows what Angels know, what Man knows, and infinitely more; he knows himself,
his own operations, all his Creatures, the notions and thoughts of them; he is
understanding above understanding, mind above mind, the mind of minds, the
light of lights; this the Greek word (...) signifies in the Etimology of it, of
(...) to see, to contemplate; and (...) of (...) scio. The Names of God signify
a nature viewing and piercing all things; and the attribution of our senses to
God in Scripture, as Hearing and Seeing, which are the Senses whereby Knowledge
enters into us, signifies Gods Knowledge.

1. The Notion of Gods Knowledge of all things lies above the ruins of Nature;
it was not obliterated by the Fall of Man. It was necessary offending man was
to know that he had a Creator whom he had injured, that he had a Judge to Try
and Punish him; since God thought fit to keep up the World, it had been kept up
to no purpose, had not this notion been continued alive in the minds of men;
there would not have been any practice of his Laws, no bar to the worst of
Crimes. If men had thought they had to deal with an Ignorant Deity, there could
be no practice of Religion: Who would lift up his eyes, or spread his hands
toward Heaven, if he imagined his Devotion were directed to a God as blind as
the Heathens imagined Fortune? To what boot would it be for them to make Heaven
and Earth resound with their Cries, if they had not thought God had an Eye to
see them, and an Ear to hear them? And indeed the very notion of a God at the
first blush, speaks him a Being endued with Understanding; no man can imagine a
Creator void of one of the noblest Perfections belonging to those Creatures
that are the Flower and Cream of his Works.

2. Therefore all Nations acknowledge this, as well as the Existence and Being
of God. * No Nation but had their Temples, particular Ceremonies of Worship,
and presented their Sacrifices, which they could not have been so vain as to
do, without an acknowledgment of this Attribute. This notion of Gods Knowledge
owed not its rise to Tradition, but to natural implantation; it was born and
grew up with every rational Creature. Though the several Nations and men of the
World agreed not in one kind of Deity, or in their Sentiments of his Nature or
other Perfections, some judging him Clothed with a fine and pure Body; others
judging him an uncompounded Spirit; some fixing him to a seat in the Heavens;
others owning his Universal Presence in all parts of the World; yet they all
agreed in the Universality of his Knowledge; and their own Consciences
reflecting their Crimes, unknown to any but themselves, would keep this notion
in some vigor whether they would or no. Now this being implanted in the minds
of all men by nature, cannot be false; for nature imprints not in the minds of
all men an assent to a falsity. Nature would not pervert the reason and minds
of men: Universal notions of God are from Original, not lapsed Nature,
Agamemnon, Homer Il. 3. v 8. making a Covenant with Priam, invocates the Su^
(...).
and preserved in mankind in order to a restoration from a lapsed state. The
Heathens did acknowledge this: in all the solemn Covenants, solemnized with
Oaths and the invocation of the Name of God, this Attribute was supposed. They
confessed Knowledge to be peculiar to the Deity; Scientia Deorum vita, says
Cicero. Some called him (...), men's, mind, pure understanding, without any note
(...), the inspector of all. As they called him Life, because he was the Author
of Life; so they called him intellectus, because he was the Author of all
Knowledge and Understanding in his Creatures; And one being asked, Whether any
man could be hid from God? no says he, not so much as thinking: Some call him
the Eye of the World Gamach in 1 Pa. Aqui. Q. 14. cap. 1. p. 119. Clem.
Alexand. strom lib. 6.
; and the Egyptians represented God by an Eye on the top of a Scepter, because
God is all Eye, and can be ignorant of nothing.

And the same Nation made Eyes and Ears of the most excellent Metals,
Consecrating them to God, and hanging them up in the midst of their Temples, in
signification of Gods seeing and hearing all things; hence they called God
Light, as well as the Scripture, because all things are visible to him.

For the better understanding of this, we will enquire, 1. What kind of
Knowledge or Understanding there is in God. 2. What God knows. 3. How God knows
things. 4. The proof, that God knows all things. 5. The Use of all to our
selves.


I. What kind of Understanding or Knowledge there is in God?

The Knowledge of God in Scripture has various Names, according to the various
relations or objects of it: In respect of present things, it is called Knowledge
or Sight; in respect of things past, Remembrance; in respect of things future,
or to come, it is called Fore-Knowledg or Prescience, 1 Pet. 1.2. in regard of
the Universality of the Objects, it is called Omniscience; in regard of the
simple Understanding of things it is called Knowledge; in regard of acting and
modelling the ways of acting, it is called Wisdom and Prudence, Ephesians. 1.8. He
must have Knowledge, otherwise he could not be Wise; Wisdom is the Flower of
Knowledge, and Knowledge is the Root of Wisdom.

As to what this Knowledge is; if we know what Knowledge is in man, we may
apprehend what it is in God, removing all Imperfection from it, and ascribing
to him the most eminent way of understanding; because we cannot comprehend God,
but as he is pleased to condescend to us in his own ways of Discovery; that is,
under some way of similitude to his perfectest Creatures; therefore we have a
notion of God by his Understanding and Will; Understanding, whereby he
conceives and apprehends things; Will, whereby he extends himself in acting
according to his Wisdom, and whereby he does approve or disapprove: Yet we must
not measure his Understanding by our own, or think it to be of so gross a
Temper as a Created mind; that he has Eyes of Flesh, or sees or knows as man
sees Job 10.4.
. We can no more measure his Knowledge by ours, than we can measure his Essence
by our Essence: As he has an incomprehensible Essence, to which ours is but as
a Drop of a Bucket; so he has an incomprehensible Knowledge, to which ours is
but as a grain of Dust, or mere Darkness: his thoughts are above our thoughts,
as the Heavens are above the Earth.

The Knowledge of God is variously divided by the Schools, and acknowledged by
all Divines.

1. A Knowledge visionis and simplicis intelligentiae; the one we may call a
Sight, the other an Understanding; the one refers to sense, the other to the
mind.

1. A Knowledge of Vision or Sight; Thus God knows himself and all things that
really were, are, or shall be in time; all those things which he has Decreed
to be, though they are not yet actually sprung up in the World, but lie couchant
in their Causes.

2. A Knowledge of Intelligence, or simple Understanding; the object of this is
not things that are in Being, or that shall by any Decree of God ever be
existent in the World; but such things as are possible to be wrought by the
Power of God, though they shall never in the least peep up into Being, but lie
for ever wrapped up in Darkness and nothing Suarez de Deo lib. 3. cap. 4. p. 130.
. This also is a necessary Knowledge to be allowed to God, because the object of
this Knowledge is necessary. The possibility of more Creatures than ever were or
shall be, is a conclusion that has a necessary Truth in it; as it is necessary
that the power of God can produce more Creatures, though it be not necessary that
it should produce more Creatures; so it is necessary that whatsoever the Power
of God can work, is possible to be. And as God knows this possibility, so he
knows all the objects that are thus possible; and herein does much consist the
Infiniteness of his Knowledge, as shall be shown presently.

These two kinds of Knowledge differ; That of Vision, is of things which God
has Decreed to be, though they are not yet. That of Intelligence, is of things
which never shall be; yet they may be, or are possible to be, if God please to
Will and Order their Being; one respects things that shall be; the other,
things that may be, and are not repugnant to the Nature of God to be: The
Knowledge of Vision follows the Act of Gods Will, and supposes an Act of Gods
Will before, Decreeing things to be. (If we could suppose any first or second
in Gods Decree, we might say God knew them as possible before he Decreed them;
he knew them as future because he Decreed them.) For without the Will of God
Decreeing a thing to come to pass, God cannot know that it will infallibly come
to pass. But the Knowledge of Intelligence stands without any Act of his Will,
in order to the Being of those things he knows; he knows possible things only
in his Power; he knows other things both in his Power, as able to effect them;
and in his Will, as determining the Being of them; such Knowledge we must grant
to be in God, for there is such a kind of knowledge in man; for man does not
only know and see what is before his eyes in this World, but he may have a
conception of many more Worlds, and many more Creatures, which he knows are
possible to the Power of God.

2. Secondly, There is a speculative and practical knowledge in God.

1. A speculative knowledge is, when the truth of a thing is known without a
respect to any working or practical operation. The knowledge of things possible
is in God only speculative, Suarez de Deo lib. 3. cap. 4. p. 138.
and some say Gods knowledge of himself is only speculative, because there is
nothing for God to work in himself: and though he knows himself, yet this
knowledge of himself does not terminate there, but flowers into a love of
himself, and delight in himself; yet this love of himself, and delight in
himself, is not enough to make it a practical knowledge, because it is natural,
and naturally and necessarily flows from the knowledge of himself and his own
Goodness: he cannot but love himself, and delight in himself, upon the knowledge
of himself. But that which is properly practice, is where there is a dominion
over the action, and it is wrought not naturally and necessarily, but in a way
of freedom and counsel. As when we see a beautiful Flower or other thing, there
arises a delight in the mind; this no man will call Practice, because it is a
natural affection of the Will, arising from the virtue of the object, without
any consideration of the Understanding in a practical manner by counselling,
commanding, etc.

2. A Practical knowledge, which tends to operation and practice, and is the
principle of working about things that are known; as the knowledge an Artificer
has in an Art or Mystery. This knowledge is in God: the knowledge he has of the
things he has decreed, is such a kind of knowledge; for it terminates in the
act of Creation, which is not a natural and necessary act, as the loving
himself, and delighting in himself is, but wholly free: for it was at his
liberty whether he would create them or no; this is called discretion, Jer.
10.12. He has stretched out the heavens by his discretion. Such also is his
knowledge of the things he has created, and which are in being, for it
terminates in the government of them for his own glorious ends. It Is by this
knowledge the depths are broken up, and the clouds drop down their dew Prove 3 20.
. This is a knowledge whereby he knows the essence, qualities, and properties of
what he creates and governs in order to his own glory, and the common good of
the World over which he resides; so that speculative knowledge is Gods knowledge
of himself and things possible, practical knowledge is his knowledge of his
creatures and things governable; yet in some sort this practical knowledge is
not only of things that are made, but of things which are possible, which God
might make, though he will not: for as he knows that they can be created, so he
knows how they are to be created, and how to be governed, though he never will
create them. This is a practical knowledge: for it is not requisite to
constitute a knowledge practical, actually to act, but that the knowledge in it
self be referrible to action Suarez de Deo l. 3. c. 4. p. 140.
.

3. There is a knowledge of approbation, as well as apprehension. This the
Scripture often mentions: words of understanding are used to signify the acts
of affection. This knowledge adds to the simple act of the understanding, the
complacency and pleasure of the will; and is improperly knowledge, because it
belongs to the Will, and not to the Understanding; only it is radically in the
understanding, because affection implies knowledge; men cannot approve of that
which they are ignorant of. Thus knowledge is taken, Amos 3.2. You only have I
known of all the families of the earth. And 2 Timothy 2.19. The Lord knows who are
his, that is, he loves them; he does not only know them, but acknowledge them
for his own: it notes not only an exact understanding, but a special care of
them; and so is that to be understood, Genesis 1. God saw every thing that he had
made, and behold it was very good: that is, he saw it with an eye of
approbation, as well as apprehension. This is grounded upon Gods knowledge of
Vision, his sight of his creatures; for God does not love or delight in any
thing but what is actually in being, or what he has decreed to bring into
being. On the contrary also, when God does not approve, he is said not to know,
Mat. 25.12. I know you not: and Mat. 7.23. I never knew you: he does not
approve of their Works: it is not an ignorance of Understanding, but an
ignorance of Will; for whiles he says he never knew them, he testifies that he
did know them, in rendering the reason of his disapproving them, because he
knows all their Works: so he knows them, and does not know them, in a different
manner: he knows them so as to understand them; but he does not know them so as
to love them.

We must then ascribe an universal knowledge to God. If we deny him a
speculative knowledge, or knowledge of intelligence, we destroy his Deity, we
make him ignorant of his own Power: if we deny him Practical knowledge, we deny
our selves to be his creatures: for as his creatures, we are the fruits of this
his discretion discovered in Creation: if we deny his knowledge of Vision, we
deny his governing Dominion. How can he exercise a Sovereign and uncontrollable
Dominion, that is ignorant of the nature and qualities of the things he is to
govern? If he had not Knowledge, he could make no Revelation; he that knows not,
cannot dictate; we could then have no Scripture. To deny God Knowledge, is to
dash out the Scripture, and demolish the Deity.

God is described in Zech. 3.9. with seven eyes, to show his perfect Knowledge
of all things, all Occurrences in the World; and the Cherubims, or whatsoever
is meant by the Wings, are described to be full of Eyes, both before and behind
Ezekiel 1.18
, round about them; much more is God all Eye, all Ear, all Understanding. The
Sun is a natural Image of God, if the Sun had an Eye, it would see; if it had
an Understanding, it would know all visible things; it would see what it
shines upon, and understand what it influenceth in the most obscure Bowels of
the Earth. Does God excel his Creature the Sun in Excellency and Beauty, and
not in Light and Understanding? certainly more than the Sun excels an Atome or
grain of Dust.

We may yet make some representation of this Knowledge of God by a lower thing,
a Picture, which seems to look upon every one, though there be never so great a
multitude in the Room where it hangs; no man can cast his Eye upon it, but it
seems to behold him in particular, and so exactly as if there were none but him
upon whom the eye of it were fixed; and every man finds the same cast of it;
shall Art frame a thing of that Nature, and shall not the God of Art and all
Knowledge, be much more in reality than that is in imagination? Shall not God
have a far greater capacity to behold everything in the World, which is
infinitely less to him than a wide Room to a Picture?

II. The second thing, what God knows? how far his Understanding reaches?

1. God knows himself, and only knows himself. This is the first and original
knowledge, wherein he excells all Creatures: No man does exactly know himself;
much less does he understand the full nature of a Spirit; much less still the
Nature and Perfections of God; for what proportion can there be between a
finite faculty and an infinite object? Herein consists the Infiniteness of Gods
Knowledge, That he knows his own Essence, that he knows that which is unknowable
to any else. It does not so much consist in knowing the Creatures which he has
made, as in knowing himself who was never made. It Is not so much infinite,
because he knows all things which are in the World, or that shall be; or things
that he can make, because the number of them is finite; but because he has a
perfect and comprehensive knowledge of his own infinite Perfections Moulin.
. Though it be said that Angels see his Face, Math. 18.10. that sight notes
rather their immediate Attendance, than their exact Knowledge; they see some
signs of his Presence and Majesty, more illustrious and express than ever
appeared to man in this Life; but the Essence of God is invisible to them, hid
from them in the secret place of Eternity; none knows God but himself, 1 Cor.
2.11. what man knows the things of a man save the spirit of a man? so the
things of God knows no man but the spirit of God; the spirit of God searches
the deep things of God; searches, that is, exactly knows, thoroughly
understands, as those who have their eyes in every Chink and Crevis, to see
what lies hid there; the word search, notes not an Enquiry, but an exact
Knowledge, such as men have of things upon a diligent scrutiny; as when God is
said to search the Heart and the Reins, it does not signify a precedent
ignorance, but an exact Knowledge of the most intimate corners of the hearts of
men. As the Conceptions of men are unknown to any but themselves; so the depths
of the Divine Essence, Perfections and Decrees, are unknown to any but to God
himself; he only knows what he is, and what he knows, what he can do, and what
he has Decreed to do.

1. For first, If God did not know himself, he would not be perfect. It Is the
Perfection of a Creature to know it self, much more a Perfection belonging to
God. If God did not comprehend himself, he would want an Infinite Perfection,
and so would cease to be God, in being defective in that which intellectual
Creatures in some measure possess. As God is the most perfect Being, so he must
have the most perfect Understanding: If he did not understand himself, he would
be under the greatest Ignorance, because he would be ignorant of the most
excellent object. Ignorance is the Imperfection of the Understanding; and
ignorance of ones self is a greater Imperfection than ignorance of things
without. If God should know all things without himself, and not know himself,
he would not have the most perfect Knowledge, because he would not have the
knowledge of the best of objects.

2. Without the Knowledge of himself, he could not be blessed. Nothing can have
any complacency in it self, without the Knowledge of it self. Nothing can in a
rational manner enjoy it self, without understanding it self. The Blessedness
of God consists not in the knowledge of any thing without him, but in the
knowledge of himself and his own excellency, as the principle of all things; If
therefore he did not perfectly know himself and his own happiness, he could not
enjoy a happiness; for to be, and not to know to be, is as if a thing were not.
He is God blessed for ever, Romans 9.5. and therefore for ever had a Knowledge of
himself.

3. Without the Knowledge of himself he could Create nothing. For he would be
ignorant of his own Power, and his own Ability; and he that does not know how
far his Power extends, could not act: If he did not know himself, he could know
nothing; and he that knows nothing, can do nothing; he could not know an Effect
to be possible to him, unless he knew his own Power as a Cause.

4. Without the Knowledge of himself, he could govern nothing. He could not
without the knowledge of his own Holiness and Righteousness, prescribe Laws to
men, nor without a knowledge of his own nature, order himself a manner of
Worship suitable to it.

All Worship must be congruous to the dignity and nature of the object
worshipped; he must therefore know his own Authority whereby Worship was to be
enacted, his own Excellency to which Worship was to be suited, his own Glory to
which Worship was to be directed. If he did not know himself, he did not know
what to punish, because he would not know what was contrary to himself: not
knowing himself, he would not know what was a contempt of him, and what an
adoration of him; what was worthy of God, and what was unworthy of him. In
fine, he could not know other things, unless he knew himself: unless he knew
his own Power, he could not know how he created things: unless he knew his own
Wisdom, he could not know the beauty of his Works: unless he knew his own
Glory, he could not know the end of his Works: unless he knew his own Holiness,
he could not know what was evil: and unless he knew his own Justice, he could
not know how to punish the Crimes of his offending creatures. And therefore,

1. God knows himself, because his Knowledge with his Will is the cause of all
other things that can fall under his cognizance: he knows himself first, before
he can know any other thing; that is, first according to our conceptions; for
indeed God knovvs himself and all other things at once; He is the first Truth,
and therefore is the first object of his own understanding. There is nothing
more excellent than himself, and therefore nothing more known to him than
himself. As he is all Knowledge, so he has in himself the most excellent
object of Knowledge. To understand is properly to know ones self. No object is
so intelligible to God as God is to himself; nor so intimately and immediately
joined with his Understanding as himself: for his Understanding is his
Essence, himself.

2. He knows himself by his own Essence. He knovvs not himself and his own
Power, by the effect, because he knovvs himself from Eternity, before there
was a World, or any effect of his Power extant. It Is not a knowledge by the
Cause, for God has no cause; nor a knowledge of himself by any species or any
thing from without: If it were any thing from without himself, that must be
created or uncreated; if uncreated, it would be God; and so we must either
own many Gods, or own it to be his Essence, and so not distinct from himself:
If created, then his knowledge of himself would depend upon a creature; he
could not then know himself from eternity, but in time, because nothing can be
created from eternity, but in time. God knovvs not himself by any faculty, for
there is no composition in God, he is not made up of parts, but is a simple
being; some therefore have called God, not intellectus, understanding, because
that savours of a faculty; but intellectio, intellection. God is all act in the
knowledge of himself, and his knowledge of other things.

3. God therefore knows himself perfectly, comprehensively. Nothing in his own
nature is concealed from him, he reflects upon every thing that he is
Magalaneus.
. There is a positive comprehension, so God does not comprehend himself; for
what is comprehended, has bounds; and what is comprehended by it self, is
finite to it self: and there is a negative comprehension, God so comprehends
himself; nothing in his own nature is obscure to him, unknown by him. For
there is as great a perfection in the understanding of God to know, as there
is in the Divine nature to be known. The Understanding of God, and the Nature
of God, are both infinite, and so equal to one another; his Understanding is
equal to himself; he knovvs himself so well, that nothing can be known by him
more perfectly, than himself is known to himself. He knovvs himself in the
highest manner, because nothing is so proportioned to the Understanding of God
as himself: He knovvs his own Essence, Goodness, Power, all his Perfections,
Decrees, Intentions, Acts, the infinite capacity of his own Understanding, so
that nothing of himself is in the dark to himself. And in this respect some use
this expression, That the Infiniteness of God is in a manner finite to himself,
because it is comprehended by himself.

Thus God transcends all Creatures; thus his Understanding is truly Infinite,
because nothing but himself is an infinite Object for it: What Angels may
understand of themselves perfectly, I know not; but no Creature in the World
understands himself: Man understands not fully the excellency and parts of his
own nature; upon Gods knowledge of himself depends the Comfort of his People,
and the Terror of the Wicked; this is also a clear Argument for his Knowledge of
all other things, without himself; he that knows himself, must needs know all
other things less than himself, and which were made by himself: When the
knowledge of his own Immensity and Infiniteness is not an object too difficult
for him; the knowledge of a finite and limited Creature in all his actions,
thoughts, circumstances, cannot be too hard for him. Since he knows himself who
is Infinite, he cannot but know whatsoever is Finite; this is the Foundation of
all his other Knowledge; the knowledge of every thing present, past, and to come,
is far less than the knowledge of himself. He is more incomprehensible in his
own nature, than all things Created, or that can be Created, put together can
be: If he then have a perfect comprehensive knowledge of his own nature, any
knowledge of all other things is less than the knowledge of himself; this ought
to be well considered by us, as the Fountain whence all his other knowledge
flows.

2. Therefore God knows all other things, whether they be possible, past,
present, or future.

Whether they be things that he can do, but will never do; or Whether they be
things that he has done, but are not now; things that are now in Being, or
things that are not now existing, that lie in the Womb of their proper and
immediate Causes Perav. Theol. Dogm. lib. p. 257.
; If his understanding be Infinite, he then knows all things whatsoever that
can be known, else his Understanding would have bounds, and what has limits is
not infinite, but finite; if he be ignorant of any one thing that is knowable,
that is a bound to him, it comes with an exceptions, a but, God knows all
things but this, a bar is then set to his Knowledge. If there were any thing,
any particular circumstance in the whole Creation, or Non-Creation, and
possible to be known by him, and yet were unknown to him, he could not be
said to be Omniscient. As he would not be Almighty, if any one thing that
employed not a repugnancy to his Nature, did transcend his Power.

1. First, all things possible. No Question but God knovvs what he could
create, as well as what he has created: what he would not Create, as well
as what he resolved to Create; he knevv what he would not do, before he
willed to do it; this is the next thing which declares the Infiniteness of
his Understanding: For as his Power is infinite, and can Create innumerable
Worlds and Creatures; so is his Knowledge infinite, in knovving innumerable
things possible to his Power. Possibles are infinite; that is, there is no end
of what God can do, and therefore no end of what God does know; otherwise
his Power would be more Infinite than his Knowledge: If he knevv only what
is Created, there would be an end of his Understanding, because all Creatures
may be numbered, but possible things cannot be reckoned up by any Creature:
There is the same reason of this in Eternity; when never so many numbers of
Years are run out, there is still more to come, there still wants an end; and
when Millions of Worlds are Created, there is no more an end of Gods Power,
than of Eternity: Thus there is no end of his Understanding; that is, his
Knowledge is not terminated by any thing.

This the Scripture gives us some account of; God knows things that are not,
for he calls things that are not, as if they were, Romans 4.17. he calls things
that are not, as if they were in Being; what he calls is not unknown to him: If
he knows things that are not, he knows things that may never be; as he knows
things that shall be, because he Wills them; so he knows things that might be,
because he is able to effect them: He knew that the Inhabitants of Kelah would
betray David to Saul, if he remained in that place, 1 Samuel 23.11. he knew what
they would do upon that occasion, though it was never done; as he knew what was
in their Power and in their Wills, so he must needs know what is within the
compass of his own Power: As he can permit more than he does permit; so he
knovvs what he can permit, and what upon that permission would be done by
his Creatures; so God knevv the possibility of the Tyrians Repentance, if they
had had the same means, heard the same Truths, and beheld the same Miracles
which were offered to the Ears, and presented to the Eyes of the Jews, Matthew.
11.21.

This must needs be so, because

1. Man knows things that are possible to him, though he will never effect them.
A Carpenter knows a House in the model he has of it in his head, though he never
build a House according to that model: A Watch-maker has the frame of a Watch
in his mind, which he will never work with his Instruments: Man knows what he
could do, though he never intends to do it Fici^ de immort. lib. 2. cap. 10.
. As the Understanding of man has a virtue, that where it sees one man, it may
imagine Thousands of men of the same shape, stature, form, parts; yea taller,
more vigorous, spritely, intelligent than the man he sees; because it is
possible such a number may be. Shall not the understanding of God much more
know what he is able to effect, since the understanding of man can know what he
is never able to produce, yet may be produced by God, viz. that he who produced
this man which I see, can produce a Thousand exactly like him? If the Divine
Understanding did not know infinite things, but were confined to a certain
number; it may be demanded whether God can understand any thing farther than
that number, or whether he cannot? If he can, then he does actually understand
all those things which he has a power to understand; otherwise there would be
an increase of Gods knowledge, if it were actually now, and not before, and so
he would be more perfect than he was before; if he cannot understand them, then
he cannot understand what a human mind can understand; for our understandings
can multiply Numbers in infinitum; and there is no number so great, but a man
can still add to it; We must suppose the Divine Understanding more excellent in
Knowledge. God knows all that a man can imagine, though it never were, nor never
shall be; he must needs know whatsoever is in the Power of man to imagine or
think, because God concurs to the support of the faculty in that Imagination;
and though it may be replied, an Atheist may imagine that there is no God; a man
may imagine that God can Lie, or that he can be destroyed; does God know
therefore that he is not? or that he can Lie, or cease to be? No, he knows he
cannot; his Knowledge extends to things possible, not to things impossible to
himself; he knows it as imaginable by man, not as possible in it self; because
it is utterly impossible, and repugnant to the nature of God, since he eminently
contains in himself all things possible, past, present and to come; he cannot
know himself without knowing them.

2. God knowing his own power, knows whatsoever is in his power to effect. If
he knows not all things possible, he could not know the extent of his own
power, and so would not know himself, as a cause sufficient for more things
than he has Created: How can he comprehend himself, who comprehends not all
effluxes of things possible that may come from him and be wrought by him? How
can he know himself as a cause, if he know not the Objects and Works which he
is able to produce Gamach.
? Since the power of God extends to numberless things, his Knowledge also
extends to numberless objects; as if a Unite could see the numbers it could
produce, it would see Infinite numbers; for a Unite is, as it were, all Number.
God knowing the fruitfulness of his own Virtue, knows a numberless multitude of
things which he can do, more than have been done, or shall be done by him; he
therefore knows innumerable Worlds, innumerable Angels, with higher Perfections
than any of them which he has Created, have: So that if the World should last
many Millions of Years, God knows that he can every day Create another World
more capacious than this; and having Created an unconceivable number, he knows
he could still Create more: So that he beholds infinite Worlds, infinite
numbers of Men and other Creatures in himself, infinite kinds of things,
infinite species and individuals under those kinds, even as many as he can
Create, if his Will did order and determine it Ficin de immort. lib. 2. cap. 10.
; for not being ignorant of his own Power, he cannot be ignorant of the effects
wherein it may display and discover it self. A comprehensive knowledge of his
own Power does necessarily include the objects of that power; so he knows
whatsoever he could effect, and whatsoever he could permit, if he pleased to do
it.

If God could not understand more than he has created, he could not create
more than he has created: for it cannot be conceived how he can create any
thing that he is ignorant of; what he does not know, he cannot do: he must know
also the extent of his own goodness, and how far any thing is capable to
partake of it: so much therefore as any detract from the Knowledge of God, they
detract from his Power.

3. It Is further evident that God knows all possible things, because he knew
those things which he has created, before they were created, when they were yet
in a possibility. If God knew things before they were created, he knew them
when they were in a possibility, and not in actual reality. It Is absurd to
imagine that his Understanding did lacquy after the creatures, and draw
knowledge from them after they were created. It Is absurd to think that God did
create, before he knew what he could or would create. If he knew those things
he did create when they were possible, he must know all things which he can
create, and therefore all things that are possible.

To conclude this, We must consider that this Knowledge is of another kind than
his knowledge of things that are or shall be. He sees possible things as
possible, not as things that ever are or shall be. If he saw them as existing
or future, and they shall never be, this knowledge would be false, there would
be a deceit in it, which cannot be. He knows those things not in themselves,
because they are not, nor in their causes because they shall never be: he knows
them in his own Power, not in his Will: He understands them as able to produce
them, not as willing to effect them. Things possible he knows only in his
Power, things future he knows both in his Power and his Will, as he is both
able and determined in his own good pleasure to give being to them. Those that
shall never come to pass, he knows only in himself, as a sufficient cause;
those things that shall come into being, he knows in himself as the efficient
cause, and also in their immediate second causes.

This should teach us to spend our thoughts in the admirations of the
excellency of God, and the divine Knowledge; his Understanding is infinite.

2. God knows all things past. This is an argument used by God himself to
elevate his Excellency above all the commonly adored Idols, Isa. 41.22. Let
them show the former things, what they be, that we may consider them, and know
the latter end of them. He knows them as if they were now present, and not
past: for indeed in his Eternity there is nothing past or future to his
knowledge. This is called remembrance in Scripture, as when God remembered
Rachels prayer for a child, Genesis 30.22. and he is said to put tears into his
bottle, and write them in his Book of Accounts, which signifies the exact and
unerring knowledge in God of the minute circumstances past in the World; and
this knowledge is called a book of remembrance, Mal. 3.16. signifying the
perpetual presence of things past, before him. There are two elegant
expressions, signifying the certainty and perpetuity of Gods knowledge of sins
past, Job 14.17. My transgression is sealed up in a bag, and thou sowest up my
iniquity. A Metaphor taken from men that put up in a bag the money they would
charily keep, tie the bag, sow up the holes, and bind it hard that nothing may
fall out; or a vessel wherein they reserve liquors, and daub it with pitch and
glutinous stuff, that nothing may leak out, but be safely kept till the time of
use. Or else, as some think, from the bags Attorneys carry with them, full of
Writings, when they are to manage a Cause against a person. Thus we find God
often in Scripture calling to men's minds their past actions, upbraiding them
with their ingratitude, wherein he testifies his remembrance of his own past
benefits, and their Crimes. His knowledge in this regard has something of
infinity in it, since though the sins of all men that have been in the World are
finite in regard of number, yet when the sins of one man in thoughts, words,
and deeds, are numberless in his own account, and perhaps in the count of any
creature, the sins of all the vast numbers of men that have been, or shall be,
are much more numberless, it cannot be less than infinite knowledge that can
make a collection of them, and take a survey of them all at once.

If past things had not been known by God, how could Moses have been acquainted
with the Original of things? How could he have declared the former
transactions, wherein all Histories are silent but the Scripture? How could he
know the cause of man's present misery so many ages after, wherewith all.
Philosophy was unacquainted? How could he have writ the order of the Creation,
the particulars of the sin of Adam, the circumstances of Cains murder, the
private speech of Lamech to his Wives, if God had not revealed them? And how
could a Revelation be made, if things past were forgotten by him? Do we not
remember many things done among men, as well as by our selves, and reserve the
forms of diverse things in our minds, which rise as occasions are presented to
draw them forth? And shall not God much more, who has no cloud of darkness
upon his understanding? A man that makes a curious Picture, has the form of it
in his mind before he made it; and if the fire burn it, the form of it in his
mind is not destroyed by the fire, but retained in it. Gods memory is no less
perfect than his understanding: If he did not know things past, he could not be
a righteous Governor, or exercise any judicial act in a righteous manner; he
could not dispense Rewards and Punishments according to his promises and
threatenings, if things that were past could be forgotten by him; he could not
require that which is past Eccles. 3 15.
, if he did not remember that which is past.

And though God be said to forget in Scripture, and not to know his People, and
his People pray to him to remember them, as if he had forgotten them Psalm. 119
49.
: This is improperly ascribed to God Bradward.
. As God is said to repent, when he changes things according to his Counsel
beyond the expectation of men; so he is said to forget, when he defers the
making good his Promise to the Godly, or his Threatenings to the Wicked; this is
not a defect of Memory belonging to his mind, but an act of his Will: When he
is said to remember his Covenant, it is to Will Grace according to his Covenant;
when he is said to forget his Covenant, it is to intercept the influences of it,
whereby to punish the Sin of his People; and when he is said not to know his
People, it is not an absolute forgetfulness of them, but withdrawing from them
the Testimonies of his Kindness, and clouding the Signs of his favor; so God
in Pardon is said to forget Sin, not that he cease to know it, but cease to
punish it: It Is not to be meant of a simple forgetfulness, or a lapse of his
Memory, but of a Judicial Forgetfulness; so when his People in Scripture Pray,
Lord Remember thy Word unto thy Servant; no more is to be understood, but Lord
fulfill thy Word and Promise to thy Servant.

3. He knows things Present. Heb. 4.13. All things are naked and opened unto
the Eyes of him with whom we have to do; This is grounded upon the Knowledge of
himself; it is not so difficult to know all Creatures exactly, as to know
himself, because they are finite, but himself is infinite; he knows his own
Power, and therefore every thing through which his Omnipotence is diffused, all
the acts and objects of it; not the least thing that is the Birth of his Power,
can be concealed from him; he knows his own Goodness, and therefore every
object upon which the warm beams of his Goodness strike; he therefore knows
distinctly the properties of every Creature, because every Property in them is
a Ray of his Goodness; he is not only the efficient, but the exemplary cause;
therefore as he knows all that his Power has wrought, as he is the efficient,
so he knows them in himself as the pattern: As a Carpenter can give an account
of every part and passage in a House he has built, by consulting the Model in
his own mind, whereby he built it. He looked upon all things after he had made
them, and pronounced them good, Genesis 1.3. full of a natural goodness he had
endowed them with; he did not ignorantly pronounce them so, and call them good,
whether he knew them or not; and therefore he knows them in particular, as he
knew them all in their first Presence. Is there any reason he should be
ignorant of every thing now present in the World, or that any thing that
derives an existence from him as a free cause, should be concealed from him? If
he did not know things present in their particularities, many things would be
known by man, yea by Beasts, which the infinite God were ignorant of; and if he
did not know all things present, but only some; it is possible for the most
Blessed God to be deceived and be miserable: Ignorance is a Calamity to the
Understanding: He could not prescribe Laws to his Creatures, unless he knew
their Natures, to which those Laws were to be suited; no, not natural
Ordinances to the Sun, Moon, and Heavenly Bodies, and inanimate Creatures,
unless he knew the vigor and virtue in them, to execute those Ordinances; for
to prescribe Laws above the nature of things, is inconsistent with the Wisdom
of Government; he must know how far they were able to obey; whether the Laws
were suited to their ability: And for his rational Creatures, Whether the
Punishments annexed to the Law, were proper, and suited to the Transgression of
the Creature.

1. First, He knows all Creatures from the highest to the lowest, the least as
well as the greatest. He knows the Ravens and their young ones Job ^^. 41.
; the Drops of Rain and Dew which he has begotten Job 38.^^.
, every Bird in the Air, as well as any man does what he has in a Cage at
home, Psalm. 50.11. I know all the Fowls in the Mountains, and the wild Beasts
in the Field; which some read creeping things. The Clouds are numbered in his
Wisdom, Job 38.37. every Worm in the Earth, every drop of Rain that falls upon
the ground, the flakes of Snow, and the knots of Hail, the Sands upon the
Seashore, the Hairs upon the Head; it is no more absurd to imagine that God
knows them, than that God made them; they are all the effects of his Power, as
well as the Stars, which he calls by their Names, as well as the most glorious
Angel and blessed Spirit; he knows them as well, as if there were none but them
in particular for him to know; the least things were framed by his Art as well
as the greatest; the least things partake of his goodness as well as the
greatest; he knows his own Arts, and his own Goodness, and therefore all the
Stamps and Impressions of them upon all his Creatures; he knows the immediate
causes of the least, and therefore the effects of those causes. Since his
knowledge is infinite, it must extend to those things which are at the greatest
distance from him, to those which approach nearest to not Being; since he did
not want Power to Create, he cannot want Understanding to know every thing he
has Created, the dispositions, qualities, and virtues of the minutest Creature.

Nor is the Understanding of God embas'd, and suffers a diminution by the
Knowledge of the vilest and most inconsiderable things: Is it not an
imperfection to be ignorant of the nature of any thing? and can God have such a
defect in his most perfect Understanding? Is the Understanding of man of an
impurer Alloy by knowing the nature of the rankest Poisons? by understanding a
Fly? or a small Insect? or by considering the deformity of a Toad? Is it not
generally counted a note of a Dignified mind, to be able to Discourse of the
Nature of them? Was Solomon, who knew all from the Cedar to the Hysop, debased
by so Rich a Present of Wisdom from his Creator? Is any Glass defiled by
presenting a Deformed Image? Is there any thing more vile than the
imaginations, which are only evil, and continually? does not the mind of man
descend to the mud of the Earth, play the Adulterer or Idolater with mean
objects, suck in the most unclean things? yet God knows these in all their
circumstances, in every appearance, inside and outside. Is there any thing
viler than some thoughts of men? than some actions of men? their unclean Beds
and Gluttonous Vomiting, and Luciferian Pride? yet do not these fall under the
Eye of God, in all their Nakedness? The Second Person's taking Human Nature,
though it obscured, yet it did not disparage the Deity; or bring any disgrace to
it: Is Gold the worse for being formed into the Image of a Fly? does it not
still retain the nobleness of the Metal? When men are despised for descending
to the knowledge of mean and vile things, it is because they neglect the knowledge
of the greater; and Sin in their enquiries after lesser things, with a neglect
of that which concerns more the Honor of God and the Happiness of themselves;
to be ambitious of such a Knowledge, and careless of that of more concern, is
criminal and contemptible. But God knows the greatest as well as the least;
mean things are not known by him to exclude the knowledge of the greater; nor
are vile things governed by him to exclude the order of the better. The
Deformity of Objects known by God does not deform him, nor defile him; he does
not view them without himself, but within himself, wherein all things in their
Ideas are Beautiful and Comely: Our knowledge of a Deformed thing, is not a
Deforming of our Understanding, but is beautiful in the Knowledge, though it be
not in the object; nor is there any fear that the Understanding of God should
become material by knowing material things, any more than our Understandings
lose their Spirituality by knowing the nature of Bodies; it is to be observed
therefore that only those senses of men, as seeing, hearing, smelling, which
have those qualities for their objects that come nearest the nature of
spiritual things, as Light, Sounds, fragrant Odours, are ascribed to God in
Scripture; not Touching or Tasting, which are senses that are not exercised
without a more immediate commerce with gross matter; and the reason may be,
because we should have no gross thoughts of God, as if he were a body, and made
of matter, like the things he knows.

2. As he knows all Creatures, so God knows all the actions of Creatures. He
counts in particular all the ways of men. Does he not see all my ways, and
count all my steps? Job 31.4. He tells their wanderings, as if one by one, Psalm.
56.8. His eyes are upon all the ways of man, and he sees all his goings, Job.
34.21. a Metaphor taken from men, when they look wistly, with fixed Eyes upon a
thing, to view it in every circumstance, whence it comes, whether it goes, to
observe every little motion of it. Gods Eye is not a wandering, but a fixed Eye;
and the ways of man are not only before his eyes, but he does exactly ponder
them Prove. 5.21.
; as one that will not be ignorant of the least Mite in them, but weigh and
examine them by the Standard of his Law; he may as well know the motions of our
Members, as the Hairs of our Heads; the smallest actions before they be,
whether Civil, Natural or Religious, fall under his Cognizance; what meaner
than a man carrying a Pitcher, yet our Savior foretells it, Luke 22.10. God
knows not only what men do, but what they would have done, had he not
restrained them; what Abimelech would have done to Sarah, had not God put a Bar
in his way, Genesis 20.6. What a man that is taken away in his Youth, would have
done, had he lived to a riper Age; yea he knows the most secret words as well
as actions; the words spoken by the King of Israel in his Bedchamber, were
revealed to Elisha, 2 Kings 6.12. and indeed how can any action of man be
concealed from God? Can we view the various actions of a heap of Ants or a Hive
of Bees in a glass, without turning our Eyes; and shall not God behold the
actions of all men in the World, which are less than Bees or Ants in his Sight,
and more visible to him than an Ant-Hill or Bee-Hive can be to the acutest eye
of man?

3. As God knows all the actions of Creatures, so he knows all the Thoughts of
Creatures. The thoughts are the most closetted acts of man, hid from men and
Angels, unless disclosed by some outward Expressions; but God descends into the
depths and abysses of the Soul, discerns the most inward contrivances; nothing
is impenetrable to him; the Sun does not so much enlighten the Earth, as God
understands the Heart; all thoughts are as visible to him, as Flies and Motes
enclosed in a body of transparent Crystal; this man naturally allows to God.
Men often speak to God by the motions of their minds and secret Ejaculations;
which they would not do, if it were not naturally implanted in them, that God
knows all their inward motions; the Scripture is plain and positive in this, He
tries the Heart and the Reins, Psalm. 7.9. as men by the use of Fire discern the
drossy and purer parts of Metals: The secret intentions and aims, the most
lurking affections seated in the Reins; he knows that which no man, no Angel is
able to know, which a man himself knows not, nor makes any particular
reflection upon; yea he weighs the Spirit, Prove. 16.2. he exactly numbers all
the devices and inclinations of men, as men do every piece of Coin they tell
out of a heap. He discerns the Thoughts and intents of the heart, Heb. 4.12.
all that is in the mind, all that is in the affections, every stirring and
purpose; so that not one thought can be withheld from him, Job. 42.2. yea Hell
and Destruction are before him, much more then the Hearts of the Children of
men? Prove. 15.11. he works all things in the Bowels of the Earth, and brings
forth all things out of that Treasure, say some: but more naturally, God knows
the whole state of the dead, all the receptacles and Graves of their bodies,
all the bodies of men consumed by the Earth, or devoured by living Creatures;
things that seem to be out of all Being; he knows the Thoughts of the Devils
and Damned Creatures, whom he has cast out of his care for ever, into the arms
of his Justice, never more to cast a delightful glance toward them; not a
secret in any Soul in Hell, (which he has no need to know, because he shall
not judge them by any of the Thoughts they now have, since they were condemned
to punishment) is hid from him; much more is he acquainted with the Thoughts of
living men, the counsels of whose hearts are yet to be manifested, in order to
their Trial and Censure; yea, he knows them before they spring up into actual
being, Psalm. 139.2. thou understandest my Thoughts afar off; my Thoughts, that
is, every Thought; though innumerable Thoughts pass through me in a day, and that
in the Sourse and Fountain, when it is yet in the Womb, before it is our
Thought; if he knows them before their Existence, before they can be properly
called ours; much more does he know them when they actually spring up in us; he
knows the tendency of them, where the Bird will light when it is in flight; he
knows them exactly, he is therefore called a discerner or criticizer of the
Heart, Heb. 4.12. As a Critic discerns every Letter, Point, and Stop; he is
more intimate with us than our Souls with our Bodies, and has more the
Possession of us than we have of our selves; he knows them by an inspection
into the heart, not by the Mediation of second causes, by the looks or gestures
of men, as men may discern the Thoughts of one another.

1. God discerns all good motions of the Mind and Will. These he puts into men,
and needs must God know his own act; he knew the Son of Jeroboam to have some
good thing in him toward the Lord God of Israel, 1 Kings 14.13. and the
integrity of David and Hezekiah; the freest motions of the Will and Affections
to him. Lord, thou know that I love thee says Peter, John 21.17. Love can
be no more restrained, than the Will it self can. A man may make another to
grieve and desire, but none can force another to Love.

2. God discerns all the evil motions of the Mind and Will. Every imagination
of the Heart, Genesis 6.5. the vanity of men's thoughts, Psalm. 94.11. their inward
darkness and deceitful disguises: No wonder that God who fashioned the heart,
should understand the motions of it, Psalm. 33.13, 15. He looks from Heaven and
beholds all the Children of men: he fashioneth their hearts alike, and
considers all their Works. Does any man make a Watch, and yet be ignorant of
its motion? Did God fling away the Key to this secret Cabinet, when he framed
it, and put off the power of unlocking it when he pleased? He did not surely
frame it in such a posture as that any thing in it should be hid from his Eye;
he did not fashion it to be Privileged from his Government; which would
follow, if he were ignorant of what was Minted and Coined in it.

He could not be a Judge to punish men, if the inward frames and Principles of
men's actions were concealed from him; an outward action may glitter to an
outward eye, yet the secret spring be a desire of applause, and not the Fear
and Love of God. If the inward frames of the heart did lie covered from him in
the secret recesses of the heart; those plausible acts, which in regard of
their Principles, would merit a Punishment, would meet with a Reward; and God
should bestow Happiness where he had denounced Misery. As without the knowledge
of what is just, he could not be a Wise Lawgiver; so without the knowledge of
what is inwardly committed, he could not be a Righteous Judge; acts that are
rotten in the spring, might be judged good by the fair color and appearance.

This is the glory of God at the last day, to manifest the secrets of all
hearts, 1 Cor. 4.5. and the Prophet Jeremiah links the power of Judging, and
the Prerogative of trying the Hearts together, Jer. 11.20. but thou, O Lord of
Hosts, that Judge Righteously, that tryest the Reins and the Heart: and Jer.
17.10. I the Lord search the Heart, I try the Reins; to what end? even to give
every man according to his way, and according to the fruit of his doings. And
indeed his binding up the whole Law with that command of not coveting,
evidenceth that he will Judge men by the inward affections and frames of their
hearts. Again, God sustains the mind of man in every act of thinking; In him we
have not only the Principle of Life, but every motion, the motion of our minds
as well as of our members: In him we live and move, etc. Acts 17.28. Since he
supports the vigor of the faculty in every act, can he be ignorant of those
acts which spring from the faculty, to which he does at that instant
communicate power and ability?

Now this knowledge of the Thoughts of men is,

1. An incommunicable Property, belonging only to the Divine Understanding.
Creatures indeed may know the thoughts of others by Divine Revelation, but not
by themselves; no Creature has a Key immediately to open the minds of men, and
see all that lodges there; no Creature can Fathom the heart by the Line of
Created Knowledge Daille sermon. Part 1. p. 230.
. Devils may have a conjectural Knowledge, and may guess at them, by the
acquaintance they have with the Disposition and Constitution of men, and the
Images they behold in their Fancies; and by some marks which an inward
imagination may stamp upon the Brain, Blood, Animal Spirits, Face, etc. But the
knowing the Thougnts merely as Thought, without any Impression by it, is a
Royalty God appropriates to himself, as the main secret of his Government, and
a Perfection declarative of his Deity, as much as any else, Jer. 17.9, 10. the
heart of man is desperately wicked, who can know it? yes, there is one, and but
one, I the Lord search the Heart, I try the Reins. Man looks on the outward
appearance, but the Lord looks upon the Heart, 1 Samuel 16.7. where God is
distinguished by this Perfection from all men whatsoever; others may know by
Revelation, as Elisha did, what was in Gehazi's heart, 2 Kings 5.26. But God
knows a man more than any man knows himself; What person upon earth understands
the windings and turnings of his own heart, what reserves it will have, what
contrivances, what inclinations? all which God knows exactly.

2. God acquires no new Knowledge of the thoughts and heart, by the Discovery of
them in the actions. He would then be but equal in this part of Knowledge to his
Creature; no man or Angel but may thus arrive to the Knowledge of them; God were
then excluded from an absolute Dominion over the prime work of his lower
Creation; he would have made a Creature superior in this respect to himself,
upon whose Will to discover, his knowledge of their inward intentions should
depend; and therefore when God is said to search the heart, we must not
understand it as if God were ignorant before, and was fain to make an exact
scrutiny and enquiry, before he attained what he desired to know; but God
condescends to our capacity in the expression of his own Knowledge, signifying
that his Knowledge is as complete as any man's Knowledge can be, of the designs of
others, after he has sifted them by a strict and through examination, and
wrung out a discovery of their intentions; that he knows them as perfectly as
if he had put them upon the rack, and forced them to make a discovery of their
secret Plottings. Nor must we understand that in Genesis 22.12. where God says,
after Abraham had stretched out his hand to Sacrifice his Son, Now I know that
thou fear God, as though God was ignorant of Abraham's gracious disposition
to him; did Abraham's drawing his Knife, furnish God with a new Knowledge? no,
God knew Abraham's pious inclinations before, Genesis 18.19. I know him that he
will command his Children after him, etc. Knowledge is sometimes taken for
approbation; then the sense will be, now I approve this Fact as a Testimony of
thy fear of me; since thy affection to thy Isaac is extinguished by the more
powerful flame of affection to my Will and Command; I now accept thee, and
count thee a meet subject of my choicest Benefits; or now I know, that is, I
have made known and manifested the Faith of Abraham to himself and to the
World. Thus Paul uses the word know, 1 Cor. 2.2. I have determined to know
nothing; that is to declare and teach nothing, to make known nothing but Christ
Crucified; or else, now I know, that is, I have an evidence and experiment in
this noble fact, that thou fear me. God often condescends to our capacity in
speaking of himself after the manner of men, as if he had (as men do) known the
inward affections of others by their outward actions.

4. God knows all the Evils and Sins of Creatures.

1. God knows all Sin. This follows upon the other. If he knows all the actions
and thoughts of Creatures, he knows also all the Sinfulness in those acts and
thoughts: This Zophar infers from Gods punishing men, Job 11.11. for he knows
vain man, he sees his wickedness also; he knows every man, and sees the
wickedness of every man: He looks down from Heaven, and beholds not only the
filthy persons, but what is filthy in them Psalm. 14.2, 3.
, all Nations in the World, and every man of every Nation, none of their
iniquity is hid from his eyes; He searches Jerusalem with Candles, Jer. 16.17.
God follows Sinners step by step, with his eye; and will not leave searching
out till he has taken them; a Metaphor taken from one that searches all Chinks
with a Candle, that nothing can be hid from him. He knows it distinctly in all
the parts of it, how an Adulterer rises out of his Bed to commit Uncleanness,
what contrivances he had, what steps he took, every circumstance in the whole
progress; not only evil in the bulk, but every one of the blacker spots upon
it, which may most aggravate it. If he did not know Evil, how could he permit
it, order it, punish it or pardon it? Does he permit he knows not what? Order
to his own holy ends what he is ignorant of? Punish or pardon that which he is
uncertain whether it be a Crime or no? Cleanse me, says David, from my secret
faults, Ps. 19.12. secret in regard of others, secret in regard of himself; how
could God cleanse him from that whereof he was ignorant? He knows Sins before
they are committed, much more when they are in act; he foreknew the Idolatry
and Apostasy of the Jews; what Gods they would serve, in what measure they
would provoke him, and violate his Covenant Deuteronomy. 31.20, 21.
; he knew Judas his Sin long before Judas his actual existence, foretelling it
in the Psalms; and Christ predicts it before he acted it. He sees Sins future
in his own permitting Will; he sees Sins present in his own supporting act. As
he knows things possible to himself, because he knows his own power; so he
knows things practicable by the Creature, because he knows the Power and
Principles of the Creature Fotherby Atheoma p. 132.
. This Sentiment of God is naturally writ in the fears of Sinners, upon
Lightning, Thunder, or some Prodigious operation of God in the World; what is
the Language of them, but that he sees their Deeds, hears their words, knows
the inward sinfulness of their hearts; that he does not only behold them as a
mere Spectator, but considers them as a just Judge. And the Poets say, that the
Sins of men leapt into Heaven and were writ in Parchments of Jupiter (...)
Cross. Anthol. dec. 1. cap. 395 p. 101.
, scelus in terram geritur, in coelo scribitur: sin is acted on Earth, and
recorded in Heaven. God indeed does not behold Evil with the approving eye; he
knows it not with a practical knowledge to be the Author of it, but with a
speculative Knowledge, so as to understand the sinfulness of it; or a knowledge
simplicis intelligentiae, of simple intelligence, as he permits them, not
positively wills them; he knovvs them not with a knowledge of assent to them,
but dissent from them. Evil pertains to a dissenting act of the mind, and an
aversive act of the Will; and what though evil formally taken, has no distinct
Conception, because it is a privation; a Defect has no Being, and all
knowledge is by the apprehension of some Being; would not this lie as strongly
against our own knowledge of Sin? Sin is a privation of the rectitude due to
an act; and who doubts man's knowledge of Sin? by his knovving the act, he
knovvs the deficiency of the act; the subject of evil has a Being, and so has
a conception in the mind; that which has no Being cannot be known by it
self, or in it self; but will it follovv that it cannot be known by its
contrary? as we know darkness to be a privation of light, and folly to be a
privation of wisdom. God knovvs all good by himself, because he is the
Sovereign good; Is it strange then, that he should know all evil, since all
evil is in some natural good?

2. The manner of Gods knowing Evil, is not so easily known. And indeed, as we
cannot comprehend the Essence of God, though it is easily intelligible that there
is such a Being; so we can as little comprehend the manner of Gods Knowledge,
though we cannot but conclude him to be an intelligent Being, a pure
Understanding, knovving all things: As God has a higher manner of Being than
his Creatures, so he has another and higher manner of knovving; and we can as
little comprehend the manner of his knovving, as we can the manner of his
Being. But as to the manner,

Does not God know his own Law, and shall he not know how much any action
comes short of his Rule? he cannot know his own Rule without knovving all
the deviations from it. He knovvs his own Holiness, and shall he not see how
any action is contrary to the Holiness of his own nature? Does not God know
every thing that is true? and is it not true that this or that is evil? and
shall God be ignorant of any Truth? How does God know that he cannot lie, but
by knovving his own Veracity? How does God know that he cannot Dye, but by
knovving his own Immutability? and by knovving those, he knovvs what a Lie
is, he knovvs what Death is; so if Sin never had been, if no Creature had ever
been, God would have known what Sin was, because he knovvs his own
Holiness; because he knevv what Law was fit to be appointed to his Creatures
if he should Create them, and that that Law might be transgrest by them. God
knovvs all good, all goodness in himself; he therefore has a foundation in
himself to know all that comes short of that goodness, that is opposite to
that Holiness: As if Light were capable of Understanding, it would know
Darkness only by knovving it self; by knovving it self, it would know what
is contrary to it self. God knovvs all Created goodness which he has planted
in the Creature; he knovvs then all defects from this goodness, what Perfection
an act is deprived of; what is opposite to that goodness, and that is evil. As
we know Sickness by Health, Discord by Harmony, Blindness by Sight, because it
is a privation of Sight; whosoever knows one contrary knows the other; God
knows unrighteousness by the Idea which he has of Righteousness, and sees an
act deprived of that rectitude and goodness which ought to be in it; he knows
evil because he knows the causes whence evil proceeds Cusan p 245.
. A Painter knows a Picture of his own framing, and if any one dashes any base
color upon it, shall not he also know that? God by his hand Painted all
Creatures, impressed upon man the fair stamp and color of his own Image; the
Devil defiles it, man daubs it; Does not God that knows his own Work, know how
this Piece is become different from his Work? Does not God that knows his
Creatures goodness, which himself was the Fountain of, know the change of this
goodness? Yea, he knew before, that the Devil would sow Tares where he had sown
Wheat; and therefore that Controversy of some in the Schools, Whether God knew
evil by its opposition to Created or Uncreated goodness, is needless. We may
say God knows Sin as it is opposite to Created goodness, yet he knows it
radically by his own goodness, because he knows the goodness he has
communicated to the Creature by his own Essential goodness in himself. To
conclude this head:

The knowledge of Sin does not bespot the Holiness of Gods nature; for the bare
knowledge of a Crime does not infect the mind of man with the Filth and
Pollution of that Crime; for then every man that knows an act of Murder
committed by another, would by that bare knowledge be tainted with his Sin; yea
and a Judge that condemns a Malefactor, may as well Condemn himself if this were
so: The Knowledge of Sins infects not the understanding that knows them, but
only the Will that approves them. It Is no discredit to us to know evil, in
order to pass a right Judgment upon it; so neither can it be to God.

4. God knows all future things, all things to come. The differences of time
cannot hinder a knowledge of all things by him, who is before time, above time,
that is not measured by hours, or days, or years; If God did not know them, the
hindrance must be in himself, or in the things themselves, because they are
things to come: Not in himself; If it did, it must arise from some impotency in
his own nature, and so we render him weak; or from an unwillingness to know,
and so we render him lazy, and an Enemy to his own Perfection; for simply
considered, the knowledge of more things is a greater Perfection than the
knowledge of a fevv; and if the knowledge of a thing includes something of
Perfection, the ignorance of a thing includes something of Imperfection: The
knowledge of future things is a greater Perfection than not to know them, and
is accounted among men a great part of Wisdom, which they call foresight;
it is then surely a greater Perfection in God to know ^^ure things than to be
ignorant of them. And would God rather have something of imperfection than be
possessor of all Perfection? Nor does the hindrance lie in the things
themselves, because their futurition depends upon his Will; for as nothing can
actually be without his Will, giving it existence; so nothing can be future
without his Will, designing the futurity of it. Certainly if God knows all
things possible, which he will not do, he must know all things future, which he
is not only able, but resolved to do, or resolved to permit. Gods perfect
knowledge of himself, that is, of his own infinite Power and concluding Will,
necessarily includes a foreknowledg of what he is able to do, and what he will
do.

Again, If God does not know future things, there was a time when God was
ignorant of most things in the World; for before the Deluge he was more
ignorant than after; the more things were done in the World, the more Knowledge
did accrue to God, and so the more Perfection; then the Understanding of God
was not perfect from Eternity, but in Time; nay, is not perfect yet, if he be
ignorant of those things which are still to come to pass; he must tarry for a
Perfection, he wants till those futurities come to be in act, till those things
which are to come, cease to be future, and begin to be present. Either God
knows them or desires to know them; if he desires to know them and does not,
there is something wanting to him; all desire speaks an absence of the object
desired, and a sentiment of want in the person desiring: If he does not desire
to know them, nay, if he does not actually know them, it destroys all
Providence, all his Government of Affairs; for his Providence has a
concatenation of means with a prospect of something that is future: As in
Joseph's Case, who was put into the Pit, and sold to the Egyptians in order to
his future advancement, and the Preservation both of his Father and his envious
Brethren. If God did not know all the future inclinations and actions of men,
something might have been done by the Will of Potiphar, or by the Free Will of
Pharaoh, whereby Joseph might have been cut short of his advancement, and so
God have been interrupted in the track and method of his designed Providence.
He that has decreed to govern man for that end he has designed him, knows all
the means before, whereby he will govern him; and therefore has a distinct and
certain knowledge of all things; for a confused knowledge is an imperfection in
Government; it is in this the infiniteness of his Understanding is more seen
than in knowing things past or present; his eyes are a flame of fire, Revel.
1.14. in regard of the penetrating virtue of them into things impenetrable by
any else.

To make it further appear, that God knows all things future, consider,

1. First, Every thing which is the object of Gods Knowledge without himself,
was once only future. There was a moment when nothing was in Being but himself;
he knew nothing actually past, because nothing was past; nothing actually
present, because nothing had any existence but himself; therefore only what was
future; and why not every thing that is future now, as well as only what was
future and to come to pass just at the beginning of the Creation? God indeed
knovvs every thing as present, but the things themselves known by him were not
present but future; the whole Creation was once future, or else it was from
Eternity; if it begun in time, it was once future in it self, else it could
never have begun to be; Did not God know what would be Created by him, before
it was Created by him Petavius changed.
? Did he create he knew not what, and knew not before, what he should Create?
Was he ignorant before he acted, and in his acting, what his operation would
tend to? or did he not know the nature of things, and the ends of them, till he
had produced them, and saw them in Being? Creatures then did not arise from his
Knowledge, but his Knowledge from them; he did not then Will that his Creatures
should be, for he had then willed what he knew not, and knew not what he
willed; they therefore must be known before they were made, and not known
because they were made; he knew them to make them, and he did not make them to
know them. By the same reason that he knew what Creatures should be before they
were, he knows still what Creatures shall be before they are Bradward, lib. 3.
cap. 14.
; for all things that are, were in God, not really in their own nature, but in
him as a cause; so the Earth and Heavens were in him, as a Model is in the mind
of a Work man, which is in his Mind and Soul, before it be brought forth into
outward act.

2. The Predictions of future things evidence this. There is not a Prophecy of
any thing to come, but is a spark of his fore-knowledg, and bears Witness to
the Truth of this assertion, in the punctual accomplishment of it; this is a
thing challenged by God as his own peculiar, wherein he surmounts all the Idols
that man's inventions have Godded in the World, Isa. 41.21, 22. Let them bring
forth (speaking of the Idols,) and show us what shall happen, or declare us
things to come: show the things that are to come hereafter, that we may know
that you are Gods. Such a fore-knowledg of things to come, is here ascribed to
God by God himself, as a distinction of him from all false Gods; such a
Knowledge, that if any could prove that they were possessors of, he would
acknowledge them Gods as well as himself; that we may know that you are Gods; He
puts his Deity to stand or fall upon this account, and this should be the point
which should decide the controversy, whether he or the Heathen Idols were the
true God; the dispute is managed by this medium. He that knows things to come,
is God; I know things to come, ergo, I am God; the Idols know not things to
come, therefore they are not Gods; God submits the Being of his Deity to this
Trial. If God know things to come no more than the Heathen Idols, which were
either Devils or men, he would be in his own account, no more a God than Devils
or men; no more a God than the Pagan Idols he does scoff at for this defect. If
the Heathen Idols were to be stripped of their Deity for want of this
foreknowledg of things to come, would not the true God also fall from the same
excellency, if he were defective in Knowledge? he would in his own judgment no
more deserve the Title and Character of a God than they. How could he reproach
them for that, if it were wanting in himself? It cannot be understood of future
things in their causes, when the effects necessarily arise from such causes, as
Light from the Sun, and Heat from the Fire; many of these, men know; more of
them, Angels and Devils know; if God therefore had not a higher and farther
Knowledge than this, he would not by this be proved to be God, any more than
Angels and Devils, who know necessary effects in their causes. The Devils
indeed did predict some things in the Heathen Oracles; but God is differenced
from them here by the infiniteness of his Knowledge, in being able to predict
things to come that they knew not, or things in their particularities, things
that depended on the liberty of man's Will, which the Devils could lay no claim
to a certain knowledge of. Were it only a conjectural knowledge that is here
meant, the Devils might answer, they can conjecture, and so their Deity were as
good as Gods; for though God might know more things, and conjecture nearer to
what would be, yet still it would be but conjectural, and therefore not a
higher kind of Knowledge than what the Devils might challenge. How much then is
God beholden to the Socinians for denying the knowledge of all future things to
him, upon which here he puts the trial of his Deity? God asserts his knowledge
of things to come, as a manifest evidence of his Godhead; those that deny
therefore the Argument that proves it, deny the conclusion too; for this will
necessarily follow, that if he be God because he knows future things, then he
that does not know future things is not God; and if God knows not future things
but only by conjecture, then there is no God; because a certain knowledge so as
infallibly to predict things to come, is an inseparable Perfection of the
Deity: It was therefore well said of Austin, that it was as high a madness to
deny God to be, as to deny him the foreknowledg of things to come.

The whole Prophetic part of Scripture declares this Perfection of God; every
Prophets Candle was lighted at this Torch, they could not have this
foreknowledg of themselves; Why might not many other men have the same insight,
if it were by nature? it must be from some superior Agent; Pacuvius said Siqui
quae eventura sunt provident, aeq^^ parent, Gell. lib. 14. c. 1.
and all Nations owned Prophecy as a Beam from God, a fruit of Divine
Illumination: Prophecy must be totally expunged if this be denied; for the
subjects of Prophecy are things future; and no man is properly a Prophet, but
in Prediction; now Prediction is nothing but foretelling, and things foretold
are not yet come; and the foretelling of them, supposes them not to be yet,
but that they shall be in time; several such Predictions we have in Scripture,
the event whereof has been certain. The years of Famine in Egypt foretold that
he would order second causes for bringing that Judgment upon them; the
Captivity of his People in Babylon, the calling of the Gentiles, the rejection
of the Jews. Daniels Revelation of Nebuchadnezzars Dream; that Prince refers to
God as the revealer of Secrets, Dan. 2.47. By the same reason that he knows one
thing future by himself, and by the infiniteness of his Knowledge before any
causes of them appear, he does know all things future.

3. Some future things are known by men; and we must allow God a greater
Knowledge than any Creature. Future things in their Causes may be known by
Angels and men, (as I said before); whosoever knows necessary causes, and the
efficacy of them, may foretell the effects; and when he sees the meeting and
concurrence of several causes together, he may presage what the consequent
effect will be of such a concurrence: So Physicians foretell the Progress of a
Disease, the increase or diminution of it by natural Signs; and Astronomers
foretell Eclipses by their observation of the motion of Heavenly Bodies, many
years before they happen Cusanus.
, can they be hid from God, with whom are the reasons of all things Fuller's
Pifgab l. 2. p. 2^1.
? an expert Gardener by knowing the Root in the depth of Winter, can tell what
Flowers and what Fruit it will bear, and the Month when they will peep out
their heads; and shall not God much more that knows the Principles of all his
Creatures, and is exactly privy to all their natures and qualities, know what
they will be, and what operations shall be from those Principles? Now if God
did know things only in their causes, his Knowledge would not be more excellent
than the knowledge of Angels and men, though he might know more than they of the
things that will come to pass, from every cause singly, and from the
concurrence of many. Now as God is more excellent in Being than his Creature;
so he is more excellent in the objects of his Knowledge and the manner of his
Knowledge; well then, shall a certain knowledge of something future, and a
conjectural knowledge of many things, be found among men; and shall a
determinate and infallible knowledge of things to come, be found no where, in no
Being? If the conjecture of future things savours of ignorance, and God knows
them only by conjecture, there is then no such thing in Being as a perfect
intelligent Being, and so no God.

4. God knows his own Decree and Will, and therefore must needs know all future
things. If any thing be future, or to come to pass, it must be from it self or
from God; not from it self, then it would be independent and absolute; if it
has its futurity from God, then God must know what he has decreed to come to
pass; those things that are future in necessary causes, God must know, because
he willed them to be causes of such effects; he therefore knows them, because
he knows what he willed: The knowledge of God cannot arise from the things
themselves, for then the knowledge of God would have a cause without him; and
Knowledge, which is an eminent Perfection, would be conferred upon him by his
Creatures. But as God sees things possible in the glass of his own power, so he
sees things future in the Glass of his own Will; in his effecting Will, if he
has Decreed to produce them; in his permitting Will, as he has Decreed to
suffer them and dispose of them: Nothing can pass out of the rank of things
merely possible into the order of things future, before some Act of Gods Will
has passed for its futurition Chequell.
.

It Is not from the infiniteness of his own Nature simply considered, that God
knows things to be future; Coccei sum. Theol. p. 50.
for as things are not future because God is infinite (for then all possible
things should be future) so neither is any thing known to be future only
because God is infinite, but because God has Decreed it; his declaration of
things to come, is founded upon his appointment of things to come Coccei sum.
Theol. p. 50.
. In Isa. 44.7. it is said, and who, as I, shall call and declare it, since I
appointed the ancient people and the things that are coming Gamaul in Aquin,
Part 1. q. 14. cap. 3. p. 124.
? Nothing is Created or ordered in the World, but what God Decreed to be
Created and ordered. God knows his own Decree, and therefore all things which
he has Decreed to exist in time; not the minutest part of the World could have
existed without his Will, not an action can be done without his Will; as Life
the Principle, so Motion the fruit of that Life, is by and from God; as he
decreed Life to this or that thing, so he decreed motion as the effect of Life,
and Decreed to exert his Power in concurring with them, for producing effects
natural from such causes; for without such a concourse they could not have
acted any thing, or produced any thing; and therefore as for natural things,
which we call necessary causes, God foreseeing them all particularly in his own
Decree, foresaw also all effects which must necessarily flow from them, because
such causes cannot but act when they are furnished with all things necessary for
action: He knows his own Decrees, and therefore necessarily knows what he has
Decreed, or else we must say things come to pass whether God will or no; or,
that he Wills he knows not what; but this cannot be, for known unto God are all
his Works from the beginning of the World, Acts 15.18. Now this necessarily
flows from that Principle first laid down, That God knows himself, since
nothing is future without Gods Will; if God did not know future things, he
would not know his own Will; for as things possible could not be known by him,
unless he knew the fullness of his own Power; so things future could not be
known by his Understanding, unless he knew the resolves of his own Will.

Maimonid. More Nevoch. Part 3. Cap. 21. P. 393. 394.
Thus the Knowledge of God differs from the Knowledge of men; Gods knowledge of his
Works precedes his Works, man's knowledge of Gods works follows his works; just
as an Artificers knowledge of a Watch, Instrument or Engine, which he would
make, is before his making of it; he knows the motions of it, and the reason of
those motions before it is made, because he knows what he has determined to
Work; he knows not those motions from the consideration of them after they were
made, as the Spectator does, who by viewing the Instrument after it is made,
gains a knowledge from the sight and consideration of it, till he understands
the reason of the whole; so we know things from the consideration of them after
we see them in being, and therefore we know not future things: But Gods
Knowledge does not arise from things because they are, but because he Wills them
to be, and therefore he knows every thing that shall be, because it cannot be
without his Will, as the Creator and maintainer of all things; knowing his own
substance he knows all his Works.

5. If God did not know all future things, he would be mutable in his Knowledge.

If he did not know all things that ever were or are to be, there would be upon
the appearance of every new object, an addition of Light to his Understanding,
and therefore such a Change in him, as every new knowledge causes in the mind of
a man, or as the Sun works in the World upon its rising every morning,
scattering the darkness that was upon the face of the Earth; if he did not know
them before they came, he would gain a knowledge by them when they came to pass,
which he had not before they were effected; his Knowledge would be new according
to the newness of the objects, and multiplied according to the multitude of the
objects. If God did not know things to come as perfectly as he knew things
present and past, but knew those certainly, and the others doubtfully and
conjecturally, he would suffer some Change, and acquire some Perfection in his
Knowledge, when those future things should cease to be future, and become
present; for he would know it more perfectly when it were present, than he did
when it was future, and so there would be a Change from Imperfection to a
Perfection; But God is every way immutable.

Besides that Perfection would not arise from the Nature of God, but from the
Existence and Presence of the thing; but who will affirm that God acquires any
Perfection of Knowledge from his Creatures, any more than he does of Being? he
would not then have had that Knowledge, and consequently that Perfection from
Eternity, as he had when he Created the World, and will not have a full
Perfection of the Knowledge of his Creature till the end of the World, nor of
Immortal Souls, which will certainly act as well as live to Eternity; and so
God never was, nor ever will be perfect in Knowledge; for when you have
conceived millions of years, wherein Angels and Souls live and act, there is
still more coming than you can conceive, wherein they will act. And if God be
always changing to Eternity, from Ignorance to Knowledge, as those acts come
to be exerted by his Creatures, he will not be perfect in Knowledge, no not to
Eternity, but will always be changing from one degree of Knowledge to
another; a very unvvorthy Conceit to entertain of the most Blessed, Perfect and
Infinite God!

Hence then it follows that,

1. God foreknows all his Creatures. All kinds which he determined to make,
all particulars that should spring out of every species, the time when they
should come forth of the Womb, the manner how, In thy Book all my Members were
written, Psalm. 139.16. Members is not in the Heb. whence some refer all, to
all living Creatures whatsoever, and all the parts of them which God did
foresee; he knevv the numbers of Creatures with all their parts, they were
written in the Book of his fore-knovvledg; the duration of them, how long
they shall remain in Being, and act upon the Stage; he knows their strength,
the links of one cause with another, and what will follow in all their
Circumstances, and the series and combination of effects with their causes.

The duration of every thing is foreknown, because determined, Job 14.5. seeing
his days are determined, the number of his months are with thee, thou have
appointed his bounds that he cannot pass; bounds are fixed, beyond which none
shall reach; he speaks of days and months, not of years, to give us notice of
Gods particular foreknovvledg of every thing, of every day, month, year, hour
of a man's life.

2. All the acts of his Creatures are foreknown by him. All natural acts
because he knows their causes; voluntary acts I shall speak of afterward.

3. This foreknowledg was certain. For it is an unworthy notion of God to
ascribe to him a conjectural Knowledge; if there were only a conjectural
knowledge, he could but conjecturally foretell any thing; and then it is possible
the events of things might be contrary to his Predictions. It would appear then
that God were deceived and mistaken, and then there could be no rule of trying
things whether they were from God or no; for the Rule God sets down to discern
his Words from the Words of false Prophets, is the event and certain
accomplishment of what is Predicted. Deuteronomy. 18.21. to that question, How shall
we know whether God has spoken or no? he answers, That if the thing does not
come to pass, the Lord has not spoken. If his Knowledge of future things were
not certain, there were no stability in this Rule, it would fall to the ground:
We never yet find God deceived in any Prediction, but the event did answer his
fore-Revelation; his foreknowledg therefore is certain and infallible. We
cannot make God uncertain in his Knowledge, but we must conceive him fluctuating
and wavering in his Will; but if his Will be not Yea and Nay, but Yea, his
Knowledge is certain, because he does certainly Will and Resolve.

4. This foreknowledg was from Eternity. Seeing he knows things possible in his
Power, and things future in his Will; if his Power and Resolves were from
Eternity, his Knowledge must be so too; or else we must make him ignorant of his
own Power, and ignorant of his own Will from Eternity; and consequently not
from Eternity Blessed and Perfect. His knowledge of possible things must run
Parallel with his Power, and his Knowledge of future things run Parallel with
his Will. If he Willed from Eternity, he knew from Eternity what he Willed; but
that he did Will from Eternity, we must grant, unless we would render him
changeable, and conceive him to be made in time of not Willing, Willing. The
Knowledge God has in time, was always one and the same, because his
Understanding is his proper Essence, as perfect as his Essence, and of an
immutable nature.

Gamach in Aquin. Part 1. q. 14. c. 3. p. 124.
And indeed the actual existence of a thing is not simply necessary to its being
perfectly known; we may see a thing that is past out of Being, when it does not
actually exist; and a Carpenter may know the House he is to Build, before it be
built, by the model of it in his own mind; much more we may conceive the same
of God whose Decrees were before the Found^tion of the World Ephesians. 1.5. and in
other places.
; and to be before time was, and to be from Eternity, has no difference. As
God in his Being exceeds all beginning of time, so does his Knowledge all
motions of time.

5. God foreknows all things as present with him from Eternity. Gerhard Exeges
ch 8. de Deo sect. 13. p. 303.
As he knows mutable things with an immutable and firm Knowledge, so he knows
future things with a present Knowledge; not that the things which are produced
in time, were actually and really present with him in their own Beings from
Eternity; for then they could not be produced in time; had they a real
existence, then they would not be Creatures, but God; and had they actual
Being, then they could not be future, for future speaks a thing to come that is
not yet: If things had been actually present with him, and yet future, they had
been made before they were made, and had a Being before they had a Being; but
they were all present to his Knowledge as if they were in actual Being, because
the reason of all things that were to be made, was present with him.

Bradward l. 3. c. 14.
The reason of the Will of God that they shall be, was equally Eternal with him,
wherein he saw what, and when, and how he would Create things, how he would
govern them, to what ends he would direct them. Thus all things are present to
Gods Knowledge, though in their own nature they may be past or future, not in esse
reali, but in esse intelligibili, objectively; not actually present Hornbeck.
; for as the unchangeableness and infiniteness of Gods Knowledge of changeable
and finite things, does not make the things he knows immutable and infinite, so
neither does the Eternity of his Knowledge, make them actually present with him
from Eternity; but all things are present to his Understanding, because he has
at once a view of all successions of times; and his knowledge of future things
is as perfect as of present things, or what is past; it is not a certain
knowledge of present things, and an uncertain knowledge of future; but his
knowledge of one is as certain and unerring as his knowledge of the other; Pugio
Fidei part I. chapter 19.
as a man that beholds a Circle with several lines from the Center, beholds the
lines as they are joined in the Center, beholds them also as they are distant
and severed from one another, beholds them in their extent and in their point
all at once, though they may have a great distance from one another: He saw from
the beginning of time to the last minute of it, all things coming out of their
causes, marching in their order according to his own appointment; as a man may
see a multitude of Ants, some creeping one way, some another, employed in
several businesses for their Winter Provision. The eye of God at once runs
through the whole Circle of Time; as the eye of man upon a Tower sees all the
Passengers at once, though some be past, some under the Tower, some coming at a
farther distance: God, says Job, looks to the end of the earth, and sees under
the whole Heaven, Job 28.24. the Knowledge of God is expressed by sight in
Scripture, and futurity to God is the same thing as distance to us; we can with
a Perspective-glass make things that are afar off, appear as if they were near;
and the Sun, so many Thousand miles distant from us, to appear as if it were at
the end of the Glass; Why should then future things be at so great a distance
from Gods Knowledge, when things so far from us may be made to approach so near
to us?

God considers all things in his own simple Knowledge, as if they were now
acted; and therefore some have chosen to call the knowledge of things to come,
not prescience or foreknowledg, but Knowledge, because God sees all things in
one instant, scientia nunquam deficientis instantiae Boet. consolat. lib. 5.
pros. 6*
. Upon this account things that are to come, are set down in Scripture as
present, and sometimes as past, Isa. 9.6. Unto us a Child is Born, though not yet
Born; so of the Sufferings of Christ, Isa. 53.4. etc. he has born our griefs,
he was wounded for our transgressions, he was taken from Prison, etc. not shall
be; and Psalm. 22.18. they part my Garments among them, as if it were present;
all to express the certainty of Gods fore-knowledg, as if things were actually
present before him.

6. This is proper to God, and incommunicable to any Creature. Nothing but what
is Eternal can know all things that are to come: Suppose a Creature might know
things that are to come, after he is in Being; he cannot know things simply as
future, because there were things future before he was in Being. The Devils
know not men's hearts, therefore cannot foretell their actions with any
certainty; they may indeed have a knowledge of some things to come, but it is
only conjectural, and often mistaken; as the Devil was in his Predictions among
the Heathen, and in his presage of Job's Cursing God to his face upon his
pressing Calamities, Job 1.11. Sometimes indeed they have a certain knowledge of
something future by the Revelation of God, when he uses them as Instruments of
his Vengeance, or for the Trial of his People, as in the Case of Job, when he
gave him a Commission to strip him of his Goods; or as the Angels have, when he
uses them as Instruments of the deliverance of his People.

7. Though this be certain, that God foreknows all things and actions; yet the
manner of his knowing all things before they come, is not so easily resolved.
We must not therefore deny this Perfection in God, because we understand not
the manner how he has the Knowledge of all things: It were unworthy for us to
own no more of God than we can perfectly conceive of him; we should then own no
more of him than that he does exist. Can thou, says Job, by searching, find
out God? can thou find out the Almighty unto Perfection? Job 11.7. Do we not
see things unknown to inferior Creatures, to be known to our selves? Irrational
Creatures do not apprehend the nature of a man, nor what we conceive of them
when we look upon them; nor do we know what they fancy of us when they look
wistly upon us; for ought as I know, we understand as little the manner of
their imaginations, as they do of ours; and shall we ascribe a darkness in God
as to future things, because we are ignorant of them, and of the manner how he
should know them Ficinus in Procl. cap. 19.
? shall we doubt whether God does certainly know those things which we only
conjecture? as our Power is not the measure of the Power of God, so neither is
our Knowledge the Judge of the Knowledge of God, no better nor so well as an
irrational nature can be the Judge of our Reason: Do we perfectly know the
manner how we know? shall we therefore deny that we know any thing? we know we
have such a faculty which we call Understanding, but does any man certainly
know what it is? and because he does not, shall he deny that which is plain and
evident to him? Because we cannot ascertain our selves of the causes of the
ebbing and flowing of the Sea, of the manner how Minerals are engendered in the
Earth, shall we therefore deny that which our eyes convince us of?

And this will be a preparation to the last thing.

5. God knows all future contingencies, that is, God knows all things that
shall accidentally happen, or as we say, by Chance; and he knows all the free
motions of men's Wills that shall be to the end of the World.

If all things be open to him, Heb. 4.13. then all contingencies are, for they
are in the number of things; and as, according to Christ's speech, those things
that are impossible to man, are possible to God; so those things which are
unknown to man, are known to God; because of the infinite fullness and
perfection of the Divine Understanding.

Let us see what a Contingent is.

That is contingent which we commonly call accidental, as when a Tile falls
suddenly upon a man's head as he is walking in the Street; or when one letting
off a Musket at random, shoots another he did not intend to hit; such was that
Arrow whereby Ahab was killed, shot by a Soldier at a venture 1 Kings 22.39.
, this some call a mixed contingent, made up partly of necessity, and partly of
accident; it is necessary the Bullet, when sent out of the Gun, or Arrow out of
the Bow, should fly and light somewhere, but it is an accident that it hits
this or that man, that was never intended by the Archer. Other things, as
voluntary actions, are purely contingents, and have nothing of necessity in
them; all free actions that depend upon the Will of man, whether to do, or not
to do, are of this nature, because they depend not upon a necessary cause, as
burning does upon the Fire, moistning upon Water, or as descent or falling down
is necessary to a heavy Body; for those cannot in their own nature do
otherwise; but the other actions depend upon a free Agent, able to turn to this
or that point, and determine himself as he pleases.

Now we must know, that what is accidental in regard of the Creature, is not so
in regard of God; the manner of Ahab's Death was accidental, in regard of the
hand by which he was slain, but not in regard of God who foretold his Death,
and foreknew the Shot, and directed the Arrow; God was not uncertain before of
the manner of his fall, nor hovered over the Battle to watch for an opportunity
to accomplish his own Prediction; what may be or not be, in regard of us, is
certain in regard of God; to imagine that what is accidental to us, is so to
God, is to measure God by our short line. How many events following upon the
results of Princes in their Counsels, seem to persons ignorant of those
Counsels to be a hap-hazard, yet were not contingencies to the Prince and his
assistants, but foreseen by him as certainly to issue so as they do, which they
knew before would be the fruit of such causes and instruments they would knit
together? That may be necessary in regard of Gods foreknowledg, which is merely
accidental in regard of the natural disposition of the immediate causes, which
do actually produce it; Contingent in its own nature, and in regard of us; but
fixed in the Knowledge of God: Zanch.
One illustrates it by this similitude: A Master sends two Servants to one and
the same place, two several ways, unknown to one another; they meet at the
place which their Master had appointed them; their meeting is accidental to
them, one knows not of the other, but it was foreseen by the Master that they
should so meet, and that in regard of them it would seem a mere accident, till
they came to explain the business to one another: Both the necessity of their
meeting in regard of their Masters Order, and the accidentalness of it in
regard of themselves, were in both their circumstances foreknovvn by the
Master that employed them.

For the clearing of this, take it in this method.

1. It Is an unworthy conceit of God in any to exclude him from the knowledge of
these things.

1. It will be a strange contracting of him, to allow him no greater a Knowledge
than we have our selves.

Contingencies are known to us when they come into act, and pass from
futurity to reality; and when they are present to us, we can order our
affairs accordingly; shall we allow God no greater a measure of Knowledge
than we have, and make him as blind as ourselves, not to see things of that
nature before they come to pass? shall God know them no more? Shall we imagine
God knows no otherwise than we know? and that he does, like us, stand gazing
with admiration at events? man can conjecture many things; is it fit to ascribe
the same uncertainty to God; as though he, as well as we, could have no assurance
till the issue appear in the view of all? If God does not certainly foreknow
them, he does but conjecture them; but a conjectural knowledge is by no means to
be fastened on God; for that is not knowledge but guess, and destroys a Deity by
making him subject to mistake; for he that only guesseth, may guess wrong; so
that this is to make God like our selves, and strip him of an universally
acknowledged Perfection of Omniscience. A conjectural Knowledge, says one
Scrivene^
, is as unworthy of God, as the Creature is unworthy of Omniscience? It Is
certain, man has a liberty to act many things this or that way as he pleases;
to walk to this or that quarter, to speak or not to speak, to do this or that
thing, or not to do it; which way a man will certainly determine himself, is
unknown before to any Creature, yea often at the present to himself, for he may
be in suspense; but shall we imagine this future determination of himself is
concealed from God? Those that deny Gods foreknowledg in such cases, must
either say, that God has an opinion that a man will resolve rather this way
than that; but then if a man by his liberty determine himself contrary to the
opinion of God, is not God then deceived? and what rational Creature can own
him for a God that can be deceived in any thing? or else they must say that God
is at uncertainty, and suspends his Opinion without determining it any way;
then he cannot know free acts till they are done; he would then depend upon the
Creature for his information; his knowledge would be every instant increased, as
things, he knew not before, came into act; and since there are every minute an
innumerable multitude of various imaginations in the minds of men, there would
be every minute an accession of new Knowledge to God which he had not before;
besides, this knowledge would be mutable according to the Wavering and
Weathercock resolutions of men, one while standing to this point, another
while to that, if he depended upon the Creatures determination for his
knowledge.

2. If the free acts of men were unknown before to God, no man can see how
there can be any Government of the World by him. Such contingencies may happen,
and such resolves of men's Free-Wills unknown to God, as may perplex his
affairs, and put him upon new Councels and methods for attaining those ends
which he settled at the first Creation of things; if things happen which God
knovvs not of before, this must be the consequence; where there is no
Foresight, there is no Providence; things may happen so sudden, if God be
ignorant of them, that they may give a check to his intentions and Scheme of
Government, and put him upon changing the whole model of it. How often does a
small intervening circumstance, unforeseen by man, dash in pieces a long
meditated and well-formed Design? To govern necessary causes as Sun and Stars,
whose effects are natural and constant in themselves, is easy to be imagined;
but how to govern the World that consists of so many men of Free Will, able to
determine themselves to this or that, and which have no constancy in
themselves, as the Sun and Stars have, cannot be imagined, unless we will allow
in God as great a certainty of foreknowledg of the designs and actions of men,
as there is inconstancy in their resolves: God must be altering the methods of
his Government every day, every hour, every minute, according to the
determinations of men, which are so various and changeable in the whole compass
of the World in the space of one minute; he must wait to see what the counsels
of men will be, before he could settle his own methods of Government; and so
must govern the World according to their mutability, and not according to any
certainty in himself. But his counsel is stable in the midst of multitudes of
free devices in the heart of man, Prove. 19.21. and knovving them all before,
orders them to be subservient to his own stable counsel. If he cannot know
what to morrow will bring forth in the mind of a man, how can he certainly
settle his own determination of Governing him? his Decrees and Resolves must
be Temporal, and arise pro re nata, and he must alvvay be in counsel what he
should do upon every change of men's minds. This is an unvvorthy conceit of the
Infinite Majesty of Heaven, to make his Government depend upon the resolves of
men, rather than their resolves upon the design of God.

2. It Is therefore certain, that God does foreknow the free and voluntary acts
of man. How could he else order his People to ask of him things to come, in
order to their deliverance, such things as depended upon the Will of man, if he
foreknevv not the motions of their Will? Isa. 45.11.

1. Actions good or indifferent depending upon the liberty of man's Will as much
as any whatsoever. Several of these he has foretold; Not only a Person to
build up Jerusalem was Predicted by him, but the Name of that person, Cyrus,
Isa. 44.28. What is more contingent, or is more the effect of the liberty of
man's Will, than the Names of their Children? Was not the Destruction of the
Babylonish Empire foretold, which Cyrus undertook, not by any compulsion, but
by a free inclination and resolve of his own Will? And was not the dismission
of the Jews into their own Country, a voluntary act in that Conqueror? if you
consider the liberty of man's Will, might not Cyrus as well have continued
their Yoke, as have struck off their Chains, and kept them Captive as well as
dismissed them? Had it not been for his own interest, rather to have strengthened
the Fetters of so turbulent a People, who being tenacious of their Religion
and Laws different from that professed by the whole World, were like to make
disturbances more when they were linkt in a body in their own Country, than
when they were transplanted and scattered into the several parts of his
Empire; It was in the power of Cyrus, (take him as a man) to choose one or the
other; his interest invited him to continue their Captivity, rather than grant
their Deliverance; yet God knevv that he would willingly do this rather than
the other; he knevv this which depended upon the Will of Cyrus; and why may
not an infinite God foreknovv the free acts of all men, as well as of one? If
the liberty of Cyrus's Will was no hinderance to Gods certain and infallible
foreknovvledg of it, how can the contingency of any other thing be a
hinderance to him? for there is the same reason of one and all; and his
Government extends to every Village, every Family, every Person, as well as to
Kingdoms and Nations.

So God foretold by his Prophet, not only the destruction of Jeroboams Altar,
but the Name of the Person that should be the Instrument of it, 1 Kings 13.2.
and this about 300 years before Josiah's Birth. It Is a vvonder that none of the
Pious Kings of Judah in detestation of Idolatry, and hopes to recover again the
Kingdom of Israel, had in all that space Named one of their Sons by that Name
of Josiah, in hopes that that Prophecy should be accomplished by him: That
Manasseh only should do this, who was the greatest imitator of Jeroboams
Idolatry among all the Jewish Kings, and indeed went beyond them; and had no
mind to destroy in another Kingdom what he propagated in his own. What is
freer than the imposition of a Name, yet this he foreknevv, and this Josiah
was Manasses's Son, 2 Kings 21.26. Was there any thing more voluntary than for
Pharaoh to Honor the Butler by restoring him to his place, and punish the
Baker by hanging him on a Gibbet? yet this was foretold, Genesis 40.8. And were
not all the voluntary acts of men, which were the means of Joseph's
advancement, foreknovvn by God, as well as his exaltation, which was the end
he aimed at by those means? Many of these may be reckoned up.

Can all the free acts of man surmount the infinite capacity of the Divine
Understanding? If God singles out one voluntary action in man as contingent as
any, and lying among a vast number of other designs and resolutions, both
antecedent and subsequent; Why should he not know the whole mass of men's
thoughts and actions, and pierce into all that the liberty of man's Will can
effect? Why should he not know every grain, as well as one that lies in the
midst of many of the same kind?

And since the Scripture gives so large an account of contingents, predicted by
God; no man can certainly prove that any thing is un-foreknovvn to him. It Is as
reasonable to think he knovvs every contingent; as that he knows some that lie
as much hid from the eye of any Creature, since there is no more difficulty to
an infinite understanding to know all, than to know some The Stoics that
thought their Souls to be some particle of God (...), pieces pulled off from
him, did conclude from thence that he knew all the motions of their Souls as
his own mover, as things coherent with him, Arrian Epi^tet. lib. 1. cap. 14. p.
60.
. Indeed if we deny Gods foreknowledg of the voluntary actions of men, we must
strike our selves off from the belief of Scripture-Predictions, that yet remain
unaccomplisht, and will be brought about by the voluntary engagements of men,
as the ruin of Antichrist, etc. If God foreknows not the secret motions of
man's Will, how can he foretell them? if we strip him of this Perfection of
Prescience, why should we believe a word of Scripture-Predictions? all the
Credit of the Word of God is torn up by the Roots. If God were uncertain of
such events, how can we reconcile Gods declaration of them to his Truth; and
his demanding our Belief of them, to his Goodness? Were it good and righteous
in God to urge us to the Belief of that he were uncertain of himself? how could
he be True in Predicting things he were not sure of? or Good, in requiring
credit to be given to that which might be false? This would necessarily follow,
if God did not foreknovv the motions of men's Wills, whereby many of his
Predictions were fulfilled, and some remain yet to be accomplished.

2. God foreknows the voluntary sinful motions of men's Wills.

1. God has foretold several of them. Were not all the minute sinful
circumstances about the Death of our Blessed Redeemer, as the piercing him,
giving him Gall to Drink, foretold, as well as the not breaking his Bones, and
parting his Garments? What were those but the free actions of men, which they
did willingly without any constraint? And those foretold by David, Isaiah and
other Prophets, some above a thousand, some eight hundred, and some more, some
fewer years, before they came to pass; and the events punctually answered the
Prophecies. Many sinful acts of men, which depended upon their Free Will, have
been foretold: The Epygtians voluntary oppressing Israel, Genesis 15.13. Pharaoh's
hardening his heart against the Voice of Moses, Exodus 3.19. That Isaiah's
Message would be in vain to the People, Isa. 6.9. that the Israelites would be
rebellious after Moses his Death, and turn Idolaters, Deuteronomy. 31.16. Judas his
betraying of our Savior, a voluntary action, John 6. ult. he was not forced to
do what he did, for he had some kind of Repentance for it; and not violence,
but voluntariness falls under repentance.

2. His Truth has depended upon this foresight. Let us consider that in Genesis
5.16. but the fourth Generation they shall come hither again; that is, the
Posterity of Abraham shall come into Canaan; for the iniquity of the Amorites
is not yet full Vid Rivet. in loc. exerci 86. p. 329.
. God makes a Promise to Abraham, of giving his Posterity the Land of Canaan,
not presently, but in the fourth Generation; if the Truth of God be infallible
in the performance of his Promise, his Understanding is as infallible in the
foresight of the Amorites sin; the fullness of their iniquity was to precede the
Israelites Possession. Did the Truth of God depend upon an uncertainty? did he
make the Promise hand over head (as we say)? How could he with any Wisdom and
Truth assure Israel of the Possession of the Land in the fourth Generation, if
he had not been sure that the Amorites would fill up the measure of their
Iniquities by that time? If Abraham had been a Socinian, to deny Gods Knowledge
of the free acts of men, had he not had a fine excuse for unbelief? What would
his reply have been to God? Alas, Lord, this is not a Promise to be relied
upon, the Amorites iniquity depends upon the acts of their Free Will, and such
thou can have no Knowledge of; thou can see no more than a likelihood of
their iniquity being full, and therefore there is but a likelihood of thy
performing thy Promise, and not a certainty: Would not this be judged not only
a saucy, but a Blasphemous Answer? And upon these Principles the Truth of the
most faithful God had been dashed to uncertainty and a peradventure.

3. God provided a remedy for man's Sin, and therefore foresaw the entrance of
it into the World by the fall of Adam. He had a Decree before the Foundation of
the World, to manifest his Wisdom in the Gospel by Jesus Christ, an Eternal
purpose in Jesus Christ, Ephesians. 3.11. and a Decree of Election past before the
foundation of the World; a separation of some to redemption, and forgiveness of
Sin in the Blood of Christ, in whom they were from Eternity chosen, as well as
in time accepted in Christ, Ephesians. 1.4, 6, 7. which is called a purpose in
himself, v. 9. had not Sin entered, there had been no occasion for the Death of
the Son of God, it being every where in Scripture laid upon that score; a
Decree for the shedding of Blood, supposed a Decree for the Permission of Sin,
and a certain foreknowledg of God, that it would be committed by man. An
uncertainty of foreknowledg, and a sixedness of purpose, are not consistent in
a wise man, much less in the only Wise God. Gods purpose to manifest his Wisdom
to men and Angels in this way, might have been defeated, had God had only a
conjectural foreknowledg of the fall of man; and all those solemn purposes of
displaying his Perfections in those methods had been to no purpose Mares. cont.
Volkel. lib. 1. cap 24. p. 343.
; the Provision of a remedy supposed a certainty of the Disease: If a Sparrow
fall not to the ground without the Will of God, how much less could such a
Deplorable ruin fall upon mankind, without Gods Will permitting it, and his
Knowledge foreseeing it?

It Is not hard to conceive how God might foreknow it; Amyrald. de Praedestin.
cap. 6.
he indeed decreed to Create man in an excellent State; the goodness of God
could not but furnish him with a Power to stand; yet in his Wisdom he might
foresee, that the Devil would be envious to man's happiness, and would out of
Envy attempt his subversion. As God knew of what temper the faculties were he
had endued man with, and how far they were able to endure the assaults of a
Temptation; so he also foreknew the grand subtilty of Satan, how he would lay
his Mine, and to what Point he would drive his Temptation; how he would propose
and manage it, and direct his Battery against the sensitive appetite, and
assault the weakest part of the Fort; might he not foresee that the efficacy of
the Temptation would exceed the measure of the resistance? cannot God know how
far the malice of Satan would extend, what Shots he would according to his
nature use, how high he would charge his Temptation without his powerful
restraint, as well as an Engineer judge how many shots of a Cannon will make a
breach in a Town, and how many Casks of Powder will blow up a Fortress, who
never yet built the one nor founded the other? We may easily conclude God could
not be deceived in the Judgment of the issue and event, since he knew how far
he would let Satan loose, how far he would permit man to act; and since he
dives to the bottom of the nature of all things, he foresaw that Adam was
endued with an ability to stand; as he foresaw that Benhadad might naturally
recover of his Disease; but he foresaw also that Adam would sink under the
allurements of the Temptation, as he foresaw that Hazael would not let Benhadad
live, 2 Kings 8.10.

Now since the whole race of mankind lies in Corruption, and is subject to the
power of the Devil, 1 John 3.18. may not God that knows that corruption in
every man's nature, and the force of every man's spirit, and what every
particular nature will incline him to upon such objects proposed to him, and
what the reasons of the Temptation will be, know also the issues? is there any
difficulty in Gods foreknowing this, since man knowing the nature of one he is
well acquainted with, can conclude what sentiments he will have, and how he
will behave himself upon presenting this or that object to him?

If a man that understands the disposition of his Child or Servant, knows
before what he will do upon such an occasion; may not God much more, who knows
the inclinations of all his Creatures, and from Eternity run with his eyes over
all the works he intended? Our Wills are in the number of causes; and since God
knows our Wills, as causes, better than we do our selves, why should he be
ignorant of the effects?

God determines to give Grace to such a man; not to give it to another, but
leave him to himself, and suffer such temptations to assault him; now God
knowing the corruption of man in the whole mass, and in every part of it; is it
not easy for him to foreknow what the future actions of the Will will be, when
the Tinder and Fire meet together, and how such a man will determine himself
both as to the substance and manner of the action? Is it not easy for him to
know, how a corrupted Temper and a Temptation will suit? God is exactly privy
to all the gall in the hearts of men, and what Principles they will have,
before they have a Being. He knows their thoughts afar off, Psalm. 139.2. as far
off as Eternity, as some explain the words; and thoughts are as voluntary as
any thing; he knows the power and inclinations of men in the order of second
causes; he understands the corruption of men, as well as the Poison of Dragons,
and the Venom of Asps; this is laid up in store with him and sealed among his
Treasures, Deuteronomy. 32.33, 34. Among the Treasures of his foreknowledg, say some.

What was the cruelty of Hazael, but a free act? yet God knew the frame of his
heart, and what acts of murder and oppression would spring from that bitter
fountain, before Hazael had conceived them in himself, 2 Kings 8.12. as a man
that knows the Mineral through which Waters pass, may know what relish they
will have before they appear above the earth; so our Savior knew how Peter
would deny him; he knew what quantity of Powder would serve for such a Battery,
in what measure he would let loose Satan, how far he would leave the Reins in
Peter's hands, and then the issue might easily be known; and so in every act of
man, God knows in his own Will what measure of Grace he will give, to determine
the Will to good, and what measure of Grace he will withdraw from such a
person, or not give to him; and consequently, how far such a person will fall
or not. God knows the inclinations of the Creature; he knows his own
Permissions, what degrees of Grace he will either allow him or, keep from him,
according to which will be the degree of his Sin. This may in some measure help
our Conceptions in this, though, as was said before, the manner of Gods
foreknowledg is not so easily explicable.

3. Gods foreknowledg of man's voluntary actions does not necessitate the Will
of man. The foreknowledg of God is not deceived, nor the liberty of man's Will
diminisht. I shall not trouble you with any School distinctions, but be as
plain as I can, laying down several Propositions in this case.

Proposition 1. It Is certain all necessity does not take away liberty. Indeed a
compulsive necessity takes away liberty; but a necessity of immutability
removes not liberty from God; why should then a necessity of Infallibility in
God remove liberty from the Creature? God did necessarily create the World,
because he Decreed it; yet freely, because his Will from Eternity stood to it;
he freely Decreed it, and freely created it; as the Apostle says in regard of
Gods Decrees, who has been his Councellor? Romans 11.34. so in regard of his
actions I may say, who has been his compeller? he freely decreed, and he
freely created. Jesus Christ necessarily took our flesh, because he had
covenanted with God so to do, yet he acted freely and voluntarily according to
that Covenant, otherwise his Death had not been efficacious for us. A good man
does naturally, necessarily love his Children, yet voluntarily: It Is part of
the happiness of the Blessed, to love God unchangeably, yet freely, for it
would not be their happiness if it were done by compulsion. What is done by
force, cannot be called felicity, because there is no delight or complacency in
it; and though the Blessed love God freely, yet if there were a possibility of
change, it would not be their Happiness, their Blessedness would be dampt by
their fear of falling from this Love, and consequently from their nearness to
God, in whom their happiness consists: God foreknows that they will Love him
for ever; but are they therefore compelled for ever to love him? If there were
such a kind of constraint, Heaven would be rendered burdensome to them, and so
no Heaven.

Again, Gods foreknowledg of what he will do, does not necessitate him to do:
he foreknew that he would create a World, yet he freely created a World. Gods
foreknowledg does not necessitate himself, why should it necessitate us more
than himself? We may instance in ourselves: When we Will a thing, we
necessarily use our faculty of Will; and when we freely Will any thing, it is
necessary that we freely Will; but this necessity does not exclude but include
liberty; or more plainly, when a man writes or speaks, whilst he writes or
speaks, those actions are necessary, because to speak and be silent, to write
and not to write at the same time, are impossible; yet our writing or speaking
does not take away the power, not to write or to be silent at that time if a
man would be so; for he might have chose whether he would have spoke or writ.
So there is a necessity of such actions of man which God foresees; that is, a
necessity of infallibility, because God cannot be deceived; but not a coactive
necessity, as if they were compelled by God to act thus or thus.

2. No man can say in any of his voluntary actions that he ever found any force
upon him. When any of us have done any thing according to our Wills, can we say
we could not have done the contrary to it? were we determined to it in our own
intrinsic nature, or did we not determine our selves? Did we not act either
according to our reason, or according to outward allurements; did we find any
thing without us or within us, that did force our Wills to the embracing this
or that? Whatever action you do, you do it because you judge it fit to be done;
or because you will do it. What though God foresaw that you would do so, and that
you would do this or that, did you feel any force upon you? did you not act
according to your nature? God foresees that you will Eat or Walk at such a
time; do you find any thing that moves you to Eat, but your own appetite? or to
Walk, but your own Reason and Will? If Prescience had imposed any necessity
upon man, should we not probably have found some kind of Plea from it in the
mouth of Adam? he knew as much as any man ever since knew of the nature of God,
as discoverable in Creation; he could not in Innocence fancy an ignorant God, a
God that knew nothing of future things; he could not be so ignorant of his own
action, but he must have perceived a force upon his Will, had there been any;
had he thought that Gods Prescience imposed any necessity upon him, he would
not have omitted the Plea, especially when he was so daring as to charge the
Providence of God in the Gift of the Woman to him, to be the cause of his
Crime, Genesis 3.12. How come his Posterity to invent new charges against God,
which their Father Adam never thought of, who had more knowledge than all of
them? He could find no cause of his Sin but the liberty of his own Will; he
charges it not upon any necessity from the Devil or any necessity from God; nor
does he alledg the gift of the Woman as a necessary cause of his Sin, but an
occasion of it, by giving the Fruit to him. Judas knew that our Savior did
foreknow his Treachery, for he had told him of it in the hearing of his
Disciples, John 13.21, 26. yet he never charged the necessity of his Crime upon
the foreknowledg of his Master; if Judas had not done it freely, he had had no
reason to repent of it; his Repentance justifies Christ from imposing any
necessity upon him by that foreknowledg. No man acts any thing, but he can give
an account of the motives of his action; he cannot father it upon a blind
necessity; the Will cannot be compelled, for then it would cease to be Will:
God does not root up the foundations of Nature, or change the order of it, and
make men unable to act like men, that is, as free Agents. God foreknows the
actions of irrational Creatures, this concludes no violence upon their nature;
for we find their actions to be according to their nature, and spontaneous.

3. Gods foreknowledg is not (simply considered) the cause of any thing. It
puts nothing into things, but only beholds them as present, and arising from
their proper causes: The knowledge of God is not the Principle of things, or the
cause of their existence, but directive of the action; nothing is because God
knows it, but because God Wills it, either positively or permissively; God
knows all things possible, yet because God knows them, they are not brought
into actual existence, but remain still only as things possible; Knowledge only
apprehends a thing, but acts nothing; it is the rule of acting, but not the
cause of acting; the Will is the immediate Principle, and the Power the
immediate cause; to know a thing, is not to do a thing, for then we may be said
to do every thing that we know; But every man knows those things which he never
did, nor never will do; Knowledge in it self is an apprehension of a thing, and
is not the cause of it. A Spectator of a thing is not the cause of that thing
which he sees, that is, he is not the cause of it as he beholds it: We see a
man Write, we know before that he will Write at such a time; but this
foreknowledg is not the cause of his Writing. We see a man Walk, but our vision
of him brings no necessity of Walking upon him; he was free to Walk, or not to
Walk Rawley of the World, lib. 1. cap. 1. sect. 12.
. We foreknow that Death will seize upon all men, we foreknow that the Seasons
of the Year will succeed one another; yet is not our foreknowledg the cause of
this succcession of Spring after Winter, or of the Death of all men, or any
man: We see one man fighting with another, our sight is not the cause of that
contest, but some Quarrel among themselves exciting their own Passions. As the
knowledge of present things imposes no necessity upon them while they are
acting and present; so the Knowledge of future things imposes no necessity upon
them while they are coming. We are certain there will be men in the World to
morrow, and that the Sea will Ebb and Flow; but is this knowledge of ours the
cause that those things will be so? I know that the Sun will rise to morrow,
it is true that it shall rise; but it is not true, that my foreknowledg makes it
to rise. If a Physician Prognosticates upon seeing the Intemperances and
Debaucheries of men, that they will fall into such a distemper, is his
Prognostication any cause of their Disease, or of the sharpness of any Symptoms
attending it? The Prophet foretold the cruelty of Hazael, before he committed
it; but who will say, that the Prophet was the cause of his Commission of that
evil? And thus the foreknowledg of God takes not away the liberty of man's Will,
no more than a foreknowledg that we have of any man's actions, takes away his
liberty: We may upon our knowledge of the temper of a man, certainly foreknow,
that if he falls into such Company, and get among his Cups, he will be Drunk;
but is this foreknowledg the cause that he is Drunk? no, the cause is the
liberty of his own Will, and not resisting the Temptation. God purposes to
leave such a man to himself and his own ways; and man being so left, God
foreknows what will be done by him according to that corrupt nature which is in
him; though the Decree of God of leaving a man to the liberty of his own Will be
certain, yet the liberty of man's Will as thus left, is the cause of all the
extravagancies he does commit. Suppose Adam had stood, would not God certainly
have foreseen that he would have stood? yet it would have been concluded that
Adam had stood, not by any necessity of Gods foreknowledg, but by the liberty
of his own Will: Why should then the foreknowledg of God add more necessity to
his falling than to his standing? Rivet in Isa. 53.1. p. 16.
And though it be said sometimes in Scripture, that such a thing was done that
the Scripture might be fulfilled, as John 12.38. that the saying of Esaias
might be fulfilled, Lord who has believed our report? the word That, does not
infer that the Prediction of the Prophet was the cause of the Jews unbelief,
but infers this, that the Prediction was manifested to be true by their
unbelief, and the event answered the Prediction; this Prediction was not the
cause of their Sin, but their foreseen Sin was the cause of this Prediction;
and so the Particle That, is taken, Psalm. 51.6. against thee, thee only have I
sinned, that thou might be justified, etc. the justifying God, was not the
end and intent of the Sin, but the event of it upon his acknowledgment.

4. God foreknows things, because they will come to pass; but things are not
future, because God knows them. Foreknowledg presupposes the object which is
foreknown; a thing that is to come to pass, is the object of the Divine
Knowledge, but not the cause of the act of Divine Knowledge; and though the
foreknowledg of God does in Eternity precede the actual presence of a thing
which is foreseen as future; yet the future thing in regard of its futurity, is
as Eternal as the foreknowledg of God: As the Voice is uttered before it be
heard, and a thing is visible before it be seen, and a thing knowable before it
be known. But how comes it to be knowable to God? it must be answered, either
in the Power of God as a thing possible, or in the Will of God as a thing
future; he first Willed, and then knew what he Willed; he knew what he Willed
to effect, and he knew what he Willed to permit; as he Willed the Death of
Christ by a determinate Counsel, and Willed the Permission of the Jews Sin, and
the ordering of the malice of their nature to that end, Acts 2.22. God decrees
to make a rational Creature, and to govern him by a Law; God Decrees not to
hinder this rational Creature from transgressing his Law; and God foresees that
what he would not hinder, would come to pass. Man did not Sin because God
foresaw him; but God foresaw him to Sin, because man would Sin. If Adam and
other men would have acted otherwise, God would have foreknown that they would
have acted well; God foresaw our actions because they would so come to pass by
the motion of our Free Will, which he would permit, which he would concur with,
which he would order to his own holy and glorious ends, for the manifestation
of the Perfection of his nature. If I see a man lie in a Sink, no necessity is
inferred upon him from my sight to lie in that filthy place, but there is a
necessity inferred by him that lies there, that I should see him in that
condition if I pass by, and cast my eye that way.

5. God did not only foreknow our actions, but the manner of our actions. That
is, he did not only know that we would do such actions, but that we would do
them freely; he foresaw that the Will would freely determine it self to this or
that; the Knowledge of God takes not away the nature of things; though God knows
possible things, yet they remain in the nature of possibility; and though God
knows contingent things, yet they remain in the nature of contingencies; and
though God knows free Agents, yet they remain in the nature of liberty. God did
not foreknow the actions of man, as necessary, but as free; so that liberty is
rather established by this foreknowledg, than removed: God did not foreknow
that Adam had not a power to stand, or that any man has not a power to omit
such a sinful action, but that he would not omit it. Man has a power to do
otherwise than that which God foreknows he will do: Adam was not determined by
any inward necessity to Fall, nor any man by any inward necessity to commit
this or that particular Sin; but God foresaw that he would Fall, and Fall
freely; for he saw the whole Circle of means and causes whereby such and such
actions should be produced; and can be no more ignorant of the motions of our
Wills, and the manner of them, than an Artificer can be ignorant of the motions
of his Watch, and how far the Spring will let down the String in the space of
an hour; he sees all causes leading to such events in their whole order, and
how the Free Will of man will comply with this, or refuse that; he changes not
the manner of the Creatures operation, whatsoever it be.

6. But what if the foreknowledg of God, and the liberty of the Will, cannot be
fully reconciled by man? shall we therefore deny a Perfection in God to support
a liberty in our selves? Shall we rather fasten ignorance upon God, and accuse
him of blindness, to maintain our liberty? That God does foreknow every thing,
and yet that there is liberty in the rational Creature, are both certain; but
how fully to reconcile them, may surmount the Understanding of man. Some Truths
the Disciples were not capable of bearing in the days of Christ; and several
Truths our understandings cannot reach as long as the World does last; yet in
the mean time we must on the one hand take heed of conceiving God ignorant, and
on the other hand of imagining the Creature necessitated; the one will render
God imperfect, and the other will seem to render him unjust, in punishing man
for that Sin which he could not avoid, but was brought into by a fatal
necessity. God is sufficient to render a reason of his own Proceedings, and
clear up all at the day of Judgment; it is a part of man's curiosity, since the
Fall, to be prying into Gods Secrets, things too high for him; whereby he
singes his own Wings, and confounds his own Understanding. It Is a cursed
affectation that runs in the Blood of Adams Posterity, to know as God, though our
first Father smarted and ruined his Posterity in that attempt; the vvays and
knowledge of God are as much above our thoughts and conceptions, as the heavens
are above the earth, Isa. 55.9. Dailla Melang. part 2. p. 712. 725.
and so sublime, that we cannot comprehend them in their true and just
greatness; his designs are so mysterious, and the vvays of his conduct so
profound, that it is not possible to dive into them: The force of our
understandings is below his infinite Wisdom, and therefore we should adore
him with an humble astonishment, and cry out with the Apostle, Romans 11.33. Oh
the depth of the Riches of the Wisdom and Knowledge of God! how unsearchable are
his Judgments! and his ways past finding out! When ever we meet with depths
that we cannot fathom, let us remember that he is God, and we his Creatures;
and not be guilty of so great extravagance, as to think that a Subject can
pierce into all the secrets of a Prince, or a Work understand all the
operations of the Artificer. Let us only resolve not to fasten any thing on God
that is unvvorthy of the Perfection of his nature, and dishonorable to the
Glory of his Majesty; nor imagine that we can ever step out of the rank of
Creatures to the glory of the Deity, to understand fully every thing in his
nature.

So much for the second general, What God knovvs.

III. The third is, How God knows all things? As it is necessary we should
conceive God to be an Understanding Being, else he could not be God; so we
must conceive his understanding to be infinitely more pure and perfect than
ours in the act of it, else we liken him to our selves, and debase him as lovv
as his Footstool. Maxim. Tyriu^ Dissert. 1. p. 9. 10.
As among Creatures there are degrees of Being and Perfection; Plants above
Earth and Sand, because they have a Power of growth; Beasts above Plants,
because to their Power of growth, there is an addition of excellency of
sense; rational Creatures above Beasts, because to Sense there is added the
Dignity of Reason: The Understanding of man is more noble than all the
vegetative power of Plants, or the sensitive Power of Beasts: God therefore
must be infinitely more excellent in his Understanding, and therefore in the
manner of it. As man differs from a Beast in regard of his knowledge; so does
God also from man, in regard of his Knowledge. As God therefore is in Being and
Perfection, infinitely more above a man than a man is above a Beast, the manner
of his Knowledge must be infinitely more above a man's knowledge, than the
knowledge of a man is above that of a Beast; our understandings can clasp an
object in a moment, that is at a great distance from our sense; our eye by one
elevated motion can view the Heavens; the manner of Gods Understanding must be
unconceivably above our glimmerings; as the manner of his Being is infinitely
more perfect than all Beings, so must the manner of his Understanding be
infinitely more perfect than all Created understandings. Maimonia^ More
Nevochim. part 3. c. 20. p. 391 392, 393.
Indeed the manner of Gods Knowledge can no more be known by us, than his
Essence can be known by us; and the same incapacity in man, which renders him
unable to comprehend the Being of God, renders him as unable to comprehend the
manner of Gods Understanding: As there is a vast distance betvveen the Essence
of God, and our Beings, so there is betvveen the Thoughts of God and our
Thoughts; the Heavens are not so much higher than the Earth, as the Thoughts of
God are above the thoughts of men, yea, and of the highest Angel, Isa. 55.8, 9.
yet though we know not the manner of Gods Knowledge, we know that he knovvs;
as though we know not the infiniteness of God, yet we know that he is
infinite. It Is Gods sole Prerogative to know himself, what he is; and it is
equally his Prerogative to know how he knovvs; the manner of Gods knowledge
therefore must be considered by us, as free from those Imperfections our
knowledge is encumbred with.

In general, God does necessarily know all things; he is necessarily
Omnipresent, because of the immensity of his Essence; so he is necessarily
Omniscient, because of the infiniteness of his Understanding. It Is no more at
the liberty of his Will, whether he will know all things, than whether he will
be able to create all things; it is no more at the liberty of his Will, whether
he will be Omniscient, than whether he will be Holy; he can as little be
ignorant, as he can be impure; he knows not all things, because he will know
them, but because it is Essential to his nature to know them.

In particular,

Proposition 1. God knows by his own Essence; that is, He sees the nature of
things in the Ideas of his own mind, and the events of things in the Decrees of
his own Will; he knows them not by viewing the things, but by viewing himself;
his own Essence is the Mirror and Book, wherein he beholds all things that he
does ordain, dispose and execute; and so he knows all things in their first and
original cause; which is no other than his own Essence Willing, and his own
Essence executing what he Wills; he knows them in his Power, as the Physical
Principle; in his Will, as the moral Principle of things, as some speak.

He borrows not the knowledge of Creatures from the Creatures, nor depends upon
them for means of Understanding, as we poor Worms do, who are beholden to the
objects abroad to assist us with Images of things, and to our senses to convey
them into our minds; God would then acquire a Perfection from those things
which are below himself, and an excellency from those things that are vile; his
Knowledge would not precede the Being of the Creatures, but the Creatures would
be before the act of his Knowledge. If he understood by Images drawn from the
Creatures, as we do, there would be something in God which is not God, viz. the
Images of things drawn from outward objects: God would then depend upon
Creatures for that which is more noble than a bare Being; for to be
Understanding, is more excellent than barely to be. Besides, if Gods Knowledge
of his Creatures were derived from the Creatures by the impression of any thing
upon him, as there is upon us, he could not know from Eternity, because from
Eternity there was no actual existence of any thing but himself; and therefore
there could not be any Images shot out from any thing, because there was not
any thing in Being but God; as there is no Principle of Being to any thing but
by his Essence; so there is no Principle of the Knowledge of any thing by
himself but his Essence: If the knowledge of God were distinct from his Essence,
his Knowledge were not Eternal, because there is nothing Eternal but his Essence.

His Understanding is not a faculty in him as it is in us, but the same with
his Essence, because of the simplicity of his nature; God is not made up of
various parts, one distinct from another as we are, and therefore does not
understand by a part of himself, but by himself; so that to be, and to
understand, is the same with God; his Essence is not one thing, and the power
whereby he understands, another; he would then be compounded, and not be the
most simple Being: This also is necessary for the Perfection of God; for the
more perfect and noble the way and manner of knowing is, the more perfect and
noble is the knowledge. The perfection of Knowledge depends upon the excellency
of the medium whereby we know. As a knowledge by Reason, is a more noble way of
knowing than knowledge by sense; so it is more excellent for God to know by his
Essence, than by any thing without him, any thing mixed with him; the first
would render him dependant, and the other would demolish his simplicity.

Again, the natures of all things are contained in God; not formally; for then
the nature of the Creatures would be God: but eminently; he that planted the
ear, shall he not hear? he that formed the eye, shall he not see? Psalm. 94.9.
He has in himself eminently the Beauty, Perfection, Life and Vigor of all
Creatures; he Created nothing contrary to himself, but every thing with some
footsteps of himself in them; he could not have pronounced them good, as he
did, had there been any thing in them contrary to his own goodness; and
therefore as his Essence primarily represents it self, so it represents the
Creatures, and makes them known to him. As the Essence of God is eminently all
things, so by understanding his Essence, he eminently understands all things.
Diony^,
And therefore he has not one knowledge of himself, and another knowledge of the
Creatures; but by knowing himself, as the original and exemplary cause of all
things, he cannot be ignorant of any Creature which he is the cause of; so that
he knows all things, not by an understanding of them, but by an understanding
of himself; by understanding his own Power as the efficient of them, his own
Will as the orderer of them, his own Goodness as the adorner and beautifier of
them, his own Wisdom as the disposer of them, and his own Holiness, to which
many of their actions are contrary.

Kendall against Goodwin of Foreknowledg.
As he sees all things possible in his own Power, because he is able to produce
them; so he sees all things future in his own Will, decreeing to effect them,
if they be good, or Decreeing to permit them, if they be Evil. In this Glass he
sees what he will give Being to, and what he will suffer to fall into a
deficiency, without looking out of himself, or borrowing Knowledge from his
Creatures; he knows all things in himself. And thus his Knowledge is more noble,
and of a higher elevation than ours, or the knowledge of any Creature can be; he
knows all things by one comprehension of the causes in himself.

Proposition 2. God knows all things by one act of intuition. This the Schools
call an intuitive knowledge. This follows upon the other; for if he know by his
own Essence, he knows all things by one act, there would be otherwise a
division in his Essence, a first and a last, a nearness and a distance. As what
he made, he made by one word; so what he sees, he pierces into by one glance
from Eternity to Eternity: As he Wills all things by one act of his Will, so he
knows all things by one act of his Understanding: he knows not some things
discursively from other things, nor knows one thing successively after another.
As by one act he imparts Essence to things; so by one act he knows the nature
of things.

1. He does not know by Discourse, as we do. That is, By deducing one thing
from another, and from common notions drawing out other rational conclusions
and arguing one thing from another, and springing up various consequences from
some Principle assented to; but God stands in no need of reasonings; the making
inferences and abstracting things, would be stains in the infinite Perfection
of God; here would be a mixture of knowledge and ignorance; while he knew the
Principle, he would not know the consequence and conclusion, till he had
actually deduced it; one thing would be known after another, and so he would
have an ignorance, and then a knowledge; and there would be different
conceptions in God, and knowledge would be multiplied according to the multitude
of objects; as it is in humane Understandings. But God knows all things before
they did exist, and never was ignorant of them, Acts 15.18. known unto God are
all his Works from the beginning of the World. He therefore knows them all at
once; the knowledge of one thing was not before another, nor depended upon
another, as it does in the way of Humane reasoning. Suarez. vol. 1. de Deo, lib
3. cap. 2. p. 133, 134.
Though indeed some make a vertual Discourse in God; that is, though God has a
simple knowledge, yet it does vertually contain a Discourse by the flowing of
one knowledge from another; as from the knowledge of his own Power, he knows what
things are possible to be made by him; and from the knowledge of himself, he
passes to the knowledge of the Creatures; but this is only according to our
Conception, and because of our weakness they are apprehended as two distinct
acts in God, one of which is the reason of another: As we say that one
Attribute is the reason of another; as his Mercy, may be said to be the reason
of his Patience; and his Omnipresence, to be the reason of the knowledge of
present things done in the World. God indeed by one simple act, knows himself
and the Creatures; but when that Act whereby he knows himself, is conceived by
us to pass to the knowledge of the Creatures, we must not understand it to be a
new Act, distinct from the other; but the same act upon different terms or
objects; such an order is in our understandings and conceptions, not in God's.

2. Nor does he know successively, as we do. That is, not by Drops, one thing
after another. This follows from the former; a knowledge of all things without
Discourse, is a Knowledge without Succession. Gamach in Aquin. q. 14. cap. 1. p.
119.
The knowledge of one thing is not in God before another, one act of knowledge
does not beget another; in regard of the objects, one thing is before another,
one year before another, one Generation of men before another, one is the
cause, the other is the effect: In the Creatures there is such a Succession,
and God knows there will be such a Succession; but there is no such order in
Gods knowledge; for he knows all those Successions by one glance, without any
succession of knowledge in himself.

Man in his view of things, must turn sometimes his Body, sometimes only his
Eyes, he cannot see all the Contents of a Letter at once, and though he beholds
all the lines in the page of a Book at once, and a whole Country in a Map, yet
to know what is contained in them, he must turn his eye from word to word, and
line to line, and so spin out one thing after another by several acts and
motions. We behold a great part of the Sea at once says Epiphanius.
, but not all the dimensions of it; for to know the length of the Sea, we move
our eyes one way; to see the breadth of it, we turn our eyes another way; to
behold the depth of it, we have another motion of them. And when we cast our
eyes up to Heaven, we seem to receive in at an instant the whole tent of the
Hemisphere; yet there is but one object the eye can attentively pitch upon, and
we cannot distinctly view what we see in a lump, without various motions of our
eyes, which is not done without succession of Time Amyrant morale chresti. Tom.
3. p. 137.
. And certainly the Understanding of Angels is bounded, according to the
measure of their Beings; so that it cannot extend it self at one time, to a
quantity of objects, to make a distinct application of them, but the objects
must present themselves one by one: But God is all Eye, all Understanding; as
there is no succession in his Essence, so there is none in his Knowledge; his
understanding in the nature, and in the act, is infinite, as it is in the Text.
He therefore sees Eternally and Universally, all things, by one act, without
any motion, much less various motions; the various changes of things, in their
substance, qualities, places and relations, withdraw not any thing from his
Eye, nor bring any new thing to his Knowledge; he does not upon consideration of
present things turn his mind from past; or when he beholds future things, turn
his mind from present; but he sees them not one after another, but all at once
and all together; the whole Circle of his own Counsels, and all the various
Lines drawn forth from the Center of his Will, to the circumference of his
Creatures; Just as if a man were able in one moment to read a whole Library;
or, as if you should imagine a transparent Crystal Globe, hung up in the midst
of a Room, and so framed as to take in the images of all things in the Room,
the Fret-Work in the Cieling, the in-laid parts of the Floor, and the
particular parts of the Tapestry about it, the eye of a man would behold all
the Beauty of the Room at once in it. As the Sun by one light and heat frames
sensible things; so God by one simple act knows all things: As he knows mutable
things by an immutable knowledge, bodily things by a spiritual knowledge; so he
knows many things by one knowledge, Heb. 4.13. All things are open and naked to
him, more than any one thing can be to us; and therefore he views all things at
once, as well as we can behold and contemplate one thing alone. As he is the
Father of Lights, a God of infinite Understanding, there is no variableness in
his mind, nor any shadow of turning of his eye, as there is of ours, to behold
various things, James 1.17. his Knowledge being Eternal, includes all times;
there is nothing past or future with him, and therefore he beholds all things
by one and the same manner of knowledge, and comprehends all knowable things by
one act, and in one moment.

This must needs be so,

1. Because of the eminency of God. God is above all, and therefore cannot but
see the motions of all. He that sits in a Theater, or at the top of a place,
sees all things, all persons, by one aspect he comprehends the whole Circle of
the place; whereas he that sits below, when he looks before, he cannot see
things behind; God being above all, about all, in all, sees at once the motions
of all. The whole World in the eye of God, is less than a Point that divides
one Sentence from another in a Book; as a Cipher, a grain of Dust, Isa. 40.15.
so little a thing can be seen by man at once; and all things being as little in
the eye of God, are seen at once by him. As all Time is but a moment to his
Eternity; so all things are but as a point to the immensity of his Knowledge,
which he can behold with more ease than we can move or turn our eye.

2. Because all the Perfections of Knowing, are united in God. Cusan. p. 646.
As particular senses are divided in man, by one he Sees, by another he Hears,
by another he Smells, yet all those are united in one common sense, and this
common sense apprehends all; so the various and distinct ways of knowledge in
the Creatures, are all eminently united in God. A man when he sees a grain of
Wheat, understands at once all things that can in Time proceed from that Seed;
so God by beholding his own virtue and power, beholds all things which shall in
time be unfolded by him. We have a shadow of this way of knowledge in our own
Understanding; the sense only perceives a thing present, and one object only
proper and suitable to it; as the eye sees color, the ear hears sounds; we see
this and that man, one time this, another minute that; but the understanding
abstracts a notion of the common nature of man, and frames a conception of that
nature wherein all men agree; and so in a manner beholds and understands all
men at once, by understanding the common nature of man, which is a degree of
knowledge above the sense and fancy; we may then conceive an infinite vaster
Perfection in the Understanding of God. As to know, is simply better than not
to know at all; so to know by one act comprehensive, is a greater Perfection
than to know by divided acts, by succession to receive information, and to have
an increase or decrease of knowledge, to be like a Bucket, always descending into
the Well, and fetching Water from thence. It Is a man's weakness that he is fixed
on one object only at a time; it is Gods Perfection that he can behold all at
once, and is fixed upon one no more than upon another.

Proposition 3. God knows all things independently. This is Essential to an
infinite Understanding. He receives not his knowledge from any thing without
him, he has no Tutor to instruct him, or Book to inform him; who has been his
Counselor? says the Prophet, Isa. 40.13. he has no need of the Counsels of
others, nor of the instructions of others. This follows upon the first and
second Propositions; if he knows things by his Essence, then as his Essence is
independent from the Creatures, so is his Knowledge; he borrows not any images
from the Creature, has no species or pictures of things in his Understanding,
as we have; no Beams from the Creature strike upon him, to enlighten him, but
Beams from him upon the World; the Earth sends not Light to the Sun, but the
Sun to the Earth.

Our knowledge indeed depends upon the object; but all Created objects depend
upon Gods Knowledge and Will: We could not know Creatures, unless they were; but
Creatures could not be, unless God knew them. As nothing that he Wills is the
cause of his Will; so nothing that he knows is the cause of his Knowledge; he
did not make things to know them, but he knows them to make them; Who will
imagine that the mark of the foot in the Dust, is the cause that the foot
stands in this or that particular place?

If his knowledge did depend upon the things, then the existence of things did
precede Gods knowledge of them; to say that they are the cause of Gods Knowledge,
is to say, that God was not the cause of their Being; and if he did Create
them, it was effected by a blind and ignorant power, he Created he knew not
what, till he had produced it. If he be beholden for his Knowledge to the
Creatures he has made, he had then no knowledge of them before he made them. If
his knowledge were dependant upon them, it could not be Eternal, but must have a
beginning when the Creatures had a beginning, and be of no longer a date than
since the nature of things was in actual existence; for whatsoever is a cause
of knowledge, does precede the knowledge it causes, either in order of time, or
order of nature; Temporal things therefore cannot be the cause of that knowledge
which is Eternal. His Works could not be foreknown to him, if his Knowledge
commenced with the existence of his Works, If he knew them before he made them,
Act, 15.18.
he could not derive a knowledge from them after they were made. He made all
things in Wisdom, Psalm. 104.24. how can this be imagined, if the things known
were the cause of his Knowledge, and so before his knowledge, and therefore
before his action Bradward lib. 1. cap. 15.
? God would not then be the first in the order of knowing Agents, because he
would not act by Knowledge, but act before he knew, and know after he had acted,
and so the Creature which he made, would be before the act of his
Understanding, whereby he knew what he made.

Again, since Knowledge is a Perfection, if Gods knowledge of the Creatures
depended upon the Creatures, he would derive an excellency from them, they
would derive no excellency from any Idea in the Divine mind; he would not be
infinitely perfect in himself; if his Perfection in Knowledge were gained from
any thing without himself and below himself, he would not be sufficient of
himself, but be under an indigence, which wanted a supply from the things he
had made; and could not be eternally perfect till he had created, and seen the
effects of his own Power, Goodness and Wisdom, to render him more wise and
knowing in Time than he was from Eternity; Who can fancy such a God as this,
without destroying the Deity he pretends to adore? for if his Understanding be
perfected by something without him, why may not his Essence be perfected by
something without him; that as he was made knowing by something without him, he
might be made God by something without him?

How could his Understanding be infinite, if it depended upon a finite object,
as upon a cause? Is the Majesty of God to be debased to a Mendicant condition,
to seek for a supply from things inferior to himself? Is it to be imagined that
a Fool, a Toad, a Fly should be assistant to the knowledge of God? that the most
noble Being should be perfected by things so vile, that the supreme cause of
all things should receive any addition of knowledge, and be determined in his
Understanding, by the notion of things so mean? To conclude this particular,
all things depend upon his knowledge, his knowledge depends upon nothing, but is
as independent as himself, and his own Essence.

Proposition 4. God knows all things distinctly. His understanding is infinite
in regard of clearness; God is light, and in him is no darkness at all, John
1.5. he sees not through a Mist or Cloud; there is no blemish in his
Understanding, no mote or beam in his eye, to render any thing obscure to him.
Man discerns the surface and outside of things, little or nothing of the
Essence of things; we see the noblest things, but as in a glass darkly, 1 Cor.
13.12. the too great nearness, as well as the too great distance of a thing,
hinders our sight; the smallness of a mote escapes our eye, and so our
knowledge; also the weakness of our understanding is troubled with the multitude
of things, and cannot know many things but confusedly. But God knows the forms
and essence of things, every circumstance; nothing is so deep, but he sees to
the bottom; he sees the mass, and sees the motes of Beings; his Understanding
being infinite, is not offended with a multitude of things, or distracted with
the variety of them; he discerns every thing infinitely more clearly and
perfectly than Adam or Solomon could any one thing in the Circle of their
knowledge: What knowledge they had, was from him; he has therefore infinitely a
more perfect knowledge than they were capable in their natures to receive a
communication of. All things are open to him, Heb. 4.13. the least fiber in its
nakedness and distinct frame, is transparent to him; as by the help of Glasses,
the mouth, feet, hands of a small Insect, are visible to a man, which seem to
the eye, without that assistance, one entire piece, not diversified into parts.
All the causes, qualities, natures, properties of things are open to him, he
brings out the Host of Heaven by number, and calls them by Names, Isa. 40.26.
he numbers the Hairs of our heads; what more distinct than number? thus God
beholds things in every unity, which makes up the heap: He knows, and none else
can, every thing in its true and intimate causes, in its original and
intermediate causes; in himself, as the cause of every particular of their
Being, every Property in their Being.

Knowledge by the causes is the most noble and perfect Knowledge, and most suited
to the infinite excellency of the Divine Being; he created all things, and
ordered them to a universal and particular end; he therefore knows the
essential Properties of every thing, every activity of their nature, all their
fitness for those distinct ends, to which he orders them, and for which he
governs and disposes them; and understands their darkest and most hidden
qualities, infinitely clearer than any eye can behold the clear Beams of the
Sun. He knows all things as he made them; he made them distinctly, and
therefore knows them distinctly, and that every individual; therefore God is
said, Genesis 1.31. to see every thing that he had made; he took a review of every
particular Creature he had made, and upon his view pronounced it good: To
pronounce that good, which was not exactly known in every Creek, in every Mite
of its nature, had not consisted with his veracity; for every one that speaks
truth ignorantly, that knows not that he speaks Truth, is a Liar in speaking
that which is true. God knows every act of his own Will, whether it be positive
or permissive, and therefore every effect of his Will. We must needs ascribe to
God a perfect Knowledge; but a confused Knowledge cannot challenge that Title. To
know things only in a heap, is unworthy of the Divine Perfection; for if God
knows his own ends in the Creation of things, he knows distinctly the means
whereby he will bring them to those ends for which he has appointed them: No
Wise man intends an end, without a knowledge of the means conducing to that end;
an ignorance then of any thing in the World, which falls under the nature of a
means to a Divine end (and there is nothing in the World but does), would be
inconsistent with the Perfection of God; it would ascribe to him a blind
Providence in the World. As there can be nothing imperfect in his Being and
Essence, so there can be nothing imperfect in his Understanding and Knowledge;
and therefore not a confused Knowledge, which is an Imperfection. Darkness and
Light are both alike to him, Psalm. 139.12. he sees distinctly into the one, as
well as the other; what is Darkness to us, is not so to him.

Proposition 5. God knows all things infallibly. His Understanding is infinite,
in regard of certainty; every Tittle of what he knows, is as far from failing,
as what he speaks; our Savior affirms the one, Math. 5.18. and there is the
same reason of the certainty of one as well as the other; his Essence is the
measure of his Knowledge; whence it is as impossible that God should be mistaken
in the knowledge of the least thing in the World, as it is that he should be
mistaken in his own Essence; for knowing himself comprehensively, he must know
all other things infallibly: Since he is Essentially Omniscient, he is no more
capable of error in his Understanding, than of Imperfection in his Essence; his
Counsels are as unerring as his Essence is perfect, and his knowledge as
infallible as his Essence is free from defect.

Again, since God knows all things with a knowledge of Vision, because he Wills
them; his Knowledge must be as infallible as his purpose; now his purpose will
certainly be effected; what he has thought shall come to pass, and what he
has purposed shall stand, Isa. 14.24. His Counsel shall stand, and he will do
all his pleasure, Isa. 46.10. There may be interruptions of nature, the
foundations of it may be out of course, but there can be no bar upon the Author
of nature; he has an infinite power to carry on and perfect the resolves of
his own Will; he can effect what he pleases by a Word. Speech is one of the
least motions; yet when God said, let there be Light, there was Light, arising
from Darkness. No reason can be given why God knows a thing to be, but because
he infallibly Wills it to be.

Again, Suarez. Vol. 2^ p. 228.
The Schools make this difference between the knowledge of the good and bad
Angels, that the good are never deceived; for that is repugnant to their
Blessed State; for deceit is an evil and an imperfection, inconsistent with
that perfect Blessedness the good Angels are possessed of; and would it not
much more be a stain upon the Blessedness of that God that is Blessed forever,
to be subject to deceit? His knowledge therefore is not an Opinion, for an
Opinion is uncertain; a man knows not what to think, but leans to one part of
the Question proposed, rather than to the other. If things did not come to pass
therefore as God knows them, his knowledge would be imperfect; and since he
knows by his Essence, his Essence also would be imperfect, if God were exposed
to any Deceit in his Knowledge; he knows by himself, who is the highest Truth;
and therefore it is impossible he should err in his Understanding.

Proposition 6. God knows immutably. His Understanding else could not be
infinite; every thing and every act that is mutable, is finite, it has its
bounds; for there is a term from which it changes, and a term to which it
changes. Tileni Syntagina Part 1. Disp. 13. Thel. 13.
There is a change in the Understanding when we gain the knowledge of a thing,
which was unknown to us before; or when we actually consider a thing which we
did not know before, though we had the Principles of the Knowledge of it; or, when
we know that distinctly, which we before knew confusedly. None of these can be
ascribed to God, without a manifest disparagement of his infiniteness: Our
knowledge indeed is always arriving to us or flowing from us; we pass from one
degree to another, from worse to better, or from better to worse; but God loses
nothing by the Ages that are run, nor will gain any thing by the Ages that are
to come. If there were a variation in the knowledge of God, by the daily and
hourly Changes in the World, he would grow wiser than he was, he was not then
perfectly wise before. A Change in the objects known, infers not any change in
the understanding exercised about them; the Wheel moves round, the Spokes that
are lowest, are presently highest, and presently return to be low again; but
the eye that beholds them, changes not with the motion of the Wheels. Gods
knowledge admits no more of increase or decrease, than his Essence does; Since
God knows by his Essence, and the Essence of God is God himself, his knowledge
must be void of any Change. The knowledge of possible things arising from the
knowledge of his own power cannot be changed, unless his power be changed, and
God become weak and impotent; the knowledge of future things cannot be changed,
because that knowledge arises from his Will, which is irreversible, the Counsel
of the Lord that shall stand, Prove. 19.21. so that if God can never decay into
weakness, and never turn to inconstancy, there can be no variation of his
knowledge. He knows what he can do, and he knows what he will do, and both these
being immutable, his knowledge must consequently be so too. It was not necessary
that this or that Creature should be, and therefore it was not necessary that
God should know this or that Creature with a knowledge of Vision; but after the
Will of God had determined the existence of this or that Creature, his knowledge
being then determined to this or that object, did necessarily continue
unchangeable. God therefore knows no more now, than he did before; and at the
end of the World he shall know no more than he does now; and from Eternity he
knows no less than he does now, and shall do to Eternity. Though things pass into
Being and out of Being, the knowledge of God does not vary with them, for he
knows them as well before they were, as when they are; and knows them as well
when they are past, as when they are present.

Proposition 7. God knows all things perpetually, i. e. in act. Since he knows
by his Essence, he always knows, because his Essence never cease, but is a
pure act; so that he does not know only in habit, but in act. Men that have the
knowledge of some Art or Science, have it always in habit, though when they are
asleep they have it not in act: A Musician has the habit of Music, but does
not so much as think of it when his Senses are bound up. But God is an unsleepy
eye Plato, (...).
, he never slumbers nor sleeps; he never slumbers, in regard of his Providence,
and therefore never slumbers in regard of his knowledge. He knows not himself,
nor any other Creature more perfectly at one time than at another; he is
perpetually in the act of knowing, as the Sun is in the act of shining; the Sun
never ceased to shine in one or other part of the World, since it was first
fixed in the Heavens; nor God to be in the act of Knowledge, since he was God;
and therefore since he always was, and always will be God, he always was, and
always will be in the act of knowledge; always knowing his own Essence, he must
always actually know what has been gone and ceased from Being, and what shall
come and arise into Being. As a Watchmaker knows what Watch he intends to make;
and after he has made it, though it be broken to pieces, or consumed by the
Fire, he still knows it, because he knows the Copy of it in his own mind. Some
therefore in regard of this perpetual act of the Divine Knowledge, have called
God not Intellect us, but the intellection of intellections; we have no proper
English Word to express the act of the Understanding; as his power is
coeternal with him, so is his knowledge; all times past, present and to come,
are embraced in the Bosom of his Understanding; he fixed all things in their
Seasons, that nothing new comes to him, nothing old passes from him Damianus.
. What is done in a Thousand years, is as actually present with his Knowledge,
as what is done in one day, or in one Watch in the night, is with ours; Since a
Thousand years are no more to God than a day, or a Watch in the Night is to us,
Psalm. 90.4. God is in the highest degree of Being, and therefore in the highest
degree of Understanding. Knowledge is one of the most perfect acts in any
Creature. God therefore has all Actual, as well as Essential and Habitual
knowledge, his Understanding is infinite.

IV. The fourth general, is Reasons to prove this.

Reas. 1. God must know what any Creature knows, and more than any Creature
knows. There is nothing done in the World, but is known by some Creature or
other; every action is at least known by the person that acts, and therefore
known by the Creator, who cannot be exceeded by any of the Creatures, or all
of them together; and every Creature is known by him, since every Creature is
made by him. Gerhard.
And as God works all things by an Infinite Power, so he knovvs all things by
an Infinite Understanding.

1. The Perfection of God requires this. Gamach in 1. part Aquin. q. 14. cap.
1. p. 118. 119.
All Perfections that include no Essential Defect, are formally in God; but
knowledge includes no Essential Defect in it self, therefore it is in God.
Knowledge in it self, is desirable, and an excellency; Ignorance is a defect;
it is impossible that the least grain of defect can be found in the most perfect
Being. Since God is Wise, he must be Knovving; for Wisdom must have Knowledge
for the Basis of it. A Creature can no more be wise without Knowledge, than
he can be active without Strength. Now God is only Wise, Romans 16.27. and
therefore only knovving in the highest degree of Knowledge, incomprehensibly
beyond all degrees of Knowledge, because infinite.

Again, the more Spiritual any thing is, the more Understanding it is. The dull
Body understands nothing; Sense perceives, but the Understanding faculty is
seated in the Soul, which is of a spiritual nature, which knovvs things that
are present, remembers things that are past, foresees many things to come. What
is the property of a Spiritual nature, must be in a most eminent manner, in the
supreme Spirit of the World, that is, in the highest degree of Spirituality,
and most remote from any matter.

Again, nothing can enjoy other things, but by some kind of Understanding them;
God has the highest enjoyment of himself, of all things he has Created, of
all the Glory that accrues to him by them; nothing of Perfection and
Blessedness can be vvanting to him. Felicity does not consist with ignorance,
and all imperfect knowledge is a degree of ignorance: God therefore does
perfectly know himself, and all things from whence he designs any glory to
himself. The most noble manner of acting must be ascribed to God, as being the
most noble and excellent Being; to act by Knowledge, is the most excellent
manner of acting; God has therefore, not only Knowledge, but the most excellent
manner of Knowledge; for as it is better to know than to be ignorant, so it is
better to know in the most excellent manner, than to have a mean and low kind
of knowledge; His knowledge therefore must be every way as perfect as his
Essence, infinite as well as that. An infinite nature must have an infinite
knowledge: A God ignorant of any thing, cannot be counted infinite, for he is
not infinite to whom any degree of Perfection is wanting.

2. All the knowledge in any Creature is from God. And you must allow God a
greater and more perfect Knowledge than any Creature has, yea, than all
Creatures have. All the drops of Knowledge any Creature has, come from God; and
all the knowledge in every Creature, that ever was, is, or shall be in the whole
Mass, was derived from him. If all those several Drops in particular Creatures,
were collected into one Spirit, into one Creature, it would be an unconceivable
knowledge, yet still lower than what the Author of all that knowledge has; for
God cannot give more knowledge than he has himself; nor is the Creature capable
of receiving so much Knowledge as God has. As the Creature is incapable of
receiving so much power as God has, for then it would be Almighty; so it is
incapable of receiving so much Knowledge as God has, for then it would be God.
Nothing can be made by God equal to him in any thing; if any thing could be
made as Knowing as God, it would be Eternal as God, it would be the cause of
all things as God. The Knowledge that we poor Worms have, is an Argument God
uses for the asserting the greatness of his own Knowledge, Psalm. 94.10. He that
teaches man knowledge, shall not he know? Man has here Knowledge ascribed to
him, the Author of this Knowledge is God, he furnished him with it, and therefore
does in a higher manner possess it; and much more than can fall under the
comprehension of any Creature; as the Sun enlightens all things, but has more
Light in it self than it darts upon the Earth or the Heavens; and shall not God
eminently contain all that knowledge he imparts to the Creatures, and infinitely
more exact and comprehensive?

3. The accusations of Conscience, evidence Gods knowledge of all actions of all
his Creatures. Does not Conscience check for the most secret Sins, to which
none are privy but a man's self; the whole World beside being ignorant of his
Crime? do not the fears of another Judge gall the heart? If a Judgment above him
be feared, an Understanding above him discerning their Secrets is confessed by
those fears; whence can those horrors arise, if there be not a Superior that
understands and records the Crime? What Perfection of the Divine Being can this
relate unto, but Omniscience? What other Attribute is to be feared, if God were
defective in this?

The Condemnation of us by our own Hearts, when none in the World can condemn
us, renders it legible, that there is one greater than our hearts, in respect
of Knowledge, who knows all things, 1 John 3.20. Conscience would be a vain
Principle, and stingless without this; it would be an easy matter to silence
all its accusations, and mockingly laugh in the face of its severest frowns.
What need any trouble themselves, if none knows their Crimes but themselves?
Concealed Sins, gnawing the Conscience, are Arguments of Gods Omniscience of
all present and past actions.

4. God is the first cause of every thing, every Creature is his Production.
Since all Creatures, from the highest Angel to the lowest Worm, exist by the
power of God; if God understands his own Power and Excellency, nothing can be
hid from him, that was brought forth by that Power, as well as nothing can be
unknown to him, that that Power is able to produce. Bradwardin p. 6.
If God knows nothing besides himself, he may then believe there is nothing
beside himself; we shall then fancy a God miserably mistaken: If he knows
nothing besides himself, then things were not Created by him, or not
understandingly and voluntarily Created, but dropped from him before he was
aware. To think that the first cause of all should be ignorant of those things
he is the cause of, is to make him not a voluntary, but natural Agent, and
therefore necessary; and then that the Creature came from him as Light from the
Sun, and moisture from the Water; this would bean absurd opinion of the Worlds
Creation; if God be a voluntary Agent, as he is, he must be an intelligent
Agent. The faculty of Will is not in any Creature, without that of
Understanding also: If God be an intelligent Agent, his knowledge must extend as
far as his operation, and every object of his operation, unless we imagine God
has lost his Memory, in that long Tract of time since the first Creation of
them. An Artificer cannot be ignorant of his own Work; If God knows himself, he
knows himself to be a Cause; how can he know himself to be a Cause, unless he
know the Effects he is the Cause of? One relation implies another; a man cannot
know himself to be a Father, unless he has a Child, because it is a name of
relation, and in the notion of it refers to another. The name of cause is a
name of relation, and implies an effect; If God therefore know himself in all
his Perfections, as the Cause of things, he must know all his acts, what his
Wisdom contrived, what his Counsel determined, and what his Power effected. The
knowledge of God is to be supposed in a free determination of himself; and that
knowledge must be perfect, both of the object, act, and all the circumstances of
it. How can his Will freely produce any thing that was not first known in his
Understanding? From this the Prophet argues the understanding of God, and the
unsearchableness of it, because he is the Creator of the ends of the earth,
Isa. 40.28. and the same reason David gives of Gods Knowledge of him, and of
every thing he did, and that afar off, because he was formed by him, Psalm.
139.2, 15, 16. As the perfect making of things only belongs to God; so does the
perfect knowledge of things; it is absurd to think, that God should be ignorant
of what he has given Being to; that he should not know all the Creatures and
their qualities, the Plants and their virtues; as that a man should not know
the Letters that are formed by him in Writing. Every thing bears in it self the
mark of Gods Perfections; and shall not God know the representation of his own
virtue?

5. Without this Knowledge, God could no more be the Governor, than he could be
the Creator of the World. Knowledge is the Basis of Providence; to Know things,
is before the Government of things; a practical knowledge cannot be without a
theoretical knowledge. Nothing could be directed to its proper end, without the
knowledge of the nature of it, and its suitableness to answer that end for which
it is intended. As every thing, even the minutest, falls under the conduct of
God, so every thing falls under the knowledge of God. A Blind Coachman is not
able to hold the Reins of his Horses, and direct them in right Paths: Since the
Providence of God is about particulars, his Knowledge must be about particulars;
he could not else govern them in particular; nor could all things be said to
depend upon him in their Being and Operations. Providence depends upon the
knowledge of God, and the exercise of it upon the Goodness of God; it cannot be
without Understanding and Will; Understanding, to know what is convenient, and
Will to perform it. When our Savior therefore speaks of Providence, he
intimates these two in a special manner, Your Heavenly Father knows that you
have need of these things, Mat. 6.32. and goodness, in Luke. 11.13. The reason
of Providence is so joined with Omniscience, that they cannot be separated:
What a kind of God would he be that were ignorant of those things that were
governed by him? The ascribing this Perfection to him, asserts his Providence;
for it is as easy for one that knows all things, to look over the whole World,
if writ with Monosyllables, in every little particular of it; as it is with a
man to take a view of one Letter in an Alphabet.

Sabund Tit. 84. much changed.
Again, if God were not Omniscient, how could he reward the Good, and punish the
Evil? the works of men are either rewardable or punishable; not only according
to their outward circumstances, but inward Principles and Ends, and the degrees
of Venom lurking in the heart. The exact discerning of these, without a
possibility to be deceived, is necessary to pass a right and infallible
Judgment upon them, and proportion the censure and punishment to the Crime:
Without such a Knowledge and discerning, men would not have their due; nay, a
Judgment just for the matter, would be unjust in the manner, because unjustly
past, without an understanding of the merit of the Cause. It Is necessary
therefore that the Supreme Judge of the World should not be thought to be
blindfold, when he distributes his Rewards and Punishments, and muffle his face
when he passes his Sentence. It Is necessary to ascribe to him the knowledge of
men's thoughts and intentions; the secret wills and aims; the hidden works of
darkness in every man's Conscience, because every man's work is to be measured by
the Will and inward frame. It Is necessary that he should perpetually retain all
those things in the indelible and plain records of his Memory, that there may
not be any work without a just proportion of what is due to it. This is the
glory of God to discover the secrets of all hearts at last, as 1 Cor. 4.5. the
Lord shall bring to light the hidden things of darkness, and will make manifest
the Counsels of all hearts, and then shall every man have praise of God. This
knowledge fits him to be a Judge; the reason why the ungodly shall not stand in
Judgment, is because God knows their ways, which is employed in his knowing the
way of the righteous. Psalm. 1.5, 6.


I now proceed to the Use.

USE the first, is of information or instruction. If God has all knowledge; then

1. Jesus Christ is not a mere Creature. The two Titles of wonderful
Counselor, and mighty God, are given him in conjunction, Isa. 9.6. not only
the Angel of the Covenant, as he is called, Malach. 3.1. or the Executor of his
Counsels, but a Counselor, in conjunction with him in Counsel as well as
Power: This Title is superior to any Title given to any of the Prophets in
regard of their Predictions; and therefore I should take it rather as the note
of his perfect understanding, than of his perfect teaching and discovering; as
Calvin does: He is not only the Revealer of what he knows, so were the Prophets
according to their measures; but the Counselor of what he revealed, having a
perfect understanding of all the Counsels of God, as being interested in them,
as the mighty God. He calls himself by the peculiar Title of God, and declares
that he will manifest himself by this Prerogative to all the Churches, Rev.
2.23. And all the Churches shall know that I am he, which searches the Reins
and Hearts, the most hidden operations of the minds of men that lie locked up
from the view of all the World besides. And this was no new thing to him, after
his Ascension; for the same Perfection he had in the time of his earthly flesh,
Luke 6.8. he knew their Thoughts; his eyes are therefore compared, Cant. 5.12.
to Doves eyes, which are clear and quick; and to a flame of fire, Rev. 1.14.
not only heat to consume his Enemies, but Light to discern their contrivances
against the Church; he pierces, by his knowledge, into all parts, as fire
pierces into the closest particle of Iron, and separates between the most
united parts of Metals; and some tell us, he is called a Roe, from the
perspicacity of his Sight, as well as from the swiftness of his motion.

1. He has a perfect Knowledge of the Father; he knows the Father, and none
else knovvs the Father; Angels know God, men know God, but Christ in a
peculiar manner knovvs the Father; no man knows the Son but the Father; neither
knows any man the Father, save the Son, Mat. 11.27. he knows so, as that he
learns not from any other; he does perfectly comprehend him, which is beyond
the reach of any Creature, with the addition of all the Divine Virtue; not
because of any incapacity in God to reveal, but the incapacity of the Creature
to receive; finite is incapable of being made infinite, and therefore incapable
of comprehending infinite; so that Christ cannot be Deus factus, made of a
Creature a God, to comprehend God; for then of finite he would become
infinite, which is a contradiction. As the Spirit is God, because he searches
the deep things of God, 1 Cor. 2.10. that is, comprehends them Potav. Theo.
dogmat. Tom. 1. p. 467. etc.
, as the Spirit of a man does the things of a man (now the Spirit of man
understands what it Thinks, and what it Wills) so the Spirit of God
understands what is in the Understanding of God, and what is in the Will of
God. He has an absolute knowledge ascribed to him, and such as could not be
ascribed to any thing but a Divinity: Now if the Spirit knovvs the deep things
of God, and takes from Christ what he shows to us of him, John 16.15. he
cannot be ignorant of those things himself; he must know the depths of God
that affords us that Spirit, that is not ignorant of any of the Counsels of the
Fathers Will; since he comprehends the Father, and the Father him, he is in
himself infinite; for God whose Essence is infinite, is infinitely knowable;
but no Created understanding can infinitely know God. The infiniteness of the
object hinders it from being understood by any thing that is not infinite.
Though a Creature should understand all the works of God, yet it cannot be
therefore said to understand God himself: As though I may understand all the
volitions and motions of my Soul, yet it does not follow that therefore I
understand the whole nature and substance of my Soul; or if a man understood
all the effects of the Sun, that therefore he understands fully the nature of
the Sun. But Christ knows the Father, he lay in the Bosom of the Father, was in
the greatest intimacy with him, John 1.18. and from this intimacy with him, he
saw him and knew him; so he knows God as much as he is knowable; and therefore
knows him perfectly as the Father knows himself by a comprehensive Vision; this
is the knowledge of God wherein properly the infiniteness of his understanding
appears: And our Savior uses such expressions which manifest his Knowledge to
be above all Created Knowledge, and such a manner of knowledge of the Father, as
the Father has of him.

2. Christ knows all Creatures. That knowledge which comprehends God,
comprehends all Created things as they are in God; it is a knowledge that sinks
to the depths of his Will, and therefore extends to all the acts of his Will in
Creation and Providence; by knowing the Father he knows all things that are
contained in the Virtue, Power and Will of God; whatsoever the Father does,
that the Son does, John 5.19. As the Father therefore knows all things he is
the cause of, so does the Son know all things he is the worker of; as the
perfect making of all things belongs to both, so does the perfect knowledge of
all things belong to both; where the action is the same, the knowledge is the
same. Now the Father did not Create one thing, and Christ another; but all
things were Created by him, and for him: all things both in Heaven and Earth,
Col. 1.16. as he knows himself as the cause of all things, and the end of all
things, he cannot be ignorant of all things that were effected by him, and are
referred to him; he knows all Creatures in God, as he knows the Essence of God,
and knows all Creatures in themselves, as he knows his own acts and the fruits
of his Power; those things must be in his Knowledge that were in his Power, all
the Treasures of the Wisdom and Knowledge of God are hid in him, Col. 2.3. Now
it is not the Wisdom of God to know in part, and be in part ignorant. He cannot
be ignorant of any thing, since there is nothing but what was made by him, John
1.3. and since it is less to know than Create; for we know many things which we
cannot make. Petav. Theolo. Dogmat. Tom. 1. p. 467.
If he be the Creator, he cannot but be the discerner of what he made; this is
a part of Wisdom belonging to an Artificer to know the nature and quality of
what he makes. Since he cannot be ignorant of what he furnished with Being, and
with various endowments, he must know them not only universally, but
particularly.

3. Christ knows the hearts and affections of men. Peter scruples not to
ascribe to him this knowledge, among the knowledge of all other things, John
21.17. Lord thou know all things, thou know that I love thee. From
Christ's knowledge of all things, he concludes his knowledge of the inward frames
and dispositions of men. To search the heart, is the sole Prerogative of God, 1
Kings 8.39. for thou, even thou only know the hearts of all the Children of
men: Shall we take (only) here with a limitation, as some that are no Friends
to the Deity of Christ would, and say, God only knows the hearts of men from
himself, and by his own infinite virtue? Why may we not take (only) in other
places with a limitation, and make nonsense of it, as Psalm. 86.10. Thou art God
alone. Is it to be understood, that God is God alone from himself, but other
Gods may be made by him, and so there may be numberless infinites? As God is
God alone, so that none can be God but himself; so he alone knows all the
hearts Of all the Children of men, and none but he can know them; this knowledge
is from his nature. Placaeus de deitate Christi.
The reason why God knows the hearts of men, is rendered in the Scripture
double, because he created them, and because he is present every where, Psalm.
33.13, 15. these two are by the Confession of Christians and Pagans universally
received as the proper Characters of Divinity, whereby the Deity is
distinguished from all Creatures. Now when Christ ascribes this to himself, and
that with such an Emphasis, that nothing greater than that could be urged, as
he does, Rev. 2.23. we must conclude that he is of the same Essence with God,
one with him in his Nature, as well as one with him in his Attributes. God only
knows the hearts of the Children of men; there is the unity of God: Christ
searches the Hearts and Reins; there is a distinction of Persons in an oneness
of essence; he knows the hearts of all men, not only of those that were with
him in the time of the Flesh, that have been and shall be, since his Ascension;
but of those that lived and died before his coming, because he is to be the
Judge of all that lived before his humiliation on earth, as well as after his
exaltation in Heaven. It pertains to him as a Judge, to know distinctly the
merits of the Cause of which he is to Judge; and this excellency of searching
the hearts is mentioned by himself with relation to his judicial Proceeding, I
will give to every one of you according to your Works. And though a Creature may
know what is in a man's heart, if it be revealed to him, yet such a knowledge is
a knowledge only by report, not by inspection; yet this latter is ascribed to
Christ, John 2.24.25. he knew all men, and needed not that any should testify
of man, for he knew what was in man; he looked into their hearts. The
Evangelist to allay the amazement of men at his relation of our Saviors
knowledge of the inward falsity of those that made a splendid Profession of him;
does not say, the Father revealed it to him; but intimates it to be an
unseparable Property of his nature. No covering was so thick as to bound his
eye; no pretense so glittering as to impose upon his understanding. Those that
made a Profession of him, and could not be discerned by the eye of man from his
faithfullest Attendants, were in their inside known to him plainer than their
outside was to others; and therefore he committed not himself to them, though
they seemed to be persuaded to a real belief in his name, because of the Power
of his Miracles; and were touched with an admiration of him, as some great
Prophet, and perhaps declared him to be the Messiah, ver. 23.

4. He had a foreknowledg of the particular inclinations of men, before those
distinct inclinations were in actual Being in them. This is plainly asserted
John 6.64. but there are some of you that believe not, for Jesus knew from the
beginning who they were that believed not, and who should betray him. When
Christ assured them from the knowledge of the hearts of his followers, that some
of them were void of that Faith they professed; The Evangelist to stop their
amazement, that Christ should have such a power and virtue, adds, that he knew
from the beginning, that he had not only a present knowledge, but a foreknowledg
of every ones inclination; he knew not only now and then what was in the Hearts
of his Disciples, but from the beginning of any ones giving up their Names to
him; he knew whether it were a pretense or sincere, he knew who should betray
him, and there was no man's inward affection but was foreseen by him. (...)
From the beginning, whether we understand it from the beginning of the World,
as when Christ says concerning Divorces, from the beginning it was not so,
that is, from the beginning of the World, from the beginning of the Law of
Nature; or from the beginning of their attending him; as it is taken, Luke 1.2.
he had a certain prescience of the inward dispositions of men's hearts, and
their succeeding sentiments; he foreknew the treacherous heart of Judas in the
midst of his splendid Profession; and discerned his resolution in the root, and
his thought in the confused Chaos of his natural corruption; he knew how it
would spring up, before it did spring up, before Judas had any distinct and
formal conception of it himself, or before there was any actual preparation to
a resolve. Peter's denial was not unknown to him, when Peter had a present
resolution, and no question spoke it in the present sincerity of his Soul,
never to forsake him; he foreknew what would be the result of that Poison which
lurkt in Peter's nature, before Peter himself imagined any thing of it; he
discerned Peter's Apostatizing heart, when Peter resolved the contrary; our
Saviors Prediction was accomplished, and Peter's valiant resolution languisht
into Cowardice.

Shall we then conclude our Blessed Savior a Creature, who perfectly and only
knew the Father, who knew all Creatures, who had all the Treasures of Wisdom
and Knowledge, who knew the inward motions of men's hearts by his own Virtue, and
had not only a present Knowledge, but a Prescience of them?

Inform. 2. The second Instruction from this position, That God has an
infinite Knowledge and Understanding. Then there is a Providence exercised by
God in the World, and that about every thing. As Providence infers Omniscience
as the guide of it; so Omniscience infers Providence as the end of it. What
Exercise would there be of this Attribute, but in the Government of the World?
To this, this infinite Perfection refers, Jer. 17.10. I the Lord search the
heart, I try the Reins, to give every man according to his ways, and according
to the fruit of his doings. He searches the heart to reward, he rewards every
man according to the rewardableness of his actions; his Government therefore
extends to every man in the World; there is no heart but he searches, therefore
no heart but he governs; to what purpose else would be this Knowledge of all his
Creatures? for a mere Contemplation of them? no, What pleasure can that be to
God, who knows himself, who is infinitely more excellent than all his
Creatures? Does he know them, to neglect all care of them? this must be either
out of Sloth; but how incompatible is laziness to a pure and infinite activity?
or out of Majesty, but it is no less for the glory of his Majesty to conduct
them, than it was for the glory of his Power to erect them into Being; he that
counts nothing unworthy of his Arms to make, nothing unworthy of his
Understanding to know; why should he count any thing unworthy of his Wisdom to
govern? If he knows them, to neglect them, it must be because he has no Will
to it, or no Goodness for it; either of these would be a stain upon God; to
want Goodness is to be Evil, and to want Will is to be negligent and scornful,
which are inconsistent with an Infinite, Active Goodness. Does a Father neglect
providing for the wants of the Family which he knows? or a Physician the cure
of that Disease he understands? God is Omniscient, he therefore sees all
things; he is good, he does not therefore neglect any thing, but conducts it to
the end he appointed it. There is nothing so little that can escape his
Knowledge, and therefore nothing so little but falls under his Providence;
nothing so sublime, as to be above his Understanding; and therefore nothing can
be without the compass of his Conduct; nothing can escape his Eye, and
therefore nothing can escape his Care; nothing is known by him in vain, as
nothing was made by him in vain; there must be acknowledged, therefore some end
of this knowledge of all his Creatures.

Instruct. 3. Hence then will follow the certainty of a day of Judgment. To
what purpose can we imagine this Attribute of Omniscience so often declared and
urged in Scripture to our consideration, but in order to a government of our
practice, and a future Trial? Every Perfection of the Divine Nature has sent
out brighter Rays in the World, than this of his Infinite Knowledge; his Power
has been seen in the Being of the World, and his Wisdom in the Order and
Harmony of the Creatures; his Grace and Mercy has been plentifully poured out
in the mission of a Redeemer; and his Justice has been elevated by the
Dying-Groans of the Son of God upon the Cross. But has his Omniscience yet met
with a Glory proportionable to that of his other Perfections? all the
Attributes of God that have appeared in some beautiful glimmerings in the
World, wait for a more full manifestation in Glory, as the Creatures do for the
manifestation of the Sons of God, Romans 8.19. But especially this, since it has
been less evidenced than others, and as much or more abused than any; it
expects therefore a public righting in the eye of the World. There have been
indeed some few sparks of this Perfection sensibly struck out now and then in
the World, in some horrors of Conscience, which have made men become their own
Accusers of unknown Crimes, in bringing out hidden Wickedness to a public
view, by various Providence. This has also been the design of sprinklings of
Judgments upon several Generations, as Psalm. 90.8. We are consumed by thy
Anger, and by thy Wrath we are troubled, thou have set our Iniquities before
thee, and our secret Sins in the light of thy Countenance. The word (...)
signifies Youth, as well as secret, i.e. Sins, committed long ago, and that
with secrecy. By this he has manifested, that secret Sins are not hid from his
eye: Though inward Terrors and outward Judgments have been let loose to worry men
into a belief of this, yet the corruptions of men would still keep a contrary
notion in their minds, that God has forgotten, that he hides his face from
Transgression, and will not regard their Impiety, Psalm. 10.11. There must
therefore be a time of Trial for the public demonstration of this Excellency,
that it may receive its due Honor by a full Testimony, that no secrecy can be
a shelter from it. As his Justice, which consists in giving every one his due,
could not be Glorified, unless men were called to an account for their actions;
so neither would his Omniscience appear in its illustrious colors, without
such a manifestation of the secret motions of men's hearts, and of Villainies
done under Lock and Key, when none were conscious to them, but the committers
of them. Now the last Judgment is the time appointed for the opening of the
Books, Dan. 7.10. The Book of Gods Records, and Conscience the counter-part,
were never fully opened and read before, only now and then some some pages
turned to, in particular Judgments; and out of those Books shall men be judged
according to their Works, Rev. 20.12. Then shall the defaced Sins be brought
with all their circumstances to every man's memory; the Counsels of men's hearts
fled far from their present remembrance; all the habitual knowledge they had of
their own actions, shall by Gods knowledge of them be excited to an actual
revievv; and their works not only made manifest to themselves, but notorious
to the World: All the Words, Thoughts, Deeds of men shall be brought forth into
the light of their own minds, by the infinite Light of Gods understanding
reflecting on them. His Knowledge renders him an unerring Witness, as well as
his Justice a swift Witness, Mal. 3.5. a swift Witness, because he shall
without any circuit, or length of Speech, convince their Consciences by an
inward illumination of them, to take notice of the blackness and deformity of
their hearts and works. In all Judgments God is somevvhat known to be the
searcher of hearts; the time of Judgment is the time of his remembrance, Hos.
8.13. Now will he remember their iniquity, and visit their sins; but the great
instant, or now, of the full glorifying it, is the grand day of account. This
Attribute must have a time for its full Discovery; and no time can be fit for
it, but a time of a general reckoning. Justice cannot be exercised without
Omniscience; for as Justice is a giving to every one his due, so there must be
knowledge to discern what is due to every man; the searching the heart is in
order to the rewarding the works.

4. This Perfection in God, gives us ground to believe a Resurrection. Who can
think this too hard for his Power, since not the least Atome of the Dust of our
Bodies can escape his Knowledge? An infinite Understanding comprehends every
mite of a departed Carcass; this will not appear impossible nor irrational to
any upon a serious consideration of this excellency in God: The body is
perished, the matter of it has been since clothed with different forms and
figures; part of it has been made the body of a Worm, part of it returned to
the Dust that has been blown away by the Wind, part of it has been concocted
in the Bodies of Cannibals, Fish, ravenous Beasts; the Spirits have evaporated
into Air, part of the Blood melted into Water; what then, is the matter of the
body annihilated? is that wholly perished? no, the foundation remains, though it
has put on variety of forms; the Body of Abel, the first man that died, nor
the body of Adam, are not to this day reduced to nothing; Indeed the quantity
and the quality of those bodies, have been lost by various changes they have
past through since their dissolution; but the matter or substance of them
remains entire, and is not capable to be destroyed by all those transforming
alterations, in so long a revolution of Time.

The body of a man in his infancy and his old Age, if it were Methuselah's, is
the same in the foundation in those multitude of years; though the quantity of it
be altered, the quality different, though the color and other things be changed
in it; the matter of this body remains the same among all the alterations after
Death. And can it be so mixed with other Natures and Creatures, as that it is
past finding out by an Infinite Understanding? Can any particle of this matter
escape the eye of him that makes and beholds all those various alterations, and
where every mite of the substance of those bodies is particularly lodged; so as
that he cannot compact it together again for a habitation of that Soul, that
many a year before fled from it? Daille Sermon. 15. p. 21. 22, 23, 24.
Since the Knowledge of God is infinite, and his Providence extensive over the
least as well as the greatest parts of the World; he must needs know the least
as well as the greatest of his Creatures in their Beginning, Progress and
Dissolution; all the forms through which the Bodies of all Creatures roll, the
particular instants of time, and the particular place when and where those
changes are made, they are all present with him; and therefore when the
Revolution of time allotted by him for the reunion of Souls and Deceased Bodies
is come, it cannot be doubted but out of the Treasures of his Knowledge he can
call forth every part of the matter of the Bodies of men, from the first to the
last man that expired, and strip it of all those forms and figures, which it
shall then have, to compact it to be a lodging for that Soul which before it
entertained; and though the Bodies of men have been devoured by Wild Beasts in
the Earth, and Fish in the Sea, and been lodged in the Stomachs of Barbarous
Men-eaters, the matter is not lost. There is but little of the Food we take,
that is turned into the substance of our own bodies; that which is not proper
for nourishment, which is the greatest part, is separated and concocted, and
rejected; whatsoever objections are made, are answered by this Attribute.
Nothing hinders a God of Infinite Knowledge from discerning every particle of
the matter, wheresoever it is disposed; and since he has an eye to discern,
and a hand to recollect and unite, what difficulty is there in believing this
Article of the Christian Faith? he that questions this revealed Truth of the
Resurrection of the Body, must question Gods Omniscience as well as his
Omnipotence and Power.

5. What semblance of reason is there to expect a justification in the sight of
God by any thing in our selves. Is there any action done by any of us, but upon
a scrutiny we may find flaws and deficiency in it? What then? shall not this
Perfection of God discern them? the motes that escape our eyes cannot escape
his, 1 John 3.20. God is greater than our hearts, and knows all things; so that
it is in vain for any man to flatter himself with the rectitude of any work; or
enter into any debate with him who can bring a Thousand Articles against us,
out of his own Infinite Records unknown to us, and unanswerable by us. If
Conscience, a Representative or Counterpart of Gods Omniscience in our own
Bosoms, find nothing done by us, but in a Copy short of the Original, and
beholds, if not blurs, yet Imperfections in the best actions, God must much
more discern them; we never knew a Copy equally exact with the Original; If our
own Conscience be as a Thousand Witnesses, the Knowledge of God is as Millions
of Witnesses against us: If our Corruption be so great, and our Holiness so low
in our own eyes, how much greater must the one, and how much meaner must the
other appear in the eyes of God? God has an unerring Eye to see, as well as an
unspotted Holiness to hate, and an unbribable Justice to punish; he wants no
more Understanding to know the shortness of our actions, than he does Holiness
to enact, and Power to execute his Laws: Nay, suppose we could recollect many
actions, wherein there were no spot visible to us; the consideration of this
Attribute should scare us from resting upon any or all of them; since it is the
Lord that by a piercing eye sees and judges according to the heart, and not
according to appearance. The least crookedness of a Stick, not sensible to an
acute eye, yet will appear when laid to the Line; and the impurity of a
Counterfeit Metal be manifest when applied to the Touchstone; so will the best
action of any mere man in the World, when it comes to be measured in Gods
Knowledge by the strait Line of his Law.

Let every man therefore, as Paul, though he should know nothing by himself,
think not himself therefore justified; Since it is the Lord, who is of an
infinite Understanding, that Judges, 1 Cor. 4.4. A man may be justified in his
own sight, but not any living man can be justified in the sight of God, Psalm.
143.2. in his Sight, whose eye pierces into our unknown secrets and frames: It
was therefore well answered of a good man upon his Deathbed, being ask't What
he was afraid of? I have labored (says he) with all my strength to observe
the commands of God; but since I am a man, I am ignorant whether my works are
acceptable to God, since God Judges in one manner, and I in another manner. Let
the consideration therefore of this Attribute, make us join with Job in his
Resolution, Job 9.21. though we were perfect, yet would we not know our own
Souls. I would not stand up to Plead any of my virtues before God. Let us
therefore look after another Righteousness, wherein the exact eye of the Divine
Omniscience, we are sure, can discern no stain or crookedness.

6. What honorable and adoring Thoughts ought we to have of God for this
Perfection? Do we not honor a man that is able to Predict; Do we not think it
a great part of Wisdom? Have not all Nations regarded such a faculty, as a
character and a mark of Divinity? There is something more ravishing in the
knowledge of future things, both to the person that knows them, and the person
that hears them, than there is in any other kind of knowledge; whence the
greatest Prophets have been accounted in the greatest veneration, and men have
thought it a way to glory to Divine and Predict: Hence it was that the Devils
and Pagan Oracles gained so much Credit; upon this Foundation were they
established, and the Enemies of Mankind owned for a true God; I say, from the
Prediction of future things, though their Oracles were often ambiguous, many
times false; yet those poor Heathens framed many ingenious excuses, to free
their Adored Gods from the charge of falsity and imposture: And shall we not
adore the true God, the God of Israel, the God Blessed for ever, for this
incommunicable Property, whereby he flies above the Wings of the Wind, the
understandings of men and Cherubims?

Sabund. Theol. natural. Tit. 84. somewhat changed.
Consider how great it is to know the Thoughts and Intentions, and Works of one
man, from the beginning to the end of his life; to foreknow all these before
the Being of this man, when he was lodged afar off in the Loins of his
Ancestors, yea of Adam; how much greater is it to foreknow and know the
Thoughts and Works of three or four men of a whole Village or Neighborhood?
It Is greater still to know the imaginations and actions of such a multitude of
men as are contained in London, Paris, or Constantinople; how much greater
still to know the intentions and practices, the clandestine contrivances of so
many Millions, that have, do, or shall swarm in all quarters of the World,
every person of them having Millions of Thoughts, Desires, Designs, Affections
and Actions!

Let this Attribute then make the Blessed God honorable in our eyes, and
adorable in all our affections; especially since it is an Excellency which has
so lately discovered it self, in bringing to Light the hidden things of
darkness, in opening, and in part confounding the wicked Devices of Bloody men.
Especially let us adore God for it, and admire it in God, since it is so
necessary a Perfection, that without it the goodness of God had been impotent,
and could not have relieved us; for what help can a distressed person expect
from a man of the sweetest disposition and the strongest arm, if the eyes which
should discover the danger, and direct the defense and rescue, were closed up
by blindness and darkness? Adore God for this wonderful Perfection.

7. In the consideration of this excellent Attribute, what low thoughts should
we have of our own knowledge, and how humble ought we to be before God? There Is
nothing man is more apt to be proud of than his Knowledge; it is a Perfection he
glories in; but if our own Knowledge of the little outside and barks of things,
puffs us up, the consideration of the infiniteness of Gods Knowledge should
abate the Tumor: As our Beings are nothing in regard to the infiniteness of his
Essence, so our Knowledge is nothing in regard of the vastness of his
understanding: We have a spark of Being, but nothing to the heat of the Sun: We
have a drop of Knowledge, but nothing to the Divine Ocean. What a vain thing is
it for a shallow Brook to boast of its Streams before a Sea, whose depths are
unfathomable? As it is a vanity to brag of our Strength when we remember the
Power of God; and of our Prudence, when we glance upon the Wisdom of God; so
it is no less a vanity to boast of our Knowledge, when we think of the
Understanding and Knowledge of God.

How hard is it for us to know any thing Pascall p. 17^
? too much noise deafs us, and too much light dazels us; too much distance
alienates the object from us, and too much nearness bars up our sight from
beholding it: When we think our selves to be near the knowledge of a thing, as a
Ship to the Haven, a puff of Wind blows us away, and the object which we
desired to know, eternally flies from us; we burn with a desire of knowledge,
and yet are oppressed with the darkness of ignorance; we spend our days more in
dark Egypt, than in enlightened Goshen. In what narrow bounds is all the
knowledge of the most intelligent persons included? Amyrant. de praedest p. 116.
117. somewhat changed.
How few understand the exact Harmony of their own bodies, the nature of the
life they have in common with other Animals? who understands the nature of his
own faculties, how he Knows, and how he Wills, how the Understanding Proposes,
and how the Will embraces, how his spiritual Soul is united to his material
Body, what the nature is of the operation of our Spirits? nay, who understands
the nature of his own body, the offices of his senses, the motion of his
Members, how they come to obey the command of the Will, and a Thousand other
things? What a vain, weak, and ignorant thing is man, when compared with God?
yet there is not a greater Pride to be found among Devils, than among ignorant
men with a little, very little flashy knowledge. Ignorant man is as proud, as if
he knew as God!

As the consideration of Gods Omniscience should render him honorable in our
eyes, so it should render us vile in our own. God, because of his knowledge, is
so far from disdaining his Creatures, that his Omniscience is a Minister to his
Goodness: No knowledge that we are possessed of, should make us swell with too
high a conceit of our selves, and a disdain of others. We have infinitely more
of ignorance than knowledge. Let us therefore remember in all our thoughts of
God, that he is God, and we are men; and therefore ought to be humble, as
becomes men, and ignorant and foolish men to be; as weak Creatures should lie
low before an Almighty God, and impure Creatures before a Holy God, false
Creatures before a Faithful God, finite Creatures before an Infinite God; so
should ignorant Creatures before an All-Knowing God. All Gods Attributes teach
admiring thoughts of God, and low thoughts of our selves.

8. It may inform us, how much this Attribute is injured in the World. The
first error after Adams eating the forbidden Fruit, was the denial of this, as
well as the Omnipresence of God, Genesis 3.10. I heard thy voice in the Garden,
and I hid my self; as if the thickness of the Trees could screen him from the
eye of his Creator. And after Cains Murder, this is the first Perfection he
affronts, Genesis 4.9. Where is Abel thy Brother, says God? How roundly does he
answer, I know not? as if God were as weak as man, to be put off with a Lie:
Man does as naturally hate this Perfection as much, as he cannot naturally but
acknowledge it; he wishes God stripped of this eminency, that he might be
incapable to be an inspector of his Crimes, and a searcher of the Closets of
his heart: In wishing him deprived of this, there is a hatred of God himself;
for it is a loathing an Essential Property of God, without which he would be a
pitiful Governor of the World. What a kind of God should that be, of a Sinners
wishing, that had wanted Eyes to see a Crime, and Righteousness to punish it?
The want of the consideration of this Attribute, is the cause of all Sin in the
World, Hos. 7.2. they consider not in their hearts that I remember all their
Wickedness; they speak not to their hearts, nor make any reflection upon the
infiniteness of my Knowledge; it is a high contempt of God, as if he were an
Idol, a senseless Stock or Stone; in all evil practices this is denied: We know
God sees all things, yet we live and walk as if he knevv nothing: We call him
Omniscient, and live as if he were ignorant; we say he is all eye, yet act as
if he were wholly blind.

In particular, this Attribute is injured, By invading the peculiar rights of
it, by presuming on it, and by a practical denial of it.

1. By invading the peculiar rights of it.

1. By invocation of Creatures. Praying to Saints, by the Romanists, is a
disparagement to this Divine Excellency; he that knows all things, is only fit
to have the Petitions of men presented to him; Prayer supposes an Omniscient
Being, as the object of it; no other Being but God ought to have that honor
acknowledged to it; no Understanding but his, is infinite; no other Presence
but his, is every where; to implore any deceased Creature for a supply of our
wants, is to own in them a Property of the Deity; and make them Deities that
were but men; and increase their Glory by a diminution of Gods Honor, in
ascribing that Perfection to Creatures which belongs only to God. Alas! they
are so far from understanding the desires of our Souls, that they know not the
words of our Lips: It Is against reason to address our Supplications to them
that neither understand us, nor discern us, Isa. 63.16. Abraham is ignorant of
us, and Israel acknowledges us not. The Jews never called upon Abraham, though
the Covenant was made with him for the whole Seed; not one departed Saint
for the whole Four Thousand Years betvveen the Creation of the World, and the
coming of Christ, was ever Prayed to by the Israelites; or ever imagined to
have a share in Gods Omniscience; so that to pray to St. Peter, St. Paul, much
less to St. Roch, St. Swithin, St. Martin, St. Francis, etc. is such a
Superstition that has no footing in the Scripture.

Daille Melang, part 2. p. 560. 561.
To desire the Prayers of the Living, with whom we have a Communion, who can
understand and grant our desires, is founded upon a mutual Charity; but to
implore persons that are absent, at a great distance from us, with whom we have
not, nor know how to have any Commerce, supposes them in their departure to
have put off Humanity, and commenced Gods, and endued with some part of the
Divinity to understand our Petitions; we are indeed to cherish their Memories,
consider their Examples, imitate their Graces, and observe their Doctrines; we
are to follow them as Saints, but not elevate them as Gods, in ascribing to
them such a knowledge which is only the necessary right of their and our common
Creator: As the invocation of Saints mingles them with Christ in the exercise
of his Office, so it sets them equal with God in the Throne of his Omniscience.
As if they had as much credit with God, as Christ in a way of Mediation; and as
much knowledge of men's affairs, as God himself. Omniscience is peculiar to God,
and incommunicable to any Creature; it is the foundation of all Religion, and
therefore one of the choicest acts of it, viz. Prayer and Invocation. To direct
our Vows and Petitions to any else, is to invade the peculiarity of this
Perfection in God, and to rank some Creatures in a Partnership with him in it.

2. This Attribute is injured by curiosity of Knowledge. Especially of future
things, which God has not discovered in natural causes, or supernatural
Revelation. It Is a common error of men's Spirits to aspire to know what God
would have hidden, and to pry into Divine Secrets; and many men are more
willing to remain without the knowledge of those things which may with a little
industry be attained, than be divested of the curiosity of enquiring into those
things which are above their reach; it is hence that some have laid aside the
Study of the common remedies of Nature, to find out the Philosophers Stone;
which scarce any ever yet attempted, but sunk in the Enterprise. Amyraut.
Moral. Tom. 3. p. 75. etc.
From this inclination to know the most abstruse and difficult things it is,
that the horrors of Magic, and the vanities of Astrology have sprung, whereby
men have thought to find in a commerce with Devils and the Jurisdiction of the
Stars, the events of their Lives, and the disposal of States and Kingdoms.
Hence also arose those Multitudes of ways of Divination invented among the
Heathen, and practiced too commonly in these Ages of the World. This is an
invasion of Gods Prerogative, to whom secret things belong, Deuteronomy. 29.29. Secret
things belong unto the Lord our God, but revealed things belong to us and our
Children. It Is an intolerable boldness to attempt to fathom those, the knowledge
whereof God has reserved to himself; and to search that which God will have to
surpass our Understandings; whereby we more truly envy God a knowledge superior
to our own, than we in Adam imagined that he envyed us. Ambition is the
greatest cause of this, Ambition to be accounted some great thing among men, by
reason of a Knowledge estranged from the common mass of mankind; but more
especially that soaring Pride to be equal with God, which lurks in our nature
ever since the Fall of our first Parents: This is not yet laid aside by man,
though it was the first thing that embroiled the World with the Wrath of God.
Some think a curiosity of Knowledge was the cause of the fall of Devils; I am
sure it was the foyl of Adam, and is yet the Crime of his Posterity; had he
been contented to know what God had furnished him with, neither he nor his
Posterity had smarted under the Venom of the Serpents Breath.

All curious and bold enquiries into things not revealed, are an attempt upon
the Throne of God; and are both sinful and pernicious, like to glaring upon the
Sun; where instead of a greater acuteness, we meet with blindness, and too
dearly buy our ignorance in attempting a superfluous knowledge. As Gods Knowledge
is destined to the government of the World, so should ours be to the advantage
of the World, and not degenerate into vain speculations.

3. This Attribute is injured by swearing by Creatures: To swear by the Name of
God in a Righteous Cause, Cajetan. Sum. p. 190.
when we are lawfully called to it by a Superior Power, or for the necessary
decision of some Controversy, for the ends of Charity and Justice, is an act of
Religion, and a part of Worship, founded upon, and directed to the honor of
this Attribute; by it we acknowledge the glory of his infallible Knowledge of all
things; but to Swear by false Gods, or by any Creature, is Blasphemous; it sets
the Creature in the place of God, and invests it in that which is the peculiar
honor of the Divinity; for when any swear truly, they intend the invocation of
an infallible Witness, and the bringing an undoubted Testimony for what they do
assert: While any therefore Swear by a Creature, or a false God, they profess
that that Creature, or that which they esteem to be a God, is an infallible
Witness, which to be, is only the right of God; they attribute to the Creature
that which is the Property of God alone, to know the Heart, and to be a Witness
whether they speak true or no; and this was accounted by all Nations the true
Design of an Oath. As to Swear falsely, is a plain denial of the All-Knowledg
of God; so to Swear by any Creature, is to set the Creature upon the Throne of
God, in ascribing that Perfection to the Creature, which Soveraignly belongs to
the Creator; for it is not in the Power of any to Witness to the truth of the
heart, but of him that is the searcher of hearts.

4. We Sin against this Attribute by censuring the hearts of others. An open
Crime indeed falls under our Cognizance, and therefore under our Judgment; for
whatsoever falls under the Authority of man to be punished, falls under the
Judgment of man to be censured, as an act contrary to the Law of God; yet when
a censure is built upon the evil of the act which is obvious to the view, if we
take a step farther to judge the heart and state, we leave the revealed rule of
the Law, and ambitiously erect a Tribunal equal with Gods; and usurp a Judicial
Power, pertaining only to the Supreme Governor of the World; and consequently
pretend to be possessed of this Perfection of Omniscience, which is necessary to
render him capable of the exercise of that Sovereign Authority. For it is in
respect of his Dominion, that God has the supreme right to Judge; and in
respect of his Knowledge that he has an incommunicable capacity to Judge.

In an action that is doubtful, the good or evil whereof depends only upon Gods
determination, and wherein much of the Judgment depends upon the discerning the
intention of the Agent, we cannot Judge any man without a manifest invasion of
Gods peculiar right; such actions are to be Tried by Gods knowledge, not by our
surmises; God only is the Master in such cases, to whom a person stands or
falls, Romans 14.4. Till the true Principle and ends of an action be known by the
confession of the party acting it, a true Judgment of it is not in our Power.
Principles and Ends lie deep and hid from us; and it is intolerable Pride to
pretend to have a joint Key with God to open that Cabinet which he has
reserved to himself.

Besides the violation of the Rule of Charity in misconstruing actions which
may be great and generous in their root and principle, we invade Gods Right, as
if our ungrounded imaginations and conjectures were in joint Commission with
this Sovereign Perfection; and thereby we become Usurping Judges of evil
thoughts, James 2.4. It Is therefore a boldness worthy to be punished by the
Judge, to assume to our selves the Capacity and Authority of him who is the
only Judge. For as the Execution of the Divine Law for the inward violation of
it, belongs only to God, so is the right of Judging a Prerogative belonging
only to his Omniscience; his Right is therefore invaded, if we pretend to a
knowledge of it. This Humor of men the Apostle checks, when he says, 1 Cor.
4.5. He that judges me is the Lord, therefore judge nothing before the time,
until the Lord come, who will manifest the Counsels of all hearts. It Is not the
time yet for God to erect the Tribunal for the trial of men's hearts, and the
Principles of their Actions; He has reserved the glorious discovery of this
Attribute for another season; We must not therefore presume to Judge of the
Counsels of men's hearts, till God has revealed them by opening the Treasures
of his own Knowledge.

much less are we to judge any Man's final Condition. Manasseh may Sacrifice to
Devils, and unconverted Paul tear the Church in pieces; but God had Mercy on
them and called them. The Action may be Censured, not the State, for we know
not whom God may call. In Censuring Men, we may doubly imitate the Devil, in a
false accusation of the Brethren, as well as in an ambitious usurpation of the
Rights of God.

2. This Perfection is injured, by presuming upon it, or making an ill use of
it. As in the neglect of Prayer for the supply of Men's wants, because God
knows them already, so that that which is an encouragement to Prayer, they make
the reason of restraining it before God. Prayer is not to administer knowledge
to God, but to acknowledge this admirable Perfection of the Divine Nature. If
God did not know, there were indeed no use of Prayer, it would be as vain a
thing to send up our Prayers to Heaven, as to implore the senseless Statue or
Picture of a Prince for a Protection. We Pray because God knows, for though he
know our wants with a knowledge of Vision, yet he will not know them with a
knowledge of supply, till he be sought unto. All the Excellencies of God are
ground of Adoration; Mat. 6.32.33. Matthew. 7.11.
and this Excellency is the ground of that part of Worship we call Prayer. If
God be to be Worshipped, he is to be called upon; Invocations of his name in
our necessities is a chief act of Worship; whence the Temple, the place of
solemn Worship, was not called the House of Sacrifice, but the House of Prayer.

Prayer was not appointed for Gods information, as if he were ignorant, but for
the expression of our desires; not to furnish him with a knowledge of what we
want, but to manifest to him by some Rational Sign convenient to our Nature,
our sense of that want, which he knows by himself. So that Prayer is not
designed to acquaint God with our wants, but to express the desire of a Remedy
of our wants. God knows our wants, but has not made promises barely to our
wants, but to our asking: That his Omniscience in hearing as well as his
sufficiency in supplying, may have a sensible honor in our acknowledgments and
receipts. It Is therefore an ill use of this Excellency of God to neglect Prayer
to him as needless, because he knows already.

4. This Perfection of God is wronged, by a practical denial of it. It Is the
language of every Sin, and so God takes it when he comes to reckon with Men for
their Impieties. Upon this he charges the greatness of the iniquity of Israel,
the overflowing of Blood in the Land, and the perverseness of the City; They say
the Lord has forsaken the Earth, and the Lord sees not Ezekiel. 9.9.
: They deny his Eyes to see, and his Resolution to punish.

1. It will appear, in forbearing Sin from a sense of Man's knowledge, not of
Gods. Open Impieties are refrained because of the Eye of Man; but secret Sins
are not checked because of the Eye of God. Wickedness is committed in darkness,
that is restrained in light; as if darkness were as great a clog to Gods Eyes
as it is to ours; as though his Eyes were mufled with the Curtains of the Night
Job. 22.14.
. This it is likely was at the root of Jonah's flight, he might have some
secret thought, that his Masters Eye could not follow him, as though the close
Hatches of a Ship could secure him from the knowledge of God, as well as the
Sides of the Ship could from the dashing of the Waves. What lies most upon the
Conscience when it is graciously wounded, is least regarded, or contemned when
it is basely inclined. David's heart smote him not only for his Sin in the
gross, but as particularly circumstantiated by the commission of it in the
sight of God; Psalm. 51.4. Against thee, thee only have I sinned, and done this
ev l in thy sight. None knew the reason of Vriah's Death but my self, and
because others knew it not, I neglected any regard to this Divine Eye. When
Jacob's Sons used their Brother Joseph so barbarously, they took care to hide
it from their Father; but cast away all thoughts of God, from whom it could not
be concealed.

Does not the presence of a Child bridle a Man, from the act of a longed for
Sin, when the Eye of God is of no force to restrain him? as if Gods knowledge
were of less value than the sight of a little Boy or Girl, as if a Child only
could see, and God were blind. He that will forbear an unworthy action for fear
of an Informer, will not forbear it for God; as if Gods Omniscience, were not
as full an Intelligencer to Him, as Man can be an Informer to a Magistrate. As
we acknowledge the power of Men seeing us, when we are ashamed to commit a
filthy action in their view; so we discover the power of God seeing us, when we
regard not what we do before the light of his Eyes. Secret Sins are more
against God than open: Open Sins are against the Law, secret Sins, are against
the Law and this prime Perfection of his Nature. The Majesty of God is not only
violated, but the Omniscience of God disowned, who is the only Witness; We must
in all of them, either imagine him to be without Eyes to behold us, or without
an Arm of Justice to punish us. And often it is, I believe, in such cases, that
if any thoughts of Gods knowledge strike upon Men, they quickly damp them, lest
they should begin to know what they fear, and fear that they might not eat
their pleasant Sinful Morsels.

2. It appears, in partial Confessions of Sin before God. As by a free, full,
and ingenuous Confession, we offer a due glory to this Attribute, so by a
feigned and curtailed Confession, we deny him the honor of it: For though by
any Confession we in part own him to be a Sovereign and Judge, yet by a half
and pared acknowledgment, we own him to be no more than a Humane and ignorant
one. Achans full Confession gave God the glory of his Omniscience, Josh. 7.19.
manifested in the discovery of his secret Crime. And Joshuah said to Achan, My
Son give glory to the Lord God of Israel, and make Confession unto him. And so
Psalm. 50.23. Who so offers praise glorifieth me, or confession, as the word
signifies, in which sense I would rather take it, referring to this Attribute,
which God seems to tax Sinners with the denial of, Verse. 21. telling them that
he would open the Records of their Sins before them, and indite them
particularly for every one. If therefore you would glorify this Attribute,
which shall one day break open your Consciences, offer to me a sincere
Confession. When David speaks of the happiness of a pardoned Man, Ps. 2.1, 2.
Camero, p. 89. col. 1.
he adds, in whose Spirit there is no guile, not meaning a sincerity in
general, but an ingenuity in Confessing. To excuse or extenuate Sin, is to deny
God the knowledge of the depths of our deceitful hearts: When we will mince it
rather than aggravate it; lay it upon the inducements of others, when it was
the free act of our own wills, study shifts to deceive our Judge, this is to
speak lies of him, as the expression is, Hos. 7.13. as though he were a God
easy to be cheated, and knew no more than we are willing to declare. What did
Saul's transferring his Sin from himself to the People, 1 Samuel 15.15.
but charge God with a defect in this Attribute? When Man could not be like God
in his knowledge, he would fancy a God like to him in his ignorance; and
imagine a possibility of hiding himself from his knowledge. And all Men tread
more or less in their Fathers steps, and are fruitful to devise distinctions to
disguise Errors in Doctrine, and excuses to palliate Errors in Practice: This
Crime Job removes from himself, Job 31.33.
when he speaks of several acts of his sincerity; If I covered my transgression
as Adam, by hiding my iniquity in my bosom. I hid not any of my Sins in my own
Conscience, but acknowledged God a Witness to them, and gave him the glory of
his knowledge by a free Confession. I did not conceal it from God as Adam did,
or as Men ordinarily do; as if God could understand no more of their secret
Crimes, than they will let him, and had no more sense of their faults, than
they would furnish him with. As the first rise of Confession is the owning of
this Attribute (for the Justice of God would not scare Men, nor the Holiness of
God awe them without a sense of his knowledge of their iniquities) so to drop
out some fragments of Confession, discover some Sins and conceal others, is a
plain denial of the extensiveness of the Divine Knowledge.

3. It is discovered, by putting God off with an outside Worship. Men are often
flatterers of God, and think to bend him by formal glavering Devotions, without
the concurrence of their hearts; as though he could not pierce into the
darkness of the Mind, but did as little know us as one Man knows another. There
are such things as feigned Lips Psalm. 17.1.
, a contradiction between the Heart and the Tongue, a clamor in the Voice, and
scoffing in the Soul; a crying to God, thou art my Father, the guide of my
youth and yet speaking and doing evil to the utmost of our power Jer. 3, 4, 5.
. As if God could be imposed upon by fawning pretenses; and like old Isaac,
take Jacob for Esau, and be couzend by the smell of his Garments: As if he
could not discern the Negro heart under an Angels Garb. Thus Ephraim, the Ten
Tribes, apostatized from the true Religion, would go with their Flocks and
their Herds to seek the Lord Hos. 5.6.
, would Sacrifice multitudes of Sheep and Heifers, which was the main outside
of the Jewish Religion; only with their Flocks and their Herds, not with their
Hearts, with those inward qualifications of deep Humiliation and Repentance for
Sin: As though outside appearances limited Gods observation, whereas God had
told them before, Verse 3.
That he knew Ephraim and Israel was not hid from him. Thus to do is to put a
cheat upon God, and think to blind his All-seeing Eye, and therefore it is
called deceit, Psalm. 78.36. They did flatter him with their Mouths; The word
(...) signifies to deceive as well as to flatter; not that they or any else can
deceive God, but it implies an endeavor to deceive him, by a few dissembling
words and gestures, or an imagination that God was satisfied with bare
professions, and would not concern himself in a further inquisition: This is an
unworthy conceit of God, to fancy that we can satisfy for inward Sins, and
avert approaching Judgments, by External Offerings, by a loud Voice with a
false Heart, as if God, (like Children) would be pleased, with the glittering
of an empty Shell, or the rattling of Stones, the chinking of Money, a mere
Voice and crying without inward frames and intentions of service.

4. In cherishing multitudes of evil thoughts. No Man but would blush for
shame, if the base, impure, slovenly thoughts, either in or out of Duties of
Worship were visible to the understanding of Man; how diligent would he be to
curb his luxuriant and unworthy fancies, as well as bite in his words; but when
we give the Rains to the Motions of our Hearts, and suffer them to run at
random without a Curb, it is an evidence we are not concerned for their falling
under the notice of the Eye of God; and it argues a very weak belief of this
Perfection, or scarce any belief at all. Who can think any Man's heart possessed
with a sense of this Infinite Excellency, that suffers his Mind, in his
Meditations on God, to wander into every Sty, and be picking up Stones upon a
Dunghill? What does it intimate, but that those thoughts are as invisible, or
unaudible to God, as they are to Men without the Garments of Words? Drexel
Nicetas, lib. 2. cap. 10. p. 357.
When a Man thinks of obscene things, his own natural Notions, if revived,
would tell him, that God discerns what he thinks, that the depths of his heart
are open to him: And the voice of those Notions are, Deface those vain
imaginations out of your Minds. But what is done? Men cast away Rational Light,
muster up Conceits, that God sees them not, knows them not, and so sink into
the Puddle of their sordid Imaginations, as though they remained in darkness to
God.

I might further instance.

In omissions of Prayer, which arise sometime from a flat Atheism: Who will
call upon a God, that believes no such Being? Or from partial Atheism, either a
denial of Gods sufficiency to help, or of his Omniscience to know, as if God
were like the Statue of Jupiter in Crete framed without Ears.

In the Hypocritical pretenses of Men, to exempt them from the service God
calls them to. When Men pretend one thing, and intend another; this lurks in
the Veins sometimes of the best Men; sometimes it arises from the fear of Man;
when Men are more afraid of the power of Man, than of dissembling with the
Almighty: It will pretend a virtue to cover a secret wile: and Choose the
Tongue of the Crafty, as the Expression in Job Job 15.5.
.

The case is plain in Moses, who when ordered to undertake an eminent Service,
pretends a want of Eloquence, and an ungrateful slowness of Speech Exodus 4.10.
. This generous Soul, that before was not afraid to discover himself in the
midst of Egypt for his Countrymen, answers sneakingly to God, and would vail
his carnal fear, with a pretense of insufficiency and humility; Who am I, that
I should go unto Pharaoh Exodus 3.11.
? He could not well allege an inability to go to Pharaoh, since he had had an
Education in the Egyptian Learning, which rendered him capable to appear at
Court. God at last uncaseth him, and shows it all to be a dissimulation, and
whatsoever was the pretense, fear lay at the bottom: He was afraid of his Life
upon his appearance before Pharaoh, from whose face he had fled upon the
slaying the Egyptian, which God intimates to him, Exodus 4.19. Go, and return
into Egypt, for all the Men are dead which sought thy life. What does this
Carriage speak, but as if Gods Eye were not upon our inward parts, as though we
could lock him out of our hearts, that cannot be shut out from any creek of the
hearts of Men and Angels.

2. The second Use is of Comfort. It Is a ground of great Comfort under the
present dispensation wherein we are; Nov. 1678. When the Popish Plot was
discovered.
We have heard the Doctrinal part, and God has given us the Experimental part
of it in his special Providence this day, upon the Stage of the World. And
blessed be God that he has given us a ground of Comfort, without going out of
our ordinary course to fetch it, whereby it seems to be peculiarly of Gods
ordering for us.

1. It Is a Comfort in all the clandestine contrivances of Men against the
Church. His Eyes pierce as far as the depths of Hell: Not one of his Churches
Adversaries lies in a mist, all are as plain as the Stars which he numbers;
Mine Adversaries are all before thee Psalm. 69.19.
, More exactly known to thee, than I can recount them. It Is a Prophecy of
Christ, wherein Christ is brought in speaking to God, of his own and the
Churches Enemies: He comforts himself with this, that God has his Eye upon
every particular Person among his Adversaries: He knows where they repose
themselves, when they go out to Consult, and when they come in with their
Resolves: He discerns all the Rage that Spirits their Hearts, in what corner it
lurks, how it acts; all the disorders, motions of it, and every Object of that
Rage; He cannot be deceived by the closest and subtilest Person. Thus God
speaks concerning Zenacherib and his Host against Jerusalem Isai. 37.28, 29.
. After he had spoke of the forming of his Church, and the weakness of it, he
adds, But I know thy abode, and thy going out, and thy coming in, and thy Rage
against me; because thy Rage against me, and thy Tumult is come up into mine
Ears, therefore will I put my Hook in thy Nose, and my Bridle in thy Lips, and
I will turn thee back, etc. He knows all the methods of the Counsels, the
Stages they had laid, the manner of the Execution of their Designs, all the
ways whither they turned themselves, and would use them no better than Men do
devouring Fish and untamed Beasts, with a Hook in the Nose and a Bridle in the
Mouth. Those Statesmen in Isa. 29.15. thought their Contrivances too deep for
God to fathom, and too close for God to frustrate; They seek deep to hide their
Counsels from the Lord; surely your turning of things upside down, shall be
esteemed as the Potters Clay, of no more force and understanding, than a
Potters Vessel, which understands not its own form wrought by the Artificer,
nor the use it is put to by the Buyer and Possessor; or shall be esteemed as a
Potters Vessel, that can be as easily flung back into the Mass from whence it
was taken, as preserved in the Figure it is now endued with. No secret Designer
is shrouded from Gods sight, or can be sheltered from Gods Arm; He understands
the Venom of their Hearts, better than we can feel it, and discovers their
inward fury more plainly, than we can see the Sting or Teeth of a Viper when
they are opened for mischief; and to what purpose does God know and see them,
but in order to deliver his People from them in his own due time; I know their
sorrow, and am come down to deliver them Ex. 3.7, 8.
: The Walls of Jerusalem are continually before him, he knows therefore all
that would undermine and demolish them; None can hurt Zion by any ignorance or
inadvertency in God.

It Is observable, that our Savior assuming to himself a different Title in
every Epistle to the Seven Churches, does particularly ascribe to himself this
of Knowledge and Wrath in that to Thyatira, an Emblem or Description of the
Romish State: Rev. 2.1^
And unto the Angel of the Church of Thyatira write, These things says the Son
of God, who has his Eyes like to a flame of Fire, and his Feet like fine
Brass. His Eyes, like a flame of Fire are of a piercing nature, insinuating
themselves into all the Pores and parts of the Body they encounter with, and
his Feet like Brass to crush them with, is explained, Verse 23. I will k ll her
Children with Death, and all the Churches shall know that I am he which
searches the Reins and the Heart, and I will give to every one of you according
to your works. He knows every design of the Romish Party, designed by that
Church of Thyatira For the Evidence of it I refer you to Dr. More's Exposition
of the seven Churches, worthy every Learned and Understanding Man's reading, and
of every sober Romanist.
. Jezabel, there, signifies a whorish Church, such a Church as shall act as
Jezabel, Ahab's Wife, who was not only a Worshipper of Idols, but propagated
Idolatry in Israel, slew the Prophets, persecuted Elijah, murdered Naboth, the
Name whereof signifies Prophecy, seized upon his Possession. And if it be said
that Verse 19. this Church was commended for her Works, Faith, Patience; it is
true Rome did at first strongly profess Christianity, and maintained the
interest of it, but afterward fell into the practice of Jezabel, and committed
Spiritual Adultery: And is she to be owned for a Wife, that now plays the
Harlot, because she was honest and modest at her first Marriage; Coc. in loc.
And though she shall be destroyed, yet not speedily, Verse 22. I will cast her
into a Bed, seems to intimate the destruction of Jezabel, not to be at once and
speedily, but in a lingering way, and by degrees, as Sickness consumes a Body.

2. This Perfection of God fits him to be a special Object of Trust. If he were
forgetful, what comfort could we have in any Promise? How could we depend upon
him, if he were ignorant of our State? His Compassions to pity us, his
Readiness to relieve us, his Power to protect and assist us, would be
insignificant, without his Omniscience to inform his Goodness, and direct the
Arm of his Power. This Perfection is as it were Gods Office of Intelligence: As
you go to your Memorandum Book to know what you are to do; so does God to his
Omniscience: This Perfection is Gods Eye, to acquaint him with the necessities
of his Church, and directs all his other Attributes in their exercise for and
about his People. You may depend upon his Mercy that has promised, and upon
his Truth to perform, upon his Sufficiency to supply you, and his Goodness to
relieve you, and his Righteousness to reward you, because he has an infinite
Understanding to know you and your wants, you and your services. And without
this knowledge of his, no comfort could be drawn from any other Perfection;
none of them could be a sure Nail to hang our hopes and confidence upon. This
is that, the Church always Celebrated, Psalm. 105.7. He has remembered his
Covenant for ever, and the Word which he has commanded to a thousand
generations; And Verse 42. He remembered his holy Promise; and he remembered for
them his Covenant Psalm 106.45.
. He remembers and understands his Covenant, therefore his Promise to perform
it, and therefore our Wants to supply them.

3. And the rather, because God knows the Persons of all his own. He has in
his infinite Understanding, the exact number of all the individual Persons that
belong to him; 2 Timothy 2.19. The Lord knows them that are his. He knows all
things, because he has Created them; and he knows his People because he has
not only made them, but also chose them: He could no more choose he knew not
what, than he could Create he knew not what: He knows them under a double
Title; of Creation as Creatures, in the common Mass of Creation; as new
Creatures by a particular act of Separation. He cannot be ignorant of them in
time, whom he fore-knew from Eternity: His knowledge in time is the same he had
from Eternity: He fore-knew them that he intended to give the Grace of Faith
unto; and he knows them after they believe, because he knows his own act, in
bestowing Grace upon them, and his own Mark and Seal wherewith he has stamped
them: No doubt but he that calls the Stars of Heaven by their names Psalm. 147.4.
, knows the number of those living Stars that sparkle in the Firmament of his
Church. He cannot be ignorant of their Persons, when he numbers the Hairs of
their Heads, and has Registered their Names in the Book of Life. As he only had
an infinite Mercy to make the choice; so he only has an infinite Understanding
to comprehend their Persons. We only know the Elect of God by a Moral assurance
in the Judgment of Charity, when the Conversation of Men is according to the
Doctrine of God: We have not an infallible knowledge of them, we may be often
mistaken; Judas, a Devil, may be judged by Man for a Saint, till he be stripped
of his disguise. God only has an infallible knowledge of them, he knows his
own Records, and the Counterparts in the hearts of his People; None can
counterfeit his Seal, nor can any raze it out. Turretin's Sermons, p. 3^2.
When the Church is either scattered, like Dust by Persecution, or overgrown
with Superstition and Idolatry, that there is scarce any grain of true Religion
appearing, as in the time of Elijah, who complained that he was left alone, as
if the Church had been rooted out of that corner of the World, 1 Kings 19.14,
18.
yet God knew that he had a number fed in a Cave, and had reserved seven
thousand Men that had preserved the purity of his Worship, and not bowed their
knee to Baal. Christ knew his Sheep, as well as he is known of them; yea,
better than they can know him John 10.14.
. History acquaints us, that Cyrus had so vast a memory, that he knew the name
of every particular Soldier in his Army, which consisted of diverse Nations;
Shall it be too hard for an infinite Understanding to know every one of that
Host that march under his Banners? may he not as well know them, as know the
number, qualities, influences of those Stars which lie concealed from our Eye,
as well as those that are visible to our Sense? Yes, he knows them, as a
General to employ them, as a Shepherd to preserve them: He knows them in the
World to guard them, and he knows them when they are out of the World to gather
them, and cull out their Bodies, though wrapped up in a Cloud of the putrified
Carcases of the Wicked: As he knew them from all Eternity to elect them, so he
knows them in time to cloth their Persons with Righteousness, to protect their
Persons in Calamity according to his good pleasure, and at last to raise and
reward them according to his Promise.

4. We may take Comfort from hence, That our sincerity cannot be unknown, to an
infinite Understanding. Not a way of the Righteous is concealed from him, and
therefore they shall stand in Judgment before him; Psalm. 1.6.
The Lord knows the way of the Righteous: He knows them to observe them, and he
knows them to Reward them. How comfortable is it to appeal to this Attribute of
God for our integrity, with Hezekiah, 2 Kings 20.3. Remember Lord, how I have
walked before thee in truth and with a perfect heart. Christ himself is brought
in in this Prophetical Psalm drawing out the Comfort of this Attribute, Psalm.
40.9. I have not restrained my Lips Oh Lord thou know, meaning his
faithfulness in declaring the Righteousness of God. Job follows the same steps,
Also now, behold, my Record is in Heaven, and my Witness is on high Job 16.1^.
: My Innocence has the Testimony of Men, but my greatest support is in the
Records of God. Also now; or besides the Testimony of my own Heart, I have
another Witness in Heaven that knows the Heart, and can only judge of the
principles of my actions, and clear me from the scorns of my Friends and the
accusations of Men, with a justification of my Innocence: He repeats it twice
to take the greater comfort in it. God knows that we do that in the simplicity
of our Hearts, which may be judged by Men to be done for unworthy and sordid
ends: He knows not only the outward action, but the inward affection; and
praises that which Men often dispraise; and writes down that with an Euge, Well
done good and faithful Servant, which Men daube with their severest Censures
Romans 2.29.
. How refreshing is it to consider, that God never mistakes the appearance for
reality, nor is lead by the judgment of Man? He sits in Heaven and laughs at
their follies and Censures. If God had no sounder and no more piercing a
Judgment than Man, woe be to the sincerest Souls that are often judged
Hypocrites by some. What a happiness is it for Integrity to have a Judge of
infinite Understanding, who will one day wipe off the dirt of Worldly
Reproaches?

Again, God knows the least dram of Grace and Righteousness in the Hearts of
his People, though but as a smoking Flax, or the least bruise of a saving
conviction Mat. 12.20.
; and knows it so as to cherish it; he knows that work he has begun, and never
has his Eye off from it to abandon it.

5. The consideration of this excellent Perfection in God may comfort us in our
secret Prayers, sighs and works. If God were not of infinite Understanding, to
pierce into the Heart, what comfort has a poor Creature that has a scantiness
of Expressions, but a Heart in a flame? If God did not understand the Heart,
Faith and Prayer which are internal works, would be in vain: How could he give
that Mercy our Hearts plead for, if he were ignorant of our inward Affections?
Hypocrites might scale Heaven by lofty Expressions, and a Sincere Soul come
short of the happiness he is prepared for, for want of flourishing Gifts.
Prayer is an internal work, words are but the Garment of Prayer; Meditation is
the Body, and Affection the Soul and Life of Prayer; Give Ear to my words Oh
Lord, consider my Meditation Psalm. 5.1.
. Prayer is a Rational act, an act of the mind, not the act of a Parrot: Prayer
is an act of the Heart, though the speaking Prayer is the work of the Tongue;
Now God gives Ear to the words, but he considers the Meditation, the frame of
the Heart. Consideration is a more exact notice than hearing, the act only of
the Ear. Were not God of an infinite Understanding, and Omniscient, he might
take fine Clothes, a heap of Garments for the Man himself; and be put off by
glittering words, without a Spiritual Frame. What matter of rejoicing is it,
that we call not upon a deaf and ignorant Idol; but on one that listens to our
secret Petitions to give them a dispatch, that knows our desires afar off, and
from the infiniteness of his Mercy, joined with his Omniscience stands ready to
give us a return? Has he not a Book of Remembrance for them that fear him, and
for their sighs and ejaculations to him as well as their discourses of him Mal.
3.16.
; and not only what Prayers they utter, but what gracious and holy thoughts
they have of him? That thought upon his Name. Though millions of supplications
be put up at the same time, yet they have all a distinct File (as I may say) in
an infinite Understanding, which perceives and comprehends them all. As he
observes millions of Sins committed at the same time by a vast number of
Persons to Record them in order to Punishment; so he distinctly discerns an
infinite number of Cries at the same moment to Register them in order to an
Answer.

A sigh cannot escape an infinite Understanding, though crowded among a mighty
multitude of Cries from others, or covered with many unwelcome distractions in
our selves, no more than a believing touch from the Woman that had the Bloody
Issue, could be concealed from Christ, and be undiscerned from the press of the
thronging multitudes: Our groans are as audible and intelligible to him as our
words, and he knows what is the mind of his own Spirit, though expressed in no
plainer language than sobs and heavings Romans 8.27.
. Thus David cheers up himself under the neglects of his Friends, Psalm. 38.9.
Lord my desire is before thee, and my groaning is not hid from thee. Not a
groan of a panting Spirit shall be lost, till God has lost his knowledge; Not
a Petition forgotten while God has a Record, nor a Tear dried while God has a
Bottle to reserve it in Psalm. 56.8.
.

Our secret works are also known and observed by him; not only our outward
labor, but our inward love in it, Heb. 6.10. If with Isaac we go privately
into the Field to meditate, or secretly cast our Bread upon the Waters, he
keeps his Eye upon us to Reward us, and returns the Fruit into our own Bosoms
Mat. 6.4.6.
; Yea, though it be but a Cup of cold Water, from an inward Spring of love
given to a Disciple: He sees your works and your labor, and faith and patience
in working them Rev. 2.2.
, all the marks of your industry, and strength of your intentions, and Will, be
as exact at last in order to a due Praise, as to open Sins in order to a just
Recompense 1 Cor. 4.5.
.

6. The Consideration of this excellent Attribute, affords Comfort in the
Afflictions of good Men. He knows their Pressures, as well as hears their Cries
Exodus 3.7.
: His Knowledge comes not by information from us; but his Compassionate
listening to our Cries springs from his own Inspection into our Sorrows; He is
affected with them, before we make any discovery of them: He is not ignorant of
the best Season, when they may be usefully inflicted, and when they may be
profitably removed: The Tribulation and Poverty of his Church is not unknown to
him, Rev. 2.8, 9. I know thy Works and Tribulation, etc. He knows their Works,
and what Tribulation they meet with for him; He sees their extremities, when
they are toiling against the Wind and Tide of the World Mark 6.48.
: Yea, the natural exigencies of the multitude are not neglected by him, he
discerns to take care of them: Our Savior considered the three days fasting of
his Followers, and miraculously provides a Dish for them in the Wilderness. No
good Man is ever out of Gods Mind, and therefore never out of his Compassionate
Care: His Eye pierces into their Dungeons and pities their Miseries. Joseph
may forget his Brethren, and the Disciples not know Christ, when he walks upon
the Midnight Waves and Turbulent Sea; Barlow's Man's Refuge, p. 29, 30.
but a Lions Den cannot obscure a Daniel from his Sight, nor the depths of the
Whales Belly bury Jonah from the Divine Understanding: He discerns Peter in his
Chains, and Stephen under the Stones of Martyrdom: He knows Lazarus under his
tattered Rags, and Abel wallowing in his Blood: His Eye and Knowledge goes
along with his People, when they are transplanted into Foreign Countries, and
sold for Slaves into the Islands of the Grecians, for he will raise them out of
the place, Joel 3.6, 7. He would defeat the hopes of the Persecutors, and
applaud the Patience of his People: He knows his People in the Tabernacle of
Life, and in the Valley of the Shadow of Death, Psalm. 23. He knows all penal
Evils because he commissions and directs them: He knows the Instruments because
they are his Sword Psalm. 17.13.
, and he knows his gracious Sufferer because he has his Mark: He discerns Job
in his Anguish, and the Devil in his Malice: By the direction of this Attribute
he orders Calamities, and rescues from them. Thou have seen it, for thou
beholdest mischief and spite Psalm. 10.14.
: That is the Comfort of the Psalmist, and the Comfort of every Believer, and
the Ground of committing themselves to God under all the injustice of Men.

7. It Is a Cofmort in all our Infirmities. As he knows our Sins to charge them;
so he knows the weakness of our Nature to pity us. As his infinite
Understanding may scare us, because he knows our Transgressions; so it may
relieve us, because he knows our natural mutability in our first Creation: He
knows our frame, he remembers that we are dust Psalm. 103.14.
. It Is the reason of the precedent Verses, why he removes our Transgression
from us, why he is so backward in Punishing; so patient in waiting, so forward
in pitying; Why? He does not only remember our Sins, but remember our frame or
forming, what brittle, though clear Glasses we were by Creation, how easy to
be cracked: He remembers our impotent and weak Condition by Corruption; what a
sink we have of vain imaginations that remain in us after Regeneration; he does
not only consider that we were made according to his Image, and therefore able
to stand, but that we were made of Dust and weak Matter, and had a sensitive
Soul, like that of Beasts, as well as an intellectual Nature, like that of
Angels, and therefore liable to follow the dictates of it, without exact care
and watchfulness. If he remembered only the first, there would be no issue but
Indignation; but the Consideration of the latter moves his Compassion. How
miserable should we be for want of this Perfection in the Divine Nature,
whereby God remembers and reflects upon his past act in our first frame, and
the mindfulness of our Condition excites the motion of his Bowels to us? Had he
lost the knowledge, how he first framed us; did he not still remember the
mutability of our Nature, as we were formed and stamped in his Mint; How much
more wretched would our Condition be than it is? If his remembrance of our
Original, be one ground of his. Pity, the sense of his Omniscience should be a
ground of our Comfort, in the stirring of our infirmities: He remembers we were
but Dust, when he made us; and yet remembers we are but Dust, while he
preserves and forbears us.

8. It Is some Comfort in the fears of some lurking Corruption in our Hearts. We
know by this whither to address our selves for the search and discovery of it:
Perhaps some Blessings we want are retarded, some Calamities we understand not
the particular cause of, are inflicted, some Petitions we have put up, hang too
long for an Answer; and the Chariot Wheels of Divine Goodness move slow and are
long in coming: Let us beg the Aid of this Attribute to open to us the Remoras,
to discover what base Affection there is that retards the Mercies we want, or
attracts the Affliction we feel, or bars the Door against the return of our
supplications. What our dim sight cannot discover, the clear Eye of God can
make visible to us. Job 10.2. Show me wherefore thou contendest with me. As in
want of Pardon, we particularly plead his Mercy, and in our desires for the
performance of his Promise, we argue with him from his faithfulness; so in the
fear of any insincerity or hidden Corruption we should implore his Omnscience:
For as God is a God in Covenant, our God, our God in the whole of his Nature;
so the Perfections of his Nature, are employed in their several Stations, as
assistances of his Creatures. This was David's Practice and Comfort, after that
large Meditation, on the Omniscience and Omnipresence of God, he turns his
thoughts of it, into Petitions for the employment of it in the concerns of his
Soul, and begs a Mercy suitable to the glory of this Perfection, Psalm. 139.23.
Search me Oh God and try my heart, try me and know my thoughts; Dive to the
bottom, Verse 24. And see if there be any wicked way in me, and lead me in the
way Everlasting. His desire is not barely that God should know him, for it
would be senseless to beg of God that he should have Mercy or faithfulness, or
power or knowledge in his Nature; but he desires the exercise of this
Attribute, in the discovery of himself to himself, in order to his sight of any
wicked way, and Humiliation for it, and Reformation of it in order to his
Conduct to Everlasting Life. As we may appeal to this Perfection to Judge us,
when the sincerity of our Actions is Censured by others; so we may implore it
to search us, when our sincerity is questioned by our selves: That our Minds
may be enlightened by a Beam from his Knowledge, and the little Thieves may be
pulled out of their Dens in our Hearts by the hand of his Power. In particular,
it is our Comfort that we can, and our necessity that we must Address
particularly to this, when we engage solemnly in a work of self-examination;
that we may have a clearer Eye to direct us than our own, that we may not
mistake Brass for Gold, or counterfeit Graces for true; that nothing that is
filthy and fit to be cast out, may escape our Sight, and preserve its Station.
And we need not question the laying at the Door of this neglect, ( viz. not
calling in this Attribute to our Aid, whose proper Office it is, (as I may so
say) to search and enquire) all the mistakes, ill success, and fruitlessness of
our endeavors in self-examination, because we would engage in it, in the
pitiful strength of our own dimness, and not in the light of Gods Countenance
and the assistance of his Eye, which can discern what we cannot see, and
discover that to us, which we cannot manifest to our selves. It Is a Comfort to
a learner of an Art, to have a skilful Eye to overlook his work, and inform him
of the defects. Beg the help of the Eye of God in all your searches and
self-examinations.

9. The Consideration of this Attribute is Comfortable in our assurances of,
and reflections upon the pardon of Sin, or seeking of it. As God punishes Men
for Sin according to his knowledge of them, which is greater than the knowledge
their own Consciences have of them; so he pardons according to his knowledge:
He pardons not only according to our knowledge, but according to his own: He is
greater than any Man's Heart, to condemn for that, which a Man is at present
ignorant of; and greater than our Hearts, to pardon that which is not at
present visible to us; He knows that which the most watchful Conscience cannot
take a survey of: If God had not an infinite Understanding of us, how could we
have a perfect and full pardon from him? It would not stand with his Honor to
pardon he knew not what. He knows what Crimes we have to be pardoned, when we
know not all of them our selves, that stand in need of a gracious Remission;
His Omniscence beholds every Sin to charge it upon our Savior. If he knows our
Sins that are black, he knows every mite of Christ's Righteousness which is
pure, and the utmost extent of his Merits, as well as the demerit of our
iniquities. As he knows the filth of our Sin, he also knows the covering of our
Savior: He knows the value of the Redeemers Sufferings, and exactly
understands every Plea in the intercession of our Advocate. Though God knows
our Sins oculo indice, yet he does not see them oculo judice, with a Judicial
Eye: His Omniscience stirs not up his Justice to Revenge, but his Mercy to
Pity. His infinite Understanding of what Christ has done, directs him to
disarm his Justice, and sound an Alarm to his Bowels. As he understands better
than we what we have committed; so he understands better than we what our
Savior has merited; and his Eye directs his Hand in the blotting out Guilt,
and applying the Remedy.

3. The third Use shall be to Sinners to humble them, and put them upon serious
Consideration. This Attribute speaks terrible things to a Profligate Sinner.
Basil thinks that the ripping open the Sins of the Damned to their faces by
this Perfection of God, is more terrible than their other Torments in Hell. God
knows the Persons of Wicked Men, not one is exempted from his Eye, he sees all
the actions of Men as well as he knows their Persons; Job 11.11. He knows vain
Men, he sees wickedness also. Job 34.21. His Eye is upon all their goings. He
hears the most private Whispers, Psalm. 139.4. the scope, manner, circumstance
of speaking he knows it altogether: He understands all our thoughts, the first
bubblings of that bitter Spring, Psalm. 139.2. The quickest glances of the
Fancy, the closest musings of the Mind, and the abortive wouldings or wishes of
the Will, the language of the Heart, as well as the language of the Tongue; Not
a foolish thought, or an idle word, not a wanton glance, or a dishonest action;
Not a negligent service, or a distracting fancy, but is more visible to him,
than the filth of a Dunghill can be to any Man by the help of a Sun Beam. How
much better would it be for desperate Sinners, to have their Crimes known to
all the Angels in Heaven, and Men upon Earth, and Devils in Hell, than that
they should be known to their Sovereign, whose Laws they have violated, and to
their Judge, whose Righteousness obliges him to revenge the injury?

1. Consider, What a poor Refuge is secrecy to a Sinner? Not the Mysts of a
foggy Day, nor the obscurity of the darkest Night, not the closest Curtains,
nor the deepest Dungeon, can hide any Sin from the Eye of God. Adam is known in
his Thickets, and Jonah in his Cabin. Achan's Wedge of Gold is discerned by
him, though buried in the Earth, and hooded with a Tent. Shall Sarah be unseen
by him, when she mockingly laughs behind the Door? Shall Gehazy tell a Lie, and
comfort himself with an imagination of his Masters ignorance, as long as God
knows it? Whatsoever works Men do, are not hid from God, whither done in the
darkness or Daylight, in the Midnight darkness, or the Noonday Sun: He is
all Eye to see, and he has a great Wrath to Punish. The Wheels in Ezekiel are
full of Eyes: A piercing Eye to behold the Sinner, and a swift Wheel of Wrath
to overtake him. God is Light, and of all things Light is most difficultly kept
out. The secretest Sins are set in the light of his Countenance Psalm. 90.8.
, as legible to him, as if writ with a Sun Beam; More visible to him than the
greatest Print to the sharpest Eye. The Fornications of the Samaritan Woman,
perhaps known only to her own Conscience, were manifest to Christ John 4.16.
. There is nothing so secretly done, but there is an infallible Witness to
prepare a Charge. Though God be invisible to us, we must not imagine we are so
to him; it is a vanity therefore to think, we can conceal our selves from God,
by concealing the Notions of God from our sense and practice. If Men be as
close from the Eyes of all Men, as from those of the Sun; yea, if they could
separate themselves from their own Shadow, they could not draw themselves from
Gods Understanding: How then can darkness shelter us, or Crafty Artifices
defend us? With what shame will Sinners be filled, when God, who has traced
their Steps, and writ their Sins in a Book, shall make a Repetition of their
Ways, and unvail the Web of their Wickedness?

2. What a dreadful Consideration is this to the juggling Hypocrite, that masks
himself with an appearance of Piety? An infinite Understanding judges not
according to Vails and Shadows, but according to Truth; He judges not according
to appearance 1 Samuel 16.7.
. The outward Comeliness of a work imposes not on him, his Knowledge, and
therefore his Estimations are quite of another Nature than those of Men. By
this Perfection God looks through the Vail, and beholds the litter of
Abominations in the secrets of the Soul; the true Quality and Principle of
every Work, and judges of them as they are, and not as they appear. Disguised
Pretexts cannot deceive him; the Disguises are known afar off before they are
weaved, he pierces into the depths of the most abstruse Wills; all secret Ends
are dissected before him: Every action is naked in its outside, and open in its
inside, all are as clear to him as if their Bodies were of Crystal, so that if
there be any secret reserves, he will certainly reprove us Job 13.10.
. We are often deceived, we may take Wolves for Sheep, and Hypocrites for
Believers; for the Eyes of Men are no better than Flesh, and dive no further
than appearance; but an infinite Understanding, that fathoms the secret depths
of the Heart, is too knowing to let a Dream pass for a Truth, or mistake a
Shadow for a Body. Though we call God Father all our days, speak the language
of Angels, or be endowed with the Gifts of Miracles, he can discern whether we
have his Mark upon us; He can espy the Treason of Judas in a Kiss; Herod's
intent of Murdering under a specious pretense of Worship: A Pharisees fraud
under a broad Philactery; A Ravenous Wolf under the softness of a Sheeps Skin;
And the Devil in Samuels Mantle, or when he would shroud himself among the Sons
of God Job 1.6, 7.
. All the Rooms of the Heart, and every atome of Dust in the least chink of it,
is clear to his Eye: He can strip Sin from the fairest Excuses, pierce into the
Heart with more ease than the Sun can through the thinnest Cloud or Vapor; and
look through all Ephraims ingenuous Inventions to excuse his Idolatry Hos. 5.3.
. Hypocrisy then is a senseless thing, since it cannot escape unmasking, by an
infinite Understanding. As all our force cannot stop his Arm, when he is
resolved to Punish; so all our sophistry cannot blind his Understanding, when
he comes to Judge. Woe to the Hypocrite, for God sees him; all his juggling is
open and naked to infinite Understanding.

3. Is it not also a senseless thing to be careless of Sins committed long ago?
The old Sins forgotten by Men, stick fast in an infinite Understanding: Time
cannot raze out that which has been known from Eternity. Why should they be
forgotten many years after they were acted, since they were foreknown in an
Eternity before they were committed, or the Criminal capable to practice them?
Amalek must pay their Arrears of their ancient Unkindness to Israel in the time
of Saul, though the Generation that committed them were rotten in their Graves
1 Samuel 15.2.
. Old Sins are written in a Book, which lies always before God; and not only
our own Sins, but the Sins of our Fathers, to be requited upon their Posterity
Isai. 65.6. Behold it is written.
. What a vanity is it then to be regardless of the Sins of an Age that went
before us; because they are in some measure out of our knowledge, are they
therefore blotted out of Gods remembrance? Sins are bound up with him, as Men
do Bonds, till they resolve to sue for the Debt; The iniquity of Ephraim is
bound up Hos. 13.12.
. As his foreknowledge extends to all acts that shall be done, so his
remembrance extends to all acts that have been done. We may as well say, God
fore-knows nothing that shall be done to the end of the World, as that he
forgets any thing that has been done from the beginning of the World. The
former Ages of the World are no further distant from him than the latter. God
has a Calendar, (as it were) or an Account Book of Men's Sins ever since the
beginning of the World, what they did in their Childhood, what in their Youth,
what in their Manhood, and what in their Old Age: He has them in store among
his Treasures Deuteronomy. 32.34.
: He has neither lost his Understanding to know them, nor his Resolution to
revenge them: As it follows, Verse 35.
To me Vengeance belongs. He intends to enrich his Justice with a glorious
manifestation, by rendering a due Recompense. And it is to be observed, that God
does not only necessarily remember them; but sometimes binds himself by an Oath
to do it; Amos 8.7. The Lord has sworn by the Excellency of Jacob, surely I
will never forget any of their works. Or in the Hebrew, If I ever forget any of
their works; That is, Let me not be accounted a God for ever, if I do forget;
Let me lose my Godhead, if I lose my remembrance. It Is not less a Misery to the
Wicked, than it is a Comfort to the Godly, that their Record is in Heaven.

4. Let it be observed, That this infinite Understanding, does exactly know the
sins of Men, he knows so as to consider. He does not only know them, but
intently behold them; Psalm. 11.4.
His Eyelids try the Children of Men, a Metaphor taken from Men, that
contract the Eyelids, when they would wistly and accurately behold a thing;
it is not a transient and careless look, Psalm. 10.14. Thou have seen it; Thou
have intently beheld it, as the word properly signifies: He beholds and knows
the actions of every particular Man, as if there were none but he in the World:
And does not only know, but ponder Prove. 5.21.
, and consider their works Psalm. 33.15.
, He is not a bare Spectator, but a diligent Observer, 1 Samuel 2.3.
By him actions are weighed; To see what degree of good or evil there is in
them, what there is to blemish them, what to advantage them, what the quality
and quantity of every action is. Consideration takes in every Circumstance of
the Considered Object: Notice is taken of the place where, the minute when, the
Mercy against which it is committed; the number of them is exact in Gods Book;
They have tempted me now these ten times Numb. 14.22.
, against the demonstrations of my Glory in Egypt and the Wilderness. The whole
Guilt in every Circumstance is spread before him: His knowledge of Men's Sins is
not confused, such an Imperfection an infinite Understanding cannot be subject
to: It Is exact, for iniquity is marked before him Jer. 2.22.
.

5. God knows Men's miscarriage so as to judge. This use his Omniscience is put
to, to maintain his Sovereign Authority in the exercise of his Justice: His
notice of the Sins of Men is in order to a just Retribution, Psalm. 10.14. Thou
have seen mischief to requite it with thy hand. The Eye of his Knowledge
directs the Hand of his Justice; and no sinful action that falls under his
Cognizance, but will fall under his Revenge; they can as little escape his
Censure as they can his Knowledge: He is a Witness in his Omniscience, that he
may be a Judge in his Righteousness: He knows the hearts of the Wicked, so as
to hate their Works, and testify his abhorrency of that which is of high value
with M n Luke 16.15.
. Sin is not preserved in his Understanding, or written down in his Book to be
moth-eaten as an old Manuscript, but to be opened one day, and Copied out in
the Consciences of Men: He writes them to publish them, and sets them in the
light of his Countenance, to bring them to the light of their Consciences. What
a terrible consideration is it, to think that the Sins of a day are upon Record
in an Infallible Uunderstanding, much more the Sins of a week; What a number
then do the Sins of a Month, a Year, ten or forty Years arise to? How many
actions against Charity, against Sincerity; what an infinite number is there of
them, all bound up in the Court Rolls of Gods Omniscience, in order to a Trial,
to be brought out before the Eyes of Men? Who can seriously consider all those
Bonds, reserved in the Cabinet of Gods Knowledge to be sued out against the
Sinner in due time, without an unexpressible horror?

4. The fourth Use is of Exhortation. Let us have a sense of Gods Knowledge
upon our hearts. All Wickedness has a spring from a want of due Consideration
and sense of it. David concludes it so, Psalm. 86.14.
The proud rose against him, and violent Men sought after his Soul, because
they did not set God before them. They think God does not know, and therefore
care not what, nor how they act. When the fear of this Attribute is removed, a
Door is opened to all Impiety: What is there so villainous, but the minds of Men
will attempt to act? What Reverence of a Deity can be left, when the sense of
his infinite Understanding is extinguished? What Faith could there be in
Judgments in Witnesses? How would the Foundations of Humane Society be
overturned? The Pillars upon which Commerce stands, be utterly broken and
dissolved? What Society can be preserved, if this be not truly believed and
faithfully stuck to? But how easily would Oaths be swallowed and quickly
violated, if the sense of this Perfection were rooted out of the minds of Men?
What fear could they have of calling to Witness a Being they imagine blind and
ignorant? Men secretly imagine, that God knows not, or soon forgets, and then
make bold to Sin against him Ezekiel. 8.12.
. How much does it therefore concern us to cherish and keep alive the sense of
this? If God writes us upon the Palms of his Hands, as the Expression is, to
remember us, let us engrave him upon the Tables of our Hearts to remember him.
It would be a good Motto to write upon our Minds, God knows all, he is of
infinite Understanding.

1. This would give check to much iniquity. Can a Man's Conscience easily and
delightfully swallow that, which he is sensible falls under the Cognizance of
God, when it is hateful to the Eye of his Holiness, and renders the Actor
odious to him? Does he not see my ways, and count all my steps, says Job Job
31.4.
. To what end does he fix this Consideration? To keep him from wanton glances,
Temptations have no encouragement to come near him, that is constantly armed
with the thoughts that his Sin is Book't in Gods Omniscience. If any impudent
Devil has the face to tempt us, we should not have the impudence to join issue
with him under the sense of an infinite Understanding. How fruitless would his
Wiles be against this Consideration? How easily would his Snares be cracked, by
one sensible thought of this? This does Solomon prescribe to allay the heat of
Carnal imaginations Prove. 5.20, 21.
. It were a useful Question to ask, at the appearance of every Temptation, at
the entrance upon every Action, as the Church did in Temptations to Idolatry;
Psalm. 44.21.
Shall not God search this out, for he knows the secrets of the heart? His
Understanding comprehends us more than our Consciences can our acts, or our
understanding our thoughts: Who durst speak Treason against a Prince, if he
were sure he heard him, or that it would come to his knowledge? A sense of Gods
knowledge of Wickedness in the first motion, and inward contrivance would bar
the accomplishment and execution. The Consideration of Gods infinite
Understanding, would cry stand to the first glances of the heart to Sin.

2. It would make us watchful over our hearts and thoughts. Should we harbor
any unworthy thoughts in our Cabinet, if our heads and hearts were possessed
with this useful truth, That God knows everything which comes into our minds
Ezekiel. 11.5.
? We should as much blush at the rising of impure thoughts before the
Understanding of God, as at the discovery of unworthy actions to the knowledge
of Men; If we lived under a sense, that not a thought of all those millions,
which flutter about our Minds, can be concealed from him; how watchful and
careful should we be of our hearts and thoughts?

3. It would be a good preparation to every Duty. This Consideration should be
the Preface to every service; The Divine Understanding knows how I now act.
This would engage us to serious Intention, and quell wandering and distracting
fancies: Who would come before God, with a careless and ignorant Soul, under a
sense of his infinite Understanding, and Prerogative of searching the heart? Oh
thou that sit in Heaven, was a Consideration the Psalmist had at the
beginning of his Prayer Psalm. 123.1.
: Whereby he testifies not only an apprehension of the Majesty and Power of
God, but of his Omniscience; as one sitting above, beholds all that is below;
Would we offer to God such raw and undigested Petitions; would there be so much
flatness in our services; should our hearts so often give us the slip: Would
any hang down their Heads like a Bulrush, by an affected or counterfeit
Humility, while the Heart is filled with Pride, if we did actuate Faith in this
Attribute? No, our Prayers would be more sound, our Devotions more vigorous,
our Hearts more close, our Spirits like the Chariots of Aminadab, more swift in
their motions: Every thing would be done by us with all our might, which would
be very feeble and faint, if we conceived God to be of a Finite Understanding
like our selves. Let us therefore before every Duty, not draw, but open the
Curtains between God and our Souls, and think that we are going before him that
sees us, before him that knows us Genesis 16.13.
. And the stronger Impressions of the Divine Knowledge are upon our Minds, the
better would our preparation be for, and the more active our frames in every
service: And certainly we may judge of the suitableness of our preparations, by
the strength of such Impressions upon us.

4. This would tend to make us sincere in our whole Course. This prescription
David gave to Solomon, to maintain a soundness and health of Spirit in his walk
before God; 1 Chronicles. 28.9. And thou Solomon my Son, know the God of thy
Fathers, and serve him with a perfect heart, for the Lord understands all the
imaginations of the thoughts. Antiquit. lib. 1. cap. 3.
Josephus gives this reason for Abels Holiness, That he believed God was
ignorant of nothing. As the Doctrine of Omniscience is the foundation of all
Religion; so the Impression of it, would promote the practice of all Religion.
When all our ways are imagined by us to be before the Lord, we shall then keep
his Precepts Psalm. 119.^68.
. And we can never be perfect or sincere, till we walk before God, Genesis 17.1.
as under the Eye of Gods Knowledge. What we speak, what we think, what we act
is in his sight: He knows every place where we are, every thing that we do, as
well as Christ knew Nathaniel under the Fig Tree. As he is too Powerful to be
vanquished, so he is too Understanding to be deceived: The sense of this would
make us walk with as much care, as if the understanding of all Men did
comprehend us and our actions.

5. The Consideration of this Attribute would make us humble. How dejected
would a Person be, if he were sure all the Angels in Heaven and Men upon Earth,
did perfectly know his Crimes, with all their aggravations? But what is Created
Knowledge to an infinite and just Censuring Understanding? When we consider
that he knows our actions, whereof there are multitudes, and our thoughts
whereof there are millions: That he views all the Blessings bestowed upon us;
all the injuries we have returned to him; That he exactly knows his own Bounty,
and our ingratitude; all the Idolatry, Blasphemy, and secret enmity in every
Man's heart against him; all Tyrannical Oppressions, hidden Lusts, omissions of
necessary Duties, violations of plain Precepts, every foolish Imagination, with
all the Circumstances of them, and that perfectly in their full Anatomy, every
mite of unworthiness and wickedness in every Circumstance; and add to this his
Knowledge, the wonders of his Patience, which are miraculous upon the score of
his Omniscience, that he is not as quick in his Revenge, as he is in his
Understanding; but is so far from inflicting Punishment, that he continues his
former Benefits, arms not his Justice against us, but sollicites our
Repentance, and waits to be Gracious with all this knowledge of our Crimes;
should not the Consideration of this, melt our hearts into Humiliation before
him, and make us earnest in begging pardon and forgivenss of him?

Again, Do we not all find a Worm in our best Fruit, a Flaw in our soundest
Duties? Shall any of us vaunt, as if God beheld only the Gold, and not any
Dross; as if he knew one thing only, and not another? If we knew something by
our selves to cheer us, do we not also know something, yea, many things to
condemn us, and therefore to humble us? Let the sense of Gods infinite
Knowledge therefore be an Incentive and Argument for more Humiliation in us. If
we know enough to render our selves vile in our own Eyes, how much more does
God know to render us vile in his!

6. The Consideration of this Excellent Perfection, should make us to acquiesce
in God, and rely upon him in every strait. In public, in private: He knows all
Cases, and he knows all Remedies; He knows the Seasons of bringing them, and he
knows the Seasons of removing them, for his own Glory. What is contingent in
respect of us, and of our foreknowledge, and in respect of second causes, is
it not so in regard of Gods, who has the knowledge of the futurition of all
things: He knows all Causes in themselves, and therefore knows what every Cause
will produce, what will be the event of every Counsel and of every Action? How
should we commit our selves to this God of infinite Understanding, who knows
all things, and fore-knows every thing, that cannot be forced through ignorance
to take new Counsel, or be surpised with any thing, that can happen to us?
This use the Psalmist makes of it, Psalm. 10.14. Thou have seen it, the poor
commits himself unto thee. Though some trust in Chariots and Horses Psalm.
20.7.
, some in Counsels and Counselors, some in their Arms and Courage, and some in
mere vanity and nothing, yet let us remember the Name and Nature of the Lord
our God, his Divine Perfections, of which this of his infinite Understanding
and Omniscience is none of the least, but so necessary, that without it he
could not be God, and the whole World would be a mear Chaos and Confusion.

A DISCOURSE UPON THE Wisdom of God.
Romans XVI. 27. To God only Wise be glory through Jesus Christ, for ever, Amen.


THis Chapter being the last of this Epistle, is chiefly made up of charitable
and friendly Salutations and Commendations of particular Persons, according to
the earliness and strength of their several Graces, and their labor of Love
for the Interest of God and his People.

In verse 17. he warns them not to be drawn aside from the Gospel Doctrine,
which had been taught them, by the plausible Pretenses and Insinuations, which
the Corrupters of the Doctrine and Rule of Christ, never want from the
suggestions of their Carnal Wisdom. The Brats of Soul-destroying Errors, may
walk about the World in a garb and disguise of good words, and fair speeches,
as it is in the 18th Verse, by good words and fair speeches deceive the hearts
of the simple. And for their encouragement to a constancy in the Gospel
Doctrine, he assures them, that all those that would dispossess them of Truth,
to possess them with Vanity, are but Satan's Instruments, and will fall under
the same Captivity and Yoke with their Principal; Verse 18. The God of Peace
shall bruise Satan under your feet shortly.

Whence observe,

1. All Corrupters of Divine Truth, and Troublers of the Churches Peace, are no
better than Devils. Our Savior thought the Name Satan, a Title merited by
Peter, when he breathed out an Advice, as an Ax at the Root of the Gospel, the
Death of Christ, the foundation of all Gospel Truth; and the Apostle concludes
them under the same Character, which hinder the superstructure, and would mix
their Chaff with his Wheat; Mat. 16.23. Get thee behind me Satan. It Is not, Get
thee behind me Simon, or, Get thee behind me Peter; but, Get thee behind me
Satan, thou art an offense to me: Thou do oppose thy self to the Wisdom, and
Grace, and Authority of God, to the Redemption of Man, and to the good of the
World.

As the Holy Ghost is the Spirit of Truth, so is Satan the Spirit of Falsehood:
As the Holy Ghost inspires Believers with Truth, so does the Devil corrupt
Unbelievers with Error. Let us cleave to the Truth of the Gospel, that we may
not be counted by God as part of the Corporation of Fallen Angels, and not be
barely reckoned as Enemies of God, but in league with the greatest Enemy to his
Glory in the World.

2. The Reconciler of the World will be the subduer of Satan. The God of Peace
sent the Prince of Peace to be the Restorer of his Rights, and the Hammer to
beat in pieces the Usurper of them. As a God of Truth he will make good his
Promise, as a God of Peace he will perfect the design, his Wisdom has laid,
and begun to act. In the subduing Satan, he will be the Conqueror of his
Instruments: He says nor, God shall bruise your Troublers, and Heretics; but
Satan: The fall of a General proves the rout of the Army. Since God, as a God
of Peace has delivered his own, he will perfect the Victory, and make them
cease from bruising the heel of his Spiritual Seed.

3. Divine Evangelical Truth shall be Victorious. No Weapon formed against it
shall prosper: The Head of the Wicked shall fall as low, as the Feet of the
Godly. The Devil never yet bluster'd in the World, but he met at last with a
disappointment: His Fall has been like Lightning, sudden, certain, vanishing.

4. Faith must look back as far as the foundation Promise. The God of Peace
shall bruise, etc. The Apostle seems to allude to the first Promise, Genesis 2.15.
A Promise that has vigor to nourish the Church in all Ages of the World: It Is
the standing Cordial; out of the Womb of this Promise all the rest have taken
their birth. The Promises of the Old Testament were designed for those under
the New, and the full performance of them, is to be expected, and will be
enjoyed by them. It Is a mighty strengthening to Faith, to trace the footsteps of
Gods Truth and Wisdom, from the Threatening against the Serpent in Eden, to the
bruise he received in Calvary, and the Triumph over him upon Mount Olivet:

5. We are to confide in the Promise of God, but leave the season of its
accomplishment to his Wisdom. He will bruise Satan under your feet, therefore
do not doubt it; and shortly, therefore wait for it: Shortly it will be done,
that is, quickly, when you think it may be a great way off; or shortly, that
is, seasonably, when Satan's Rage is hottest. God is the best Judge of the
seasons of distributing his own Mercies, and darting out his own Glory: It Is
enough to encourage our waiting, that it will be, and that it will be shortly;
but we must not measure God's shortly by our Minutes.

The Apostle after this concludes with a comfortable Prayer, That since they
were liable to many Temptations, to turn their backs upon the Doctrine which
they had learned; yet he desires God, who had brought them to the knowledge of
his Truth, would confirm them in the belief of it, since it was the Gospel of
Christ, his dear Son, and a Mystery he had been chary of and kept in his own
Cabinet, and now brought forth to the World in pursuance of the ancient
Prophesies, and now had published to all Nations for that end that it might be
obeyed; and concludes with a Doxology, a voice of Praise, to him who was only
Wise to effect his own purposes; Verses 25, 26, 27. Now to him that is of power
to establish you, according to my Gospel and the preaching of Jesus Christ,
according to the revelation of the Mystery, which was kept secret since the
World began; but now is made manifest, and by the Scriptures of the Prophets,
according to the commandment of the Everlasting God, made known to all Nations
for the obedience of Faith. This Doxology is interlac'd with many Comforts for
the Romans. He explains the causes of this glory to God, Power and Wisdom;
Power to establish the Romans in Grace, which includes his Will. This he proves
from a Divine Testimony, viz. the Gospel; the Gospel committed to him, and
preached by him, which he commends by calling it the preaching of Christ; and
describes it, for the instruction and comfort of the Church from the Adjuncts,
the obscurity of it under the old Testament, and the clearness of it under the
New: It was hid from the former Ages, and kept in silence; not simply and
absolutely, but comparatively and in part; because in the Old Testament, the
Doctrine of Salvation by Christ was confined to the limits of Judea, preached
only to the Inhabitants of that Country: To them he gave his Statutes and his
Judgments, and dealt not so magnificently with any Nation Psalm. 147.19, 20.
; but now he causes it to spring with greater Majesty out of those narrow
bounds, and spread its Wings about the World. This manifestation of the Gospel
he declares first from the subject, All Nations: 2. From the principal
efficient cause of it, The Commandment and Order of God: 3. The Instrumental
cause, The Prophetic Scriptures: 4. From the End of it, Gomarus in loc.
The obedience of Faith.

1. Observe, The glorious Attributes of God bear a comfortable respect to
Believers. Power and Wisdom are here mentioned as two props of their Faith; his
Power here includes his Goodness. Power to help, without Will to assist, is a
dry Chip. The Apostle mentions not Gods Power simply and absolutely considered,
for that of it self is no more comfort to Men, than it is to Devils; but as
considered in the Gospel Covenant, his Power, as well as his other Perfections,
are ingredients in that Cordial of Gods being our God. We should never think of
the Excellency of the Divine Nature, without considering the Duties they
demand, and gathering the Honey they present.

2. Obs. The stability of a gracious Soul depends upon the Wisdom, as well as
the Power of God. It would be a disrepute to the Almightiness of God, if that
should be totally vanquished which was introduced by his Mighty Arm, and rooted
in the Soul by an irresistible Grace. It would speak a want of Streng h to
maintain it, or a change of Resolution, and so would be no honor to the Wisdom
of his first design. It Is no part of the wisdom of an Artificer, to let a work
wherein he determined to show the greatness of his Sk^ll, to be dashed in
pieces, when he has power to preserve it. God designed every gracious Soul for
a piece of his workmanship Ephesians. 2.10.
: What, to have the Skill of his Grace defeated? If any Soul which he has
graciously conquered should be wrested from him, what could be thought, but
that his Power is enfeebled? If deserted by him, what could be imagined, but
that he repented of his labor, and altered his Counsel, as if rashly
undertaken? These Romans were rugged Pieces, and lay in a filthy quarry, when
God came first to smooth them; for so the Apostle represents them with the rest
of the Heathen, Romans 1.19. and would he throw them away, or leave them to the
power of his Enemy, after all his pains he had taken with them, to fit them for
his Building? Did he not foresee the designs of Satan against them; what
stratagems he would use to defeat his Purposes, and strip him of the honor of
his work; and would God so gratify his Enemy, and disgrace his own Wisdom? The
deserting of what has been acted is a real Repentance, and argues an
Imprudence in the first resolve and attempt. The Gospel is called, the Manifold
wisdom of God, Ephesians. 3.10. the frui^ of it in the heart of any Person, which is
a main design of it, has a Title to the same Character; and shall this Grace,
which is the product of this Gospel, and therefore the birth of Manifold
Wisdom, be suppressed? It Is at Gods hand we must seek our fixedness and
establishment, and act Faith upon these two Attributes of God. Power is no
ground to expect stability, without Wisdom interesting the Agent in it, and
finding out and applying the Means for it. Wisdom is naked without Power to
act, and Power is useless without Wisdom to direct: They are these two
Excellencies of the Deity, the Apostle here pitches the Hope and Faith of the
Converted Romans upon for their stability.

3. Obs. Perseverance of Believers in Grace, is a Gospel Doctrine. According to
my Gospel: My Gospel Ministerially, according to that Gospel Doctrine I have
taught you in this Epistle; (for, as the Prophets were Comments upon the Law,
so are the Epistles upon the Gospel:) This very Doctrine he had discoursed of
Romans 8.38, 39. where he tells them, that neither death nor life, the Terrors of
a cruel death, or the Allurements of an honorable and pleasant life, nor
Principalities and Powers, with all their subtilty and strength; not the things
we have before us, nor the Promises of a future felicity, by either Angels in
Heaven, or Devils in Hell; not the highest Angel, nor the deepest Devil, is
able to separate us, us Romans, from the love of God which is in Christ Jesus.
So that, According to my Gospel, may be according to that Declaration of the
Gospel, which I have made in this Epistle, which does not only promise the
first creating Grace, but the perfecting and crowning Grace; for not only the
being of Grace, but the health, liveliness, and perpetuity of Grace is the
fruit of the New Covenant, Jer. 32.40.

4. Observe, That the Gospel is the sole Means of a Christians Establishment.
According To my Gospel, that is, By my Gospel. The Gospel is the Instrumental
cause of our Spiritual life, it is the cause also of the Continuance of it; it is
the Seed whereby we were born, and the Milk whereby we are nourished 1 Pet.
1.23.
; it is the Power of God to salvation 1 Pet. 2.2.
, and therefore to all the degrees of it. John 17.17. Sanctify them by thy
Truth, or through thy Truth; by or through his Truth he sanctifies us, and by
the same Truth he establishes us: The first Sanctification, and the progress
of it, the first lineaments and the last colors, are wrought by the Gospel.
The Gospel therefore ought to be known, studied, and considered by us: It Is the
Charter of our Inheritance, and the security for our standing. The Law
acquaints us with our Duty, but contributes nothing to our strength and
settlement.

5. Observe, The Gospel is nothing else but the Revelation of Christ. Verse 25.
According to my Gospel, and the preaching of Jesus Christ: The discovery of the
Mystery of Redemption and Salvation, in and by him. It Is Genitivus objecti,
that Preaching wherein Christ is declared and set out, with the Benefits
accruing by him. This is the privilege the Wisdom o^ God reserved for the
latter Times, which the Old Testament-Church had only under a Vail.

6. It Is a part of the Excellency of the Gospel, that it had the Son of God for
its Publisher: The Preaching of Jesus Christ. It was first preached to Adam in
Paradise by God, and afterward published by Christ in Person to the
Inhabitants of Judea. It was not the Invention of Man, but Copied from the
bosom of the Father by him that lay in his Bosom. The Gospel we have, is the
same which our Savior himself preached when he was in the World: He preached
it not to the Romans; but the same Gospel he preached is transmitted to the
Romans. It therefore Commands our respect; who ever slights it, it is as much as
if he slighted Jesus Christ himself, were he in Person to sound it from his own
Lips. The validity of a Proclamation is derived from the Authority of the
Prince that dictates it and orders it; yet the greater the Person that
publishes it, the more dishonor is cast upon the Authority of the Prince that
enjoins it, if it be contemned. The Everlasting God ordained it, and the
Eternal Son published it.

7. The Gospel was of an Eternal Resolution, though of a temporary Revelation.
Verse 25. According to the Revelation of the Mystery, which was kept secret
since the World began. It Is an Everlasting Gospel. It was a Promise before the
world began, Tit. 1.2. It was not a new Invention, but only kept secret among
the Arcana, in the Breast of the Almighty. It was hidden from Angels, for the
depths of it are not yet fully made known to them; their desire to look into
it, speaks yet a deficiency in their Knowledge of it 1 Pet. 1.12.
. It was published in Paradise, but in such words as Adam did not fully
understand: It was both discovered and clouded in the Smoke of Sacrifices: It
was wrapped up in a Vail under the Law, but not opened till the Death of the
Redeemer: It was then plainly said to the Cities of Judah, Behold your God
comes. The whole Transaction of it between the Father and the Son, which is the
Spirit of the Gospel, was from Eternity; the Creation of the World was in order
to the manifestation of it. Let us not then regard the Gospel as a Novelty; the
consideration of it, as one of Gods Cabinet Rarities, should enhance our
Estimation of it. No Traditions of Men, no Inventions of vain Wits, that
pretend to be wiser than God, should have the same Credit with that which bears
date from Eternity.

8. Observe, That Divine Truth is Mysterious. According to the revelation of
the mystery, Christ manifested in the flesh. The whole Scheme of Godliness is a
Mystery. No Man or Angel could imagine, how two Natures so distant as the
Divine and Human, should be united; how the same Person should be Criminal and
Righteous; how a Just God should have a Satisfaction, and Sinful Man a
Justification; how the Sin should be punished, and the Sinner saved. None could
imagine such a way of Justification, as the Apostle in this Epistle declares:
It was a Mystery, when hid under the Shadows of the Law; and a Mystery to the
Prophets, when it sounded from their Mouths; they searched it, without being
able to comprehend it 1 Pet. 1.10, 11.
.

If it be a Mystery, it is humbly to be submitted to: Mysteries surmount Human
Reason. The study of the Gospel must not be with a yawning and careless frame.
Trades you call Mysteries, are not learned sleeping and nodding; Diligence is
required, we must be Disciples at Gods Feet. As it had God for the Author, so
we must have God for the Teacher of it; the Contrivance was his, and the
Illumination of our Minds must be from him. As God only manifested the Gospel,
so he only can open our Eyes to see the Mysteries of Christ in it.

In Verse 26. we may observe,

1. The Scriptures of the Old Testament verify the substance of the New, and
the New does evidence the Authority of the Old. By the Scriptures of the
Prophets made known. The Old Testament credits the New, and the New illustrates
the Old. The New Testament is a Comment upon the Prophetic part of the Old.
The Old shows the Promises and Predictions of God, and the New shows the
Performance: What was foretold in the Old, is fulfilled in the New; the
Predictions are cleared by the Events. The Predictions of the Old are Divine,
because they are above the Reason of Man to foreknow: None but an Infinite
Knowledge could foretell them, because none but an Infinite Wisdom could order
all things for the accomplishment of them.

The Christian Religion has then the surest Foundation, since the Scriptures
of the Prophets, wherein it is foretold, are of undoubted Antiquity, and owned
by the Jews and many Heathens, which are and were the great Enemies of Christ.
The Old Testament is therefore to be read for the strengthening of our Faith.
Our Blessed Savior himself draws the Streams of his Doctrine from the Old
Testament: He clears up the Promise of Eternal Life, and the Doctrine of the
Resurrection, from the words of the Covenant, I am the God of Abraham, etc.
Mat. 22.32. And our Apostle clears up the Doctrine of Justification by Faith
from Gods Covenant with Abraham, Romans 4. It must be read, and it must be read
as it is writ: It was writ to a Gospel End, it must be studied with a Gospel
Spirit. The Old Testament was writ to give Credit to the New, when it should be
manifested in the World. It must be read by us, to give strength to our Faith,
and establish us in the Doctrine of Christianity. How many view it as a bare
story, an Almanac out of date, and regard it as a dry Bone, without sucking
from it the Evangelical Marrow? Christ is, in Genesis, Abraham's Seed; in David's
Psalms and the Prophets, the Messiah and Redeemer of the World.

2. Observe the Antiquity of the Gospel. Is made manifest by the Scriptures of
the Prophets. It was of as Ancient a date as any Prophesy: The first Prophesy
was nothing else but a Gospel Charter; it was not made at the Incarnation of
Christ, but made manifest. It then rose up to its Meridian luster, and sprung
out of the Clouds, wherewith it was before obscured. The Gospel was preached to
the Ancients by the Prophets, as well as to the Gentiles by the Apostles; Heb.
4.2. Unto us was the Gospel preached, as well as unto them. To them first, to
us after; to them indeed more cloudy, to us more clear; but they as well as we,
were Evangeliz'd, as the word signifies.

The Covenant of Grace was the same in the Writings of the Prophets, and the
Declarations of the Evangelists and Apostles. Though by our Saviors
Incarnation, the Gospel Light was clearer, and by his Ascension, the Effusions
of the Spirit fuller and stronger; yet the Believers under the Old Testament,
saw Christ in the Swaddling Bands of Legal Ceremonies, and the Lattice of
Prophetical Writings; they could not else offer one Sacrifice, or read one
Prophesy with a Faith of the right stamp. Abraham's Justifying Faith had Christ
for its Object, though it was not so Explicit as ours, because the
Manifestation was not so clear as ours.

3. All Truth is to be drawn from Scripture. The Apostle refers them here to
the Gospel and the Prophets: The Scripture is the Source of Divine Knowledge;
not the Traditions of Men, nor Reason separate from Scripture. Whosoever brings
another Doctrine, coyns another Christ; nothing is to be added to what is
written, nothing detracted from it. He does not send us for Truth, to the
Puddles of Human Inventions, to the Enthusiasms of our Brain; not to the Sea of
Rome, no nor to the Instructions of Angels; but the Writings of the Prophets,
as they clear up the Declarations of the Apostles. The Church of Rome is not
made here the Standard of Truth; but the Scriptures of the Prophets are to be
the Touchstone to the Romans, for the Trial of the Truth of the Gospel.

4. How great is the Goodness of God? The Borders of Grace are enlarged to the
Gentiles, and not hid under the Skirts of the Jews. He that was so long the God
of the Jews, is now also manifest to be the God of the Gentiles: The Gospel is
now made known to all Nations, according to the Commandment of the Everlasting
God. Not only in a way of Common Providence, but Special Grace; in Calling them
to the Knowledge of himself, and a Justification of them by Faith, He has
brought Strangers to him, to the Adoption of Children, and lodged them under
the Wings of the Covenant, that were before alienated from him through the
universal Corruption of Nature. Now he has manifested himself a God of Truth,
mindful of his Promise in Blessing all Nations in the Seed of Abraham. The Fury
of Devils, and the Violence of Men, could not hinder the propagation of this
Gospel: Its Light has been dispersed as far as that of the Sun; and that Grace
that sounded in the Gentiles Ears, has bent many of their Hearts to the
Obedience of it.

5. Observe, That Libertinism and Licentiousness find no encouragement in the
Gospel. It was made known to all Nations for the Obedience of Faith. The
Goodness of God is published, that our Enmity to him may be parted with.
Christ's Righteousness is not offered to us to be put on, that we may roll more
warmly in our Lusts. The Doctrine of Grace commands us to give up our selves to
Christ, to be accepted through him, and to be ruled by him. Obedience is due to
God, as a Sovereign Lord in his Law; and it is due out of gratitude, as he is a
God of Grace in the Gospel. The discovery of a further perfection in God
weakens not the right of another, nor the obligation of the Duty the former
Attribute claims at our hands. The Gospel frees us from the Curse, but not from
the Duty and Service: We are delivered from the hands of our Enemies, that we
might serve God in Holiness and Righteousness, Luke 1.74. This is the will of
God in the Gospel, even our Sanctification. When a Prince strikes off a
Malefactors Chains, though he deliver him from the punishment of his Crime, he
frees him not from the Duty of a Subject: His Pardon adds a greater obligation,
than his Protection did before while he was Loyal. Christ's Righteousness gives
us a Title to Heaven; but there must be a Holiness to give us a fitness for
Heaven.

6. Observe, That Evangelical Obedience, or the Obedience of Faith, is only
acceptable to God. Obedience of Faith; Genitivus speciei, noting the kind of
Obedience God requires; an Obedience springing from Faith, animated and
influenced by Faith. Not Obedience of Faith, as though Faith were the Rule, and
the Law were abrogated; but to the Law as a Rule, and from Faith as a
Principle. There is no true Obedience before Faith: Heb. 11.6. Without Faith it
is impossible to please God; and therefore without Faith impossible to obey
him. A good Work cannot proceed from a defiled Mind and Conscience; and without
Faith every man's Mind is darkened, and his Conscience polluted Tit. 1.15.
. Faith is the Band of Union to Christ, and Obedience is the Fruit of Union; we
cannot bring forth fruit without being Branches John 15.4, 5.
, and we cannot be Branches without Believing. Legitimate Fruit follows upon
Marriage to Christ, not before it: Romans 7.4. That you should be married to
another, even to him that is raised from the dead, that you should bring forth
fruit unto God. All Fruit before Marriage is Bastard, and Bastards were
excluded from the Sanctuary. Our Persons must be first accepted in Christ,
before our Services can be acceptable; those Works are not acceptable where the
Person is not pardoned. Good Works flow from a pure Heart; but the Heart cannot
be pure before Faith. All the Good Works reckoned up in the 11th Chapter of the
Hebrews were from this Spring; those Heroes first believed, and then obeyed. By
Faith Abel was righteous before God, without it his Sacrifice had been no
better than Cains: By Faith Enoch pleased God, and had a Divine Testimony to
his Obedience before his Translation: By Faith Abraham offered up Isaac,
without which he had been no better than a Murderer. All Obedience has its
Root in Faith, and is not done in our own strength, but in the strength and
virtue of another, of Christ, whom God has set forth as our Head and Root.

7. Observe, Faith and Obedience are distinct, though inseparable: The
Obedience of Faith. Faith indeed is Obedience to a Gospel Command, which
enjoins us to believe; but it is not all our Obedience. Justification and
Sanctification are distinct Acts of God; Justification respects the Person,
Sanctification the Nature; Justification is first in order of Nature, and
Sanctification follows: They are distinct, but inseparable; every Justified
Person has a Sanctified Nature, and every Sanctified Nature supposes a
Justified Person. So Faith and Obedience are distinct; Faith as the Principle,
Obedience as the Product; Faith as the Cause, Obedience as the Effect; the
Cause and the Effect are not the same. By Faith we own Christ as our Lord; by
Obedience we regulate our selves according to his Command. The acceptance of
the Relation to him as a Subject, precedes the performance of our Duty: By
Faith we receive his Law, and by Obedience we fulfill it. Faith makes us Gods
Children, Gal. 3.26. Obedience manifests us to be Christ's Disciples, John 15.8.
Faith is the Touchstone of Obedience; the Touchstone, and that which is tried
by it, are not the same. But though they are distinct, yet they are
inseparable. Faith and Obedience are joined together; Obedience follows Faith
at the heels. Faith purifies the heart, and a pure Heart cannot be without pure
Actions. Faith unites us to Christ, whereby we partake of his Li^e; and a
living Branch cannot be without fruit in its season, and much fruit, John 15.5.
and that naturally from a newness of Spirit, Romans 7.9. not constrained by the
rigors of the Law, but drawn forth from a sweetness of Love; for Faith works by
Love. The Love of God is the strong Motive, and Love to God is the quickening
Principle; as there can be no Obedience without Faith, so no Faith without
Obedience.

After all this, the Apostle ends with the celebration of the Wisdom of God; To
God only wise, be glory through Jesus Christ for ever. The rich Discovery of
the Gospel, cannot be thought of by a gracious Soul, without a return of Praise
to God, and Admiration of his singular Wisdom.

Wise God.] His Power before, and his Wisdom here, are mentioned in conjunction
(in which his Goodness is included, as interested in his establishing Power) as
the ground of all the Glory and Praise God has from his Creatures.

Only Wise.] As Christ says, Mat. 19.17. None is good, but God; so the Apostle
says, None Wise, but God. As all Creatures are unclean in regard of his
Purity; so they are all Fools in regard of his Wisdom, yea the glorious Angels
themselves Job 4.18.
. Wisdom is the Royalty of God; the proper Dialect of all his Ways and Works.
No Creature can lay claim to it; He is so Wise, that he is Wisdom it self.

Be glory through Jesus Christ.] As God is only known in and by Christ, so he
must be only worshipped and celebrated in and through Christ. In him we must
Pray to him, and in him we must Praise him. As all Mercies flow from God
through Christ to us, so all our Duties are to be presented to God through
Christ.

In the Greek, verbatim, it runs thus; To the alone Wise God, through Jesus
Christ, to him be glory for ever. But we must not understand it, as if God were
Wise by Jesus Christ; but that Thanks is to be given to God through Christ,
because in and by Christ God has revealed his Wisdom to the World. The Greek
has a Repetition of the Article (...), not expressed in the Translation, To him
be glory. Beza expungeth this Article, but without reason, for (...) is as much
as (...), To him; and joining this, The only Wise God with the 25th Verse, To
him that is of Power to establish you; Reading it thus, To him that is of Power
to establish you, the only Wise God, leaving the rest in a Parenthesis, it runs
smoothly, To him be glory through Jesus Christ. And Crellius the Socinian
observes, that this Article (...), which some leave out, might be industriously
inserted by the Apostle, to show, that the Glory we ascribe to God, is also
given to Christ.

We may Observe, That neither in this place, nor any where in Scripture, is the
Virgin Mary, or any of the Saints, associated with God or Christ in the Glory
ascribed to them.

In the Words there is,

1. An Appropriation of Wisdom to God, and a Remotion of it from all Creatures;
Only wise God.

2. A Glorifying him for it.

The Point I shall insist upon, is,

That Wisdom is a transcendent Excellency of the Divine Nature. We have before
spoken of the Knowledge of God, and the Infiniteness of it: The next Attribute
is the Wisdom of God. Most, confound the Knowledge and Wisdom of God together;
but there is a manifest distinction between them in our conception.

I shall handle it thus; 1. Show what Wisdom is. Then lay down, 2. Some
Propositions about the Wisdom of God. And show, 3. That God is Wise; and only
Wise. 4. Wherein his Wisdom appears. 5. The Use.


I. What Wisdom is. Wisdom among the Greeks, first signified an eminent
Perfection in any Art or Mystery; so a good Statuary, Engraver, or Limner, was
called Wise, as having an excellent Knowledge in his particular Art. But
afterward the Title of Wise was appropriated to those that devoted themselves
to the contemplation of the highest things, that served for a Foundation to
Speculative Sciences A myrant. Moral. Iom. 3. p. 123.
. But ordinarily we count a Man a Wise Man, when he conducts his Affairs with
discretion, and governs his Passions with moderation, and carries himself with
a due proportion and harmony in all his concerns.

But in Particular, Wisdom consists,

1. In acting for a right End. The chiefest part of Prudence is in fixing a
right End, and in choosing fit Means, and directing them to that scope: To shoot
at random is a mark of Folly. As he is the wisest Man, that has the noblest
End and fittest Means; so God is Infinitely Wise; as he is the most excellent
Being, so he has the most excellent End. As there is none more excellent than
himself, nothing can be his End but himself: As he is the Cause of all, so he
is the End of all; and he puts a true Bias into all the Means he uses to hit
the Mark he aims at: Of him, and through him, and to him are all things, Romans
11.36.

2. Wisdom consists, in observing all Circumstances for Action. He is counted a
Wise man, that lays hold of the fittest Opportunities to bring his designs
about, that has the fullest foresight of all the little Intrigues which may
happen in a Business he is to manage, and Times every part of his Action in an
exact harmony with the proper Minutes of it. God has all the Circumstances of
things in one entire Image before him; he has a prospect of every little Creek
in any design. He sees what Second Causes will act, and when they will act this
or that; yea, he determines them to such and such Acts; so that it is
impossible he should be mistaken, or miss of the due Season of bringing about
his own Purposes. As he has more Goodness, than to deceive any; so he has
more Understanding, than to be mistaken in any thing. Hence the Time of the
Incarnation of our Blessed Savior, is called the Fullness of Time, the proper
Season for his coming. Every Circumstance about Christ was Timed according to
the Predictions of God; even so little a thing as not parting his Garment, and
the giving him Gall and Vinegar to drink: And all the Blessings he showrs down
upon his People, according to the Covenant of Grace, are said to come in his
season, Ezekiel. 34.25, 26.

3. Wisdom consists, In willing and acting according to the right Reason,
according to a right Judgment of things. We never count a Wilful man a Wise
man, but him only that acts according to a right Rule, when right Counsels are
taken and vigorously executed. The Resolves and Ways of God are not mere Will,
but Will guided by the Reason and Counsel of his own Infinite Understanding;
Ephesians. 1.11. Who works all things according to the counsel of his own will. The
Motions of the Divine Will are not rash, but follow the Proposals of the Divine
Mind: He chooses that which is fittest to be done, so that all his Works are
graceful, and all his Ways have a comeliness and decorum in them. Hence all his
Ways are said to be Judgment, Deuteronomy. 32.4. not mere Will.

Hence it appears, that Wisdom and Knowledge are two distinct Perfections,
Knowledge has its seat in the Speculative Understanding, Wisdom in the
Practical. Wisdom and Knowledge are evidently distinguished as two several
gifts of the Spirit in Man, 1 Cor. 12.8. To one is given by the Spirit the word
of Wisdom, to another the word of Knowledge by the same Spirit. Knowledge is an
understanding of general Rules, and Wisdom is a drawing Conclusions from those
Rules in order to particular cases. A Man may have the Knowledge of the whole
Scripture, and have all Learning in the Treasury of his Memory, and yet be
destitute of Skill to make use of them upon particular Occasions, and unty
those knotty Questions which may be proposed to him, by a ready application of
those Rules.

Again, Knowledge and Wisdom may be distinguished in our Conception, as two
distinct Perfections in God: The Knowledge of God is his Understanding of all
things; his Wisdom is the Skilful resolving and acting of all things. And the
Apostle, in his Admiration of him, owns them as distinct, Oh the depths of the
riches, both of the Wisdom and Knowledge of God, Romans 11.33. Knowledge is the
Foundation of Wisdom, and antecedent to it; Wisdom the Superstructure upon
Knowledge: Men may have Knowledge without Wisdom, but not Wisdom without
Knowledge; according to our common Proverb, The greatest Clerks are not the
wisest Men. All Practical Knowledge is founded in Speculation, either Secundum
rem, as in a Man; or Secundum rationem, as in God. They agree in this, that
they are both Acts of the Understanding; but Knowledge is the Apprehension of a
thing, and Wisdom is the Appointing and Ordering of things. Wisdom is the
splendour and luster of Knowledge shining forth in Operations, and is an Act
both of Understanding and Will; Understanding in Counselling and Contriving,
Will in Resolving and Executing: Counsel and Will are linked together, Ephesians.
1.11.

II. The Second thing is to lay down some Propositions in general, concerning
the Wisdom of God.

1. There is an Essential and a Personal Wisdom of God. The Essential Wisdom,
is the Essence of God; the Personal Wisdom, is the Son of God. Christ is called
Wisdom by himself, Luke 7.35. The Wisdom of God by the Apostle, 1 Cor. 1.24.
The Wisdom I speak of belongs to the Nature of God, and is considered as a
necessary Perfection. The Personal Wisdom is called so, because he opens to us
the Secrets of God. If the Son were that Wisdom whereby the Father is Wise, the
Son would be also the Essence whereby the Father is God. If the Son were the
Wisdom of the Father, whereby he is Essentially Wise; the Son would be the
Essence of the Father, and the Father would have his Essence from the Son,
since the Wisdom of God is the Essence of God; and so the Son would be the
Father, if the Wisdom and Power of the Father were originally in the Son.

2. Therefore Secondly, The Wisdom of God is the same with the Essence of God.
Wisdom in God is not a Habit added to his Essence, as it is in Man, but it is
his Essence. It Is like the splendour of the Sun, the same with the Sun it self;
or like the brightness of Crystal, which is not communicated to it by any
thing else, as the Brightness of a Mountain is by the Beam of the Sun, but it
is one with the Crystal it self. It Is not a Habit superadded to the Divine
Essence; that would be repugnant to the Simplicity of God, and speak him
compounded of diverse Principles; it would be contrary to the Eternity of his
Perfections: If he be Eternally Wise, his Wisdom is his Essence; for there is
nothing Eternal, but the Essence of God. Maimon. Mor. Part 1. cap. 53.
As the Sun melts some things, and hardens others; blackens some things, and
whitens others, and produces contrary qualities in different Subjects; yet it
is but one and the same quality in the Sun, which is the cause of those
contrary Operations: So the Perfections of God seem to be diverse in our
Conceptions, yet they are but one and the same in God. The Wisdom of God, is
God acting Prudently; as the Power of God, is God acting Powerfully, and the
Justice of God, is God acting Righteously: And therefore it is more truly said,
that God is Wisdom, Justice, Truth, Power, than that He is Wise, Just, True,
etc. as if he were compounded of Substance and Qualities. All the Operations of
God proceed from one Simple Essence; as all the Operations of the Mind of Man,
though various, proceed from one faculty of Understanding,

3. Wisdom is the Property of God alone. He is only Wise. It Is an Honor
peculiar to him. Upon the account that no Man deserved the Title of Wise, but
that it was a Royalty belonging to God Laert. lib. 1. Proem.
, Pythagoras would not be called (...), a Title given to their Learned Men; but
(...). The Name Philosopher, arose out of a respect to this transcendent
Perfection of God.

1. God is only Wise necessarily. As He is necessarily God, so he is
necessarily Wise; for the Notion of Wisdom is inseparable from the Notion of a
Deity. When we say God is a Spirit, is True, Righteous, Wise; we understand
that he is transcendently these, by an intrinsic and absolute necessity, by
virtue of his own Essence, without the Efficiency of any other, or any
Efficiency in and by him^^lf. God does not make himself Wise, no more than he
makes himself God. As ^e is a necessary Being in regard of his Life, so he is
necessarily Wise in regard o^ ^is Understanding. Synesius says, that God is
Essentiated, (...), by his Vnderstan^ing. He places the Substance of God in
Understanding and Wisdom: Wisdom is the first vital Operation of God. He can no
more be Unwise than he can be Untrue; for Folly in the Mind is much the same
with Falsity in Speech. Wisdom among Men is gained by Age and Experience,
furthered by Instructions and Exercise; but the Wisdom of God is his Nature. As
the Sun cannot be without Light, while it remains a Sun; and as Eternity cannot
be without Immortality; So neither can God be without Wisdom. As he only has
Immortality, 1 Timothy 6.16. not arbitrarily, but necessarily; so he only has
Wisdom: Not because he will be Wise, but because he cannot but be Wise. He
cannot but contrive Counsels, and exert Operations, becoming the Greatness and
Majesty of his Nature.

2. Therefore only Wise originally. God is (...). Men acquire Wisdom by the
loss of their fairest years; but his Wisdom is the Perfection of the Divine
Nature, not the birth of Study or the growth of Experience, but as necessary,
as Eternal, as his Essence. He goes not out of himself to search Wisdom: He
needs no more the Brains of Creatures in the contrivance of his Purposes, than
he does their Arm in the execution of them. He needs no Counsel, he receives no
Counsel from any; Romans 11.34. Who has been his Counselor? and Isai 40.14.
With whom took he counsel, and who instructed him, or taught him in the path of
Judgment, and taught him Knowledge, and showed to him the path of
Understanding? He is the only Fountain of Wisdom to others; Angels and Men have
what Wisdom they have, by communication from him. All created Wisdom is a spark
of the Divine Light, like that of the Stars borrowed from the Sun. He that
borrows Wisdom from another, and does not originally possess it in his own
Nature, cannot properly be called Wise. As God is the only Being, in regard
that all other Beings are derived from him; so he is only Wise, because all
other Wisdom slows from him. He is the Spring of Wisdom to all; none the
Original of Wisdom to him.

3. Therefore only Wise perfectly. There is no cloud upon his Understanding. He
has a distinct and certain Knowledge of all things that can fall under action:
As he has a perfect Knowledge without Ignorance, so he has a Beautiful Wisdom
without Mole or Wart. Men are wise, yet have not an Understanding so vast as to
grasp all things; nor a Perspicacity so clear, as to penetrate into the depths
of all Beings. Angels have more delightful and lively sparks of Wisdom, yet so
imperfect, that in regard of the Wisdom of God they are charged with folly, Job
4.18. Their Wisdom as well as their Holiness is veiled in the Presence of God.
It vanishes, as the glowing of a Fire does before the beauty of the Sun; or as
a Light of a Candle in the midst of a Sunshine contracts it self, and none of
its Rays are seen, but in the body of the Flame. The Angels are not perfectly
Wise, because they are not perfectly Knowing: The Gospel, the great Discovery
of Gods Wisdom, was hid from them for Ages.

4. Therefore only Wise universally. Wisdom in one Man is of one sort, in
another of another sort; one is a wise Tradesman, another a wise Statesman, and
another a wise Philosopher: One is wise in the business of the World, another
is wise in Divine Concerns. One has not so much of plenty of one sort, but he
may have a scantiness in another; one may be wise for Invention, and foolish
in. Execution; an Artificer may have skill to frame an Engine, and not skill to
use it: The ground that is fit for Olives, may not be fit for Vines; that will
bear one sort of Grain and not another. But God has an Universal Wisdom,
because his Nature is Wise; it is not limited, but hovers over every thing,
shines in every Being. His Executions are as wise as his Contrivances: He is
Wise in his Resolves, and wise in his Ways; Wise in all the varieties of his
Works of Creation, Government, Redemption. As his Will wills all things, and
his Power effects all things; so his wisdom is the universal Director of the
motions of his will, and the executions of his power: As his Righteousness is
the measure of the matter of his Actions, so his Wisdom is the Rule that
directs the manner of his Actions. The absolute power of God is not an unruly
power: His wisdom orders all things, so that nothing is done, but what is fit
and convenient, and agreeable to so excellent a Being: As he cannot do an
unjust thing because of his righteousness, so he cannot do an unwise act,
because of his infinite wisdom. Though God be not necessitated to any Operation
without himself, as to the Creation of any thing, yet supposing he will act,
his wisdom necessitates him to do that which is congruous, as his righteousness
necessitates him to do that which is just: So that though the will of God be
the principle, yet his wisdom is the rule of his Actions. We must in our
conceiving of the order, suppose wisdom antecedent to will: None that
acknowledges a God, can have such an impious thought, as to affix temerity and
rashness to any of his proceedings.

All his Decrees are drawn out of the infinite Treasury of Wisdom in himself.
Polhil. against Sherlock, p. 377.
He resolves nothing about any of his Creatures without Reason; but the reason
of his purposes is in himself, and springs from himself, and not from the
Creatures: There is not one thing that he wills, but he wills by counsel, and
works by counsel, Ephesians. 1.11. Counsel writ down every line, every letter, in his
eternal Book; and all the Orders are drawn out from thence by his wisdom and
will: What was illustrious in the contrivance, glitters in the execution. His
understanding and will are infinite; what is therefore the act of his will, is
the result of his understanding, and therefore rational: His understanding and
will join hands; there is no contest in God, will against mind, and mind
against will; they are one in God, one in his resolves, and one in all his
works.

5. Therefore he is only wise perpetually. As the wisdom of man is got by
ripeness of Age, so it is lost by decay of years; it is got by instruction, and
lost by dotage. The perfectest minds, when in the wane, have been darkened with
folly: Nebuchadnezzar that was wise for a man, became as foolish as a Brute.
But the Ancient of days is an unchangeable Possessor of Prudence; his wisdom is
a mirror of brightness, without a defacing spot. It was possessed by him in
the beginning of his ways, before his works of old, Prove. 8.22. and he can
never be dispossessed of it in the end of his works. It Is inseparable from him:
The Being of his Godhead may as soon cease, as the Beauty of his Mind; with him
is wisdom, Job 12.13. it is inseparable from him, therefore as durable as his
Essence. It Is a wisdom infinite, and therefore without increase or decrease in
it self. The experience of so many Ages in the Government of the World, has
added nothing to the immensity of it; as the shining of the Sun since the
Creation of the World, has added nothing to the light of that glorious Body.
As Ignorance never darkens his knowledge, so Folly never disgraces his
Prudence: God infatuates men, but neither Men nor Devils can infatuate God; he
is unerringly wise; his Counsel does not vary and flatter; it is not one day one
Counsel, and another day another, but it stands like an immovable Rock, or a
Mountain of Brass. The Counsel of the Lord stands for ever, and the thoughts of
his heart to all Generations, Psalm. 33.11.

6. He is only incomprehensibly wise. His thoughts are deep, Psalm. 92.5. His
judgments unsearchable, his ways past finding out, Romans 11.33. Depths that
cannot be fathomed. A splendour, more dazzling to our dimm minds, than the light
of the Sun to our weak eyes. The wisdom of one man may be comprehended by
another, and over comprehended; and often men are understood by others to be
wiser in their Actions, than they understand themselves to be. And the wisdom
of one Angel may be measured by another Angel of the same perfection. But as
the Essence, so the wisdom of God is incomprehensible to any Creature, God is
only comprehended by God: The secrets of wisdom in God are double to the
expressions of it in his works, Job 11.6, 7. Can thou by searching find out
God. There is an unfathomable depth in all his Decrees, in all his Works; we
cannot comprehend the reason of his Works, much less that of his Decrees, much
less that in his Nature; because his wisdom being infinite as well as his
power, can no more act to the highest pitch, than his power. As his power is
not terminated by what he has wrought, but he could give further testimonies
of it; so neither is his wisdom, but he could furnish us with infinite
expressions and pieces of his skill. As in regard of his Immensity, he is not
bounded by the limits of place; in regard of his Eternity, not measured by the
Minutes of Time; in regard of his Power, not terminated with this or that
number of Objects; so in regard of his Wisdom, he is not confined to this or
that particular mode of working; so that in regard of the reason of his
Actions, as well as the Glory and Majesty of his Nature, he dwells in
unapproachable light, 1 Timothy 6.16. and whatsoever we understand of his wisdom
in Creation and Providence, is infinitely less than what is in himself, and his
own unbounded Nature.

Many things in Scripture are declared chiefly to be the acts of the Divine
will, yet we must not think that they were acts of mere will without wisdom,
but they are represented so to us, because we are not capable of understanding
the infinite Reason of its acts: His Sovereignty is more intelligible to us
than his Wisdom. We can better know the Commands of a Superior, and the Laws
of a Prince, than understand the reason that gave birth to those Laws. We may
know the Orders of the Divine will, as they are published, but not the sublime
Reason ot his will. Though Election be an act of God's Sovereignty, and he has
no cause from without to determine him; yet his infinite wisdom stood not
silent while mere Dominion acted. Whatsoever God does, he does wisely, as well
as soveraignly; though that wisdom which lies in the secret places of the
Divine Being, be as incomprehensible to us, as the effects of his Sovereignty
and Power in the World are visible: God can give a reason of his proceeding,
and that drawn from himself, though we understand it not.

The causes of things visible lie hid from us; Does any man know how to
distinguish the seminal virtue of a small Seed from the Body of it, and in what
nook and corner that lies, and what that is that spreads it self in so fair a
Plant, and so many Flowers? Can we comprehend the Justice of God's proceedings
in the prosperity of the wicked, and the afflictions of the Godly? Yet as we
must conclude them the fruits of an unerring righteousness, so we must conclude
all his actions the fruits of an unspotted wisdom, though the concatenation of
all his counsels is not intelligible to us; for he is as essentially and
necessarily wise, as he is essentially and necessarily good and righteous.

God is not only so wise that nothing more wise can be conceived, but he is
more wise than can be imagined; something greater in all his Perfections than
can be comprehended by any Creature. It Is a foolish thing therefore to question
that which we cannot comprehend: we should adore it instead of disputing
against it; and take it for granted, that God would not order any thing, were
it not agreeable to the Sovereignty of his wisdom, as well as that of his will.
Though the reason of man proceed from the wisdom of God, yet there is more
difference between the reason of man, and the wisdom of God, than between the
light of the Sun, and the feeble shining of the Glowworm; yet we presume to
censure the ways of God, as if our purblind reason had a reach above him.

7. God is only wise infallibly. The wisest men meet with rubs in the way, that
make them fall short of what they aim at; they often design, and fail; then
begin again, and yet all their counsels end in smoke, and none of them arrive
at perfection. If the wisest Angels lay a plot, they may be disappointed; for
though they are higher and wiser than man, yet there is one higher and wiser
than they, that can check their Projects. God always compasses his end, never
fails of any thing he designs and aims at; all his undertakings are counsel and
will; as nothing can resist the efficacy of his will, so nothing can
countermine the skill of his counsel; There is no wisdom nor understanding nor
counsel against the Lord, Prove. 21.30. He compasses his ends by those actions
of Men and Devils, wherein they think to cross him; they shoot at their own
Mark, and hit his. Lucifer's plot by Divine wisdom fulfilled God's purpose
against Lucifer's mind. The counsel of Redemption by Christ, the end of the
Creation of the World, rode into the World upon the back of the Serpents
Temptation. God never mistakes the means, nor can there be any disappointments,
to make him vary his Counsels, and pitch upon other means than what before he
had ordained. His word that goes forth of his mouth shall not return to him
void, but it shall accomplish that which he pleases, and it shall prosper in
the thing whereto he sent it, Isa. 55.11. What is said of his word, is true of
his counsel, it shall prosper in the thing for which it is appointed; it cannot
be defeated by all the Legions of Men and Devils* for as he thinks, so shall it
come to pass; and as he has purposed, so shall it stand; The Lord has
purposed, and who shall disanul it? Isa. 14.24, 27. The wisdom of the Creature
is a drop from the wisdom of God, and is like a drop to the Ocean, and a shadow
to the Sun; and therefore is not able to mate the wisdom of God, which is
infinite and boundless. No wisdom is exempted from mistakes, but the Divine: He
is wise in all his Resolves, and never calls b^ck his words and purposes, Isa.
31.2.

III. The third General is to prove that God is wise.

This is ascribed to God in Scripture; Dan. 2.20. Wisdom and might are his;
Wisdom to contrive, and Power to effect. Culverwell light of Nature. p. 30.
Where should Wisdom dwell, but in the head of a Deity; and where should Power
triumph, but in the arm of Omnipotency? All that God does, he does
artificially, skilfully; whence he is called the Builder of the Heavens, Heb.
11.10. (...), an artificial and curious Builder, a Builder by Art. And that
word, Prove. 8.30. meant of Christ, Then I was by him as one brought up with
him; some render it, Then was I the curious Artificer; and the same word is
translated a cunning workman, Cant. 7.5. For this cause Counsel is ascribed to
God Isa. 46.10. Jer. 22.19. Great in counsel. Job 12.13. He has counsel and
understanding.
; not properly; for Counsel implies something of Ignorance, or Irresolution,
antecedent to the consultation, and a posture of will afterward, which was not
before. Counsel is properly a laborious deliberation, and a reasoning of
things: An invention of means for the attainment of the end, after a discussing
and reasoning of all the doubts which arise pro re nata, about the matter in
counsel: But God has no need to deliberate in himself, what are the best means
to accomplish his ends: He is never ignorant, or undetermined, what course he
should take, as men are before they consult. But it is an expression in
condescension to our Capacity, to signify that God does nothing but with
reason and understanding, with the highest prudence, and for the most glorious
ends, as men do after consultation, and the weighing of every foreseen
circumstance.

Though he acts all things Soveraignly by his will, yet he acts all things
wisely by his understanding; and there is not a decree of his will, but he can
render a satisfactory reason for in the face of Men and Angels. As he is the
Cause of all things, so he has the highest wisdom for the ordering of all
things. If wisdom among men be the knowledge of Divine and Human things, God
must be infinitely wise, since knowledge is most radiant in him; he knows what
Angels and Men do, and infinitely more; what is known by them obscurely, is
known by him clearly: What is known by man after it is done, was known by God
before it was wrought. By his wisdom as much as by any thing, he infinitely
differs from all his Creatures; as by wisdom Man differs from a Brute. We
cannot frame a notion of God, without conceiving him infinitely wise. We should
render him very inconsiderable, to imagine him furnished with an infinite
knowledge, and not have an infinite wisdom to make use of that knowledge; or to
fancy him with a mighty power, destitute of prudence. Knowledge without
prudence is an eye without motion; and power without discretion, is an arm
without a head; a hand to act, without understanding to contrive and model; a
strength to act, without reason to know how to act: It would be a miserable
notion of a God, to fancy him with a brutish and unguided power. The Heathens
therefore had, and could not but have this natural notion of God. Plato
therefore calls him Men's Eugub. per. Philosoph. lib. 1. cap. 5.
, and Cleanthes used to call God Reason, and Socrates thought the title of
(...) too magnificent to be attributed to any thing else but God alone.

Arguments to prove that God is wise.

Reas. 1. God could not be infinitely perfect without wisdom. A rational Nature
is better than an irrational Nature. A man is not a perfect man without reason;
how can God without it, be an infinitely perfect God. Wisdom is the most
eminent of all Virtues; all the other perfections of God without this, would be
as a body without an eye, a soul without understanding. A Christian's Graces
want their luster, when they are destitute of the guidance of wisdom: Mercy is
a feebleness, and Justice a cruelty, Patience a timerousness, and Courage a
madness, without the conduct of wisdom; so the Patience of God would be
cowardice, his Power an oppression, his Justice a tyranny, without wisdom as
the Spring and Holiness as the Rule. No attribute of God could shine with a due
luster and brightness without it. Power is a great perfection, but wisdom a
greater Licet magnum sit posse, majus tamen est sapere.
. Wisdom may be without much power, as in Bees and Ants; but power is a
tyrannical thing without wisdom and righteousness. The Pilot is more valuable
because of his skill, than the Gally Slave because of his strength; and the
conduct of a General more estimable than the might of a private Soldier.
Generals are chosen more by their skill to guide, than their strength to act;
What a Clod is a man without Prudence; what a Nothing would God be without it?
This is the Salt that gives relish to all other perfections in a Creature: This
is the Jewel in the Ring of all the Excellencies of the Divine Nature, and
Holiness is the splendour of that Jewel.

Now God being the first Being, possesses whatsoever is most noble in any
Being. If therefore Wisdom, which is the most noble perfection in any Creature,
were wanting to God, he would be deficient in that which is the highest
Excellency. God being the living God, as he is frequently termed in Scripture,
he has therefore the most perfect manner of living, and that must be a pure
and intellectual life: Being essentially living, he is essentially in the
highest degree of living. As he has an infinite life above all Creatures; so
he has an infinite intellectual life, and therefore an infinite Wisdom; whence
some have called God not sapientem, but super-sapientem Suarez. Vol. 1: lib. 1.
cap. 3 p. 10.
, not only wise, but above all wisdom.

Reas. 2. Without infinite Wisdom he could not govern the World. Without wisdom
in forming the Matter, which was made by Divine power, the World could have
been no other than a Chaos; and without wisdom in Government, it could have
been no other than a heap of Confusion; without wisdom the World could not have
been created in the posture it is. Creation supposes a determination of the
will putting power upon acting; the determination of the will supposes the
counsel of the understanding, determining the will: No work, but supposes
understanding as well as will in a rational Agent. As without skill things
could not be created, so without it things cannot be governed. Reason is a
necessary perfection to him that presides over all things: Without knowledge
there could not be in God a foundation for Government, and without wisdom there
could not be an exercise of Government; and without the most excellent wisdom,
he could not be the most excellent Governor. He could not be an universal
Governor, without a universal wisdom; nor the sole Governor without an
unimitable wisdom; nor an independent Governor without an original and
independent wisdom; nor a perpetual Governor without an incorruptible wisdom.
He would not be the Lord of the World in all points, without skill to order the
affairs of it. Power and wisdom are foundations of all Authority and
Government: Wisdom to know how to rule, and command; Power to make those
Commands obeyed: No regular Order could issue out without the first, nor could
any order be enforced without the second. A feeble wisdom, and a brutish power,
seldom or never produce any good effect. Magistracy without wisdom, would be a
frantic power, a rash conduct; like a strong arm when the eye is out, it
strikes it knows not what, and leads it knows not whither. Wisdom without
power, would be like a great body without feet Amirant. moral.
, like the knowledge of a Pilot that has lost his arm, who though he knows the
Rule of Navigation, and what Course to follow in his Voyage, yet cannot manage
the Helm: But when those two, wisdom and power are linked together, there
arises from both a fitness for Government: There is wisdom to propose an end,
and both wisdom and power to employ means that conduct to that end. And
therefore when God demonstrates to Job his right of Government, and the
unreasonableness of Job's quarrelling with his proceedings, he chiefly urges
upon him the consideration of those two excellencies of his Nature, power and
wisdom, which are expressed in his Works Chap. 38, 39, 40, 41.
. A Prince without wisdom, is but a Title without a Capacity to perform the
Office; no man without it is fit for government: Nor could God without wisdom
exercise a just Dominion in the World. He has therefore the higest wisdom,
since he is the universal Governor. That wisdom which is able to govern a
Family, may not be able to govern a City; and that wisdom which governs a City,
may not be able to govern a Nation or Kingdom, much less a World. The bounds of
God's government being greater than any, his wisdom for government must needs
surmount the wisdom of all. Amyrald. desert. The^l p. 111.
And though the Creatures be not in number actually infinite, yet they cannot
be well governed, but by one endowed with infinite Discretion. Providential
government can be no more without infinite wisdom, than infinite wisdom can be
without Providence.

Reas. 3. The Creatures working for an end, without their own knowledge,
demonstrates the wisdom of God that guides them. All things in the World work
for some end; the ends are unknown to them, though many of their ends are
visible to us. As there was some prime Cause, which by his power inspired them
with their several instincts, so there must be some supreme wisdom, which moves
and guides them to their end. As their Being manifests his power that endowed
them, so the acting according to the rules of their Nature, which they
themselves understand not, manifests his wisdom in directing them. Every thing
that acts for an end, must know that end, or be directed by another to attain
that end. The Arrow does not know who shoots it, or to what end it is shot, or
what Mark is aimed at; but the Archer that puts it in, and darts it out of the
Bow, knows. A Watch has a regular motion, but neither the Spring nor the
Wheels that move, know the end of their motion; no man will judge a wisdom to
be in the Watch, but in the Artificer that disposed the Wheels and Spring, by a
joint combination to produce such a motion for such an end. Does either the Sun
that enlivens the Earth, or the Earth that travels with the Plant, know what
Plant it produces in such a Soil, what temper it should be of, what fruit it
should bear, and of what color? What Plant knows its own medicinal qualities,
its own beautiful flowers, and for what use they are ordained? When it strikes
up its head from the Earth, does it know what proportion of them there will be?
Yet it produces all these things in a state of ignorance. The Sun warms the
Earth, concocts the humors, excites the virtue of it, and cherishes the Seeds,
which are cast into her lap, yet all unknown to the Sun or the Earth. Since
therefore that Nature, that is the immediate cause of those things, does not
understand its own quality, nor operation, nor the end of its action, that
which thus directs them must be conceived to have an infinite wisdom. When
things act by a Rule they know not, and move for an end they understand not,
and yet work harmoniously together for one end, that all of them, we are sure,
are ignorant of, it mounts up our minds to acknowledge the wisdom of that
supreme Cause, that has ranged all these inferior Causes in their order, and
imprinted upon them the Laws of their motions, according to the Ideas in his
own Mind, who orders the Rule by which they act, and the end for which they
act, and directs every motion according to their several Natures, and therefore
is possessed with infinite wisdom in his own Nature.

Reas. 4. God is the fountain of all wisdom in the creatures and therefore is
infinitely wise himself. As he has a fullness of being in himself, because the
streams of being are derived to other things from him; So he has a fullness of
wisdom, because he is the spring of wisdom to Angels and men. That Being must
be infinitely wise, from whence all other wisdom derives its original: For
nothing can be in the effect, which is not eminently in the cause; the cause is
always more perfect than the effect. If therefore the creatures are wise, the
Creator must be much more wise. If the Creator were destitute of wisdom, the
creature would be much more perfect than the Creator. If you consider the
wisdom of the Spider in her web, which is both her house and net; the artifice
of the Be in her Comb, which is both her chamber and granary; the provision of
the Pismire in her repositories for corn; the wisdom of the Creator is
illustrated by them; whatsoever excellency you see in any creature, is an Image
of some excellency in God. The skill of the artificer is visible in the fruits
of his Art; a workman transcribes his spirit in the work of his hands. But the
wisdom of rational creatures, as men, does more illustrate it: All Arts among
men are the rays of divine Wisdom shining upon them, and by a common gift of
the Spirit enlightening their minds to curious inventions, as Prove. 8.12. I
wisdom find out the knowledge of witty inventions; that is, I give a faculty to
men to find them out; without my wisdom, all things would be buried in darkness
and ignorance: Whatsoever wisdom there is in the World, it is but a shadow of
the wisdom of God, a small Rivulet derived, from him, a spark leaping out from
Uncreated Wisdom. Isa 54.16. He created the Smith that blows the coals in the
fire, and makes the Instruments: The skill to use those weapons in Warlike
Enterprises is from him, I have created the waster to destroy; It Is not meant
of creating their Persons, but communicating to them their Art; He speaks it
there to expel fear from the Church of all warlike preparations against them:
He had given Men the skill to form and use Weapons, and could as well strip
them of it, and defeat their purposes: The Art of husbandry is a fruit of
divine teaching, Isa. 28.24, 25. If those lower kinds of Knowledge, that are
common to all Nations, and easily learned by all, are discoveries of Divine
Wisdom, much more the nobler Sciences, intellectual and Political Wisdom, Dan.
2.21. He gives Wisdom to the wise, and knowledge to them that know
understanding; speaking of the more abstruse parts of knowledge The;
inspiration of the Almighty gives Understanding, Job. 32.8. Hence the Wisdom
which Solomon expressed in the Harlots case, 1 Kings 3.28. was in the Judgment of
all Israel, the Wisdom of God; that is, a fruit of Divine Wisdom, a beam
communicated to him from God. Every man's Soul is endowed more or less with
those noble qualities: The Soul of every man exceeds that of a Brute; If the
streams be so excellent, the Fountain must be fuller and clearer. The first
Spirit must infinitely more possess, what other Spirits derive from him by
Creation; Were the Wisdom of all the Angels in Heaven and men on Earth
collected in one Spirit, it must be infinitely less than what is in the Spring;
for no Creature can be equal to the Creator. As the highest Creature already
made, or that we can conceive may be made by Infinite Power, would be
infinitely below God in the Notion of a Creature, so it would be infinitely
below God in the Notion of Wise.

IV. The fourth Thing is, Wherein the Wisdom of God appears.

It appears (1.) In Creation, (2.) In Government, (3.) In Redemption.

1. In Creation. As in a Musical Instrument, there is first the skill of the
Workman in the frame; then the skill of the Musician in stringing it, proper
for such Musical Notes as he will express upon it; and after that the tempering
of the Strings by various stops to a delightful Harmony: So is the Wisdom of
God seen in framing the World, then in tuning it, and afterward in the motion
of the several Creatures. The Fabric of the World is called the Wisdom of God;
1 Cor. 1.21. After that in the Wisdom of God the World by Wisdom knew not God;
i. e. by the Creation the World knew not God; the framing Cause is there put
for the Effect and the Work framed: Because the Divine Wisdom stepped forth in
the Creatures to a public appearance, as if it had presented it self in a
visible shape to Man, giving Instructions in and by the Creatures, to know and
adore him. What we translate 1 Genesis 1. In the beginning God Created the Heaven
and the earth, the Targum expresses, In wisdom God created the Heaven and the
Earth. Both bear a stamp of this perfection on them: Omne opus naturae est opus
intelligentiae.
And when the Apostle tells the Romans, Romans 1.20. the invisible things of God
were clearly understood by the things that are made; the word he uses is,
(...), not (...); this signifies a work of labor, but (...), a work of skill,
or a Poem. The whole Creation is a Poem, every Species a Stanza, and every
individual Creature a Verse in it. The Creation presents us with a prospect of
the Wisdom of God, as a Poem does the Reader with the wit and fancy of the
Composer: By wisdom he created the Earth, Pro. 3.19. and stretched out the
Heavens by discretion, Jer. 10.12. There is not any thing so mean, so small,
but Glitters with a beam of Divine skill; and the consideration of them would
justly make every man subscribe to that of the Psalmist, O Lord, how manifold
are thy works! in Wisdom have thou made them all. Psalm. 104.24. All, the least
as well as the greatest, and the meanest as well as the noblest; even those
creatures which seem ugly and deformed to us, as Toads, etc. because they fall
short of those perfections which are the dowry of other Animals: In these there
is a footstep of Divine Wisdom, since they were not produced by him at random,
but determined to some particular end, and designed to some usefulness, as
parts of the World in their several natures and stations. God could never have
had a satisfaction in the review of his works, and pronounced them good or
comely, as he did, Genesis 1.31. had they not been agreeable to that eternal
original Copy in his own mind: It Is said he was refresh't, viz. with that
review, Exodus 31.17. which could not have been, if his piercing eye had found
any defect in any thing which had sprung out of his hand, or an unsutableness
to that end for which he Created them. He seems to do as a man that has made a
curious and polite work, with exact care to peer about every part and line, if
he could perceive any imperfection in it, to rectify the mistake: But no defect
was found by the infinitely wise God upon this second examination.

This Wisdom of the Creation appears,

(1.) In the variety, (2.) In the beauty, (3.) The fitness of every Creature
for its use, (4) The subordination of one Creature to another, and the joint
concurrence of all to one common end.

1. In the Variety. Psalm. 104.24. O Lord how manifold are thy works! How great
a variety is there (...) Animals and Plants, with a great variety of forms,
Shapes, Figurations, Colors, various smells, virtues and qualities! and this
rarity is produced from one and the same Matter, as Beasts and Plants from the
Earth; Genesis 1.11.24. Let the Earth bring forth living Creatures; and the Earth
brought forth grass and the herb yielding seed after his kind: Such diversity
of Fowl and Fish from the water; Genesis 1.20. Let the waters bring forth
abundantly the moving Creature that has life, and Fowl that may fly; Such a
beautiful and active variety from so dull a matter as the Earth; so solid a
variety from so fluid a matter as the Water; so noble a piece as the body of
man, with such variety of members, fit to entertain a more excellent Soul as a
guest, from so mean a matter as the dust of the ground, Genesis 2.7. This
extraction of such variety of forms out of one single and dull matter, is the
Chimistry of Divine wisdom: It Is a greater skill to frame noble Bodies of vile
Matter, as varieties of precious Vessels of Clay and Earth, than of a nobler
Matter, as Gold and Silver.

Again, all those varieties propagate their kind in every particular and
quality of their nature, and uniformly bring forth exact copies according to
the first pattern God made of the kind, Genesis 1.11.12.24. Consider also how the
same piece of ground is garnisht with Plants and Flowers of several virtues,
Fruits, Colors, Scents, without our being able to perceive any variety in the
Earth that breeds them, and not so great a difference in the Roots that bear
them. Add to this, the diversities of Birds of different Colors, Shapes,
Notes, consisting of various Parts, Wings like Oars to cut the Air, and Tails
as the Rudder of a Ship to guide their motion.

How various also are the Endowments of the Creatures? some have Vegetation,
and the power of growth; others have the addition of Sense, and others the
excellency of Reason; something wherein all agree, and something wherein all
differ; variety in unity, and unity in variety: The wisdom of the Workman had
not been so conspicuous, had there been only one degree of goodness: The
greatest skill is seen in the greatest variety.

The comeliness of the Body is visible in the variety of Members, and their
usefulness to one another; What an inform thing had Man been, had he been all
Ear, or all Eye? If God had made all the Stars to be Suns, it would have been a
demonstration of his Power, but perhaps less of his Wisdom; No Creatures, with
the Natures they now have, could have continued in being under so much heat:
There was no less Wisdom went to the frame of the least, than to the greatest
Creature. It speaks more art in a Limner to paint a Landscape exactly, than to
draw the Sun, though the Sun be a more glorious Body.

I might instance also in the different Characters and Features imprinted upon
the Countenances of Men and Women, the differences of Voices and Statures,
whereby they are distinguished from one another: These are the Foundations of
Order and of Human Society and Administration of Justice; what Confusion would
have been, if a grown-up Son could not be known from his Father, the Magistrate
from the Subject, the Creditor from the Debtor, the Innocent from the Criminal?
The Laws God has given to Mankind, could not have been put in execution: This
variety speaks the wisdom of God.

2. The wisdom of the Creation appears in the beauty and order and situation
of the several Creatures. Eccles. 3.11. He has made every thing beautiful in
his time. As their Being was a fruit of Divine Power, so their Order is a fruit
of Divine wisdom. All Creatures are as Members in the great Body of the World,
proportioned to one another, and contributing to the beauty of the whole;
Amyraut. moral. Vol. 1. p. 257.
so that if the particular forms of every thing, the union of all for the
Composition of the World, and the Laws which are established in the Order of
Nature for its conservation, be considered, it would ravish us with an
admiration of God: All the Creatures are as so many Pictures or Statues,
exactly framed by line; Psalm. 19.4. Their Line is gone through all the Earth;
Their Line, a measuring Line, or a Carpenters Rule, whereby he proportions
several pieces to be exactly linkt and coupled together. Their Line, that is,
their harmonious proportion, and the instruction from it is gone forth through
all the Earth. Upon the account of this harmony, some of the ancient Heathens
framed the Images of their Gods with Musical Instruments in their hands,
signifying tha^ God wrought all things in a due proportion Mountag. against
Seldom, p. 281. Plutarch. calls God (...), he says, nothing was made without
music.
.

The Heavens speak this wisdom in their Order.

The Revolutions of the Sun and Moon determine the Seasons of the Year, and
make Day and Night in an orderly Succession. The Stars beautify the Heavens,
and influence the Earth, and keep their Courses, Judges 5.20. They keep their
Stations without interfering with one another; and though they have rould about
for so many Ages, they observe their distinct Laws, and in the variety of their
Motions have not disturbed one another Functions.

Charlton Light of Nature, p. 57.
The Sun is set as the heart in the midst of this great Body, to afford warmth
to all: Had it been set lower, it had long since turned the Earth into flame
and ashes: Had it been placed higher, the Earth would have wanted the
nourishment and refreshment necessary for it. Too much nearness had ruined the
Earth by parching heat, and too great a distance had destroyed the Earth by
starving it with cold.

The Sun has also its appointed Motion; had it been fixed without motion, half
of the Earth had been unprofitable; there had been a perpetual darkness in a
moiety of it; nothing had been produced for nourishment, and so it had been
rendered uninhabitable: But now by this motion, it visits all the Climates of
the World, runs its Circuit, so that nothing is hid from the heat thereof,
Psalm. 19.6. It imparts its virtue to every Corner of the World in its daily and
yearly visits. Had it been fixed, the Fruits of the Earth under it had been
parch't and destroyed before their Maturity; but all those Inconveniences are
provided against by the perpetual Motion of the Sun.

This Motion is orderly Daille. m^l. part. 1 p. 483.
; It makes its daily Course from East to West, its yeary Motion from North to
South: It goes to the North, till it comes to the Point God has set it, and
then turns back to the South, and gains some point every day: It never rises
nor sets in the same place one day, where it did the day before. The World is
never without its light; some see it Rising the same moment we see its Setting.

The Earth also speaks the Divine wisdom; it is the Pavement of the World, as
the Heaven is the Ceiling of Fretwork. Amyraut. ^^dic^in. p. 9.
It Is placed lowermost, as being the heaviest Body, and sit to receive the
weightiest Matter, and provided as an Habitation proper for those Creatures,
which derive the Matter of their Bodies from it, and partake of its Earthy
Nature; and garnisht with other Creatures for the profit and pleasure of man.

The Sea also speaks the same Divine Wisdom. He strengthened the Fountains of
the Deep, and gave the Sea a decree, that it should not pass his Command, Prove.
8.28, 29. He has given it certain Bounds, that it should not overflow the
Earth, Job 28.11. It contains it self in the situation wherein God has placed
it, and does not transgress its bounds. What if some part of a Country, a
little Spot, has been overflowed by it, and groaned under its Waves? yet for
the main, it retains the same Channels wherein it was at first lodged.

All Creatures are clothed with an outward Beauty, and endowed with an inward
Harmony; there is an agreement in all parts of this great Body; every one is
beautiful and orderly; but the Beauty of the World results from all of them
disposed and linkt together.

3. This Wisdom is seen in the fitness of every thing for its end, and the
usefulness of it. Divine Wisdom is more illustrious in the fitness and
usefulness of this great variety, than in the Composure of their distinct
parts: As the Artificers Skill is more eminent in fitting the Wheels, and
setting them in order for their due motion, than in the external Fabric of the
Materials which compose the Clock.

After the most diligent inspection, there can be found nothing in the Creation
unprofitable; nothing but is capable of some Service, either for the support of
our Bodies, recreation of our Senses, or Moral Instruction of our Minds: Not
the least Creature, but is formed and shaped and furnished with Members and
Parts, in a due proportion for its end and service in the World; nothing is
superfluous, nothing defective.

The Earth is fitted in its parts Amyrant. sur diverses Text. p. 127.
; the Valleys are appointed for Granaries, the Mountains to shadow them from
the scorching heat of the Sun; the Rivers like veins, carry refreshment to
every Member of this Body; Plants and Trees thrive on the face of the Earth,
and Metals are engendered in the Bowels of it, for Materials for Building and
other uses for the service of Man. There he causes the Grass to grow for the
Cattle, and Herb for the Service of Man, that he may bring forth food out of
the Earth, Psalm. 104.14.

The Sea is fitted for use; it is a Fish Pond for the Nourishment of Man; a
Boundary for the dividing of Lands and several Dominions; It joins together
Nations far distant: A great Vessel for Commerce, Psalm. 104.26. There go the
Ships. It affords Vapors to the Clouds, wherewith to water the Earth, which
the Sun draws up, separating the finer from the salter parts, that the Earth
may be fruitful, without being burdened with barrenness by the salt. The Sea
has also its Salt, its ebbs and floods; the one as Brine, the other as Motion,
to preserve it from Putrification, that it may not be Contagious to the rest of
the World.

Showers are appointed to refresh the Bodies of living Creatures, to open the
Womb of the Earth, and water the Ground to make it fruitful, Psalm. 104.3. The
Clouds therefore are called the Chariots of God; he rides in them in the
manifestation of his goodness and wisdom.

Lessius.
Winds are fitted to purify the Air, to preserve it from Putrefaction; to
carry the Clouds to several parts, to refresh the parched Earth, and assist her
Fruits: And also to serve for the Commerce of one Nation with another by
Navigation. God in his wisdom and goodness walks upon the wings of the Wind,
Psalm. 104.3.

Daille melan. part. 2. p. 472, 473.
Rivers are appointed to bathe the Ground, and render it fresh and lively; they
fortify Cities, are the limits of Countries, serve for Commerce; they are the
Watring-pots of the Earth, and the Vessels for Drink for the living Creatures
that dwell upon the Earth. God cut those Channels for the wild Asses, the Beasts
of the Desert, which are his Creatures as well as the rest, Psalm. 104.10, 12,
13.

Trees are appointed for the Habitations of Birds, Shadows for the Earth,
Nourishment for the Creatures, Materials for Building, and Fuel for the relief
of man against Cold.

The Seasons of the Year have their use; the Winter makes the Juice retire into
the Earth, fortifies Plants, and fixes their Roots: It moystens the Earth that
was dried before by the heat of Summer, and cleanses and prepares it for a new
fruitfulness. The Spring calls out the Sap in new Leaves and Fruit: The Summer
consumes the superfluous moisture, and produces Nourishment for the
Inhabitants of the World.

Daille melang. part. 1. p. 477, etc.
The Day and Night have also their usefulness: The Day gives Life to Labor, and
is a guide to Motion and Action. Psalm. 104.23. The Sun arises, man goes forth
to his labor until the Evening. It warms the Air, and quickens Nature; without
Day the World would be a Chaos, an unseen Beauty. The Night indeed casts a Vail
upon the bravery of the Earth, but it draws the Curtains from that of Heaven;
though it darkens below, it makes us see the Beauty of the World above, and
discovers to us a glorious part of the Creation of God, the Tapistry of Heaven,
and the Motion of the Stars, hid from us by the eminent light of the Day. It
procures a Truce from Labor, and refreshes the Bodies of Creatures, by
recruiting the Spirits which are scattered by watching. It prevents the ruin of
Life, by a reparation of what was wasted in the Day. It takes from us the sight
of Flowers and Plants, but it washes their Face with Dews for a new Appearance
next Morning. The length of the Day and Night, is not without a Mark of Wisdom;
were they of a greater length, as the length of a Week or Month, the one would
too much dry, and the other too much moisten; and for want of Action, the
Members would be stupefied. The perpetual Succession of Day and Night, is an
Evidence of the Divine Wisdom, in tempering the travel and rest of Creatures.
Hence the Psalmist tells us, Psalm. 74.16, 17. The day is thine, and the night
is thine; thou have prepared the light of the Sun, and made Summer and Winter;
i. e. they are of God's framing, not without a wise counsel and end.

Hence let us ascend to the Bodies of living Creatures, and we shall find every
Member fitted for use. What a Curiosity is there in every Member? Every one
fitted to a particular use in their situation, form, temper, and mutual
agreement for the good of the whole: The Eye to direct, the Ear to receive
Directions from others, the Hands to act, the Feet to move. Every Creature has
Members fitted for that Element wherein it resides: And in the Body, some parts
are appointed to change the Food into Blood, others to refine it, and others to
distribute and convey it to several parts for the maintenance of the whole: The
Heart to mint vital Spirits for preserving Life, and the Brain to coin Animal
Spirits for Life and Motion; the Lungs to serve for the cooling the Heart,
which else would be parcht as the ground in Summer. The Motion of the Members
of the Body by one act of the Will, and also without the Will by a natural
Instinct, is an admirable Evidence of Divine Skill in the Structure of the
Body; so that well might the Psalmist cry out, Psalm. 139.14. I am fearfully and
wonderfully made.

But how much more of this Divine Perfection is seen in the Soul? A Nature
furnished with a Faculty of Understanding to judge of things, to gather in
things that are distant, and to reason and draw Conclusions from one thing to
another, with a Memory to treasure up things that are past, with a Will to
apply it self so readily to what the Mind judges fit and comely, and fly so
speedily from what it judges ill and hurtful. The whole World is a Stage, every
Creature in it has a part to act, and a Nature suited to that part and end it is
designed for; and all concur in a joint Language to publish the Glory of Divine
Wisdom, they have a Voice to proclaim the Glory of God, Psalm. 19.1, 3. And it
is not the least part of God's Skill, in framing the Creatures so, that upon
Man's Obedience, they are the Channels of his Goodness; and upon Man's
Disobedience, they can in their Natures be the Ministers of his Justice for the
punishing of offending Creatures.

4. Fourthly, This Wisdom is apparent in the linking all these useful parts
together, so that one is subordinate to the other for a common end. All parts
are exactly suited to one another, and every part to the whole, though they are
of different Natures, as Lines distant in themselves, yet they meet in one
common Center, the good and the preservation of the Universe; they are all
joynted together, as the word translated framed Heb. 11.3.
signifies; knit by fit Bands and Ligaments to contribute mutual Beauty,
Strength and Assistance to one another; like so many Links of a Chain coupled
together, that though there be a distance in place, there is a unity in regard
of connection and end, there is a consent in the whole. Hosea 2.21, 22. The
Heavens hear the Earth, and the Earth hears the Corn, and the Wine, and the
Oil. The Heavens communicate their qualities to the Earth, and the Earth
conveys them to the Fruits she bears: Dalle 15. Sermon. p. 17^.
The Air distributes Light, Wind and Rain to the Earth; the Earth and the Sea
render to the Air Exhalations and Vapors, and all together charitably give to
the Plants and Animals that which is necessary for their nourishment and
refreshment. The Influences of the Heavens animate the Earth, and the Earth
affords matter in part for the Influences it receives from the Regions above.
Living Creatures are maintained by Nourishment; Nourishment is conveyed to them
by the Fruits of the Earth; the Fruits of the Earth are produced by means of
Rain and Heat; Matter for Rain and Dew is raised by the heat of the Sun; and
the Sun by its motion distributes heat and quickening virtue to all parts of the
Earth. So Colors are made for the pleasure of the Eye, Sounds for the delight
of the Ear: Light is formed, whereby the Eye may see the one, and Air to convey
the Species of Colors to the Eye, and Sound to the Ear; all things are like
the Wheels of a Watch compacted: And though many of the Creatures be endowed
with contrary qualities, yet they are joined in a Marriage-knot for the Public
Security, and Subserviency to the Preservation and Order of the Universe: As
the variety of Strings upon an Instrument, sending forth various and distinct
sounds, are tempered together, for the framing excellent and delightful Airs.
In this universal conspiring of the Creatures together to one end, is the
wisdom of the Creator apparent; in tuning so many Contraries as the Elements
are, and preserving them in their Order, which if once broken, the whole Frame
of Nature would crack, and fall in pieces; all are so interwoven and inlaid
together, by the Divine Workmanship, as to make up one entire Beauty in the
whole Fabric: As every part in the Body of Man has a distinct Comeliness, yet
there is besides, the Beauty of the whole, that results from the union of
diverse parts exactly fashioned to one another, and linkt together.

By the way,

Use. How much may we see of the Perfection of God in every thing that presents
it self to our eyes? And how should we be convinced of our unworthy neglect of
ascending to him with reverent and admiring thoughts, upon the prospect of the
Creatures? What dull Scholars are we, when every Creature is our Teacher, every
part of the Creature a lively Instruction! Those things that we tread under our
feet, if used by us according to the full design of their Creation, would
afford rich matter, not only for our heads, but our hearts. As Grace does not
destroy Nature, but elevate it, so neither should the fresher and fuller
discoveries of Divine Wisdom in Redemption, deface all our thoughts of his
Wisdom in Creation. Though the greater Light of the Sun, obscures the lesser
sparkling of the Stars, yet it gives way in the Night to the discovery of them,
that God may be seen, known, and considered in all his Works of Wonder, and
Miracles of Nature. No part of Scripture is more spiritual than the Psalms;
none filled with clearer Discoveries of Christ in the Old Testament; yet how
often do the Penmen consider the Creation of God, and find their Meditations on
him to be sweet, as considered in his Works? Psalm. 104.34. My meditation of him
shall be sweet. When? why, after a short History of the Goodness and Wisdom of
God in the Frame of the World, and the Species of the Creatures.

2. The wisdom of God appears in his Government of his Creatures. The regular
motion of the Creatures speaks for this Perfection, as well as the exact
Composition of them. If the exquisiteness of the Frame conducts us to the skill
of the Contriver; the exactness of their Order, according to his Will and Law,
speaks no less the wisdom of the Governor. It cannot be thought that a rash
and irrational Power presides over a World so well disposed: The disposition of
things has no less characters of Skill, than the Creation of them. No man can
hear an excellent Lesson upon a Lute, but must presently reflect upon the Art
of the Person that touches it. The Prudence of man appears in wrapping up the
Concerns of a Kingdom in his mind, for the well-ordering of it; and shall not
the wisdom of God shine forth, as he is the Director of the World?

I shall omit his Government of Inanimate Creatures, and confine the Discourse
to his Government of Man, as Rational, as Sinful, as Restored.

1. In his Government of man as a Rational Creature.

1. In the Law he gives to man. Wisdom framed it, though Will enacted it. The
will of God is the Rule of Righteousness to us, but the wisdom of God is the
Foundation of that Rule of Righteousness which he prescribes us. Castellio
Dialog. l. 4. p. 46.
The Composure of a Musician is the Rule of singing to his Scholars; yet the
Consent and Harmony in that Composure, derives not it self from his will, but
from his understanding; he would not be a Musician, if his Composures were
contrary to the Rules of true Harmony: So the Laws of men are composed by
wisdom, though they are enforced by will and authority.

The Moral Law, which was the Law of Nature, the Law imprinted upon Adam, is so
framed, as to secure the Rights of God as Supreme, and the Rights of Men in
their distinctions of Superiority and Equality: It Is therefore called holy and
good, Romans 7.12. holy, as it prescribes our duty to God in his worship; good,
as it regulates the offices of human life, and preserves the common interest of
Mankind.

1. It Is suited to the Nature of Man. As God has given a Law of Nature, a fixed
Order to Inanimate Creatures, so he has given a Law of Reason to Rational
Creatures: Other Creatures are not capable of a Law differencing good and evil,
because they are destitute of Faculties and Capacities to make distinction
between them. It had not been agreeable to the wisdom of God to propose any
Moral Law to them, who had neither understanding to discern, nor will to choose.
It Is therefore to be observed, that whilst Christ exhorted others to the
embracing his Doctrine, yet he exhorted not little Children, though he took
them in his Arms, because though they had Faculties, yet they were not come to
such a Maturity, as to be capable of a Rational Instruction. But there was a
necessity for some Command for the government of man; since God had made him a
Rational Creature, it was not agreeable to his wisdom to govern him as a Brute,
but as a Rational Creature, capable of knowing his Precepts, and voluntarily
walking in them; and without a Law, he had not been capable of any exercise of
his Reason in Services respecting God.

He therefore gives him a Law with a Covenant annexed to it, whereby man is
obliged to Obedience, and secured of a Reward. This was enforced with severe
Penalties, Death, with all the Horrors attending it, to deterr him from
Transgression, Genesis 2.17. wherein is implied a Promise of continuance of Life,
and all its Felicities, to allure him to a mindfulness of his Obligation. So
perfect a Hedge did Divine Wisdom set about him, to keep him within the bounds
of that Obedience, which was both his Debt and Security, that wheresoever he
looked, he saw either something to invite him, or something to drive him to the
payment of his Duty, and perseverance in it. Thus the Law was exactly framed to
the Nature of man; man had twisted in him a desire of Happiness; the Promise
was suited to cherish this natural Desire. He had also the Passion of Fear; the
proper Object of this was any thing destructive to his Being, Nature, and
Felicity; this the threatening met with. In the whole it was accommodated to man
as rational: Precepts to the Law in his mind, Promises to the natural Appetite,
Threatenings to the most prevailing Affection, and to the implanted Desires of
preserving both his Being and Happiness in that Being. These were rational
Motives, fitted to the nature of Adam, which was above the life God had given
Plants, and the sense he had given Animals.

The Command given man in Innocence, was suited to his strength and power; God
gave him not any Command, but what he had ability to observe: and Since we want
not power to forbear an Apple in our corrupted and impotent State, he wanted
not strength in his state of Integrity. The Wisdom of God Commanded nothing,
but what was very easy to be observed by him, and inferior to his natural
Ability. It had been both unjust and unwise to have commanded him to fly up to
the Sun, when he had not Wings; or stop the Course of the Sea, when he had not
strength.

2. It Is suited to the happiness and benefit of man. God's Laws are not an act
of mere Authority respecting his own Glory, but of wisdom and goodness
respecting man's Benefit. They are perfective of man's Nature, conferring a
Wisdom upon him, rejoicing his Heart, enlightening his eyes, Psalm. 19.7, 8.
affording him both a knowledge of God, and of himself. To be without a Law, is
for man to be as Beasts, without Justice and without Religion: Other things are
for the good of the Body, but the Laws of God for the good of the Soul; the
more perfect the Law, the greater the benefit. The Laws given to the Jews were
the honor and excellency of that Nation; Deuteronomy. 1.8. What Nation is there so
great, that has statutes and Judgments so righteous? They were made Statesmen
in the Judicial Law, Ecclesiastics in the Ceremonial, honest men in the Second
Table, and Divine in the First. All his Laws are suited to the true satisfaction
of man, and the good of Human Society. Had God framed a Law only for one
Nation, there would have been the Characters of a particular Wisdom; but now an
universal wisdom appears, in accommodating his Law, not only to this or that
particular Society or Corporation of men, but to the benefit of all mankind in
the variety of Climates, and Countries wherein they live: Every thing that is
disturbing to Human Society is provided against; nothing is enjoined, but what
is sweet, rational and useful: It orders us not to attempt any thing against
the life of our Neighbor, the honor of his Bed, propriety in his Goods, and
the clearness of his Reputation; and if well observed, would alter the face of
the World, and make it look with another hue. The World would be altered from a
brutish to a human World: It would ch^nge Lions and Wolves, men of Lion-like
and Wolvish disposition, into reason and sweetness. And because the whole Law
is sum'd up in love, it obliges us to endeavor the preservation of one
another Beings, the favoring of one another Interests, and increasing the
Goods, as much as Justice will permit, and keeping up one another Credits;
because love, which is the Soul of the Law, is not shown by a cessation from
action, but signifies an ardor upon all occasions in doing good. I say were
this Law well observed, the World would be another thing than it is. It would
become a Religious Fraternity, the Voice of Enmity and the Noise of Groans and
Cursings would not be heard in our Streets: Peace would be in all Borders;
plenty of Charity in the midst of Cities and Countries; Joy and singing would
sound in all habitations. Man's advantage was designed in Gods Laws, and does
naturally result from the observance of them. God so ordered them by his
Wisdom, that the obedience of man should draw forth his Goodness, and prevent
those smarting Judgments, which were necessary to reduce the Creature to order,
that would not voluntarily continue in the order God had appointed. The Laws of
men are often unjust, oppressive, cruel; sometimes against the Law of nature:
But an universal wisdom and righteousness glitters in the Divine Law. There is
nothing in it, but what is worthy of God, and useful for the Creature; so that
we may well say with Job, Who teaches like God, Job. 36.22. or as some render
it, who is a lawgiver like God? Who can say to him, thou have wrought iniquity
or folly among men? His Precepts were framed for the preservation of man in
that rectitude wherein he was Created, in that likeness to God wherein he was
first made, that there might be a correspondence between the Integrity of the
Creature and the Goodness of his Creator, by the Obedience of man; that man
might exercise his Faculties in Operations worthy of him, and beneficial to the
World.

3. The Wisdom of God is seen in suting to Laws to the Consciences, as well as
the Interest of all Mankind. Romans 2.14. The Gentiles do by nature the things
contained in the Law; so great an affinity there is between the wise Law and
the Reason of man.

There is a natural Beauty emerging from them, and darting upon the Reasons,
and Consciences of men, which dictates to them that this Law is worthy to be
observed in it self. The two main Principles of the Law, the Love and worship
of God, and doing as we would be done by, have an indelible impression in the
Consciences of all men in regard of the Principle, though they are not sutably
expressed in the Practice. Were there no Law outwardly published, yet every man's
Conscience would dictate to him, that God was to be acknowledged, worshipped,
loved, as naturally as his Reason would acquaint him that there was such a
Being as God. This sutableness of them to the Consciences of men, is manifest,
in that the Laws of the best governed Nations among the Heathen have had an
agreement with them. Nothing can be more exactly composed, according to the
Rules of right and exact Reason than this; no man but approves of something in
it, yea of the whole when he exercises that dimm Reason which he has. Suppose
any man, (not an absolute Atheist) he cannot but acknowledge the reasonableness
of worshipping God. Grant him to be a Spirit, and it will presently appear
absurd to represent him by any Corporeal Image, and derogate from his
Excellency by so mean a resemblance; with the same easiness he will grant a
reverence due to the Name of God; that we must not serve our turn of him, by
calling him to witness to a lie in a solemn Oath. That as Worship is due to
him, so that some stated time is a circumstance necessary to the performance of
that Worship. And as to the Second Table, will any man in his right reason
quarrel with that Command that engages his Inferiors to honor him; that
secures his Being from a violent murder, and his goods from unjust rapine? and
though by the fury of his Lusts he break the Laws of Wedlock himself, yet he
cannot but approve of that Law, as it prohibits every man from doing him the
like injury and disgrace. The sutableness of the Law to the Consciences of men,
is further evidenced by those furious reflections and strong alarms of
Conscience upon a transgression of it, and that in all parts of the World, more
or less in all men: So exactly has Divine wisdom fitted the Law to the Reason
and Consciences of men, as one Tally to another. Indeed, without such an
agreement, no man's Conscience could have any ground for a Hue and Cry, nor need
any man be startled with the Records of it. This manifests the wisdom of God in
framing his Law so, that the Reasons and consciences of all men do one time or
other subscribe to it. What Governor in the World is able to make any Law
distinct from this revealed by God, that shall reach all places, all persons,
all Hearts?

We may add to this the extent of his Commands in ordering goodness at the
root, not only in action but affection; not only in the motion of the Members,
but the disposition of the Soul; which suting a Law to the inward frame of man,
is quite out of the compass of the wisdom of any Creature.

4. His Wisdom is seen in the encouragements he gives for the studying and
observing his will, Psalm. 19.11. In keeping thy Commandments there is great
reward. The variety of them; there is not any particular Genius in man, but may
find something suitable to win upon him in the revealed will of God. There is a
strain of Reason to satisfy the Rational; of Eloquence, to gratify the the
Fanciful; of Interest to allure the Selfish; of Terror, to startle the
Obstinate. As a skilful Angler stores himself with Baits, according to the
Appetites of the sorts of fish he intends to catch; so in the Word of God,
there are varieties of Baits, according to the varieties of the Inclinations of
men; Threatenings to work upon Fear; Promises to work upon Love; Examples of
holy men set out for Imitation; and those plainly, neither his Threatenings nor
his Promises are dark as the Heathen Oracles; but peremptory, as becomes a
Sovereign Law giver; and plain, as was necessary for the understanding of a
Creature: As he deals graciously with men in exhorting and encouraging them; so
he deals wisely herein, by taking away all Excuse from them if they ruin the
interest of their Souls by denying Obedience to their Sovereign.

Again, the Rewards God proposes are accommodated, not to the Brutish parts of
man, his Carnal Sense and Fleshly Appetite; but to the Capacity of a Spiritual
Soul, which admits only of Spiritual Gratifications; and cannot in its own
Nature, without a sordid subjection to the Humors of the Body, be moved by
Sensual Proposals. God backs his Precepts with that which the Nature of Man
longed for, and with Spiritual Delights, which can only satisfy a rational
Appetite: And thereby did as well gratify the noblest Desires in man, as
Oblige him to the noblest Service and Work Amytaut.
. Indeed Virtue and Holiness being perfectly amiable, ought chiefly to affect
our Understandings, and by them draw our Wills to the esteem and pursuit of
them. But since the desire of Happiness is inseparable from the Nature of Man,
as impossible to be dis-join'd, as an Inclination to descend to be severed from
heavy Bodies, or an instinct to ascend from Light and A ry of Substances; God
serves himself of the Inclination of our Natures to happiness, to engender in
us an esteem and affection to the Holiness he does require. He proposes the
enjoyment of a supernatural Good and everlasting Glory, as a Bait to that
insatiable longing our Natures have for Happiness, to receive the impression of
Holiness into our Souls. And besides, he does proportion Rewards according to
the degrees of men's Industry, Labor, and Zeal for him; and weighs out a
Recompense, not only suited to, but above the service. He that improves five
Talents, is to be ruler over five Cities; that is, a greater proportion of
Honor and Glory than another, Luke 19.17.18. As a wise Father excites the
affection of his Children to things worthy of Praise, by varieties of
Recompenses according to their several Actions. And it was the Wisdom of the
Steward, in the Judgment of our Savior, to give every one the portion that
belonged to him, Luke 12.42. There is no part of the Word wherein we meet not
with the will and Wisdom of God, varieties of Duties, and varieties of
Encouragement mingled together.

5. The Wisdom of God is seen In fitting the Revelations of his will to
aftertimes, and for the preventing of the foreseen Corruptions of men. The
whole Revelation of the mind of God is stored with Wisdom in the words,
connection, sense; It looks backwards to past, and forwards to Ages to come: A
hidden wisdom lies in the bowels of it, like Gold in a Mine.

The Old testament was so composed, as to fortify the New, when God should
bring it to light. The Foundations of the Gopel were laid in the Law: The
Predictions of the Prophets, and figures of the Law were so wisely framed and
laid down in such clear expressions, as to be Proofs of the Authority of the
New Testament, and Convictions of Jesus his being the Messiah, Luke 24.14.
Things concerning Christ, were written in Moses, the Prophets, and Psalms, and
do to this day stare the Jews so in the face, that they are fain to invent
absurd and Nonsensical Interpretations to excuse their Unbelief, and continue
themselves in their obstinate Blindness. And in pursuance of the efficacy of
those Predictions, it was a part of the Wisdom of God to bring forth the
Translation of the Old Testament, (by the means Ptolomy King of Egypt some
hundreds of years before the coming of Christ) into the Greek Language, the
Tongue then most known in the World; And why? to prepare the Gentiles by the
reading of it, for that gracious call he intended them, and for the
entertainment of the Gospel, which some few years after was to be published
among them; that by reading the Predictions so long before made, they might
more readily receive the accomplishment of them in their due time.

The Scripture is written in such a manner, as to obviate Errors foreseen by
God to enter into the Church. It may be wondered, why the Universal Particle
should be inserted by Christ, in the giving the Cup in the Supper, which was
not in the distributing the Bread, Mat. 26, 27. Drink ye all of it; Not at the
distributing the Bread, Eat you all of it: And Mark in his Relation tells us,
They all drank of it, Mark 11.23. The Church of Rome has been the occasion of
discovering to us the Wisdom of our Savior in ins erting that Particle all,
since they were so bold to exclude the Communicants from the Cup by a trick of
Concomitancy. Christ foresaw the Error, and therefore put in a little word to
obviate a great Invasion: And the spirit of God has particularly left upon
record, that Particle, as we may reasonably suppose to such a purpose. And so
in the description of the blessed Virgin, Luke 1.27. There is nothing of her
Holiness mentioned, which is with much diligence recorded of Elizabeth; Verse.
6. Righteous, walking in all the commandments of God blameless; Probably to
prevent the superstition which God foresaw would arise in the World. And we do
not find more undervaluing speeches, uttered by Christ to any of his Disciples
in the exercise of his Office, than to her, except to Peter. As when she
acquainted him with the want of Wine at the Marriage in Cana, she receives a
slighting answer; Woman, what have I to do with thee? John. 2.4. And when one
was admiring the blessedness of her that bare him, he turns the Discourse
another way, to pronounce a blessedness rather belonging to them that hear the
Word of God and keep it, Luke 11.27, 28. in a mighty Wisdom to Antidote his
people against any conceit of the prevalency of the Virgin over him in Heaven,
in the Exercise of his Mediatory Office.

2. As his Wisdom appears in his Government by his Laws, so it appears in the
various inclinations and conditions of Men. As there is a distinction of
several Creatures, and several qualities in them, for the Common good of the
World; so among men there are several inclinations and several Abilities, as
Donatives from God, for the Common advantage of Human Society; As several
Channels cut out from the same River run several ways, and refresh several
Soils; one Man is qualified for one Employment, another marked out by God for a
different Work, yet all of them fruitful to bring in a Revenue of Glory to God,
and a harvest of Profit to the rest of Mankind. How unusefull would the Body
be, if it had but one Member? 1 Cor. 12.19. How unprovided would a House be, if
it had not Vessels of Dishonor as well as of Honor? The Corporation of
Mankind would be as much a Chaos, as the Matter of the Heavens and the Earth
was, before it was distinguished by several forms breathed into it at the
Creation. Some are inspired with a particular Genius for one Art, some for
another: Every man has a distinct Talent. If all were Husbandmen, where would
be the Instruments to Plow and Reap? If all were Artificers, where would they
have Corn to nourish themselves? All men are like Vessels, and Parts in the
Body, designed for distinct Offices and Functions for the good of the whole,
and mutually return an advantage to one another.

As the variety of Gifts in the Church is a fruit of the Wisdom of God, for the
preservation and increase of the Church, so the variety of Inclinations and
Employments in the World is a fruit of the Wisdom of God, for the preservation
and subsistence of the World by mutual Commerce, What the Apostle largely
discourses of the former, in 1 Cor. 12. may be applied to the other.

The various Conditions of men is also a fruit of Divine Wisdom. Some are Rich,
and some Poor; the Rich have as much need of the Poor, as the Poor have of the
Rich: If the Poor depend upon the Rich for their livelihood, the Rich depend
upon the Poor for their Conveniences. Many Arts would not be learned by men,
if Poverty did not oblige them to it; and many would faint in the learning of
them, if they were not thereunto encouraged by the Rich.

The Poor labor for the Rich, as the Earth sends Vapors into the vaster and
fuller Air; and the Rich return advantages again to the Poor, as the Clouds do
the Vapors in Rain upon the Earth. As Meat would not afford a nourishing Juice
without Bread, and Bread without other Food would immoderately fill the
Stomach, and not be well digested; so the Rich would be unprofitable in the
Commonwealth without the Poor, and the Poor would be burthensom to a
Commonwealth without the Rich: The Poor could not be easily governed without
the Rich, nor the Rich sufficiently and conveniently provided for without the
Poor. If all were Rich, there would be no Objects for the exercise of a Noble
part of Charity: If all were Poor, there were no Matter for the exercise of it.
Thus the Divine Wisdom planted various Inclinations, and diversified the
Conditions of Men for the public advantages of the World.

2. Gods Wisdom appears, in the government of Men, as Fallen and Sinful; or in
the government of Sin. After the Law of God was broke, and Sin invaded and
conquered the World; Divine Wisdom had another Scene to act in, and other
Methods of Government were necessary. The Wisdom of God is then seen in
ordering those Jarring Discords, drawing Good out of Evil, and Honor to
himself out of that, which in its own Nature tended to the supplanting of his
Glory. God being a Sovereign Good, would not suffer so great an Evil to enter,
but to serve himself of it for some greater End; for all his Thoughts are full
of Goodness and Wisdom.

Now though the Permission of Sin be an Act of his Sovereignty, and the
Punishment of Sin be an Act of his Justice; yet the Ordination of Sin to good,
is an Act of his Wisdom, whereby he does dispose the Evil, overrules the
Malice, and orders the Events of it to his own Purposes. Sin in it self is a
Disorder, and therefore God does not permit Sin for it self; for in its own
Nature it has nothing of Amiableness; but he wills it for some Righteous End,
which belongs to the manifestation of his Glory, which is his aim in all the
Acts of his Will: He wills it not as Sin, but as his Wisdom can order it to
some greater Good than was before in the World, and make it contribute to the
beauty of the Order he intends. As a dark Shadow is not delightful and pleasant
in it self, nor is Drawn by a Painter for any Amiableness there is in the
Shadow it self, but as it serves to set forth that Beauty, which is the main
design of his Art; so the glorious Effects which arise from the Entrance of Sin
into the World, are not from the Creatures Evil, but the Depths of Divine
Wisdom.

Particularly,

1. Gods Wisdom is seen in the bounding of Sin. As it is said of the Wrath of
Man, it shall praise him, and the remainder of Wrath God does restrain, Psalm.
76.10. He sets limits to the boiling Corruption of the Heart, as he does to the
boisterous Waves of of the Sea, Hitherto shall thou go, and no further. As God
is the Rector of the World, he does so restrain Sin, so temper and direct it,
as that Human Society is preserved, which else would be overflown with a Deluge
of Wickedness, and Ruin would be brought upon all Communities. The World would
be a Shambles, a Brothel-house, if God by his Wisdom and Goodness, did not set
bars to that Wickedness which is in the Hearts of Men: The whole Earth would be
as bad as Hell. Since the Heart of Man is a Hell of Corruption, by that, the
Souls of all Men would be excited to the acting the worst Villainies; since
every thought of the heart of Man is only evil, and that continually, Genesis 6.5.
if the Wisdom of God did not stop these Floud-gates of Evil in the Hearts of
Men, it would overflow the World, and frustrate all the Gracious Designs he
carries on among the Sons of Men. Were it not for this Wisdom, every House
would be filled with Violence, as well as every Nature is with Sin. What harm
would not strong and furious Beasts do, did not the Skill of Man tame and
bridle them? How often has Divine Wisdom restrained the Viciousness of Human
Nature, and let it run, not to that point they ^^^^^'d, but to the end he
purposed? Labans Fury, and Esaus Enmity against (...) ^ere p^^t in within
bounds for Jacobs safety, and their Hearts overruled (...) intended
destruction of the good Man to a perfect Amity Genesis 31.29. and Genesis 32.
.

II. Gods Wisdom is seen, in the bringing glory to himself out of Sin.

1. Out of Sin it self. God erects the Trophies of Honor upon that, which is a
Natural means to hinder and deface it. His glorious Attributes are drawn out to
our view, upon the occasion of Sin, which otherwise had lain hid in his own
Being. Sin is altogether black and abominable; but by the Admirable Wisdom of
God, he has drawn out of the dreadful darkness of Sin, the saving Beams of his
Mercy, and displayed his Grace in the Incarnation and Passion of his Son for
the Atonement of Sin. Thus he permitted Adams Fall, and wisely ordered it, for
a fuller discovery of his own Nature, and a higher elevation of Man's good, that
as Sin reigned to death, so might Grace reign through Righteousness to Eternal
life, by Jesus Christ, Romans 5.21. The unbounded Goodness of God could not have
appeared without it. His Goodness in rewarding Innocent Obedience, would have
been manifested; but not his Mercy, in pardoning Rebellious Crimes: An Innocent
Creature is the Object of the Rewards of Grace, as the standing Angels are
under the Beams of Grace; but not under the Beams of Mercy, because they were
never Sinful, and consequently never Miserable. Without Sin the Creature had
not been Miserable: Had Man remained Innocent, he had not been the Subject of
Punishment; and without the Creatures Misery, Gods Mercy in sending his Son to
save his Enemies, could not have appeared. The abundance of Sin is a Passive
occasion for God to manifest the Abundance of his Grace:

The Power of God in the changing the Heart of a Rebellious Creature, had not
appeared, had not Sin infected our Nature. We had not clearly known the
Vindictive Justice of God, had no Crime been committed; for that is the proper
Object of Divine Wrath. The Goodness of God could never have permitted Justice
to exercise it self upon an Innocent Creature, that was not guilty either
Personally, or by Imputation. Psalm. 11.7. The righteous Lord loves
Righteousness, his countenance does behold the upright. Wisdom is illustrious
hereby. God suffered Man to fall into a Mortal Disease, to show the virtue of
his own Restoratives to cure Sin, which in it self is Incurable by the Art of
any Creature. And otherwise this Perfection whereby God draws Good out of Evil,
had been utterly useless, and would have been destitute of an Object wherein to
discover it self.

Again, Wisdom in ordering a Rebellious headstrong World to its own ends, is
greater than the ordering an Innocent World, exactly observant of his Precepts,
and complying with the End of the Creation. Now, without the entrance of Sin,
this Wisdom had wanted a Stage to act upon. Thus God raised the Honor of his
Wisdom, while Man ruined the Integrity of his Nature; and made use of the
Creatures breach of his Divine Law, to establish the Honor of it in a more
signal and stable manner, by the Active and Passive Obedience of the Son of his
Bosom. Nothing serves God so much, as an occasion of glorifying himself, as the
entrance of Sin into the World; by this occasion God communicates to us the
knowledge of those Perfections of his Nature, which had else been folded up
from us in an Eternal Night; his Justice had lain in the dark, as having
nothing to punish; his Mercy had been obscure, as having none to pardon; a
great part of his Wisdom had been silent, as having no such Object to order.

2. His Wisdom appears, In making use of sinful Instruments. He uses the Malice
and Enmity of the Devil to bring about his own Purposes, and makes the sworn
Enemy of his Honor contribute to the Illustrating of it against his will. This
great Crafts-Master he took in his own Net, and defeated the Devil by the
Devils Malice; by turning the Contrivances he had hatched and accomplished
against Man, against himself. He used him as a Tempter, to grapple with our
Savior in the Wilderness, whereby to make him fit to succor us; and as the
God of this World, to inspire the wicked Jews to Crucify him, whereby to
render him actually the Redeemer of the World, and so made him an Ignorant
Instrument of that Divine Glory he designed to ruin.

Moulins Sermon. Decad. 10. p. 221, 232.
It Is more Skill to make a curious piece of Workmanship with Ill conditioned
Tools, than with Instruments naturally sitted for the work: It Is no such great
wonder for a Limner to draw an exact piece with a fit Pencil and suitable
Colors, as to begin and perfect a beautiful work with a Straw and Water,
things improper for such a design. This Wisdom of God is more admirable and
astonishing than if a Man were able to rear a vast Palace by Fire, whose nature
is to consume Combustible matter, not to erect a Building.

To make things serviceable contrary to their own Nature, is a Wisdom peculiar
to the Creator of Nature. Gods making use of Devils, for the glory of his Name,
and the good of his People, is a more amazing piece of Wisdom, than his
Goodness in employing the Blessed Angels in his work. To promise, that the
World, (which includes the God of the World) and Death, and Things present, let
them be as Evil as they will, should be ours, that is, for our good, and for
his glory, is an act of Goodness; but to make them serviceable to the Honor of
Christ, and the good of his People, is a Wisdom that may well raise our highest
Admirations 1 Cor. 3.22.
: They are for Believers, as they are for the glory of Christ, and as Christ is
for the glory of God.

To Chain up Satan wholly, and frustrate his Wiles, would be an Argument of
Divine Goodness; but to suffer him to run his risque, and then improve all his
Contrivances for his own glorious and grac^ous Ends and Purposes, manifests
besides his Power and Goodness, his Wisdom also. He uses the Sins of Evil
Instruments for the glory of his Justice, Isa. 10.5 6, 7. Thus he served
himself of the Ambition and Covetousness of the Assyrians, Chaldeans, and
Romans, for the Correction of his People and Punishment of his Rebels. Just as
the Roman Magistrates used the fury of Lions and other wild Beasts, in their
Theaters, for the Punishment of Criminals: The Lions acted their Natural temper
in tearing those that were exposed to them for a Prey; but the intent of the
Magistrates was to punish their Crimes. The Magistrate inspired not the Lions
with their Rage, that they had from their Natures; but served themselves of
that Natural Rage, to execute Justice.

3. Gods Wisdom is seen in bringing good to the Creature out of Sin. He has
ordered Sin to such an end as Man never dreamt of, the Devil never imagined,
and Sin in its own Nature could never attain. Sin in its own Nature tends to no
good, but that of Punishment, whereby the Creature is brought into order. It
has no relation to the Creatures good in it self, but to the Creatures
mischief: But God, by an act of Infinite Wisdom brings good out of it to the
Creature, as well as glory to his Name, contrary to the Nature of the Crime,
the Intention of the Criminal, and the Design of the Tempter.

God willed Sin, that is, he willed to permit it, that he might communicate
himself to the Creature in the most excellent manner. He willed the Permission
of Sin, as an occasion to bring forth the Mystery of the Incarnation and
Passion of our Savior; as he permitted the Sin of Joseph's Brethren that he
might use their Evil to a good end. He never, because of his Holiness, wills
Sin as an End; but in regard of his Wisdom he wills to permit it as a Means and
Occasion: And thus, to draw good out of those things which are in their own
Nature most contrary to Good, is the highest pitch of Wisdom.

1. The Redemption of Man in so excellent away, was drawn from the occasion of
Sin. The greatest Blessing that ever the World was blessed with, was ushered in
by Contrarieties, by the Lust and irregular Affection of Man; the first Promise
of the Redeemer by the Fall of Adam, Genesis 3.15. and the bruising the heel of
that Promised Seed, by the blackest Tragedy acted by wicked Rebels, the
Treachery of Judas and the Rage of the Jews; the highest Good has been brought
forth by the greatest Wickedness. As God out of the Chaos of rude and
indigested Matter framed the first Creation; so from the S ns of Men, and
Malice of Satan, he has erected the Everlasting Scheme of Honor in a New
Creation of all things by Jesus Christ.

The Devil inspired Man, to content his own fury in the Death of Christ; and
God ordered it to accomplish his own design of Redemption in the Passion of the
Redeemer: The Devil had his Diabolical Ends, and God over-powers his Action to
serve his own Divine ends. The Person that betrayed him, was admitted to be a
Spectator of the most private Actions of our Savior, that his Innocence might
be justified; to show, that he was not afraid to have his Enemies Judges of his
most retired Privacies. While they all thought to do their own Wills, Divine
Wisdom orders them to do Gods Will. Acts 2.23. Him being delivered by the
determinate Counsel and Foreknowledge of God, you have taken, and by wicked
hands have Crucified and slain. And wherein the Crucifiers of Christ sinned, in
shedding the richest Blood, upon their Repentance they found the expiation of
their Crimes, and the discovery of a superabundant Mercy. Nothing but Blood was
aimed at by them: The best Blood was shed by them; but Infinite Wisdom makes
the Cross the Scene of his own Righteousness, and the Womb of Man's Recovery.

By the occasion of Man's Lapsed state, there was a way open to raise Man to a
more excellent Condition, than that whereinto he was put by Creation: And the
depriving Man of the happiness of an Earthly Paradise, in a way of Justice, was
an occasion of advancing him to a Heavenly Felicity, in a way of Grace. The
Violation of the Old Covenant, occasionally introduced a better: The loss of
the first Integrity, ushered in a more stable Righteousness, an Everlasting
Righteousness, Dan. 9.24. And the falling of the First Head, was succeeded by
one whose standing could not but be Eternal.

The Fall of the Devil was ordered by Infinite Wisdom, for the good of that
Body from which he fell. It Is supposed by some, that the Devil was the Chief
Angel in Heaven, the Head of all the rest; and that he Falling, the Angels were
left as a Body without a Head; and after he had Politically beheaded the
Angels, he endeavored to destroy Man, and rout him out of Paradise: But God
takes the opportunity to set up his Son, as the Head of Angels and Men. And
thus whilst the Devil endeavored to spoil the Corporation of Angels, and make
them a Body contrary to God, God makes Angels and Men one Body under one Head,
for his Service.

The Angels in losing a defectible Head, attained a more excellent and glorious
Head in another Nature, which they had not before; though of a Lower Nature in
his Humanity, yet of a more glorious Nature in his Divinity: From whence many
suppose they derive their Confirming Grace, and the stability of their
standing. All things in Heaven and Earth are gathered together in Christ, Ephesians.
1.10. (...), All united in him, and reduced under one Head: That though our
Savior be not properly their Redeemer, for Redemption supposes Captivity, yet
in some sense he is their Head and Mediator; so that now the Inhabitants of
Heaven and Earth are but one Family, Ephesians. 3.15. And the Innumerable Company
of Angels are parts of that Heavenly and Triumphant Jerusalem, and that General
Assembly, whereof Jesus Christ is Mediator, Heb. 12.22, 29.

2. The Good of a Nation often, by the skill of Divine Wisdom, is promoted by
the Sins of some Men. The Patriarchs selling Joseph to the Midianites Genesis
37.28.
, was without question a Sin, and a breach of Natural Affection; yet by Gods
Wise Ordination, it proved the Safety of the whole Church of God in the World,
as well as the Egyptian Nation Genesis 45.5, 8. and Genesis 50.20.
.

The Jews Unbelief, was a step whereby the Gentiles arose to the knowledge of
the Gospel: As the setting of the Sun in one place, is the rising of it in
another Mat. 22.9^
. He uses the Corruptions of Men Instrumentally to propagate his Gospel: He
built up the True Church by the Preaching of some out of envy, Phil. 1.15. as
he blessed Israel out of the Mouth of a False Prophet, Numb. 23. How often have
the Heresies of Men been the occasion of clearing up the Truth of God, and
fixing the more lively Impressions of it on the Hearts of Believers?

Neither Judah nor Tamar, in their Lust, dreamt of a Stock for the Redeemer;
yet God gave a Son from that Unlawful Bed, whereof Christ came according to the
flesh; Genesis 38.29. compared with Mat. 1.3.

Jonahs Sin was probably the first and remote occasion of the Ninivites giving
credit to his Prophesy: His Sin was the cause of his Punishment, and his being
slung into the Sea, might facilitate the reception of his Message, and excite
the Ninivites Repentance, whereby a Cloud of severe Judgment was blown away
from them.

It Is thought by some, That when Jonah passed through the Streets of Niniveh
with his Proclamation of Destruction, he might be known by some of the Mariners
of that Ship, from whence he was cast Overboard into the Sea, and might after
their Voyage be occasionally in that City, the Metropolis of the Nation, and
the place of some of their Births; and might acquaint the People, that this was
the same Person they had cast into the Sea by his own consent, for his
acknowledged running from the Presence of the Lord; for that he had told them
Jonah 1.10. and the Mariners Prayer, Verse 14. evidenceth it, whereupon they
might conclude his Message worthy of Belief, since they knew from such
Evidences, that he had sunk into the Bowels of the Waters, and now saw him safe
in their Streets, by a Deliverance unknown to them; and that therefore that
Power that delivered him, could easily verify his Word in the threatened
Judgment.

Had Jonah gone at first without committing that Sin, and receiving that
Punishment, his Message had not been judged a Divine Prediction, but a fruit of
some Enthusiastic madness: His Sin upon this account was the first occasion of
averting a Judgment from so great a City.

3. The good of the Sinner himself is sometimes promoted by Divine Wisdom,
ordering the Sin. As God had not permitted Sin to enter upon the World, unless
to bring Glory to himself by it; so he would not let Sin remain in the little
World of a Believers Heart, if he did not intend to order it for his good. What
is done by Man to his damage and disparagement, is directed by Divine Wisdom to
his advantage; not that it is the intent of the Sin, or the Sinner; but it is
the event of the Sin, by the Ordination of Divine Wisdom and Grace.

As without the Wisdom of God permitting Sin to enter into the World, some
Attributes of God had not been Experimentally known; so some Graces could not
have been exercised: For where had there been an Object for that Noble Zeal, in
vindicating the Glory of God, had it not been invaded by an Enemy? The
intenseness of Love to him could not have been so strong, had we not an Enemy
to hate for his sake. Where had there been any place for that Noble part of
Charity in holy Admonitions and Compassion to the Souls of our Neighbors, and
Endeavors to reduce them out of a destructive to a happy Path? Humility would
not have had so many grounds for its growth and exercise, and holy Sorrow had
had no fuel.

And as without the appearance of Sin, there had been no exercise of the
Patience of God; so without Afflictions, the Fruits of Sin, there had been no
ground for the exercise of the Patience of a Christian, one of the Noblest
parts of Valor. Now Sin being Evil, and such as cannot but be Evil, has no
respect in it self to any good, and cannot work a gracious End, or any thing
profitable to the Creature; nay it is a hindrance to any good, and therefore
what good comes from it, is Accidental, occasioned indeed by Sin, but
efficiently caused by the overruling Wisdom of God, taking occasion thereby to
display it self and the Divine Goodness.

The Sins and Corruptions remaining in the Heart of a Man, God orders for good,
and there are good effects by the direction of his Wisdom and Grace.

I. As the Soul respects God.

1. God often brings forth a sensibleness of the necessity of Dependence on
him. The Nurse often lets the Child slip, that it may the better know who
supports it, and may not be too venturous and confident of its own strength.
Peter would trust in Habitual Grace, and God suffers him to Fall, that he might
trust more in Assisting Grace, Mat. 26.35. Though I should die with thee, yet I
will not deny thee. God leaves sometimes the brightest Souls in an Eclipse, to
manifest, that their Holiness, and the preservation of it, depend upon the
darting out his Beams upon them.

As the Falls of Men are the effects of their coldness and remisness in Acts of
Faith and Repentance; so the fruit of these Falls is often a running to him for
Refuge, and a deeper sensibleness where their Security lies. It makes us Lower
our swelling Sails, and come under the Lee and Protection of Divine Grace. When
the Pleasures of Sin answer the expectations of a Revolted Creature, he
reflects upon his former state, and sticks more close to God, when before God
had little of h^s Company; Hos. 2.7. I will return to my first husband, for
then it was better with me than now.

As God makes the Sins of Men sometimes an occasion of their Conversion; so he
sometimes makes them an occasion of a further Conversion. Onesimus run from
Philemon, and was met with by Paul, who proved an Instrument of his Conversion,
Philem. 10. My Son Onesimus, whom I have begotten in my Bonds. His slight from
his Master, was the occasion of his Regeneration by Paul a Prisoner.

The Falls of Believers God orders to their further stability: He that is
fallen for want of using his Staff, will Lean more upon it to preserve himself
from the like Disaster.

God, by permitting the Lapses of Men, does often make them despair of their
own strength to subdue their Enemies, and rely upon the strength of Christ,
wherein God has laid up Power for us, and so becomes stronger in that strength
which God has ordained for them.

We are very apt to trust in our selves, and have confidence in our own worth
and strength; and God lets loose Corruptions to abate this swelling humor. This
was the reason of the Apostle Paul's Thorn in the flesh, 2 Cor. 12.9. whether it
were a Temptation, or Corruption, or Sickness, that he might be sensible of his
own inability, and where the sufficiency of Grace for him was placed.

He that is in danger of Drowning, and has the Waves come over his head, will
with all the might he has, lay hold upon any thing near him, which is capable
to Save him. God lets his People somet^mes sink into such a condition, that
they may lay the faster hold on him who is near to all that call upon him.

2. God hereby raises higher Estimations of the value and virtue of the Blood
of Christ. As the great Reason why God permitted Sin to enter into the World,
was to honor himself in the Redeemer; so the Continuance of Sin, and the
Conquests it sometimes makes in Renewed Men, are to honor the Infinite value
and virtue of the Redeemers Merit, which God from the beginning intended to
magnify: The Value of it, in taking off so much successive Guilt; and the
Virtue of it, in washing away so much daily filth.

The Wisdom of God hereby keeps up the Credit of Imputed Righteousness, and
manifests the Immense Treasure of the Redeemers Merit to pay such daily Debts.
Were we perfectly Sanctified, we should stand upon our own Bottom, and imagine
no need of the continual and repeated Imputation of the Righteousness of Christ
for our Justification: We should confide in Inherent Righteousness, and slight
Imputed.

If God should take off all Remainders of Sin, as well as the Guilt of it, we
should be apt to forget that we are Fallen Creatures, and that we had a
Redeemer: But the Relics of Sin in us, mind us of the necessity of some
higher strength to set us right: They mind us both of our own Misery, and the
Redeemers perpetual benefit. God by this keeps up the Dignity and Honor of our
Saviors Blood to the height, and therefore sometimes lets us see, to our own
cost, what filth yet remains in us for the employment of that Blood, which we
should else but little think of, and less admire. Our Gratitude is so small to
God, as well as Man, that the first Obligations are soon forgot, if we stand
not in need of fresh ones successively to second them; we should lose our
Thankful Remembrance of the first virtue of Christ's Blood in washing us, if our
Infirmities did not mind us of fresh Reiterations and Applications of it.

Ours Saviors Office of Advocacy was erected especially for Sins committed
after a Justified and Renewed state 1 John 2.1.
. We should scarce remember we had an Advocate, and scarce make use of him
without some sensible Necessity; but our Remainders of Sin discover our
Impotency, and an impossibility for us either to expiate our Sin, or conform to
the Law, which necessitates us to have recourse to that Person whom God has
appointed, to make up the breaches between God and us.

So the Apostle wraps up himself in the Covenant of Grace and his Interest in
Christ, after his conflict with Sin, Romans 7. ult. I thank God through Jesus
Christ. Now, after such a Body of Death, a Principle within me that sends up
daily steams; yet as long as I serve God with my Mind, as long as I keep the
main Condition of the Covenant, there is no Condemnation Romans 8.1.
: Christ takes my part, procures my acceptance, and holds the Band of Salvation
firm in his hands. The brightness of Christ's Grace, is set off by the darkness
of our Sin. We should not understand the Sovereignty of his Medicines, if there
were no Relics of Sin for him to exercise his Skill upon: The Physicians Art
is most experimented, and therefore most valued in Relapses, as dangerous as
the former Disease. As the Wisdom of God brought our Savior into Temptation,
that he might have Compassion to us; so it permits us to be overcome by
Temptation, that we might have due Valuations of him.

3. God hereby often engages the Soul to a greater Industry for his glory. The
highest Persecutors, when they have become Converts, have been the greatest
Champions for that Cause they both hated and oppressed. The Apostle Paul is such
an Instance of this, that it needs no enlargement. By how much they have failed
of answering the end of their Creation in glorifying God; by so much the more
they summon up all their Force for such an end, after their Conversion; to
restore as much as they can of that Glory to God, which they by their Sin had
robbed him of. Their Sins, by the order of Divine Wisdom, prove Whetstones to
sharpen the edge of their Spirits for God. Paul never remembered his Persecuting
Fury, but he doubled his Industry for the Service of God, which before he
trampled under his feet. The further we go back, the greater Leap many times we
take forward.

Our Savior, after his Resurrection, put Peter upon the exercise of that Love
to him, which had so lately shrunk his head out of Suffering John 21.15, 16, 17.
; and no doubt, but the consideration of his base Denial, together with a
reflection upon a gracious Pardon, engaged his Ingenuous Soul to stronger and
fiercer flames of Affection. A Believers Courage for God, is more sharpened
oftentimes by the shame of his Fall: He endeavors to repair the faults of his
Ingratitude and Disingenuity, by larger and stronger steps of Obedience. As a
Man in a fight, having been foiled by his Enemy, reassumes new Courage by his
Fall; and is many times obliged to his Foil, both for his Spirit and his
Victory. A gracious Heart will, upon the very motions to sin, double its Vigor,
as well as by good ones: It is usually more quickened, both in its motion to God
and for God, by the Temptations and Motions to Sin, which run upon it. This is
another Good the Wisdom of God brings forth from Sin.

4. Again, Humility toward God, is another Good, Divine Wisdom brings forth
from the Occasion of Sin. By this God beats down all good opinion or our
selves. Hezekiah was more humbled by his fall into Pride, than by all the
Distress he had been in by Senacharibs Army, 2 Chronicles. 32.26. Peter's Confidence
before his Fall, gave way to an humble Modesty after it: You see his
Confidence, Mark 14.24. Though all should be offended in thee, yet will not I;
and you have the mark of his Modesty, John 21.17. it is not then, Lord, I will
love thee to the death, I will not start from thee; but, Lord, thou know
that I love thee. I cannot assure my self of any thing after this Miscarriage;
but, Lord, thou know there is a Principle of Love in me to thy Name: He was
ashamed, that himself who appeared such a Pillar, should bend as meanly as a
Shrub to a Temptation.

The reflection upon Sin, lays a Man as low as Hell in his Humiliation, as the
Commission of Sin did in the Merit. When David comes to exercise Repentance for
his Sin, he begins it from the Wellhead of Sin Psalm. 51.5.
, his Original Corruption, and draws down the streams of it to the last
commission: Perhaps he did not so seriously humble himself for the Sin of his
Nature all his days, so much as at that time; at least, we have not such
Evidences of it. And Hezekiah humbled himself for the pride of his heart; not
only for the Pride of his Act 2 Chronicles. 32.26.
, but for the Pride in the Heart, which was the Spring of that Pride in Act, in
showing his Treasures to the Babylonish Ambassadors. God lets Sin continue in
the Hearts of the best in this World, and sometimes gives the Reins to Satan,
and a Man's own Corruption, to keep up a sense of the ancient Sale we made of
our selves to both.

II. In regard of our selves. Herein is the wonder of Divine Wisdom, that God
many times makes a Sin, which Meritoriously fits us for Hell, a Providential
occasion to fit us for Heaven; when it is an occasion of a more humble Faith
and believing Humility, and an occasion of a through Sanctification and growth
in Grace, which prepares us for a state of Glory.

1. He makes use of one Sin's breaking out to discover more; and so brings us
to a Self-abhorrency and Indignation against Sin, the first step toward
Heaven. Perhaps David, before his gross Fall, thought he had no Hypocrisy in
him. We often find him appealing to God for his Integrity, and desiring God to
try him, if any guile could be found in his Heart, as if he could find none
himself: But his Lapse into that great Wickedness, makes him discern much
Falseness in his Soul, when he desires God to renew a right Spirit within him,
and speaks of Truth in the inward parts, Psalm. 51.6, 10. The stirring of one
Corruption, makes all the Mud at the bottom appear, which before a Soul did not
suspect. No Man would think there were so great a Cloud of Smoke contained in a
little Stick of Wood, were it not for the powerful operation of the Fire, that
both discovers and separates it. Job, that Cursed the Day of his Birth, and
uttered many Impatient expressions against God upon the account of his own
Integrity; upon his Recovery from his Affliction, and Gods close application of
himself, was wrought to a greater Abhorrency of himself, than ever we read he
was exercised in before Job 42.6.
. The Hostile acts of Sin increase the Souls hatred of it; and the deeper our
Humiliations are for it, the stronger impressions of Abhorrency are made upon
us.

2. He often orders it, to make Conscience more tender, and the Soul more
watchful. He that finds by his Calamity, his Enemy to have more strength
against him than he suspected, will double his Guards and quicken his Diligence
against him. A being overtaken by some Sin, is by the Wisdom of God disposed to
make us more fearful of cherishing any occasion to inflame it, and watchful
against every motion and start of it. By a Fall, the Soul has more experience
of the Deceitfulness of the Heart; and by observing its methods, is rendered
better able to watch against them. It Is our Ignorance of the Devices of Satan,
and our own hearts, that makes us obnoxious to their Surprises. A fall into one
Sin is often a prevention of more which lay in wait for us. As the fall of a
small Body into an Ambush, prevents the design of the Enemy upon a greater. As
God suffers Heresies in the Church, to try our Faith; so he suffers Sins to
remain, and sometimes to break out, to try our Watchfulness. This advantage he
brings from them, to steel our Resolutions against the same Sins, and quicken
our Circumspection for the future against new Surprises by a Temptation. David's
Sin was ever before him, Psalm. 51.3. and made his Conscience cry, Blood, Blood,
upon every occasion: He refused the Water of the Well of Bethlehem, 2 Samuel,
23.16, 17. because it was gained with the hazard of Lives: He could endure
nothing that had the taste of Blood in it. Our fear of a thing depends much
upon a Trial of it: A Child will not fear too near approaches to the Fire, till
he feels the smart of it.

Mortification does not wholly suppress the Motions of Sin, though it does the
Resolutions to commit it; but that there will be a proneness in the Relics of
it, to entice a Man into those Faults, which upon sight of their blemishes cost
him so many Tears. As great Sicknesses after the Cure are more watched, and the
Body humored, that a Man might not fall from the Craziness they have left in
him; which he is apt to do, if Relapses are not carefully provided against. A
Man becomes more careful of any thing, that may contribute to the resurrection
of an expired Disease.

3. God makes it an occasion of the Mortification of that Sin, which was the
matter of the Fall. The livelyness of one Sin in a Renewed Man, many times is
the occasion of the death of it. A wild Beast, while kept close in a Den, is
secure in its life; but when it breaks out to Rapine, it makes the Master
resolve to prevent any further mischief by the death of it. The impetuous
stirring of a humor in a Disease, is sometime Critical, and a Prognostic of
the strength of Nature against it, whereby the Disease loses its strength by
its struggling, and makes room for health to take place by degrees. One Sin is
used by God for the destruction both of it self and others: As the Flesh of a
Scorpion cures the biting of it. It sometimes by wounding us loses its Sting,
and like the Be renders it self incapable of a second Revenge. Peter, after
his gross Denial, never denied his Master afterward. The Sin that lay
undiscovered, is by a Fall become visible, and so more obvious to a mortifying
stroke. The Soul lays the faster hold on Christ and the Promise, and goes out
against that Enemy in the Name of that Lord of Hosts of which he was too
negligent of before; and therefore as he proves more strong, so more
successful: He has more strength, because he has less confidence in himself,
and more in God, the prime strength of his Soul. As it was with Christ, so it
is with us, while the Devil was bruising his Heel, he was bruising his Head;
and while the Devil is bruising our Heel, the God of Peace and Wisdom is
sometimes bruising his Head both in us and for us; so that the strugglings of
Sin, are often as the faint groans or bitings of a Beast that is ready to
expire. It Is just with a Man sometimes, as with a Running Fountain that has
Mud at the bottom, when it is stirred the Mud tinctures and defiles it all
over; yet some of that Mud has a vent with the Streams which run from it, so
that when it is re-settled at the bottom, it is not so much in quantity as it
was before. God by his Wisdom weakens the Sin, by permitting it to stir and
defile.

4. Sometimes Divine Wisdom makes it an occasion to promote a Sanctification in
all parts of the Soul. As the working of one Ill-humor in the Body, is an
occasion of cashiering not only that, but the rest by a sound Purge. As a Man
that is a little Cold, does not think of the Fire; but if he slips with one
Foot into an Icy-puddle, he hastens to the Fire, whereby not only that part,
but all the rest receive a warmth and strength upon that occasion: Or, as if a
Person fall into the Mire, his Clothes are washed; and by that means cleansed,
not only from the filth at present contracted, but from the former Spots that
were before unregarded. God by his Wisdom brings secret Sins to a discovery,
and thereby cleanses the Soul of them.

David's Fall might be ordered as an Answer to his former Petition, Psalm. 19.12.
Cleanse thou me from my secret sins; and as he did earnestly pray after his
Fall, so no doubt but he endeavored a thorough Sanctification, Psalm 51.7.
Purge me, wash me; and that he meant not only a Sanctification from that single
Sin, but from all, Root and Branch, is evident by that Complaint of the slaw in
his Nature, verse 5. the Dross and Chaff which lies in the heart is hereby
discovered, and an opportunity administered of throwing it out, and searching
all the corners of the Heart to discover where it lay. As God sometimes takes
occasion from one Sin, to reckon with Men in a way of Justice for others; so he
sometimes takes occasion from the commission of one Sin, to bring out all the
actions against the Sinner, to make him, in a way of gracious Wisdom, set more
cordially upon the work of Sanctification.

A great Fall sometimes has been the occasion of a Man's Conversion. The Fall
of Mankind occasioned a more blessed Restoration; and the Falls of particular
Believers, ofttimes occasion a more extensive Sanctification. Thus the only
Wise God makes poisons in Nature, to become Medicines in a way of Grace and
Wisdom.

5. Hereby the growth in Grace is furthered. It Is a wonder of Divine Wisdom, to
substract sometimes his Grace from a Person, and let him fall into Sin, thereby
to occasion the increase of habitual Grace in him, and to augment it by those
ways that seemed to depress it. By making Sins an occasion of a more vigorous
acting the contrary Grace, the Wisdom of God makes our Corruptions in their own
nature destructive, to become profitable to us. Grace often breaks out more
strongly afterward, as the Sun does with its heat, after it has been masked
and interrupted with a Mist: They often, through the mighty working of the
Spirit make us more humble, and Humility fits us to receive more Grace from God
James 4.6.
. How does Faith, that sunk under the Waves, lift up its head again, and carry
the Soul out with a greater liveliness? What ardours of Love, what floods of
Repenting Tears, what severity of Revenge, what horrors at the remembrance of
the Sin, what Tremblings at the appearance of a second Temptation? So that
Grace seems to be be awakened to a new and more vigorous life 2 Cor. 7.11.
. The broken Joint is many times stronger in the Rupture, than it was before.
The Luxuriancy of the Branches of Corruption, is an occasion of purging, and
purging is with a design to make Grace more fruitful; John 15.2. He purges it,
that it may bring forth more fruit.

Thus Divine Wisdom does both sharpen and brighten us by the dust of Sin, and
ripen and mellow the fruits of Grace by the dung of Corruption. Grace grows the
stronger by opposition, as the Fire burns hottest and clearest, when it is most
surrounded by a cold Air; and our Natural heat reassumes a new strength by the
coldness of the Winter. The foyl under a Diamond, though an imperfection in it
self, increases the beauty and luster of the Stone. The Enmity of Man was a
commendation of the Grace of God: It occasioned the breaking out of the Grace
of God upon us; and is an occasion, by the Wisdom and Grace of God, of the
increase of Grace many times in us.

How should the Consideration of Gods Incomprhensible Wisdom, in the management
of Evil, swallow us up in Admiration; who brings forth such beauty, such
eminent Discoveries of himself, such excellent good to the Creature, out of the
bowels of the greatest Contrarieties, making dark Shadows serve to display and
beautisie to our Apprehensions the Divine Glory? If Evil were not in the World,
Men would not know what Good is: They would not behold the luster of Divine
Wisdom; as without Night we could not understand the beauty of the Day.

Though God is not the Author of Sin, because of his Holiness, yet he is the
Administrator of Sin by his Wisdom, and accomplisheth his own Purposes, by the
Iniquities of his Enemies, and the Lapses and Infirmities of his Friends.

Thus much for the Second, The Government of Man in his Lapsed state, and the
Government of Sin, wherein the Wisdom of God does wonderfully appear.

III. The Wisdom of God appears in the Government of Man in his Conversion and
Return to him. If there be a Counsel in framing the lowest Creature, and in the
minutest passages of Providence; there must needs be a higher Wisdom in the
government of the Creature to a Supernatural End, and framing the Soul to be a
monument of his Glory. The Wisdom of God is seen with more Admirations, and in
more varieties by the Angels in the Church, than in the Creation Ephesians. 3.10.
; that is, in forming a Church out of the Rubbish of the World, out of
Contrarieties and Contradictions to him; which is greater than the framing a
Celestial and Elementary World out of a rude Chaos. The most glorious Bodies in
the World, even those of the Sun, Moon, and Stars, have not such stamps of
Divine Skill upon them, as the Soul of Man; nor is there so much of Wisdom in
the Fabric and Faculties of that, as in the reduction of a blind, wilful,
rebellious Soul to its own happiness, and Gods glory; Ephesians. 1.11, 12. He works
all things according to the counsel of his own Will, that we should be for the
praise of his glory. If all things, then this, which is none of the least of
his works: To the praise of the glory of his Goodness in his work, and to the
praise of the Rule of his work, his Counsel, in both the act of his Will, and
the act of his Wisdom. The restoring of the Beauty of the Soul, and its fitness
for its true end, speaks no less Wisdom, than the first draught of it in
Creation: And the application of Redemption, and bringing forth the fruits of
it, is as well an act of his Prudence, as the contrivance was of his Counsel.

Divine Wisdom appears,

First, In the Subjects of Conversion. His Goodness reigns in the very Dust,
and he erects the Walls and Ornaments of his Temple from the Clay and Mud of
the World: He passes over the Wise, and Noble, and Mighty, that may pretend
some grounds of boasting in their own natural or acquired Endowments; and
pitches upon the most contemptible Materials, wherewith to build a Spiritual
Tabernacle for himself, 1 Cor. 1.26, 27. The foolish, and weak things of the
World; those that are naturally most unfit for it, and most refractory to it.
Herein lies the Skill of an Architect, to render the most knotty, crooked, and
inform Pieces, by his Art, subservient to his main purpose and design. Thus God
has ordered from the beginning of the World, contrary Tempers, various Humors,
diverse Nations, as Stones of several Natures, to be a Building for himself,
fitly framed together, and to be his own Family 1 Cor. 3.7.
. Who will question the Skill that alters a black Jet into a clear Crystal, a
Glowworm into a Star, a Lion into a Lamb, and a Swine into a Dove? The more
intricate and knotty any business is, the more eminent is any Man's Ability and
Prudence, in untying the knots and bringing it to a good Issue. The more
desperate the Disease, the more admirable is the Physicians Skill in the Cure.

He pitches upon Men for his service, who have Natural dispositions to serve
him in such ways as he disposes of them, after their Conversion; So Paul was
naturally a Conscientious Man; what he did against Christ was from the dictates
of an erroneous Conscience, soaked in the Pharisaical Interpretations of the
Jewish Law: He had a strain of Zeal to prosecute what his depraved Reason and
Conscience did inform him in. God pitches upon this Man, and works him in the
Fire for his Service: He alters not his Natural disposition, to make him of a
Constitution and Temper contrary to what he was before; but directs it to
another Object, claps in another Bias into the Bowl, and makes his
Ill-governed Disposition^ move in a new way of his own appointment, and guided
that Natural heat to the service of that Interest, which he was before
ambitious to extirpate. As a high metled Horse, when left to himself, creates
both disturbance and danger. But under the conduct of a wise Rider, moves
regularly; not by a change of his Natural fierceness, but a skilful management
of the Beast to the Riders purpose.

2. In the seasons of Conversion. The Prudence of Man consists in the Timing
the execution of his Counsels; and no less does the Wisdom of God consist in
this. As he is a God of Judgment, or Wisdom, he waits to introduce his Grace
into the Soul in the fittest Season.

This Attribute, Paul in the story of his own Conversion puts a particular
remark upon, which he does not upon any other, in that Catalogue he reckons up
1 Timothy 1.17. Now unto the King Eternal, Immortal, Invisible, the only Wise God,
be Honor and Glory for ever and ever, Amen. A most solemn Doxology, wherein
Wisdom sits upon the Throne above all the rest, with a special Amen to the
glory of it; which refers to the Timing of his Mercy so to Paul, as made most
for the glory of his Grace, and the encouragement of others from him as the
Pattern. God took him at a time when he was upon the brink of Hell; when he was
ready to devour the Newborn Infant Church at Damascus; when he was Armed with
all the Authority from without, and fired with all the Zeal from within, for
the prosecution of his Design: Then God seizes upon him, and runs him in a
Chanel for his own Honor, and his Creatures happiness.

It Is observable Which I have upon another Occasion noted.
how God set his Eye upon Paul all along in his furious course, and lets him
have the Reins, without putting out his hand to bridle him; yet no motion he
could take, but the Eye of God runs along with him: He suffered him to kick
against the pricks of Miracles, and the convincing Discourse of Stephen, at his
Martyrdom. There were many that Voted for Stephens Death, as the Witnesses that
flung the Stones first at him; but they are not named, only Saul, who testified
his Approbation as well as the rest, and that by watching the Witnesses Clothes
while they were about that bloody work, Acts 7.58. The Witnesses laid their
clothes at a young Man's feet, named Saul. Again, though Multitudes were
consenting to his Death, yet Acts 8.1. Saul only is mentioned. Gods Eye is upon
him, yet he would not at that time stop his Fury. He goes on further, and makes
havoc of the Church, Acts 8.3. He had surely many more Accomplices, but none are
named (as if none regarded with any design of Grace) but Saul: Yet God would
not reach out his hand to Change him, but Eyes him, waiting for a fitter
opportunity, which in his Wisdom he did foresee. And therefore Acts 9.1. the
Spirit of God adds a Yet; Saul yet breathing out Threatenings. It was not Gods
time yet, but it would be shortly. But when Saul was putting in execution his
design against the Church of Damascus, when the Devil was at the top of his
Hopes, and Saul in the height of his Fury, and the Christians sunk into the
depth of their Fears; the Wisdom of God lays hold of the opportunity, and by
Paul's Conversion at this Season, defeats the Devil, disappoints the High
Priests, shields his People, discharges their Fears by pulling Saul out of the
Devils hands, and forming Satan's Instrument to a holy Activity against him.

3. The Wisdom of God appears, In the manner of Conversion. So great a Change
God makes, not by a destruction, but with a preservation of, and sutableness to
Nature. As the Devil Tempts us, not by offering violence to our Natures, but by
proposing things convenient to our Corrupt Natures; so does God solicit us to
a Return, by proposals suited to our Faculties. As he does in Nature convey
Nourishment to Men, by means of the Fruits of the Earth, and produces the
Fruits of the Earth by the Influences of Heaven; the Influences of Heaven do
not force the Earth, but excite that Natural virtue and strength which is in
it. So God produces Grace in the Soul by the Means of the Word, fitted to the
capacity of Man, as Man, and proportioned to his Rational Faculties, as
Rational.

It would be contrary to the the Wisdom of God, to move Man like a Stone, to
invert the order and privilege of that Nature which he settled in Creation; for
then God would in vain have given Man Understanding and Will: Because without
moving Men according to those Faculties, they would remain unprofitable and
unuseful in Man. Daille sur Philip. Part 1. p. 545, 546.
God does not reduce us to himself, as Logs, by a mere force; or as Slaves
forced by a Cudgel, to go forth to that place, and do that work which they have
no stomach to: But he does accommodate himself to those Foundations he has
laid in our Nature, and guides us in a way agreeable thereunto, by an Action as
sweet as powerful; clearing our Understandings of dark Principles whereby we
may see his Truth, our own Misery, and the Seat of our Happiness; and bending
our Wills according to this Light, to desire and move conveniently to this End
of our Calling: Efficaciously, yet agreeably; powerfully, yet without imposing
on our Natural Faculties; Sanderson, Part 2. p. 203.
sweetly without Violence in ordering the Means, but effectually without
Failing in accomplishing the End. And therefore the Scripture calls it,
Teaching, John 6.45. Alluring, Hos. 2.14. Calling us to seek the Lord, Psalm.
27.8. Teaching, is an act of Wisdom; Alluring, an act of Love; Calling, an act
of Authority: But none of them argue a violent constraint. The principle that
moves the Will is Supernatural; but the Will, as a Natural Faculty, concurs in
the act or motion.

God does not act in this in a way of Absolute Power, without an Infinite
Wisdom, suting himself to the Nature of the things he acts upon: He does not
change the Physical Nature, though he does the Moral. As in the Government of
the World, he does not make heavy things ascend, nor light things descend,
ordinarily; but guides their Motions according to their Natural qualities: So
God does not strain the Faculties beyond their due pitch. He lets the nature of
the Faculty remain; but changes the Principle in it: The Understanding remains
Understanding, and the Will remains Will. But where there was before Folly in
the Understanding, he puts in a Spirit of Wisdom; and where there was before a
stoutness in the Will, he forms it to a pliableness to his offers. He has a
Key to fit every Ward in the Lock, and opens the Will without injuring the
Nature of the Will.

He does not change the Soul by an alteration of the Faculties, but by an
alteration of something in them: Not by an Inroad upon them, or by mere power,
or a blind Instinct; but by proposing to the Understanding something to be
known, and informing it of the Reasonableness of his Precepts, and the Innate
goodness and excellency of his Offers, and by inclining the Will to love and
embrace what is proposed. And things are proposed under those Notions, which
usually move our Wills and Affections. We are moved by things as they are good,
pleasant, profitable; we entertain things as they make for us, and detest
things as they are contrary to us. Nothing affects us but under such qualities,
and God suits his Encouragements to these Natural Affections which are in us:
His Power and Wisdom go hand in hand together; his Power to act what his Wisdom
orders, and his Wisdom to conduct what his Power executes. He brings Men to him
in ways suited to their Natural dispositions. The stubborn he tears like a Lion,
the gentle he wins like a Turtle, by sweetness; he has a Hammer to break the
stout, and a Cord of Love to draw the more pliable Tempers: He works upon the
more Rational in a way of Gospel Reason; upon the more Ingenuous in a way of
kindness, and draws them by the Cords of Love.

The Wisemen were led to Christ by a Star, and Means suited to the knowledge
and study that those Eastern Nations used, which was much in Astronomy: He
works upon others by Miracles accommodated to every ones sense, and so
proportions the Means according to the Nature of the Subjects he works upon.

4. The Wisdom of God is apparent in his Discipline, and Penal Evils. The
Wisdom of Human Governments is seen in the matter of their Laws, and in the
Penalties of their Laws, and in the proportion of the Punishment to the
Offense, and in the good that redounds from the Punishment either to the
Offender, or to the Community.

The Wisdom of God is seen in the Penalty of Death upon the Transgression of
his Law; both in that it was the greatest Evil that Man might fear, and so was
a convenient means to keep him in his due bound, and also in the proportion of
it to the Transgression. Nothing less could be in a Wise Justice inflicted upon
an Offender for a Crime against the highest Being, and the Supreme Excellency:
But this has been spoken of before, in the Wisdom of his Laws. I shall only
mention some few, it would be too tedious to run into all.

1. His Wisdom appears in Judgments, in the suting them to the qualities of
Persons, and nature of Sins. He devises evil, Jer. 18.11. his Judgments are
fruits of Counsel. He also is wise, and will bring Evil, Isai. 31.2. Evil
suitable to the Person offending, and Evil suitable to the Offense committed: As
the Husbandman does his Threshing Instruments to the Grain: He has a Rod for
the Cummin, a tenderer Seed, and a Flayl for the harder; so has God greater
Judgments for the obdurate Sinner, and lighter for those that have something of
tenderness in their Wickedness, Isai. 28.27, 29. Because he is wonderful in
Counsel, and excellent in working; so Some understand the place, With the
froward, he will show himself froward.

He proportions punishment to the Sin, and writes the cause of the Judgment in
the Forehead of the Judgment it self. Sodom burned in Lust, and was consumed by
Fire from Heaven. The Jews sold Christ for Thirty pence; and at the Taking of
Jerusalem, Thirty of them were sold for a Penny. So Adonibezek Cut off the
Thumbs and great Toes of others, and he is served in the same kind, Judge. 1.7.
The Babel Builders designed an indissoluble union, and God brings upon them an
unintelligible Confusion. And in Exodus 9.9. the Ashes of the Furnace, where the
Israelites burnt the Egyptian Bricks, sprinkled toward Heaven, brought Boyls
upon the Egyptian Bodies, that they might feel in their own, what Pain they had
caused in the Israelites flesh; and find by the smart of the inflamed Scab,
what they had made the Israelites endure. The Waters of the River Nilus are
turned into Blood, wherein they had stifled the breath of the Israelites
Infants: And at last the Prince, and the flower of their Nobility, are drowned
in the Red Sea.

It Is part of the Wisdom of Justice to proportion punishment to the Crime, and
the degrees of Wrath to the degrees of Malice in the Sin. Afflictions also are
wisely proportioned: God, as a wise Physician, considers the nature of the
humor and strength of the Patient, and suits his Medicines both to the one and
the other, 1 Cor. 10.13.

2. In the seasons of Punishments and Afflictions. He stays till Sin be ripe,
that his Justice may appear more equitable, and the Offender more inexcusable;
Dan. 9.14. he watches upon the evil to bring it upon Men. To bring it in the
just Season, and order for his righteous and gracious Purpose; his Righteous
purpose on the Enemies, and his Gracious purpose on his People.

Jerusalems Calamity came upon them, when the City was full of People at the
Solemnity of the Passover, that he might Mow down his Enemies at once, and Time
their Destruction to such a moment wherein they had Timed the Crucifixion of
his Son. He watched over the Clouds of his Judgments, and kept them from
pouring down, till his People the Christians were provided for, and had
departed out of the City to the Chambers and Retiring places God had provided
for them. He made not Jerusalem the Shambles of his Enemies, till he had made
Pella, and other places, the Arks of his Friends. As Pliny tells us, The
Providence of God holds the Sea in a calm for fifteen days, that the Halcyons,
little Birds, that frequent the Shore, may build their Nests, and hatch up
their Young. The Judgment upon Sodom was suspended for some hours, till Lot was
secured.

Daille sur 1 Cor. 10. p. 390.
God suffered not the Church to be Invaded by Violent Persecutions, till she was
established in the Faith: He would not expose her to so great Combats, while
she was weak and feeble, but gave her time to fortify her self, to be rendered
more capable of bearing up under them. He stifled all the motions of Passion
the Idolaters might have for their Superstition, till Religion was in such a
condition, as rather to be increased and purified, than extinguished by
Opposition. Paul was s^cured from Neroes Chains, and the Nets of his Enemies,
till he had broke off the Chain of the Devil from many Cities of the Gentiles,
and catched them by the Net of the Gospel out of the Sea of the World.

Thus the Wisdom of God is seen in the Seasons of Judgments and Afflictions.

3. It is apparent in the gracious issue of Afflictions and Penal Evils. It is
a part of Wisdom to bring Good out of Evil of Punishment, as well as to bring
Good out of Sin. The Church never was so like to Heaven, as when it was most
Persecuted by Hell: The Storms often cleans'd it, and the Lance often made it
more healthful. Jobs Integrity had not been so clear, nor his Patience so
illustrious, had not the Devil been permitted to afflict him. God by his Wisdom
outwits Satan; when he by his Temptations intends to pollute us and buffet us,
God orders it to purify us; he often brings the clearest light out of the
thickest darkness, makes Poisons to become Medicines. Turretin, Sermon. p. 53.
Death it self, the greatest Punishment in this Life, and the entrance into
Hell in its own Nature, he has by his Wise contrivance, made to his People the
Gate of Heaven, and the passage into Immortality. Penal Evils in a Nation often
end in in a public Advantage: Troubles and Wars among a People are many times
not destroying, but Medicinal, and cure them of that Degeneracy, Luxury, and
Effeminateness, they contracted by a long Peace.

4. This Wisdom is evident, in the various Ends which God brings about by
Afflictions. The attainment of various Ends by one and the same Means, is the
fruit of the Agents Prudence. By the same Affliction, the Wise God corrects
sometimes for some base Affection, excites some sleepy Grace, drives out some
lurking Corruption, refines the Soul, and ruins the Lust; discovers the
greatness of a Crime, the Vanity of the Creature, and the Sufficiency in
himself.

The Jews bind Paul, and by the Judge he is sent to Rome; whi^ his Mouth is
stopped in Judea, it is opened in one of the greatest Cities of the World, and his
Enemies unwittingly contribute to the increase of the knowledge of Christ by
those Chains, in that City Acts 28.31.
that triumphed over the Earth. And his afflictive Bonds added Courage and
Resolution to others, Phil. 1.14. Many waxing confident by my Bonds; which
could not in their own Nature produce such an effect, but by the order and
contrivance of Divine Wisdom: In their own nature, they would rather make them
disgust the Doctrine he suffered for, and cool their Zeal in the propagating of
it, for fear of the same disgrace and hardship they saw him suffer Daille sur
Philip. Part 1. page 116, 117.
. But the Wisdom of God changed the nature of these Fetters, and conducted them
to the glory of his Name, the encouragement of others, the increase of the
Gospel, and the comfort of the Apostle himself, Phil. 1.12, 13, 18. The
Sufferings of Paul at Rome confirmed the Philippians, a People at a distance
from thence, in the Doctrine they had already received at his hands.

Thus God makes Sufferings sometimes, which appear like Judgments, to be like
the Viper on Paul's hand, Acts 28.6. a means to clear up Innocence, and procure
favor to the Doctrine among those Barbarians. How often has he multiplied the
Church by Death and Massacres, and increased it by those means used to
annihilate it?

5. The Divine Wisdom is apparent in the Deliverances he affords to other parts
of the World, as well as to his Church. There are delicate composures, curious
threads in his Webs, and he works them like an Artificer. A goodness wrought for
them, curiously wrought, Psalm. 31.19.

1. In making the Creatures subservient in their Natural order to his gracious
Ends and Purposes. He orders things in such a manner, as not to be necessitated
to put forth an extraordinary Power in things, which some part of the Creation
might accomplish. Miraculous productions would speak his Power; but the
ordering the Natural course of things, to occasion such effects they were never
intended for, is one part of the glory of his Wisdom. And that his Wisdom may
be seen in the course of Nature, he conducts the Motions of Creatures, and acts
them in their own strength; and does that by various windings and turnings of
them, which he might do in an instant by his Power, in a Supernatural way.
Indeed, sometimes he has made Invasions on Nature, and suspended the Order of
their Natural Laws for a season, to show himself the Absolute Lord and
Governor of Nature: Yet if frequent Alterations of this nature were made, they
would impede the knowledge of the Nature of things, and be some bar to the
discovery and glory of his Wisdom; which is best seen by moving the wheels of
Inferior Creatures, in an exact regularity to his own Ends. He might, when his
little Church in Jacobs Family was like to starve in Canaan, have for their
preservation turned the Stones of the Country into Bread; but he sends them
down to Egypt to procure Corn, that a way might be opened for their removal
into that Country; the Truth of his Prediction in their Captivity accomplished,
and a way made after the declaration of his great Name Jehovah, both in the
fidelity of his Word and the greatness of his Power, in their Deliverance from
that Furnace of Affliction. He might have struck Goliath, the Captain of the
Philistines Army, with a Thunderbolt from Heaven, when he Blasphemed his Name
and scared his People; but he uses the Natural strength of a Stone, and the
Artificial motion of a Sling, by the Arm of David, to confront the Giant, and
thereby to free Judea from the ravage of a potent Enemey. He might have
delivered the Jews from Babylon by as strange Miracles, as he used in their
Deliverance from Egypt: He might have plagued their Enemies, gathered his
People into a Body, and protected them by the bulwark of a Cloud and a Pillar
of Fire, against the Assaults of their Enemies. But he uses the differences
between the Persians and those of Babylon, to accomplish his Ends. How
sometimes has the veering about of the Wind on a sudden been the loss of a
Navy, when it has been upon the point of Victory, and driven back the
Destruction upon those which intended it for others? And the accidental
stumbling, or the Natural fierceness of a Horse, flung down a General in the
midst of a Battle, where he has lost his life by the throng, and his death
has brought a defeat to his Army, and deliverance to the other Party, that
were upon the brink of ruin? Thus does the Wisdom of God link things together
according to Natural order, to work out his intended preservation of a People.

2. In the season of Deliverance. The Timing of Affairs is a part of the Wisdom
of Man, and an eminent part of the Wisdom of God. It is in due season he sends
the former and the latter Rain, when the Earth is in the greatest Indigence,
and when his Influences may most contribute to the bringing forth and ripening
the Fruit. The dumb Creatures have their meat from him in due season Psalm.
104.27.
: And in his due season have his darling People their Deliverance. When Paul
was upon his Journey to Damascus with a Persecuting Commission, he is struck
down for the security of the Church in that City. The Nature of the Lion is
changed in due season, for the preservation of the Lambs from worrying. The
Israelites are miraculously rescued from Egypt, when their Wits were at a loss,
when their danger to Human understanding was unavoidable; when Earth and Sea
refused protection, then the Wisdom and Power of Heaven stepped in to effect
that, which was past the skill of the Conductors of that Multitude. And when
the Lives of the Jews lay at the stake, and their Necks were upon the Block at
the mercy of their Enemies Swords, by an Order from Shushan; not only a
Reprieve, but a Triumph arrives to the Jews, by the Wisdom of God guiding the
Affair, whereby of Persons designed to execution, they are made Conquerors, and
have opportunity to exercise their Revenge instead of their Patience, proving
Triumphers where they expected to be Sufferers Esih. 8, and 9.
. How strangely does God by secret ways bow the hearts of Men, and the nature
of things to the execution of that which he designs, notwithstanding all the
resistance of that which would traverse the security of his People? How often
does he trap the wicked in the work of their own hands, make their confidence
to become their ruin, and ensnare them in those Nets they wrought and laid for
others? Psalm. 9.16. The wicked is snared in the work of his own hands. He
scatters the proud in the imagination of their hearts, Luke 1.51. in the height
of their hopes, when their designs have been laid so deep in the Foundation,
and knit and cemented so close in their superstructure, that no Human Power or
Wisdom could raze them down: He has then disappointed their Projects, and
befooled their Craft. How often has he kept back the Fire, when it has been
ready to devour; broke the Arrows, when they have been prepared in the Bow;
turned the Spear into the bowels of the Bearers, and wounded them at the very
instant they were ready to wound others?

3. In suting Instruments to his purpose. He either finds them sit, or makes
them on a sudden fit for his gracious ends. If he has a Tabernacle to build,
he will sit a Bezaleel and an Aholiab, with the Spirit of wisdom and
Understanding in all cunning workmanship, Exodus 31.3, 6. If he finds them
crooked pieces, he can, like a wise Architect, make them strait Beams for the
rearing his House, and for the honor of his Name.

He sometimes picks out men, according to their natural Tempers, and employs
them in his Work: Jehu, a man of a furious Temper, and ambitious Spirit, is
called out for the destruction of Ahab's House. Moses, a man furnished with all
Egyptian wisdom, fitted by a generous Education, prepared also by the
Affliction he met with in his flight, and one who had had the benefit of
conversation with Jethro, a man of more than an ordinary wisdom and goodness,
as appears by his prudent and religious Counsel; this man is called out to be
the Head and Captain of an oppressed People, and to rescue them from their
Bondage, and settle the first National Church in the World. So Elijah, a high
spirited man, of a hot and angry temper, one that sl ghted the Frowns, and
undervalued the Favor of Princes, is set up to stem the Torrent of the
Israelitish Idolatry. So Luther, a man of the same temper, is drawn out by the
same Wisdom to encounter the Corruptions in the Church, against such
Opposition, which a milder Temper would have sun^ under. The Earth in Rev.
12.16. is made an Instrument to help the woman: When the Grandees of that Age
transferred the Imperial Power upon Constantine, who became afterward a
protecting and nursing Father to the Church, a thnig end which many of his
Favorers never designed, nor ever dreamt of: But God by his infinite Wisdom
made these several Designs like several Arrows shot at Rovers, meet in one Mark
to which he directed them, viz. in bringing forth an Instrument to render Peace
to the World, and Security and Increase to his Church.

3. The wisdom of God does wonderfully appear in Redemption. His wisdom in
Creation ravisheth the Eye and Understanding; his wisdom in Government, does no
less affect a curious Observer of the Links and Concatenation of the Means; but
his wisdom in Redemption mounts the Mind to a greater astonishment. The works
of Creation are the Footsteps of his wisdom; the work of Red^mption is the Face
of his wisdom: A man is better known by the Features of his Face, than by the
Prints of his Feet. We with open face, or a revealed face, beholding the glory
of the Lord, 2 Cor. 3.18. Face there, refers to God, not to us; the glory of
God's wisdom is now open, and no longer covered and veiled by the shadows of
the Law. As we behold the Light glorious, as scattered in the Air before the
appearance of the Sun, but more gloriously in the Face of the Sun, when it
begins its Race in our Horizon. All the wisdom of God in Creation and
Government in his variety of Laws, was like the light the three first days of
the Creation dispersed about the World, but the fourth day it was more glorious,
when all gathered into the Body of the Sun, Genesis 1.4, 16. So the Light of
Divine wisdom and glory, was scattered about the World, and so more obscure,
till the fourth Divine day of the World about the four thousandth year, it was
gathered into one Body, the Sun of Righteousness, and so shone out more
gloriously to Men and Angels. All things are weaker, the thinner they are
extended, but stronger, the more they are united and compacted in one Body and
Appearance. In Christ, in the dispensation by him, as well as in his Person,
were hid all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge, Coloss. 2.3. Some Doles of
wisdom were given out in Creation, but the Treasures of it opened in
Redemption; the highest degrees of it that ever God did exert in the World.
Christ is therefore called the wisdom of God, as well as the power of God, 1
Cor. 1.24. and the Gospel is called the wisdom of God. Christ is the wisdom of
God principally, and the Gospel instrumentally, as it is the power of God
instrumentally to subdue the heart to himself. This is wrapped up in the
appointing Christ as Redeemer, and opened to us in the revelation of it by the
Gospel.

1. It is a hidden wisdom. In this regard God is said in the Text, to be only
wise; and it is said to be a hidden wisdom, 1 Timothy 1.17. and wisdom in a
mystery, 1 Cor. 2.7. incomprehensible to the ordinary Capacity of an Angel,
more than the abstruse qualities of the Creatures are to the understanding of
man. No wisdom of Men or Angels is able to search all the Veins of this Mine,
to tell all the threads of this Web, or to understand the luster of it; they are
as far from an ability fully to comprehend it, as they were at first to
contrive it. That wisdom that invented it, can only comprehend it. In the
uncreated Understanding only there is a clearness of light without any shadow
of darkness. We come as short of full apprehensions of it, as a Child does of
the Counsel of the wisest Prince. It is so hidden from us, that without
Revelation, we could not have the least imagination of it; and though it be
revealed to us, yet without the help of an Infiniteness of Understanding, we
cannot fully fathom it: It Is such a tractate of Divine wisdom, that the Angels
never before had seen the Edition of it, till it was published to the World.
Ephesians. 3.10. To the intent that now unto Principalities and Powers in heavenly
places might be known by the Church the manifold wisdom of God. Now made known
to them, not before; and now made known to them in the heavenly places. They
had not the knowledge of all heavenly Mysteries, though they had the possession
of heavenly Glory: They knew the Prophecies of it in the Word, but attained not
a clear Interpretation of those Prophecies, till the things that were
prophesied of came upon the Stage.

2. Manifold wisdom: So it is called. As manifold as mysterious. Variety in the
Mystery, and Mystery in every part of the Variety. It was not one single act,
but a variety of Counsels met in it; a conjunction of excellent ends and
excellent means. The glory of God, the salvation of Man, the defeat of the
Apostate Angels, the discovery of the blessed Trinity in their Nature,
Operations, their combined and distinct Acts and Expressions of Goodness: The
means are the conjunction of two Natures infinitely distant from one another;
the union of Eternity and Time, of Mortality and Immortality: Death is made the
way to Life, and Shame the path to Glory. The weakness of the Cross is the
reparation of man; and the Creature is made wise by the foolishness of
preaching; fallen man grows rich by the poverty of the Redeemer, and man is
filled by the emptiness of God: The Heir of Hell made a Son of God, by God's
taking upon him the form of a Servant; the Son of Man advanced to the highest
degree of Honor, by the Son of God becoming of no reputation.

It Is called Ephesians. 1.8. abundance of wisdom and prudence. Wisdom in the Eternal
Counsel, contriving a way; Prudence in the Temporary Revelation, ordering all
Affairs and Occurrences in the World for the attaining the end of his Counsel.
Wisdom refers to the Mystery; Prudence to the manifestation of it in fit ways
and convenient seasons. Wisdom, to the contrivance and order; Prudence, to the
execution and accomplishment. In all things God acted as became him, as a wise
and just Governor of the World, Heb. 2.10. Whether the wisdom of God might not
have found out some other way, or whether he were, in regard of the necessity
and naturalness of his Justice, limited to this, is not the question: But that
it is the best and wisest way for the manifestation of his glory, is out of
question.

This wisdom will appear in the different Interests reconciled by it. In the
Subject, the second Person in the Trinity, wherein they were reconciled: In the
two Natures, wherein he accomplished it; whereby God is made known to man in
his Glory, Sin eternally condemned, and the repenting and believing sinner
eternally rescued. The honor and righteousness of the Law vindicated both in
the Precept and Penalty. The Devil's Empire overthrown by the same Nature he
had overturned, and the Subtilty of Hell defeated by that Nature he had
spoiled: The Creature engaged in the very act to the highest Obedience and
Humility, that as God appears as a God upon his Throne, the Creature might
appear in the lowest posture of a Creature, in the depths of resignation and
dependence; the publication of this made in the Gospel, by ways congruous to
the wisdom which appeared in the execution of his Counsel, and the Conditions
of enjoying the fruit of it, most wise and reasonable.

1. The greatest different Interests are reconciled, Justice in punishing, and
Mercy in pardoning. For man had broken the Law, and plunged himself into a Gulf
of Misery: The Sword of Vengeance was unsheathed by Justice, for the punishment
of the Criminal: The Bowels of Compassion were stirred by Mercy, for the rescue
of the Miserable. Justice severely beholds the Sin, and Mercy compassionately
reflects upon the Misery. Two different claims are entered by those concerned
Attributes: Justice votes for Destruction, and Mercy votes for Salvation.
Justice would draw the Sword, and drench it in the blood of the Offender; Mercy
would stop the Sword, and turn it from the breast of the Sinner. Justice would
edge it, and Mercy would blunt it. The Arguments are strong on both sides.

1. Justice pleads. I Arraign, before thy Tribunal, a Rebel, who was the
glorious Work of thy Hands, the Center of thy rich Goodness, and a Counterpart
of thy own Image; he is indeed miserable, whereby to excite thy Compassion; but
he is not miserable, without being Criminal. Thou did create him in a state,
and with ability to be otherwise: The riches of thy Bounty aggravate the
blackness of his Crime. He is a Rebel, not by necessity, but will. What
constraint was there upon him to listen to the Counsels of the Enemy of God?
What force could there be upon him, since it is without the compass of any
Creature to work upon, or constrain the Will? Nothing of Ignorance can excuse
him; the Law was not ambiguously expressed, but in plain words, both as to
Precept and Penalty; it was writ in his Nature in legible Characters: Had he
received any disgust from thee after his Creation, it would not excuse his
Apostasy, since, as a Sovereign, thou were not obliged to thy Creature. Thou
had provided all things richly for him; he was crowned with glory and honor:
Thy infinite power had bestowed upon him an Habitation richly furnished, and
varieties of Servants to attend him. Whatever he viewed without, and whatever
he viewed within himself, were several Marks of thy Divine Bounty, to engage
him to Obedience: Had there been some reason of any disgust, it could not have
balanced that kindness which had so much reason to oblige him: However, he had
received no courtesy from the fallen Angel, to oblige him to turn into his
Camp. Was it not enough, that one of thy Creatures would have stripped thee of
the glory of Heaven, but this also must deprive thee of thy glory upon Earth,
which was due from him to thee as his Creator? Can he charge the difficulty of
the Command? No: It was rather below, than above his strength. He might rather
complain that it was no higher, whereby his Obedience and Gratitude might have
a larger scope, and a more spacious Field to move in, than a Precept so light,
so easy, as to abstain from one Fruit in the Garden. What excuse can he have,
that would prefer the liquorishness of his Sense before the dictates of his
Reason, and the Obligations of his Creation? The Law thou did set him, was
righteous and reasonable, and shall Righteousness and Reason be rejected by the
Supreme and Infallible Reason, because the rebellious Creature has trampled
upon it? What? must God abrogate his holy Law, because the Creature has
slighted it? What Reflection will this be upon the Wisdom that enacted it; And
upon the Equity of the Command and Sanction of it? Either Man must suffer, or
the Holy Law be expunged, and for ever out of date. And is it not better, Man
should Eternally smart under his Crime, than any dishonorable Reflections of
Unrighteousness be cast upon the Law, and of folly, and want foresight upon the
Lawgiver? Not to punish, would be to approve the Devils Lie, and justify the
Creatures Revolt. It would be a Condemnation of thy own Law as unrighteous, and
a Sentencing thy own Wisdom as imprudent. Better Man should for ever bear the
Punishment of his Offense, than God bear the dishonor of his Attributes:
Better Man should be miserable, than God should be unrighteous, unwise, false,
and tamely bear the denial of his Sovereignty. But what advantage would it be
to gratify Mercy by Pardoning the Malefactor? Besides the irreparable
dishonor to the Law, the falsifying thy veracity in not executing the
denounced threatening, he would receive encouragement by such a grace to spurn
more at thy Sovereignty, and oppose thy Holiness by running on in a course of
sin with hopes of Impunity: If the Creature be restored, it can not be
expected, that he that has fared so well, after the breach of it, should be
very careful of a future observance: His easy readmission would abet him in the
repetition of his Offense, and thou shall soon find him cast off all Moral
dependence on thee. Shall he be restored without any Condition, or Covenant? He
is a Creature not to be governed without a Law, and a Law is not be enacted
without a Penalty. What future regard will he have to thy Precept, or what fear
will he have of thy Threatening, if his Crime be so lightly past over? Is it the
stability of thy Word? What reason will he have to give credit to that, which
he has found already disregarded by thy self? Thy Truth in future Threatenings
will be of no force with him, who has experienced thy laying it aside in the
former. It Is necessary therefore that the rebellious creature should be
punished for the preservation of the honor of the Law and the honor of the
Lawgiver, with all those perfections that are united in the composure of it.

2. Secondly, Mercy does not want a Plea. It Is true indeed, the sin of man
wants not its aggravations: He has slighted thy Goodness, and accepted thy
Enemy as his Counselor; but it was not a pure act of his own, as the Devils
revolt was: He had a Tempter, and the Devil had none: He had, I acknowledge, an
Understanding to know thy Will, and a Power to obey it; yet he was mutable, and
had a capacity to fall. It was no difficult task that was set him, nor a hard
yoke that was laid upon him; yet he had a brutish part, as well as a rational,
and sense as well as Soul; whereas the fallen Angel was a pure Intellectual
Spirit. Did God create the World to suffer an eternal dishonor, in letting
himself be outwitted by Satan, and his work wrested out of his hands? Shall the
work of eternal Counsel presently sink into irreparable destruction, and the
honor of an Almighty and wise Work be lost in the ruin of the Creature? This
would seem contrary to the nature of thy Goodness, to make Man only to render
him miserable: To design him in his Creation for the Service of the Devil, and
not for the Service of his Creator. What else could be the issue, if the chief
work of thy Hand, defaced presently after the erecting, should for ever remain
in this marred condition? What can be expected upon the continuance of his
misery, but a perpetual hatred, and enmity of thy Creature against thee? Did
God in Creation design his being hated, or his being loved by his Creature?
Shall God make a holy Law, and have no obedience to that Law from that Creature
whom it was made to govern? Shall the curious workmanship of God, and the
excellent Engravings of the Law of Nature in his heart, be so soon defaced, and
remain in that blotted condition for ever? This fall thou could not but in
the treasures of thy Infinite Knowledge foresee; Why had thou Goodness then
to Create him in an Integrity, if thou would not have Mercy to pity him in
Misery? Shall thy Enemy for ever trample upon the honor of thy Work, and
triumph over the glory of God, and applaud himself in the success of his
subtilty? Shall thy Creature only passively glorify thee as an Avenger, and
not actively as a Compassionater? Am not I a perfection of thy Nature as well
as Justice? Shall Justice ingross all, and I never come into view? It Is
resolved already, that the fallen Angels shall be no Subjects for me to
exercise my self upon; and I have now less reason than before to plead for
them: They fell with a full consent of will, without any motion from another;
and not content with their own Apostasy they envy thee, and thy glory upon
Earth, as well as in Heaven, and have drawn into their party the best part of
the Creation below: Shall Satan plunge the whole Creation in the same
irreparable ruin with himself? If the Creature be restored, will he contract a
boldness in sin by impurity? Have thou not a Grace to render him ingenuous in
Obedience, as well as a Compassion to recover him from Misery? What will
hinder, but that such a Grace, which has established the standing Angels, may
establish this recovered Creature? If I am utterly excluded from exercising my
self on men, as I have been from Devils, a whole Species is lost; nay, I can
never expect to appear upon the Stage: If thou will quite ruin him by Justice,
and create another World, and another Man, if he stand, thy Bounty will be
eminent, yet there is no room for Mercy to act, unless by the Commission of
sin, he exposes himself to Misery; and if sin enter into another World, I have
little hopes to be heard then, if I am rejected now. Worlds will be perpetually
created by Goodness, Wisdom, and Power: Sin entering into these Worlds, will be
perpetually punished by Justice; and Mercy, which is a Perfection of thy
Nature, will for ever be commanded silence, and lie wrapped up in an eternal
Darkness. Take occasion now therefore to expose me to the knowledge of thy
Creature, since without Misery, Mercy can never set foot into the World.

Mercy pleads, if man be ruined, the Creation is in vain; Justice pleads, if
man be not sentenced, the Law is in vain; Truth backs Justice, and Grace abets
Mercy. What shall be done in this seeming Contradiction? Mercy is not
manifested, if man be not pardoned; Justice will complain, if man be not
punished.

3. An expedient is found out by the wisdom of God to answer these Demands, and
adjust the Differences between them. The wisdom of God answers, I will satisfy
your Pleas. The Pleas of Justice shall be satisfied in punishing, and the Pleas
of Mercy shall be received in pardoning. Justice shall not complain for want of
Punishment, nor Mercy for want of Compassion. I will have an infinite Sacrifice
to content Justice; and the Virtue and Fruit of that Sacrifice shall delight
Mercy. Here shall Justice have punishment to accept, and Mercy shall have
Pardon to bestow. The Rights of both are preserved, and the Demands of both
amicably accorded in punishment and pardon, by transferring the punishment of
our Crimes upon a Surety, exacting a Recompense from his Blood by Justice, and
conferring life and salvation upon us by Mercy, without the expense of one drop
of our own. Thus is Justice satisfied in its Severities, and Mercy in its
Indulgences. The riches of Grace are twisted with the terrors of Wrath. The
bowels of Mercy are wound about the flaming Sword of Justice, and the Sword of
Justice protects and secures the bowels of Mercy. Thus is God righteous without
being cruel, and merciful without being unjust; his Righteousness inviolable,
and the World recoverable. Thus is a resplendent Mercy brought forth in the
midst of all the Curses, Confusions, and Wrath threatened to the Offender.

This is the admirable temperament found out by the wisdom of God: His Justice
is honored in the Sufferings of Man's Surety; and his Mercy is honored in the
application of the Propitiation to the Offender. Romans 3.24, 25. Being justified
freely by his Grace, through the Redemption that is in Jesus Christ: Whom God
has set forth to be a Propitiation through faith in his blood, to declare his
righteousness for the remission of sins that are past, through the forbearance
of God. Had we in our Persons been Sacrifices to Justice, Mercy had for ever
been unknown; had we been solely fostered by Mercy, Justice had for ever been
secluded; had we, being guilty, been absolved, Mercy might have rejoiced, and
Justice might have complained; had we been solely punished, Justice would have
triumphed, and Mercy grieved. But by this medium of Redemption, neither has
ground of Complaint: Justice has nothing to charge, when the Punishment is
inflicted; Mercy has whereof to boast when the Surety is accepted. The Debt of
the Sinner is transferred upon the Surety, that the Merit of the Surety may be
conferred upon the Sinner; so that God now deals with our sins in a way of
consuming Justice, and with our Persons in a way of relieving Mercy. It Is
highly better, and more glorious, than if the Claim of one had been granted,
with the exclusion of the Demand of the other: It had then been either an
unrighteous Mercy, or a merciless Justice: It Is now a righteous Mercy, and a
merciful Justice.

2. The Wisdom of God appears in the Subject or Person wherein these were
accorded; The second Person in the blessed Trinity. There was a congruity in
the Sons undertaking and effecting it rather than any other Person, according
to the order of the Persons, and the several functions of the Persons, as
represented in Scripture. The Father, after Creation, is the Lawgiver, and
presents man with the Image of his own Holiness and the way to his Creatures
happiness: But after the Fall, man was too impotent to perform the Law, and too
polluted to enjoy a Felicity. Redemption was then necessary; not that it was
necessary for God to redeem man, but it was necessary for man's happiness, that
he should be recovered. To this the second Person is appointed, that by
Communion with him, man might derive a happiness, and be brought again to God.
But since man was blind in his Understanding, and an Enemy in his will to God,
there must be the exerting of a Virtue to enlighten his mind, and bend his Will
to understand, and accept of this Redemption: And this work is assigned to the
third Person, the Holy Ghost.

1. It was not congruous that the Father should assume Human Nature, and suffer
in it for the Redemption of man. He was first in order, he was the Lawgiver,
and therefore to be the Judge. As Lawgiver, it was not convenient he should
stand in the stead of the Law-breaker; and as Judge, it was as little
convenient he should be reputed a Malefactor: That he who had made a Law
against sin, denounced a Penalty upon the commission of sin, and whose part it
was actually to punish the sinner, should become sin for the wilful
Transgressor of his Law. He being the Rector, how could he be an Advocate and
Intercessor to himself? How could he be the Judge and the Sacrifice? A Judge,
and yet a Mediator to himself? If he had been the Sacrifice, there must be some
Person to examine the validity of it, and pronounce the Sentence of acceptance.
Was it agreeable that the Son should sit upon a Throne of Judgment, and the
Father stand at the Bar, and be responsible to the Son? That the Son should be
in the place of a Governor, and the Father in the place of the Criminal? That
the Father should be bruised Isa. 53.10.
by the Son, as the Son was by the Father; Zach. 13 70.
that the Son should awaken a Sword against the Father, as the Father did
against the Son; that the Father should be sent by the Son as the Son was by
the Father Gal. 4.4.
: The order of the Persons in the blessed Trinity had been inverted and
disturbed. Had the Father been sent, he had not been first in order; the Sender
is before the Person sent: As the Father begets, and the Son is begotten, Joh.
1.14. so the Father sends, and the Son is sent. He whose order is to send,
cannot properly send himself.

2. Nor was it congruous that the Spirit should he sent upon this Affair. If
the Holy Ghost had been sent to redeem us, and the Son to apply that Redemption
to us, the order of the Persons had also been inverted: The Spirit then, who
was third in order, had been second in Operation. The Son would then have
received of the Spirit, as the Spirit does now of Christ, and show it unto us,
Joh. 1.15. As the Spirit proceeded from the Father and the Son, so the proper
Function and Operation of it, was in order alter the Operations of the Father
and the Son: Had the Spirit been sent to redeem us, and the Son sent by the
Father, and the Spirit to apply that Redemption to us; the Son in his acts had
proceeded from the Father and the Spirit; the Spirit, as sender, had been in
order before the Son; whereas the Spirit is called the Spirit of Christ, as
sent by Christ from the Father, Gal. 4.6. Joh. 15.27. But as the order of the
Works, so the order of the Persons is preserved in their several Operations.
Creation, and a Law to govern the Creature, precedes Redemption. Nothing, or
that which has no being, is not capable of a redeemed being. Redemption
supposes the existence and the misery of a Person redeemed. As Creation
precedes Redemption, so Redemption precedes the application of it. As
Redemption supposes the being of the Creature, so application of Redemption
supposes the efficacy of Redemption. According to the order of these Works, is
the order of the Operations of the three Persons. Creation belongs to the
Father, the first Person. Redemption, the second work, is the Function of the
Son, the second Person. Application, the third work, is the Office of the Holy
Ghost, the third Person. The Father orders it, the Son acts it, the Holy Ghost
applies it. He purifies our Souls to understand, believe, and love these
Mysteries. He forms Christ in the womb of the Soul, as he did the Body of
Christ in the womb of the Virgin. As the Spirit of God moved upon the waters,
to garnish and adorn the World, after the Matter of it was formed, Genesis 1.2. so
he moves upon the heart, to supple it to a compliance with Christ, and draws
the Lineaments of the new Creation in the Soul, after the Foundation is laid.

The Son pays the price that was due from us to God, and the Spirit is the
earnest of the Promises of Life and Glory purchased by the Merit of that Death.
Amyra^t. Moral. Tom. 5. p. 478, 479, 480.
It Is to be observed, that the Father, under the dispensation of the Law,
proposed the Commands with the Promises and Threatenings, to the Understandings
of Men and Christ, under the dispensation of Grace, when he was upon the Earth,
proposes the Gospel as the Means of Salvation, exhorts to Faith as the
Condition of salvation; but it was neither the Function of the one, or the
other, to display such an efficacy in the Understanding, and Will to make men
believe and obey, and therefore there were such few Conversions in the time of
Christ, by his Miracles: But this work was reserved, for the fuller and
brighter appearance of the Spirit, whose Office it was to convince the World of
the necessity of a Redeemer, because of their lost Condition; of the Person of
the Redeemer, the Son of God; of the sufficiency and efficacy of Redemption,
because of his righteousness and acceptance by the Father. The Wisdom of God
is seen in preparing and presenting the Objects, and then in making impression
of them upon the Subjects he intends. And thus is the order of the three
Persons preserved.

2. The second Person had the greatest congruity to this work. He by whom God
created the World, was most conveniently employed in restoring the defaced
World: Who more fit to recover it from its lapsed state, John 1.4.
than he that had erected it in its primitive state? Hebr. 1.2. He was the
light of men in Creation, and therefore it was most reasonable he should be the
light of men in Redemption. Who sitter to reform the Divine Image, than he that
first formed it? Who fitter to speak for us to God, than he who was the Word?
Joh. 1.1. Who could better intercede with the Father, than he who was the only
begotten and beloved Son? Who so fit to redeem the forfeited Inheritance as the
Heir of all things? Who fitter and better to prevail for us to have the right
of Children, than he that possessed it by Nature? We fell from being the Sons
of God, and who fitter to introduce us into an adopted state, than the Son of
God? Herein was an expression of the richer Grace, because the first sin was
immediately against the wisdom of God, by an ambitious affectation of a wisdom
equal to God: That that Person, who was the wisdom of God, should be made a
Sacrifice for the expiation of the sin against Wisdom.

3. The wisdom of God is seen in the two Natures of Christ, whereby this
Redemption was accomplished. The Union of the two Natures was the Foundation of
the Union of God, and the fallen Creature.

1. The Union it self is admirable: The Word is made Flesh, Joh. 1.14. One
equal with God in the form of a Servant, Phil. 2.7. When the Apostle speaks of
God manifested in the flesh, he speaks the wisdom of God in a Mystery. 1 Timothy
3.16. That which is incomprehensible to the Angels, which they never imagined
before it was revealed, which perhaps they never knew till they beheld it. I am
sure, under the Law the Figures of the Cherubims were placed in the Sanctuary
with their faces looking toward the Propitiatory, in a perpetual posture of
Contemplation and Admiration, Exodus 37.9. to which the Apostle alludes, 1 Pet.
1.12.

Mysterious is the wisdom of God to unite Finite and Infinite, Almightiness and
Weakness, Immortality and Mortality, Immutability with a Thing subject to
Change; to have a Nature from Eternity, and yet a Nature subject to the
Revolutions of Time; a Nature to make a Law, and a Nature to be subjected to
the Law; to be God blessed for ever, in the bosom of his Father, and an Infant
exposed to C^l^mities from the Womb of his Mother: Terms seeming most distant
from union, most incapable of conjunction, to shake hands together, to be most
intimately conjoined; Glory and Vileness, Fullness and Emptiness, Heaven and
Earth; the Creature with the Creator; he that made all things, in one Person
with a Nature that is made; Immanuel, God and Man in one: That which is most
Spiritual to partake of that which is Carnal flesh and blood: Heb. 2.14.
One with the Father in his Godhead, one with us in his Manhood: The Godhead to
be in him in the fullest Perfection, and the Manhood in the greatest Purity:
The Creature one with the Creator, and the Creator one with the Creature. Thus
is the incomprehensible Wisdom of God declared in the Word being made Flesh.

2. In the manner of this Union. A Union of two Natures, yet no Natural Union.
It transcends all the Unions visible among Creatures Savana tri^mp. crucis Lib.
3 cap. 7. p. 211.
: It is not like the Union of Stones in a Building, or of two pieces of Timber
fastened together, which touch one anot^er only in their Superficies and
outside, without any intimacy with one another. By such a kind of Union, God
would not be man: The Word could ^ot so be made Flesh. Nor is it a Union of
Parts to the whole, as the Members and the Body; the Members are Parts, the
Body is the whole; for the whole results from the Parts, and depends upon the
Parts: But Christ being God, is independent upon any thing. The parts are in
order of Nature before the whole, but nothing can be in order of Nature before
God. Nor is it as the Union of two Liquors, as when Wine and Water are mixed
together; for they are so Incorporated, as not to be distinguished from one
another; no man can tell which Particle is Wine, and which is Water. But the
Properties of the Divine Nature are distinguishable from the Properties of the
Humane. Nor is it as the Union of the Soul and Body, so as that the Deity is
the form of the Humanity, as the Soul is the form of the Body: For as the Soul
is but a part of the Man, so the Divinity would be then but a part of the
Humanity; and as a Form, or the Soul is in a state of Imperfection, without
that which it is to inform; so the Divinity of Christ would have been
Imperfect, till it had assumed the Humanity. And so the perfection of an
Eternal Deity would have depended on a Creature of Time.

This Union of two Natures in Christ is incomprehensible: And it is a mystery
we cannot arrive to the top of, How the Divine Nature, which is the same with
that of the Father and the Holy Ghost, should be united to the Human Nature;
without its being said, that the Father and the Holy Ghost were united to the
Flesh; but the Scripture does not encourage any such Notion: It speaks only of
the Word, the Person of the Word being made Flesh. And in his being made Flesh,
distinguishes him from the Father, as the only begotten of the Father, Joh.
1.14. The Person of the Son was the term of this Union.

1. This Union does not confound the Properties of the Deity, and those of the
Humanity. They remain distinct and entire in each other. The Deity is not
changed into Flesh, nor the Flesh transformed into God: They are distinct and
yet united: They are conjoined, and yet unmixt: The Dues of either Nature are
preserved. It Is impossible that the Majesty of the Divinity can receive an
alteration: It Is as impossible that the meaness of the Humanity can receive the
Impressions of the Deity, so as to be changed into it, and a creature be
metamorphos'd into the Creator, and Temporary Flesh become Eternal, and Finite
mount up into Infinity: As the Soul and Body are united, and make one Person,
yet the Soul is not changed into the perfections of the Body, nor the Body into
the perfections of the Soul. There is a change made in the Humanity by being
advanced to a more Excellent Union, but not in the Diety; as a change is made
in the Air, when it is enlightened by the Sun, not in the Sun, which
communicates that brightness to the Air. Athanasius makes the burning Bush to
be a type of Christ's Incarnation, Exodus 3.2. The Fire signifying the Divine
Nature, and the Bush the human. The Bush is a branch springing up from the
Earth, and the Fire descends from Heaven; as the Bush was united to the Fire,
yet was not hurt by the slame, nor converted into Fire, there remained a
difference between the Bush and the Fire, yet the properties of the Fire shined
in the Bush, so that the whole Bush seemed to be on Fire. So in the Incarnation
of Christ, the Human Nature is not swallowed up by the Divine, nor changed into
it, nor confounded with it; But so united, that the properties of both remain
firm: Two are so become one that they remain two still: One person in Two
Natures, containing the glorious perfections of the Divine, and the weaknesses
of the Humane. The fullness of the Deity dwells bodily in Christ, Col. 2.9.

2. The Divine Nature is united to every part of the Humanity. The whole
Divinity to the whole Humanity; so that no part but may be said to be the
Member of God, as well as the Blood is said to be the Blood of God, Acts 20.28.
By the same reason it may be said, the Hand of God, the Eye of God, the Arm of
God. As God is infinitely present every where, so as to be excluded from no
place; so is the Deity hypostatically every where in the Humanity not excluded
from any part of it; As the light of the Sun in every part of the Air; as a
sparkling splendour in every part of the Diamond. Therefore it is concluded by
all that acknowledge the Deity of Christ, that when his Soul was separated from
the Body, the Deity remained united both to Soul and Body, as light does in
every part of a broken Crystal.

3. Therefore perpetually united Coloss. 2.9. The fullness of the Godhead dwells
in him bodily. It Dwells in him, not lodges in him as a Traveller in an Inn: It
resides in him as a fixed habitation. As God describes the perpetuity of his
presence in the Ark by his habitation or dwelling in it, Exodus 29.44. so does
the Apostle the inseparable duration of the Deity in the Humanity, and the
indissoluble Union of the Humanity with the Deity. It was united on Earth, it
remains united in Heaven. It was not an Image or an Apparition, as the Tongues
wherein the Spirit came upon the Apostles, were a Temporary Representation, not
a thing united perpetually to the person of the Holy Ghost.

4. It was a personal Union. It was not an union of persons, though it was a
personal union; So Davenant expounds, Col. 2.9. Christ did not take the Person
of Man, but the Nature of Man into subsistence with himself. The Body and Soul
of Christ were not united in themselves, had no subsistence in themselves, till
they were united to the Person of the Son of God. If the Person of a Man were
united to him, the Human Nature would have been the Nature of the Person so
united to him, and not the Nature of the Son of God, Heb. 2.14, 16. Forasmuch
then as the Children are partakers of flesh and blood, he also himself likewise
took part of the same, that through death he might destroy him, that had the
power of death, that is, the Devil. For verily he took not on him the nature of
Angels: but he took on him the seed of Abraham. He took flesh and blood to be
his own Nature, perpetually to subsist in the Person of the (...), which must
be by a Personal Union, or no way: The Deity united to the Humanity, and both
Natures to be one Person. This is the mysterious and manifold Wisdom of God.

3. The end of this Union.

1. He was hereby fitted to be Mediator. He has something like to Man, and
something like to God. If he were in all things only like to Man, he would be
at a distance from God: If he were in all things only like to God, he would be
at a distance from Man. He is a true Mediator between Mortal Sinners, and the
Immortal Righteous One. He was near to us by the Infirmities of our Nature, and
near to God by the Perfections of the Divine; as near to God in his Nature, as
to us in ours; as near to us in our Nature as he is to God in the Divine.
Nothing that belongs to the Deity, but he possesses; nothing that belongs to
the Human Nature, but he is clothed with.

He had both the Nature which had offended, and that Nature which was offended;
a Nature to please God, and a Nature to pleasure us: A Nature whereby he
experimentally knew the excellency of God, which was injured, and understood
the Glory due to him, and consequently the Greatness of the Offense, which was
to be measured by the Dignity of his Person: And a Nature whereby, he might be
sensible of the Miseries contracted by, and endure the calamities due to the
Offender, that he might both have Compassion on him, and make due Satisfaction
for him. Gomb. de relig. p. 42.
He had two distinct Natures, capable of the Affections and Sentiments of the
two Persons he was to accord; he was a just Judge of the Rights of the one, and
the demerit of the other. He could not have this full and perfect
Understanding, if he did not possess the Perfections of the one, and the
Qualities of the other: The one fitted him for things appertaining to God, Heb.
5.1. and the other furnished him with a sense of the Infirmities of man, Heb.
4.15.

2. He was hereby fitted for the working out the happiness of man. A Divine
Nature to communicate to man, and a Human Nature to carry up to God.

1. He had a Nature whereby to suffer for us, and a Nature whereby to be
meritorious in those Sufferings. A Nature to make him capable to bear the
Penalty, and a Nature to make his Sufferings sufficient for all that embraced
him. A Nature capable to be exposed to the flames of Divine Wrath, and another
Nature incapable to be crushed by the weight, or consumed by the heat of it: A
Human Nature to suffer, and stand a Sacrifice in the stead of Man; a Divine
Nature to sanctify these Sufferings, and fill the Nostrils of God with a sweet
savor, and thereby atone his wrath: The one to bear the stroke due to us, and
the other to add merit to his Sufferings for us. Had he not been Man, he could
not have filled our place in suffering; and could he otherwise have suffered,
his sufferings had not been applicable to us; and had he not been God, his
Sufferings had not been meritoriously and fruitfully applicable. Had not his
Blood been the Blood of God, it had been of as little advantage as the Blood of
an ordinary Man, or the Blood of the Legal Sacrifices Heb. 9.12.
. Nothing less than God, could have satisfied God for the injury done by Man.
Nothing less than God, could have countervail'd the Torments due to the
offending Creature: Nothing less than God, could have rescued us out of the
hands of the Jailer, too powerful for us.

2. He had therefore a Nature to be compassionate to us, and victorious for us.
A Nature sensibly to compassionate us, and another Nature to render those
Compassions effectual for our Relief; he had the Compassions of our Nature to
pity us, and the Patience of the Divine Nature to bear with us. He has the
affections of a Man to us, and the power of a God for us: A Nature to disarm
the Devil for us, and another Nature to be sensible of the working of the Devil
in us, and against us. If he had been only God, he would not have had an
experimental sense of our Misery; and if he had been only Man, he could not
have vanquished our Enemies: Had he been only God, he could not have died; and
had he been only Man, he could not have conquered Death.

3. A Nature efficaciously to instruct us. As Man, he was to instruct us
sensibly; as God, he was to instruct us infallibly. A Nature whereby he might
converse with us, and a Nature whereby he might influence us in those
Converses. A Human Mouth to minister Instruction to Man, and a Divine Power to
imprint it with efficacy.

4. A Nature to be a pattern to us. A Pattern of Grace as Man, as Adam was to
have been to his Posterity. Amyrant. morals Tom. 5. p. 468, 469.
A Divine Nature shining in the Human, the Image of the invisible God in the
glass of our Flesh, that he might be a perfect Copy for our Imitation. Col.
1.15. The Image of the invisible God, and the firstborn of every Creature in
conjunction The Virtues of the Deity are sweetened and tempered by the Union
with the Humanity, as the Beams of the Sun are by shining through a colored
Glass, which condescends more to the weakness of our eye.

Thus the Perfections of the invisible God, breaking through the firstborn of
every Creature, glittering in Christ's created state, became more sensible for
Contemplation by our Mind, and more imitable for Conformity in our practice.

5. A Nature to be a ground of confidence in our approach to God. A Nature
wherein we may behold him, and wherein we may approach to him. A Nature for our
comfort, and a Nature for our confidence. Had he been only Man, he had been too
feeble to assure us; and had he been only God, he had been too high to attract
us: But now we are allured by his Human Nature, and assured by his Divine, in
our drawing near to Heaven. Communion with God was desired by us, but our Guilt
stifled our hopes, and the Infinite Excellency of the Divine Nature, would have
dampt our hopes of speeding; but since these two Natures, so far distant, are
met in a Marriage-knot, we have a ground of hope, nay, an earnest that the
Creator and believing Creature shall meet and converse together.

And since our sins are expiated by the Death of the Human Nature in
conjunction with the Divine, our Guilt, upon believing, shall not hinder us
from this comfortable approach. Had he been only Man, he could not have assured
us an approach to God: Had he been only God, his Justice would not have
admitted us to approach to him; he had been too terrible for guilty Persons,
and too holy for polluted Persons to come near to him: But by being made Man,
his Justice is tempered, and by his being God and Man, his Mercy is ensured. A
Human Nature he had, one with us, that we might be related to God, as one with
him.

6. A Nature to derive all good to us. Had he not been Man, we had had no share
or part in him: A Satisfaction by him had not been imputed to us. If he were
not God, he could not communicate to us Divine Graces and Eternal Happiness; he
could not have had power to convey so great a good to us, had he been only Man;
and he could not have done it, according to the Rule of inflexible
righteousness, had he been only God. As Man, he is the way of Conveyance; as
God, he is the spring of Conveyance. From this Grace of Union, and the Grace of
Unction, we find Rivers of Waters flowing, to make glad the City of God.
Believers are his Branches, and draw Sap from him as he is their Root in his
Human Nature, and have an endless duration of it from his Divine. Had he not
been Man, he had not been in a state to obey the Law: Had he not been God as
well as Man, his Obedience could not have been valuable to be imputed to us.

How should this Mystery be studied by us, which would afford us both
Admiration and Content! Admiration, in the incomprehensibleness of it;
Contentment, in the fitness of the Mediator. By this Wisdom of God we receive
the props of our Faith, and the fruits of Joy and Peace. Wisdom consists in
choosing fit means, and conducting them in such a method, as may reach with good
success the variety of Marks which are aimed at. Thus has the Wisdom of God
set forth a Mediator, suited to our wants, fitted for our supplies, and ordered
so the whole Affair by the union of these two Natures in the Person of the
Redeemer, that there could be no disappointment, by all the bustle Hell and
hellish Instruments could raise against it.

4. The Wisdom of God is seen in this way of Redemption, in vindicating the
Honor and Righteousness of the Law, both as to Precept and Penalty. The first
and irreversible design of the Law, was Obedience. The Penalty of the Law had
only entrance upon Transgression. Obedience was the design, and the Penalty was
added to enforce the observance of the Precept. Genesis 2.17. Thou shall not eat;
there is the Precept: In the day thou eatest thereof thou shall dye; There is
the Penalty, Obedience was our Debt to the Law, as Creatures; Punishment was
due from the Law to us, as Sinners: We were bound to endure the Penalty for our
first Transgression, but the Penalty did not Cancel the Bond of future
Obedience: The Penalty had not been incurred without transgressing the Precept;
yet the Precept was not abrogated by enduring the Penalty. Since Man so soon
revolted, and by his Revolt fell under the threatening, the Justice of the Law
had been honored by Man's sufferings, but the holiness, and equity of the Law
had been honored by man's Obedience. The Wisdom of God finds out a Medium to
satisfy both: The Justice of the Law is preserved in the Execution of the
Penalty; and the Holiness of the Law is honored in the observance of the
Precept.

The Life of our Savior is a Conformity to the Precept, and his Death is a
Conformity to the Penalty; the Precepts are exactly performed, and the Curse
punctually executed, by a voluntary observing the one, and a voluntary
undergoing the other. It is obeyed, as if it had not been transgrest, and
executed as if it had not been obeyed.

It became the Wisdom, Justice, and Holiness of God, as the Rector of the
World, to exact it, Heb. 2.10. and it became the holiness of the Mediator to
fulfill all the righteousness of the Law Romans 8.3. Matthew. 3.15.
And thus the Honor of the Law was vindicated in all the parts of it. The
Transgression of the Law was Condemned in the Flesh of the Redeemer, and the
Righteousness of the Law was fulfilled in his Person: And both these acts of
Obedience, being counted as one Righteousness, and imputed to the believing
sinner, render him a subject to the Law, both in its preceptive and minatory
part. By Adams sinful acting we were made sinners, and by Christ's righteous
acting we are made righteous. Romans 5.10. As by one man's disobedience many were
made sinners, so by the obedience of one shall many be made righteous. The Law
was obeyed by him, that the righteousness of it might be fulfilled in us, Romans
8.4. It Is not fulfilled in us, or in our actions, by inherency, but fulfilled
in us by imputation of that righteousness which was exactly fulfilled by
another. As he died for us, and rose again for us, so he lived for us. The
Commands of the Law were as well observed for us, as the Threatenings of the Law
were endured for us. This justification of a sinner, with the preservation of
the holiness of the Law in truth, in the inward parts, in sincerity of
intention, as well as conformity in action, is the wisdom of God, the
Gospel-wisdom which David desires to know, Psalm. 51.6. Thou desire truth in
the inward parts, and in the hidden part thou shall make me to know wisdom; or
as some render it, the hidden things of wisdom. Not an inherent wisdom in the
acknowledgments of his sin, which he had confessed before; but the wisdom of God
in providing a Medicine, so as to keep up the holiness of the Law in the
observance of it in Truth, and the averting the Judgment due to the sinner. In
and by this way methodiz'd by the wisdom of God, all doubs and troubles are
discharged. Naturally if we take a view of the Law to behold its Holiness and
Justice, and then of our hearts, to see the contrariety in them to the command,
and the pollution repugnant to its holiness; and after this cast our eyes
upward, and behold a flaming Sword, edged with Curses and Wrath; Is there any
matter, but that of terror, afforded by any of these? But when we behold, in
the life of Christ, a conformity to the Mandatory part of the Law, and in the
Cross of Christ, a sustaining the minatory part of the Law; this wisdom of God
gives a well-grounded and rational dismiss to all the horrors that can seize
upon us.

5. The wisdom of God in Redemption is visible in manifesting two contrary
Affections at the same time, and in one act: The greatest hatred of Sin, and
the greatest love to the Sinner. In this way he punishes the sin without
ruining the sinner, and repairs the ruins of the sinner, without indulging the
sin. Here is eternal love, and eternal hatred; a condemning the sin to what it
merited, and an advancing the sinner to what he could not expect. Herein is the
choicest love, and the deepest hatred manifested. An implacableness against the
sin, and a placableness to the sinner. His hatred of sin has been discovered
in other ways; in punishing the Devil without remedy; sentencing Man to an
expulsion from Paradise, though seduced by another; in accursing the Serpent,
an irrational Creature, though but a misguided Instrument. The whole tenor of
his Threatenings declare his loathing of sin, and the sprinklings of his
Judgments in the World, and the horrible expectations of terrified Consciences
confirm it. But what are all these Testimonies to the highest evidence that can
possibly be given in the sheathing the Sword of his wrath in the heart of his
Son? If a Father should order his Son to take a mean Garb below his Dignity,
order him to be dragged to Prison, seem to throw off all Affection of a Father
for the severity of a Judge, condemn his Son to a horrible Death, be a
Spectator of his bleeding Condition, withhold his hand from asswaging his
Misery, regard it rather with Joy than Sorrow, give him a bitter Cup to drink,
and stand by to see him drink it off to the bottom, dregs and all, and s^ash
frowns in his face all the while; and this not for any fault of his own, but
the Rebellion of some Subjects he undertook for, and that the Offenders might
have a pardon sealed by the Blood of the Son the sufferer; all this would
evidence his detestation of the Rebellion, and his affection to the Rebels; his
hatred to their Crime, and his love to their Welfare. This did God do; He
delivered Christ up for our Offenses, Romans 8.32. the Father gave him the Cup,
John 18 18. the Lord bruised him with pleasure, Isa. 53.10. and that for sin:
^e transferred upon the shoulders of his Son the pain we had merited, that the
Criminal might be restored to the place he had forfeited. He hates the sin so,
as to condemn it for ever, and wrap it up in the Curse he had threatened; and
loves the sinner believing and repenting so, as to mount him to an expectation
of a happiness exceeding the first state, both in glory and perpetuity. Instead
of an Earthly Paradise, lays the Foundation of an Heavenly Mansion, brings
forth a weight of Glory from a weight of Misery, separates the comfortable
light of the Sun, from the scorching heat we had deserved at his hands. Thus
has Gods hatred of sin been manifested. He is at an eternal Defiance with sin,
yet nearer in alliance with the sinner, than he was before the Revolt: As if
man's miserable Fall had endeared him to the Judge. This is the wisdom and
prudence of Grace wherein God has abounded, Ephesians. 1.9. A wisdom in twisting the
happy restoration of the broken Amity, with an everlasting Curse, upon that
which made the breach, both upon sin the Cause, and upon Satan the Seducer to
it. Thus is hatred and love in their highest glory manifested together: Hatred
to sin, in the death of Christ, more than if the torments of Hell had been
undergone by the sinner; and love to the sinner, more than if he had, by an
absolute and simple Bounty, bestowed upon him the possession of Heaven; because
the gift of his Son, for such an end, is a greater token of his boundless
Affections, than a reinstating Man in Paradise. Thus is the wisdom of God seen
in Redemption; consuming the sin, and recovering the sinner.

6. The wisdom of God is evident in overturning the Devil's Empire, by the
Nature he had vanquished, and by ways quite contrary to what that malicious
Spirit could imagine. The Devil indeed read his own doom in the first Promise,
and found his ruin resolved upon, by the means of the Seed of the Woman, but by
what Seed, was not so easily known to him And indeed the (...) ^^racles,
managed by the Devils, declared that they were not long to hold their Scepter
in the World, but the Hebrew Child should vanquish them
And the methods whereby it was to be brought about, was a Mystery kept secret
from the malicious Devils, since it was not discovered to the obedient Angels.
He might know from Isa. 53. that the Redeemer was assured to divide the Spoil
with the strong, and rescue a part of the lost Creation out of his hands; and
that this was to be effected, by making his Soul an offering for sin: But could
he imagine which way his Soul was to be made such an Offering? He shrewdly
suspected Christ just after his Inauguration into his Office by Bapism, to be
the Son of God. But did he ever dream that the Messiah, by dying as a reputed
Malefactor, should be a Sacrifice for the expiation of the sin, the Devil had
introduced by his subtilty? Did he ever imagine a Cross should dispossess him
of his Crown, and that dying groans should wrest the Victory out of his hands?

He was conquered by that Nature he had cast headlong into ruin: A Woman, by
his subtilty, was the occasion of our death; and a Woman, by the conduct of the
only wise God, brings forth the Author of our Life, and the Conqueror of our
Enemies. The Flesh of the old Adam had infected us, and the Flesh of the new
Adam cures us. 1 Cor. 15.21. By man came death; by man also came the
resurrection from the dead. We are killed by the old Adam, and raised by the
new. As among the Israelites, a fiery Serpent gave the wound, and a brazen
Serpent administers the Cure. The Nature that was deceived bruiseth the
Deceiver, and razeth up the Foundations of his Kingdom. Satan is defeated by
the Counsels he took to secure his Possession, and loses the Victory by the
same means whereby he thought to preserve it.

His tempting the Jews to the sin of Crucifying the Son of God, had a contrary
success to his tempting Adam to eat of the Tree. The first death he brought
upon Adam, ruined us, and the death he brought by his Instrum^nts upon the
second Adam, restored us. By a Tree, if one may so say, he had Triumphed over
the World, and by the fruit of a Tree, one hanging upon a Tree, he is
disch^^ged of his power over us, Heb. 2.14. Through death he destroyed him that
had the power of death. And thus the Devil ruins his own Kingdom while he
thinks to confirm and enlarge it. And is defeated by his own policy, whereby he
thought to continue the World under his chains, and deprive the Creator of the
World of his purposed honor. What deeper Counsel could he resolve upon for
his own security, than to be instrumental in the death of him, who was God, the
terror of the Devil himself, and to bring the Redeemer of the World to expire
with disgrace in the sight of a multitude of men? Thus did the Wisdom of God
shine forthin restoring us by methods seemingly repugnant to the end he aimed
at, and above the suspicion of a subtle Devil, whom he intended to baffle.

Could he Imagine that we should be healed by stripes, quickened by death,
purified by blood, crowned by a cross, advanced to the highest honor by the
lowest humility, comforted by sorrows, glorified by disgrace, absolved by
condemnation, and made rich by poverty? That the sweetest honey should at once
spring out of the belly of a dead Lion, the Lion of the tribe of Judah and out
of the bosom of the living God? How wonderful is this Wisdom of God! That the
seed of the woman, born of a mean Virgin, brought forth in a stable, spending
his days in affliction, misery and poverty, without any pomp and splendour,
passing some time in a Carpenters shop, with Carpenters tools, and afterward
exposed to a horrible and disgraceful death, Mark. 6 6.
should by this way pull down the gates of Hell, subvert the kingdom of the
Devil, and be the hammer to break in pieces that power, which he had so long
exercised over the World! Thus became he the Author of our life, by being bound
for a while in the chains of death, and arrived to a principality over the most
malicious powers by being a prisoner for us, and the anv^l of their rage and
fury.

7. The Wisdom of God appears, In giving us this way the surest ground of
comfort and the strongest incentive to obedience. The Rebel is reconciled, and
the rebellion shamed; God is propitiated and the sinner sanctified by the same
blood. What can more contribute to our comfort and confidence, than Gods
richest gift to us? What can more inflame our love to him, than our recovery
from death by the oblation of his Son to misery and death for us? It does as
much engage our duty as secure our happiness. It presents God glorious and
gracious, and therefore every way fit to be trusted in regard of the interest
of his own glory in it, and in regard of the effusions of his grace by it. It
renders the Creature obliged in the highest manner, and so awakens his industry
to the strictest and noblest obedience. Nothing so effectual as a crucified
Christ to wean us from sin and stifle all motions of despair; a means, in
regard of the Justice signalized in it, to make man to hate the sin which had
ruined him; and a means, in regard of the love expressed, to make him delight in
that Law he had violated, 2. Cor. 5.14, 15. The love of Christ, and therefore
the love of God expressed in it, constrains us no longer to live to our selves.

1. It is a ground of the highest comfort and confidence in God. Since he has
given such an evidence of his impartial truth to his threatening for the honor
of his Justice, we need not question but he will be as punctual to his promise
for the honor of his mercy. It Is a ground of confidence in God, since he has
redeemed us in such a way as glorifies the steadiness of his veracity, as well
as the severity of his Justice; We may well trust him for the performance of
his promise, since we have experience of the execution of his threatening; his
m^rciful truth will as much engage him to accomplish the one, as his just truth
did to inflict the other. The goodness which shone forth in weaker rays in the
Creation, breaks out with stronger beams in redemption. And the mercy which
before the appearance of Christ was manifested in some small Rivulets,
diffuseth itself like a boundless Ocean. That God that was our Creator, is our
Redeemer, the Repayrer of our Breaches, and the Restorer of our Paths to dwell
in. And the plenteous Redemption from all Iniquity, manifested in the
Incarnation and Passion of the Son of God, is much more a ground of hope in the
Lord, than it was in the past Ages, when it could not be said, the Lord has,
but the Lord shall redeem Israel from all his iniquities, Psalm. 130.8. It is a
full Warrant to cast our selves into his Arms.

2. At incentive to obedience.

1. The Commands of the Gospel require the obedience of the Creature. There is
not one Precept in the Gospel which interferes with any rule in the Law, but
strengthens it, and represents it in its true exactness: The heat to scorch us
is allaied, but the light to direct us is not extinguished. Not the least
allowance to any sin is granted; not the least affection to any sin is
indulged. The Law is tempered by the Gospel, but not nulled and cast out of
doors by it; It enacts that none but those that are sanctified, shall be
glorified; that there must be Grace here, if we expect Glory hereafter; that we
must not presume to expect an admittance to the Vision of Gods face, unless our
Souls be clothed with a robe of Holiness, Heb. 12.14. It requires an obedience
to the whole Law in our intention and purpose, and an endeavor to observe it
in our actions: It promotes the honor of God, and ordains a universal Charity
among men; it reveals the whole Counsel of God, and furnishes men with the
holiest Laws.

2. It presents to us the exactest pattern for our Obedience. The redeeming
Person is not only a Propitiation for the sin, but a pattern to the sinner, 1
Pet. 2.21. The Conscience of man, after the fall of Adam, approved of the
reason of the Law, but by the corruption of Nature, man had no strength to
perform the Law. The possibility of keeping the Law by Human Nature, is
evidenced by the Appearance and life of the Redeemer, and an assurance given
that it shall be advanced, to such a state, as to be able to observe it: We
aspire to it in this life, and have hopes to attain it in a future: And while
we are here, the Actor of our Redemption is the copy for our Imitation. The
Pattern to imitate is greater than the Law to be ruled by. What a luster did
his Virtues cast about the World? How attractive are his Graces? With what high
Examples, for all Duties, has he furnished (...) out of the copy of his Life?

3. It presents us with the strongest motives to Obedience. Tit. 2.11, 12. The
grace of God teaches us to deny ungodliness. What Chains bind faster and closer
than love? Here is love to our nature, in his Incarnation; love to us, though
Enemies, in his Death and Passion; Encouragements to Obedience by the proffers
of Pardon for former Rebellions: By the disobedience of man, God introduces
his redeeming Grace, and ingageth his Creature to more Ingenious and excellent
returns than his Innocent state could oblige him to. In his Created state he
had goodness to move him, he has the same goodness now to oblige him as a
Creature, and a greater love and mercy to oblige him as a repaired Creature;
and the terror of Justice is taken off, which might invenom his Heart as a
Criminal. In his revolted state he had misery to discourage him; in his
redeemed state he has love to attract him. Without such a way, black despair
had seized upon the Creature exposed to a remediless misery: And God would have
had no returns of love from the best of his earthly Works: But if any sparks of
Ingenuity be left, they will be excited by the efficacy of this Argument.

The willingness of God to receive returning sinners, is manifested in the
highest degree; and the willingness of a sinner to return to him in duty has
the strongest engagements. He has done as much to encourage our Obedience, as
to illustrate his Glory. We cannot conceive that could be done greater for the
salvation of our Souls, and consequently what could have been done more to
enforce our observance. We have a Redeemer, as man, to copy it to us, and as
God to perfect us in it. It would make the heart of any to tremble to wound him
that has provided such a salve for our Sores, and to make Grace a warrant for
Rebellion: Motives, capable to form Rocks into a flexibleness. Thus is the
Wisdom of God seen in giving us a ground of the surest confidence, and
furnishing us with incentives to the greatest Obedience by the horrors of
wrath, death and sufferings of our Savior.

8. The Wisdom of God is apparent in the Condition he has settled for the
enjoying the fruits of Redemption, and this is faith, a wise and reasonable
Condition: And the concomitants of it.

1. In that it is suited to man's lapsed state and Gods Glory. Innocence is not
required here; that had been a Condition impossible in its own nature after the
Fall: The rejecting of Mercy is now only condemning, where mercy is proposed:
Had the Condition of Perfection in Works been required, it had rather been a
condemnation than redemption. Works are not demanded whereby the Creature might
ascribe any thing to himself; but a Condition which continues in man a sense of
his Apostasy, abates all aspiring Pride, and makes the reward of Grace not of
Debt: A Condition whereby Mercy is owned, and the Creature emptied: Flesh
silenced in the Dust, and God set upon his Throne of Grace and Authority: The
Creature brought to the lowest debasement, and Divine Glory raised to the
highest pitch. The Creature is brought to acknowledge Mercy, and seal to
Justice, to own the Holiness of God in the hatred of sin, the Justice of God in
the Punishment of sin, and the Mercy of God in the pardoning of sin: A
condition that despoils Nature of all its pretended excellency: Beats down the
glory of man at the foot of God, 1 Cor. 1.29.31. It subjects the Reason and
Will of man to the Wisdom and Authority of God; it brings the Creature to an
unreserved submission and entire resignation. God is made the Sovereign Cause
of all; the Creature continued in his emptiness, and reduced to a greater
dependence upon God than by a Creation; depending upon him for a constant
influx for an entire happiness. A Condition that renders God glorious in the
Creature, and the fallen creature happy in God: God glorious in his
Condescension to Man, and Man happy in his emptiness before God.

Faith is made the Condition of man's recovery, that the lofty looks of man
might be humbled, and the haughtiness of man be pulled down, Isa. 2.11. that
every towering imagination might be levelled, 2. Cor. 10.5. Man must have all
from without doors; he must not live upon himself, but upon another allowance.
He must stand to the provision of God, and be a perpetual Suitor at his Gates.

2. A Condition opposite to that which was the cause of the Fall. We fell from
God an unbelief of the Threatening, he recovers us by a belief of the Promise;
by Unbelief we laid the Foundation of Gods dishonor, by Faith therefore God
exalts the Glory of his free Grace. We lost our selves by a desire of self
dependence, and our return is ordered by a way of self-emptiness. It Is
reasonable we should be restored in a way contrary to that whereby we fell: We
sinned by a refusal of cleaving to God, it is a part of divine Wisdom to restore
us in a denial of our own righteousness and strength Laud against Fisher. p. 5.
. Man having sinned by Pride, the Wisdom of God humbles him (says one) at the
very root of the Tree of Knowledge, and makes him deny his own Understanding,
and submit to Faith, or else, for ever to lose his desired Felicity.

3. It is a Condition suited to the Common Sentiment and custom of the World.
There is more of belief than reason in the World. All Instructers and Masters
in Sciences and Arts, require first a belief in their Disciples, and a
resignation of their Understandings and Wills to them. And it is the Wisdom of
God to require that of man, which his own reason makes him submit to another
which is his fellow Creature. He therefore that quarrels with the Condition of
Faith, must quarrel with all the World, since Belief is the beginning of all
Knowledge Bradward p. 28.
; yea, and most of the Knowledge in the World, may rather come under the title
of Belief, than of Knowledge: For what we think we know this day, we may find
from others such Arguments as may stagger our Knowledge, and make us doubt of
that we thought our selves certain of before: Nay sometimes we change our
Opinions, our Selves, without an^ Instructor; and see a reason to entertain an
Opinion quite contrary to what we had before. And if we found a general
Judgment of others ^o vote against what we think we know, it would make us give
the less Credit to our selves and our own Sentiments. All Knowledge in the
World, is only a belief depending upon the testimony or arguings of others; for
indeed it may be said of all men as in Job, 8. Job. 9. We are but of yesterday,
and know nothing: Since therefore Belief is so universal a thing in the World,
the Wisdom of God requires that of us which every man must count reasonable, or
render himself utterly ignorant of any thing. It is a Condition that is common
to all Religions. All Religions are Founded upon a Belief: Unless men did
believe future things, they would not hope nor fear. A Belief and Resignation
was required in all the Idolatries in the World; so that God requires nothing
but what a universal custom of the World gives its suffrage to the
reasonableness of: Indeed justifying Faith is not suited to the Sentiments of
men; but that Faith which must precede justifying, a belief of the Doctrine,
though not comprehended by Reason, is common to the custom of the World
J^neway p. 88.
. It Is no less madness not to submit our Reason to Faith, than not to regulate
our Fancies by Reason.

4. This Condition of Faith and Repentances is suited to the Conscience of Men.
The Law of Nature teaches us, that we are bound to believe every revelation
from God, when it is made known to us: And not only to assent to it as true,
but embrace it as good. This Nature dictates, that we are as much oblige^ to
believe God, because of his Truth, as to love him, because of his Goodness.
Every man's Reason tells him, he cannot obey a Precept, nor depend upon a
Promise, unless he believes both the one and the other. No man's Conscience,
but will inform him upon hearing the revelation of God, concerning his
excellent contrivance of Redemption, and the way to Enjoy it, that it is very
reasonable he should strip off all affections to sin, lie down in Sorrow and
bewail what he has done amiss against so tender a God. Can you expect that any
man that Promises you a great honor or a rich donative, should demand less of
you than to trust his word, bear an affection to him, and return him kindness?
Can any less be expected by a Prince than obedience from a pardoned Subject,
and a redeemed Captive? If you have injured any man in his Body, Estate,
Reputation, would you not count it a reasonable Condition for the partaking of
his Clemency and Forgiveness, to express a hearty sorrow for it, and a
resolution not to fall into the like Crime again? Such are the Conditions of
the Gospel, suited to the Consciences of men.

5. The Wisdom of God appears, in that this condition was only likely to attain
the end. There are but two Common Heads appointed by God, Adam and Christ: By
one we are made a living Soul, by the other a quickening Spirit: By the one we
are made sinners, by the other we are made righteous. Adam fell as a Head, and
all his members, his whole Issue and Posterity fell with him, because they
proceeded from him by natural Generation. But since the second Adam can not be
our Head by natural Generation, there must be some other way of engrafting us
in him, and uniting us to him as our Head, which must be Moral and Spiritual;
this can not rationally be conceived to be by any other way than What is
suitable to a reasonable Creature, and therefore must be by an act of the Will,
Consent and Acceptance, and owning the terms settled for an Admission to that
Union. And this is that we properly call Faith, and therefore called a
receiving of him, John 1.12.

Now this Condition of enjoying the Fruits of Redemption could not be a bare
Knowledge; for that is but only an act of the Understanding, and does not in
itself include the act of the Will, and so would have united only one Faculty
to him, not the whole Soul: But Faith in an act both of the Understanding and
Will too; and principally of the Will, which does presuppose an act of the
Understanding: For there cannot be a Persuasion in the Will, without a
Proposition from the Understanding. The Understanding must be convinced of the
truth and goodness of a thing, before the Will can be persuaded to make any
motion toward it; and therefore all the Promises, Invitations and Proffers are
suited to the Understanding and Will; To the Understanding in regard of
Knowledge, to the Will in regard of Appetite; to the Understanding as true, to
the Will as good; To the Understanding as practical and influencing the Will.

2. Nor could it be an entire Obedience. That, as was said before, would have
made the Creature have some matter of boasting, and this was not suitable to the
Condition he was sunk into by the fall. Besides, man's Nature being corrupted,
was rendered incapable to obey, and unable to have one thought of a due
Obedience. 2 Cor. 3.5.

When man turned from God, and upon that was turned out of Paradise, his return
was impossible by any strength of his own; his Nature was as much corrupted as
his re-entrance into Paradise was prohibited. That Covenant, whereby he stood
in the garden, required a perfection of action and intention in the observance
of all the Commands of God: But his Fall had cracked his Ability to recover
happiness, by the terms and condition of an entire Obedience; yet man being a
person governable by a Law, and capable of happiness by a Covenant; if God
would restore him, and enter into a Covenant with him, we must suppose it to
have some Condition, as all Covenants have. That Condition could not be works,
because man's Nature was polluted. Indeed, had God reduced man's Body to the
dust, and his Soul to nothing, and framed another man, he might have governed
him by a Covenant of Works: But that had not been the same man that had
revolted, and upon his revolt was stained and disabled. But suppose God had by
any transcendent Grace, wholly purified him from the stain of his former
Transgression, and restored to him the strength and ability he had lost, might
he not as easily have rebelled again? And so the Condition would never have
been accomplished, the Covenant never have been performed, and Happiness never
have been enjoyed. There must be some other Condition then in the Covenant God
would make for man's Security.

Now Faith is the most proper for receiving the Promise of Pardon of Sin:
Belief of those promises is the first natural reflection that a Malefactor can
make upon a pardon offered him, and acceptance of it is the first consequent
from that belief. Hence is Faith entitled a persuasion of, and embraceing the
Promises, Heb, 11.13. and a receiving the atonement, Romans 5.11.

Thus the Wisdom of God is apparent in annexing such a Condition to the
Covenant, whereby man is restored, as answers the end of God for his glory, the
State, Conscience, and necessity of Man, and had the greatest congruity to his
recovery.

9. This Wisdom of God is manifest in the manner of the publishing and
propagating this Doctrine of Redemption.

1. In the gradual discoveries of it. Flashing a great light in the face of a
sudden, is amazing; should the Sun glare in our Eye in all its brightness on a
sudden, after we have been in a thick darkness, it would blind us, instead of
comforting us: So great a work as this must have several digestions.

God first reveals of what Seed the Redeeming Person should be, the Seed of the
Woman, Genesis 3.15. Then of what Nation, Genesis 26.4. then of what Tribe, Genesis
49.12. of the Tribe of Judah; then of what Family, the family of David; then
what works he was to do, what sufferings to undergo. The first Predictions of
our Savior were obscure. Adam could not well see the Redemption in the
Promise, for the punishment of death which succeeded in the Threatening; the
Promise exercised his Faith, and the Obscurity and bodily Death, his Humility.
The Promise made to Abraham was clearer than the Revelations made before, yet
he could not tell how to reconcile his Redemption with his Exile. God supported
his Faith by the Promise, and exercised his Humility by making him a Pilgrim,
and keeping him in a perpetual dependence upon him in all his motions.

The Declarations to Moses are brighter than those to Abraham. The delineations
of Christ by David in the Psalms, more illustrious than the former. And all
those exceeded by the Revelations made to the Prophet Isaiah, and the other
Prophets, according as the Age did approach, wherein the Redeemer was to enter
into his Office.

God wrapped up this Gospel in a multitude of Types and Ceremonies, fitted to the
Infant state of the Church, Gal. 4.3. An Infant State is usually affected with
sensible things; yet all those Ceremonies were fitted to that great end of the
Gospel, which he would bring forth in time to the World. And the Wisdom of God
in them would be amazing, if we could understand the analogy between every
Ceremony in the Law and the thing signified by it. As it cannot bu^ affect a
diligent Reader to observe that little account of them we have by the Apostle
Paul, sprinkled in his Eipstles, and more largely in that to the Hebrews. As
the Political Laws of the Jews flowed from the depth of the Moral Law, so their
Ceremonial did from the depth of Evangelical Counsels, and all of them had a
special relation to the honor of God, and the debasing the Creature.

Though God formed the Mass and Matter of the World at the first creation at
once, yet his Wisdom took six days time for the disposing and adorning it. The
more illustrious truths of God are not to be comprehended on a sudden by the
weakness of men: Christ did not declare all Truths to his Disciples in the time
of his life, because they were not able at that present to bear them, John,
16.12. Ye cannot bear them now. Some were reserved for his Resurrection, others
for the coming of the Spirit; and the full discovery of all kept back for
another World. This Doctrine God figured out in the Law, Oracled by the
Prophets, and unvailed by Christ and his Apostles:

2. The Wisdom of God appeared, in using all proper means to render the belief
of it easy.

1. The most minute things that were to be transacted, were predicted in the
ancient foregoing Age, long before the comeing of the Redeemer: The vinegar and
gall offered to him upon the Cross, the parting his Garments, the not breaking
of his Bones, the piercing of his Hands and Feet, the betraying of him, the
slighting of him by the multitude, all were exactly painted and represented in
variety of Figures. There was Light enough to good men not to mistake him; and
yet not so plain, as to hinder bad men from being Serviceable to the counsels
of God in the crucifying of him when he came.

2. The translation of the Old Testament from the private Language of the Jews,
into the most public Language of the World. That Translation which we call
Septuagint, from Hebrew into Greeks, some years before the coming of Christ,
that Tongue being most diffused at that time, by reason of the Macedonian
Empire raised by Alexander, and the University of Athens, to which other
Nations resorted for Learning and Education: This was a preparation for the
Sons of Japhet to dwell in the Tents of Shem. By this was the entertainment of
the Gospel facilitated: When they compared the Prophecies of the Old Testament,
with the Declarations of the New, and found things so long predicted before
they were transacted in the public view.

3. By ordering concurrent Testimonies as to matter of Fact, that the matter of
Fact was not deniable. That there was such a Person as Christ, that his
Miracles were stupendous, that h^s Doctrine did not incline to Sedition, that
he affected not Worldly Applause, that he did suffer at Jerusalem, was
acknowledged by all: Not a man among the greatest Enemies of Christians, was
found, that denied the matter of Fact. And this great truth, that Christ is the
Messiah and Redeemer, has been, with universal consent, owned by all the
Professors of Christianity throughout the World: Whatever Bickerings there have
been among them about some particular Doctrines, they all centred in that Truth
of Christ's being the Redeemer. The first publication of this Doctrine was
sealed by a thousand Miracles, and so illustrious, that he was an utter
Stranger to the World that was ignorant of them.

4. In keeping up some Principles and Opinions in the World to facilitate the
belief of this, or render men inexcusable for rejecting of it. The Incarnation
of the Son of God could not be so strange to the World, if we consider the
general belief of the Appearances (...)
of their Gods among them; that the Epicureans, and others, that denied any
such Appearances, were counted Atheists Dionis. Halicar. Antiq. l. 2. p. 128.
And Pythagoras was esteemed to be one, not of the inferior Genij and Lunar
Demons, but one of the higher Gods, who appeared in a Human Body, for the
curing and rectifying mortal Life Iamblych. Vit. Pythag. l. 1. cap. 6. p. 44.
and lib. 2. c. 19. p. 94.
. And himself tells Abaris the Scythian, that he was (...), that he took the
flesh of man, that men might not be astonished at him, and in a fright fly from
his Instructions. It was not therefore accounted an irrational thing among
them, that God should be Incarnate: But indeed the great stumbling block was a
crucified God. But had they known the holy and righteous Nature of God, the
Malice of sin, the universal Corruption of Human Nature, the first threatening,
and the necessity of vindicating the honor of the Law, and clearing the
Justice of God; the Notion of his crucifixion would not have appeared so
incredible, since they believed the possibility of an Incarnation.

Another Principle was that universal One of Sacrifices for Expiation, and
rendering God propitious to man, and was practiced among all Nations. I remember
not any wherein this Custom did not prevail; for it did even among those People
where the Jews, as being no trading Nation, had not any Commerce; and also in
America, found out in these latter Ages. It was not a Law of Nature, no man can
find any such thing written in his own heart, but a Tradition from Adam. Now
that among the loss of so many other Doctrines, that were handed down from Adam
to his immediate Posterity, as in particular that of the Seed of the Woman,
which one would think a necessary Appendix to that of Sacrificing; This latter
should be preserved as a Fragment of an ancient Tradition, seems to be an Act
of Divine Wisdom, to prepare men for the entertainment of the Doctrine of the
great Sacrifice for the Expiation of the sin of the World. And as the Apostle
forms his Argument from the Jewish Sacrifices in the Epistle to the Hebrews,
for the convincing them of the end of the death of Christ, so did the Ancient
Fathers make use of this practice of the Heathen, to convince them of the same
Doctrine.

5. The wisdom of God appeared in the time and circumstances of the first
solemn publication of the Gospel by the Apostles at Jerusalem. The Relation you
may read in Acts 2. from verse 1. to the 12th. The Spirit was given to the
Apostles on the day of Pentecost; a time wherein there were multitudes of Jews
from all Nations, not only near, but remote, that heard the great things of God
spoken in the several Languages of those Nations, where their Habitations were
fixed; and that by twelve illiterate men, that two or three hours before knew
no Language but that of their Native Country.

It was the custom of the Jews, that dwelt among other Nations, at a distance
from Jerusalem, to assemble together at Jerusalem at the Feast of Pentecost:
And God pitched upon this Season, that there might be Witnesses of th^s Miracle
in many parts of the World: There were some of every Nation under Heaven; verse
5. that is, of that known part of the World, so says the Text. Fourteen
several Nations are mentioned; and Proselytes as well as Jews by Birth. They
are called devout men, men of Conscience, whose testimony would carry weight
with it among their Neighbors at their return, because of their Reputation by
their Religious Carriage.

Again, this was not heard and seen by some of them at one time, and some at
another, by some one hour, by others the next successively Faucheur in loc. p.
294, 295.
, but altogether, in a Solemn Assembly, that the testimony of so many Witnesses
at a time, might be more valid, and the truth of the Doctrine appear more
illustrious and undeniable. And it must needs be astonishing to them, to hear
that Person magnified in so miraculous a manner, who had so lately been
condemned by their Countrymen as a Malefactor.

Wisdom consists in the timing of things. And in this Circumstance does the
wisdom of God appear, in furnishing the Apostles with the Spirit at such a
time, and bringing forth such a Miracle, as the gift of Tongues, on a sudden,
that every Nation might hear in their own Language, the wonder of Redemption,
and as Witnesses at their returns into their own Countries, report it to
others; that the credit they had, in their several Places, might facilitate the
belief and entertainment of the Gospel, when the Apostles, or others, should
arrive to those several Charges and Dioceses appointed for them to preach the
Gospel in. Had this Miracle been wrought in the presence only of the
Inhabitants of Judea, that understood only their own Language, or one or two of
the Neighboring Tongues, it had been counted by them rather a Madness than a
Miracle. Or had they understood all the Tongues which they spoke, the news of
it had spread no further than the limits of their own Habitations, and had been
confined within the narrow bounds of the Land of Judea: But now it is carried
to several remote Nations, where any of those Auditors then assembled had their
Residence.

As God chose the time of the Passover for the Death of Christ, that there
might be the greatest Number of the Inhabitants of the Country, as Witnesses of
the Matter of Fact, the Innocence and Sufferings of Christ, so he chose the
time of Pentecost for the first publishing the value and end of this Blood to
the World.

Thus the Evangelical Law was given in a Confluence of People from all Parts
and Nations, because it was a Covenant with all Nations: And the variety of
Languages spoken by a Company of poor Galileans, bred up at the Lake of
Tiberias, and in poor corners of Canaan, without the Instructions of men for so
great a Skill, might well evidence to the hearers, that God that brought the
Confusion of Languages first at Babel, did only work that Cure of them, and
combine all together at Jerusalem.

3. The wisdom of God is seen in the Instruments he employed in the publishing
the Gospel. He did not employ Philosophers, but Fishermen, used not acquired
Arts, but infused wisdom and courage. This Treasure was put into, and preserved
in Earthen Vessels, that the Wisdom, as well as the Power of God, might be
magnified. The weaker the means are which attain the end, the greater is the
skill of the Conductor of them.

Wise Princes choose men of most credit, Interest, Wisdom, and Ability to be
Ministers of their Affairs, and Ambassadors to others. But what were these that
God chose for so great a Work, as the publishing a new Doctrine to the World?
What was their quality but mean, what was their Authority, without Interest?
What was their Ability, without eminent Parts for so great a Work, but what
Divine Grace in a special manner endowed them with? Nay, what was their
disposition to it? as dull and unweildy. Witness the frequent rebukes for their
slow-heartedness, from their Master, when he conversed in the Flesh with them.
And One of the greatest of them, so fond of the Jewish Ceremonies and
Pharisaical Principles, wherein he had been more than ordinarily principled,
that he hated the Christian Religion to extirpation, and the Professors of it
to death; by those ways which were out of the rode of Human wisdom, and would
be accounted the greatest absurdity to be practiced by men that have a repute
for Discretion, did God advance his Wisdom. 1 Cor. 1.25. The foolishness of God
is wiser than man. By this means it was indisputably evidenced to unbyassed
Minds, that the Doctrine was Divine. It could not rationally be imagined, that
Instruments destitute of all Human Advantages, should be able to vanquish the
World, confound Judaism, overturn Heathenism, chase away the Devils, strip them
of their Temples, alienate the Minds of men from their several Religions, which
had been rooted in them by Education, and established by a long succession. It
could not, I say, reasonably be imagined to be without a Supernatural
Assistance, an heavenly and efficacious working: Whereas, had God taken a
Course agreeable to the prudence of Man, and used those that had been furnished
with Learning, tip'd with Eloquence, and armed with Human Authority, the
Doctrines would have been thought to have been of a Human Invention, and to be
some subtle Contrivance for some unworthy and ambitious end: The nothingness
and weakness of the Instruments manifest them to be conducted by a Divine
Power, and declare the Doctrine it self to be from Heaven.

When we see such feeble Instruments proclaiming a Doctrine repugnant to Flesh
and Blood, sounding forth a crucified Christ to be believed in, and trusted on,
and declaiming against the Religion and Worship, under which the Roman Empire
had long flourished; exhorting them to the Contempt of the World, preparation
for Afflictions, denying themselves, and their own Honors, by the hopes of an
unseen reward, things so repugnant to Flesh and Blood. And these Instruments
concurring in the same Story, with an admirable Harmony in all parts, and
sealing this Doctrine with their Blood; can we upon all this, ascribe this
Doctrine to a Human Contrivance, or fix any lower Author of it than the wisdom
of Heaven? It Is the wisdom of God that carries on his own Designs in methods
most suitable to his own Greatness, and different from the Customs and Modes of
Men, that less of Humanity, and more of Divinity might appear.

4. The wisdom of God appears in the ways and manner, as well as in the
Instruments of its propagation. By ways seemingly contrary. You know how God
had sent the Jews into Captivity in Babylon, and though he struck off their
Chains, and restored them to their Country, yet many of them had no mind to
leave a Country wherein they had been born and bred. The distance from the
place of the Original of their Ancestors, and their affection to the Country
wherein they were born, might have occasioned their embracing the Idolatrous
Worship of the place. Afterwads the Persecutions of Antiochus scattered many of
the Jews for their security into other Nations; yet a great part, and perhaps
the greatest, preserved their Religion, and by that were obliged to come every
year to Jerusalem to Offer, and so were present at the effusion of the Spirit
on the day of Pentecost, and were witnesses of the miraculous effects of it:
Had they not been dispersed by Persecution, had they not resided in several
Countries, and been acquainted with their Languages, the Gospel had not so
easily been diffused into several Countries of the World. The first
Persecutions also raised against the Church propagated the Gospel; the
scattering of the Disciples enflamed their courage, and dispersed the Doctrine
Acts 8.3.
, ccording to the Prophecy of Daniel, Dan. 12.4. Many should run to and fro,
and knowledge should be increased. The flights and hurryings of men should
enlarge the Territories of the Gospel. There was not a Tribunal, but the
primitive Christians were cited to; not a horrible Punishment, but was
inflicted upon them. Treated they were, as the dregs and offals of Mankind, as
the common Enemies of the World; yet the Flames of the Martyrs brightned the
Doctrine and the Captivity of its Professors, made way for the Throne of its
Empire. The imprisonment of the Ark was the downfall of Dagon. Religion grew
stronger by Sufferings, and Christianity taller by Injuries. What can this be
ascribed to, but the conduct of a Wisdom superior to that of Men and Devils,
defeating the methods of human and hellish Policy; thereby making the wisdom of
the World foolishness with God? 1 Cor. 3.19.

Fifthly, The Use, I. Of Information. If wisdom be an excellency of the Divine
Nature; then

1. Christ's Deity may hence be asserted. Wisdom is the emphatical Title of
Christ in Scripture, Prove. 8.12, 13, 31. where Wisdom is brought in speaking as
a distinct Person; ascribing Counsel, and Understanding, and the Knowledge of
witty Inventions to it self. He is called also the power of God, and the wisdom
of God 1 Cor. 1.21.
. And the Ancients generally understood that place, Col. 2.3. In him are hid
all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge, as an assertion of the Godhead of
Christ, in regard of the infiniteness of his knowledge; referring wisdom to his
knowledge of Divine things; and knowledge to his understanding of all Human
things. But the natural sense of the place seems to be this, that all wisdom
and knowledge is displayed by Christ in the Gospel; and the words, (...), refer
either to Christ, or the mystery of God spoken of, verse. 2. But the Deity of
Christ, in regard of infinite Wisdom, may be deduced from his Creation of
things, and his Government of things; both which are ascribed to him in
Scripture. The first ascribed to him, John 1.3. All things were made by him;
and verse 27. Without him was not any thing made, that was made. The second
John 5.22. The Father has committed all Judgment to the Son; and both put
together, Col. 2.16, 17.

Now since he has the Government of the World, he has the Perfections
necessary to so great a Work. As the Creation of the World, which is ascribed
to him, requires an infinite power, so the Government of the World requires an
infinite wisdom. That he has the knowledge of the hearts of men, was proved in
handling the Omniscience of God. That knowledge would be to little purpose
without wisdom to order the motions of men's hearts, and conduct all the
qualities and actions of Creatures, to such an end as is answerable to a wise
Government; we cannot think so great an Employment can be without an Ability
necessary for it. The Government of Men and Angels is a great part of the glory
of God; and if God should entrust the greatest part of his Glory in hands unfit
for so great a trust, it would be an argument of weakness in God, as it is in
men, to pitch upon unfit Instruments for particular Charges: Since God has
therefore committed to him his greatest Glory, the Conduct of all things for
the highest end, he has a wisdom requisite for so great an end, which can be
no less than infinite: If then Christ were a finite Person, he would not be
capable of an infinite Communication; he could not be a Subject wherein
infinite wisdom could be lodged; for the terms finite and infinite are so
distant, that they cannot commence one another; finite can never be changed
into infinite, no more than infinite can into finite.

2. Hence we may assert, The right and fitness of God for the Government of the
World, as he is the wisest Being. Among men, those who are excellent in
Judgment, are accounted fittest to preside over, and give orders to others; the
wisest in a City are most capable to govern a City; or at least, though
ignorant men may bear the Title, yet the advice of the soundest and skilfullest
Heads should prevail in all public Affairs: We see in Nature, that the eye
guides the body, and the mind directs the eye.

Amy^^u^. M^^. ^or. 1. p. 253, 259.
Power and Wisdom are the two Arms of Authority: Wisdom knows the end, and
directs the means; Power executes the means designed for such an end. The more
splendid and strong those are in any, the more Authority results from thence,
for the conduct of others that are of an inferior Orb: Now God being
infinitely excellent in both, his ability and right to the management of the
World, cannot be suspected; the whole World is but one Commonwealth, whereof
God is the Monarch. Did the Government of the World depend upon the Election of
Men and Angels, where could they pitch, or where would they find Perfections
capable of so great a work, but in the Supreme Wisdom? His Wisdom has already
been apparent in those Laws, whereby he formed the World into a Civil Society,
and the Israelites into a Commonwealth: The one suited to the Consciences and
Reasons of all his Subjects, and the other suited to the Genius of that
particular Nation, drawn out of the Righteousness of the Moral Law, and
applicable to all Cases that might arise among them in their Government; so
that Moses asserts, that the wisdom apparent in their Laws enacted by God, as
their chief Magistrate, would render them famous among other Nations, in regard
of their Wisdom, as well as their Righteousness, Deuteronomy. 4.6, 7, 9. Also this
perfection does evidence, that God does actually govern the World. It would not
be a commendable thing for a man, to make a curious Piece of Clock-work, and
take no care for the orderly motion of it. Would God display so much of his
Skill in framing the Heaven and Earth, and none in actual guidance of them to
their particular and universal ends? Did he lay the Foundation in order, and
fit every Stone in the Building, make all things in weight and measure, to let
them afterward run at hap hazard? Would he bring forth his Power to view in
the Creation, and let a more glorious perfection lie idle, when it had so large
a Field to move in? Infinite wisdom is inconsistent with inactivity. All
Prudence does illustrate itself in untying the hardest knots, and disposing the
most difficult Affairs to a happy and successful Issue: All those various Arts
and Inventions among men, which lend their assisting hand to one another, and
those various Employments, their several Genius's lead them to, whereby they
support one another welfare, are Beams and instincts of Divine wisdom in the
Government of the World. He that made all things in wisdom Psalm. 104.24
would not leave his works to act and move only according to their own folly,
and idly behold them jumble together, and run counter to that end he designed
them for; we must not fancy a Divine Wisdom to be destitute of Activity.

3. Here we may see a ground of God's patience. The most impotent persons are
the most impatient, when un-foreseen Emergencies arise, or at Events expected
by them, when their feeble Prudence was not a sufficient match to contest with
them, or prevent them. But the wiser any man is, the more he bears with those
things which seem to cross his Intentions, because he knows he grasps the whole
Affair, and is sure of attaining the end he proposes to himself; yet as a
finite wisdom can have but a finite patience, so an infinite wisdom possesses
an infinite patience.

The wise God intends to bring glory to himself, and good to some of his
Creatures, out of the greatest evils that can happen in the World: He beholds
no exorbitant Afflictions and monstrous Actions, but what he can dispose to a
good and glorious end, even to work together for good to them that love God
Romans 8.28.
; and therefore does not presently fall foul upon the Actors, till he has
wrought out that temporary Glory to himself, and Good to his People which he
designs. The times of Ignorance God winkt at, till he had brought his Son into
the World, and manifested his wisdom in Redemption, and when this was done he
presses men to a speedy repentance Acts 17.30.
; that as, he forebore punishing their Crimes, in order to the displaying his
wisdom in the designed Redemption; so when he had effected it, they must
forbear any longer abusing his Patience.

4. Hence appears the Immutability of God in his Decrees. He is not destitute
of a Power and Strength to change his own Purposes; but his Infinite Perfection
of Wisdom is a bar to his laying aside his Eternal Resolves, and f rming new
ones; Isai. 46.10. He resolves the end from the beginning, and his counsel
stands; stands immovable, because it is Counsel. It Is an impotent Counsel, that
is subject to a daily thwarting it self. Inconstant Persons are accounted by
Men, destitute of a due measure of Prudence. If God change his Mind, it is
either for the better or the worse; if for the better, he was not wise in his
former Purpose; if for the worse, he is not wise in his present Resolve. No
alteration can be without a reflect on of Weakness upon the former or present
determination. God must either cease to be as Wise as he was before, or begin
to be Wiser than he was before the change; which to think or imagine is to deny
a Deity. If any Man change his Resolution, he is apprehensive of a flaw in his
former Purpose, and finds an Inconvenience in it, which moves him to such a
change; which must be either for want of foresight in himself, or want of a
due consideration of the object of his Counsel: Neither of which can be
imagined of God without a denial of the Deity. No, t^ere are no blots and
blemishes in his Purposes and Promises. Repentance indeed is an act of Wisdom
in the Creature; but it presupposes Folly in his former Actions, which is
inconsistent with Infinite Perfection. Men are often too rash in Promising; and
therefore what they promise in haste, they perform at leisure, or not at all:
They consider not before they Vow, and make After-enquiries, whether they had
best stand to it.

The only wise God need not any After-game: As he is Soveraignly Wise, he sees
no cause of r^versing any thing, and wants not expedients for his own Purpose;
and as he is Infinitely Powerful, he has no Superior to hinder him from
executing his Will, and making his People enjoy the effects of his Wisdom. If
he had a recollection of Thoughts (as Man has) and saw a necessity to mend
them, he were not Infinitely Wise in his first Decrees. As in Creation, he
looked back upon the several Pieces of that goodly Frame he had erected, and
saw them so exact, that he did not take up his Pensil again to mend any
Particle of the first Draught; so his Promises are made with such Infinite
Wisdom and Judgment, that what he writes is Irreversible and for Ever, as the
Decrees of the Medes and Persians. All the words of God are Eternal, because
they are the Births of Righteousness and Judgment, Hos. 2.19. I will betroth
thee to me for ever, in Righteousness and Judgment. He is not of a wavering and
flitting Discretion: If he Threatens, he wisely considers what he Threatens; if
he Promises, he wisely considers what he Promises, and therefore is Immutable
in both.

5. Hence it follows, that God is a fit Object for our Trust and Confidence.
For God being Infinitely Wise, when he Promises any thing, he sees every th ng
which may hinder, and every thing which may promote the execution of it; so
that he cannot discover any thing aft^rwards, that may move him to take up
After thoug^ts: He has more Wisdom than to promise any thing hand over head,
or any thing which he knows he cannot accomplish. Thoug^ God, as True, be the
Object of our Trust; yet God, as Wise, is the Foundation of our Trust. We trust
him in his Promise; the Promise was made by Mercy, and it is perform d by Truth;
but Wisdom conducts all Means to the accomplishment of it. There are many Men,
whose Honesty we can confide in, but whose Discretion we are diffident of: But
there is no defect eith r of the one or the other, which may scare us from a
depending upon God in our concerns. The words of Man's wisdom the Apostle
entitles Enticing, 1 Cor. 2.4. in opposition to the words of Gods wisdom, which
are firm, stable, and undeniable demonstrations. As the Power of God is an
encouragement of Trust, because he is able to effect; so the Wisdom of God
comes into the rank of those Attributes which support our Faith. To put a
Confidence in him, we must be persuaded, not only that he is Ignorant of
nothing in the World, but that he is Wise to manage the whole course of Nature,
and dispose of all his Creatures, for the bringing his Purposes and his
Promises to their designed perfection.

6. Hence appears the necessity of a public review of the Management of the
World, and of a Day of Judgment. As a Day of Judgment may be inferred from many
Attribute of God; as his Sovereignty, Justice, Omniscience, etc. so among the
rest from this of Wisdom. How much of this Perfection will lie unvailed and
obscure, if the Sins of Men be not brought to view, whereby the ordering the
unrighteous Actions of Men, by his directing and overruling Hand of
Providence, in subserviency to his own Purposes and his Peoples good, may
appear in all its glory? Without such a public Review, this part of Wisdom
will not be clearly visible; how those Actions, which had a vile foundation in
the Hearts and designs of Men, and were formed there to gratify some base
Lust, Ambition, and Covetousness, etc. were by a secret Wisdom presiding over
them, conducted to amazing Ends.

It Is a part of Divine Wisdom to right it self, and convince Men of the
reasonableness of its Laws, and the unreasonableness of their Contradictions to
it. The execution of the Sentence, is an act of Justice; but the conviction of
the reasonableness of the Sentence, is an act of Wisdom, clearing up the
Righteousness of the proceeding; and this precedes, and the other follows. Jude
15. To convince all that are ungodly, of all their ungodly deeds. That Wisdom
which contrived satisfaction, as well as that Justice which required it, is
concerned in righting the Law, which was enacted by it. The Wisdom of a
Sovereign Lawgiver is engaged not to see his Law vilified and trampled on, and
exposed to the Lusts and Affronts of Men, without being concerned in
vindicating the Honor of it. It would appear a Folly to enact and publish it,
if there were not a Resolution to right and execute it.

The Wisdom of God can no more associate Iniquity and Happiness together, than
the Justice of God can separate Iniquity from Punishment. It would be
defective, if it did always tamely bear the Insolences of Offenders, without a
time of remark of their Crimes, and a Justification of the Precept rebelliously
spurned at. He would be Unwise, if he were Unjust; Unrighteousness has no
better a Title in Scripture, than that of Folly. It Is no part of Wisdom, to
give birth to those Laws which he will always behold ineffectual, and neither
vindicate his Law by a due execution of the Penalty, nor right his own
Authority, con^emn'd in the violation of his Law, by a just Revenge. Besides,
What Wisdom would it be for the Sovereign Judge, to lodge such a Spokesman for
himself, as Conscience in the Soul of Man, if it should be always found
speaking, and at length be found false in all that it speaks? There is
therefore an apparent prospect of the Day of Account, from the consideration of
this Perfection of the Divine Nature.

7. Hence we have a ground for a mighty Reverence and Veneration of the Divine
Majesty. Who can contemplate the Sparklings of this Perfection in the variety
of the Works of his hands, and the exact Government of all his Creatures,
without a raised Admiration of the Excellency of his Being, and a falling flat
before him, in a posture of Reverence to so great a Being? Can we behold so
great a mass of Matter, digested into several Forms, so exact a Harmony and
Temperament in all the Creatures, the proportions of Numbers and Measures, and
one Creature answering the Ends and Designs of another, the distinct Beauties
of all, the perpetual Motion of all things without checking one another; the
variety of the Nature of things, and all acting according to their Nature with
an admirable Agreement; and altogether, like differing strings upon an
Instrument, emitting diverse Sounds, but all reduced to order in one delightful
Lesson. I say, Can we behold all this without Admiring and Adoring the Divine
Wisdom, which appears in all?

And from the Consideration of this, let us pass to the Consideration of his
Wisdom in Redemption; in reconciling divided Interests, untying Hard-knots,
drawing one contrary out of another; and we must needs acknowledge that the
Wisdom of all the Men on Earth, and Angels in Heaven, is worse than Nothing,
and Vanity in comparison of this vast Ocean. And as we have a greater esteem
for those that invent some excellent Artificial Engines; what Reverence ought
we to have for him that has stamped an unimitable Wisdom upon all his Works?
Nature orders us to give Honor to our Superiors in Knowledge, and conside in
their Counsels; but none ought to be Reverenced as much as God, since none
equals him in Wisdom.

8. If God be Infinitely Wise, it shows us the necessity of our Address to him,
and Invocation of his Name. We are subject to Mistakes, and often overseen; we
are not able rightly to Counsel our selves. In some cases all Creatures are too
short-sighted to apprehend them, and too ignorant to g ve Advice proper for
them, and to contrive Remedies for their ease; but with the Lord there is
Counsel, Jer. 32.19. He is great in counsel, and mighty in working; great in
Counsel to advise us, mighty in Working to assist us. We know not how to effect
a design, or prevent an expected Evil. We have an Infinite Wisdom to go to,
that is every way skilful to manage any business we desire, to avert any Evil
we fear, to accomplish any thing we commit into his hands. When we know not
what to resolve, he has a Counsel to guide us, Psalm 73.24. He is not more
Powerful to effect what is needful, than Wise to direct what is fitting. All
Men stand in need of the Help of God, as one Man stands in need of the
assistance of other Men, and will not do any thing without Advice; and he that
takes Advice, deserves the Title of a Wise man, as well as he that gives
Advice. But no Man needs so much the Advice of another Man, as all Men need the
Counsel and Assistance of God: Neither is any man's Wit and Wisdom so far
in^eriour to the Prudence and Ability of an Angel, as the Wisdom of the wisest
Man and the most sharp-sighted Angel, is inferior to the Infinite Wisdom of
God. We see therefore, that it is best for us to go to the Fountain, and not
content our selves with the Streams; to beg Advice from a Wisdom that is
Infinite and Infallible, rather than from that which is Finite and Fallible.

Use II. If Wisdom be the Perfection of the Divine Majesty, How prodigious is
the Contempt of it in the World?

In General.

All Sin strikes at this Attribute, and is in one part or other a degrading of
it: The first Sin directed its Venom against this. As the Devils endeavored to
equal their Creator in Power; so Man endeavored to equal him in Wisdom: Both
indeed scorned to be ruled by his Order; but Man evidently exalted himself
against the Wisdom of God, and aspired to be a sharer with him in his Infinite
Knowledge: Would not let him be the only wise God, but cherished an ambition to
be his Partner. Just as if a Beam were able to imagine, it might be as bright
as the Sun; or a Spark fancy, it could be as full fraught with Heat, as the
whole Element of Fire. Man would not submit to the Infinite Wisdom of God in
the prohibition of one single Fruit in the Garden, when by the right of his
Sovereign Authority, he might have granted him only the use of one. All
Presumptuous sins are of th^s nature, they are therefore called Reproaches of
God, Numb. 15.30. the Soul that does ought presumptuously, reproacheth the
Lord. All Reproaches are either for Natural, Moral, or Intellectual defects.
All Reproaches of God, must imply either a Weakness or Unrighteousness in God.
If Unrighteousness, his Holiness is denied; if Weakness, his Wisdom is
blemished.

In General, All Sin strikes at this Perfection two ways.

1. As it defaceth the wise workmanship of God. Every Sin is a deforming and
blemishing our own Souls, which, as they are the prime Creatures in the lower
World, so they have greater Characters of Divine Wisdom in the Fabric of them:
But this Image of God is ruined and broken by Sin. Though the spoiling of it be
a scorn of his Holiness, it is also an affront to his Wisdom; for though his
Power was the cause of the production of so fair a Piece, yet his Wisdom was
the guide of his Power, and his Holiness the Pattern whereby he wrought it: His
Power effected it, and his Holiness was exemplified in it; but his Wisdom
contrived it.

If a Man had a curious Clock or Watch, which had cost him many years pains and
the strength of his Skill to frame it; for another, after he had seen and
considered it, to trample upon it, and crush it in pieces, would argue a
contempt of the Artificers Skill. God has shown infinite Art in the Creation
of Man; but Sin unbeautifies Man, and ravisheth his Excellency. It cuts and
slasheth the Image of God stamped by Divine Wisdom, as though it were an Object
only of Scorn and Contempt. The Sinner in every Sin acts, as if he intended to
put himself in a better posture, and in a fairer dress, than the Wisdom of God
has put him in by Creation.

2. In the slighting his Laws. The Laws of God are highly Rational; they are
drawn from the depths of the Divine Understanding, wherein there is no
unclearness, and no defect. As his Understanding apprehends all things in their
true Reason; so his Will enjoins all things for worthy and wise Ends: His Laws
are contrived by his Wisdom for the happiness of Man, whose Happiness, and the
M^thods to it, he understands better than Men or Angels can do. His Laws being
the Orders of the Wisest Understanding, every breach of his Law is a flying in
the Face of his Wisdom. All Human Laws, though they are enforced by Sovereign
Authority; yet they are, or ought to be in the composing of them, founded upon
Reason, and should be particular applications of the Law of Nature, to this or
that particular emergency. The Laws of God then, who is summa ratio, are the
birth of the truest Reason; though the Reason of every one of them may not be
so clear to us.

Every Law, though it consists in an act of the Will, yet does presuppose an
act of the Understanding. The act of the Divine Understanding in framing the
Law, must be supposed to precede the act of his Will, in commanding the
Observance of that Law. So every Sin against the Law, is not only against the
Will of God commanding, but the Reason of God contriving; and a cleaving to our
own Reason, rather than the Understanding or Mind of God: As if God had
mistaken in making his Law, and we had more understanding to frame a better,
and more conducing to our happiness: As if God were not Wise enough to govern
us, and prescribe what we should do, and what we should avoid; as if he
designed not our welfare, but our misfortune.

Whereas the Precepts of God are not tyrannical Edicts, or Acts of mere Will,
but the fruits of Counsel; and therefore every breach of them is a real
declamation against his Discretion and Judgment, and preferring our own
Imaginations, or the Suggestions of the Devil, as our Rule, before the Results
of Divine Counsel: While we acknowledge him Wise in our Opinion, we speak him
Foolish by our Practice; when instead of being guided by him, we will guide our
selves. No Man will question, but it is a controuling Divine Wisdom, to make
Alterations in his Precepts; dogmatically, either to add some of their own, or
expunge any of his: And is it not a Crime of the like reflection to alter them
Practically? When we will observe one part of the Law, and not another part;
but pick and choose where we please our selves, as our Humors and Carnal
Interest prompts us. It is to charge that part of the Law with Folly, which we
refuse to conform unto.

The more cunning any Man is in Sin, the more his sin is against Divine Wisdom,
as if he thought to out-wit God. He that receives the Promises of God, and the
Testimony of Christ, sets to his Seal, that God is true, John 3.33. By the like
strength of Argument it will undeniably follow, That he that refuses Obedience
to his Precept, sets to his Seal that God is foolish. Were they not Rational,
God would not enjoin them; and if they are Rational, we are Enemies to Infinite
Wisdom, by not complying with them. If Infinite Prudence has made the Law, why
is not every part of it observed; if it were not made with the best Wisdom, why
is any part of it observed? If the defacing his Image be any Sin, as being a
defaming his Wisdom in Creation; the breaking his Law is no less a Sin, as
being a disgracing his Wisdom in his Administration. It Is upon this account,
likely, that the Scripture so often counts Sinners Fools, since it is certainly
inexcusable Folly, to contradict undeniable and infallible Wisdom; yet this is
done in the least Sin: And as he that breaks one title of the Law, is
deservedly accounted guilty of the breach of the whole, James 2.10. so he that
despises the least stamp of Wisdom in the minutest part of the Law, is
deservedly counted as a Contemner of it, in the frame of the whole Statute-Book.

But in Particular, the Wisdom of God is affronted and Invaded,

1. By introducing new Rules and Modes of Worship, different from Divine
Institutions. Is not this a manifest reflection on this Perfection of God, as
though he had not been Wise enough to provide for his own Honor, and model his
own S^rvice; but stood in need of our directions, and the caprichio's of our
Brains? Some have observed, that it is a greater Sin in Worship to do what we
should not, than to omit what we should perform Strong of the Will.
. The one seems to be out of weakness, because of the high exactness of the
Law; and the other out of impudence, accusing the Wisdom of God of
Imperfection, and controuling it in its Institutions. At best, it seems to be
an Imputation of Human Bashfulness to the Supreme Sovereign; as if he had been
ashamed to prescribe all that was necessary to his own Honor, but had left
something to the Ingenuity and Gratitude of Men.

Man has ever since the foolish Conceit of his old Ancestor Adam, presumed he
could be as Wise as God; and if he who was created upright entertained such
Conceits, much more does Man now, under a mass of Corruption, so capable to
foment them. This has been the continual practice of Men; not so much to
reject what once they had received as Divine, but add something of their own
Inventions to it.

The Heathens renounced not the Sacrificing of Beasts for the expiation of
their Offenses (which the Old World had received by Tradition from Adam, and
the New World, after the Deluge, from Noah.) But they had blended that
Tradition with Rites of their one, and offered Creatures unclean in themselves,
and not fit to be offered to an Infinitely Pure Being; for the distinction of
Clean and Unclean, was as Ancient as Noah, Genesis 8.20. yea before, Genesis 7.2.

So the Jews did not discard what they had received from God, as Circumcision,
the Passover, and Sacrifices; but they would mix a heap of Heathenish Rites
with the Ceremonies of Divine Ordination, and practice things which he had not
commanded, as well as things which he had enjoined them. And therefore it is
observable, that when God taxes them with this Sin; he does not say, They
brought in those things which he had forbidden into his Worship; but those
things which he had not commanded, and had given no order for, to intimate,
that they were not to move a step without his Rule; ( Jer. 7.31. They have
built the high places of Tophet, which I commanded them not, nor came it into
my heart; and Levit. 10.1. Nadabs and Abihu's strange Fire was not commanded;)
so charging them with Impudence and Rashness in adding something of their own,
after he had revealed to them the manner of his Service, as if they were as
Wise as God. So loath is Man to acknowledge the Supremacy of Divine
Understanding, and be sensible of his own Ignorance.

So after the divulging of the Gospel, the Corrupters of Religion did not fling
off, but preserved the Institutions of God, but painted and patched them up
with Pagan Ceremonies; imposed their own Dreams with as much force, as the
Revelations of God. Thus has the Papacy turned the Simplicity of the Gospel
into Pagan Pomp, and Religion into Politics; and revived the Ceremonial Law,
and raked some Limbs of it out of the Grave, after the Wisdom of God had rung
her Knell, and honorably Interred her, and sheltered the Heathenish
Superstitions in Christian Temples, after the Power of the Gospel had chased
the Devils, with all their Trumpery, from their ancient Habitations.

Whence should this proceed, but from a partial Atheism, and a mean conceit of
the Divine Wisdom? As though God had not Understanding enough to prescribe the
Form of his own Worship; and not Wisdom enough to support it, wit^out the
Crutches of Human Prudence.

Human Prudence is too low to parallel Divine Wisdom; it is an incompetent Judge
of what is fit for an Infinite Majesty. It Is sufficiently seen in the
ridiculous and senseless Rites among the Heathens; and the Cruel and Devilish
ones, fetched from them by the Jews. What work will Human Wisdom make with
Divine Worship, when it will presume to be the Director of it, as a Mate with
the Wisdom of God? Whence will it take its measures, but from Sense, Humor, and
Fancy? As though what is grateful and comely to a depraved Reason, were as
beautiful to an unspotted, and Infinite Mind. Do not such tell the World, that
they were of Gods Cabinet Council, since they will take upon them to judge, as
well as God, what is well pleasing to him? Where will it have the humility to
stop, if it has the presumption to add any one thing to Revealed Modes of
Worsh p? How did God tax the Israelites with making Idols according to their
own understanding? Hos. 13.2. imagining their own Understandings to be of a
siner make, and a perfecter Mould than their Creators; and that they had
fetched more light from the Chaos of their own Brains, than God had from
Eternity in his own Nature? How slight will the Excuse be, God has not
forbidden this, or that, when God shall silence Men with the Question, Where,
or when did I command this, or that? There was no Addition to be made under the
Law to the meanest Instrument God had appointed in his Service. The Sacred
Perfume was not to have one Ingredient more put into it, than what God had
prescribed in the Composition; nor was any Man upon pain of Death to imitate
it; nor would God endure, that Sacrifices should be consumed with any other
Fire, than that which came down from Heaven. So tender is God of any Invasions
of his Wisdom and Authority. In all things of this Nature, whatsoever voluntary
humility and respect to God they may be disguised with, there is a swelling of
the fleshly mind against Infinite Understanding, which the Apostle nauseates,
Coloss. 2.18.

Such Mixtures have not been blessed by God: As God never prosper'd the Mixtures
of several kinds of Creatures, to form and multiply a new Species, as being a
dissatisfaction with his Wisdom, as Creator; so he does not prosper Mixtures in
Worship, as being a Conspiracy against his Wisdom, as a Lawgiver. Vaifin. The
Talmud takes notice, that the Court of Bethany was wasted three years before
Jerusalem, because they preferred their own words before the words of the Law.
The Destruction of the Jews, was judged by some of their Doctors to be, for
preferring Human Traditions before the Written Word; which they ground on Isai.
29.33. Their fear of me was taught by the Precepts of Men. The Injunctions of
Men were the Rule of their Worship, and not the Prescripts of my Law.

To conclude, Such as make Alterations in Religion, different from the first
Institution, are intolerable Busybodies, that will not let God alone with his
own Affairs. Vain Man would be wiser than his Maker, and be dabbling in that
which is his sole Prerogative.

2. In neglecting Means Instituted by God. When Men have risings of heart
against Gods Ordinances, They reject the counsel of the Lord against
themselves, or in themselves, Luke 7.30. (...). They disannulled the Wisdom of
God, the Spring of his Ordinances: All neglects, are disregards of Divine
Prescriptions, as impertinent and unavailable to that End for which they were
appointed, as not being suited to the common dictates of Reason; sometimes out
of a Voluntary humility, such as Peter's was, when he denied Christ's
condescension to wash his feet, John 13.8. and thereby judged of the comeliness
of his Masters intention and action. Such as continually neglect the great
Institution of the Lords Supper out of a sense of Unworthiness, are in the same
rank with Peter, and do, as well as he, fall under the blame and reproof of
Christ.

Men would be saved, and use the Means; but either Means of their own
Appointment, or not all the Means of Gods ordering Pont. M^dit. part. 3 p 366.
. They would have Gods Wisdom and Will condescend to theirs, and not theirs
conformed to God. As if our blind Judgments were fittest to make the election
of the Paths to Happiness. L^ke Na^man, who when he was ordered by the Prophet,
for the cure of his Leprosy, to wash seven times in Jordan, would be the
Prophets Director, and have him touch him with his Hand: As if a Patient sick
of a desperate Disease, should Prescribe to his Skilful Physician, what
Remedies he should order for his Cure, and make his own infirm Reason, or his
Gust and Palate the Rule, rather than the Physicians Skill.

Men's Inquiries are, Who will show us any good? They rather fasten upon any
Means, than what God has ordained. Durant de Tent. p. 403, 404.
We invert the Order Divine Wisdom has established, when we would have God
save us in our own way, not in his. It Is the same thing, as if we would have
God nourish us without Bread, and cure our Diseases without Medicines, and
increase our Wealth without our Industry, and cherish our Souls without his
Word and Ordinances. It Is to demand of him an alteration or his Methods, and a
separation of that which he has by his Eternal Judgment joined together.
Therefore for a Man to pray to God to save him, when he will not use the Means
he has appointed for Salvation, when he slights the Word, which is the
Instrument of Salvation, is a Contempt of the Wisdom of Divine Institutions.

Also in Onassions of Prayer; when we consult not with God upon emergent
Occasions, we trust more to our own wisdom than Gods, and imply, that we stand
not in need of his Conduct, but have ability to direct our selves, and
accomplish our Ends without his guidance. Not seeking God, is by the Prophet
taxed to be a reflection upon this Perfection of God, Isai. 31.1, 2. They look
not to the Holy One of Israel, neither seek the Lord, etc. And the like Charge
he brings against them, Hos. 8.9. They are gone up to up to Assyria, a wild Ass
alone by himself, not consulting God.

3. In censuring Gods Revelations and Actions, if they be not according to our
Schemes. When we will not submit to his plain Will, without penetrating into
the unrevealed Reason of it, nor adore his Counsels without controuling them;
as if we could correct both Law and Gospel, and frame a better Method of
Redemption than that of Gods contriving. Thus Men slighted the Wisdom of God in
the Gospel, because it did not agree with that Philosophical Wisdom and Reason
they had sucked in by Education from their Masters 1 Cor. 1 21, 22.
, contrary to their Practice in their Superstitious Worship; where the Oracles
they thought Divine, were entertained with Reverence, not with Dispute; and
though ambiguous, were not counted ridiculous by the Worshipper. How foolish is
Man in this, wherein he would be accounted wise? Adam in Innocence was unfit to
control the Doctrine of God, when the Eye of his Reason was clear; and much
more are we, since the depravation of our Natures.

The Revelations of God tower above Reason in its Purity; much more above
Reason in its Mud and Earthiness. The Rays of Divine Wisdom are too bright for
our Human Understandings, much more for our Sinful Understandings. It Is base to
set up Reason, a Finite principle, against an Infinite Wisdom; much baser to
set up a depraved and and purblind Reason, against an All-seeing and holy
Wisdom. If we would have a Reason for all that God speaks, and all that God
acts; our Wisdom must become Infinite as his, or his Wisdom become Finite as
ours.

All the Censures of Gods Revelations arise from some prejudicate Opinions or
Traditional Maxims, that have enthroned themselves in our Minds, which are
made the Standard whereby to judge of the things of God, and receive or reject
them, as they agree with or dissent from those Principles Coloss. 2.8.
. Hence it was that the Philosophers in the Primitive Times were the greatest
Enemies to the Gospel: And the Contempt of Divine Wisdom, in making Reason the
Supreme Judge of Divine Revelation, was the fruitful Mother of the Heresies in
all Ages springing up in the Church, and especially of that Socinianism, that
daily insinuates it self into the minds of Men.

This is a wrong to the Wisdom of God. He that censures the Words or Actions of
another, implies, that he is in his Censure wiser than the Person censured by
him. It Is as insupportable to determine the Truth of Gods plain Dictates by our
Reason, as it is to measure the sutableness or unsutableness of his Actions by
the humor of our Will. We may sooner think to span the Sun, or grasp a Star, or
see a Gnat swallow a Leviathan, than fully understand the Debates of Eternity.

To this we may refer too curious Enquiries into Divine Methods, and intruding
into those things which are not revealed, Coloss. 2.18. It is to affect a
Wisdom equal with God, and an Ambition to be of his Cabinet-Councel. We are not
content to be Creatures, that is, to be every way below God; below him in
Wisdom, as well as Power.

4. In prescribing God methods of Acting. When we pray for a thing without a
due submission to Gods Will; as if we were his Counselors, yea his Tutors, and
not his Subjects, and God were bound to follow our humors, and be swayed
according to the Judgment of our Ignorance; when we would have such a Mercy
which God thinks not fit to give, or have it in this method, which God designs
to convey through another Chanel. Thus we would have the only wise God take his
measures from our Passions: Such a controuling of God was Jonahs Anger about a
Gourd, Jonah 3.10. It displeased Jonah exceedingly, and he was very angry.

We would direct him how to dispose of us; as though he that had Infinite
Wisdom to contrive, and rear the excellent Fabric of the World, had not Wisdom
enough, without our Discretions, to place us in a sphere proper for his own
Ends, and the use he intends us in the Universe. All the Speeches of Men,
(Would I had been in such an Office, had such a Charge: Would I had such a
Mercy, in such a method, or by such Instruments,) are Intrenchments upon Gods
wise disposal of Affairs.

This imposing upon God is a Hellish disposition, and in Hell we find it. The
Rich man in Hell, that pretends some Charity for his Brethren on Earth, would
direct God a way to prevent their ruin, by sending one from the dead to school
them, as a more effectual Means than Moses and the Prophets, Luke 16.29, 30.
It Is a Temper also to be found on Earth; what else was the language of Saul's
saving the Amalekites Cattle against the plain Command of God, 1 Samuel 15.15. As
if God in his Fury had overshot himself, and overlooked his Altar, in d^priving
it of so great a Booty for its Service: As if it were an unwise thing in God,
to lose the Prey of so many stately Cattle, that might make the Altar smoke
with their Entrails, and serve to expiate the Sins of the People; and therefore
he would rectify that which he thought to be an oversight in God, and so
magnifies his own Prudence and Discretion above the Divine.

We will not let God act as he thinks fit, but will be directing him, and
teaching him knowledge, Job. 21.22. As if God were a Statue, an Idol, that had
Eyes and saw not, Hands, but acted not; and could be turned as an Image may be,
to what quarter of the Heaven we please our selves. The Wisdom of God is
unbyast; he orders nothing but what is fittest for his End, and we would have
our shallow Brains the bias of Gods acting. And will not God resent such an
Indignity, as a reflection upon his Wisdom as well as Authority, when we
intimate that we have better Heads than he, and that he comes short of us in
Understanding?

5. In Murmuring and Impatience. One demands a Reason, why he has this or that
Cross? Why he has been deprived of such a Comfort, lost such a Venture,
languisheth under such a Sickness, is tormented with such Pains, oppressed by
Tyrannical Neighbors, is unsuccessful in such Designs? In these, and such
like, the Wisdom of God is questioned and defamed. All Impatience, is a
suspicion, if not a condemnation of the Prudence of Gods Methods, and would
make Human Feebleness and Folly the Rule of Gods dealing with his Creatures.
This is a presuming to instruct God, and a reproving him for Unreasonableness
in his Proceedings, when his dealings with us do not exactly answer our Fancies
and Wishes; as if God, who made the World in Wisdom, wanted Skill for the
management of his Creatures in it. Job 40.2. Shall he that contends with the
Almighty, instruct him? he that reproves God, let him answer it. We that are
not wise enough to know our selves, and what is needful for us; presume to have
Wit enough to guide God in his dealing with us. The Wisdom of God rendered Job
more useful to the World by his Afflictions, in making him a Pattern of
Patience, than if he had continued him in a confluence of all Worldly Comforts,
wherein he had been beneficial only in communicating his Morsels to his Poor
Neighbors. All Murmuring is a fastening Error upon unerring Wisdom.

6. In Pride and Haughtiness of Spirit. No Proud man, but sets his Heart as the
heart of God, Ezekiel. 28.2, 3. The Wisdom of God has given to Men diverse
Offices, set them in diverse places; some have more honorable Charges, some
meaner. Not to give that respect their Offices and Places call for, is to
quarrel with the Wisdom of God, and overturn the Rank and Order wherein he has
placed things.

It Is unfit we should affront God in the disposal of his Creatures, and
intimate to him by our Carriage that he had done more wisely in placing
another, and that he has done foolishly in placing this or that Man in such a
Charge. Sometimes Men are unworthy the Place they fill; they may be set there
in Judgment to themselves and others: But the Wisdom of God in his management
of things, is to be honored and regarded.

It Is an infringing the Wisdom of God, when we have a vain Opinion of our
selves, and are blind to others. When we think our selves Monarchs, and treat
others as Worms or Flies in comparison of us. He would reduce all things to his
own honor, perverts the Order of the World, and would constitute another Order
than what the Wisdom of God has established; and move them to an End contrary
to the intention of God, and charges God with want of Discretion and Skill.

7. Distrust of Gods Promise is an impeachment of his Wisdom. A secret Reviling
of it, as if he had not taken due consideration before he past his Word; or a
suspicion of his Power, as if he could not accomplish his Word. We trust the
Physicians Skill with our Bodies, and the Lawyers Counsel with our Estates; but
are loath to rely upon God for the concerns of our Lives. If he be Wise to
dispose of us, why do we distrust him? If we distrust him, why do we embrace an
opinion of his Wisdom?

Unbelief also is a contradiction to the Wisdom of God in the Gospel, etc. but
that I have already handled in a Discourse of the Nature of Unbelief.

III. Use of Comfort. God has an Infinite Wisdom, to conduct us in our
Affairs, rectify us in our Mistakes, and assist us in our Straits. It Is an
inestimable privilege to have a God in Covenant with us; so Wise, to
communicate all Good, to prevent all Evil; who has Infinite ways to bring to
pass his gracious Intentions toward us. How unsearchable are his Judgments,
and his ways past finding out? Romans 11.33. His Judgments or Decrees are
incomprehensibly Wise, and the ways of effecting them, are as wise as his
Resolves effected by them. We can a little search into his Methods of Acting,
as we can into his Wisdom of Resolving; both his Judgments and Ways are
unsearchable.

1. Comfort in all Straits and Afflictions. There is a Wisdom in inflicting
them, and a Wisdom in removing them. He is wise to suit his Medicines to the
humor of our Disease, though he does not to the humor of our Wills: He cannot
mistake the nature of our Distemp r, or the virtue of his own Physic. Like a
skilful Physician, he sometime prescribes bitter Potions, and sometimes
cheering Cordials, according to the strength of the Malady, and necessity of
the Patient to reduce him to health. As nothing comes from him, but what is for
our good; so nothing is acted by him in a rash and temerarious way. His Wisdom
is as Infinite as his Goodness; and as exact in managing, as his Goodness is
plentiful in streaming out to us. He understands our Griefs, weighs our
Necessities, and no Remedies are beyond the reach of his Contrivance. When our
feeble Wits are bewildred in a maze, and at the end of their Line for a rescue;
the Remedies unknown to us, are not unknown to God. When we know not how to
prevent a Danger, the Wise God has a Thousand Blocks to lay in the way: When
we know not how to free our selves from an oppressive Evil, he has a Thousand
ways of Relief.

He knows how to Time our Crosses, and his own Blessings. The heart of a Wise
God, as well as the heart of a wise Man, discerns both time and judgment,
Eccles. 8.5. There is as much Judgment in sending them, as Judgment in removing
them. How comfortable is it to think, that our Distresses, as well as our
Deliverances, are the fruits of Infinite Wisdom? Nothing is done by him too
soon or too slow; but in the true point of Time, with all its due
circumstances, most conveniently for his glory and our good. How Wise is God,
to bring the glory of our Salvation out of the depths of a seeming Ruin, and
make the Evils of Affliction subservient to the good of the Afflicted?

2. In Temptations, his Wisdom is no less employed in permitting them, than in
bringing them to a good issue. His Wisdom in leading our Savior to be Tempted
of the Devil, was to fit him for our succor; and his Wisdom in suffering us to
be Tempted, is to fit us for his own Service, and our Salvation. He makes a
Thorn in the flesh to be an occasion of a refreshing Grace to the Spirit, and
brings forth cordial Grapes from those pricking Brambles, and magnifies his
Grace by his Wisdom, from the deepest subtilties of Hell. Let Satan's Intentions
be what they will, he can be for him at every turn, to out-wit him in his
Stratagems, to baffle him in his Enterprises; to make him instrumental for our
good, where he designs nothing but our hurt. The Lord has his methods of
Deliverance from him, 2 Pet. 2.9. The Lord knows how to deliver the godly out
of Temptation.

3. In Denials, or delays of Answers of Prayer. He is gracious to Hear; but he
is wise to Answer in an acceptable time, and succor us in a day proper for our
salvation, 2 Cor. 6.2. We have partial Affections to our selves, Ignorance is
natural to us, Romans 8.26. We ask we know not what, because we ask out of
Ignorance. God grants what he knows, what is fit for him to do, and fit for us
to receive; and the exact season wherein it is fittest for him to bestow a
Mercy. As God would have us bring forth our Fruit in season, so he will send
forth his Mercies in season.

He is wise to suit his Remedy to our Condition, to Time it so, as that we
shall have an evident prospect of his Wisdom in it; that more of Divine Skill,
and less of Human, may appear in the Issue. He is ready at our Call; but he
will not Answer, till he see the Season fit to reach out his hand. He is wise
to prove our Faith, to humble us under the sense of our own Unworthiness, to
whet our Affections, to set a better estimate on the Blessings prayed for, and
that he may double the Blessing, as we do our Devotion: But when his Wisdom
sees us fit to receive his Goodness, he grants what we stand in need of. He is
Wise to choose the fittest Time, and Faithful to give the best Covenant Mercy.

4. In all Evils threatened to the Church by her Enemies. He has Knowledge to
foresee them, and Wisdom to disappoint them; Job 5.13. He takes the wise in
their own craftiness, and the counsel of the froward is carried headlong.

The Church has the Wisdom of God, to enter the Lists with the Policy of Hell.
He defeated the Serpent in the first Net he laid, and brought a glorious
Salvation out of Hells Rubbish; and is yet as Skilful to disappoint the
After-game of the Serpentine-brood. The Policy of Hell, and the Subtilty of the
World, are no better than Folly with God, 1 Cor. 3.19. All Creatures are Fools,
as Creatures, in comparison with the Creator. The Angels he charge with
Folly, much more us Sinners.

Depraved Understandings are not fit Mates for a pure and unblemished Mind.
Pharaoh, with his wisdom, finds a Grave in the Sea; and Achitophels Plots are
finished in his own murder: He breaks the Enemies by his Power, and orders them
by his Skill to be a feast to his People. Psalm. 74.14. Thou brakest the Head of
the Leviathan, and gave him to be meat to the people in the Wilderness. The
Spoils of the Egyptians Carcasses cast upon the shore served the Israelites
Necessities (or were as Meat to them;) as being a Deliverance the Church might
feed upon in all Ages in a Wilderness Condition, to maintain their Faith, the
vital Principle of the Soul.

There is a Wisdom superior to the subtilties of Men, which laughs at their
Follies, and has them in derision, Psalm. 2.4. There is no wisdom or counsel
against the Lord, Prove. 21.30. You never question the wisdom of an Artist, to
use his File, when he takes it into his hand: Wicked Instruments are Gods Axes
and Files; let him alone, he has Skill enough to manage them: God has too
much Affection to destroy his People, and Wisdom enough to beautify them by
the worst Tools he uses. He can make all things conspire in a perfect harmony
for his own Ends, and his Peoples good, when they see no way to escape a Danger
feared, or attain a Blessing wanted.

Use IV.

I. For Exhortation.

1. Meditate on the Wisdom of God in Creation and Government. How little do we
think of God when we behold his Works? Our Sense dwells upon the surface of
Plants and Animals, beholds the variety of their Colors, and the progress in
their Motion: Our Reason studies the qualities of them; our Spirits seldom take
a slight to the Divine Wisdom which framed them. Our Senses engross our Minds
from God, that we scarce have a Thought free to bestow upon the Maker of them,
but only on the by. The constancy of seeing things that are common, stifles our
Admiration of God, due upon the sight of them. How seldom do we raise our Souls
as far as Heaven in our views of the Order of the World, the Revolutions of the
Seasons, the Natures of the Creatures that are common among us, and the mutual
Assistances they give to each other? Since God has manifested himself in them,
to neglect the Consideration of them, is to neglect the Manifestation of God,
and the way whereby he has transmitted something of his Perfections to our
Understanding. It renders Men inexcusably guilty of not glorifying of God, Romans
1.19, 20. We can never neglect the meditation of the Creatures, without a
blemish cast upon the Creators Wisdom. As every River can conduct us to the
Sea; so every Creature points us to an Ocean of Infinite Wisdom. Not the
minutest of them, but rich tracts of this may be observed in them, and a due
sense of God result from them. They are exposed to our view, that something of
God may be lodged in our Minds; that as our Bodies extract their quintessence
for our Nourishment, so our Minds may extract a quintessence for the Makers
Praise.

Though God is principally to be Praised in and for Christ; yet as Grace does
not raze out the Law of Nature, so the operations of Grace put not the dictates
of Nature to silence, nor suspend the Homage due to God upon our inspection of
his Works. God has given full Testimonies of this Perfection in the Heavenly
Bodies, dispersing their Light, and distributing their Influences to every part
of the World: In framing Men into Societies, giving them various Dispositions,
for the preservation of Governments; making some Wise for Counsel, others
Martial for Action; changing Old Empires, and raising New. Which way soever we
cast our Eyes, we shall find frequent occasions to cry out, Oh the depth of the
Riches, both of the Wisdom and Knowledge of God, Romans 11.33.

To this purpose, we must not only look upon the bulk and outside of his Works,
but consider from what Principles they were raised, in what order disposed, and
the exact symmetry and proportion of their parts. When a Man comes into a City
or Temple, and only considers the surface of the Build^ngs, they will amaze his
Sense, but not better his Understanding; unless he considers the Methods of the
Work, and the Art whereby it was erected.

1. This was an End for which they were created. God did not make the World for
Man's use only, but chiefly for his own Glory; for Man's use to enjoy his
Creatures, and for his own Glory to be acknowledged in his Creatures, that we
may consider his Art in framing them, and his Skill in disposing them; and not
only gaze upon the Glass without considering the Image it represents, and
acquainting our selves whose Image it is. The Creatures were not made for
themselves, but for the service of the Creator and the service of Man. Man was
not made for himself, but for the Service of the Lord that created him. He is
to consider the Beauty of the Creation, that he may thereby glorify the
Creator. He knows in part their excellency; the Creatures themselves do not. If
therefore Man be idle and unobservant of them, he deprives God of the glory of
his Wisdom, which he should have by his Creatures.

The Inferior Creatures themselves cannot observe it. If Man regard it not,
what becomes of it; his Glory can only be handed to him by Man. The other
Creatures cannot be Active Instruments of his Glory, because they know not
themselves, and therefore cannot render him an active Praise. Man is therefore
bound to praise God for himself, and for all his Creatures; because he only
knows himself, and the Perfections of the Creatures, and the Author both of
himself and them.

God Created such Variety, to make a Report of himself to us; we are to receive
the Report, and to reflect it back to him. To what purpose did he make so many
things, not necessary, for the support and pleasure of our L^ves, but that we
should behold him in them, as well as in the other?

We cannot behold the Wisdom of God in his own Essence and Eternal Idea's, but
by the reflection of it in the Creatures: As we cannot steadily behold the Sun
with our Eye, but either through a Glass, or by reflection of the Image of it
in the Water. God would have us meditate on his Perfections; he therefore chose
the same Day wherein he reviewed his Work, and rested from it, to be celebrated
by Man for the contemplation of him, Genesis 2.2, 3. that we should follow his
Example, and rejoice as himself did, in the frequent reviews of his Wisdom and
Goodness in them. In vain would the Creatures afford Matter for this study, if
they were wholly neglected.

God offers something to our Consideration in every Creature: Shall the Beams
of God shine round about us, and strike our Eyes, and not affect our Minds?
Shall we be like Ignorant Children, that view the Pictures, or point to the
Letters in a Book without any sense and meaning? How shall God have the homage
due to him from his Works, if Man has no care to observe them? The 148 Psalm
is an Exhortation to this. The view of them should often extract from us a
wonder of the like nature of that of David's, Psalm. 104.24. Oh Lord, how
wonderful are thy Works, in wisdom have thou made them all. The World was not
Created to be forgotten, nor Man created to be unobservant of it.

2. If we observe not the Wisdom of God in the views of the Creatures, we do no
more than Brutes. To look upon the Works of God in the World, is no higher an
act than mere Animals perform. The Glories of Heaven, and Beauties of the
Earth, are visible to the sense of Beasts and Birds. A Brute beholds the motion
of a Man, as it may see the Wheels of a Clock, but understands not the inward
Springs of Motion; the End for which we move, or the Soul that acts us in our
motion; much less that Invisible Power which presides over the Creatures, and
conducts their motion. If a Man do no more than this, he goes not a step beyond
a Brutish Nature, and may very well acknowledge himself with Asaph, a foolish
and ignorant Beast before God, Psalm 73.22. The World is viewed by Beasts, but
the Author of it to be contemplated by Man. Since we are in a higher rank than
Beasts, we owe a greater Debt than Beasts; not only to enjoy the Creatures, as
they do, but behold God in the Creatures, which they cannot do.

The Contemplation of the Reason of God in his Works, is a noble and suitable
employment for a Rational Creature: We have not only Sense to perceive them,
but Souls to mind them. The Soul is not to be without its operation: Where the
operation of Sense ends, the work of the Soul ought to begin. We travel over
them by our Senses, as Brutes; but we must pierce further by our
Understandings, as Men, and perceive and praise him that lies Invisible, in his
visible Manufactures. Our Senses are given us as Servants to the Soul, and our
Souls bestowed upon us for the knowledge and praise of their and our Common
Creator.

3. This would be a means to increase our Humility. We should then flag our
Wings and vail our Sails, and acknowledge our own Wisdom to be as a drop to the
Ocean, and a Shadow to the Sun. We should have mean thoughts of the Nothingness
of our Reason, when we consider the sublimity of the Divine Wisdom. Who can
seriously consider the Sparks of Infinite Skill in the Creature, without
falling down at the feet of the Divine Majesty, and acknowledging himself a
dark and foolish Creature, Psalm. 8.4, 5. When the Psalmist considered the
Heavens, the Moon and Stars, and Gods ordination and disposal of them, the use
that results from it is, What is Man, that thou art mindful of him? We should
no more think to mate him in Prudence, or set up the spark of our Reason to vye
with the Sun. Our Reason would more willingly submit to the Revelation, when
the Characters of Divine Wisdom are stamped upon it, when we find his Wisdom in
Creation incomprehensible to us.

4. It would help us in our acknowledgments of God, for his Goodness to us.
When we behold the Wisdom of God in Creatures below us, and how ignorant they
are of what they possess. It will cause us to reflect upon the deeper
Impressions of Wisdom in the frame of our own Bodies and Souls, an excellency
far superior to theirs; this would make us admire the magnificence of his
Wisdom and Goodness, and sound forth his Praise for advancing us in dignity
above other Works of his hands, and stamping on us by Infinite Art, a Nobler
Image of himself.

And by such a Comparison of our selves with the Creatures below us, we should
be induced to act excellently, according to the nature of our Souls; not
brutishly, according to the nature of the Creatures God has put under our feet.

5. By the Contemplation of the Creatures, we may receive some assistance in
clearing our knowledge in the Wisdom of Redemption. Though they cannot of
themselves inform us of it; yet since God has revealed his Redeeming Grace,
they can illustrate some particulars of it to us. Hence the Scripture makes use
of the Creatures to set forth things of a higher orb to us: Our Savior is
called a Sun, a Vine, and a Lion; the Spirit likened to a Dove, Fire, and
Water. The Union of Christ and his Church, is set forth by the Marriage Union
of Adam and Eve.

God has placed in Corporeal things the Images of Spiritual, and wrapped up in
his Creating Wisdom the representations of his Redeeming Grace; Whence some
call the Creatures, Natural Types of what was to be transacted in a new
formation of the World, and Allusions to what God intended in and by Christ.

6. The Meditation of Gods Wisdom in the Creatures, is in part a beginning of
Heaven upon Earth. No doubt but there will be a perfect opening of the Model of
Divine Wisdom. Heaven is for clearing what is now obscure, and a full
discovering of what seems at present intricate. Psalm. 36.9. In his light shall
we see light: All the Light in Creation, Government, and Redemption. The Wisdom
of God in the New Heavens, and the New Earth, would be to little purpose, if
that also were not to be regarded by the Inhabitants of them. As the Saints are
to be restored to the state of Adam and higher; so they are to be restored to
the employment of Adam, and higher: But his employment, was to behold God in
the Creatures. The World was so soon depraved, that God had but little joy in,
and Man but little knowledge of his Works.

And since the Wisdom of God in Creation is so little seen by our Ignorance
here, would not God lose much of the glory of it, if the glorified Souls should
lose the understanding of it above? When their Darkness shall be expelled, and
their Advantages improved; when the Eye that Adam lost, shall be fully
restored, and with a greater clearness; when the Creature shall be restored to
its true End, and Reason to its true Perfection Romans 8.21, 22.
; when the Fountains of the depths of Nature and Government shall be opened,
Knowledge shall increase, and according to the increase of our Knowledge, shall
the admiration of Divine Wisdom increase also.

The Wisdom of God in Creation, was not surely intended to lie wholly
unobserved in the greatest part of it; but since there was so little time for
the full observation of it, there will be a time wherein the Wisdom of God
shall enjoy a resurrection, and be fully contemplated by his understanding and
glorified Creature.

II. Exhortation. Study and admire the Wisdom of God in Redemption. This is the
Duty of all Christians. We are not called to understand the great depth of
Philosophy; we are not called to a skill in the Intricacies of Civil
Government, or understand all the methods of Physic: but we are called to be
Christians, that is, Studiers of Divine Evangelical Wisdom. There are first
Principles to be learned; but not those Principles to be rested in, without a
further progress. Heb. 6.1. Therefore leaving the principles of the Doctrine of
Christ, let us go on to perfection. Duties must be practiced, but knowledge is
not to be neglected. The study of Gospel Mysteries, the harmony of Divine
Truths, the sparkling of Divine Wisdom, in their mutual combination to the
great ends of Gods Glory and Man's Salvation, is an Incentive to Duty, a Spur to
Worship, and particularly to the greatest and highest part of Worship, that
part which shall remain in Heaven; the Admiration and Praise of God, and
Delight in him. If we acquaint not our selves with the Impressions of the glory
of Divine Wisdom in it, we shall not much regard it as worthy our observance in
regard of that Duty.

The Gospel is a Mystery; and as a Mystery has something Great and Magnificent
in it, worthy of our daily inspection; we shall find fresh Springs of New
wonders, which we shall be invited to adore with a Religious Astonishment. It
will both raise and satisfy our Longings. Who can come to the depths of God
manifested in the flesh? How amazing is it, and unworthy of a slight thought,
that the Death of the Son of God should purchase the happy Immortality of a
Sinful Creature, and the glory of a Rebel be wrought by the Ignominy of so
great a Person? That our Mediator, should have a Nature whereby to Covenant
with his Father, and a Nature whereby to be a Surety for the Creature? How
admirable is it, that the Fallen Creature should receive an advantage by the
Forfeiture of his Happiness? How Mysterious is it, that the Son of God should
bow down to Death upon a Cross, for the satisfaction of Justice; and rise
Triumphantly out of the Grave, as a declaration, that Justice was contented and
satisfied? That he should be exalted to Heaven, to Intercede for us; and at
last return into the World, to receive us, and invest us with a Glory for ever
with himself?

Are these things worthy of a Careless regard, or a Blockish amazement? What
Understanding can p^erce into the depths of the Divine Doctrine of the
Incarnation and Birth of Christ; the indissoluble Union of the two Natures?
What Capacity is able to measure the miracles of that Wisdom, found in the
whole Draught and Scheme of the Gospel? Does it not merit then to be the Object
of our daily Meditation? How comes it to pass then, that we are so little
curious to concern our Thoughts in those Wonders, that we scarce taste or sip
of these Delicacies? That we busy our selves in Trifles, and consider what we
shall eat, and in what fashion we shall be dressed; please our selves with the
ingeniousness of a Lace or Feather; admire a Moth-eaten Manuscript, or some
Half-worn piece of Antiquity; and think our time Ill-spent in the contemplating
and celebrating that wherein God has busied himself, and Eternity is designed
for the perpetual expressions of?

How Inquisitve are the Blessed Angels; with what vigor do they renew their
daily Contemplations of it, and receive a fresh Contentment from it; still
learning, and still enquiring? 1 Pet. 1.12. their Eye is never off the Mercy
Seat; they strive to see the bottom of it, and employ all the Understanding
they have to conceive the Wonders of it. Shall the Angels be ravished with it,
and bend themselves down to study it, who have but little interest in it in
comparison of us, for whom it was both contrived and dispensed? And shall not
our Pains be greater for this hidden Treasure? Is not that worthy the study of
a Rational Creature, that is worthy the study of the Angelical? There must
indeed be Pains, it is expressed by Digging, Prove. 2.4. A lazy Arm will not sink
to the depth of a Mine. The neglect of Meditating on it is inexcusable, since
it has the Title and Character of the Wisdom of God.

The Ancient Prophets searched into it, when it was folded up in Shadows, when
they saw only the fringes of Wisdoms Garment 1 Pet. 1.10.
; and shall not we, since the Sun has mounted up in our Horizon, and sensibly
scattered the light of the knowledge of this and the other Perfections of God?
As the Jewish Sabbath was appointed to celebrate the Perfections of God,
discovered in Creation; so is the Christian Sabbath appointed to meditate on,
and bless God for the discovery of his Perfections in Redemption. Let us
therefore receive it according to its worth; let it be our only Rule to walk
by. It Is worthy to be valued above all other Counsels; and we should never
think of it without the Doxology of the Apostle, To the only wise God be glory
through Jesus Christ, for ever; that our Speculations may end in affectionate
Admirations, and Thanksgivings, for that which is so full of Wonders! What a
little prospect should we have had of God, and the Happiness of Man, had not
his Wisdom and Goodness revealed these things to us? The Gospel is a mavelous
Light, and should not be regarded with a stupid Ignorance, and pursued with a
duller Practice.

3. Exhortation, Let none of us be proud of, or trust in our own wisdom. Man by
affecting Wisdom out of the way of God, got a crack in his Head, which has
continued Five thousand years and upwards; and ever sin our own wisdom and
knowledge has perverted us, Isai. 47.10. To be guided by this, is to be under
the conduct of a blind Leader, and follow a Traitor and Enemy to God and our
Selves. Man's Prudence often proves hurtful to him: He often accomplisheth his
ruin, while he designs his establishment; and finds his Fall, where he thought
to settle his Fortune: Such bad Eyes has Human wisdom often in its own
Affairs. Those that have been heightened with a conceit of their own Cunning,
have at last proved the greatest Fools. God delights to make foolish the wisdom
of this world, 1 Cor. 1.20.

Thus God writ Folly upon the crafty Brains of Achitophel, and Simplicity upon
the subtle Projects of Herod against our Savior; and the Devil, the Prince of
Carnal Wisdom, was befooled into a furthering our Redemption by his own
Projects to hinder it. Carnal Policy, against the Prescripts of Divine Wisdom,
never prospers: It Is like an Ignis fatuus, which leads Men out of the w^y of
Duty, and out of the way of Security, and perverts them into the Mire, and
dangerous Precipices.

When Jeroboam would coin a Religion to serve his Interest of State, he ^ore up
the Foundations both of his Kingdom and Family. The way the Jews took to
prevent a fresh Invasion of the Romans, by the Crucifying Christ, brought the
Judgment more swift upon them John 11.43.
. There is no Man ruined here, or damned hereafter, but by his own wisdom and
will. Prove. 3.5, 7. The fear of the Lord, and departure from evil, are
inconsistent with an overweening conceit of our own Wisdom; and leaning to our
own understanding, is inconsistent with a trusting in the Lord with all our
hearts. It Is as much a Deifying our selves, to trust to our own wit, as it is a
Deifying the Creature to affect or conside in it, superior to God, or equally
with him.

The true way to Wisdom is to be sensible of our own Folly, 1 Cor. 3.18. If any
man be wise, let him become a fool. He that distrusts his own guidance, will
more securely and successfully follow the Counsel of another in whom he
consides. The more Water, or any other Liquor, is poured out of a Vessel, the
more Air enters. The more we distrust our own wisdom, the more capable we are
of the conduct of Gods.

Had Jehosaphat relied upon his own Policy, he might have found a Defeat when
he met with a Deliverance; but he disowned his own skill and strength, in
telling God, We know not what to do, but our eyes are toward thee, 2 Chronicles.
20.12. Let us therefore with Augur, disesteem our own Understanding to esteem
Divine. Human Prudence is like a Spiders-web, easily blown away, and swept down
by the Besom of some unexpected Revolution. God by his Infinite Wisdom can
cross the wisdom of Man, and make a Man's own Prudence hang in his own light.
Isaiah 29.14. The understanding of their Prudent Men shall be hid.

4. Exhortation, Seek to God for Wisdom. The Wisdom we have by Nature, is like
the Weeds the Earth brings forth without Tillage. Our Wisdom since the Fall, is
the Wisdom of the Serpent, without the Innocence of the Dove: It flows from
Self-love, runs into Self-interest. It Is the wisdom of the Flesh, and a
prudence to manage means for the contenting our Lusts. Our best wisdom is
imperfect, a mere Nothing and Vanity, in comparison of the Divine, as our
Beings are in comparison of his Essence. We must go to God for a Holy and
Innocent Wisdom, and fill our Cisterns from a pure Fountain. The Wisdom that
was the glory of Solomon, was the Donation of the most High. James 1.5. If any
man want wisdom, let him ask of God, that gives to all men liberally, and
upbraideth not; and it shall be given him. The faculty of Understanding is from
God by Nature; but a Heavenly light to direct the Understanding is from God by
Grace. Children have an Understanding, but stand in need of wise Masters to
rectify it, and form Judicious Notions in it.

There is a spirit in man, but the inspiration of the Almighty gives him
understanding, Job 32.8. We must beg of God, Wisdom. The Gospel is the Wisdom
of God; the Concerns of it great and Mysterious, not to be known without a New
understanding, 1 John 5.20. A new Understanding is not to be had but from the
Creator of the first. The Spirit of God is the Searcher of the deep things of
God; the Revealer of them to us, and the enlightner of our Minds to apprehend
them; and therefore called, a Spirit of wisdom and revelation, Ephesians. 1.17.
Christ is made Wisdom to us, as well as Righteousness; not only by Imputation,
but Effusion Seamans S^^ on before the Parliament.
. Seek to God therefore for that Wisdom which is like the Sun, and not that
Worldly wisdom which is like a Shadow: For that Wisdom whose effects are not so
outwardly glorious, but inwardly sweet, seek it from him, and seek it in his
Word, that is the Transcript of Divine Wisdom; through his Precepts
understanding is to be had*. Psalm. 119.1^4.
. As the wisdom of Men appears in their Laws; so does the Wisdom of God in his
Statutes.

By this means we arrive to a Heavenly sagacity. If these be rejected, what
Wisdom can be in us? a dream and conceit only; Jer. 8. They have rejected the
word of the Lord, and what Wisdom is in them? Who knows how to order any
concerns as he ought, or any one faculty of his Soul? Therefore desire Gods
direction in outward concerns, in personal, family, in Private and Public: He
has not only a Wisdom for our Salvation, but for our outward Direction. He
does not only guide us in the one, and leave Satan to manage us in the other:
Those that go with Saul to a Witch of Endor, go to Hell for craft, and prefer
the Wisdom of the hostile Serpent, before the holy Counsel of a Faithful
Creator. If you want health in your Body, you advise with a Physician; if
direction for your Estate, you resort to a Lawyer; If passage for a voyage, you
address to a Pilot; why not much more your selves, your all to a Wise God. As
Pliny said concerning a Wise man, Oh sir, how many Cato's are there in that
wise Person? how much more Wisdom than men or Angels possess, is infinitely
centered in the Wise God?

5. Submit to the Wisdom of God in all cases. What else was inculcated in the
first Precept forbidding man to eat of the Fruit of the tree of Knowledge of
good and evil; but that he should take heed of the swelling of his mind against
the Wisdom of God? It Is a Wisdom Incomprehensible to flesh and blood: We should
adore it in our minds, and resign up our selves to it in our practice: How
unreasonable are repinings against God, whereby a Creatures Ignorance endites
and judges a Creators Prudence? Were God weak in Wisdom and only mighty in
Power, we might suspect his Conduct. Power without Wisdom and goodness is an
unruly and ruinous thing in the World. But God being Infinite in one, as well
as the other, we have no reason to be jealous of him, and repine against his
methods; Why should we quarrel with him that we are not as high, or as wealthy
as others; that we have not presently the Mercy we want? If he be Wise, we
ought to stay his time, and wait his leisure, because he is a God of Judgment.
Esa. 30.18. Presume not to shorten the time which his discretion has fixed,
it is a folly to think to do it. By impatience we cannot hasten relief; we
alienate him from us by debasing him to stand at our bar, disturb our selves,
lose the comfort of our lives and the sweetness of his mercy. Submission to God
we are in no case exempted from, because there is no case wherein God does not
direct all the acts of his Will by Counsel. Whatsoever is drawn by a strait
rule must be right and strait; the rule that is right in it self, is the
measure of the straitness of every thing else: Whatsoever is wrought in the
World by God, must be Wise, Good, Righteous; because God is essentially Wisdom,
Goodness, and Righteousness.

Submit to God, (1.) in his Revelations.

1. Measure them Not by Reason: The truths of the gospel must be received with
a self emptiness and annnihilation of the Creature. If our Reason seems to lift
up itself against Revelation, because it finds no testimony for it in its own
light; Consider how Crazy it is in natural and obvious things and therefore
sure it is not strong enough to enter into the depths of Divine Wisdom: The
Wisdom of God in the Gospel is too great an Ocean to be contained or laved out
by a Cockleshell. It were not infinite, if it were not beyond our finite reach;
our Reason must as well stoop to his Wisdom, as our Wills to his Sovereignty.
How great a vanity is it for a Glowworm to boast, that it is as full of light
as the Sun in the firmament? for reason to leave its proper sphere, is to fall
into confusion, and thicken its own darkness. We should settle our selves in
the belief of the Scripture, and confirm our selves by a meditation on those
many undeniable arguments, for its divine authority. The fulfilling of its
predictions, the antiquity of the writing, the holiness of the precepts, the
heavenliness of the Doctrine, the glorious effects it has produced, and does
yet produce, different from human methods of success; and submit our reason to
the voice of so high a Majesty.

2. Not to be too curiously inquisitive into what is not Revealed. There is
something hid in whatsoever is Revealed. We know the son of God was begotten
from eternity, but how he was begotten, we are ignorant. We know there is a
Union of the Divine Nature wi h the Human, and that the Fullness of the Godhead
dwells in him bodily; but the manner of its inhabitation we are in a great part
ignorant of. We know God has chosen some and refused others, and that he did
it with Counsel; but the reason why he chose this man and not that, we know
not; we can referr it to nothing but Gods Sovereign pleasure. It Is revealed
that there will be a day wherein God shall judge the World; but the particular
time is not reveal d. We know that God Created the World in Time; but why he
did not create the World millions of years before, we are ignorant of, and our
Reasons would be be wildred in their too much curiosity. If we ask why he did
not create it before; we may as well ask why he did create it then? And may not
the same q^^^^ion be asked, if the World had been Created millions of years
before it was? That he Created in it six days, and not in an instant, is
revealed; but why he did not do it in a moment, since we are sure he was able
to do it, is not revealed. Are the reasons of a wise man's proceedings hid from
us, and shall we presume to dive into the reason of the proceedings of an only
wise God, which he has Judged not expedient to discover to us? Some sparks of
his Wisdom he has caused to issue out, to exercise and delight our Minds;
others he keeps within the center of his own breast: We must not go about to
unlock his Cabinet. As we cannot reach to the utmost lines of his Power; so we
cannot grasp the intimate reasons of his Wisdom. We must still remember, that
which is Finite can never be able to comprehend, the Reasons, Motives, and
Methods of that which is Infinite. It does not become us to be resty, because
God has not admitted us into the Debates of Eternity. We are as little to be
curious at what God has hid, as to be careless of what God has manifested.
Too great an inquisitiveness beyond our line, is as much a provoking arrogance,
as a blockish negligence of what is revealed, is a slighting ingratitude.

2. Submit to God in his Precepts and Methods. Since they are the results of
Infinite Wisdom, disputes against them are not tolerable: What orders are given
out by Infallible Wisdom are to be entertained with respect and reverence,
though the reason of them be not visible to our purblind minds. Shall God have
less respect from us than Earthly Princes, whose Laws we observe without being
able to pierce into the exact reason of them all? Since we know he has not a
Will without an Understanding, our observance of him must be without Repining;
we must not think to mend our Creators Laws, and presume to judge and condemn
his Righteous Statutes: If the flesh rise up in opposition, we must cross its
motions, and Silence its Murmurings; his Will should be an acceptable Will to
us, because it is a wise Will in itself. God has no need to impose upon us and
deceive us; He has just and righteous ways to attain his glory and his
Creatures good. To deceive us, would be to dishonor himself and contradict his
own nature. He cannot impose false injurious Precepts or unavailable to his
subjects happiness; not false, because of his Truth; not injurious because of
his Goodness; not vain, because of his Wisdom. Submit therefore to him in his
Precepts, and in his Methods too. The honor of his Wisdom and the interest of
our Happiness calls for it. Had Noah disputed with God about building an Ark,
and listened to the scoffs of the senseless World, he had perished under the same
fate and lost the honor of a Preacher and worker of righteousness. Had not the
Israelites been their own enemies, if they had been permitted to be their own
guides, and returned to the Egyptian bondage and furnaces, instead of a liberty
and earthly felicity in Canaan? Had our Savior gratified the Jews by
descending from the Cross and freeing himself from the power of his
Adversaries, he might have had that Faith from them which they promised him:
but It had been a faith to no purpose, because without ground; they might have
believed him to be the Son of God, but he could not have been the Savior of
the World: His death the great ground and object of Faith had been
unaccomplished, they had believed a God pardoning without a content to his
Justice, and such a Faith could not have rescued them from falling into eternal
Misery. The Precepts and Methods of Divine Wisdom must be submitted to.

3. Submit to God in all Crosses and Revolutions. Infinite Wisdom cannot err in
any of his paths, or step the least hairs breadth from the way of Righteousness:
There is the Understanding of God in every motion; an Eye in every Wheel; the
Wheel that goes over us and crusheth us. We are led by Fancy more than Reason:
We know no more what we ask or what is fit for us, than the Mother of Zebedees
children did, when she Petitioned Christ for her sons advancement, when he came
into his Temporal Kingdom Mat. 20.22.
: The things we desire might pleasure our Fancy or Appetite, but impair our
health: One man complains for want of Children, but knows not whither they may
prove Comforts or Crosses: Another for want of Health, but knows not whither
the health of his Body may not prove the disease of his Soul. We might lose in
Heavenly things, if we possess in Earthly things what we long for. God in
regard of his infinite Wisdom is fitter to carve out a condition than we our
selves; our Shallow reason, and self-love, would wish for those things, that
are injurious to God, to our selves, to the World; but God always chooses what
is best for his Glory, and what is best for his Creatures, either in regard of
themselves, or as they stand in relation to him, or to others, as parts of the
World.

We are in danger from our self-love, in no danger in complying with Gods
Wisdom: When Rachel would dye, if she had no Children, she had Children, but
Death with one of them Genesis 30.1.
. Good men may conclude, that whatsoever is done by God in them or with them,
is best and fittest for them; because by the Covenant which makes over God to
them, as their God, the conduct of his Wisdom is assured to them as well as any
other Attribute: And therefore, as God in every transaction appears as their
God, so he appears as their wise Director, and by this Wisdom he extracts good
out of evil, makes the affliction which destroys our outward Comforts, consume
our inward Defilements; And the waves which threatened to swallow up the vessel,
to cast it upon the shore: And when he has occasion to manifest his Anger
against his People, his Wisdom directs his Wrath. In Judgment he has a work to
do upon Zion, and when that work is done, he punishes the fruit of the stout
heart of the King of Assyria Isa. 10.1^.
; As in the answers of Prayer he does give oftentimes above what we ask or
think, Ephesians. 3.20. so in outward concerns he does above what we can expect, or
by our short-sightedness conclude will be done; Let us therefore in all things
frame our minds to the Divine Wisdom, and say with the Psalmist, Psalm 47.4. The
Lord shall choose our inheritance and condition for us.

6. Exhortation. Censure not God in any of his ways. Can we Understand the
full scope of Divine Wisdom in Creation, which is perfected before our Eyes?
Can we by a rational knowledge walk over the whole Surface of the Earth, and
wade through the Sea? Can we Understand the Nature of the Heavens? Are all, or
most, or the thousandth part of the particles of Divine Skill known by us, yea
or any of them thoroughly known? How can we then Understand his deeper methods
in things, that are but of yesterday, that we have not had a time to View? We
should not be too quick or too rash in our Judgments of him: The best that we
attain to, is but feeble conjectures at the designs of God.

As there is something hid in whatsoever is revealed in his Word, so there is
some thing inaccessible to us in his Works, as well as in his Nature and
Majesty. In our Saviors act in washing his Disciples feet, he checked Peter's
contradiction, John 13.7. What I do, thou know not now, but thou shall know
hereafter. God were not infinitely wise if the reason of all his acts were
obvious to our Shallowness. He is no profound Statesman, whose inward
intention can be sounded by vulgar Heads at the first act he starts in his
designed method. The wise God is in this like wisemen, that have not breasts
like glasses of Crystal, to discover all that they intend. There are secrets
of Wisdom above our reach Job 11.6.
; nay when we see all his acts, we cannot see all the draughts of his skill in
them. An unskilful hearer of a musical lesson may receive the melody with his
Ear, and understand not the rarities of the composition as it was wrought by
the Musicians mind. Under the old Testament there was more of Divine Power, and
less of his Wisdom apparent in his acts: As his Laws, so his acts were more
fitted to their Sense. Under the new Testament there is more of Wisdom and less
of power; As his Laws so his acts are more fitted to a spiritual mind; Wisdom
is less discernable than power. Our Wisdom therefore in this case, as it does
in other things, consists in silence and expectation of the end and event of a
work. We owe that honor to God that we do to men wiser than our selves, to
imagine he has reason to do what he does, though our shallowness cannot
comprehend it. We must suffer God to be wiser than our selves, and acknowledge
that there is something sovereign in his ways not to be measured by the feeble
reed of our weak understandings. And therefore we should acquiesce in his
proceedings; take heed we be not found slanderers of God, but be adorers
instead of Censurers; and lift up our hands in admiration of him and his ways,
instead of citing him to answer it at our Bar. Many things in the first
appearance may seem to be rash and unjust, which in the Issue appear comely and
regular. If it had been plainly spoke before that the Son of God should dye,
that a most holy person should be crucified; it would have seemed cruel to
expose a Son to misery; unjust to inflict punishment upon one that was no
Criminal; to join together exact Goodness and Physical evil; that the Sovereign
should dye for the Malefactor, and the Observer of the Law for the Violators of
it. But when the whole design is unravelled, what an admirable connection is
there of Justice and Mercy, Love and Wisdom, which before would have appeared
absurd to the muddied reason of man?

We see the Gardener pulling up some delightful Flowers by the roots, digging
up the Earth, overwhelming it with Dung; an ignorant person would imagine him
wild, out of his wits, and charge him with spoiling his Garden: But when the
Spring is arrived, the spectator will acknowledge his skill in his former
Operations.

The truth is, the whole design and methods of God are not to be judged by us
in this World; the full declaration of the whole contexture is reserved for the
other World, to make up a part of good men's happiness in the amazing views of
divine Wisdom, as well as the other perfections of his nature. We can no more
perfectly understand his Wisdom, than we can his Mercy and Justice, till we see
the last lines of all drawn, and the full expressions of them: We should
therefore be sober and modest in the consideration of Gods ways; his Judgments
are unsearchable, and his ways past finding out. The riches of his Wisdom are
past our counting, his depths not to be fathomed, yet they are depths of
righteousness and equity: Though the full manifestation of that equity, the
grounds and methods of his proceedings are unknown to us. As we are too short
fully to know God, so we are too ignorant fully to comprehend the acts of God:
Since he is a God of Judgment, we should wait till we see the issue of his
works, Esa. 30.18. And in the mean time, with the Apostle in the Text, give him
the glory of all, in the same expressions, To the only wise God be glory,
through Jesus Christ for ever. Amen.

A DISCOURSE UPON THE Power of God.
Job 26.14. Lo, these are parts of his ways, but how little a portion is
heard of him? [but the thunder of his power who can understand?]


BILDAD had in the foregoing Chapter entertained Job with a Discourse of the
dominion and power of God, and the purity of his righteousness, whence he
argues an impossibility of the justification of Man in his Presence, who is no
better than a Worm. Job in this Chapter acknowledges the greatness of Gods
power, and descants more largely upon it than Bildad had done; but does Preface
it with a kind of Ironical speech, as if he had not acted a friendly part, or
spoke little to the purpose, or the matter in hand: The subject of Job's
Discourse was the worldly happiness of the Wicked, and the Calamities of the
Godly: And Bildad reads him a Lecture, of the extent of Gods Dominion, the
number of his Armies, and the unspotted rectitude of his Nature, in comparison
of which the purest Creatures are foul and crooked. Job therefore from verse 1.
to verse 4. taxes him in a kind of scoffing manner, that he had not touched
the Point, but rambled from the Subject in hand, and had not applied a Salve
proper to his Sore: Verse 2. How have thou helped him that is without power?
how savest thou the arm of him that has no strength? etc. your discourse is so
impertinent, that it will neither strengthen a weak person, nor instruct a
simple one Munster.
. But since Bildad would take up the Argument of Gods Power, and discourse so
short of it, Job would show that he wanted not his Instructions in that kind,
and that he had more distinct Conceptions of it than his Antagonist had
uttered: And therefore from verse 5. to the end of the Chapter, he does
magnificently treat of the Power of God in several Branches. And verse 5. he
begins with the lowest.

Dead things are formed from under the waters, and the inhabitants thereof. You
read me a Lecture of the Power of God in the heavenly Host: Indeed it is
visible there, yet of a larger extent; and Monuments of it are found in the
lower parts. What do you think of those dead things under the Earth and Waters,
of the Corn that dies, and by the moys^^ng influences of the Clouds springs up
again with a numerous progeny and increase for the nourishment of man? What do
you think of those varieties of Metals and Minerals conceived in the bowels of
the Earth; those Pearls and Riches in the depths of the Waters, midwifed by
this Power of God? Add to these those more prodigious Creatures in the Sea, the
Inhabitants of the Waters, with their vastness and variety, which are all the
Births of Gods Power; both in their first Creation by his mighty Voice, and
their propagation by his cherishing Providence.

Stop not here, but consider also that his Power extends to Hell; either the
Graves the Repositories of all the crumbled dust that has yet been in the
World (for so Hell is sometimes taken in Scripture: Verse 6. Hell is naked
before him, and destruction has no covering) The several lodgings of deceased
men are known to him: No skreen can obscure them from his sight, nor their
dissolution be any bar to his Power, when the time is come to compact those
mouldred Bodies to entertain again their departed Souls, either for weal or
woe. The Grave, or Hell, the place of punishment, is naked before him; as
distinctly discerned by him, as a naked Body in all its lineaments by us, or a
dissected Body is in all its parts by a skilful Eye. Destruction has no
covering; none can free himself from the Power of his Hand. Every person in the
bowels of Hell; every person punished there, is known to him, and feels the
Power of his Wrath.

From the lower parts of the World he ascends to the consideration of the Power
of God in the Creation of Heaven and Earth, He stretches out the North over the
empty places Verse 7.
. The North, or the North Pole over the Air, which by the Greeks was called
void or empty, because of the tenuity and thinness of that Element; and he
mentions here the North, or North Pole, for the whole Heaven, because it is
more known and apparent than the Southern-pole. And hangs the Earth upon
nothing: The massy and weighty Earth hangs like a thick Globe in the midst of
a thin Air, that there is as much Air on the one side of it, as on the other.
The Heavens have no prop to sustain them in their height, and the Earth has no
basis to support it in its place. The Heavens are as if you saw a Curtain
stretched smooth in the Air without any hand to hold it; and the Earth is as if
you saw a Ball hanging in the Air without any solid Body to under-prop it, or
any Line to hinder it from falling; both standing Monuments of the Omnipotence
of God.

He then takes notice of his daily Power in the Clouds, He binds up the waters
in his thick Clouds, and the Cloud is not rent under them Verse 8.
. He compacts the Waters together in Clouds, and keeps them by his Power in the
Air against the force of their natural gravity and heaviness, till they are fit
to flow down upon the Earth, and perform his pleasure in the places for which
he designs them. The Cloud is not rent under them; the thin Air is not split
asunder by the weight of the Waters contained in the Cloud above it. He causes
them to distill by drops, and strains them as it were through a thin Lawn, for
the refreshment of the Earth; and suffers them not to fall in the whole lump,
with a violent torrent, to waste the industry of Man, and bring Famine upon the
World, by destroying the Fruits of the Earth. What a wonder would it be to see
but one entire drop of water hang it self but one Inch above the ground, unless
it be a Bubble which is preserved by the Air enclosed within it? What a wonder
would it be to see a Gallon of Water contained in a thin Cobweb as strongly as
in a Vessel of Brass? Greater is the wonder of Divine Power in those thin
Bottles of Heaven, as they are called Job 38.37.
; and therefore called his Clouds here, as being daily Instances of his
Omnipotence: That the Air should sustain those rouling Vessels, as it should
seem, weightier than it self: That the force of this Mass of Waters should not
break so thin a Prison, and hasten to its proper place which is below the Air:
That they should be daily confined against their natural inclination, and held
by so slight a Chain: That there should be such a gradual and successive
falling of them, as if the Air were pierced with holes like a Gardiners
watring-pot, and not fall in one entire body to drown or drench some parts of
the Earth. These are hourly Miracles of Divine Power, as little regarded as
clearly v sible.

He proceeds, Verse 9. He holds back the face of his Throne, and spreads the
Cloud upon it. The Clouds are designed as ^^rtains to cover the Heavens, as
well as Vessels to water the Earth Psalm. 147.8.
. As a Tapestry Curtain between the Heavens, the Throne of God, Isa. 66.1. and
the Earth his Footstool: the Heavens are called his Throne, because his Power
does most shine forth there, and magnificently declare the glory of God; and
the Clouds are as a Skreen between the scorching heat of the Sun, and the
tender Plants of the Earth, and the weak Bodies of Men.

From hence he descends to the Sea, and considers the Divine Power apparent in
the bounding of it: Verse 10. He has compassed the Waters with bounds, till
the day and night come to an end. This is several times mentioned in Scripture
as a signal Mark of Divine strength Job 38.8. Prove. 8.27.
. He has measured a place for the Sea, and struck the Limits of it as with a
Compass, that it might not mount above the Surface of the Land, and ruin the
ends of the Earths Creation; and this while day and night have their mutual
turns, till he shall make an end of time by removing the measures of it. The
bounds of the tumultuous Sea are in many places as weak as the Bottles of the
upper Waters; the one is contained in thin Air, and the other restrained by
weak Sands in many places, as well as by stubborn Rocks in others; that though
it swells, foams, roars, and the Waves encouraged and egged on by strong Winds,
come like Mountains against the Shore, they overflow it not, but humble
themselves when they come near to those Sands, which are set as their Lists and
Limits, and retire back to the Womb that brought them forth, as if they were
ashamed and repented of their proud Invasion: Or else it may be meant of the
Tides of the Sea, and the stated time God has set it for its ebbing and
flowing, till night and day come to an end Coccei in loc.
; both that the fluid Waters should contain themselves within due bounds, and
keep their perpetual orderly motion, are amazing Argumens of Divine Power.

He passes on to the Consideration of the Commotions in the Air and Earth
raised and stilled by the Power of God; The Pillars of Heaven tremble, and are
astonished at his reproof. By Pillars of Heaven are not meant Angels, as some
think; but either the Air called the Pillars of Heaven in regard of place, as
it continues and knits together the parts of the World, as Pillars do the upper
and nether parts of a Building. As the lowest parts of the Earth are called the
Foundations of the Earth; so the lowest parts of the Heaven may be called the
Pillars of Heaven Coccei.
. Or else by that Phrase may be meant Mountains, which seem at a distance to
touch the Sky, as Pillars do the top of a Structure; and so it may be spoken
according to vulgar Capacity, which imagines the Heavens to be sustained by the
two extreme parts of the Earth, as a Unequal Body, or to be archt by Pillars;
whence the Scripture, according to common apprehensions, mentions the ends of
the Earth, and the utmost parts of the Heavens, tho they have properly no end,
as being round. The Power of God is seen in those Commotions in the Air and
Earth, by Thunders, Lightnings, Storms, Earthquakes, which rack the Air, and
make the Mountains and Hills tremble as Servants before a frowning and rebuking
Master.

And as he makes motions in the Earth and Air, so is his Power seen in their
Influences upon the Sea; He judges the Sea with his power, and by his
understanding he smites through the proud Verse 12.
. At the Creation he put the Waters into several Channels, and caused the dry
Land to appear barefaced for a Habitation for Man and Beasts; or rather he
splits the Sea by Storms, as though he would make the bottom of the Deep
visible, and rakes up the Sands to the Surface of the Waters, and marshals the
Waves into Mountains and Valleys. After that, he smites through the proud, that
is, humbles the proud Waves, and by allaying the Storm reduces them to their
former Level: The Power of God is visible, as well in rebuking, as in awakning
the winds; he makes them sensible of his Voice, and according to his Pleasure
exasperates or calms them. The striking through the proud here, is not probably
meant of the destruction of the Egyptian Army; for some guess that Job died
that year Drusius in loc.
, or about the time of the Israelites coming out of Egypt: So that this
Discourse here being in the time of his Affliction, could not point at that
which was done after his restoration to his temporal Prosperity.

And now at last he sums up the Power of God in the chiefest of his Works
above, and the greatest wonder of his Works below: Verse 13. By his Spirit he
has garnisht the Heavens; his hand has formed the crooked Serpent, etc. The
greater and lesser Lights, Sun, Moon, and Stars, the Ornaments and Furniture of
Heaven; and the Whale, a prodigious Monument of Gods Power, often mentioned in
Scripture to this purpose, and in particular in this Book of Job Job 41.
, and called by the same name of Crooked Serpent, Isa. 27.1. where it is
applied by way of Metaphor, to the King of Assyria or Egypt, or all Oppressors
of the Church. Various Interpretations there are of this crooked Serpent: Some
understanding that Constellation in Heaven which Astronomers call the Dragon;
some that Combination of weaker Stars, which they call the Galaxia, which winds
about the Heavens: But it is most probable that Job, drawing near to a
conclusion of his Discourse, joins the two greatest Testimonies of Gods Power
in the World, the highest Heavens, and the lowest Leviathan, which is here
called a bar Serpent As the word signifies in the Hebrew.
in regard of his strength and hardness, as mighty Men are called bars in
Scripture, Jer. 51.30. Her bars are broken things. And in regard of this Power
of God in the Creation of this Creature, it is particularly mentioned in the
Catalogue of Gods Works, Genesis 1.21. And God created great Whales; all the other
Creatures being put into one sum, and not particularly expressed.

And now he makes the use of this Lecture in the Text, Lo, these are parts of
his ways, but how little a portion is heard of him? but the thunder of his
Power who can understand? This is but a small Landscape of some of his Works of
Power, the outsides and extremities of it; more glorious things are within his
Palaces: Though those things argue a stupendous Power of the Creator in his
Works of Creation and Providence, yet they are nothing to what may be declared
of his Power. And what may be declared, is nothing to what may be conceived;
and what may be conceived, is nothing to what is above the conceptions of any
Creature. These are but little Crumbs and Fragments, of that infinite Power
which is in his Nature, like a drop in comparison of the mighty Ocean; a hiss
or whisper in comparison of a mighty Voice of Thunder Oecolamp.
. This which I have spoken is but like a Spark to the fiery Region, a few lines
by the by, a drop of speech.

The thunder of his Power: Some understand it of Thunder literally, for
material Thunder in the Air: The Thunder of his Power, that is according to the
Hebrew Dialect, his powerful Thunder. This is not the sense; the nature of
Thunder in the Air does not so much exceed the capacity of human understanding;
it is therefore rather to be understood Metaphorically, The Thunder of his
Power, that is, the greatness and immensity of his Power manifested in the
magnificent Miracles of Nature, in the consideration whereof men are
astonished, as if they had heard an unusual Clap of Thunder. So Thunder is
used, Job 39.25. The Thunder of the Captains; that is, strength and force of
the Captains of an Army. And verse 19. God speaking to Job of a Horse, says,
Have thou clothed his neck with thunder? that is, strength. And Thunder being a
mark of the Power of God, some of the Heathen have called God by the name of a
Thunderer The ancient Gawl^ worshipped him under the name of Taranis. The
Greeks called Jupiter (...) and Thor: whence our Thursday is derived,
signifies, Thunderer, a title the Germans gave their God. And Toran in the
British Language signifies Thunder. Voss. Idolo. lib. 2. cap. 33. Camb. Britan.
p. 17.
. As Thunder pierces the lowest places, and alters the state of things; so
does the Power of God penetrate into all things whatsoever; the Thunder of his
Power; that is, the Greatness of his Power: as the strength of Salvation, Psalm.
20.6. that is, a mighty Salvation.

Who can understand? Who is able to count all the Monuments of his Power? How
does this little, which I have spoken of, exceed the capacity of our
Understanding, and is rather the matter of our astonishment, than the object of
our comprehensive knowledge? The Power of the greatest Potentate or the
mightiest Creature, is but of small extent: None but have their limits: It may
be understood, how far they can act, in what sphere their activity is bounded:
But when I have spoken all of Divine Power that I can; when you have thought
all that you can think of it, your Souls will prompt you to conceive something
more, beyond what I have spoken, and what you have thought. His Power shines in
every thing, and is beyond every thing. There is infinitely more Power lodged
in his Nature, not expressed to the World. The understanding of Men and Angels
centred in one Creature, would fall short of the perception of the Infiniteness
of it. All that can be comprehended of it, are but little Fringes of it, a
small Portion. No man ever discoursed, or can, of Gods Power according to the
magnificence of it. No Creature can conceive it; God himself only comprehends
it; God himself is only able to express it. Man's power being limited, his Line
is too short to measure the incomprehensible Omnipotence of God. The thunder of
his Power who can understand? that is, none can.

The Text is a lofty declaration of the Divine Power, with a particular note of
Attention, Lo.

1. In the expressions of it, in the works of Creation and Providence; [Loe,
these are his ways; Ways and Works excelling any created strength, referring to
the little summary of them he had made before. In the Insufficiency of these
ways to measure his Power; [but how little a portion is heard of him? In the
Incomprehensibleness of it; [The thunder of his Power who can understand?
Infinite and Incomprehensible Power pertains to the Nature of God, and is
expressed in part in his Works: or, Though there be a mighty expression of Divine
Power in his Works, yet an Incomprehensible Power pertains to his Nature. The
thunder of his Power, who can understand?

His Power glitters in all his Works, as well as his Wisdom; Psalm. 62.11. Twice
have I heard this, that Power belongs unto God. In the Law and in the Prophets,
say some: But why* Power twice, and not Mercy, which he speaks of in the
following Verse? He had heard of Power twice, from the voice of Creation, and
from the voice of Government. Mercy was heard in Government after Man's Fall,
not in Creation; Innocent man was an object of Gods goodness, not of his Mercy
till he made himself miserable: Power was expressed in both; or Twice have I
heard, that Power belongs to God, that is, it is a certain and undoubted Truth,
that Power is essential to the Divine Nature. It Is true, Mercy is essential,
Justice is essential; but Power more apparently essential, because no acts of
Mercy, or Justice, or Wisdom, can be exercised by him without Power: The
repetition of a thing confirms the certainty of it. Some observe, that God is
called Almighty Seventy times in Scripture Lessius, de perfect. Divin. lib. 5.
cap. 1.
. Though his Power be evident in all his Works, yet he has a Power beyond the
expression of it in his Works, which, as it is the glory of his Nature, so it
is the comfort of a Believer. To which purpose the Apostle expresses it by an
excellent Periphrasis for the honor of the Divine Nature; Ephesians. 3.20. Now unto
him that is able to do exceeding abundantly above all that we can ask or think,
unto him be glory in the Churches. We have reason to acknowledge him Almighty,
who has a Power of acting above our power of understanding. Who could have
imagined such a powerful operation in the propagation of the Gospel, and the
Conversion of the Gentiles, which the Apostle seems to hint at in that place?
His Power is expressed by Horns in his hands, Hab. 3.4. because all the Works of
his hands are wrought with Almighty strength. Power is also used as a Name of
God, Mark 14.62. The Son of Man sitting on the right hand of Power, that is, at
the right hand of God: God and Power are so inseparable that they are
reciprocated. As his Essence is Immense not to be confined in Place, as it is
Eternal, not to be measured by Time; so it is Almighty, not to be limited in
regard of Action.

Unit Fotherby, Atheomastic, p. 306, 307.
; all Numbers depend upon it, it makes Numbers by Addition, Multiplies them
unexpressibly; when one Unit is removed from a Number, how vastly does it
diminish it? It gives perfection to all other Numbers, it receives perfection
from none. If you add a Unit before 100, how does it multiply it to 1100? If
you set a Unit before twenty Millions, it presently makes the Number swell up
to an hundred and twenty Millions: and so powerful is a Unit by adding it to
Numbers, that it will infinitely enlarge them to such a vastness that shall
transcend the capacity of the best Arithmetician to count them. By such a
Meditation as this you may have some prospect of the Power of that God who is
only Unity; the Beginning of all things, as a Unit is the beginning of all
Numbers; and can perform as many things really, as a Unit can numerically, that
is, can do as much in the making of Creatutes, as a Unit can do in the
multiplying of Numbers. The Omnipotence of God was scarce denied by any
Heathen, that did not deny the Being of a God, and that was Pliny, and that
upon weak Arguments.

cannot have a conception of God, if we conceive him not most Powerful, as well
as most Wise: He is not a God, that cannot do what he will, and perform all his
pleasure. If we imagine him restrained in his Power, we imagine him limited in
his Essence. As he has an infinite Knowledge to know what is possible, he
cannot be without an infinite Power to do what is possible. As he has a Will
to resolve what he sees good, so he cannot want a Power to effect what he sees
good to decree. As the Essence of a Creature cannot be conceived without that
activity that belongs to his nature; as when you conceive Fire, you cannot
conceive it without a power of burning and warming; and when you conceive
Water, you cannot conceive it without a power of moistning and cleansing: So
you cannot conceive an Infinite Essence without an Infinite Power of activity.
And therefore a Heathen could say, If you know God, you know he can do all
things; and therefore says Austin, Give me not only a Christian but a Jew, not
only a Jew but a Heathen, that will deny God to be Almighty. A Jew, a Heathen
may deny Christ to be Omnipotent, but no Heathen will deny God to be
Omnipotent, and no Devil will deny either to be so: God cannot be conceived
without some Power, for then he must be conceived without Action: Whose then
are those products and effects of Power which are visible to us in the World?
to whom do they belong? who is the Father of them? God cannot be conceived
without a Power suitable to his Nature and Essence; if we imagine him to be of
an Infinite Essence, we must imagine him to be of an Infinite Power and
Strength.

In particular, I shall show, 1. The Nature of God's Power. 2. Reasons to prove
that God must needs be Powerful. 3. How his Power appears; in Creation, in
Government, in Redemption. 4. The Use.


What this Power is; or the Nature of it.

1. Power sometimes signifies Authority: And a Man is said to be Mighty and
Powerful in regard of his Dominion, and the right he has to Command multitudes
of other persons to take his part; but Power taken for Strength, and Power
taken for Authority, are distinct things, and may be separated from one
another: Power may be without Authority, as in successful Invasions that have
no just foundation: Authority may be without Power; as in a Just Prince,
expelled by an unjust Rebellion, the Authority resides in him, though he be
overpowered, and is destitute of Strength to support and exercise that
Authority. The Power of God is not to be understood of his Authority and
Dominion, but his Strength to act, and the word in the Text properly signifies
Strength. (...).


2. This Power is divided ordinarily into Absolute and Ordinate. Absolute, is
that Power whereby God is able to do that which he will not do, but is possible
to be done: Ordinate, is that Power whereby God does that which he has decreed
to do, that is, which he has ordained or appointed to be exercised Scaliger,
Publ. exercit. 365.. 8.
. Which are not distinct Powers, but one and the same Power; his Ordinate Power
is a part of his Absolute; for if he had not a Power to do every thing that he
could will, he might not have a Power to do every thing that he does will.

The Object of his Absolute Power is all things possible; such things that
imply not a contradiction, such that are not repugnant in their own nature to
be done, and such as are not contrary to the Nature and Perfections of God to
be done: Those things that are repugnant in their own nature to be done are
several, as to make a thing which is past not to be past. As for Example, The
World is created; God could have chose whether he would create the World, and
after it is created he has Power to dissolve it; but after it was created, and
when it is dissolved, it will be eternally true, that the World was created,
and that it was dissolved; for it is impossible, that that which was once true,
should ever be false: If it be true that the World was created, it will for
ever be true that it was created, and cannot be otherwise. And also, if it be
once true that God has decreed, it is impossible in its own nature to be true
that God has not decreed. Some things are repugnant to the Nature and
Perfections of God: As it is impossible for his Nature to die and perish;
impossible for him in regard of Truth, to lie and deceive. But of this
hereafter; only at present to understand the Object of Gods Absolute Power to
be things possible, that is, possible in Nature; not by any strength in
themselves, or of themselves; for nothing has no strength, and every thing is
nothing before it comes into being Estius in Sent. lib. 1. did. 43.. 2.
: So God by his Absolute Power might have prevented the Sin of the Fallen
Angels, and so have preserved them in their first habitation. He might by his
Absolute Power have restrained the Devil from tempting of Eve, or restrained
Her and Adam from swallowing the Bait, and joining hands with the Temptation.
By his Absolute Power, God might have given the reins to Peter to betray his
Master, as well as to deny him; and employed Judas in the same glorious and
successful Service, wherein he employed Paul. By his Absolute Power he might
have created the World Millions of years before he did create it, and can
reduce it into its empty Nothing this moment. This the Baptist affirms, when he
tells us, That God is able of these Stones (meaning the Stones in the
Wilderness, and not the People which came out to him out of Judea, which were
Children of Abraham) to raise up Children to Abraham, Mat. 3.9. that is, there
is a possibility of such a thing, there is no contradiction in it, but that God
is able to do it if he please.

But now the Object of his Ordinate Power, is all things ordained by him to be
done, all things decreed by him; and because of the Divine ordination of
things, this Power is called Ordinate; and what is thus ordained by him he
cannot but do, because of his Unchangeableness. Both those Powers are expressed,
Mat. 26.53, 54. My Father can send twelve legions of Angels, there is his
Absolute Power; but how then shall the Scriptures be fulfilled, that thus it
must be? there is his Ordinate Power. As his Power is free from any act of his
Will, it is called Absolute; as it is joined with an act of his Will, it is
called Ordinate. His Absolute Power is necessary, and belongs to his Nature;
his Ordinate Power is free, and belongs to his Will; a Power guided by his
Will; not, as I said before, that they are two distinct Powers, both belonging
to his Nature, but the latter is the same with the former, only it is guided by
his Will and Wisdom.

That the Power of God is that ability and strength, whereby he can bring to
pass whatsoever he please. Whatsoever his infinite Wisdom can direct, and
whatsoever the infinite purity of his Will can resolve. Power, in the primary
notion of it, does not signify an act, but an ability to bring a thing into
act; it is Power, as able to act before it does actually produce a thing: As God
had an Ability to create before he did create, he had Power before he acted
that Power without. Power notes the principle of the Action, and therefore is
greater than the Act it self. Power exercised and diffused, in bringing forth
and nursing up its particular Objects without, is unconceivably less than that
Strength which is Infinite in himself, the same with his Essence, and is indeed
Himself: By his Power exercised he does whatsoever he actually Wills; but by
the Power in his Nature, he is able to do whatsoever he is able to Will. The
Will of Creatures may be, and is more extensive than their Power; and their
Power more contracted and shortened, than their Will: But, as the Prophet
says, His Counsel shall stand, and he will do all his pleasure, Isai. 46.10.
His Power is as great as his Will, that is, whatsoever can fall within the
verge of his Will, falls within the compass of his Power. Though he will never
actually Will this or that, yet supposing he should Will it, he is able to
perform it: So that you must in your notion of Divine Power, enlarge it further
than to think, God can only do what he has resolved to do; but that he has as
Infinite a Capacity of Power to act, as he has an Infinite Capacity of Will to
resolve.

Besides, this Power is of that nature, that he can do whatsoever he pleases
without difficulty, without resistance; it cannot be checked, restrained,
frustrated Cra. Syntag. lib. 3. cap. 17. p. 611.
. As he can do all things possible in regard of the Object, he can do all
things easily in regard of the manner of acting: What in humane Artificers is
Knowledge, Labor, Industry, that in God is his Will; his Will works without
labor, his works stand forth as he Wills them. Hands and Arms are ascribed to
him for our Conceptions, because our power of acting is distinct from our will;
but Gods Power of acting is not really distinct from his Will; it is sufficient
to the existence of a thing, that God Wills it to exist; he can act what he
will only by his Will, without any Instruments. He needs no Matter to work
upon, because he can make something from nothing; all Matter owes it self to
his Creative Power: He needs no time to work in, for he can make Time, when he
pleases to begin to work: He needs no Copy to work by, Himself is his own
Pattern and Copy in his Works. All created Agents want Matter to work upon.
Instruments to work with, Copies to work by; Time to bring either the births of
their Minds, or the works of their hands to perfection: But the Power of God
needs none of these things, but is of a vast and Incomprehensible nature,
beyond all these. As nothing can be done without the compass of it, so it self
is without the compass of every Created Understanding.

This Power is of a distinct conception from the Wisdom and Will of God. They
are not really distinct, but according to our Conceptions. We cannot discourse
of Divine things, without observing some proportion of them with humane,
ascribing unto God the Perfections, sifted from the Imperfections of our
Nature. In Us there are three Orders, of Understanding, Will, Power; and
accordingly three Acts, Counsel, Resolution, Execution; which though they are
distinct in Us, are not really distinct in God. In our Conceptions, the
Apprehension of a thing belongs to the Understanding of God; Determination, to
the Will of God; Direction, to the Wisdom of G^d; Execution, to the Power of
God. The Knowledge of God regards a thing as possible, and as it may be done;
the Wisdom of God regards a thing as fit, and convenient to be done; the Will
of God resolves that it shall be done; the Power of God is the application of
his Will, to effect what it has resolved. Wisdom is a fixing the Being of
things, the measures and perfections of their several Beings; Power is a
conferring those Perfections and Beings upon them. His Power is his ability to
act, and his Wisdom is the Director of his action: His Will orders, his Wisdom
guides, and his Power effects. His Will as the spring, and his Power as the
worker, are expressed Psalm. 115.3. He has done whatsoever he pleased. He
commanded, and they were created, Psalm. 140.5. and all three expressed Ephesians. 1.11.
Who works all things according to the counsel of his own will: So that the
Power of God is a Perfection (as it were) subordinate to his Understanding and
Will, to execute the results of his Wisdom and the orders of his Will; to his
Wisdom as directing, because he works skilfully; to his Will as moving and
applying, because he works voluntarily and freely. The exercise of his Power
depends upon his Will: His Will is the supreme cause of every thing that stands
up in Time, and all things receive a Being as he wills them. His Power is but
Will perpetually working, and diffusing it self in the season his Will has
fixed from Eternity; it is his Eternal Will in perpetual and successive springs
and streams in the Creatures; it is nothing else but the constant efficacy of
his Omnipotent Will. This must be understood of his Ordinate Power: But his
Absolute Power is larger than his Resolving Will: for though the Scripture
tells us, He has done whatsoever he will; yet it tells us not, that he has
done whatsoever he could: He can do things that he will never do.

Again, His Power is distinguished from his Will in regard of the Exercise of
it, which is after the act of his Will: His Will was conversant about Objects,
when his Power was not exercised about them. Creatures were the objects of his
Will from Eternity, but they were not from Eternity the effects of his Power.
His Purpose to Create was from Eternity, but the execution of his Purpose was
in Time. Now this execution of his Will we call his Ordinate Power: His
Wisdom and his Will are supposed antecedent to his Power, as the Counsel and
Resolve, as the Cause precedes the performance of the Purpose, as the effect.
Gamacheus.
Some distinguish his Power from his Understanding and Will, in regard that
his Understanding and Will are larger than his Absolute Power; for God
understands Sins, and wills to permit them, but he cannot himself do any Evil
or Unjust action, nor have a power of doing it. But this is not to distinguish
that Divine Power, but Impotence; for to be unable to do Evil is the perfection
of Power; and to be able to do things Unjust and Evil, is a weakness,
imperfection, and inability. Man indeed wills many things that he is not able
to perform, and understands many things that he is not able to effect; he
understands much of the Creatures, something of Sun, Moon and Stars; he can
conceive many Suns, many Moons, yet is not able to create the least Atom: But
there is nothing that belongs to Power but God understands, and is able to
effect. To sum this up, The Will of God is the Root of all, the Wisdom of God
is the Copy of all, and the Power of God is the Framer of all.

The Power of God gives activity to all the other perfections of his Nature,
and is of a larger extent and efficacy, in regard of its Objects, than some
perfections of his Nature. I put them both together.

It contributes Life and Activity to all the other perfections of his Nature.
How vain would be his Eternal Counsels, if Power did not step in to execute
them? His Mercy would be a feeble pity, if he were destitute of Power to
relieve; and his Justice a slighted Scarecrow, without Power to punish; his
Promises an empty sound, without Power to accomplish them. As Holiness is the
Beauty, so Power is the Life of all his Attributes in their exercise; and as
Holiness, so Power is an Adjunct belonging to All, a Term that may be given to
All. God has a powerful Wisdom to attain his Ends, without interruption: He
has a powerful Mercy to remove our Misery; a powerful Justice to lay all
Misery upon Offenders: He has a powerful Truth to perform his Promises; an
Infinite Power to bestow Rewards and inflict Penalties. It Is to this purpose
Power is first put in the two things which the Psalmist had heard, Psalm. 62.11,
12. Twice have I heard, or two things have I heard; first Power, then Mercy and
Justice, included in that expression, Thou rendrest to every man according to
his work: In every perfection of God he heard of Power. This is the Arm, the
Hand of the Deity, which all his other Attributes lay hold on, when they would
appear in their Glory; this hands them to the World; by this they act, in this
they triumph. Power framed every stage for their appearance in Creation,
Providence, Redemption.

It Is of a larger extent in regard of its Objects, than some other Attributes.
Power does not always suppose an Object, but constitutes an Object. It supposes
an Object in the act of Preservation, but it makes an Object in the act of
Creation; but Mercy supposes an object Miserable, yet does not make it so.
Justice supposes an object Criminal, but does not constitute it so: Mercy
supposes him Miserable, to relieve him; Justice supposes him Criminal, to
punish him: but Power supposes not a thing in real existence, but as possible;
or rather, it is from Power that any thing has a possibility, if there be no
repugnancy in the nature of the thing.

Again, Power extends further than either Mercy or Justice. Mercy has
particular Objects, which Justice shall not at last be willing to punish; and
Justice has particular Objects, which Mercy at last shall not be willing to
refresh: but Power does, and always will extend to the Objects of both Mercy and
Justice. A Creature, as a Creature, is neither the object of Mercy nor Justice,
nor of Rewarding Goodness: A Creature, as Innocent, is the Object of Rewarding
Goodness; a Creature, as Miserable, is the Object of Compassionate Mercy; a
Creature, as Criminal, is the Object of Revenging Justice: but all of them the
Objects of Power, in conjunction with those Attributes of Goodness, Mercy, and
Justice, to which they belong. All the Objects that Mercy, and Justice, and
Truth, and Wisdom, exercise themselves about, have a possibility and an actual
Being from th^s perfection of Divine Power. It Is Power first frames a Creature
in a capacity of Nature for Mercy or Justice, though it does not give an
immediate qualification for the exercise of either. Power makes Man a Rational
Creature, and so confers upon him a Nature mutable, which may be Miserable by
its own fault, and punishable by Gods Justice; or pityable by Gods Compassion,
and relievable by Gods Mercy: but it does not make him Sinful, whereby he
becomes miserable and punishable.

Again, Power runs through all the degrees of the states of a Creature. As a
thing is possible, or may be made, it is the Object of Absolute Power; as it is
factibile, or ordered to be made, it is the Object of Ordinate Power: As a thing
is actually made, and brought into Being, it is the Object of Preserving Power.
So that Power does stretch out its Arms to all the Works of God, in all their
Circumstances, and at all Times. When Mercy cease to relieve a Creature, when
Justice cease to punish a Creature, Power cease not to preserve a Creature.
The Blessed in Heaven, that are out of the reach of punishing Justice, are for
ever maintained by Power in that Blessed Condition: the Damned in Hell, that
are cast out of the Bosom of Entreating Mercy, are for ever sustained in those
remediless Torments by the Arm of Power.

This Power is Originally and Essentially in the Nature of God, and not
distinct from his Essence. It Is Originally and Essentially in God. The strength
and power of Great Kings is originally in their People, and managed and ordered
by the Authority of the Prince for the Common good. Though a Prince has
Authority in his Person to Command, yet he has not sufficient Strength in his
Person, without the Assistance of Others, to make his Commands to be obeyed. He
has not a single Strength in his own Person to conquer Countries and Kingdoms,
and increase the Number of his Subjects: He must make use of the Arms of his
own Subjects, to overrun other places, and yoke them under his Dominion: But
the Power of all things that ever were, are, or shall be, is Originally and
Essentially in God. It Is not derived from any thing without him, as the Power
of the greatest Potentates in the World is: Therefore Psalm. 62.11. it is said,
Power belongs unto God, that is, solely, and to none else. He has a Power to
make his Subjects, and as many as he pleases; to create Worlds, to enjoin
Precepts, to execute Penalties, without calling in the strength of his
Creatures to his Aid. The Strength that the Subjects of a Mortal Prince have,
is not derived to them from the Prince, though the Exercise of it for this or
that end, is ordered and directed by the Authority of the Prince: But what
Strength soever any thing has to act as a Means, it has from the Power of God
as Creator, as well as whatsoever Authority it has to act is from God, as a
Rector and Governor of the World. God has a Strength to act without Means,
and no Means can act any thing without his Power and Strength communicated to
them. As the Clouds in the 8th Verse before the Text, are called Gods Clouds,
his Clouds: So all the Strength of Creatures may be called, and truly is, Gods
Strength and Power in them; a drop of Power shot down from Heaven, originally
only in God. Creatures have but a little Mite of Power; somewhat communicated
to them, somewhat kept and reserved from them, of what they are capable to
possess. They have limited Natures, and therefore a limited Sphere of Activity.
Clothes can warm us, but not feed us; Bread can nourish us, but not cloth us.
One Plant has a Medicinal quality against one Disease, another against
another; but God is the possessor of Universal Power, the Common Exchequer of
this Mighty Treasure. He acts by Creatures, as not needing their power, but
deriving power to them: What he acts by them, he could act himself without
them: And what they act as from themselves, is derived to them from Him through
Invisible Channels. And hence it will follow, that because Power is Essentially
in God, more Operations of God are possible than are exerted.

And as Power is Essentially in God, so it is not distinct from his Essence. It
belongs to God in regard of the unconceivable Excellency and Activity of his
Essence Ratione summae actualitatis essentiae. Suarez, vol. 1. p. 150, and 151.
. And Omnipotence is nothing but the Divine Essence efficacious ad extra. It Is
his Essence as operative, and the immediate principle of Operation: As the
power of Enlightening in the Sun, and the power of Heating in the Fire, are not
things distinct from the Nature of them; but the Nature of the Sun bringing
forth Light, and the Nature of the Fire bringing forth Heat. The power of
Acting is the same with the Substance of God, though the Action from that Power
be terminated in the Creature. If the Power of God were distinct from his
Essence, he were then compounded of Substance and Power, and would not be the
most Simple Being. As when the Understanding is informed in several parts of
Knowledge; it is skilled in the Government of Cities and Countries, it knows
this or that Art: It Learns Mathematics, Philosophy; this, or that Science.
The Understanding has a power to do this; but this power, whereby it Learns
those Excellent things, and brings forth Excellent Births, is not a thing
distinct from the Understanding it self; we may rather call it the
Understanding powerful, than the Power of the Understanding; and so we may
rather say, God powerful, than say, the Power of God; because his Power is not
distinct from his Essence.

From both these it will follow, That this Omnipotence is incommunicable to any
Creature; no Creature can inherit it, because it is a contradiction for any
Creature to have the Essence of God. This Omnipotence is a peculiar Right of
God, wherein no Creature can share with him. To be Omnipotent is to be
Essentially God* And for a Creature to be Omnipotent, is for a Creature to be
its own Creator. It being therefore the same with the Essence of the Godhead,
it cannot be communicated to the Humanity of Christ, as the Lutherans say it
is, without the communication of the Essence of the Godhead *; for then the
Humanity of Christ would not be Humanity, but Deity. If Omnipotence were
communicated to the Humanity of Christ, the Essence of God were also
communicated to his Humanity, and then Eternity would be communicated. His
Humanity then was not given him in Time, his Humanity would be uncompounded,
that is, his Body would be no Body, his Soul no Soul. Omnipotence is
Essentially in God; it is not distinct from the Essence of God, it is his
Essence, Omnipotent, able to do all things.

7. Hence it follows, That this Power is infinite; Ephesians. 1.19. What is the
exceeding greatness of his power, etc. According to the working of his mighty
power. God were not Omnipotent, unless his Power were Infinite; for a Finite
Power is a limited Power, and a limited Power cannot effect every thing that is
possible. Nothing can be too difficult for the Divine Power to effect: He has
a Fullness of Power, an Exceeding Strength, above all Humane Capacities; it is a
Mighty power Ephesians. 1.19.
, able to do above all that we can ask or think Ephesians. 3.20.
: That which he acts, is above the power of any Creature to act. Infinite Power
consists in the bringing things forth from nothing. No Creature can imitate God
in this Prerogative of Power. Man indeed can carve various Forms, and erect
various pieces of Art; but from preexistent Matter. Every Artificer has the
Matter brought to his hand, he only brings it forth in a new Figure. Chimists
separate one thing from another, but create nothing, but sever those things
which were before compacted and crudled together: But when God speaks a
powerful Word, Nothing begins to be Something: Things stand forth from the Womb
of Nothing and obey his mighty Command, and take what Forms he is pleased to
give them. The Creating one thing, though never so small and minute, as the
least Fly, cannot be but by an Infinite Power; much less can the producing of
such Variety we see in the World. His Power is Infinite, in regard it cannot be
resisted by any thing that he has made; nor can it be confined by any thing he
can will to make. His Greatness is unsearchable *. It Is a Greatness, not of
quantity, but quality. Psalm. 145.3.
The Greatness of his Power has no end: It Is a vanity to imagine any limits
can be affixed to it, or that any Creature can say, Hitherto it can go, and no
further. It Is above all Conception, all Inquisition of any Created
Understanding. No Creature ever had, nor ever can have that strength of Wit and
Understanding, to conceive the extent of his Power, and how Magnificently he
can work.

1. His Essence is Infinite. As in a Finite Subject there is a Finite Virtue:
so in an Infinite Subject there must be an Infinite Virtue. Where the Essence
is limited, the Power is so Operationes sequuntur essentiam.
: Where the Essence is unlimited, the Power knows no bounds Aq^in par. 1. Qu.
25. Artic. 2.
. Among Creatures, the more excellency of Being and Form any thing has, the
more activity, vigor and power it has, to work according to its Nature. The
Sun has a mighty power to warm, enlighten and fructify, above what the Stars
have; because it has a vaster Body, more intense degrees of light, heat, and
vigor. Now, if you conceive the Sun made much greater than it is, it would
proportionably have greater degrees of power to heat and enlighten than it has
now: And were it possible to have an Infinite Heat and Light, it would
infinitely heat and enlighten other things; for every thing is able to act
according to the Measures of its Being: Therefore, since the Essence of God is
unquestionably Infinite, his power of Acting must be so also. His Power (as was
said before) is one and the same with his Essence: And though the Knowledge of
God extends to more Objects than his Power, because he knows all Evils of Sin,
which because of his Holiness he cannot commit; yet it is as Infinite as his
Knowledge, because it is as much one with his Essence, as his Knowledge and
Wisdom is: For as the Wisdom or Knowledge of God, is nothing but the Essence of
God, Knowing; so the Power of God, is nothing but the Essence of God, Able.

2. The Objects of Divine Power are innumerable. The Objects of Divine Power
are not Essentially Infinite; and therefore we must not measure the
Infiniteness of Divine Power by an Ability to make an Infinite Being; because
there is an Incapacity in any created thing to be Infinite; for to be a
Creature and to be Infinite; to be Infinite and yet Made, is a contradiction.
To be Infinite, and to be God, is one and the same thing. Nothing can be
Infinite, but God; nothing but God is Infinite. But the Power of God is
Infinite, because it can produce Infinite effects, or Innumerable things, such
as surpass the Arithmetic of a Creature; nor yet does the Infiniteness consist
simply in producing innumerable Effects; for that a Finite Cause can produce.
Fire can by its finite and limit d Heat burn numberless combustible things and
parcels; and the Understanding of Man has an infinite number of thoughts and
acts of Intellection, and Thoughts different from one another. Who can number
the Imaginations of his Fancy, and Thoughts of his Mind, the space of one Month
or Year? much less of Forty or an Hundred years; yet all these Thoughts are
about things that are in Being, or have a foundation in things that are in
Being. But the Infiniteness of Gods Power consists in an ability to produce
Infinite Effects, formally distinct, and diverse from one another; such as
never had Being, such as the Mind of Man cannot conceive: Ephesians. 3.20.
Able to do above what we can think, Ephesians. 3.20. And whatsoever God has made,
or is able to make, he is able to make in an Infinite manner, by calling them
to stand forth from nothing. To produce innumerable Effects of distinct
Natures, and from so distant a term as Nothing, is an argument of Infinite
Power.

Now, that the Objects of Divine Power are Innumerable appears, because God can
do Infinitely more th^n he has done, or will do. Nothing that God has done
can enfeeble or dull his Power; there still resides in him an Ability beyond
all the settled Contrivances of his Understanding, and Resolves of his Will,
which no Effects which he has wrought can drain and put to a stand. As he can
raise Stones to be Children to Abraham Mat. 3.9.
; so with the same mighty Word whereby he made one World, he can make Infinite
numbers of Worlds, to be the Monuments of his Glory. After the Prophet Jeremy,
32.17. had spoke of Gods Power in Creation, he adds, And nothing is too hard
for thee. For one World that he has made, he can create Millions: For one Star
which he has beautified the Heavens with, he could have garnisht it with a
Thousand, and multiplied, if he had pleased, Romans 4.17.
every one of those into Millions, for he can call things that are not; not
some things, but all things possible. The barren Womb of Nothing can no more
resist his Power now to educe a World from it, than it could at first: No
doubt, but for one Angel which he has made, he could make many Worlds of
Angels. He that made one with so much ease, as by a Word, cannot want Power to
make many more, till he wants a Word. The Word that was not too weak to make
One, cannot be too weak to make Multitudes. If from One Man he has, in a way
of Nature, multiplied so many in all Ages of the World, and covered with them
the whole Face of the Earth; he could in a Supernatural way, by One Word,
multiply as many more. It Is the breath of the Almighty that gives life, Job.
33.4. He can create infinite Species and kinds of Creatures more than he has
created, more variety of Forms: For since there is no searching of his
Greatness, there is no conceiving the numberless possible effects of his Power.
The Understanding of Man can conceive Numberless things possible to be, more
than have been or shall be. And shall we imagine, that a Finite Understanding
of a Creature has a greater Omnipotency to conceive things possible, than God
has to produce things possible? When the Understanding of Man is tired in its
Conceptions, it must still be concluded, That the Power of God extends, not
only to what can be conceived, but infinitely beyond the measures of a Finite
faculty. Touching the Almighty we cannot find him out, he is excellent in power
and in judgment, Job. 36.23. For the Understanding of Man, in its Conceptions
of more kind of Creatures, is limited to those Creatures which are: It cannot,
in its own Imagination conceive any thing, but what has some foundation in and
from something already in Being. It may frame a new kind of Creature, made up
of a Lion, a Horse, an Ox; but all those parts whereof its Conception is made,
have distinct Beings in the World, though not in that composition as his Mind
mixes and joins them: But no question but God can create Creatures that have no
resemblance with any kind of Creatures yet in Being. It Is certain, that if God
only knows those things which he has done, and will do, and not all things
possible to be done by him, his knowledge were finite; so if he could do no
more than what he has done, his Power would be finite.

1. Creatures have a power to act about more objects than they do. The
Understanding of man can frame from one Principle of Truth many Conclusions and
Inferences more than it does. Why cannot then the Power of God frame from one
first Matter, an infinite number of Creatures more than have been created? The
Almightiness of God in producing real Effects, is not inferior to the
Understanding of man in drawing out real Truths. An Artificer that makes a
Watch, supposing his li^e and health, can make many more of a different form
and motion: And a Limner can draw many Draughts, and frame many Pictures with a
new variety of Colors, according to the richness of his Fancy. If these can do
so, that require a preexistent Matter framed to their hands, God can much more,
who can raise beautiful Structures from nothing. As long as men have matter,
they can diversifie the matter, and make new Figures from it: So long as there
is nothing, God can produce out of that nothing whatsoever he pleases.

We see the same in Inanimate Creatures. A spark of Fire has a vast Power in
it; it will kindle other things, increase and enlarge it self: Nothing can be
exempt from the active force of it. It will alter by consuming or refining
whatsoever you offer to it. It will reach all, and refuse none; and by the
efficacious power of it, all those new Figures which we see in Metals, are
brought forth: When you have exposed to it a multitude of things, still add
more, it will exert the same strength; yea, the vigor is increased rather than
diminisht. The more it catches, the more fiercely and irresistibly it will
act; you cannot suppose an end o^ its operation, or a decrease of its strength,
as long as you can conceive its duration and continuance: This must be but a
weak shadow of that infinite Power which is in God. Take another Instance in
the Sun: It has power every year to produce Flowers and Plants from the Earth;
and as is able to produce them now, as it was at the first lighting it and
rearing it in the Sphere wherein it moves. And if there were no kind of Flowers
and Plants now created, the Sun has a power residing in it, ever since its
first Creation, to afford the same warmth to them for the nourish^ng and
bringing them forth. Whatsoever you can conceive the Sun to be able to do in
regard of Plants, that can God do in regard of Worlds; produce more Worlds than
the Sun does Plants every year, without weariness, without languishment. The
Sun is able to influence more things than it does, and produce numberless
effects; but it does not do so much as it is able to do, because it wants
matter to work upon: God therefore who wants no matter, can do much more than
he does; He can either act by second Causes if there were more, or make more
second Causes if he pleased.

2. God is the most free Agent. Every free Agent can do more than he will do.
Man being a free Creature, can do more than ordinarily he does will to do. God
is most free, as being the Spring of Liberty in other Creatures: He acts not by
a necessity of Nature; as the waves of the Sea, or the motions of the Wind; and
therefore is not determined to those things which he has already called forth
into the World. If God be infin^tely wise in contrivance, he could contrive
more than he has, and therefore can effect more than he has effected. He does
not act to the extent of his Power upon all occasions. It Is according to his
will that he works, Ephesians. 1. It Is not according to his work that he wills; his
work is an evidence of his will, but not the rule of his will. His Power is not
the rule of his Will, but h^s Will is the disposer of his Power, according to
the light of his infinite Wisdom, and other Attributes that direct his Will;
and therefore his Power is not to be measured by his actual Will. No doubt, but
he could in a moment have produced that World which he took six days time to
frame: He could have drowned the old World at once, without prolonging the time
till the revolution of forty days: He was not limited to such a term of time by
any weakness, but by the determination of his own Will. God does not do the
hundred thousandth part of what he is able to do, but what is convenient to do,
according to the and which he has proposed to himself. Jesus Christ, as Man,
could have asked Legions of Angels; and God, as a Sovereign, could have sent
them Matthew. 26 53.
. God could raise the dead every day if he pleased, but he does not: He could
heal every d seized person in a moment, but he does not: As God can will more
than he does actually will; so he can do more than he has actually done: He
can do whatsoever he can will; he can will more Worlds, and therefore can
create more Worlds. If God has not abil^ty to do more than he will do, he then
can do no more than what he actually has done; and then it will follow, that
he is not a free, but a natural and necessary Agent, which cannot be supposed
of God.

This Power is infinite in regard of action. As he can produce numberless
Objects above what he has produced, so he could produce them more
magnificently than he has made them. As he never works to the extent of his
Power in regard of things, so neither in regard of the manner of acting; for he
never acts so but he could act in a higher and perfecter manner.

1. His Power is infinite in regard of the independency of Action: He wants no
Instrument to act. When there was nothing but God, there was no cause of action
but God: When there was nothing in being but God, there could be no
instrumental Cause of the being of any thing. God can perfect his action
without dependence on any thing Suarez. vol. 1. ac Deo. p. 151.
; And to be simply independent, is to be simply infinite. In this respect it is
a Power incommunicable to any Creature, though you conceive a Creature in
higher degrees of perfection than it is. A Creature cannot cease to be
dependent, but it must cease to be a Creature: To be a Creature and
independent, are terms repugnant to one another.

2. But the infiniteness of Divine Power consists in an ability to give higher
degrees of perfection to every thing which he has made. Becan. Sum. Theol. p.
82.
As his Power is infinite extensive, in regard of the multitude of Objects he
can bring into being; so it is infinite intensive, in regard of the manner of
operation, and the endowments he can bestow upon them. Some things indeed God
does so perfect, that higher degrees of perfection cannot be imagined to be
added to them Becan. Sum. Theol. p. 84.
. As the Humanity of Christ cannot be united more gloriously than to the Person
of the Son of God; a greater degree of perfection cannot be conferred upon it.
Nor can the Souls of the Blessed have a nobler Object of vision and fruition
than God himself, the infinite Being: No higher than the enjoyment of himself
can be conferred upon a Creature, Respectu termini. This is not want of power:
He cannot be greater because he is greatest, nor better because he is best;
nothing can be more than infinite. But as to the things which God has made in
the World, he could have given them other manner of beings than they have. A
human Understanding may improve a thought or conclusion; strengthen it with
more and more force of reason, and adorn it with richer and richer elegancy of
Language: Why then may not the Divine Providence produce a World more perfect
and excellent than this? He that makes a plain Vessel, can embellish it more,
engrave more Figures upon it, according to the capacity of the subject: And
cannot God do so much more with his Works? Could not God have made this World
of a larger quantity, and the Sun of a greater bulk and proportionable strength
to influence a bigger World? so that this World would have been to another that
God might have made, as a Ball or a Mount, this Sun as a Star to another Sun
that he might have kindled. He could have made every Star a Sun, every spire of
Grass a Star, every grain of Dust a Flower, every Soul an Angel. And though the
Angels be perfect Creatures, and unexpressibly more glorious than a visible
Creature; yet who can imagine God so confined, that he cannot create a more
excellent kind, and endow those which he has made with excellency of a higher
rank than he invested them with at the first moment of their Creation? Without
question God might have given the meaner Creatures more excellent endowments,
put them into another order of nature for their own good and more diffusive
usefulness in the World. What is made use of by the Prophet Mal 2.15.
in another case, may be used in this, Yet had he a residue of Spirit. The
capacity of every Creature might have been enlarged by God; for no work of his
in the World does equal his Power, as nothing that he has framed does equal
his Wisdom. The same matter which is the matter of the body of a Beast, is the
matter of a Plant and Flower; is the matter of the body of a Man; and so was
capable of a higher form and higher perfections, than God has been pleased to
bestow upon it. And he had power to bestow that perfection on one part of
matter which he denied to it, and bestowed on another part. If God cannot make
things in a greater perfection, there must be some limitation of him: He cannot
be limited by another, because nothing is superior to God. If limited by
himself, that limitation is not from a want of Power, but a want of Will. He
can by his own Power raise Stones to be Children to Abraham Matthew. 3.9.
: He could alter the nature of the Stones, form them into Human Bodies,
dignifie them with rational Souls, inspire those Souls with such Graces that
may render them the Children of Abraham. But for the more fully understanding
the nature of this Power, we may observe,

1. That though God can make every thing with a higher degree of perfection,
yet still within the limits of a finite Being. No Creature can be made
infinite, because no Creature can be made God. No Creature can be so improved,
as to equal the goodness and perfection of God Gamach in Aquin. tom. 1. qu. 25.
; yet there is no Creature, but we may conceive a possibility of its being made
more perfect in that rank of a Creature than it is: As we may imagine a Flower
or Plant to have greater beauty and richer qualities imparted to it by Divine
Power, without rearing it so high as to the dignity of a rational or sensitive
Creature. Whatsoever perfections may be added by God to a Creature, are still
finite perfections; and a multitude of finite excellencies can never amount to
the value and honor of infinite: As if you add one number to another as high
as you can, as much as a large piece of Paper can contain, you can never make
the numbers really infinite, though they may be infinite in regard of the
inability of any human Understanding to count them. The finite condition of the
Creature suffers it not to be capable of an infinite perfection. God is so
great, so excellent, that it is his perfection not to have any Equal; the
defect is in the Creature, which cannot be elevated to such a pitch; as you can
never make a Gallon measure to hold the quantity of a Butt, or a Butt the
quantity of a River, or a River the fullness of the Sea.

2. Though God has a Power to furnish every Creature with greater and nobler
perfections than he has bestowed upon it, yet he has framed all things in the
perfectest manner, and most convenient to that end for which he intended them.
Every thing is endowed with the best nature and quality suitable to Gods end in
Creation, though not in the best manner for it self Best. ex part faclentis
and modi, but not ex part rei. Esti. in Senten. lib. 1. distin. 44. 2.
. In regard of the Universal end, there cannot be a better; for God himself is
the End of all things, who is the supreme Goodness. Nothing can be better than
God, who could not be God if he were not Superlatively best or Optimus; and he
has ordered all things for the declaration of his Goodness or Justice,
according to the behaviors of his Creatures. Man does not consider what
strength or power he can put forth in the means he uses to attain such an end,
but the sutableness of them to his main design, and so fits and marshals them
to his grand purpose. Had God only created things that are most excellent, he
had created only Angels and Men; how then would his Wisdom have been
conspicuous in other works in the subordination and subserviency of them to one
another? God therefore determined his Power by his Wisdom: Aquin. part. 1. qu.
25. artic. 6.
And though his absolute Power could have made every Creature better, yet his
ordinate Power, which in every step was regulated by his Wisdom, made every
thing best for his designed intention. A Musician has a power to wind up a
string on a Lute to a higher and more perfect Note in it self, but in wisdom he
will not do it, because the intended Melody would be disturbed thereby, if it
were not suited to the other Strings on the Instrument; a Discord would mar and
taint the Harmony which the Lutenist designed. God in Creation observed the
Proportions of Nature: He can make a Spider as strong as a Lion; but according
to the order of Nature which he has settled, it is not convenient that a
Creature of so small a compass should be as strong as one of a greater bulk.
The absolute Power of God could have prepared a Body for Christ as glorious as
that he had after his Resurrection; but that had not been agreeable to the end
designed in his Humiliation: And therefore God acted most perfectly by his
ordinate Power, in giving him a Body that wore the Livery of our Infirmities.
Gods Power is always regulated by his Wisdom and Will; and though it produces
not what is most perfect in it self, yet what is most perfect and decent in
relation to the end he fixed. And so in his Providence, though he could rack
the whole Frame of Nature to bring about his ends in a more miraculous way and
astonishment to Mortals; yet his Power is usually and ordinarily confined by
his Will to act in concurrence with the nature of the Creatures, and direct
them according to the Laws of their being, to such ends which he aims at in
their conduct, without violencing their Nature.

Though God has an absolute Power to make more Worlds, and infinite numbers of
other Creatures, and to render every Creature a higher mark of his Power, yet
in regard of his decree to the contrary, he cannot do it. He has a Physical
Power, but after his resolve to the contrary, not a Moral Power: The exercise
of his Power is subordinate to his decree, but not the essence of his Power.
Gamach in Aquin. tom. 1. quest. 25.
The decree of God takes not away any Power from God, because the Power of God
is his own Essence, and incapable of change; and is as great physically and
essentially after his decree as it was before; only his Will has put in a bar
to the demonstration of all that Power which he is able to exercise. As a
Prince that can raise a 100000 men for an Invasion, raises only 20 or 30000; he
here, by his order limits his Power, but does not divest himself of his
Authority and Power to raise the whole number of the Forces of his Dominions if
he pleases: The Power of God has more Objects than his Decree has; but since
it is his perfection to be immutable, and not to change his Decree, he cannot
morally put forth his Power upon all those Objects, which as it is essentially
in him, he has Ability to do. Crell. de Deo, cap. 22.
God has decreed to save those that believe in Christ, and to judge
Unbelievers to everlasting Perdition: He cannot morally damn the first, or save
the latter; yet he has not divested himself of his Absolute Power to save all,
or damn all. Or suppose God has decreed not to create more Worlds than this we
are now in, does his decree weaken his strength to create more if he pleased:
His not creating more is not a want of strength, but a want of will: It Is an
act of Liberty, not an act of Impotency. As when a man solemnly resolves not to
walk in such a way, or come at such a place, his Resolution deprives him not of
his natural strength to walk thither; but fortifies his Will against using his
strength in any such motion to that place. The Will of God has set bounds to
the exercise of his Power, but does not infringe that Absolute Power which
still resides in his Nature: He is girded with more power than he puts forth
Psalm. 65.6.
.

Power of God is infinite in regard of his Essence, in regard of the Objects,
in regard of Action, so Fourthly, in regard of Duration. The Apostle calls it
an eternal power Romans 1.20.
. His eternal Power is collected and concluded from the things that are made:
They must needs be the products of some Being which contains truly in it self
all Power, who wrought them without Engines, without Instruments; and therefore
this Power must be infinite, and possessed of an unalterable virtue of acting.
If it be eternal, it must be infinite, and has neither beginning nor end; what
is eternal has no bounds. (...) it be eternal, and not limited by time, it
must be infinite, and not to be restrained by any finite Object: His Power
never begun to be, nor ever cease to be, it cannot languish; men are fain to
unbend themselves, and must have some time to recruit their tired spirits: But
the Power of God is perpetually vigorous, without any interrupting qualm. Isa.
40.28. Have thou not known, have thou not heard that the everlasting God the
Lord, the Creator of the ends of the Earth faints not, neither is weary? That
Might which suffered no diminution from Eternity, but hatched so great a World
by brooding upon nothing, will not suffer any dimness or decrease to Eternity.
This Power being the same with his Essence, is as durable as his Essence, and
resides for ever in his Nature.

The impossibility of Gods doing some things, is no infringing of his
Almightiness, but rather a strengthening of it. It Is granted that some things
God cannot do; or rather, as Aquinas and others, it is better to say, such
things cannot be done, than to say that God cannot do them; to remove all kind
of imputation or reflection of weakness on God Robins. observat. p. 14.
, and because the reason of the impossibility of those things is in the nature
of the things themselves.

1. First, Some things are impossible in their own nature. Such are all those
things which imply a Contradiction; as for a thing to be, and not to be at the
same time; for the Sun to shine, and not to shine at the same moment of time;
for a Creature to act, and not to act at the same instant: One of those parts
must be false; for if it be true that the Sun shines this moment, it must be
false to say it does not shine. So it is impossible that a rational Creature
can be without reason: It Is a contradiction to be a rational Creature, and yet
want that which is essential to a rational Creature. So it is impossible that
the Will of man can be compelled, because Liberty is the Essence of the Will;
while it is Will it cannot be constrained; and if it be constrained it cease
to be Will. Magalano. de scientia Dei, part. 2. c. 6. 3.
God cannot at one time act as the Author of the Will, and the Destroyer of the
Will. It Is impossible that Vice and Virtue, Light and Darkness, Life and Death
should be the same thing. Those things admit not of a Conception in any
Understanding. Some things are impossible to be done, because of the
incapability of the subject; as for a Creature to be made infinite,
independent, to preserve it self without the Divine concourse and assistance.
So a Brute cannot be taken into communion with God, and to everlasting
spiritual Blessedness, because the Nature of a Brute is incapable of such an
Elevation: A rational Creature only can understand and relish spiritual
delights, and is capable to enjoy God and have communion with him. Indeed God
may change the nature of a Brute, and bestow such Faculties of Understanding
and Will upon it, as to render it capable of such a Blessedness; but then it is
no more a Brute, but a rational Creature; but while it remains a Brute, the
excellency of the Nature of God does not admit of communion with such a
Subject: So that this is not for want of Power in God, but because of a
deficiency in the Creature: To suppose that God could make a Contradiction
true, is to make himself false, and to do just nothing.

2. Some things are impossible to the Nature and Being of God. As to dye,
implies a flat repugnance to the Nature of God: To be able to die, is to be
able to be cashierd out of being. If God were able to deprive himself of life,
he might then cease to be: He were not then a necessary, but an uncertain
contingent being, and could not be said only to have Immortality, as he is 1 Timothy 6.16.
. He cannot dye who is life it self, and necessarily Existent: He cannot grow
old or decay, because he cannot be measured by time. And this is no part of
Weakness, but the perfection of Power. His Power is that whereby he remains for
ever fixed in his own everlasting being; that cannot be reckoned as necessary
to the Omnipotence of God, which all Mankind count a part of weakness in
themselves. God is Omnipotent because he is not Impotent; and if he could dye,
he would be Impotent, not Omnipotent: Death is the feebleness of Nature. It Is
undoubtedly the greatest impotence to cease to be: Who would count it a part of
Omnipotency to disenable himself, and sink into nothing and not being. The
impossibility for God to dye, is not a fit Article to impeach his Omnipotence;
this would be a strange way of arguing, a thing is not powerful, because it is
not feeble, and cannot cease to be powerful; for Death is a cessation of all
Power. August.
God is Almighty in doing what he will, not in suffering what he will not. To
dye is not an active, but a passive Power; a defect of a Power: God is of too
noble a Nature to perish.

Some things are impossible to that eminency of Nature which he has above all
Creatures; as to walk, sleep, feed, these are Imperfections belonging to Bodies
and compounded Natures. If he could walk, he were not every where present:
Motion speaks Succession. If he could increase, he would not have been perfect
before.

3. Some things are impossible to the glorious perfections of God. God cannot
do any thing unbecoming his holiness and goodness; any thing unworthy of
himself, and against the perfections of his Nature. God can do whatsoever he
can will. As he does actually do whatsoever he does actually will; so it is
possible for him to do whatsoever it is possible for him to will. He does
whatsoever he will, and can do whatsoever he can will; but he cannot do what he
cannot will: He cannot will any unrighteous thing, and therefore cannot do any
unrighteous thing. God cannot love sin, this is contrary to his Holiness; he
cannot violate his Word, this is a denial of his Truth; he cannot punish an
Innocent, this is contrary to his Goodness; he cannot cherish an impenitent
Sinner, this is an injury to h^s Justice: He cannot forget what is done in the
World, this is a disgrace to his Omniscience; he cannot deceive his Creature:
This is contrary to his faithfulness: none of these things can be done by him,
because of the perfection of his Nature. Would it not be an imperfection in God
to absolve the Guilty, and condemn the Innocent? Is it congruous to the
righteous and holy nature of God to command Murder and Adultery; to command men
not to worship him, but to be base and unthankful? These things would be
against the Rules of Righteousness. As when we say of a good Man, he cannot rob
or fight a Duel; we do not mean that he wants a courage for such an Act, or
that he has not a natural strength and knowledge to manage his Weapon as well
as another; but he has a righteous Principle strong in him which will not
suffer him to do it; his will is settled against it: No Power can pass into Act
unless applied by the will. But the will of God cannot will any thing but what
is worthy of him, and decent for his Goodness.

1. The Scripture says it is impossible for God to lie Hebr. 6.18.
; and God cannot deny himself because of his faithfulness 2 Timothy 2.13.
. As he cannot dye, because he is life it self; as he cannot deceive, because
he is goodness it self; as he cannot do an unwise action, because he is wisdom
it self; so he cannot speak a false word, because he is truth it self. If he
should speak any thing as true, and not know it, where is his infinite
Knowledge and Comprehensiveness of Understanding? If he should speak any thing
as true, which he knows to be false, where is his infinite Righteousness? If he
should deceive any Creature, there is an end of his Perfection of Fidelity and
Veracity. If he should be deceived himself, there is an end of his Omniscience;
we must then fancy him to be a deceitful God, an ignorant God, that is, no God
at all. Becan. sum. Theolog. p. ^3.
If he should lie, he would be God and no God; God upon supposition, and no
God, because not the first Truth. All Unrighteousness is Weakness, not Power;
it is a Defection from right Reason, a Deviation from Moral Principles, and the
Rule of perfect Action, and arises from a defect of Goodness and Power: It Is a
Weakness, and not Omnipotence, to lose Goodness: Maximus Tyrius.
God is Light, it is the perfection of Light not to become Darkness, and a want
of Power in Light, if it should become Darkness: His Power is infinitely
strong, so is his Wisdom infinitely clear, and his Will infinitely pure: Would
it not be a part of Weakness to have a disorder in himself, and these
Perfections shock one against another? Since all Perfections are in God in the
most Sovereign height of Perfection, nothing can be done by the Infiniteness of
one against the Infiniteness of the other. He would then be unstable in his own
Perfections, and depart from the infinite rectitude of his own Will, if he
shoul do an evil action. Again; Ambrose.
What is an Argument of greater strength, then to be utterly ignorant of
Infirmity? God is Omnipotent, because he cannot do Evil, and would not be
Omnipotent if he could: Those things would be Marks of Weakness, and not
Characters of Majesty. Would you count a sweet Fountain impotent, because it
cannot send forth bitter Streams? Or the Sun weak, because it cannot diffuse
Darkness as well as Light in the Air? There is an inability arising from
Weakness, and an ability arising from Perfection: It Is the Perfection of Angels
and blessed Spirits, that they cannot sin: And it would be the Imperfection of
God, if he could do Evil.

2. Hence it follows, that it is impossible that a thing past should not be
past. If we ascribe a Power to God, to make a thing that is past not to be
past, we do not truly ascribe Power to him, but a Weakness: For it is to make
God to lie: As though God might not have created man, yet after he had created
Adam, though he should presently have reduced Adam to his first nothing, yet it
would be for ever true that Adam was created, and it would for ever be false
that Adam never was created: So though God may prevent sin, yet when sin has
been committed, it will always be true that sin was committed: It will never be
true to say such a Creature that did sin, did not sin; his sin cannot be
recalled: Though God by pardon take off the Guilt of Peter's denying our
Savior, yet it will be eternally true, that Peter did deny him. It is
repugnant to the Righteousness and Truth of God, to make that which was once
true to become false, and not true; that is, to make a Truth to become a Lie,
and a Lie to become a Truth.

This is well argued from Hebr. 6.18. It Is impossible for God to lie. Becan.
sum. Theol. p 84. Crel. de Deo, cap. 22.
The Apostle argues, that what God had promised and sworn will come to pass,
and cannot but come to pass. Now if God could make a thing past not to be past,
this consequence would not be good, for then he might make himself not to have
promised, not to have sworn, after he has promised and sworn: And so if there
were a power to undo that which is past, there would be no foundation for
Faith, no certainty of Revelation. It cannot be asserted, that God has created
the World, that God has sent his Son to dye, that God has accepted his death
for man: These might not be true, if it were possible that, that which has
been done, might be said never to have been done: So that what any may imagine
to be a want of Power in God, is the highest perfection of God; and the
greatest security to a believing Creature that has to do with God.

Fourthly, Some things are impossible to be done, because of God's Ordination.
Some things are impossible, not in their own nature, but in regard of the
determined Will of God: So God might have destroyed the World after Adam's
fall, but it was impossible; not that God wanted Power to do it, but because he
did not only decree from Eternity to create the World, but did also decree to
redeem the World by Jesus Christ, and erected the World in order to the
manifestation of his glory in Christ. Ephesians. 1.4.5. The choice of some in Christ
was before the foundation of the World: Supposing that there was no hinderance
in the Justice of God to pardon the sin of Adam after his fall, and to execute
no punishment on him; yet in regard of Gods threatening, that in the day he eat
of the forbidden fruit, he should dye, it was impossible. So though it was
possible that the Cup should pass from our blessed Savior, that is, possible
in its own nature; yet it was not possible in regard of the determination of
Gods Will; since he had both decreed and published his Will to redeem Man by the
Passion and Blood of his Son. These things God by his absolute Power might have
done, but upon the account of his decree, they were impossible, because it is
repugnant to the Nature of God to be mutable: It Is to deny his own Wisdom which
contrived them, and his own Will which resolved them, not to do that which he
had decreed to do. This would be a diffidence in his Wisdom, and a change of
his Will. The impossibility of them is no result of a want of Power, no mark of
an Imperfection, of Feebleness and Impotence; but the Perfection of
Immutability and Unchangeableness.

Thus have I endeavored to give you a right Notion of this excellent Attribute
of the Power of God, in as plain terms as I could; which may serve us for a
matter of Meditation, Admiration, Fear of him, Trust in him, which are the
proper Uses we should make of this Doctrine of Divine Power. The want of a
right understanding of this Doctrine of the Divine Power has caused many to
run into mighty Absurdities; I have therefore taken the more pains to explain
it.

II. The second thing I proposed, is the Reasons to prove God to be Omipotent.
The Scripture describes God by this Attribute of Power. Psalm. 115.3. He has
done whatsoever he pleased. It sometimes sets forth his Power in a way of
derision of those that seem to doubt of it. When Sarah doubted of his ability
to give her a Child in her old Age, Genesis 18.14. Is any thing too hard for the
Lord? They deserve to be scoff't, that will despoil God of his strength, and
measure him by their shallow Models. And when Moses uttered something of
unbelief of this Attribute, as if God were not able to feed 600000 Israelites
besides Women and Children, which he aggravates by a kind of imperious scoff;
Shall the flocks and the herds be slain for them to suffice them? Or shall all
the fish of the Sea be gathered together for them? etc. Numb. 11.23. God takes
him up short, verse. 23. Is the Lords hand waxed short? What, can any weakness
seize upon my Hand? Can I not draw out of my own Treasures what is needful for
a supply? The Hand of God is not at one time strong, and another time feeble.
Hence it is that we read of the Hand and Arm of God, an outstretched Arm;
because the strength of a man is exerted by his Hand and Arm; the Power of God
is called the Arm of his Power, and the right hand of his Strength. Sometimes,
according to the different manifestation of it, it is expressed by Finger, when a
less power is evidenced; by Hand, when something greater; by Arm, when more
mighty than the former. Since God is Eternal, without limits of time, he is
also Almighty, without limits of strength. As he cannot be said to be more in
Being now than he was before; so he is neither more nor less in strength than
he was before: As he cannot cease to be, so he cannot cease to be Powerful,
because he is Eternal. His Eternity and Power are linked together as equally
demonstrable Romans 1.20.
; God is called the God of Gods, El Elohim Dan. 11.36.
, the Mighty of Mighties, whence all mighty persons have their activity and
vigor: He is called the Lord of Hosts, as being the Creator and Conductor of
the heavenly Militia.

Reason 1. The Power that is in Creatures demonstrates a greater and an
unconceivable Power in God. Nothing in the World is without a power of Activity
according to its Nature: No Creature but can act something: The Sun warms and
enlightens every thing: It sends its Influences upon the Earth, into the bowels
of the Earth, into the depths of the Sea: All Generations owe themselves to its
instrumental Virtue: How powerful is a small Seed to rise into a mighty Tree
with a lofty top, and extensive branches, and send forth other Seeds, which can
still multiply into numberless Plants? How wonderful is the Power of the
Creator, who has endowed so small a Creature as a Seed with so fruitful an
Activity? Yet this is but the virtue of a limited nature: God is both the
producing and preserving cause of all the virtue in any Creature, in every
Creature: The power of every Creature belongs to him as the Fountain, and is
truly his Power in the Creature. As he is the first Being, he is the original
of all Being; as he is the first Good, he is the Spring of all Goodness; as he
is the first Truth, he is the source of all Truth; so as he is the first Power,
he is the Fountain of all Power.

1. He therefore that communicates to the Creature what power it has, contains
eminently much more power in himself. Psalm. 94.10. He that teaches man
knowledge, shall not he know? So he that gives created Beings power, shall not
he be Powerful? The first Being must have as much Power as he has given to
others: He could not transfer that upon another, which he did not
transcendently possess himself. The sole cause of created Power cannot be
destitute of any Power in himself. We see that the power of one Creature
transcends the power of another. Beasts can do the things that Plants cannot
do; besides the power of growth, they have a power of sense and progressive
motion: Men can do more than Beasts; they have rational Souls to measure the
Earth and Heavens, and to be repositories of multitudes of things, Notions and
Conclusions. We may well imagine Angels to be far superior to man: The power of
the Creator must far surmount the power of the Creature, and must needs be
Infinite; for if it be limited, it is limited by himself or by some other; if
by some other, he is no longer a Creator, but a Creature; for that which limits
him in his Nature, did communicate that Nature to him; not by himself, for he
would not deny himself any necessary Perfection: We must still conclude a
reserve of Power in him, that he that made these can make many more of the same
kind.

2. All the power which is distinct in the Creatures, must be united in God.
One Creature has a strength to do this, another to do that; every Creature is
as a Cistern filled with a particular and limited power, according to the
capacity of its nature, from this Fountain; all are distinct Streams from God:
But the strength of every Creature, though distinct in the rank of Creatures,
is united in God the Center, whence those lines were drawn, the Fountain whence
those Streams were derived: If the power of one Creature be admirable, as the
power of an Angel, which the Psalm. 103.20.
Psalmist says, excels in strength; how much greater must the power of a
Legion of Angels be? How unconceivably superior the power of all those numbers
of spiritual Natures, which are the excellent Works of God? Now if all this
particular power which is in every Angel distinct, were compacted in one Angel,
how would it exceed our Understanding, and be above our power to form a
distinct Conception of it? What is thus divided in every Angel, must be thought
united in the Creator of Angels, and far more excellent in him. Every thing is
in a more noble manner in the Fountain, than in the Streams which distill and
descend from it. He that is the Original of all those distinct Powers, must be
the Seat of all Power without distinction: In him is the Union of all without
division; what is in them as a quality, is in him as his Essence. Again, if all
the powers of several Creatures, with all their principal qualities and vigors,
both of Beasts, Plants, and rational Creatures, were united in one Subject; As
if one Lion had the strength of all the Lions that ever were; or if one
Elephant had the strength of all the Elephants that ever were; nay, if one Be
had all the power of motion and stinging that all Bees ever had, it would have
a vast strength; but if the strength of all those thus gathered into one of
every kind should be lodged in one sole Creature, one Man, would it not be a
Strength too big for our conception? Or suppose one Canon had all the force of
all the Canons that ever were in the World, what a battery would it make, and,
as it were, shake the whole frame of Heaven and Earth? All this Strength must
be much more incomprehensible in God, all is united in him. If it were in one
individual Created Nature, it would still be but a finite Power in a finite
Nature: But in God it is Infinite and Immense.

Reas. 2. If there were not an incomprehensible Power in God, he would not be
infinitely perfect. God is the First Being; It can only be said of him, Est, he
is. All other things are nothing to him, Less than nothing, and vanity, Isai.
40.17. and reputed as nothing, Dan. 4.35. All the Inhabitants of the Earth,
with all their Wit and Strength, are counted as if they were not; just in
comparison with Him and his Being, as a little Mote in the Sunbeams: God
therefore is a pure Being. Any kind of Weakness whatsoever is a defect, a
degree of not Being; so far as any thing wants this or that Power, it may be
said Not to be. Were there any thing of Weakness in God, any want of strength
which belonged to the perfection of a Nature, it might be said of God, He is
not this or that, he wants this or that perfection of Being, and so he would
not be a pure Being, there would be something of not Being in him. But God
being the First Being, the only Original Being, He is infinitely distant from
not Being, and therefore infinitely distant from any thing of Weakness.

Victorin. in Petar. Tom. 1. p. 333.
Again, If God can know whatsoever is possible to be done by him and cannot do
it, there would be something more in his Knowledge than in his Power. What
would then follow? That the Essence of God would be in some regard greater than
it self, and less than it self, because his Knowledge and his Power are his
Essence; his Power as much his Essence, as his Knowledge: And therefore, in
regard of his Knowledge his Essence would be greater, in regard of his Power
his Essence would be less, which is a thing impossible to be conceived in a
most perfect Being. We must understand this of those things, which are properly
and in their own Nature subjected to the Divine Knowledge; for otherwise God
knows more than he can do; for he knows Sin, but he cannot act it; because Sin
belongs not to Power, but Weakness; and Sin comes under the Knowledge of God,
not in it self and its own Nature, but as it is a defect from God, and contrary
to Good, which is the proper Object of Divine Knowledge. He knows it also not
as possible to be done by himself, but as possible to be done by the Creature.
Victorin. in Petar. Tom. 1. p. 233.
Again, If God were not Omnipotent, we might imagine something more perfect
than God: For if we bar God from any one thing which in its own nature is
possible, we may imagine a Being that can do that thing, one that is able to
effect it; and so imagine an Agent greater than God, a Being able to do more
than God is able to do, and consequently a Being more perfect than God: But no
Being more perfect than God can be imagined by any Creature. Nothing can be
called most Perfect, if any thing of Activity be wanting to it. Active Power
follows the perfection of a thing, and all things are counted more noble, by
how much more of Efficacy and Virtue they possess. We count those the best and
most perfect Plants, that have the greatest Medicinal Virtue in them, and power
of working upon the Body for the cure of Distempers. God is perfect of himself,
and therefore most powerful of himself. If his Perfection in Wisdom and
Goodness be unsearchable, his Power, which belongs to Perfection, and without
which all the other Excellencies of his Nature were insignificant, and could
not show themselves, (as was before evidenced) must be unsearchable also. It Is
by the Title of Almighty he is denominated, when declared to be Unsearchable to
perfection. Job 11.7. Can thou by searching find out God, can thou find out
the Almighty to perfection? This would be limited and searched out, if he were
destitute of an active Ability to do whatsoever he pleased to do, whatsoever
was possible to be done. As he has not a perfect liberty of Will, if he could
not will what he pleased; so he would not have a perfect Activity, if he could
not do what he willed.

Reason 3. The Simplicity of God manifests it. Every Substance, the more
Spiritual it is, the more Powerful it is. All Perfections are more united in a
simple, than in a compounded Being. Angels, being Spirits, are more powerful
than Bodies. Where there is the greatest Simplicity, there is the greatest
Unity; and where there is the greatest Unity, there is the greatest Power.
Where there is a composition of a Faculty and a Member, the Member or Organ may
be weakened and rendered unable to act, though the Power does still reside in
the Faculty. As a Man, when his Arm or Hand is cut off or broke, he has the
faculty of Motion still; ^^t he has lost that Instrument, that part whereby he
did manifest and put forth that Motion: But God being a pure Spiritual Nature,
has no Members, no Organs to be defaced or impaired. All Impediments of Action
arise either from the nature of the thing that acts, or from something without
it. There can be no hindrance to God to do whatsoever he pleases; not in
himself, because he is the Most Simple Being, has no contrariety in himself,
is not composed of diverse things: And it cannot be from any thing without
himself, because nothing is equal to him, much less Superior. He is the
Greatest, the Supreme: All things were made by him, depend upon him, nothing
can disappoint his Intentions.

Reas. 4. The Miracles that have been in the World evidence the Power of God.
Extraordinary productions have awakened Men from their stupidity, to the
acknowledgment of the Immensity of Divine Power. Miracles are such effects as
have been wrought without the assistance and cooperation of Natural Causes, yea
contrary, and besides the ordinary course of Nature, above the reach of any
Created Power. Miracles have been; and says Bradwardine Lib. 1. cap. 1. p. 38.
, To deny that ever such things were, is uncivil: It Is inhuman to deny all the
Histories of Jews and Christians; whosoever denies Miracles, must deny all
possibility of Miracles, and so must imagine himself fully skilled in the
extent of Divine Power. How was the Sun suspended from its Motion for some
hours; Josh. 10.13.
The Dead raised from the Grave; Those reduced from the brink of it, that had
been brought near to it by prevailing Diseases; and this by a word speaking?
How were the famisht Lions bridled from exercising their rage upon Daniel, Dan.
6.22.
exposed to them for a Prey? The activity of the Fire curbed for the
preservation of the Three Children? Dan. 3.15.
Which proves a Deity more powerful than all Creatures. No power upon Earth can
hinder the operation of the Fire upon combustible Matter, when they are united,
unless by quenching the Fire, or removing the Matter: But no created Power can
restrain the Fire, so long as it remains so, from acting according to its
Nature. Exodus 3.2.
This was done by God, in the case of the Three Children, and that of the
Burning Bush. It was as much miraculous that the Bush should not consume, as it
was natural that it should burn by the efficacy of the Fire upon it. No Element
is so obstinate and deaf, but it hears and obeys his Voice, and performs his
Orders, though contrary to its own Nature: All the violence of the Creature is
suspended as soon as it receives his Command. Damianus in Petar.
He that gave the original to Nature, can take away the necessity of Nature: He
presides over Creatures, but is not confined to those Laws he has prescribed
to Creatures. He framed Nature, and can turn the Channels of Nature according
to his own pleasure. Men dig into the bowels of Nature, search into all the
Treasures of it, to find Medicines to cure a Disease, and after all their
Attempts it may prove Labor in vain: But God, by one Act of his Will, one Word
of his Mouth, overturns the Victory of Death, and rescues from the most
desperate Diseases Fauch. in Acts Vol. 2.. 56.
. All the Miracles which were wrought by the Apostles, either speaking some
Words, or Touching with the Hand, were not effected by any virtue inherent in
their Words or in their Touches. For such Virtue inherent in any created finite
Subject would be created and finite it self, and consequently were incapable to
produce effects, which required an infinite Virtue, as Miracles do which are
above the power of Nature. So when our Savior wrought Miracles, it was not by
any quality resident in his humane Nature, but by the sole Power of his
Divinity. The Flesh could only do what was proper to the Flesh; but the Deity
did what was proper to the Deity. God alone does wonders. Psalm. 136.4.
Excluding every other cause from producing such things. He only does those
things which are above the power of Nature, and cannot be wrought by any
Natural causes whatsoever. He does not hereby put his Omnipotence to any
stress: It Is as easy with him to turn Nature out of its settled course, as it
was to place it in that station it holds, and appoint it that course it runs.
All the Works of Nature are indeed Miracles and Testimonies of the Power of God
producing them, and sustaining them: But Works above the Power of Nature, being
Novelties and unusual, strike Men with a greater admiration upon their
appearance, because they are not the products of Nature, but the convulsions of
it.

I might also add as an Argument, The Power of the Mind of Man to conceive more
than has been wrought by God in the World. And God can work whatsoever
Perfection the Mind of man can conceive: Otherwise the reaches of a created
Imagination and Fancy, would be more extensive than the Power of God. His Power
therefore is far greater than the conception of any Intellectual Creature; else
the Creature would be of a greater capacity to conceive, than God is to effect.
The Creature would have a power of Conception, above Gods Power of Activity;
and consequently a Creature, in some respect greater than himself. Now
whatsoever a Creature can conceive possible to be done, is but finite in its
own nature; and if God could not produce what Being a created Understanding can
conceive possible to be done, he would be less than Infinite in Power, nay, he
could not go to the extent of what is Finite. But I have touched this before;
That God can create more than he has created, and in a more perfect way of
Being, as considered simply in themselves.

III. The Third general thing, is to declare, How the Power of God appears, in
Creation, in Government, in Redemption.

1. In Creation. With what Majestic Lines does God set forth his Power, in the
giving Being, and Endowments to all the Creatures in the World? Job 38.
All that is in Heaven and Earth is his, and shows the greatness of his Power,
Glory, Victory, 1 Chro. 29.11.
and Majesty. The Heaven being so Magnificent a piece of work, is called
emphatically, The Firmament of his Power Psalm. 150.1.
; his Power being more conspicuous and unvailed in that glorious Arch of the
World. Indeed, God exalts by his Power Job 36.22.
, that is, exalts himself by his Power in all the Works of his hands; in the
smallest Shrub, as well as the most glorious Sun. All his Works of Nature are
truly Miracles, though we consider them not, being blinded with too frequent
and customary a sight of them; yet in the neglect of all the rest, the view of
the Heavens does more affect us with astonishment at the Might of Gods Arm:
These declare his Glory, and the Firmament shows his handy work. Psalm. 19.1.
Psalm. 8.3.
And the Psalmist peculiarly calls them His Heavens, and the work of his
Fingers: These were immediately created by God, whereas many other things in
the World were brought into Being by the Power of God, yet by the means of the
influence of the Heavens.

1. His Power is the first thing evident in the story of the Creation. In the
beginning God created the Heavens and the Earth, Genesis 1.1. There Is no
appearance of any thing in this declaratory Preface, but of Power: The
Characters of Wisdom march after in the distinct formation of things, and
animating them with suitable qualities for an Universal good. By Heaven and
Earth is meant the whole mass of the Creatures: By Heaven, all the Aerie Region,
with all the Host of it; by the Earth is meant, all that which makes the entire
inferior Globe. The Jews observe, that in the first of Genesis, in the whole
Chapter unto the finishing the Work in six Days, God is called (...), which is
a Name of Power, and that Thirty two times in that Chapter; but after the the
finishing the six days Work, he is called (...), which according to their
notion is a Name of Goodness and Kindness: Mercer, 9.7. col. 1, 2.
His Power is first visible in framing the World, before his Goodness is
visible in the sustaining and preserving it. It was by this Name of Power and
Almighty that he was known in the first Ages of the World, not by his Name
Jehovah; Exodus 6.3. And I appeared unto Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, by the name
of God Almighty; but by my name Jehovah was I not known to them. Not but that
they were acquainted with the Name, but did not experience the intent of the
Name, which signified his Truth in the performance of his Promises: They knew
him by that name as promising, but they knew him not by that Name, as
performing. He would be known by his Name Jehovah, True to his Word, when he
was about to effect the Deliverance from Egypt; a Type of the Eternal
Redemption, wherein the Truth of God, in performing of his first Promise, is
gloriously magnified. And hence it is that God is called Almighty more in the
Book of Job, than in all the Scripture besides, I think about Thirty two times,
and Jehovah but once, which is Job 12.9. unless in Job 38. when God is
introduced speaking himself; which is an Argument of Jobs living before the
Deliverance from Egypt, when God was known more by his Works of Creation, than
by the performance of his Promises, before the Name Jehovah was formally
published. Indeed, this Attribute of his Eternal Power, is the first thing
visible and intelligible upon the first glance of the eye upon the Creatures
Romans 1.20.
. Bring a man out of the Cave where he has been Nursed, without seeing any
thing out of the confines of it, and let him lift up his Eyes to the Heavens,
and take a prospect of that glorious body the Sun, then cast them down to the
Earth, and behold the Surface of it with its Green clothing; the first Notion
which will start up in his Mind from that spring of Wonders, is that of Power,
which he will at first adore with a Religious astonishment. The Wisdom of God
in them is not so presently apparent, till after a more exquisite consideration
of his Works and Knowledge of the properties of their natures, the convenience
of their situations, and the usefulness of their functions, and the order
wherein they are linkt together for the good of the Universe.

2. By this Creative Power God is often distinguished from all the Idols and
False gods in the World. And by this Title he sets forth himself when he would
act any great and wonderful Work in the World. He is great above all gods, for
he has done whatsoever he pleased in Heaven and in Earth. Psalm. 135.5, 6.
Upon this is founded all the Worship he challenges in the World, as his
peculiar glory. Revel. 4.11. Thou art worthy, Oh Lord, to receive glory,
honor, and power, for thou have Created all things. And Rev. 10.6. I have made
the Earth, and created Man upon it. I, even my hands have stretched out the
Heavens, and all their Host have I commanded, Isai. 45.12. What is the issue,
Verse 16. They shall be ashamed and confounded, all of them, that are makers of
Idols. And the weakness of Idols is expressed by this Title, The gods that have
not made the Heavens and the Earth, Jer. 10.11. The portion of Jacob is not
like them, for he is the former of all things, Verse 16.

What is not that God able to do, that has created so great a World? How does
the Power of God appear in Creation?

1. In making the World of Nothing. When we say, the World was made of Nothing,
we mean, that there was no Matter existent for God to work upon, but what he
raised himself in the first act of Creation. In this regard, the Power of God
in Creation surmounts his Power in Providence. Creation supposes nothing,
Providence supposes something in Being. Creation intimates a Creature making,
Providence speaks a thing already made, and capable of Government, and in
Government. God uses second Causes to bring about his Purposes.

1. The World was made of nothing. The Earth which is described as the first
Matter, without any form or ornament, without any distinction or figures, was
of Gods forming in the Bulk, before he did adorn it with his Pensil Genesis 1.1, 2.
. Suarez. Vol. 3. p. 33.
God in the beginning creating the Heaven and the Earth, includes two things:
First, That those were created in the beginning of time, and before all other
things. Secondly, That God begun the Creation of the World from those things.
Therefore before the Heavens and the Earth there was nothing absolutely
created, and therefore no Matter in being before an act of Creation past upon
it. It could not be Eternal, because nothing can be Eternal but God; it must
therefore have a beginning: If it had a beginning from it self, then it was
before it was. If it acted in the making it self before it was made, then it
had a being before it had a being; for that which is nothing, can act nothing:
The action of any thing supposes the existence of the thing which acts. It
being made, it was not before it was made; for to be made is to be brought into
being. It was made then by another, and that Maker is God. It Is necessary that
the first Original of things was from nothing: When we see one thing to arise
from another, we must suppose an Original of the first of each kind: As when we
see a Tree spring up from a Seed, we know that Seed came out of the bowels of
another Tree; it had a Parent, and it had a Matter; we must come to some First,
or else we run into an endless Maze: We must come to some first Tree, some
first Seed that had no cause of the same kind, no matter of it, but was mere
nothing. Suarez. Vol. 3. p. 6.
Creation does suppose a production ^^^m nothing; because if you suppose a
thing without any real or actual Existence, it is not capable of any other
production then from nothing: Nothing must be supposed before the World, or we
must suppose it Eternal, and that is to deny it to be a Creature, and make it
God. The Creation of spiritual Substances, such as Angels and Souls evince
this; those things that are purely spiritual, and consist not of matter, cannot
pretend to any Original from Matter, and therefore they rose up from nothing.
If spiritual things arose from nothing, much more may corporeal, because they
are of a lower nature than spiritual. And he that can create a higher Nature of
nothing, can create an inferior nature of nothing. As bodily things are more
imperfect than spiritual, so their Creation may be supposed easier than that of
spiritual. There was as little need of any matter to be wrought to his hands,
to contrive into this visible Fabric, as there was to erect such an excellent
Order as the glorious Cherubims.

2. This Creation of things from nothing, speaks an infinite power. The
distance between Nothing and Being, has been always counted so great, that
nothing but an infinite Power can make such distances meet together; either for
Nothing to pass into Being, or Being to return to nothing. To have a thing
arise from nothing, was so difficult a Text to those that were ignorant of the
Scripture, that they knew not how to fathom it; and therefore laid it down as a
certain Rule. That of nothing, nothing is made; which is true of a created
Power, but not of an uncreated and Almighty Power. A greater distance cannot be
imagined then that which is between Nothing and Something; that which has no
being, and that which has: And a greater Power cannot be imagined, then that
which brings Something out of Nothing. Amyral Morale, tom. 1. p. 252.
We know not how to conceive a Nothing, and afterward a Being from that
Nothing; but we must remain swallowed up in admiration of the Cause that gives
it being, and acknowledge it to be without any bounds and measures of Greatness
and Power. The further any thing is from being, the more immense must that
Power be which brings it into being: It Is not conceivable that the power of all
the Angels in one, can give being to the smallest spire of Grass. To imagine
therefore so small a thing as a Be a Fly, a grain of Corn, or an Atome of Dust
to be made of nothing, would stupifie any Creature in the consideration of it:
Much more to behold the Heavens with all the Troop of Stars, the Earth with all
its embroidery, and the Sea with all her Inhabitants of Fish; and Man, the
noblest Creature of all, to arise out of the Womb of mere Emptiness. Indeed God
had not acted as an Almighty Creator if he had stood in need of any Materials,
but of his own framing: It had been as much as his Deity was worth if he had
not had all within the compass of his own Power, that was necessary to
Operation; if he must have been beholden to something without himself, and
above himself, for matter to work upon: Had there been such a necessity, we
could not have imagined him to be Omnipotent, and consequently not God.

3. In this the power of God exceeds the power of all natural and rational
Agents. Nature, or the Order of second Causes, has a vast Power: The Sun
generates Flies and other Insects, but of some Matter, the Slime of the Earth
or a Dunghill: The Sun and the Earth bring forth Harvests of Corn, but from
Seed first sown in the Earth: Fruits are brought forth, but from the Sap of the
Plant. Were there no Seed or Plants in the Earth, the power of the Earth would
be idle, and the influence of the Sun insignificant; whatsoever strength either
of them had in their Nature, must be useless without matter to work upon. All
the united strength of Nature cannot produce the least thing out of nothing: It
may multiply and increase things, by the powerful blessing God gave it at the
first erecting of the World, but it cannot create. The Word which signifies
Creation, used in Genesis 1.1. is not ascribed to any second Cause, but only to
God; a word in that sense as incommunicable to any thing else, as the action it
signifies.

Rational Creatures can produce admirable Pieces of Art from small things, yet
still out of Matter created to their hands. Excellent Garments may be woven,
but from the Entrails of a small Silkworm. Delightful and Medicinal Spirits and
Essences may be extracted by ingenious Chemists; but out of the Bodies of
Plants and Min^rals. No Picture can be drawn without Colors; no Statue
engraven without ^tone, no Building erected without Timber, Stones, and other
Materials. Nor can any man raise a thought, without some Matter framed to his
hands, or cast into him. Matter is by Nature formed to the hands of all
Artificers; they bestow a new Figure upon it, by the help of Instruments, and
the product of their own Wit and Skill, but they create not the least particle
of Matter; when they want it, they must be supplied, or else stand still, as
well as Nature; for none of them, or all together, can make the least Mite or
Atom. And when they have wrought all that they can, they will not want some to
find a flaw and defect in their work. God as a Creator has the only
Prerogative, to draw what he pleases from nothing, without any defect, without
any imperfection: He can raise what Matter he please; enoble it with what form
he pleases. Of nothing, nothing can be made by any created Agent: But the
Omnipotent Architect of the World, is not under the same necessity, nor is
limited to the same Rule, and tied by so short a Tedder as created Nature, or
an ingenious, yet feeble, Artificer.

2. It appears, In raising such variety of Creatures from this barren Womb of
Nothing, or from the Matter which he first commanded to appear out of Nothing.
Had there been any preexistent Matter, yet the bringing forth such varieties
and diversities of excellent Creatures; some with life, some with sense, and
others with reason superadded to the rest; and those out of indisposed and
undigested Matter, would argue an infinite Power resident in the first Author
of this variegated Fabric. From this Matter he formed that glorious Sun, which
every day displays its Glory, scatters its Beams, clears the Air, ripens our
Fruits, and maintains the propagation of Creatures in the World. From this
Matter he lighted those Torches which he set in the Heaven to qualify the
darkness of the Night: From this he compacted those Bodies of Light, which
though they seem to us as little sparks, as if they were the Glowworms of
Heaven, yet some of them exceed in greatness this Globe of the Earth on which
we live. And the highest of them has so quick a motion, that some tell us,
they run in the space of every hour 42 millions of Leagues. From the same
matter he drew the Earth, on which we walk; from thence he extracted the
Flowers to adorn it, the Hills to secure the Valleys, and the Rocks to fortify
it against the Inundations of the Sea. And on this dull and sluggish Element,
he bestowed so great a fruitfulness, to maintain, feed, and multiply so many
Seeds of different kinds, and conferred upon those little Bodies of Seeds a
power to multiply their kinds in conjunction with the fruitfulness of the Earth
to many thousands. From this rude Matter, the Slime or Dust of the Earth, he
kneaded the Body of Man, and wrought so curious a Fabric, fit to entertain a
Soul of a heavenly extraction, formed by the breath of God Genesis 2.7.
. He brought Light out of thick Darkness, and living Creatures, Fish and Foul,
out of inanimate waters Genesis 1.20.
, and gave a power of spontaneous motion to things arising from that Matter
which had no living motion. To convert one thing into another, is an evidence
of infinite Power, as well as creating things of nothing; for the distance
between life and not life, is next to that which is between being and not
being. God first forms Matter out of Nothing, and then draws upon and from this
indisposed Chaos, many excellent Pourtraitures. Neither Earth nor Sea were
capable of producing living Creatures, without an infinite Power working upon
it, and bringing into it such variety and multitude of Forms; and this is
called by some mediate Creation; as the producing the Chaos, which was without
form and void, is called immediate Creation. Is not the power of the Potter
admirable in forming out of tempered Clay, such varieties of neat and curious
Vessels, that after they are fashioned, and past the Furnace, look as if they
were not of any kin to the Matter they are formed of? And is it not the same
with the Glass-maker, that from a little melted gelly of Sand and Ashes, or the
Dust of Flint, can blow up so pure a Body as Glass, and in such varieties of
shapes; and is not the Power of God more admirable, because infinite in
speaking out so beautiful a World out of nothing; and such varieties of living
Creatures from Matter utterly indisposed in its own nature for such forms?

3. And this conducts to a third thing were in the power of God appears, in
that He did all this with the greatest ease and facility.

1. Without Instruments. As God made the World without the advice, so without
the assistance of any other. He stretched forth the Heavens alone, and spread
abroad the Earth by himself, Isai. 44.24. He had no engine, but his Word; no
pattern or model but himself. What need can he have of Instruments, that is
able to create what Instruments he pleases? Where there is no resistance in the
Object, where no need of preparation or instrumental advantage in the Agent;
there the actual determination of the Will is sufficient to a production. What
Instrument need we to the thinking of a Thought, or an act of our Will? Men
indeed cannot act any thing without Tools; the best Artificer must be beholden
to something else for his noblest works of Art. The Carpenter cannot work
without his Rule, and Ax, and Saw, and other Instruments. The Watch-maker
cannot act without his File and Pliars: But in Creation, there is nothing
necessary to Gods bringing forth a World, but a simple act of his Will, which
is both the principal cause, and instrumental. He had no Scaffolds to rear it,
no Engines to polish it, no Hammers or Mattocks to clod and work it together.
It Is a miserable Error to measure the actions of an Infinite Cause by the
imperfect model of a Finite, since by his own Power and Outstretched Arm, he
made the Heaven and the Earth Jer. 32.17.
. Gassend.
What excellency would God have in his work above others, if he needed
Instruments, as Feeble men do? Every Artificer is counted more admirable, that
can frame curious Works with the less matter, fewer Tools and assistances: God
uses Instruments in his Works of Providence, not for necessity, but for the
display of his Wisdom in the management of them; yet those Instruments were
originally framed by him without Instruments. Indeed, some of the Jews thought
the Angels were the Instruments of God in creating Man, and that those words,
Genesis 1.26.
Let us make Man in our own image, were spoken to Angels. But certainly the
Scripture, which denies God any Counselor in the model of Creation Isai.
40.12, 13, 14.
, does not join any Instrument with him in the operation, which is every where
ascribed to himself without created assistance, Isai. 45.18. It was not to
Angels God spoke in that affair; if so, Man was made after the image of Angels,
if they were Companions with God in that work: But it is every where said, Genesis
1.27.
that Man was made after the image of God. Again, the image wherein Man was
created, was that of dominion over the lower Creatures, as appears verse 26.
which we find not conferred upon Angels; and it is not likely that Moses should
introduce the Angels, as Gods Privy Counsel, of whose Creation he had not
mentioned one syllable. Let us make Man, rather signifies the Trinity, and not
spoken in a Royal style, as some think. Which of the Jewish Kings writ in the
style, We? That was the custom of later Times; and we must not measure the
language of Scripture by the style of Europe, of a far later date than the
penning the History of the Creation. If Angels were his Counselors in the
Creation of the material World, what Instrument had he in the Creation of
Angels? If his own Wisdom were the Director, and his own Will the producer of
the one; why should we not think, that he acted by his sole Power in the other?
It Is concluded by most, that the Power of Creation cannot be derived to any
Creature, it being a work of Omnipotency: The drawing Something out from
Nothing, cannot be communicated without a communication of the Deity it self.
The educing things from Nothing exceeds the capacity of any Creature, and the
Creature is of too feeble a Nature to be elevated to so high a degree. It Is
very unreasonable to think, that God needed any such aid. If an Instrument were
necessary for God to create the World, then he could not do it without that
Instrument: If he could not, he were not then All-sufficient in himself, if he
depended upon any thing without himself, for the production or consummation of
his Works. And it might be enquired, how that Instrument came into Being: If it
begun to be; and there was a time when it was not, it must have its Being from
the Power of God; and then, why could not God as well create all things without
an Instrument, as create that Instrument without an Instrument? For there was
no more Power necessary to a producing the whole without Instruments, than to
produce one Creature without an Instrument.

No Creature can in its own nature be an Instrument of Creation. If any such
Instrument were used by God, it must be elevated in a miraculous and
supernatural way; and what is so an Instrument, is in effect no Instrument; for
it works nothing by its own nature, but from an elevation by a Superior nature,
and beyond its own nature. All that power in the Instrument is truly the Power
of God, and not the power of the Instrument. And therefore what God does by an
Instrument, he could do as well without. If you should see one apply a Straw to
Iron, for the cutting of it, and effect it, you would not call the Straw an
Instrument in that action, because there was nothing in the nature of the Straw
to do it. It was done wholly by some other force, which might have done it as
well without the Straw as with it. The narrative of the Creation in Genesis
removes any Instrument from God. The Plants which are preserved and propagated
by the influence of the Sun, were created the Day before the Sun, viz. on the
Third day, whereas the Light was collected into the body of the Sun on the
Fourth day Genesis 1.11, 16.
; to show, that though the Plants do instrumentally owe their yearly beauty and
preservation to the Sun, yet they did not in any manner owe their Creation to
the the Instrumental heat and vigor of it.

2. God created the World by a Word, by a simple Act of his Will. The whole
Creation is wrought by a Word; Genesis 1.3, 5, etc. throughout the whole Chapter.
God said, Let there be Light; and God said, Let there be a Firmament. Not that
we should understand it of a sensible Word, but to express the easiness of this
operation to God, as easy as a word to Man. We must understand it of a
Powerful order of his own Will, which is expressed by the Psalmist in the nature
of a Command, Psalm. 33.9. He spoke and it was done, he commanded and it stood
fast; and Psalm. 148.5. He commanded and they were created. At the same instant
that he willed them to stand forth, they did stand forth. The efficacious
Command of the Creator was the Original of All things; he insensibility of
Nothing obeyed the act of his Will. Creation is therefore enituled a Calling,
Romans 4.17. He calls those things which are not, as if they were. To Create is
no more with God, than to Call; and what he calls, presents it self before him
in the same posture that he calls it. He did with more ease make a World, than
we can form a Thought. It Is the same ease to him to create Worlds, as to decree
them: There needs no more than a Resolve to have things wrought at such a time,
and they will be, according to his pleasure. This Will is his Power: Let there
be light, is the Precept of his Will; and there was light, is the effect of his
Precept. By a Word was the Matter of the Heavens and the Earth framed: By a
Word Things separate themselves from the rude Mass into their proper Forms. By
a Word, Light associates it self into one body, and forms a Sun: By a Word are
the Heavens, as it were, bespangled with Stars, and the Earth dressed with
Flowers: By a Word, is the World both ceil'd and floor'd. One act of his Will
formed the World, and perfected its beauty. All the variety and several
exploits of his Power were not caused by distinct Words or Acts of Power. God
uttered not distinct Words for distinct Species; as let there be an Elephant,
and let there be a Lion; but as he produced those various Creatures out of one
Matter, so by one Word. By one single Command, those varieties of Creatures,
with their Clothing, Ornaments, distinct Notes, Qualities, Functions, were
brought forth. Genesis 1.11.
By one Word, all the Seeds of the Earth, with their various Virtues. By one
Word, Gen 1.20.
all the Fish of the Sea, and Fowls of the Air in their distinct Natures,
Instincts, Genesis 1.24.
Colors. By one Word, all the Beasts of the Field, with their varieties.
August.
Heaven and Earth, Spiritual and Corporeal Creatures, Mortal and Immortal, the
Greater and the Less, Visible and Invisible, were formed with the same ease. A
Word made the Least, and a Word made the Greatest. It Is as little difficulty to
him to produce the highest Angel, as the lightest Atom. It Is enough for the
existence of the slateliest Cherubim, for God only to will his Being. It was
enough for the forming and fixing the Sun, to will the compacting of Light into
one Body. Genesis 2.7.
The creation of the Soul of Man is expressed by Inspiration: To show, that it is
as easy with God to create a Rational Soul, as for Man to breath Theodoret.
. Breathing is natural to Man, by a communication of Gods goodness; and the
creation of the Soul is as easy to God, by virtue of his Almighty Word. As
there was no proportion between Nothing and Being; so there was as little
proportion between a Word and such glorious Effects. A mere Voice, coming from
an Omnipotent Will, was capable to produce such Varieties, which Angels and Men
have seen in all Ages of the World; and this without weariness. What labor is
there in Willing, what pain could there be in speaking a Word? Isai. 40.28. The
Creator of the ends of the Earth is not weary. And though he be said to Rest
after the Creation, it is to be meant a Rest from work, not a repose from
weariness. So great is the Power of God, that without any Matter, without any
Instruments, he could create many Worlds, and with the same ease as he made
this.

4. I might add also, the appearance of this Power in the Instantaneous
production of things. The ending of his Word was not only the beginning, but
the perfection of every thing he spoke into Being; not several Words to several
parts and Members, but one Word, one breath of his Mouth, one act of his Will
to the whole species of the Creatures, and to every Member in each Individual.
Heaven and Earth were created in a moment, Six days went to their disposal; and
that comely Order we observe in the World was the work of a Week: The Matter was
formed as soon as God had spoken the word; and in every part of the Creation,
as soon as God spoke the word, Let it be so, the answer immediately is, Genesis 1.
It was so; which notes the present standing up of the Creature according to
the act of his Will: And therefore Pei^s. p. 111.
One observes, that Let there be light, and there was light, in the Hebrew are
the same words, without any alteration of Letter or Point, only the conjunctive
Particle added (...) Let there be light, and let there be light, to show, that
the same instant of the speaking the Divine word, was the appearance of the
Creature: So great was the Authority of his Will.

2. We are to show Gods Power in the Government of the World. As God decreed
from Eternity the Creation of things in time, so he decreed from Eternity the
particular ends of Creatures, and their operations respecting those ends. Now
as there was need of his Power to execute his Decree of Creation, there is also
need of his Power to execute his Decree about the manner of Government. Suarez,
Vol. 1. lib 3. cap. 10.
All Government is an act of the Understanding, Will and Power. Prudence to
design belongs to the Understanding, the election of the Means belongs to the
Will, and the accomplishment of the whole is an act of Power. It Is a hard
matter to determine which is most necessary: Wisdom stands in as much need of
Power, to perfect; as Power does of Wisdom, to model and draw out a scheme;
though Wisdom directs, Power must effect. Wisdom and Power are distinct things
among Men: A Poor man in a Cottage may have more Prudence to Advise, than a
Privy Counselor; and a Prince more power to act, than wisdom to conduct. A
Pilot may direct though he be lame, and cannot climb the Masts and spread the
Sails: But God is wanting in nothing; neither in Wisdom to design, nor in Will
to determine, nor in Power to accomplish. His Wisdom is not feeble, nor his
Power foolish: A Powerful wisdom could not act what it would, and a Foolish
power would act more than it should. The Power expressed in his Government, is
shadowed forth in the Living Creatures, which are Gods Instruments in it. It Is
said, Every one of them had four faces; that of a Man to signify Wisdom; of a
Lion, Ezekiel. 1.10.
Eagle, the strongest among Birds, to signify their Courage and Strength to
perform their offices.

This Power is evident in the Natural, Moral, Gracious Government.

There is a Natural Providence, which consists in the preservation of all
things, propagation of them by Corruptions and Generations, and in a
Cooperation with them in their motions to attain their ends.

Moral Government is of the Hearts and Actions of Men.

Gracious Government, as respecting the Church.

I. His Power is evident in Natural Government.

1. In Preservation. God is the great Father of the World, to nourish it as
well as create it Da^^^, (...) 1 Cor. 10. p. 102.
. Man and Beast would perish if there were not Herbs for their food; and Herbs
would wither and perish, if the Earth were not watered with fruitful showers.
This some of the Heathens acknowledged, in their worshipping God under the
image of an Ox, a useful Creature, by reason of its strength, to which we owe
so much of our food in Corn. Hence God is styled the Preserver of Man and
Beast. Psalm. ^6 6.
Hence the Jews called God (...)
Place; because he is the subsistence of all things. By the same Word whereby
he gave Being to things, he gives to them continuance and duration in Being to
such a term of time. As they were created by his word, they are supported by
his word, Heb. 1.3. The same powerful Fiat, Genesis 1.11.
Let the Earth bring forth Grass, when the Plants peeped upon Man out of
nothing, is expressed every Spring, when they begin to lift up their heads from
their naked Roots and Winter graves. The resurrection of Light every morning,
the reviving the pleasure of all things to the eye; the watering the Valleys
from the Mountain Springs; the curbing the natural appetite of the Waters from
covering the Earth; every draught that the Beast drink, every lodging the Fowls
have, every bit of Food for the sustenance of Man and Beast, is ascribed to the
Opening of his hand, the diffusing of his Power, Psalm. 104.27, etc. as much as
the first Creation of things, and endowing them with their particular nature:
Whence the Plants, Verse 16.
which are so serviceable, are called the Trees of the Lord, of Jehovah, that
has only Being and Power in himself. The whole Psalm is but the description of
his preserving, as the first of Genesis is of his creating Power, It Is by this
Power Angels have so many Thousand years remained in the power of understanding
and willing. By this Power things distant in their natures have been joined
together, a Spiritual Soul and a Dusty Body knit in a Marriage knot. By this
Power the Heavenly Bodies have for so many Ages roul'd in their Spheres, and
the Tumultuous Elements have persisted in their order: By this has the Matter
of the World been to this day continued, and as capable of entertaining forms
as it was at the first Creation. What an amazing sight would it be to see a man
hold a Pillar of the Exchange upon one of his Fingers? What is this to the
Power of God, who holds the waters in the hollow of his hand, metes out the
Heaven with a span, and weighs the Mountains in scales, and the Hills in a
balance? Isai. 40.12.


Daille Melange, Part 2. p. 457, etc.
The preserving the Earth from the violence of the Sea is a plain instance of
this Power. How is that raging Element kept pent within those lists where he
first lodged it; continues its course in its Channel without overflowing the
Earth, and dashing in pieces the lower part of the Creation? The natural
situation of the Water is to be above the Earth, because it is lighter; and to
be immediately under the Air, because it is heavier than that thinner Element.
Who restrains this natural quality of it, but that God that first formed it?
The word of Command at first, Hitherto shall thou go, and no further, keeps
those Waters linkt together in their Den, that they may not ravage the Earth,
but be useful to the Inhabitants of it. And when once it finds a gap to enter,
what power of Earth can hinder its passage? How fruitless sometimes is all the
Art of Man to send it to its proper Channel, when once it has spread its
mighty waves over some Countries, and trampled part of the inhabited Earth
under its feet? It has triumphed in its victory, and withstood all the power
of Man to conquer its force. It Is only the Power of God that does bridle it
from spreading it self over the whole Earth. And that his Power might be more
manifest, he has set but a weak and small bank against it. Though he has
bounded it in some places by mighty Rocks, which lift up their heads above it,
yet in most places by feeble Sand. How often is it seen in every stormy motion,
when the waves boil high and roll furiously, as if they would swallow up all
the neighboring Houses upon the Shore; when they come to touch those Sandy
limits, they bow their heads, fall flat, and sink into the Lap whence they were
raised; and seem to foam with Anger that they can march no further, but must
split themselves at so weak an obstacle? Can the Sand be thought to be the
cause of this? The weakness of it gives no footing to such a thought. Who can
apprehend, that an enraged Army should retire upon the opposition of a Straw in
an Infants hand? Is it the nature of the Water? Its retirement is against the
natural quality of it; pour but a little upon the ground, and you always see it
spread it self: No cause can be rendered in nature; it is a standing Monument of
the Power of God in the preservation of the World, and ought to be more taken
notice of by us in this Island, surrounded with it, than by some other
Countries in the World.

1. We find nothing has power to preserve it self. Does not every Creature
upon Earth require the assistance of some other for its maintenance? Can the
Rush grow up without mire; can the flag grow up without water? Job 8.11. Can
Man or Beast maintain it self without grain from the bowels of the Earth? Would
not every Man tumble into the grave, without the aid of other Creatures to
nourish him? Whence do these Creatures receive that virtue of supplying him
nourishment, but from the Sun and Earth; and whence do they derive that virtue,
but from the Creator of all things? And should he but slack his hand, how soon
would they and all their qualities perish, and the links of the World fall in
pieces, and dash one another into their first Chaos and confusion? All
Creatures indeed have an appetite to preserve themselves, they have some
knowledge of the outward Means for their preservation; so have irrational
Animals a natural instinct, as well as men have some skill to avoid things that
are hurtful, and apply things that are helpful: But what thing in the World can
preserve it self by an inward influx into its own Being? All things want such a
Power without Gods, Fiat, Let it be so: Nothing but is destitute of such a
power for its own preservation, as much as it is of a power for its own
creation. Were there any true Power for such a work, what need of so many
External helps from things of an inferior nature to that which is preserved by
them?

No created thing has a Power to preserve any decayed Being. Who can lay claim
to such a virtue, as to recall a withering Flower to its former beauty, to raise
the head of a drooping Plant, or put life into a gasping Worm when it is
expiring; or put impaired Vitals into their former posture? Not a Man upon
Earth, nor an Angel in Heaven, can pretend to such a virtue; they may be
spectators, but not Assisters, and are in this case Physicians of no value.

2. It Is therefore the same Power preserves things which at first created them.
The Creature does as much depend upon God in the first instant of its Being,
for its preservation; as it did when it was nothing, for its production and
creation into Being. Lessius, de Perfect. divin. p. 69.
As the continuance of a Thought of our Mind depends upon the power of our
Mind, as well as the first framing of that Thought. There is as little
difference between Creating and Preserving Power, as there is between the power
of mine Eye to begin an act of Vision and continue that act of Vision; as to
cast my Eye upon an Object and continue it upon that Object: As the first act
is caused by the Eye, so the duration of that act is preserved by the Eye; shut
the Eye and the act of Vision perishes, divert the Eye from that Object, and
that act of Vision is exchanged for another. And therefore the Preservation of
things is commonly called a Continual creation: And certainly it is no less, if
we understand it of a Preservation by an inward influence into the Being of
things. Lessius, de Sum. bon. p. 580, 581, 582.
It Is one and the same action invariably continued, and obtaining its force
every moment: The same action whereby he created them of Nothing, and which
every moment has a virtue to produce a thing out of nothing, if it were not
yet extant in the World: It remains the same without any diminution throughout
the whole time wherein any thing does remain in the World. For all things would
return to Nothing, if God did not keep them up in the elevation and state to
which he at first raised them by his Creative Power. Acts 17.28. In him we live
and have our being. By him, or by the same Power whence we derived our Being,
are our lives maintained: As it was his Almighty Power whereby we were, after
we had been nothing; so it is the same Power whereby we now are, after he has
made us something.

Certainly all things have no less a dependence on God, than Light upon the
Sun, which vanishes and hides its head upon the withdrawing of the Sun. And
should God suspend that powerful Word, whereby he erected the frame of the
World, it would sink down to what it was, before he commanded it to stand
(...). There needs no new act of Power to reduce things to Nothing, but the
cessation of that Omnipotent influx: When the appointed time set them for their
Being comes to a period, they faint and bend down their heads to their
dissolution, they return to their elements and perish. Psalm. 104.29. Thou
hidest thy face, and they are troubled: thou take away their breath, they die
and return to their dust. That which was Nothing cannot remain on this side
Nothing, but by the same Power that first called it out of Nothing. As when God
withdrew his concurring Power from the Fire, its quality ceased to act upon the
Three Children: so if he withdraws his Sustaining Power from the Creature, its
Nature will cease to be.

Genesis 1.22, 23.
2. It appears in Propagation. That powerful word, Increase and multiply,
pronounced at the first Creation, has spread it self over every part of the
World; every Animal in the World, in the formation of every one of them. From
Two of a kind, how great a number of individuals and single Creatures have been
multiplied, to cover the face of the Earth in their continued successions? What
a world of Plants spring up from the womb of a dry Earth, moistened by the
influence of a Cloud, and hatched by the beams of the Sun? How admirable an
instance of his propagating Power is it, that from a little Seed a massy Root
should strike into the bowels of the Earth, a tall body and thick branches,
with Leaves and Flowers of various colors, should break through the surface of
the Earth, and mount up toward Heaven, when in the Seed you neither smell the
scent, nor see any firmness of a Tree, nor behold any of those Colors which
you view in the Flowers that the years produce? A Power not to be imitated by
any Creature. How astonishing is it, that a small Seed, whereof many will not
amount to the weight of a grain, should spread it self into Leaves, Bark, Fruit
of a vast weight, and multiply it self into Millions of Seeds? What Power is
that, that from one Man and Woman has multiplied Families, and from Families,
stockt the World with People? Consider the living Creatures, as formed in the
womb of their several kinds; every one is a wonder of Power. The Psalmist
instanceth in the forming and propagation of Man. Psalm. 139.14. I am fearfully
and wonderfully made, marvelous are thy works. The forming of the Parts
distinctly in the Womb, the bringing forth into the World every particular
Member, is a roll of wonders, of Power. That so fine a structure as the Body of
Man should be polisht in the lower parts of the Earth, as he calls the Womb,
verse 15. in so short a time, with Members (...) a various form and usefulness,
each laboring in their several functions. Can any man give an exact account of
the manner, how the Bones do grow in the womb: Eccles. 11.5.
It Is unknown to the Father, and no less hid from the Mother, and the wisest
Men cannot search out the depths of it. It Is one of the Secret works of an
Omnipotent Power, secret in the manner, though open in the effect. So that we
must ascribe it to God, as Job does, Thine hands have made me and fashioned me
together round about. Job 10.8.
Thy hands which formed Heaven, have formed every Part, every Member, and
wrought me like a Mighty workman. The Heavens are said to be the work of Gods
hands, and Man is here said to be no less. The forming and propagation of Man
from that Earthy matter, is no less a wonder of Power, than the structure of
the World from a rude and indisposed Matter. Trismegist, in Sermon. Greek in the
Temple, p. 57.
A Heathen Philosopher descants elegantly upon it: Do thou understand (my
Son) the forming of Man in the womb; who erected that noble Fabric; who carved
the Eyes, the Christal-windows of light, and the conductors of the Body; who
bored the Nostrils and Ears, those Loop-holes of scents and sounds; who
stretched out and knit the Sinews and Ligaments for the fastening of every
Member; who cast the hollow Veins, the Channels of Blood; set and strengthened
the Bones, the Pillars and Rafters of the Body; who dug the Pores, the sinks
to expel the filth; who made the Heart, the repository of the Soul, and formed
the Lungs like a Pipe? What Mother, what Father wrought these things? No, none
but the Almighty God, who made all things according to his pleasure; it is He
who propagates this Noble piece from a pile of Dust. Who is born by his own
advice; who gives stature, features, sense, wit, strength, speech, but God?

It Is no less a wonder, that a little Infant can live so long in a dark Sink,
in the midst of filth, without breathing: And the eduction of it out of the
Womb is no less a wonder, than the forming, increase, nourishment of it in that
Cell. A wonder, that the life of the Infant is not the death of the Mother, or
the life of the Mother the death of the Infant. This little Creature, when it
springs up from such small beginnings by the Power of God, grows up to b^ one
of the Lords of the World, to have a Dominion over the Creatures, and
propagates its kind in the same manner: All this is unaccountable without
having recourse to the Power of God in the government of the Creatures.

And to add to this wonder, Consider also what multitudes of Formations and
Births there are at one time all over the World, in every of which the Finger
of God is at work; and it will speak an unwearied Power. It Is admirable in one
Man, more in a Town of Men, still more in a greater and larger Kingdom, a
vaster World; there is a Birth for every Hour in this City, were but 168 born
in a Week, though the Weekly Bills mention more: What is this City to Three
Kingdoms; what Three Kingdoms to a populous World? Eleven Thousand and eighty
will make one for every Minute in the Week; what is this to the Weekly
propagation in all the Nations of the Universe, besides the generation of all
the Living Creatures in that Space, which are the works of Gods fingers as well
as Man? What will be the result of this, but the notion of an unconceivable,
unwearied Almightiness, always active, always operating?

3. It appears in the Motions of all Creatures. All things live and move in
him; Acts 17.28.
by the same Power that Creatures have their Beings, they have their Motions:
They have not only a Being by his powerful Command, but they have their
minutely Motion by his Powerful concurrence. Nothing can act without the
Almighty influx of God, no more than it can exist without the Creative Word of
God. It Is true indeed, the ordering of all Motions to his Holy ends, is an act
of Wisdom; but the motion it self whereby those Ends are attained, is a work of
his Power.

1. God as the first Cause has an influence into the motions of all second
Causes. As all the Wheels in a Clock are moved in their different motions, by
the force and strength of the principal and primary Wheel; if there be any
defect in that, or if that stand still, all the rest languish and stand idle
the same moment. All Creatures are his Instruments, his Engines, and have no
Spirit, but what he gives, and what he assists. Whatsoever Nature works, God
works in Nature; Nature is the Instrument, God is the Supporter, Director,
Mover of Nature; that what the Prophet says in another case, may be the
language of universal Nature, Lord, thou have wrought all our works in us,
Isai. 26.12. They are our works subjectively, efficiently, as second causes;
Gods works originally, concurrently. The Sun moved not in the Valley of Ajalon
for the space of many hours, in the time of Joshua Josh. 10.13.
; nor did the Fire exercise its consuming quality upon the Three Children, in
Nebuchadnezzars Furnace Dan. 3.25.
: He withdrew not his supporting Power from th ir Being, for then they had
van^shed, but his influencing Power from their qualities, whereby their motion
ceased, till he returned his influential concurrence to them; which evidenceth,
that without a perpetual derivation of Divine Power, the Sun could not run one
stride or inch of its race, nor the Fire devour one grain of light Chaff, or an
inch of Straw. Nothing without his sustaining Power can continue in Being;
nothing without his co-working Power can exercise one mite of those qualities
it is possessed of. All Creatures are wound up by him, and his hand is
constantly upon them, to keep them in perpetual motion.

2. Consider the variety of motions in a single Creature. How many motions are
there in the Vital parts of a Man, or in any other Animal, which a Man knows
not, and is unable to number? The renewed motion of the Lungs, the Systoles and
Diastoles of the Heart; the Contractions and Dilatations of the Heart, whereby
it spouts out and takes in Blood; the power of Concoction in the Stomach; the
motion of the Blood in the Veins, etc. all which were not only settled by the
Powerful hand of God, but are upheld by the same, preserved and influenced in
every distinct motion by that Power that stamped them with that Nature. To every
one of those there is not only the sustaining Power of God holding up their
Natures, but the motive Power of God concurring to every motion; for if we move
in him as well as we live in him, then every particle of our motion is
exercised by his concurring Power, as well as every moment of our Life
supported by his preserving Power. What an infinite variety of motions is there
in the whole World in universal Nature, to all which God concurs, all which he
conducts, even the motions of the meanest as well as the greatest Creatures,
which demonstrate the indefatigable Power of the Governor. It Is an Infinite
Power which does act in so many varieties, whereby the Soul forms every
Thought, the Tongue speaks every Word, the Body exerts every Action. What an
Infinite Power is that which presides over the birth of all things, concurs
with the motion of the Sap in the ^ree, Rivers on the Earth, Clouds in the Air,
every drop of Rain, fleece of Snow, crack of Thunder? Not the least motion in
the World, but is under an actual influence of this Almighty Mover.

And lest any should scruple the Concurrence of God to so many Varieties of the
Creatures motion, as a thing utterly unconceivable; let them consider the Sun,
a natural image and shadow of the Perfections of God; does not the power of
that finite Creature extend it self to various Objects at the same moment of
time? How many Insects does it animate, as Flies, etc. at the same moment
throughout the World? How many several Plants does it erect at its appearance
in the Spring, whose Roots lay mourning in the Earth all the foregoing Winter?
What multitudes of Spires of Grass, and nobler Flowers, does it Midwife in the
same hour? It warms the Air, melts the Blood, cherishes Living Creatures of
various kinds, in distinct places, without tiring: And shall the God of this
Sun be less than his Creature?

3. And since I speak of the Sun, consider the Power of God in the Motion of
it. A Lapide, in 1. cap. Genesis 16. Lessius, de Perfect. divin. p. 90, 91.
The vastness of the Sun is computed to be at the least 166 Times bigger than
the Earth, and its distance from the Earth, some tell us to be about Four
Millions of Miles; whence it follows, that it is whirled about the World with
that swiftness, that in the space of an Hour it runs a Million of Miles, which
is as much as if it should move round about the surface of the Earth Fifty
times in one hour; Lessius, de Providen. p. 633. Voss. de Idol. lib. 2. cap. 2.
which vastness exceeds the swiftness of a Bullet shot out of a Canon, which is
computed to fly not above Three mile in a Minute: So that the Sun runs further
in one Hours space, than a Bullet can in Five thousand, if it were kept in
motion; so that if it were near the Earth, the swiftness of its motion would
shatter the whole frame of the World and dash it in pieces; so that the
Psalmist may well say, It runs a race like a strong Man, Psalm. 19.5. What an
Incomprehensible Power is that which has communicated such a strength and
swiftness to the Sun, and does daily influence its Motion; especially since
after all those years of its motion, wherein one would think it should have
spent it self, we behold it every day as vigorous as Adam did in Paradise,
without limping, without shattering it self, or losing any thing of its natural
Spirits in its unwearied motion. How great must that Power be, which has kept
this great body so entire, and thus swiftly moves it every day?

Is it not now an Argument of Omnipotency, to keep all the strings of Nature in
tune; to wind them up to a due pitch for the harmony he intended by them; to
keep things that are contrary from that Confusion they would naturally fall
into; to prevent those Jarrings which would naturally result from their various
and snarling qualities; to preserve every Being in its true nature; to
propagate every kind of Creature; order all the Operations, even the meanest of
them, when there are such innumerable Varieties?

But let us consider, that this Power of preserving things in their station and
motion, and the renewing of them is more stupendous, than that which we
commonly call Miraculous.

We call those Miracles, which are wrought out of the track of Nature, and
contrary to the usual stream and current of it; which Men wonder at, because
they seldom see them, and hear of them as things rarely brought forth in the
World; when the truth is, there is more of Power expressed in the ordinary
station and motion of Natural causes, than in those extraordinary exertings of
Power. Is not more Power signalized in that whirling motion of the Sun every
hour for so many Ages, than in the suspending of its motion one Day, as it was
in the days of Joshua? That Fire should continually ravage and consume, and
greedily swallow up every thing that is offered to it, seems to be the effect
of as admirable a Power, as the stopping of its appetite a few moments, as in
the case of the Three Children? Is not the rising of some small Seeds from the
ground, Faucher, sur Act. Vol. 2. p. 47.
with a multiplication of their numerous posterity, an effect of as great a
Power, as our Saviors seeding many Thousands with a few Loaves, by a secret
augmentation of them? Is not the Chimical producing so pleasant and delicious a
Fruit as the Grape, from a dry Earth, insipid Rain, and a sour Vine, as
admirable a token of Divine Power, as our Saviors turning Water into Wine? Is
not the cure of Diseases by the application of a simple inconsiderable Weed, or
a slight Infusion, as wonderful in it self, as the Cure of it by a powerful
word? What if it be naturally designed to heal, what is that Nature, who gave
that Nature, who maintains that Nature, who conducts it, cooperates with it?
Does it work of it self, and by its own strength; why not then equally in all,
in one as well as another? Miracles indeed affect more, because they testify
the immediate operation of God without the concurrence of second Causes; not
that there is mere of the Power of God shining in them, than in the other.

II. This Power is evident in Moral Government.

1. In the restraint of the Malicious nature of the Devil. Since Satan has the
Power of an Angel, and the Malice of a Devil, what safety would there be for
our Persons from destruction, what security for our Goods from rifling, by this
invisible, potent, and envious Spirit, if his Power were not restrained and his
Malice curbed, by one more Mighty than himself? How much does he envy God, the
glory of his Creation; and Man, the use and benefit of it? How desirous would
he be in regard of his passion, how able in regard of his strength and
subtilty; to overthrow or infect all Worship, but what was directed to himself;
to manage all things according to his lusts, turn all thing topsie-turvy,
plague the World, burn Cities, Houses, plunder us of the supports of Nature,
waste Kingdoms, etc. if he were not held in a Chain, as a ravenous Lion, or a
furious wild Horse, by the Creator and Governor of the World? What remedy
could be used by Man against the activity of this unseen and swift Spirit? The
World could not subsist under his Malice; he would practice the same things
upon All, as he did upon Job, when he had got leave from his Governor; turn
the Swords of Men into one another bowels; send Fire from Heaven upon the
Fruits of the Earth and the Cattle, intended for the use of Man: Raise Winds,
to shake and tear our Houses upon our Heads; daub our Bodies with Scabs and
Boils, and let all the humors in our Blood loose upon us. He that envied Adam a
Paradise, does envy us the pleasure of enjoying its outworks: If we were not
destroyed by him, we should live in a continued vexation by Spectrums and
Apparitions, affrighting sounds and noise; as some think the Egyptians did in
that three days Darkness: He would be always winnowing us, as he desired to
winnow Peter. Luke 22.31.
But God over-masters his strength, that he cannot move a hairs breadth beyond
his Tedder; not only he is unable to touch an Upright Job, but to lay his
fingers upon one of the Unbelieving Gadarens forbidden and filthy Swine without
special license. Mat. 8.31.
When he is cast out of one place, he walks through dry places seeking rest,
Luke 11.24.
new objects for his Malicious designs, but finding none, till God lets loose
the reins upon him for a new employment. Though Satan's Power be great, yet God
suffers him not to tempt as much as his Diabolical appetite would, but as much
as Divine Wisdom thinks fit: And the Divine Power tempers the others active
Malice, and gives the Creature victory, where the Enemy intended spoil and
captivity. How much stronger is God, than all the Legions of Hell; Luke 11.22.
as he that holds a strong man from effecting his purpose, testifies more
ability than his Adversary? How does he lock him up for a Thousand years in a
Pownd, which he cannot leap over? Rev. 20.3.
and this restraint is wrought partly by blinding the Devil in his designs,
partly by denying him concourse to his motion: As he hindered the active
quality of the Fire upon the Three Children, by withdrawing his power, which
was necessary to the motion of it; and his power is as necessary for the motion
of the Devil, as for that of any other Creature. Sometimes he makes him to
confess him against his own interest, as Apollo's Oracle confessed Caete^^^ deos
ae^eos esse, etc. Grot. ^e^it, re^. lib. 4.
. And though when the Devil was cast out of the possessed person, he publicly
owned Christ to be the Holy one of God, Mark 1.24. to render him suspected by
the People of having commerce with the Unclean Spirits; yet this he could not
do without the leave and permission of God, that the power of Christ in
stopping his mouth and imposing silence upon him might be evidenced; and that
it reaches to the Gates of Hell, as well as to the quieting of Winds and Waves.
This is a part of the Strength, as well as the Wisdom of God, Job 12.16.
that the deceived and the deceiver are his. Wisdom to defeat, and Power to
overruled his most Malicious designs to his own glory.

2. In the restraint of the Natural Corruption of Men. Since the impetus of
Original Corruption runs in the Blood, conveyed down from Adam to the Veins of
all his Posterity, and universally diffused in all Mankind; what wrack and
havoc would it make in the World, if it were not suppressed by this Divine
Power, which presides over the hearts of Men? Man is so wretched by Nature,
that nothing but what is vile and pernicious can drop from him. Man drinks
Iniquity like water, Job 15.16.
being by Nature abominable and filthy. He greedily swallows all matter for
Iniquity, every thing suitable to the mire and poison in his Nature, and would
sprout it out with all fierceness and insolence. God himself gives us the
description of Man's Nature, Genesis 6.5. that he has not one good imagination at
any time. Romans 3.10, etc.
And the Apostle from the Psalmist dilates and comments upon it: There is none
righteous, no not one; their mouth is full of cursing and bitterness, their
feet are swift to shed blood, etc. This Corruption is equal in all, natural to
all; it is not more poisonous or more fierce in one Man, than in another. The
Root of all Men is the same; all the Branches therefore do equally possess the
Villainous nature of the Root. No Child of Adam can by Natural descent be better
than Adam, or have less of baseness and vileness, and venom than Adam. How
fruitful would this loathsome Lake be in all kind of steams? What unbridled
Licentiousness and headstrong Fury would triumph in the World, if the Power of
God did not interpose it self to lock down the Floud-gates of it? What rooting
up of Humane society would there be; how would the World be drencht in Blood,
the number of Malefactors be greater, than that of Apprehenders and Punishers?
How would the prints of Natural Laws be razed out of the heart, if God should
leave Humane nature to it self? Who can read the first Chapter to the Romans,
24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29 Verses without acknowledging this Truth; where there is
a Catalogue of those Villainies which followed upon Gods pulling up the Sluices,
and letting the malignity of their Inward Corruption have its natural course?
If God did not hold back the fury of Man, his Garden would be overrun, his
Vine rooted up; the Inclinations of Men would hurry them to the worst of
Wickedness. How great is that Power, that curbs, bridles, or changes, as many
headstrong Horses at once and every minute, as there are Sons of Adam upon the
Earth? The floods lift up their waves; Psalm. 93.3, 4.
the Lord on high is mightier than the noise of many Waters, yea than the
mighty waves of the Sea; that does hush and pen in the turbulent Passions of
Men.

3. In the ordering and framing the hearts of Men to his own ends. That must be
an Omnipotent hand that grasps and contains the Hearts of all Men; the Heart of
the Meanest person, as well as of the most towering Angel, and turns them as he
pleases, and makes them sometime ignorantly, sometime knowingly concur to the
accomplishment of his own purposes: When the Hearts of Men are so numerous,
their Thoughts so various and different from one another, yet he has a Key to
those Millions of Hearts, and with Infinite Power guided by as Infinite Wisdom,
he draws them into what Channels he pleases for the gaining his own ends. Though
the Jews had embrued their hands in the Blood of our Savior, and their Rage
was yet reeking-hot against his Followers, God bridled their Fury in the
Churches Infancy, till it had got some strength, and cast a Terror upon them by
the Wonders wrought by the Apostles, Acts 2.43. And fear came upon every Soul,
and many wonders and signs were done by the Apostles. Was there not the same
reason in the nature of the Works our Savior wrought, to point them to the
Finger of God and calm their rage? Yet did not the Power of God work upon their
Passions in those Miracles, nor stop the impetuousness of the Corruption
resident in their hearts. Yet now those who had the boldness to attack the Son
of God and nail him to the Cross, are frighted at the Appearance of Twelve
unarmed Apostles; as the Sea seems to be afraid when it approaches the bounds
of the feeble Sand. How did God bend the Hearts of the Egyptians to the
Israelites, and turn them to that point, as to lend their most costly Vessels,
their precious Jewels, and rich Garments, to supply those whom they had just
before tyrannically loaded with their Chains Exodus 3.21, 22. 1 Chro. 18.31.
? When a great part of an Army came upon Jehosaphat to dispatch him into
another World, how does God in a trice touch their hearts, and move them by a
secret instinct at once to depart from him? As if you should see a numerous
sight of Birds in a moment turn wing another way, by a sudden and joint
consent. When he gave Saul a Kingdom, he gave him a Spirit fit for Government,
and gave him another heart; 1 Samuel 1^ ^,
and brought the People to submit to his yoke, who a little before wandered
about the Land upon no nobler employment than the seeking of Asses. It Is no
small remark of the Power of God, to make a number of strong and discontented
Persons, and desirous enough of liberty, to bend their Necks under the yoke of
Government, and submit to the Authority of One, and that of their own Nature,
often weaker and unwiser than the most of them; and many times, an Oppressor
and Invader of their Rights. Upon this account David calls God his Fortress,
Tower, Shield; Psalm. 144 2.
all terms of Strength, in subduing the People under him. It Is the Mighty hand
of God, that links Princes and People together in the bands of Government. The
same hand that asswageth the Waves of the Sea, suppresseth the Tumults of the
People.

III. It appears in his Gracious and Judicial Government.

1. In his Gracious Government. In the Deliverance of his Church: He is the
strength of Israel, and has protected his Little Flock in the midst of Wolves;
1 Samuel 15.29.
and maintained their standing, when the strongest Kingdoms have sunk, and the
best joynted States have been broken in pieces. When Judgments have ravaged
Countries, and torn up the Mighty, as a tempestuous Wind has often done the
tallest Trees, which seemed to threaten Heaven with their Tops, and dare the
Storm with the depth of their Roots, when yet the Vine and Rose-bushes have
stood firm, and been seen in their beauty next morning. The state of the Church
has outlived the most flourishing Monarchies; when there has been a mighty
knot of Adversaries against her; when the Bulls of Bashan have pusht her, and
the whole Tribe of the Dragon have sharpened their weapons, and edged their
Malice; when the voice was strong, and the hopes high to raze her foundation
even with the ground; when Hell has roared; when the wit of the World has
contrived, and the strength of the World has attempted her ruin; when Decrees
have been past against her, and the Powers of the World armed for the execution
of them; when her Friends have drooped and skulk'd in Corners; when there was
no Eye to pity, and no Hand to assist, help has come from Heaven; her Enemies
have been defeated, Kings have brought gifts to her and reared her; Tears have
been wiped off her Cheeks, and her very Enemies, by an unseen Power, have been
forced to court her, whom before they would have devoured quick. The Devil and
his Armies have sneakt into their Den, and the Church has triumphed when she
has been upon the brink of the Grave. Thus did God send a mighty Angel to be
the Executioner of Senacheribs Army, and the Protector of Jerusalem, who run
his Sword into the hearts of Eighty Thousand, 2 King 19.35.
when they were ready to swallow up his beloved City.

When the Knife was at the Throats of the Jews in Shushan, Esther 8.
by a powerful hand it was turned into the hearts of their Enemies. With what
an Outstretched Arm were the Israelites freed from the Egyptian yoke? Deuteronomy.
4.34.
When Pharaoh had mustered a great Army to pursue them, assisted with Six
hundred Chariots of War, the Red Sea obstructed their passage before, and an
enraged Enemy trod on their rear; when the fearful Israelites despaired of
Deliverance, and the insolent Egyptian assured himself of his Revenge; God
stretches out his irresistible Arm, to defeat the Enemy and assist his People;
he strikes down the Wolves, and preserves the Flock. God restrained the
Egyptian Enmity against the Israelites till they were at the brink of the Red
Sea, and then lets them follow their humor and pursue the Fugitives, that his
Power might more gloriously shine forth in the Deliverance of the one, and the
Destruction of the other. God might have brought Israel out of Egypt in the
^ime of those Kings, that had remembered the good Service ^f Joseph to their
Country; but he leaves them till the Reign of a cruel Tyrant, suffers them to
be Slaves, that they might by his sole Power be Conquerors; which had had no
appearance, had there been a willing dismission of them at the first summons.
Exodus 9.16. In very deed, for this cause have I raised thee up, for to show my
Power, and that my Name might be declared throughout all the Earth. I have
permitted thee to rise up against my People, and keep them in Captivity, that
thou might be an occasion for the manifestation of my Power in their rescue;
and whilst thou art obstinate to enslave them, I will stretch out my Arm to
deliver them, and make my Name famous among the Gentiles, in the wrack of thee
and thy Host in the Red Sea. The Deliverance of the Church has not been in one
Age or in one Part of the World, but God has signalized his Power in all
Kingdoms where she has had a footing: As he has guided her in all places by
one Rule, animated her by one Spirit; so he has protected her by the same Arm
of Power.

When the Roman Emperors bandied all their Force against Her for about Three
hundred years, they were further from effecting her ruin at the end, than when
they first attempted it: The Church grew under their Sword, and was hatched
under the Wings of the Roman Eagle, which were spread to destroy her. The Ark
was elevated by the Deluge; and the Waters the Devil poured out to drown Her,
did but slime the Earth for a new increase of her. She has sometime been
beaten down, and, like Lazarus, has seemed to lie in the Grave for some days,
that the Power of God might be more visible in her sudden resurrection, and
lifting up her head above the Throne of her Persecutors.

2. In his Judicial proceedings. The Deluge was no small testimony of his
Power, in opening the Cisterns of Heaven, and pulling up the Sluices of the Sea.
He does but call for the waters of the Sea, and they pour themselves upon the
face of the Earth, Amos 9.6. In Forty days time the Waters overtopt the highest
Mountains fifteen Cubits; Genesis 7.17, 19, 20.
and by the same Power he afterward reduced the Sea to its proper Channel, as
a roaring Lion into his Den. A shower of Fire from Heaven upon Sodom and the
Cities of the Plain, was a signal display of his Power, either in creating it
on the sudden for the execution of his Righteous sentence, or sending down the
Element of Fire, contrary to its nature (which affects ascent) for the
punishment of Rebels against the light of Nature.

How often has he ruined the most flourishing Monarchies, led Princes away
spoiled, and overthrown the Mighty? Which Job makes an Argument of his
Strength, Job 12.13, 14. Troops of unknown People, the Goths and Vandals, broke
the Romans, a Warlike People, and hurled down all before them. They could not
have had the thought to succeed in such an Attempt, unless God had given them
strength and motion, for the executing his Judicial Vengeance upon the People
of his Wrath.

How did he evidence his Power, by dawbing the Throne of Pharaoh, and his
Chamber of Presence, Exodus 8.3.
as well as the Houses of his Subjects, with the slime of Frogs; turning their
Waters into Blood, Exodus 7.20.
and their Dust into biting Lice; raising his Militia of Locusts against them;
causing a Three days Darkness without stopping the motion of the Sun: Taking
off their Firstborn, the excellency of their strength, in a Night, by the
stroke of the Angels Sword? He takes off the Chariot Wheels of Pharaoh, and
presents him with a Destruction, where he expected a Victory: brings those
Waves over the heads of him and his Host, which stood firm as Marble Walls for
the safety of his People: The Sea is made to swallow them up, that durst not by
the order of their Governor touch the Israelites. It only sprinkled the one as
a type of Baptism, and drowned the other as an image of Hell. Thus he made it
both a Deliverer and a Revenger, the Instrument of an offensive and defensive
War. Isai. 40.23, 24.
He brings Princes to nothing, and makes the Judges of the Earth as vanity.
Great Monarchs have by his Power been hurled from their Thrones, and their
Scepters (like Venice-Glasses) broken before their faces, and They been
advanced, that have had the least hopes of Grandeur. He has plucked up Cedars
by the Roots, lopt off the Branches, and set a Shrub to grow up in the place;
dissolved Rocks, and established Bubbles. Luke 1.52. He has showed strength
with his arm, he has scattered the proud in the imagin^tion of their hearts:
he has put down the mighty from their seat, and exalted them of low degree.

And these things he does magnify his Power in.

1. By ordering the nature of Creatures as he pleases. By restraining their
force, or guiding their motions. The restraint of the destructive qualities of
the Creatures argues as great a Power, as the change of their Natures, yea and
a greater. The qualities of Creatures may be changed by Art and Composition, as
in the preparing of Medicines; but what but a Divine Power could restrain the
operation of the Fire from the Three Children, while it retained its heat and
burning quality in Nebuchadnezzars Furnace? The operation was curbed while its
nature was preserved. All Creatures are called his Host, because he Marshals
and ranks them as an Army to serve his purposes. The whole Scheme of Nature is
ready to favor Men when God orders it, and ready to punish Men when God
comm^ssions it. He gave the Red Sea but a check, and it obeyed his Voice; Psalm.
106.9. He rebuked the Red Sea also, and it was dried up; the motion of it
ceased, and the Waters of it were ranged as defensive Walls, to secure the
march of his People: And at the motion of the Hand of Moses, the Servant of the
Lord, the Sea recovered its violence, and the Walls that were framed came
tumbling down upon the Egyptians heads Exodus 14.27.
. The Creator of Nature is not led by the necessity of Nature: He that settled
the order of Nature, can change or restrain the order of Nature according to
his Sovereign pleasure. The most necessary and useful Creatures he can use as
Instruments of his Vengeance: Water is necessary to cleanse, and by that he can
deface a World; Fire is necessary to warm, and by that he can burn a Sodom:
From the Water he formed the Fowl Genesis 1.21.
, and by that he dissolves them in the Deluge; Fire or Heat is necessary to the
Generation of Creatures, and by that he ruins the Cities of the Plain. He
orders all as he pleases, to perform every tittle and punctilio of his purpose.
The Sea observed him so exactly, that it drowned not one Israelite, nor saved
one Egyptian. Psalm. 106.11. There was not One of them left. And to perfect the
Israelites Deliverance, he followed them with Testimonies of his Power above
the strength of Nature. When they wanted Drink, he orders Moses to strike a
Rock, and the Rock spouts a River, and a Channel is formed for it to attend
them in their Journey. When they wanted Bread, he dressed Manna for them in the
Heavens, and sent it to their Tables in the Desert. When he would declare his
Strength, he calls to the Heavens to pour down Righteousness, and to the Earth
to bring forth Salvation, Isai. 45.8. Though God had created Righteousness or
Deliverance for the Jews in Babylon, yet he calls to the Heavens and the Earth
to be assistant to the design of Cyrus, whom he had raised for that purpose, as
he speaks in the beginning of the Chapter, verse. 1, 2, 3, 4. As God created Man
for a supernatural end, and all Creatures for Man as their immediate end; so he
makes them, according to opportunities, subservient to that supernatural end of
Man, for which he created him. He that spans the Heavens with his fist, can
shoot all Creatures like an Arrow, to hit what mark he pleases. He that spread
the Heavens and the Earth by a Word, and can by a Word fold them up more easily
than a Man can a garment Heb. 1.12.
, can order the streams of Nature; Cannot he work without Nature as well as
with it, beyond Nature, contrary to Nature, that can (as it were) fillip Nature
with his finger into that Nothing whence he drew it? Who can cast down the Sun
from his Throne, clap the distinguished parts of the World together, and make
them march in the same order to their Confusion, as they did in their Creation:
Who can jumble the whole Frame together, and by a Word dissolve the Pillars of
the World, and make the Fabric lie in a ruinous heap.

2. In effecting his Purposes by small Means: In making use of the Meanest
Creatures. As the Power of God is seen in the creation of the smallest
Creatures, and assembling so many perfections in the little body of an Insect,
as an Ant, or Spider: So his Power is not less magnified in the use he makes of
them. As he magnifies his Wisdom, by using ignorant Instruments; so he exalts
his Power, by employing weak Instruments in his service: The Meaness and
Imperfection of the matter sets off the Excellency of the Workman; so the
weakness of the Instrument is a foyl to the Power of the principal Agent. When
God has effected things by Means in the Scripture, he has usually brought
about his Purposes by weak Instruments.

Moses, a Fugitive from Egypt, and Aaron a Captive in it, are the Instruments
of the Israelites Deliverance. By the motion of Moses his Rod, he works Wonders
in the Court of Pharaoh, and summons up his Judgments against him. He brought
down Pharaohs stomach for a while by a squadron of Lice and Locusts, wherein
Divine Power was more seen, than if Moses had brought him to his own Articles
by a multitude of Warlike Troops. The fall of the Walls of Jericho by the sound
of Rams horns, was a more glorious Character of Gods Power, than if Joshuah had
battered it down with an hundred of Warlike Engines. Josh. 6.20.
Thus the great Army of the Midianites, which lay as Grasshoppers upon the
ground, were routed by Gideon in the head of Three hundred Men; and Goliath a
Giant, laid level with the ground by David a Stripling, by the force of a
Sling: A Thousand Philistines dispatched out of the World by the Jaw Bone of an
Ass in the hand of Sampson. He can master a stout Nation by an Army of Locusts,
and render the Teeth of those little Insects as destructive as the Teeth, yea
the strongest Teeth, the Cheek Teeth of a great Lion Joel 1.6, 7.
. The Thunderbolt, which produces sometimes dreadful effects, is compacted of
little Atoms which fly in the Air, small Vapors drawn up by the Sun, and mixed
with other Sulphurous matter and petrifying Juice. Nothing is so weak, but his
Strength can make victorious; nothing so small, but by his Power he can
accomplish his great ends by it; nothing so vile, but his Might can conduct to
his glory; and no Nation so mighty, but he can waste and enfeeble by the
Meanest Creatures. God is great in Power in the greatest things, and not little
in the smallest; his Power in the minutest Creatures which he uses for his
service, surmounts the force of our Understanding.

III. The Power of God appears in Redemption. As our Savior is called the
Wisdom of God, 1 Cor. 1.24.
so he is called the Power of God. The Arm of Power was lifted up as high, as
the designs of Wisdom were laid deep: As this way of Redemption could not be
contrived, but by an Infinite Wisdom; so it could not be accomplished, but by
an Infinite Power. None but God could shape such a design, and none but God
could effect it. The Divine Power in Temporal deliverances, and freedom from
the slavery of humane Oppressors, vails to that which glitters in Redemption;
whereby the Devil is defeated in his designs, stripped of his spoils, and yoked
in his strength. The Power of God in Creation requires not those degrees of
Admiration, as in Redemption. In Creation the World was erected from Nothing;
as there was Nothing to act, so there was Nothing to oppose; no victorious
Devil was in that to be subdued, no thundering Law to be silenced, no Death to
be conquered, no Transgression to be pardoned and rooted out, no Hell to be
shut, no Ignominious death upon the Cross to be suffered. It had been in the
nature of the thing, an easier thing to Divine Power to have created a new
World, than repaired a broken, and purified a polluted one. This is the most
admirable Work that ever God brought forth in the World, greater than all the
Marks of his Power in the first Creation.

And this will appear, 1. In the Person Redeeming. 2. In the publication and
propagation of the Doctrine of Redemption. 3. In the application of Redemption.


I. In the Person Redeeming.

First, In his Conception.

1. He was conceived by the Holy Ghost in the Womb of the Virgin. Luke 1.35.
The Holy Ghost shall come upon thee, and the power of the highest shall
overshadow thee. Which act is expressed to be the effect of the Infinite Power of
God; and it expresses the supernatural manner of the forming the Humanity of
our Savior, and signifies not the Divine Nature of Christ infusing it self
into the Womb of the Virgin; for the Angel refers it to the manner of the
operation of the Holy Ghost in the producing the Humane Nature of Christ, and
not to the Nature assuming that Humanity into union with it self. The Holy
Ghost, or the Third Person in the Trinity, overshadowed the Virgin, and by a
Creative act framed the Humanity of Christ, and united it to the Divinity. It
is therefore expressed by a word of the same import with that used Genesis 1.2. The
Spirit moved upon the face of the face of the Waters, which signifies (as it
were) a Brooding upon the Chaos, shadowing it with his Wings, as Hens sit upon
their Eggs, to form them and hatch them into Animals; or else it is an allusion
to the Cloud which covered the Tent of the Congregation, when the Glory of the
Lord filled the Tabernacle Exodus 40 34,
. It was not such a Creative Act as we call Immediate, which is a production
out of Nothing; but a Mediate Creat^on, such as Gods bringing things into form
out of the first Matter, which had nothing but an Obediential or Passive
disposition to whatsoever stamp the Powerful Wisdom of God should imprint upon
it. So the substance of the Virgin had no active, but only a passive
disposition to this work: The Matter of the Body was Earthy, the substance of
the Virgin; the forming of it was Heavenly, the Holy Ghost working upon that
Matter. And therefore when it is said, Mat. 1.18.
that she was found with Child of the Holy Ghost, it is to be understood of the
Efficacy of the Holy Ghost, not of the Substance of the Holy Ghost. The matter
was Natural, but the manner of Conceiving was in a Supernatural way, above the
methods of Nature. In reference to the Active Principle the Redeemer is called
in the Prophecy Isai. 4.2.
, The Branch of the Lord, in regard of the Divine hand that planted him: In
respect to the Passive Principle, The Fruit of the Earth, in regard of the Womb
that bare him; and therefore said to be made of a Woman Gal. 4 4.
. That part of the Flesh of the Virgin whereof the Humane Nature of Christ was
made, was refined and purified from Corruption by the overshadowing of the Holy
Ghost, as a skilful Workman separates the Dross from the Gold: Our Savior is
therefore called, that Holy thing Luke 1.35.
, though born of the Virgin: He was necessarily some way to descend from Adam.
God indeed might have created his Body out of Nothing, or have formed it (as he
did Adams) out of the Dust of the Ground: But had he been thus extraordinarily
formed, and not propagated from Adam; though he had been a Man like one of us,
yet he would not have been of kin to us, because it would not have been a
Nature derived from Adam, the Common Parent of us all. Amyrald. in Symbol. p.
103, etc.
It was therefore necessary to an affinity with us, not only that he should
have the same Humane Nature, but that it should slow from the same Principle,
and be propagated to him. But now, by this way of producing the Humanity of
Christ of the Substance of the Virgin, He was in Adam (say some) Corporally,
but not Seminally; of the Substance of Adam, or a Daughter of Adam, but not of
the Seed of Adam: And so he is of the same Nature that had sinned, and so what
he did and suffered may be imputed to us; which, had he been created as Adam,
could not be claimed in a Legal and Judicial way.

2. It was not convenient he should be born in the Common order of Nature, of
Father and Mother: For whosoever is so born is polluted: A Clean thing cannot
be brought out of an unclean Job 14.4.
: And our Savior had been incapable of being a Redeemer, had he been tainted
with the least Spot of our Nature, but would have stood in need of Redemption
himself. Besides, it had been inconsistent with the Holiness of the Divine
Nature, to have assumed a tainted and defiled Body. He that was the Fountain of
Blessedness to all Nations, was not to be subject to the Curse of the Law for
himself; which he would have been, had he been conceived in an ordinary way. He
that was to overturn the Devils Empire, was not to be any way captive under the
Devils Power, as a Creature under the Curse; nor could he be able to break the
Serpents head, had he been tainted with the Serpents breath.

Again, supposing that Almighty God by his Divine Power had so ordered the
matter, and so perfectly sanctified an Earthly Father and Mother from all
Original spot, that the Humane Nature might have been transmitted Immaculate to
him, as well as the Holy Ghost did purge that part of the flesh of the Virgin
of which the Body of Christ was made; yet it was not convenient that that
Person, that was God blessed for ever as well as Man, partaking of our Nature,
should have a Conception in the same manner as ours, but different, and in some
measure conformable to the Infinite dignity of his Person; which could not have
been, had not a supernatural Power and a Divine Person been concerned as an
active Principle in it. Besides, such a Birth had not been agreeable to the
first Promise, Genesis 1.15.
which calls him The Seed of the woman, not of the Man; and so the Veracity of
God had suffered some detriment: The seed of the woman only, is set in
opposition to the seed of the Serpent.

3. By this manner of Conception, the Holiness of his Nature is secured, and
his fitness for his Office is assured to us. It Is now a pure and unpolluted
Humanity that is the Temple and Tabernacle of the Divinity: The Fullness of the
Godhead dwells in him bodily, and dwells in him Holily. His Humanity is
supernaturaliz'd, and elevated by the activity of the Holy Ghost, hatching the
Flesh of the Virgin into Man, as the Chaos into a World. Though we read of some
sanctified from the Womb, it was not a pure and perfect Holiness; it was like
the Light of Fire mixed with Smoke, an infused Holiness accompanied with a
Natural t^int: But the Holiness of the Redeemer by this Conception, is like the
Light of the Sun, pure and without spot. The Spirit of Holiness supplying the
place of a Father in a way of Creation.

His Fitness for his Office is also assured to us; for being born of the
Virgin, one of our Nature, but conceived by the Spirit a Divine Person, the
guilt of our Sins may be imputed to him because of our Nature, without the
stain of Sin inherent in him; because of his Supernatural Conception he is
capable, as one of Kin to us, to bear our Curse without being touched by our
Taint. By this means our sinful Nature is assumed without Sin in that Nature
which was assumed by him: Flesh he has, but not Sinful flesh, Romans 8.3. Real
Flesh, but not really Sinful, only by way of Imputation.

Nothing but the Power of God is evident in this whole Work: By the ordinary
Laws and course of Nature a Virgin could not bear a Son; nothing but a
Supernatural and Almighty Grace could intervene to make so holy and perfect a
Conjunction. Amyrant s^r ^imole, p. 292.
The generation of others, in an ordinary way, is by Male and Female: But the
Virgin is overshadow'd by the Spirit and Power of the Highest. Man only is the
product of Natural generation; this which is born of the Virgin is the Holy
thing, the Son of God. In other generations, a Rational Soul is only united to
a Material Body: But in this, the Divine Nature is united with the Humane in
one Person by an indissoluble Union.

II. The Second Act of Power in the Person Redeeming, is the Union of the two
Natures, the Divine and Humane. The designing indeed of this was an act of
Wisdom; but the accomplishing it was an act of Power.

1. There is in this Redeeming Person a Union of two Natures. He is God and Man
in one Person. Heb. 1.8, 9. Thy Throne, O God, is for ever and ever: God, even
thy God, has anointed thee with the Oil of Gladness, etc. The Son is called
God, having a Throne for ever and ever, and the Unction speaks him Man: The
Godhead cannot be Anointed, nor has any Fellows. Humanity and Divinity are
ascribed to him, Romans 1.3, 4. He was of the Seed of David according to the
Flesh, and declared to be the Son of God, by hi^ Resurrection from the dead.
The Divinity and Humanity are both Prophetically joined, Zach. 12.10. I will
pour out my Spirit; the pouring forth the Spirit is an Act only of Divine Grace
and Power. And they shall look upon me whom they have pierced; the same Person
pours forth the Spirit as God, and is pierced as Man. The Word was made Flesh,
John 1.14. Word from Eternity was made Flesh in time, Word and Flesh in one
Person; a great God, and a little Infant.

2. The Terms of this Union were infinitely distant. What greater distance can
there be than between the Deity and Humanity, between the Creator and a
Creature? Can you imagine the distance between Eternity and Time, Infinite
Power and Miserable Infirmity, an Immortal Spirit and Dying Flesh, the Highest
Being and Nothing? yet these are espoused. A God of unmixt Blessedness is linkt
personally with a Man of perpetual Sorrows: Life incapable to Die, joined to a
Body in that Economy incapable to live without dying first; Infinite Purity,
and a reputed Sinner; Eternal Blessedness with a Cursed Nature, Almightiness
and Weakness, Omniscience and Ignorance, Immutability and Changableness,
Incomprehensibleness and comprehensibility; that which cannot be comprehended,
and that which can be comprehended; that which is entirely Independent, and
that which is totally Dependant; the Creator forming all things, and the
Creature made met together to a Personal Union; the Word made flesh John. 1.14.
, the Eternal Son, the Seed of Abraham Heb. 2.16.
. What more Miraculous, than for God to become Man, and Man to become God. That
a Person possessed of all the Per^ections of the Godhead, should inherit all
the Imperfections of the Manhood in one Person, Sin only excepted: A Holiness
incapable of sinning to be made Sin; God blessed for ever, taking the
properties of Humane Nature, and Humane Nature admitted to a Union with the
Properties of the Creator: The Fullness of the Deity and the Emptiness of Man
united together Colos. 2.9.
; not by a shining of the Deity upon the Humanity, as the light of the Sun upon
the Earth, but by an inhabitation or indwelling of the Deity in the Humanity.
Was there not need of an Infinite Power to bring together Terms so far asunder,
to elevate the Humanity to be capable of and disposed for a conjunction with
the Deity? If a clod of Earth should be advanced to, and united with the Body
of the Sun, such an advance would evidence it self to be a work of Almighty
Power: The Clod has nothing in its own nature to render it so glorious, no
power to climb up to so high a dignity: How little would such a Union be, to
that we are speaking of? Nothing less than an incomprehensible Power could
effect, what an Incomprehensible Wisdom did project in this affair.

3. Especially since the Union is so strait. It Is not such a Union as is
between a Man and his House he dwells in, whence he goes out and to which he
returns, without any alteration of himself or his House; nor such a Union as is
between a Man and his Garment, which both communicate and receive warmth from
one another; nor such as is between an Artificer and his Instrument wherewith
he works; nor such a Union as one Friend has with another: All these are
distant things, not one in Nature, but have distinct subsistences. Two Friends,
though united by love, are distinct Persons; a Man and his Clothes, an
Artificer and his Instruments, have distinct subsistences: But the Humanity of
Christ has no subsistence, but in the Person of Christ.

Lessius, de Perf. divin. lib. 12. cap. 4. p. 104.
The straitness of this Union is expressed, and may be somewhat conceived, by the
union of Fire with Iron; [Fire pierces through all the parts of Iron, it
unites it self with every particle, bestows a light, heat, purity upon all of
it; you cannot distinguish the Iron from the Fire, or the Fire from the Iron,
yet they are distinct Natures: So the Deity is united to to the whole Humanity,
seasons it, and bestows an excellency upon it, yet the Natures still remain
distinct. And as during that union of Fire with Iron, the Iron is incapable of
rust or blackness; so is the Humanity incapable of Sin: And as the operation of
Fire is attributed to the red-hot Iron, (as the Iron may be said to heat, burn,
and the Fire may be said to cut and pierce) yet the imperfections of the Iron
do not affect the Fire; so in this Mystery, those things which belong to the
Divinity are ascribed to the Humanity, and those things which belong to the
Humanity are ascribed to the Divinity, in regard of the Person in whom those
Natures are united; yet the Imperfections of the Humanity do not hurt the
Divinity.] The Divinity of Christ is as really united with the Humanity, as the
Soul with the Body: The Person was one, though the Natures were two, so united,
that the Sufferings of the Humane Nature were the Sufferings of that Person,
and the dignity of the Divine was imputed to the Humane, by reason of that
Unity of both in one Person: Hence the Blood of the Humane Nature is said to be
the Blood of God Acts 20.28:
. Lessius, p. 103, 104.
All things ascribed to the Son of God, may be ascribed to this Man; and the
things ascribed to this Man, may be ascribed to the Son of God, as this Man is
the Son of God Eternal, Almighty: And it may be said, God suffered, was
Crucified, etc. for the Person of Christ is but one, most simple; the Person
suffered, that was God and Man united, making One Person.

4. And though the Union be so strait, yet without confusion of the Natures, or
change of them into one another. Lessius, ut antea, p. 103, 104. Amyrald.
Irenic. p. 284.
The two Natures of Christ are not mixed, as Liquors that incorporate with one
another when they are poured into a Vessel; the Divine Nature is not turned
into the Humane, nor the Humane into the Divine, one Nature does not swallow up
another and make a third Nature, distinct from each of them. The Deity is not
turned into the Humanity, as Air (which is next to a Spirit) may be thickened
and turned into Water, and Water may be rarifi'd into Air by the power of Heat
boiling it. The Deity cannot be changed, because the Nature of it is to be
unchangeable: It would not be Deity, if it were Mortal and capable of
Suffering. The Humanity is not changed into the Deity, for then Christ could
not have been a Sufferer: If the Humanity had been swallowed up into the Deity,
it had lost its own distinct Nature and put on the Nature of the Deity, and
consequently been incapable of Suffering: Finite can never by any mixture be
changed into Infinite, nor Infinite into Finite.

This Union in this regard may be resembled to the Union of Light and Air,
which are strictly joined; for the Light passes through all parts of the Air,
but they are not confounded, but remain in their distinct essences as before
the union, without the least confusion with one another. Amyrald. Irenic. p.
282.
The Divine Nature remains as it was before the Union, entire in it self, only
the Divine Person assumes another Nature to himself. The Humane Nature remains,
as it would have done had it existed separately from the (...), except that
then it would have had a proper subsistence by it self, which now it borrows
from its union with the (...), or Word; but that does not belong to the
Constitution of its Nature.

Now let us Consider, what a wonder of Power is all this: The knitting a Noble
Soul to a Body of Clay was not so great an exploit of Almightiness, as the
espousing Infinite and Finite together. Man is further distant from God, than
Man from Nothing. What a wonder is it, that two Natures infinitely distant,
should be more intimately united than any thing in the World, and yet without
any confusion? That the same Person should have both a Glory and a Grief; an
infinite Joy in the Deity, and an unexpressible Sorrow in the Humanity? That a
God upon a Throne should be an Infant in a Cradle; the Thundering Creator be a
weeping Babe and a suffering Man, are such expressions of mighty Power, as well
as condescending Love, that they astonish Men upon Earth, and Angels in Heaven.

3. Power was evident in the progress of his life. In the Miracles he wrought;
How often did he expel malicious and powerful Devils from their habitations;
hurl them from their Thrones, and make them fall from Heaven like Lightning?
How many Wonders were wrought by his bare Word, or a single Touch? Sight
restored to the Blind, and Hearing to the Deaf; Palsy Members restored to the
exercise of their functions; a dismiss given to many deplorable Maladies,
impure Leprosies chased from the Persons they had infected, and Bodies
beginning to putrify raised from the Grave. But the mightiest Argument of
Power was his Patience. That he who was in his Divine Nature elevated above the
World, should so long continue upon a Dunghill, endure the contradiction of
Sinners against himself; be patiently subject to the Reproaches and Indignities
of Men, without displaying that Justice which was essential to the Deity, and
in especial manner daily merited by their provoking Crimes. The Patience of Man
under great Affronts, is a greater Argument of power, than the Brawnyness of
his Arm: A Strength employed in the revenge of every Injury, signifies a
greater infirmity in the Soul, than there can be ability in the Body.

4. Divine Power was apparent in his Resurrection. The unlocking the belly of
the Whale for the deliverance of Jonas; the rescue of Daniel from the Den of
Lions; and the restraining the Fire from burning the Three Children, were
signal declarations of his Power, and types of the Resurrection of our Savior.
But what are those to that which was represented by them? That was a power over
Natural causes, a curbing of Beasts, and restraining of Elements; But in the
Resurrection of Christ, God exercised a power over himself, and quenched the
flames of his own Wrath, hotter than Millions of Nebuchadnezzars Furnaces;
unlockt the Prison doors, wherein the Curses of the Law had lodged our Savior,
stronger than the Belly and Ribbs of a Leviathan. In the rescue of Daniel and
Jonas, God overpowered Beasts; and in this tore up the strength of the Old
Serpent, and plucked the Scepter from the hand of the Enemy of Mankind. The Work
of Resurrection indeed, considered in it self, requires the efficacy of an
Almighty Power: Neither Man nor Angel can create new dispositions in a Dead
Body, to render it capable of lodging a Spiritual Soul; nor can they restore a
dislodged Soul, by their own power, to such a Body. The restoring a Dead Body
to life requires an Infinite Power, as well as the Creation of the World: But
there was in the Resurrection of Christ something more difficult than this;
while he lay in the Grave he was under the Curse of the Law, under the
execution of that dreadful Sentence, Thou shall die the death. His Resurrection
was not only the re-tying ^he Marriage knot between his Soul and Body, or the
rouling the Stone from the Grave; but a taking off an infinite weight, the Sin
of Mankind, which lay upon him: So vast a weight could not be removed without
the strength of an Almighty Arm. It Is therefore ascribed, not to an ordinary
operation, but an operation with Power Romans 1.4.
, and such a Power wherein the Glory of the Father did appear. Romans 6.4. Raised
up from the dead by the glory of the Father, that is, the glorious Power of
God. As the Eternal Generation is stupendous, so is his Resurrection, which is
called, a new begetting of him, Acts 13.33. It Is a wonder of Power, that the
Divine and Humane Nature should be joined; and no less wonder, that his Person
should surmount and rise up from the Curse of God, under which he lay. The
Apostle therefore adds one expression to another, and heaps up a variety,
signifying thereby that one was not enough to represent it, Ephesians. 1.19.
Exceeding greatness of power, and working of mighty power, which he wrought in
Christ when he raised him from the dead. It was an hyperbole of Power, the
excellency of the Mightiness of his Strength; the loftiness of the expressions
seems to come short of the apprehension he had of it in his Soul.

Secondly, This Power appears in the Publication and Propagation of the
Doctrine of Redemption.

The Divine Power will appear, if you consider, 1. The Nature of the Doctrine.
2. The Instruments employed in it. 3. The Means they used to propagate it. 4.
The Success they had.


I. The Nature of the Doctrine.

1. It was contrary to the common received reason of the World. The
Philosophers, the Masters of Knowledge among the Gentiles, had Maxims of a
different stamp from it. Though they agreed in the Being of a God, yet their
Notions of his Nature were confused and embroiled with many Errors; the Unity
of God was not commonly assented unto: They had multiplied Deities ac^ording to
the Fancies they had received from some of a more elevated Wit and refined
Brain, than others. Though they had some notion of Mediators, yet they placed
in those Seats, their public Benefactors; Men that had been useful to the
World, or their particular Countries, in imparting to them some profitable
Invention. To discard those, was to charge themselves with Ingratitude to them,
from whom they had received signal benefits, and to whose Mediation, Conduct,
or Protection, they ascribed all the Success they had been blessed with in
their several Provinces; and to charge themselves with Folly, for rendering an
Honor and Worship to them so long. Could the Doctrine of a Crucified Mediator,
whom they had never seen, that had conquered no Country for them, never
enlarged their Territories, brought to light no new profitable Invention for
the increase of their Earthly welfare, as the rest had done, be thought
sufficient to balance so many of their reputed Heroes? How ignorant were they
in the foundations of the True Religion? The belief of a Providence was
staggering; nor had they a true prospect of the nature of Virtue and Vice: Yet
they had a fond Opinion of the strength of their own Reason, and the Maxims
that had been handed down to them by their Predecessors, which Paul 1 Timothy 6.20.
entitles, a Science falsely so called, either meant of the Philosophers or the
Gnostics. They presumed that they were able to measure all things by their own
Reason; whence, when the Apostle came to preach the Doctrine of the Gospel at
Athens, the great School of Reason in that Age, they gave him no better a Title
than that of a Babbler, Acts 17.18. and openly mocked him, verse 32. a Seed
gatherer (...).
, one that has no more brain or sense, than a Fellow that gathers up Seeds
that are spilt in a Market, or one that has a vain and empty found without
Sense or Reason, like a foolish Mountebank; so slightly did those Rationalists
of the World think of the Wisdom of Heaven. That the Son of God should veil
himself in a Mortal Body, and suffer a disgraceful Death in it, were things
above the ken of Reason.

Besides, the World had a general disesteem of the Religion of the Jews, and
were prejudiced against any thing that came from them. Whence the Romans, that
used to incorporate the gods of other Conquered Nations in their Capitol, never
moved to have the God of Israel worshipped among them. Again, they might argue
against it with much fleshly Reason: Here is a Crucified God preached by a
Company of Mean and Ignorant persons; What Reason can we have to entertain this
Doctrine, since the Jews, who (as they tell us) had the Prophecies of him, did
not acknowledge him? Surely, had there been such Predictions, they would not
have Crucified, but Crowned their King, and expected from him the Conquest of
the Earth under their Power? What reason have we to entertain him, whom his own
Nation (among whom he lived, with whom he conversed) so unanimously, by the
Vote of the Rulers as well as the Rout, rejected? It was impossible to conquer
Minds possessed with so many Errors, and applauding themselves in their own
Reason, and to render them capable of receiving Revealed Truths without the
influence of a Divine Power.

2. It was contrary to the Customs of the World. The strength of Custom in
most Men surmounts the strength of Reason, and Men commonly are so wedded to
it, that they will be sooner divorced from any thing, than the Modes and
Patterns received from their Ancestors. The endeavoring to change Customs of
an ancient standing, has begotten Tumults and furious Mutinies among Nations,
though the change would have been much for their advantage.

This Doctrine struck at the Root of the Religion of the World, and the
Ceremonies wherein they had been educated from their Infancy, delivered to them
from their Ancestors, confirmed by the customary Observance of many Ages,
rooted in their Mindss and established by their Laws. Acts 18.13. This Fellow
persuades us to worship God contrary to the Law, against Customs, to which
they ascribed the happiness of their States, and the prosperity of their
People; and would put in the place of this Religion they would abolish, a new
one instituted by a Man whom the Jews had condemned, and put to death upon a
Cross, as an Impostor, Blasphemer, and Seditions person.

It was a Doctrine that would change the Customs of the Jews, who were
entrusted with the Oracles of God. It would bury for ever their Ceremonial
Ri^^s, delivered to them by Moses from that God, who had with a mighty hand
brought them out of Egypt, consecrated their Law with Thunders and Lightnings
from Mount Sinai, at the time of its publication, backed it with severe
Sanctions, confirmed it by many Miracles, both in the Wilderness and their
Canaan, and had continued it for so many Hundred years. They could not but
remember how they had been ravaged by other Nations, and Judgments sent upon
them when they neglected and slighted it; and with what great success they were
followed when they valued and observed it; and how they had abhorred the Author
of this new Religion, who had spoken slightly of their Traditions, till they
put him to death with Infamy. Was it an easy matter to divorce them from that
Worship, upon which were entailed (as they imagined) their Peace, Plenty, and
Glory, things of the dearest regard with Mankind? The Jews were no less devoted
to their Ceremonial Traditions, than the Heathen were to their Vain
Superstitions.

This Doctrine of the Gospel was of that nature, that the state of Religion all
over the Earth must be overturned by it; the Wisdom of the Greeks must vail to
it, the Idolatry of the People must stoop to it, and the profane Customs of
Men must moulder under the weight of it. Was it an easy matter for the Pride
of Nature to deny a customary Wisdom, to entertain a new Doctrine against the
Authority of their Ancestors; to inscribe Folly upon that which has made them
admired by the rest of the World? Nothing can be of greater esteem with Men,
than the Credit of their Lawgivers and Founders, the Religion of their
Fathers, and Prosperity of themselves; hence the Minds of Men were sharpened
against it. The Greeks, the Wisest Nation, slighted it as Foolish; the Jews,
the Religious Nation, stumbled at it, as contrary to the received
Interpretations of Ancient Prophecies and Carnal Conceits of an Earthly glory.
The dimmest Eye may behold the difficulty to change Custom, a Second Nature:
It Is as hard as to change a Wolf into a Lamb, to level a Mountain, stop the
course of the Sun, or change the Inhabitants of Africa into the color of
Europe. Custom dips Men in as durable a Dye, as Nature. The difficulties of
carrying it on against the Divine Religion of the Jew, and rooted Customs of
the Gentiles, were unconquerable by any but an Almighty Power. And in this the
Power of God has appeared wonderfully.

3. It was contrary to the Sensuality of the World, and the Lusts of the Flesh.
How much the Gentiles were overgrown with base and unworthy Lusts at the time
of the Publication of the Gospel, needs no other Memento than the Apostles
Discourse, Romans 1. As there was no Error but prevailed upon their Minds, so
there was no brutish Affection but was wedded to their Hearts. The Doctrine
proposed to them was not easy; it flattered not the Sense, but checked the
Stream of Nature. It thundered down those three great Engines whereby the Devil
had subdued the World to himself, the lust of the Flesh, the lust of the Eye,
and the pride of Life. Not only the most sordid Affections of the Flesh, but
the more refined Gratifications of the Mind: It stripped Nature both of Devil and
Man; of what was commonly esteemed great and virtuous. That which was the root
of their Fame, and the satisfaction of their Ambition, was struck at by this Ax
of the Gospel. The first Article of it ordered them to deny themselves, not to
presume upon their own worth; to lay their Understandings and Wills at the foot
of the Cross, and resign them up to one newly crucified at Jerusalem: Honors
and Wealth were to be despised, Flesh to be tamed, the Cross to be borne,
Enemies to be loved, Revenge to be satisfied, Blood to be spilt, and Torments
to be endured for the Honor of One they never saw, nor ever before heard of,
who was preached with the Circumstances of a shameful Death, enough to affright
them from the Entertainment: And the Report of a Resurrection and glorious
Ascension were things never heard of by them before, and unknown in the World,
that would not easily enter into the belief of men: The Cross, Disgrace,
Self-denial, were only discoursed of in order to the attainment of an invisible
World, and an unseen reward, which none of their Predecessors ever returned to
acquaint them with; a Patient death, contrary to the pride of Nature, was
published as the way to Happiness and a blessed Immortality: The dearest Lusts
were to be pierced to death for the honor of this new Lord. Other Religions
brought Wealth and Honor; this, struck them off from such Expectations, and
presented them with no Promise of any thing in this Life, but a prospect of
Misery: Except those inward Consolations to which before they had been utter
Strangers, and had never experimented. It made them to depend not upon
themselves, but upon the sole Grace of God. It decried all natural, all moral
Idolatry, things as dear to men as the Apple of their Eyes. It despoyl'd them
of whatsoever the Mind, Will, and Affections of men, naturally lay claim to,
and glory in. It pulled Self up by the Roots, unmanned carnal Man, and debased
the Principle of Honor and Self-satisfaction, which the World counted at that
time noble and brave. In a word, it took them off from themselves, to act like
Creatures of God's framing; to know no more than he would admit them, and do no
more than he did command them. How difficult must it needs be to reduce men,
that placed all their happiness in the Pleasures of this Life, from their
pompous Idolatry and brutish Affections, to this mortifying Religion? What
might the World say? Here is a Doctrine will render us a company of puling
Animals: Farewell Generosity, Bravery, Sense of Honor, Courage in enlarging the
Bounds of our Country, for an ardent Charity to the bitterest of our Enemies.
Here Is a Religion will rust our Swords, Canker our Arms, dispirit what we have
hitherto called Virtue, and annihilate what has been esteemed worthy and
comely among Mankind. Must we change Conquest for Suffering, the increase of
our Reputation for Self-denial, the natural Sentiment of Self-preservation for
affecting a dreadful Death? How impossible was it that a Crucified Lord, and a
Crucifying Doctrine, should be received in the World without the mighty
Operation of a Divine Power upon the Hearts of Men? And in this also the
Almighty Power of God did notably shine forth.

II. Divine Power appeared in the Instruments employed for the publishing and
propagating the Gospel. Who were

1. Mean and worthless in themselves. Not noble and dignified with an earthly
Grandeur, but of a low Condition, meanly bred: So far from any splendid
Estates, that they possessed nothing but their Nets; without any Credit and
Reputation in the World; without Comeliness and Strength; as unfit to subdue the
World by Preaching, as an Army of Hares were to conquer it by War. Not learned
Doctors, bred up at the feet of the Famous Rabbis at Jerusalem, whom Paul
calls the Princes of the World 1 Cor. 2.8.
; nor nursed up in the School of Athens, under the Philosophers and Orators of
the time: Not the Wisemen of Greece, but the Fishermen of Galilee; naturally
skilled in no Language but their own, and no more exact in that than those of
the same Condition in any other Nation: Ignorant of every thing but the
Language of their Lakes and their fishing Trade; except Paul, called sometime
after the rest to that Employment: And after the descent of the Spirit, they
were ignorant and unlearned in every thing but the Doctrine they were commanded
to publish; for the Council before whom they were summoned, proved them to be
so, which increased their wonder at them, Acts 4.13. Had it been published by a
Voice from Heaven, That Twelve poor men, taken out of Boats and Creeks, without
any help of Learning, should conquer the World to the Cross, it might have been
thought an Illusion against all the Reason of Men; yet we know it was
undertaken and accomplished by them. They published this Doctrine in Jerusalem,
and quickly spread it over the greatest part of the World. Folly outwitted
Wisdom, and Weakness over-powred Strength. The Conquest of the East by
Alexander was not so admirable as the Enterprise of these poor men. He
attempted his Conquest with the hands of a Warlike Nation, though indeed but a
small number of Thirty thousand against Multitudes, many Hundred thousands of
the Enemies; yet an Effeminate Enemy; a People inured to Slaughter and Victory
attacked great Numbers, but enfeebled by Luxury and Voluptuousness. Besides, he
was bred up to such Enterprises, had a learned Education under the best
Philosopher, and a Military Education under the best Commander, and a natural
Courage to animate him. These Instruments had no such advantage from Nature;
the Heavenly Treasure was placed in those Earthen Vessels; as Gideons Lamps in
empty Pitchers, Judges 7.16. that the excellency or Hyperbole of the Power
might be of God, 2 Cor. 4.7. and the strength of his Arm be displayed in the
infirmity of the Instruments. They were destitute of earthly Wisdom, and
therefore despised by the Jews, and derided by the Gentiles; the Publishers
were accounted Mad men, and the embracers Fools. Had they been Men of known
natural Endowments, the Power of God had been veiled under the Gifts of the
Creature.

2. Therefore a Divine Power suddenly spirited them, and fitted them for so
great a Work. Instead of Ignorance they had the knowledge of the Tongues; and
they that were scarce well skilled in their own Dialect, were instructed on the
sudden to speak the most flourishing Languages of the World, and Discourse to
the People of several Nations, the great things of God Acts 2.11.
. Though they were not enricht with any Worldly wealth and possessed nothing,
yet they were so sustained that they wanted nothing in any place where they
came, a Table was spread for them in the midst of their bitterest Enemies.
Their Fearfulness was changed into Courage, and they that a few days before
skulk'd in Corners for fear of the Jews John 20.19.
, speak boldly in the Name of that Jesus, whom they had seen put to death by
the Power of the Rulers and the Fury of the People: They reproach them with the
Murder of their Master, and out-brave that great People in the midst of their
Temple, with the glory of that Person they had so lately Crucified Acts 2.23.
Acts 3.13.
. Peter, that was not long before qualm'd at the presence of a Maid, was not
daunted at the Presence of the Council, that had their hands yet reeking with
the Blood of his Master; but being filled with the Holy Ghost, seems to dare
the Power of the Priests and Jewish Governors, and is as confident in the
Council Chamber, as he had been cowardly in the High Priests Hall Acts 4.9, etc.
, the efficacy of Grace triumphing over the Fearfulness of Nature. Whence
should this Ardor and Zeal, to propagate a Doctrine that had already born the
Scars of the Peoples Fury be, but from a mighty Power, which changed those
Hares into Lions, and stripped them of their Natural Cowardice ^o cloth them
with a Divine Courage; making them in a moment both Wise and Magnanimous,
alienating them from any Consultations with Flesh and Blood? As soon as ever
the Holy Ghost came upon them as a mighty rushing Wind, they move up and down
for the Interest of God; as Fish, after a great Clap of Thunder, are rowz'd,
and move more nimbly on the top of the Water; therefore that which did so fit
them for this undertaking is called by the title of Power from on high, Luke
24.49.

III. The Divine Power appears in the Means whereby it was propagated.

1. By Means different from the Methods of the World. Not by force of Arms, as
some Religions have taken root in the World. Mahomets Horse has trampled upon
the Heads of Men, to imprint an Alcoran in their Brains, and robbed Men of
their Goods to plant their Religion. But the Apostles bore not this Doctrine
through the World upon the Points of their Swords; they presented a Bodily
death where they would bestow an Immortal life: They employed not Troops of Men
in a Warlike posture, which had been possible for them after the Gospel was
once spread; they had no Ambition to subdue Men unto themselves, but to God;
they coveted not the Possessions of others; designed not to enrich themselves;
invaded not the Rights of Princes, nor the Liberties and Properties of the
People: They rifled them not of their Estates, nor scared them into this
Religion by a fear of losing their Worldly happiness. The Arguments they used
would naturally drive them from an entertainment of this Doctrine, rather than
allure them to be Proselytes to it: Their design was to change their Hearts,
not their Government; to wean them from the love of the World, to a love of a
Redeemer; to remove that which would ruin their Souls. It was not to enslave
them, but ransom them; they had a warfare, but not with Carnal weapons, but
such as were mighty through God for the pulling down of strong holds, 2 Cor.
10.4. they used no weapons but the Doctrine they preached. Others that have not
gained Conquests by the Edge of the Sword and the Stratagems of War, have
extended their Opinions to others by the strength of Humane Reason, and the
Insinuations of Eloquence. But the Apostles had as little flourish in their
Tongues, as edge upon their Swords: Their Preaching was not with the enticing
words of Man's wisdom 1 Cor. 2.4.
; their Presence was mean, and their Discourses without varnish; their Doctrine
was plain, a Crucified Christ; a Doctrine unlac'd, ungarnisht, untoothsom to
the World; but they had the demonstration of the Spirit, and a mighty Power for
their Companion in the work. The Doctrine they preached, viz. the Death,
Resurrection, and Ascension of Christ, are called the Powers, not of this
World, but of the World to come Heb. 6.5.
. No less than a Supernatural Power could conduct them in this Attempt, with
such weak Methods in Humane appearance.

2. Against all the Force, Power, and Wit of the World. The Divisions in the
Eastern Empire, and the feeble and consuming State of the Western, contributed
to Mahomets Success Dail^e, 15. Sermon. p. 57.
. But never was Rome in a more flourishing condition: Learning, Eloquence,
Wisdom, Strength were at the highest pitch: Never was there a more diligent
Watch against any Innovations; never was that State governed by more severe and
suspicious Princes, than at the time when Tiberius and Nero held the Rains. No
time seemed to be more unfit for the entrance of a New Doctrine than that Age,
wherein it begun to be first published; never did any Religion meet with that
Opposition from Men. Idolatry has been often settled without any Contest; but
this has suffered the same Fate with the Institutor of it, and endured the
Contradictions of Sinners against it self: And those that published it, were
not only without any Worldly prop, but exposed themselves to the Hatred and
Fury, to the Racks and Tortures of the strongest Powers on Earth. It never set
foot in any place, but the Country was in an uproar Acts 19.28.
; Swords were drawn to destroy it; Laws made to suppress it; Prisons provided
for the Professors of it; Fires kindled to consume them, and Executioners had a
perpetual employment to stifle the progress of it.

Rome in its Conquest of Countries changed not the Religion, Rites, and Modes
of their Worship: They altered their Civil Government, but left them to the
liberty of their Religion, and many times joined with them in the Worship of
their Peculiar gods; and sometime imitated them at Rome, instead of abolishing
them in the Cities they had subdued. But all their Councils were assembled, and
their Force was bandied against the Lord and against his Christ; and that City
that kindly received all manner of Superstitions, hated this Doctrine with an
irreconcilable hatred. It met with Reproaches from the Wise, and Fury from the
Potentates; it was derided by the one as the greatest Folly, and persecuted by
the other as contrary to God and Mankind; the one were afraid to lose their
Esteems by the Doctrine, and the other to lose their Authority by a Sedition
they thought a change of Religion would introduce. The Romans, that had been
Conquerors of the Earth, feared Intestine Commotions, and the falling asunder
the Links of their Empire: Scarce any of their first Emperors, but had their
Swords died Red in the Blood of the Christians. The Flesh with all its Lusts,
the World with all its Flatteries, the Statesmen with all their Craft, and the
Mighty with all their Strength joined together to extirpate it: Though many
Members were taken off by the Fires, yet the Church not only lived, but
flourished in the Furnace. Converts were made by the Death of Martyrs, and the
Flames which consumed their Bodies, were the occasion of firing Men's hearts
with a Zeal for the Profession of it. Instead of being extinguished, the
Doctrine shone more bright, and multiplied under the Sickles that were employed
to cut it down: God ordered every Circumstance so, both in the Persons that
published it, the Means whereby, and the Time when, that nothing but his Power
might appear in it, without any thing to dim and darken it.

IV. The Divine Power was conspicuous in the great success it had under all
these difficulties. Multitudes were Prophesied of to embrace it; whence the
Prophet Isaiah, after the Prophecy of the Death of Christ, Isai. 53. calls upon
the Church to enlarge her Tents, and lengthen out her Cords to receive those
Multitudes of Children that should call her Mother. Isai. 54.2, 3. for she
should break forth on the right hand and on the left, and her seed should
inherit the Gentiles: The Idolaters and Persecutors should list their Names in
the Muster-Roll of the Church.

Presently after the Descent of the Holy Ghost from Heaven upon the Apostles,
you find the hearts of Three thousand melted by a plain declaration of this
Doctrine; who were a little before so far from having a Favorable thought of
it, that some of them at least, if not all, had expressed their Rage against it,
in Voting for the Condemning and Crucifying the Author of it Acts 2.41, 42.
: But in a moment they were so altered, that they breath out Affections instead
of Fury; neither the respect they had to their Rulers, nor the honor they bore
to their Priests; not the derisions of the People, nor the threatening of
Punishment, could stop them from owning it in the face of multitudes of
Discouragements. How wonderful is it that they should so soon, and by such
small Means pay a reverence to the Servants, who had none for the Master? that
they should hear them with patience, without the same Clamor against them as
against Christ, Crucify them, Crucify them? But, that their hearts should so
suddenly be enflamed with Devotion to him dead, whom they so much abhorred when
living. It had gained footing not in a Corner of the World, but in the most
famous Cities; in Jerusalem, where Christ had been Crucified; in Antioch, where
the Name of Christians first began; in Corinth, a place of Ingenious Arts; and
Ephesus, the Seat of a noted Idol. In less than Twenty years there was never a
Province of the Roman Empire, and scarce any part of the known World but was
stored with the Professors of it. Rome, that was the Metropolis of the
Idolatrous World, had multitudes of them sprinkled in every Corner, whose Faith
was spoken of throughout the World Romans 1.8.
. The Court of Nero, that Monster of Mankind, and the cruellest and sordid'st
Tyrant that ever breathed, was not empty of sincere Votaries to it; there were
Saints in Caesar's house, while Paul was under Nero's Chain Phil. 4.
: And it maintained its standing, and flourished in spite of all the force of
Hell 250 years before any Sovereign Prince espoused it.

The Potentates of the Earth had conquered the Lands of Men, and subdued their
Bodies; these vanquished Hearts and Wills, and brought the most beloved Thoughts
under the Yoke of Christ: So much did this Doctrine overmaster the Consciences
of its Followers, that they rejoiced more at their Yoke, than others at their
Liberty; and counted it more a glory to die for the honor of it, than to live
in the profession of it. Thus did our Savior Reign and gather Subjects in the
midst of his Enemies; in which respect, in the first discovery of the Gospel,
he is described as a Mighty Conqueror, Revel. 6.2. and still conquering in the
greatness of his strength.

How great a Testimony of his Power is it, that from so small a Cloud should
rise so glorious a Sun, that should chase before it the Darkness and Power of
Hell; Triumph over the Idolatry, Superstition and Profaneness of the World? This
plain Doctrine vanquished the Obstinacy of the Jews, baffled the Understanding
of the Greeks, humbled the Pride of the Grandees, threw the Devil not only out
of Bodies, but Hearts; tore up the foundation of his Empire, and planted the
Cross where the Devil had for many Ages before established his Standard. How
much more than a humane Force is illustrious in this whole Conduct? Nothing in
any Age of the World can parallel it; it being so much against the Methods of
Nature, the Disposition of the World, and (considering the Resistance against
it) seems to surmount even the Work of Creation. Never were there in any
Profession such multitudes, not of Bedlams, but Men of Sobriety, Acuteness, and
Wisdom, that exposed themselves to the fury of the Flames, and challenged Death
in the most terrifying shapes for the Honor of this Doctrine.

To conclude, This should be often meditated upon to form our Understandings to
a full assent to the Gospel, and the Truth of it; the want of which
Consideration of Power, and the Customariness of an Education in the outward
Profession of it, is the ground of all the Profaneness under it and Apostasy
from it; the disesteem of the Truth it declares and the neglect of the Duties
it enjoins. The more we have a prospect and sense of the Impressions of Divine
Power in it, the more we shall have a Reverence of the Divine Precepts.

III. The Third thing is, The Power of God appears in the application of
Redemption, as well as in the Person Redeeming, and the publication and
propagation of the Doctrine of Redemption.

1. In the planting Grace. 2. In the Pardon of Sin. 3. In the preserving Grace.
1. In the planting Grace. There is no Expression which the Spirit of God has
thought fit in Scripture to resemble this Work to, but argues the exerting of a
Divine Power for the effecting of it. When it is expressed by Light, it is as
much as the Power of God in creating the Sun; when by Regeneration, it is as
much as the Power of God in forming an Infant, and fashioning all the Parts of
a Man; when it is called Resurrection, it is as much as the rearing of the Body
again out of putrified Matter; when it is called Creation, it is as much as
erecting a comely World out of mere Nothing, or an inform and uncomly Mass. As
we could not contrive the Death of Christ for our Redemption, so we cannot form
our Souls to the Acceptance of it; the Infinite efficacy of Grace is as
necessary for the one, as the Infinite Wisdom of God was for laying the
Platform of the other.

It Is by his Power we have whatsoever pertains to Godliness as well as Life 2
Pet. 1.3.
: He puts his Fingers upon the handle of the Lock, and turns the Heart to what
Point he pleases; the Action whereby he performs this is expressed by a word of
Force Colos. 1.19. (...).
. He has snatched us from the power of Darkness; the Action whereby it is
performed manifests it. In reference to this Power it is called Creation, which
is a production from Nothing; and Conversion is a production from something
more incapable of that state, than mere Nothing is of Being. There is a greater
distance between the Terms of Sin and Righteousness, Corruption and Grace, than
between the Terms of Nothing and Being; The greater the distance is, the more
Power is required to the producing any thing. As in Miracles, the Miracle is
the greater where the Change is the greater; and the Change is the greater
where the Distance is the greater: As it was a more signal mark of Power to
change a Dead Man to life, than to change a Sick Man to health; so that the
change here being from a Term of a greater distance, is more Powerful than the
Creation of Heaven and Earth: Therefore whereas Creation is said to be wrought
by his Hands, and the Heavens by his Fingers, or his Word; Conversion is said
to be wrought by his Arm Isai. 53.1.
: In Creation we had an Earthly; by Conversion, a Heavenly state: In Creation,
Nothing is changed into Something; in Conversion, Hell is transformed into
Heaven, which is more than the turning Nothing into a glorious Angel. In that
Thanksgiving of our Savior for the revelation of the knowledge of himself to
Babes, the simple of the World, he gives the Title to his Father, of Lord of
Heaven and Earth Mat. 11.5.
, intimating it to be an act of his Creative and Preserving Power; that Power
whereby he formed Heaven and Earth, has preserved the standing, and governed
the motions of all Creatures from the beginning of the World.

It Is resembled to the most Magnificent Act of Divine Power that God ever put
forth, viz. that in the Resurrection of our Savior Ephesians. 1.19.
, wherein there was more than an ordinary impression of Might. It Is not so
small a Power as that whereby we speak with Tongues, or whereby Christ opened
the Mouths of the Dumb and the Ears of the Deaf, or unloosed the Cords of Death
from a Person. It Is not that Power whereby our Savior wrought those stupendous
Miracles when he was in the World; but that Power which wrought a Miracle that
amazed the most knowing Angels, as well as ignorant Man. The taking off the
weight of the Sin of the World from our Savior, and advancing him in his
Humane Nature to rule over the Angelical Host, making him Head of
Principalities and Powers; as much as to say, as great as all that Power which
is displayed in our Redemption, from the first foundation to the last line in
the superstructure. It Is therefore often set forth with an Emphasis, as
Excellency of power 2 Cor. 4.7.
, and Glorious power 2 Pet. 1.3.
. To glory and virtue, we Translate it; but it is (...), Through glory and
virtue, that is, by a glorious virtue or strength.

2. The Instrument whereby it is wrought is dignified with the title of Power.
The Gospel which God uses in this great affair is called, The Power of God to
salvation, Romans 1.16. and the Rod of his strength, Psalm. 110.2. And the day of
the Gospel's appearance in the heart is emphatically called, The day of Power,
verse 3. wherein he brings down strong holds and towering Imaginations. Grotlus
in Luke 1.19.
And therefore the Angel Gabriel, which Name signifies the Power of God, was
always sent upon those Messages which concerned the Gospel, as to Daniel,
Zechary, Mary. The Gospel is the Power of God in way a of Instrumentality, but
the Almightiness of God is the Principal in a way of Efficiency. The Gospel is
the Scepter of Christ; but the Power of Christ is the Mover of that Scepter.
The Gospel is not as a bare Word spoken, and proposing the thing; but as backed
with a higher efficacy of Grace: As the Sword does instrumentally cut, but the
Arm that wields it gives the blow, and makes it successful in the stroke. But
this Gospel is the Power of God, because he edgeth this by his own Power, to
surmount all resistance, and vanquish the greatest Malice of that Man he
designs to work upon.

The Power of God is conspicuous,

1. In turning the Heart of Man against the strength of the Inclinations of
Nature. In the forming of Man of the Dust of the Ground, as the Matter
contributed nothing to the Action whereby God formed it, so it had no Principle
of resistance contrary to the design of God: But in Converting the Heart, there
is not only wanting a principle of Assistance from him in this work, but the
whole strength of Corrupt Nature is alarmed to combat against the Power of his
Grace. When the Gospel is presented, the Understanding is not only ignorant of
it, but the Will perverse against it; the one does not relish, and the other
does not esteem the Excellency of the Object. The Carnal wisdom in the Mind
contrives against it, and the Rebell^ous Will puts the orders in execution
against the Counsel of God, which requires the invincible Power of God to
enlighten the dark Mind, to know what it slights; and the fierce Will, to
embrace what it loathes. The stream of Nature cannot be turned, but by a Power
above Nature: It Is not all the Created Power in Heaven and Earth can change a
Swine into a Man, or a venomous Toad into a holy and illustrious Angel. Yet
this work is not so great in some respect, as the stilling the fierceness of
Nature, the silencing the swelling Waves in the heart, and the casting out
those brutish Affections which are born and grow up with us. There would be no,
or far less resistance in a mere Animal to be changed into a Creature of a
higher rank, than there is in a Natural Man to be turned into a serious
Christian.

There is in every Natural Man a stoutness of heart, a stiff-neck,
unwillingness to good, forwardness to evil: Infinite Power quells this
stoutness, demolisheth these strong holds, turns this wild Ass in her course,
and routs those Armies of turbulent Nature against the Grace of God. To stop
the Floods of the Sea is not such an act of Power, as to turn the Tide of the
Heart. This Power has been employed upon every Convert in the World; What
would you say then, if you knew all the Channels in which it has run since the
days of Adam? If the alteration of one Rocky heart into a Pool of Water be a
wonder of Power, what then is the calming and sweetning by his Word those One
hundred forty four Thousand of the Tribes of Israel, and that numberless
Multitude of all Nations and People that shall stand before the Throne Revel.
7.3.
, which were all naturally so many raging Seas? Not one Converted Soul from
Adam to the last that shall be in the End of the World, but is a Trophy of the
Divine Conquest. None were pure Volunteers, nor listed themselves in his
Service, till he put forth his strong Arm to draw them to him. No man's
Understanding but was chained with Darkness, and fond of it; no Man but had
Corruption in his Will, which was dearer to him than any thing else which could
be proposed for his True happiness. These things are most evident in Scripture
and Experience.

2. As it is wrought against the Inclinations of Nature; so against a multitude
of Corrupt habits rooted in the Souls of Men. A distemper in its first invasion
may more easily be cured, than when it becomes Chronical and inveterate. The
strength of a Disease, or the complication of many, magnifies the Power of the
Physician, and efficacy of the Medicine that tames and expels it. What Power is
that which has made Men stoop, when Natural habits have been grown Giants by
Custom; when the putrefaction of Nature has engendered a multitude of Worms;
when the Ulcers are many and deplorable; when many Cords, wherewith God would
have bound the Sinner, have been broken, and (like Sampson) the wicked Heart
has gloried in its strength and grown more proud, that it has stood like a
strong Fort against those Batteries, under which others have fallen flat?

Every Proud thought, every Evil habit captivated, serves for matter of Triumph
to the Power of God 2 Cor. 10.5.
. What resistance will a multitude of them make, when one of them is enough to
hold the Faculty under its dominion, and intercept its Operations? So many
Customary habits, so many Old natures, so many different strengths added to
Nature, every one of them standing as a Barricado against the way of Grace; all
the Errors the Understanding is possessed with, think the Gospel Folly; all the
Vices the Will is filled with, count it the Fetter and Band. Nothing so
contrary to Man, as to be thought a Fool; nothing so contrary to Man, as to
enter into slavery. It Is no easy matter to plant the Cross of Christ upon a
Heart guided by many Principles against the Truth of it, and byast by a World
of Wickedness against the Holiness of it. Nature renders a Man too feeble and
indisposed, and Custom renders a Man more weak and unwilling to change his Hue
Jer. 13.23.
. To dispossess Man then of his Self-esteem and Self-excellency; to make room
for God in the Heart, where there was none but for Sin, as dear to him as
himself; to hurl down the Pride of Nature; to make stout Imaginations stoop to
the Cross; to make desires of Self-advancement sink under a Zeal for the
glorifying of God, and an overruling design for his Honor, is not to be
ascribed to any, but an Outstretched A^m wielding the Sword of the Spirit. To
have a Heart full of the Fear of God, that was just before filled with a
Contempt of him; to have a sense of his Power, an eye to his Glory, admiring
Thoughts of his Wisdom, a Faith in his Truth, that had lower Thoughts of him
and all his Perfections, than he had of a Creature: To have a hatred of his
Habitual Lusts, that had brought him in much Sensitive pleasure; to loath them
as much as he loved them; to cherish the Duties he hated; to live by Faith in,
and Obedience to the Redeemer, who was before so heartily under the conduct of
Satan and Self; to chase the acts of Sin from his Members, and the pleasing
thoughts of Sin from his Mind; to make a stout Wretch willingly fall down,
crawl upon the ground, and adore that Savior whom before he out-dar'd, is a
Triumphant Act of Infinite Power that can subdue all things to it self, and
break those multitude of Locks and Bolts that were upon us.

3. Against a multitude of Temptations and Interests. The Temptations Rich Men
have in this World are so numerous and strong, that the entrance of one of them
into the Kingdom of Heaven, that is, the entertainment of the Gospel is made by
our Savior an impossible thing with Men, and procurable only by the Power of
God Luke 18.24, 25, 26.
. The Divine Strength only can separate the World from the Heart, and the Heart
from the World. There must be an Incomprehensible Power to chase away the
Devil, that had so long, so strong a footing in the Affections, to render the
Soil he had sown with so many Tares and Weeds, capable of good Grain; to make
Spirits, that had found the sweetness of Worldly prosperity, wrapped up all their
Happiness in it, and not only bent down, but (as it were) buried in Earth and
Mud, to be loosened from those beloved Cords, to disrelish the Earth for a
Crucified Christ; I say, this must be the effect of an Almighty Power.

4. The Manner of Conversion shows no less the Power of God. There is not only
an irresistible Force used in it, but an agreeable Sweetness. The Power is so
Efficacious, that nothing can vanquish it; and so Sweet, that none did ever
complain of it. The Almighty Virtue displays it self Invincibly, yet without
Constraint; compelling the Will without offering Violence to it, and making it
cease to be Will: Not forcing it, but changing it; not dragging it, but drawing
it; making it will where before it nill'd; removing the Corrupt Nature of the
Will, without invading the Created Nature and Rights of the Faculty; not
working in us against the Physical nature of the Will, but working to will
Phil. 2.13.
. This work is therefore called Creation, Resurrection, to show its
Irresistible Power; It Is called Illumination, Persuasion, Drawing, to show the
suitableness of its Efficacy to the nature of the Humane Faculties: It Is a
drawing with Cords, which testifies an Invincible strength; but, with Cords of
Love, which testifies a Delightful conquest: It Is hard to determine whether it
be more Powerful than Sweet, or more Sweet than Powerful. It Is no mean part of
the Power of God to twist together Victory and Pleasure; to give a blow as
delightful as strong, as pleasing to the Sufferer, as it is sharp to the Sinner.

II. The Power of God in the application of Redemption is evident in the
Pardoning a Sinner.

1. In the Pardon it self. The Power of God is made the ground of his Patience;
or the reason why he is Patient, is, because he would show his Power Romans 9.22.
. It Is a part of Magnanimity to pass by Injuries: As weaker Stomachs cannot
concoct the tougher food, so weak Minds cannot digest the harder Injuries; He
that passes over a Wrong, is superior to his Adversary that does it. When God
speaks of his own Name as Merciful, he speaks first of himself as Powerful.
Exodus 34.6. The Lord, the Lord God, that is, the Lord the strong Lord, Jehovah
the strong Jehovah. Let the Power of my Lord be great, says Moses, when he
prays for the Forgiveness of the People Numb 14.17. (...), be exalted. Sept.
(...) St^ength, etc.
: The word Jigdal is written with a great Jod, or a Jod above the other
Letters. The Power of God in Pardoning is advanced beyond an ordinary strain,
beyond the Creative strength. In the Creation, he had power over the Creatures;
in this, power over himself: In Creation, not Himself, but the Creatures were
the Object of his Power; in that, no Attribute of his Nature could article
against his Design. In the Pardon of a Sinner, after many Overtures made to him
and refused by him, God exercises a power over himself; for the Sinner has
dishonored God, pr^^ok'd his Justice, abused his Goodness, done injury to all
those Attributes which are necessary to his relief: It was not so in Creation,
nothing was incapable of disobliging God from bringing it into Being. The Dust,
which was the Matter of Adams Body, need^d only the extrinsick Power of God to
form it into a Man, and inspire it with a living Soul: It had not rendered it
self obnoxious to Divine Justice, nor was capable to excite any disputes
between his Perfections. But after the entrance of Sin, and the merit of Death,
thereby there was a resistance in Justice to the free Remission of Man: God was
to exercise a Power over himself, to answer his Justice, and pardon the Sinner;
as well as a power over the Creature, to reduce the Runaway and Rebel. Unless
we have recourse to the Infiniteness of Gods Power, the infiniteness of our
Guilt will weigh us down: We must consider not only that we have a mighty Guilt
to press us, but a mighty God to relieve us. In the same act of his being our
Righteousness, he is our Strength: In the Lord have I righteousness and
strength, Isai. 45.24.

2. In the sense of Pardon. When the Soul has been wounded with the sense of
sin, and its Iniquities have star'd it in the face; the raising the Soul from a
despairing condition, and lifting it above those Waters which terrified it; to
cast the light of Comfort, as well as the light of Grace, into a heart covered
with more than an Egyptian Darkness, is an act of his Infinite and Creating
Power; Isai. 57.19. I create the fruit of the lips, peace. Men may wear out
their Lips with numbering up the Promises of Grace and Arguments of Peace; but
all will signify no more without a Creative Power, than if all Men and Angels
should call to that White upon the Wall to shine as splendidly as the Sun. God
only can create Jerusalem, and every Child of Jerusalem a rejoicing Isai. 65.18.
. A Man is no more able to apply to himself any word of Comfort under the sense
of Sin, than he is able to Convert himself, and turn the proposals of the Word
into gracious Affections in his heart. To restore the joy of Salvation, is in
David's Judgment an act of Sovereign Power, equal to that of creating a clean
heart, Psalm. 51.10, 12. Alas, it is a state like to that of Death; as Infinite
Power can only raise from Natural death, so from a Spiritual death, also from a
Comfortless death: In his favor there is life; in the want of his Favor there
is death. The Power of God has so placed Light in the Sun, that all Creatures
in the World, all the Torches upon Earth kindled together cannot make it Day,
if that does not rise: so all the Angels in Heaven and Men upon Earth, are not
competent Chirurgions for a wounded Spirit. The cure of our Spiritual Ulcers,
and the pouring in Balm, is an Act of Sovereign Creative Power: It Is more
visible in silencing a Tempestuous Conscience, than the Power of our Savior
was in the stilling the stormy Winds and the roaring Waves. As none but
Infinite Power can remove the Guilt of Sin, so none but Infinite Power can
remove the Despairing sense of it.

III. This Power is evident in the preserving Grace. As the Providence of God
is a manifestation of his Power in a continued Creation; so the preservation of
Grace, is a manifestation of his Power in a continued Regeneration. To keep a
Nation under the Yoke, is an act of the same Power that subdued it. It Is this
that strengthens Men in suffering against the Fury of Hell Colos. 1.13.
; it is this that keeps them from falling against the force of Hell, the Fathers
hand, John 10.29. His strength abates and moderates the violence of
Temptations; his Staff sustains his People under them; his Might defeats the
Power of Satan, and bruiseth him under a Believers feet. The Counterworkings of
Indwelling Corruption; the reluctances of the Flesh against the breathings of
the Spirit; the fallacy of the Senses and the rovings of the Mind, have ability
quickly to stifle and extinguish Grace, if it were not maintained by that
Powerful blast that first inbreathed it. No less Power is seen in perfecting
it, than was in planting it 2 Pet. 1.3.
; no less in fulfilling the work of Faith, than in ingrafting the Word of
Faith, 2 Thessalonians. 1.11.

The Apostle well understood the Necessity and Efficacy of it in the
preservation of Faith, as well as in the first infusion, when he expresses
himself in those terms of a Greatness or Hyperbole of Power, his Mighty Power,
or the Power of his Might, Ephesians. 1.19. The Salvation he bestows, and the
Strength whereby he effects it, are joined together in the Prophets Song, Isai.
12.2. The Lord is my strength and my salvation: And indeed, God does more
magnify his Power in continuing a Believer in the World, a weak and
half-rigg'd Vessel, in the midst of so many Sands whereon it might split; so
many Rocks whereon it might dash; so many Corruptions within, and so many
Temptations without; than if he did immediately transport him into Heaven, and
cloth him with a perfectly Sanctified Nature.

To Conclude: What is there then in the World which is destitute of Notices of
Divine Power? Every Creature affords us the Lesson; all acts of Divine
Government are the marks of it. Look into the Word, and the manner of its
propagation instructs us in it; your Changed Natures, your Pardoned Guilt, your
Shining Comfort, your quelled Corruptions, the standing of your staggering
Graces, are sufficient to preserve a sense, and prevent a forgetfulness of this
great Attribute, so necessary for your support, and conducing so much to your
comfort.

Uses.
I. Of Information and Instruction.

1. If Incomprehensible and Infinite Power belongs to the Nature of God, then
Jesus Christ has a Divine Nature, because the Acts of Power proper to God are
ascribed to him. This Perfection of Omnipotence does unquestionably pertain to
the Deity, and is an incommunicable Property, and the same with the Essence of
God: He therefore to whom this Attribute is ascribed, is essentially God.

This is challenged by Christ in conjunction with Eternity; Revel. 1.8. I am
Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the ending, says the Lord, which is, and
which was, and which is to come, the Almighty. This the Lord Christ speaks of
himself. He who was equal with God, proclaims himself by the Essential title of
the Godhead, part of which he repeats again verse 11. and this is the Person
which walks in the midst of the seven Golden Candlesticks; the Person that was
dead and now lives, verse. 17, 18. which cannot possibly be meant of the Father,
the first Person, who can never come under that denomination of having been
dead. Being therefore adorned with the same Title, he has the same Deity; and
though his Omnipotence be only positively asserted, v. 8. yet his Eternity
being asserted, v. 11, 17. it infers his Immense Power; for he that is
Eternal without limits of Time, must needs be conceived Powerful, without any
dash of Infirmity.

Again, when He is said to be a Child born and a Son given, in the same breath
he is called the Mighty God Isai 9.6.
. It Is introduced as a ground of Comfort to the Church, to preserve their Hopes
in the accomplishment of the Promises made to them before. They should not
imagine him to have only the Infirmity of a Man, though he was veiled in the
Appearance of a Man. No, they should look through the disguise of his Flesh, to
the Might of his Godhead. The Attribute of Mighty is added to the Title GOD,
because the consideration of Power is most capable to sustain the drooping
Church in such a condition, and to prop up her hopes. It Is upon this account he
says of himself, that whatsoever things the Father does, those also does the
Son likewise, John 5.19. In creation of Heaven, Earth, Sea, and the
Preservation of all Creatures, the Son works with the same Will, Wisdom,
Virtue, Power, as the Father works: Not as two may concur in an Action in a
different manner; as an Agent and an Instrument, a Carpenter and his Tools; but
in the same manner of operation, (...), which we Translate Likeness, which does
not express so well the Emphasis of the word. There is no diversity of Action
between Us; what the Father does, that I do by the same Power, with the same
Easiness in every respect; there is the same Creative, Productive, Conservative
Power in both of us; and that not in one work that is done ad extra, but in
All, in whatsoever the Father does. In the same manner; not by a delegated, but
Natural and Essential Power, by one undivided operation and manner of working.

1. The Creation, which is a work of Omnipotence, is more than once ascribed to
him. This he does own himself; the Creation of the Earth, and of Man upon it;
the stretching out the Heavens by his Hands, and the forming of all the Host of
them by his Command, Isai. 45.12. He is not only the Creator of Israel, the
Church, verse 12. but of the whole World, and every Creature on the face of the
Earth, and in the Glories of the Heavens; which is repeated also verse 18.
where in this act of Creation he is called God himself, and speaks of himself
in the Term Jehovah; and swears by himself, verse 23. What does he swear? That
unto me every knee shall bow, and every tongue shall swear. Is this Christ?
Yes, if the Apostle may be believed, who applies it to him Romans 14.11. to prove
the Appearance of all Men before the Judgment Seat of Christ, whom the Prophet
calls, verse 15. a God that hides himself; and so he was a hidden God when
obscured in our fleshly Infirmities. He was in conjunction with the Father when
the Sea received his Decree, and the foundations of the Earth were appointed;
not as a Spectator, but as an Artificer, ^or so the word in Prove. 8.30.
signifies, As one brought up with him; it signifies also, A cunning workman
Cant. 7.1.
. He was the East, or the Sun from whence sprang all the light of life and
Being to the Creature; so the word (...) verse 22. which is translated Before
his works of old, is rendered by some, and signifies the East as well as Before:
But if it notes only his existence before, it is enough to prove his Deity.

The Scripture does not only allow him an existence before the World, but
exalts him as the cause of the World: A thing may precede another that is not
the cause of that which follows; a precedence in Age does not entitle one
Brother or thing the cause of another: But our Savior is not only Ancienter
than the World, but is the Creator of the World, Heb. 1.10, 11. Who laid the
foundations of the Earth, and the Heavens are the works of his hands. So great
an Elogy cannot be given to one destitute of Omnipotence. Since the distance
between Being and not Being is so vast a Gulf that cannot be surmounted and
stepped over, but by an Infinite Power: He is the First and the Last, that called
the Generations from the beginning Isai. 41.4.
, and had an Almighty voice to call them out of Nothing. In which regard he is
called the Everlasting Father, Isai. 9.6. as being the Efficient of Creation;
as God is called the Father of the Rain, or as Father is taken for the Inventor
of an Art; as Jubal, the first framer and Inventor of Music, is called the
Father of such as handle the Harp, Gen 4.21. And that Person is said to make
the Sea, and form the dry Land by his hands, Psalm. 95.5, 6. against whom we are
exhorted not to harden our hearts, verse 8. which is applied to Christ by the
Apostle, Heb. 3.8. in the 15 verse he is called a great King, and a great God
our Maker. The Places wherein the Creation is attributed to Christ, those that
are the Antagonists of his Deity, would evade by understanding them of the New
or Evangelical, not of the first, Old and Material Creation: But what
appearance is there for such a sense? Consider,

1. That of Heb. 1.10, 11. it is spoken of that Earth and Heavens which were in
the beginning of Time; it is that Earth that shall perish, that Heaven that
shall be folded up, that Creation that shall grow old toward a decay; that is,
only the visible and material Creation: The Spiritual shall endure for ever; it
grows not old to decay, but grows up to a perfection; it sprouts up to its
happiness, not to its detriment. The same Person creates that shall destroy,
and the same World is created by him that shall be destroyed by him, as well as
it subsisted by virtue of his Omnipotency.

2. Can that also Heb. 1.2. By whom also he made the worlds, speaking of
Christ, bear the same plea? It was the same Person by whom God spoke to us in
these last times, the same Person which he has constituted Heir of all things,
by whom also he made the worlds: And the Particle Also, intimates it to be a
distinct act from his Speaking or Prophetical Office, whereby he restored and
new created the World, as well as the rightful foundation God had to make him
Heir of all things. It refers likewise, not to the time of Christ's speaking
upon Earth; but to something past, and something different from the publication
of the Gospel: It Is not, does make, which had been more likely if the Apostle
had meant only the New Creation; but has made (...).
, referring to time long since past, something done before his appearance upon
Earth as a Prophet. By whom also he made the Worlds, or Ages, all things
subjected to, or measured by Time; which must be meant according to the Jewish
Phrase of this Material visible World: So they entitle God in their Liturgy,
the Lord of Ages, that is, the Lord of the World, and all Ages and Revolutions
of the World, from the Creation to the last Period of Time. If any thing were
in Being before this frame of Heaven and Earth, and within the compass of Time,
it received Being and Duration from the Son of God. The Apostle would give an
Argument to prove the equity of making him Heir of all things as Mediator,
because he was the Framer of all things as God. He may well be the Heir or Lord
of Angels as well as Men, who created Angels as well as Men: All things were
justly under his Power as Mediator, since they derived their Existence from him
as Creator.

3. But Thirdly, what evasion can there be for that Coloss. 1.16. By him were
all things created that are in Heaven and that are in Earth, whether they be
Thrones, or Dominions, or Principalities, or Powers, all things were created by
him and for him. He is said to be the Creator of Material and Visible things,
as well as Spiritual and Invisible; of things in Heaven, which needed no
restoration, as well as things on Earth, which were polluted by Sin, and stood
in need of a new Creation. How could the Angels belong to the new Creation, who
had never put off the honor and purity of the first? Since they never divested
themselves of their original Integrity, they could not be reinvested with that
which they never lost. Besides, suppose the Holy Angels be one way or other
reduced as parts of the new Creation, as being under the Mediatory Government
of our Savior, as their Head, and in regard of their confirmation by him in
that happy state. In what manner shall the Devils be ran'kd among new
Creatures? They are called Principalities and Powers as well as the Angels, and
may come under the Title of Things invisible: That they are called
Principalities and Powers is plain, Ephesians. 6.12. For we wrestle not against
Flesh and Blood, but against Principalities and Powers, the Rulers of the
Darkness of this World; against Spiritual wickedness in high places. Good
Angels are not there meant, for what War have Believers with them, or they with
Believers? They are the Guardians of them, since Christ has taken away the
Enmity between our Lord and theirs, in whose quarrel they were engaged against
us: And since the Apostle speaking of All things created by him, expresses it
so, that it cannot be conceived he should except any thing; how come the
finally Impenitent and Unbelievers, which are Things in Earth, and visible, to
be listed here in the Roll of New Creatures? None of these can be called New
Creatures, because they are subjected to the Government of Christ; no more than
the Earth and Sea, and the Animals in it, are made New Creatures, because they
are all under the Dominion of Christ and his Providential Government. Again,
the Apostle manifestly makes the Creation he here speaks of, to be the
Material, and not the New Creation; for that he speaks of afterward as a
distinct act of our Lord Jesus under the Title of Reconciliation, Coloss. 1.20,
21. which was the restoration of the World, and the satisfying for that Curse
that lay upon it. His intent is here to show, that not an Angel in Heaven, nor
a Creature upon Earth, but was placed in their several degrees of excellency by
the Power of the Son of God, who after that act of Creation and the entrance of
Sin, was the Reconciler of the World through the Blood of his Cross.

4. There is another place as clear, John 1.3. All things were made by him, and
without him was nothing made that was made. The Creation is here ascribed to
him; Affirmatively, All things were made by him; Negatively, There was nothing
made without him: And the Words are Emphatical, (...), Not one thing; excepting
nothing; including invisible things, as well as things conspicuous to sense
only, mentioned in the story of the Creation, Genesis 1. not only the entire Mass,
but the distinct parcels, the smallest Worm and the highest Angel, owe their
Original to him. And if not one thing, then the Matter was not created to his
hands; and his work consisted not only in the forming things from that Matter:
If that one thing of Matter were excepted, a chief thing were excepted; if not
one thing were excepted, then he created Something of Nothing, because Spirits,
as Angels and Souls, are not made of any pre-existing or fore-created Matter.
How could the Evangelist phrase it more extensively and comprehensively? This
is a Character of Omnipotency; to create the World, and every thing in it, of
Nothing, requires an Infinite Virtue and Power. If all things were created by
him, they were not created by him as Man, because Himself, as Man, was not in
Being before the Creation: If all things were made by him, then Himself was not
made, Himself was not created; and to be existent without being made, without
being created, is to be unboundedly Omnipotent. And if we understand it of the
New Creation, as they do that will not allow him an existence in his Deity
before his Humanity, it cannot be true of that; for how could he regenerate
Abraham, make Simeon and Anna new Creatures, who waited for the salvation of
Israel, and form John Baptist and fill him with the Holy Ghost even from the
womb Luke 1.15.
(who belonged to the new Creation, and was to prepare the way) if Christ had
not a Being before him? The Evangelist alludes to, and explains the History of
the Creation in the beginning, and acquaints us what was meant by God said, so
often, viz. the Eternal Word, and describes him in his Creative Power,
manifested in the framing the World, before he describes him in his
Incarnation, when he came to lay the Foundation of the restoration of the
World, John 1.14. The Word was made flesh; this Word who was with God, who was
God, who made all things, and gave Being to the most glorious Angels and the
meanest Creature without exception; this Word, in time, was made flesh.

5. The Creation of things mentioned in these Scriptures cannot be attributed
to him as an Instrument. As if when it is said, God created all things by him,
and by him made the Worlds, we were to understand the Father to be the Agent,
and the Son to be a Tool in his Fathers hand, as an Ax in the hand of a
Carpenter, or a File in the hand of a Smith, or a Servant acting by Command as
the Organ of his Master. The Preposition Per., or (...), does not always
signify an Instrumental cause: When it is said, that the Apostle gave the
Thessalonians a Command by Jesus Christ, 1 Thessalonians. 4 2. was Christ the
Instrument, and not the Lord of that Command the Apostle gave? The immediate
Operation of Christ dwelling in the Apostles, was that whereby they gave the
Commands to their Disciples. When we are called by God, 1 Cor. 1.9. Is he the
Instrumental, or Principal cause of our effectual Vocation? And can the Will of
God be the Instrument of putting Paul into the Apostleship, or the Sovereign
cause of investing him with that Dignity, when he calls himself an Apostle by
the will of God? Ephesians. 1.3. And when all things are said to be through God, as
well as of him, must he be counted the Instrumental cause of his own Creation,
Counsels, and Judgments Romans 11.36.
? When we mortify the deeds of the Body through the Spirit, Romans 8.13. or keep
the Treasure of the Word by the Holy Ghost, 2 Timothy 1.14. Is the Holy Ghost of
no more dignity in such acts than Instrument? Nor does the gaining a thing by a
Person make him a mere Instrument or Inferior; as when a Man gains his Right in
a way of Justice against his Adversary by the Magistrate, is the Judge
inferior to the Suppliant? If the Word were an Instrument in Creation, it must
be a created or uncreated Instrument: If Created, it could not be true what the
Evangelist says, that All things were made by him, since himself the Principal
thing could not be made by himself; if Uncreated, he was God, and so acted by a
Divine Omnipotency, which surmounts an Instrumental cause. But indeed, an
Instrument is impossible in Creation, since it is wrought only by an act of the
Divine Will. Do we need any Organ to an act of Volition? the efficacious Will
of the Creator is the cause of the Original of the Body of the World, with its
particular Members and exact Harmony: It was formed by a Word and established
by a Command Psalm. 33.9.
; the beauty of the Creation stood up at the Precept of his Will. Nor was the
Son a Partial cause; as when many are said to build a House, one works one
part, and another frames another part: God created all things by the immediate
operation of the Son, in the unity of Essence, Goodness, Power, Wisdom; not an
extrinsick, but a connatural Instrument. As the Sun does illustrate all things
by his Light, and quickens all things by his Heat; so God created the Worlds by
Christ, as he was the brightness or splendour of his Glory, the exact image of
his Person; which follows the declaration of his making the Worlds by him Heb.
1.3, 4.
, to show, that he acted not as an Instrument, but one in Essential conjunction
with him; as Light and Brightness with the Sun. But suppose he did make the
World as a kind of Instrument, He was then before the World, not bounded by
Time; and Eternity cannot well be conceived belonging to a Being without
Omnipotency: He is the End as well as the Author of the Creatures Colos. 1.16.
; not only the Principle which gave them Being, but the Sea into whose glory
they run and dissolve themselves, which consists not with the meaness of an
Instrument.

2. As Creation, so Preservation is ascribed to him, Colos. 1.17. By him all
things consist. As he preceded all things in his Eternity, so he establishes
all things by his Omnipotency, and fixes them in their several Centers, that
they sink not into that nothing from whence he fetched them. By him they
flourish in their several Beings, and observe the Laws and Orders he first
appointed: That Power of his which extracted them from insensible Nothing,
upholds them in their several Beings with the same facility as he spoke Being
into them, even by the word of his Power Heb. 1 3.
, and by one Creative continued Voice called all Generations from the beginning
to the Period of the World Isai. 41.4.
, and causes them to flourish in their several seasons. It Is by him Kings
reign, and Princes decree justice, and all things are confined within the
limits of Government. All which are Acts of an Infinite Power.

3.. Resurrection is also ascribed to him. The Body crumbled to Dust, and that
Dust blown to several quarters of the World, cannot be gathered in its distinct
parts, and new formed for the entertainment of the Soul, without the strength
of an Infinite Arm. This he will do and more; change the vileness of an Earthly
Body into the glory of an Heavenly one; a Dusty flesh into a Spiritual Body,
which is an argument of a Power Invincible, to which all things cannot but
stoop; for it is by such an operation, which testifies an ability to subdue all
things to himself Phil. 3.21.
; especially when he works it with the same ease as he did the Creation, by the
power of his Voice. John 5.28. All that are in the Graves shall hear his voice
and shall come forth: Speaking them into a restored life from insensible Dust,
as he did into Being from an empty Nothing. The greatest acts of Power are
owned to belong to Creation, Preservation, Resurrection: Omnipotence therefore
is his Right; and therefore a Deity cannot be denied to him that inherits a
Perfection essential to none but God, and impossible to be entrusted in, or
managed by the hands of any Creatures.

And this is no mean comfort to those that believe in him: He is, in regard of
his Power, the Horn of salvation; so Zachariah sings of him, Luke 1.69. Nor
could there be any more Mighty found out upon whom God could have laid our help
Psalm. 89.19.
. No reason therefore to doubt his ability to save to the utmost, who has the
Power of Creation, Preservation, and Resurrection in his hands. His Promises
must be accomplished, since nothing can resist him: He has Power to fulfill his
Word, and bring all things to a final issue, because he is Almighty; by his
Outstretched Arm in the Deliverance of his Israel from Egypt, (for it was his
Arm 1 Cor. 10.) he showed that he was able to deliver us from Spiritual Egypt.
The charge of Mediator to expiate Sin, vanquish Hell, form a Church, conduct
and perfect it, are not to be effected by a Person of less ability than
Infinite. Let this Almightiness of his be the Bottom, wherein to cast and fix
the Anchor of our Hopes.

2. Information. Hence may be inferred the Deity of the Holy Ghost. Works of
Omnipotency are ascribed to the Spirit of God: By the motion of the Wings of
this Spirit, as a Bird over her Eggs, was that rude and unshapen Mass hatched
into a comely World Genesis 1.2. So the word Moved properly signifies.
. The Stars, or perhaps the Angels, are meant by the garnishing of the Heavens
in the Verse before the Text, were brought forth in their comeliness and
dignity, as the ornaments of the upper World, by this Spirit; By his Spirit he
has garnished the Heavens. To this Spirit Job ascribes the formation both of
the Body and Soul under the Title of Almighty, Job 33.4. The Spirit of God has
made me, and the breath of the Almighty has given me life. Resurrection,
another work of Omnipotency is attributed to him, Romans 8.11. The Conception of
our Savior in the Womb; the Miracles that he wrought, were by the Power of the
Spirit in him. Power is a Title belonging to him, and sometimes both are put
together, 1 Thessalonians. 1.5. and other places. And that great Power of changing the
Heart, and sanctifying a polluted Nature, a work greater than Creation, is
frequently acknowledged in the Scripture to be the peculiar act of the Holy
Ghost. The Father, Son, Spirit, are one Principle in Creation, Resurrection,
and all the Works of Omnipotence.

3. Inference from the Doctrine. The Blessedness of God is hence evidenced. If
God be Almighty, he can want nothing; all want speaks Weakness. If he does what
he will, he cannot be miserable; all Misery consists in those things which
happen contrary to our will. There is nothing can hinder his Happiness, because
nothing can resist his Power. Since he is Omnipotent nothing can hurt him,
nothing can strip him of what he has, of what he is Sal unde, Tit. 39.
. If he can do whatsoever he will, he cannot want any thing that he wills: He
is as happy, as great, as glorious, as he will; for he has a perfect liberty
of Will to will, and a perfect Power to attain what he will; His Will cannot be
restrained, nor his Power mated. It would be a defect in Blessedness, to Will
what he were not able to do: Sorrow is the result of a want of Power, with a
presence of Will. Pont. Part 6. med. 16. p 531.
If he could Will any thing which he could not effect, he would be miserable,
and no longer God: He can do whatsoever he pleases, and therefore can want
nothing that pleases him. He cannot be happy, the original of whose Happiness
is not in himself: Nothing can be infinitely happy, that is limited and bounded.

4. Hence is a ground for the Immutability of God. As he is incapable of
changing his Resolves, because of his Infinite Wisdom; so he is incapable of
being forced to any Change, because of his Infinite Power. Being Almighty, He
can be no more changed from Power to Weakness; than being All-wise, He can be
changed from Wisdom to Folly; or being Omniscient, from Knowledge to Ignorance.
He cannot be altered in his Purposes, because of his Wisdom; nor in the manner
and method of his Actions, because of his Infinite strength. Men indeed, when
their Designs are laid deepest, and their Purposes stand firmest, yet are
forced to stand still, or change the manner of the execution of their Resolves,
by reason of some outward Accidents that obstruct them in their course; for
having not Wisdom to foresee future hindrances, they have not power to prevent
them, or strength to remove them, when they unexpectedly interpose themselves
between their desire and performance: But no created Power has strength enough
to be a bar against God. By the same act of his Will that he resolves a thing,
He can puff away any Impediments that seem to rise up against him. He that
wants no Means to effect his Purposes, cannot be checked by any thing that
rises up to stand in his way: Heaven, Earth, Sea, the deepest places, are too
weak to resist his Will Psalm. 135.6.
. The Purity of the Angels will not, and the Devils Malice cannot frustrate his
Will; the one voluntarily obeys the beck of his hand, and the other are
vanquished by the Power of it. What can make him change his Purposes, who (if he
please) can dash the Earth against the Heavens in the twinkling of an Eye,
untying the World from its Center, clap the Stars and Elements together into
one Mass, and blow the whole Creation of Men and Devils into Nothing. Because
he is Almighty, therefore he is Immutable.

5. Hence is inferred the Providence of God, and his Government of the World.
His Power as well as his Wisdom gives him a right to Govern: Nothing can equal
him, therefore nothing can share the Command with him; since All things are his
Works, it is fittest they should be under His Order: He that frames a work, is
fittest to guide and govern it. God has the most Right to Govern, because he
has Knowledge to direct his Power, and Power to execute the Results of his
Wisdom: He knows what is convenient to order, and has Strength to effect what
he orders. As his Power would be oppressive without Goodness and Wisdom; so his
Goodness and Wisdom would be fruitless without Power. An Artificer that has
lost his Hands may direct, but cannot make an Engine: A Pilot that has lost
his Arms, may advise the way of Steerage, but cannot hold the Helm; something
is wanting in him to be a complete Governor: But since both Counsel and Power
are Infinite in God, hence results an Infinite Right to Govern, and an Infinite
Fitness, because his Will cannot be resisted, his Power cannot be enfeebled or
diminished; he can quicken and increase the strength of all Means as he
pleases. He can hold all things in the World together, and preserve them in
those Functions wherein he settled them, and conduct them to those ends for
which he designed them.

Every Artificer, the more Excellent he is, and the more Excellency of Power
appears in his work, is the more careful to maintain and cherish it. Those that
deny Providence, do not only ravish from him the bowels of his Goodness, but
strip him of a main exercise of his Power, and engender in Men a suspicion of
Weariness and Feebleness in him; as though his strength had been spent in
making them, that none is left to guide them. They would make him Headless in
regard of his Wisdom, and Bowelless in regard of his Goodness, and Armless in
regard of his Strength: If he did not, or were not able to preserve and provide
for his Creatures, his Power in making them would be in a great part an
Invisible Power; if he did not preserve what he made, and govern what he
preserves, it would be a kind of strange and rude Power, to make, and suffer it
to be dashed in pieces at the pleasure of others. If the Power of God should
relinquish the World, the life of things would be extinguished, the Fabric
would be confounded and fall into a deplorable Chaos. That which is composed of
so many various pieces, could not maintain its Union, if there were not a
secret virtue binding them together and maintaining those varieties of links.

Well then, since God is not only so Good, that he cannot will any thing but
what is good; so Wise, that he cannot err or mistake; but also so Able, that
he cannot be defeated or ma^ed: He has every way a full Ability to govern the
World; where those Three are Infinite, the right and fitness resulting from
thence is unquestionable: And indeed, to deny God this Active part of his
Power, is to render him Weak, Foolish, Cruel, or all.

6. Here is a ground for the Worship of God. Wisdom and Power are the grounds
of the Respect we give to Men; they being both infinite in God, are the
foundation of a solemn Honor to be returned to him by his Creatures. If a Man
make a curious Engine, we honor him for his Skill; If another vanquish a
vigorous Enemy, we admire him for his Strength: And shall not the efficacy of
Gods Power in Creation, Government, Redemption, inflame us with a sense of the
Honor of his Name and Perfections? We admire those Princes that have vast
Empires, numerous Armies, that have a Power to conquer their Enemies, and
preserve their own People in peace: How much more ground have we to pay a
mighty Reverence to God, who without Trouble and Weariness made and manages
this vast Empire of the World by a Word and Beck? What sensible thoughts have
we of the noise of Thunder, the power of the Sun, the storms of the Sea? These
things that have no Understanding have struck Men with such a Reverence, that
many have adored them as gods. What Reverence and Adoration does this Mighty
Power, joined with an Infinite Wisdom in God, demand at our hands?

All Religion and Worship stands especially upon two Pillars, Goodness and
Power in God; if either of these were defective, all Religion would faint away.
We can expect no entertainment with him without Goodness, nor any benefit from
him without Power. This God Prefaceth to the Command to Worship him, the
benefit his Goodness had conferred upon them, and the Powerful manner of
conveyance of it to them, 2 Kings 17.36. The Lord brought you up from the Land
of Egypt with great Power and an Outstretched Arm; him shall you fear, and him
shall you worship, and to him shall you do sacrifice. Because this Attribute is
a main foundation of Prayer, the Lords Prayer is concluded with a doxology of
it, For thine is the Kingdom, the Power, and the Glory. As he is Rich,
possessing all Blessings; so he is Powerful, to confer all Blessings on us, and
make them efficacious to us. Capel. in 1 Timothy 1.17.
The Jews repeat many times in their Prayers, some say an hundred times (...)
The King of the World; it is both an Awe and an Encouragement. We could not
without consideration of it pray in Faith of success; nay we could not pray at
all, if his Power were defective to help us, and his Mercy too weak to relieve
us. Who would solicit a Lifeless, or lie a prostrate Suppliant to a feeble
Arm! Upon this Ability of God, Our Savior built his Petitions; Heb. 5.7. He
offered up strong Cries unto him that was able to save him from death.
Abraham's Faith hung upon the same string, Romans 4.21. and the Captived Church
supplicates God to act according to the greatness of his Power, Psalm. 79.11. In
all our Addresses this is to be eyed and considered, God is able to help, to
relieve, to ease me, let my Misery be never so great and my Strength never so
weak. Matt. 8.2.
If thou will thou can make me clean, was the Consideration the Leper had
when he came to worship Christ; he was clear in his Power and therefore
worshipped him, though he was not equally clear in his Will. All Worship is
shot wrong that is not directed to, and conducted by the thoughts of this
Attribute, whose assistance we need. When we beg the Pardon of our Sins, we
should eye Mercy and Power; when we beg his righting us in any case where we
are unjustly oppressed, we do not eye Righteousness without Power; when we plead
the performance of his Promise, we do not regard his Faithfulness only without
the Prop of his Power. As Power ushers in all the Attributes of God in their
exercise and manifestation in the World, so should it be the Butt our eyes
should be fixed upon in all our acts of Worship: As without his Power his other
Attributes would be useless, so without due Apprehensions of his Power our
Prayers will be Faithless and Comfortless. The Title in the Lords Prayer
directs us to a prospect both of his Goodness and Power; his Goodness in the
word Father, his Greatness, Excellency and Power in the word Heaven. The
heedless Consideration of the Infiniteness of this Perfection roots up Piety in
the midst of us, and makes us so careless in Worship. Did we more think of that
Power that raised the World out of nothing; that orders all Creatures by an an
act of his Will; that performed so great an Exploit, as that of our Redemption,
when masterless sin had triumphed over the World, we should give God the honor
and adoration which so great an excellency challenges and deserves at our
hands, though we our selves had not been the work of his hands, or the
monuments of his strength; how could any Creature engross to it self that
reverence from us which is due to the powerful Creator, of whom it comes
infinitely short in strength as well as wisdom?

7. From this we have a ground for the belief of the Resurrection. God aims at
the glory of his Power, as well as the glory of any other Attribute. Moses else
would not have culled out this as the main Argument in his pleading with God,
for the sheathing the Sword which he began to draw out against them in the
Wilderness, Numb. 14.16. The Nations will say, because the Lord was not able to
bring these People into the Land which he swear to them, etc. As the finding
out the particulars of the dust of our Bodies discovers the vastness of his
Knowledge; so to raise them will manifest the glory of his Power as much as
Creation: Bodies that have mouldred away into multitudes of Atoms, been
resolved into the Elements, passed through varieties of changes; been sometimes
the matter to lodge the form of a Plant, or been turned into the substance of a
Fish or Foul, or vapour'd up into a Cloud, and been part of that matter which
has compacted a Thunderbolt; disposed of in places far distant, scattered by
the Winds, swallowed and concocted by Beasts; for these to be called out from
their different places of abode to meet in one Body, and be restored to their
former Consistency in a marriage union in the twinkling of an eye 1 Cor. 15.22.
, it is a Consideration that may justly amaze us, and our shallow Understandings
are too feeble to comprehend it. But is it not credible, since all the Disputes
against it may be silenced by reflections on Infinite Power, which nothing can
oppose, for which nothing can be esteemed too difficult to effect, which does
not imply a Contradiction in it self. It was no less amazing to the blessed
Virgin to hear a Message that she should Conceive a Son without knowing a Man;
but she is quickly answered by the Angel, with a Nothing is impossible to God,
Luke. 1.34, 37. The distinct parts of our Bodies cannot be hid from his
All-seeing Eye, wherever they are lodged, and in all the Changes they pass
through, as was discoursed when the Omniscience of God was handled; shall then
the collection of them together be too hard for his Invincible Power and
Strength, and the uniting all those parts into a Body, with new dispositions,
to receive their several Souls, be too big and bulky for that Power which never
yet was acquainted with any bar? Was not the Miracle of our Saviors
multiplying the Loaves, suppose it had not been by a new Creation, but a
collection of Grain from several parts, very near as stupendous as this? Had
any one of us been the only Creatures made just before the matter of the World,
and beheld that inform Chaos covered with a thick darkness, mentioned Genesis 1.2.
would not the Report, that from this dark deep, next to nothing, should be
raised such a multitude of comely Creatures, with such innumerable varieties of
Members, Voices, Colors, Motions, and such Numbers of shining Stars; a bright
Sun, one uniform Body of Light from this Darkness, that should like a Giant,
rejoice to run a race for many thousands of years together, without stop or
weariness: Would not all these have seemed as incredible as the Collection of
scattered Dust? What was it that erected the innumerable Host of Heaven, the
glorious Angels, and glittering Stars, for ought we know, more numerous than
the Bodies of Men, but an act of the Divine Will; and shall the Power that
wrought this, sink under the Charge of gathering some dispersed Atoms, and
compacting them into a Human Body? Lingend. Tom. 3. p. 779, 780.
Can you tell how the Dust of the ground was kneaded by God into the Body of
Man, and changed into Flesh, Skin, Hair, Bones, Sinews, Veins, Arteries and
Blood, and fitted for so many several Activities, when a Human Soul was
breathed into it? Can you imagine how a Rib taken from Adam's side, a lifeless
Bone was formed into Head, Hands, Feet, Eyes? Why may not the matter of men
which have been, be restored, as well as that which was not, be first erected?
Is it harder to repair those things which were, than to create those things
which were not? Is there not the same Artificer? Has any Disease or Sickliness
abated his Power? Is the Ancient of days grown feeble; or shall the Elements
and other Creatures, that always yet obeyed his Command, russle against his
raising Voice, and refuse to disgorge those remains of Human Bodies, they have
swallowed up in their several Bowels? Did the whole World, and all the parts of
it rise at his word, and shall not some parts of the World, the Dust of the
dead, stand up out of the Graves at a word of the same mighty Efficacy? Do we
not annually see those Marks of Power which may stun our Incredulity in this
Concern? Do you see in a small Acorn or little Seed, any such sights, as a Tree
with Body, Bark, Branches, Leaves, Flowers, Fruit, where can you find them? Do
you know the invisible Corners where they lurk in that little Body? And yet
these you afterward view rising up from this little Body, when sown in the
Ground, that you could not possibly have any prospect of when you rould it in
your hand, or opened its Bowels. And why may not all the particulars of our
Bodies, however disposed as to their distinct Natures invisibly to us, remain
distinct, as well as if you mingle a thousand Seeds together, they will come up
in their distinct kinds, and preserve their distinct Virtues?

Again, Is not the Making Heaven and Earth, the Union of the Divine and Human
Nature, Eternity and Infirmity, to make a Virgin conceive a Son, bear the
Creator, and bring forth the Redeemer, to form the Blood of God of the Flesh of
a Virgin, a greater Work than the Calling together and Uniting the scattered
parts of our Bodies, which are all of one Nature and Matter? And since the
Power of God is manifested in pardoning innumerable sins, is not the scattering
our Transgressions, as far as the East is from the West, as the expression is
Psalm. 103.12. and casting such numbers into the Depths of the Sea, which is
Gods Power over himself, a greater Argument of Might, than the recalling and
repairing the Atoms of our Bodies from their various receptacles? It Is not hard
for them to believe this of the Resurrection, that have been sensible of the
weight and force of their Sins, and the Power of God in pardoning and
vanquishing that mighty resistance which was made in their Hearts against the
power of his renewing and sanctifying Grace. The consideration of the Infinite
Power of God, is a good ground of the belief of the Resurrection.

8. Since the Power of God is so great and Incomprehensible, How strange is it,
that it should be contemned and abused by the Creatures, as it is? The Power of
God is beaten down by some, outraged by others, blasphemed by many under their
Sufferings. The stripping God of the honor of his Creation, and the glory of
his Preservation of the World, falls under this charge: Thus do they that deny
his framing the World alone, or thought the first matter was not of Gods
creation; and such as fancied an Evil Principle, the Author of all Evil, as God
is the Author of all good, and so exempt from the Power of God, that it could
not be vanquished by him. These things have formerly sound Defenders in the
World; but they are in themselves ridiculous and vain, and have no sooting in
common Reason, and are not worthy of debate in a Christian Auditory.

In General, All Idolatry in the World did arise from the want of a due Notion
of this Infinite Power. The Heathen thought one God was was not sufficient for
the managing all things in the World, and therefore they feigned several gods
that had several charges: As Ceres presided over the Fruits of the Earth;
Esculapius over the Cure of Distempers; Mercury for Merchandise and Trade; Mars
for War and Battles; Apollo and Minerva for Learning and Ingenious Arts; and
Fortune for Casual things. Whence does the other sort of Idolatry, the adoring
our Bags and Gold, our dependencies on, and trusting in Creatures for help,
arise, but from Ignorance of God's Power, or mean and slender Apprehensions of
it?

First, There is a Contempt of it.

Secondly, An Abuse of it.

1. It Is contemned in every sin, especially in obstinacy in Sin. All Sin
whatsoever is built upon some false Notion or monstrous Conception of one or
other of Gods Perfections, and in particular of this. It includes a secret and
lurking Imagination, that we are able to grapple with Omnipotence, and enter
the lists with Almightiness; what else can be judged of the Apostles expression
1 Cor. 10.22. Do we provoke the Lord to jealousy, are we stronger than he? Do
we think we have an Arm too powerful for that Justice we provoke, and can repel
that Vengeance we exasperate? Do we think we are an even match for God, and are
able to despoil him of his Divinity? To despise his Will, violate his Order;
practice what he forbids with a severe Threatening, and pawns his Power to make
it good; is to pretend to have an Arm like God, and be able to thunder with a
Voice equal or superior to him, as the expression is Job 40.9. All Security in
Sin is of this strain; When Men are not concerned at Divine Threatenings, nor
staggered in their sinful Race, they intimate, that the Declarations of Divine
Power are but Vainglorious boastings; that God is not so strong and able, as he
reports himself to be; and therefore they will venture it, and dare him to try,
whether the strength of his Arm be as forcible as the Words of his Mouth are
terrible in his Threats; this is to believe themselves Creators, not Creatures.
We magnify Gods Power in our wants, and debase it in our Rebellions; as though
Omnipotence were only able to supply our Necessities, and unable to revenge the
Injuries we offer him.

2. This Power is Contemned in Distrust of God. All Distrust is founded in a
doubting of his Truth, as if he would not be as good as his Word; or of his
Omniscience, as if he had not a Memory to retain his Word; or of his Power, as
if He could not be as great as his Word. We measure the Infinite Power of God
by the short Line of our Understandings, as if Infinite strength were bounded
within the narrow compass of our Finite Reason; as if He could do no more than
we were able to do.

How soon did those Israelites lose the Remembrance of Gods Outstretched Arm,
when they uttered that Atheistical Speech Psalm. 78.9. Can God furnish a Table
in the Wilderness? As if he that turned the Dust of Egypt into Lice, for the
punishment of their Oppressors, could not turn the Dust of the Wilderness into
Corn, for the support of their Bodies? As if he that had Miraraculously rebuked
the Red Sea, for their Safety, could not provide Bread, for their Nourishment?
Though they had seen the Egyptians with lost Lives in the Morning, in the same
place where Their Lives had been miraculously preserved in the Evening; yet
They disgrace that Experimented Power, by opposing to it the Stature of the
Anakims, the Strength of their Cities, and the height of their Walls, Numb.
13.32. And Numb. 14.3. Wherefore has the Lord brought us into this Land to
fall by the Sword? As though the Giants of Canaan were too strong for Him, for
whom they had seen the Armies of Egypt too weak. How did they contract the
Almightiness of God into the littleness of a Little man, as if he must needs
sink under the Sword of a Canaanite?

This Distrust must arise either from a flat Atheism, a denial of the Being of
God, or his Government of the World; or unworthy Conceits of a Weakness in him,
that he had made Creatures too hard for himself; that He were not strong enough
to grapple with those mighty Anakims, and give them the possession of Canaan
against so great a Force. Distrust of him implies either, that He was always
destitute of Power, or that his Power is exhausted by his former Works, or that
it is limited and near a Period: It Is to deny him to be the Creator that
molded Heaven and Earth. Why should we by Distrust put a slight upon that
Power which he has so often expressed, and which in the minutest Works of his
hands surmount the force of the sharpest Understanding?

3. It Is Contemned in too great a fear of Man, which arises from a distrust of
Divine Power. Fear of Man, is a crediting the Might of Man with a disrepute of
the Arm of God; it takes away the glory of his Might, and renders the Creature
stronger than God, and God more feeble than a Mortal; as if the Arm of Man were
a Rod of Iron, and the Arm of God a brittle Reed. How often do Men tremble at
the Threatenings and Hectorings of Ruffians, yet will stand as Stakes against
the Precepts and Threatenings of God, as though he had less Power to preserve
us, than Enemies had to destroy? With what disdain does God speak to Men
infected with this humor? Isai. 51.12, 13. Who art thou, that art afraid of a
Man that shall die, and of the Son of Man that shall be made as grass; and
forgettest the Lord thy Maker, that has stretched forth the Heavens, and laid
the foundation of the Earth; and have feared continually every day, because of
the fury of the Oppressor?

To fear Man that is as Grass, that cannot think a Thought without a Divine
concourse, that cannot Breath, but by a Divine Power, nor touch a Hair without
License first granted from Heaven; This is a forgetfulness, and consequently a
slight of that Infinite Power, which has been manifested in founding the Earth
and garnishing the Heavens. All Fear of Man, in the way of our Duty, does in
some sort thrust out the Remembrance, and discredit the great Actions of the
Creator. Would not a Mighty Prince think it a Disparagement to him, if his
Servant should decline his Command for fear of one of his Subjects? And has
not the Great God just cause to think himself disgraced by us, when we deny him
Obedience for fear of a Creature: As though he had but an Infant ability too
feeble to bear us out in Duty, and incapable to balance the strength of an Arm
of Flesh?

4. It Is Contemned by trusting in our selves, in Means, in Man, more than in
God. When in any Distress we will try every Creature-refuge, before we have
recourse to God; and when we apply our selves to him, we do it with such slight
and perfunctory frames, and with so much despondency, as if we despaired either
of his Ability or Will to help us; and implore him with cooler Affections, than
we solicit Creatures: Or, when in a Disease we depend upon the virtue of the
Medicine, the ability of the Physician, and reflect not upon that Power that
endued the Medicine with that virtue, and supports the quality in it, and
concurs to the operation of it. When we depend upon the activity of the Means,
as if they power originally in themselves, and not derivatively; and do not eye
the Power had of God animating and assisting them. We cannot expect relief from
any thing with a neglect of God, but we render it in our thoughts more powerful
than God: We acknowledge a greater fullness in a shallow Stream, than in an
Eternal Spring; we do in effect depose the True God, and create to our selves a
New one, we assert by such a kind of acting, the Creature, if not superior, yet
equal with God and independent on him. When we trust in our own strength,
without begging his Assistance; or boast of our own strength, without
acknowledging his concurrence, as the Assyrian; By the strength of my hand have
I done this, I have put down the Inhabitants like a valiant Man, Isai. 10.13.
It Is, as if the Ax should boast it self against him that hews therewith, and
thinks it self more Mighty than the Arm that wields it, verse 15. when we trust
in others more than in God. Thus God upbraids those by the Prophet, that sought
help from Egypt, telling them Isai. 31.3. The Egyptians were men, and not gods;
intimating, that by their dependence on them, they rendered them gods and not
Men, and advanced them from the state of Creatures to that of Almighty Deities.
It Is to set a pile of Dust, a heap of Ashes, above Him that created and
preserves the World. To trust in a Creature, is to make it as Infinite as God;
to do that which is impossible in it self to be done. God himself cannot make a
Creature infinite, for that were to make him God.

It Is also contemned when we ascribe what we receive, to the power of
Instruments, and not to the Power of God. Men, in whatsoever they do for us,
are but the Tools whereby the Creator works. Is it not a disgrace to the Limner
to admire his Pensil, and not himself; to the Artificer, to admire his File and
Engines, and not his Power? It Is not I, says Paul, that labor, but the Grace,
the efficacious Grace of God which is in me. Whatsoever good we do is from him,
not from our selves; to ascribe it to our selves, or to Instruments, is to
overlook and contemn his Power.

5. Unbelief of the Gospel is a contempt and disowning Divine Power. This
Perfection has been discovered in the Conception of Christ, the Union of the
two Natures, his Resurrection from the Grave, the Restoration of the World, and
the Conversion of Men, more than in the Creation of the World: Then what a
disgrace is Unbelief to all that Power, that so severely punished the Jews for
the rejecting the Gospel; turned so many Nations from their beloved
Superstitions; humbled the Power of Princes and the Wisdom of Philosophers;
chased Devils from their Temples, by the weakness of Fishermen; planted the
Standard of the Gospel, against the common Notions and inveterate Customs of
the World? What a disgrace is Unbelief to this Power, which has preserved
Christianity from being extinguished by the force of Men and Devils, and kept
it flourishing in the midst of Sword, Fire, and Executioners; that has made
the Simplicity of the Gospel overpower the Eloquence of Orators, and multiplied
it from the Ashes of Martyrs, when it was destitute of all Humane Assistances?
Not heartily to believe and embrace that Doctrine, which has been attended
with such Marks of Power, is a high reflection upon this Divine Perfection, so
highly manifested in the first publication, propagation, and preservation of it.

II. The Power of God is abused, as well as contemned.

1. When we make use of it to justify Contradictions. The Doctrine of
Transubstantiation is an abuse of this Power. When the Maintainers of it cannot
answer the Absurdities alleged against it, they have recourse to the Power of
God. It implies a Contradiction, that the same Body should be on Earth and in
Heaven at the same instant of time; that it should be at the Right hand of God,
and in the Mouth and Stomach of a Man; that it should be a Body of Flesh, and
yet Bread to the Eye and to the Taste; that it should be Visible and Invisible,
a glorious Body and yet gnawn by the Teeth of a Creature; that it should be
multiplied in a Thousand places, and yet an entire Body in every one, where
there is no Member to be seen, no Flesh to be tasted; that it should be above
us in the highest Heavens, and yet within us in our lower Bowels: Such
Contradictions as these are an Abuse of the Power of God.

Again, We abuse this Power when we believe every idle Story that is reported,
because God is able to make it so, if he pleased. We may as well believe Esop's
Fables to be true, that Birds spoke and Beasts reasoned, because the Power of
God can enable such Creatures to such acts. Gods Power is not the Rule of our
Belief of a thing without the exercise of it in matter of Fact, and the
declaration of it upon sufficient Evidence.

2. The Power of God is abused, by presuming on it, without using the Means he
has appointed. When Men sit with folded-Arms, and make a Confidence in his
Power, a glorious Title to their Idleness and Disobedience; they would have his
Strength do all, and his Precept should move them to do nothing; this is a
trust of his Power against his Command, a pretended glorifying his Power with a
slight of his Sovereignty. Though God be Almighty, yet for the most part he
exercises his Might in giving life and success to Second Causes and lawful
endeavors. When we stay in the mouth of Danger, without any Call ordering us
to to continue, and against a Door of Providence opened for our rescue, and
sanctuary our selves in the Power of God without any Promise, without any
Providence conducting us; this is not to glorify the Divine Might, but to
neglect it, in neglecting the Means which his Power affords to us for our
escape. Harwood, p. 13.
To condemn it to our humors; to work Miracles for us according to our wills,
and against his own. God could have sent a Worm to be Herod's Executioner, when
he sought the life of our Savior, or employed an Angel from Heaven to have
tied his hands or stopped his breath, and not put Joseph upon a flight to Egypt
with our Savior; yet had it not been an abuse of the Power of God, for Joseph
to have neglected the Precept, and slighted the Means God gave him for the
preserving his own life and that of the Child's? Christ himself, when the Jews
consulted to destroy him, presumed not upon the Power of God to secure him, but
used ordinary means for his preservation, by walking no more openly, but
retiring himself into a City near the Wilderness till the hour was come, and
the Call of his Father manifest John 11.53, 54.
. A rash running upon Danger, though for the Truth it self, is a presuming
upon, and consequently an abuse of this Power; a proud challenging it to serve
our turns against the Authority of his Will, and the force of his Precept: A
not resting in his Ordinate Power, but demanding his Absolute Power to pleasure
our Follies and Presumptions; concluding and expecting more from it than what
is Authorized by his Will.

9. Instruction. If Infinite Power be a peculiar Property of God; How miserable
will all wicked Rebels be under this Power of God? Men may break his Laws, but
not impair his Arm; they may slight his Word, but cannot resist his Power. If
he swear that he will sweep a place with the Besom of Destruction, As he has
thought, so shall it come to pass; and as he has purposed, so shall it stand,
Isai. 14.23, 24. Rebels against an Earthly Prince may exceed him in strength,
and be more powerful than their Sovereign: None can equal God, much less exceed
him. As none can exercise an act of Hostility against him without his
permissive Will; so none can struggle from under his hand without his positive
Will. He has an Arm not to be moved, a Hand not to be wrung aside. God is
represented on his Throne like a Jasper Stone, Revel. 4.3. as one of Invincible
Power when he comes to Judge; the Jasper is a Stone which withstands the
greatest force Grot. in loc.
. Though Men resist the Order of his Laws, they cannot resist the Sentence of
their punishment, nor the Execution of it. None can any more exempt themselves
from the Arm of his Strength, than they can from the Authority of his Dominion.
As they must bow to his Sovereignty; so they must sink under his Force. A
Prisoner in this World may make his Escape; but a Prisoner in the World to come
cannot; Job 10.7. There is none that can deliver out of thine hand. There is
none to deliver when he tears in pieces, Psalm. 50.22. His Strength is
uncontrollable; hence his Throne is represented as a Fiery flame, Dan. 7.9. As
a spark of Fire has power to kindle one thing after another, and increase till
it consumes a Forest, a City, swallow up all combustible Matter till it
consumes a World, and many Worlds, if they were in Being. What power has a
Tree to resist the Fire, though it seems mighty when it outbraves the Winds?
What Man to this day has been able to free himself from that Chain of Death,
God clapped upon him for his Revolt? And if he be too feeble to rescue himself
from a Temporal, much less from an Eternal Death. The Devils have to this
minute groaned under the Pile of Wrath, without any success in delivering
themselves by all their strength, which much surmounts all the strength of
Mankind, nor have they any hopes to work their rescue to Eternity.

How foolish is every Sinner? Can we poor Worms strut it out against Infinite
Power? We cannot resist the meanest Creatures when God Commissions them, and
puts a Sword into their hands. They will not, no not the Worms, be startled at
the glory of a King, when they have their Creators Warrant to be his
Executioners Acts 12.23.
. Who can withstand him, when he commands the Waves and Inundations of the Sea
to leap over the Shore; when he divides the Ground in Earthquakes, and makes it
gape wide to swallow the Inhabitants of it; when the Air is corrupted to breed
Pestilences; when Storms and Showers, unseasonably falling, putrify the Fruits
of the Earth; what Created Power can mend the matter, and with a prevailing
Voice say to him, What do thou?

There are two Atributes God will make glister in Hell to the full, his Wrath
and his Power; Romans 9.22. What if God willing to show his wrath, and to make
his power known, endured with much Longsuffering the vessels of wrath fitted
for destruction? If it were mere Wrath, and no Power to second it, it were not
so terrible; but it is Wrath and Power, both are joined together: It Is not only
a sharp Sword, but a powerful Arm; and not only that, for then it were well for
the damned Creature. To have many sharp blows, and from a strong Arm; this may
be without putting forth the highest strength a Man has: But in this God makes
it his design to make his Power known and conspicuous; He takes the Sword (as
it were) in both hands, that he may show the strength of his Arm in striking
the harder blow; and therefore the Apostle calls it 2 Thessalonians. 1.9. the Glory of
his Power, which puts a Sting into this Wrath; and it is called Revel. 19.15.
the fierceness of the wrath of the Almighty. God will do it in such a manner,
as to make Men sensible of his Almightiness in every stroke. How great must
that Vengeance be, that is backed by all the Strength of God? When there will
be a powerful Wrath without a powerful Compassion; when all his Power shall be
exercised in Punishing, and not the least mite of it exercised in Pitying; how
irresistible will be the load of such a weighty Hand? How can the dust of the
Balance break the mighty Bars, or get out of the Lists of a powerful
Vengeance, or hope for any grain of Comfort? Oh, that every obstinate Sinner
would think of this, and consider his unmeasurable boldness in thinking himself
able to grapple with Omnipotence! What force can any have to resist the
presence of him, before whom Rocks melt, and the Heavens at length shall be
shrivelled up as a Parchment by the last Fire? As the Light of Gods face is too
dazeling to be beheld by us; so the Arm of his Power is too Mighty to be
opposed by us. His Almightiness is above the reach of our Pot-sheard strength,
as his Infiniteness is above the capacity of our Purblind Understandings. God
were not Omnipotent, if his Power could be rendered ineffectual by any.

Second Use of this Point from the Consideration of the Infinite Power of God,
is of Comfort. As Omnipotence is an Ocean that cannot be fathomed; Comfort.
so the Comforts from it are streams that cannot be exhausted. What Joy can be
wanting to him that finds himself folded in the Arms of Omnipotence?

This Perfection is made over to Believers in the Covenant, as well as any
other Attribute; I am the Lord your God; therefore that Power, which is as
essential to the Godhead as any other Perfection of his Nature, is in the
rights and extent of it assured unto you. Nay, may we not say, It is made over
more than any other, because it is that which animates every other Perfection,
and is the Spirit that gives them Motion and Appearance in the World? If God
had expressed himself in particular, as, I am a True God, a Wise God, a Loving
God, a Righteous God, I am yours; what would all or any of those have
signified, unless the other also had been employed, as, I am an Almighty God, I
am your God? In Gods making over himself in any particular Attribute, this of
his Power is included in every one, without which all his other Grants would be
insignificant. It Is a Comfort that Power is in the hand of God; it can never be
better placed, for he can never use his Power to injure his confiding Creature:
If it were in our own hands, we might use it to injure our selves. It Is a Power
in the hand of an indulgent Father, not a hard-hearted Tyrant: It Is a just
Power, His right hand is full of Righteousness, Psalm. 48.10. because of his
Righteousness he can never use it ill, and because of his Wisdom he can never
use it unseasonably. Men that have strength, often misplace the actings of it,
because of their Folly; and sometimes employ it to base ends, because of their
Wickedness: But this Power in God is always awakned by Goodness and conducted by
Wisdom; it is never exercised by Self-will and Passion, but according to the
Immutable Rule of his own Nature, which is Righteousness. How Comfortable is it
to think, that you have a God that can do what he pleases; nothing so difficult
but he can effect, nothing so strong but he can overruled? You need not dread
Men, since you have One to restrain them; nor fear Devils, since you have One
to chain them: No Creature but is acted by this Power; no Creature but must
fall upon the withdrawing of this Power. It was not all laid out in Creation:
It Is not weakened by his Preservation of things; he yet has a fullness of Power,
and a residue of Spirit: For whom should that Eternal Arm of the Lord be
displayed, and that Incomprehensible Thunder of his Power be shot out, but for
those for whose sake and for whose Comfort it is revealed in his Word?

In Particular,

1. Here is Comfort in all Afflictions and Distresses. Our Evils can never be
so great to oppress us, as his Power is great to deliver us. The same Power
that brought a World out of a Chaos, and constituted, and has hitherto
preserved the regular Motion of the Stars, can bring Order out of our
Confusions, and Light out of our Darkness. When our Savior was in the greatest
distress, and beheld the face of his Father frowning, while he was upon the
Cross, in his Complaint to him he exercises Faith upon his Power, Math. 27.46.
Eli, Eli; My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me; that is, My strong, my
strong; El, is a Name of Power belonging to God: He comforts himself in his
Power, while he complains of his Frowns. Follow his Pattern, and forget not
that Power that can scatter the Clouds, as well as gather them together. The
Psalmists support in his Distress was in the Creative Power of God, Psalm.
121.2. My help comes from the Lord which made Heaven and Earth.

2. It Is Comfort in all strong and stirring Corruptions and mighty Temptations.
It Is by this we may arm our selves, and be strong in the power of his might,
Ephesians. 6.10. By this we may conquer Principalities and Powers as dreadful as
Hell, but not so mighty as Heaven. By this we may triumph over Lusts within,
too strong for an Arm of Flesh. By this the Devils that have possessed us may
be cast out; the battered Walls of our Souls may be repaired, and the Sons of
Anak laid slat. That Power that brought Light out of Darkness, and overmaster'd
the deformity of the Chaos, and set bounds to the Ocean, and dried up the Red
Sea by a Rebuke; can quell the Tumults in our Spirits, and level Spiritual
Goliahs by his Word. When the Disciples heard that terrifying Speech of our
Savior, concerning Rich men, that it was easier for a Camel to go through the
eye of a Needle, than for a rich man to enter into the Kingdom of God, Mat.
19.24. to entertain the Gospel, which commanded Self-denial; and that, because
of the Allurements of the World, and the strong Habits in their Soul; Christ
refers them to the Power of God, verse 26. who could expel those ill Habits,
and plant good ones; With Men this is impossible, but with God all things are
possible. There is no resistance, but he can surmount; no strong hold, but he
can demolish; no Tower, but he can level.

3. It Is Comfort from hence, that all Promises shall be performed. Goodness is
sufficient to make a Promise, but Power is necessary to perform a Promise. Men
that are honest, cannot often make good their words, because something may
intervene that may shorten their Ability; but nothing can disable God, without
diminishing his Godhead. He has an Infiniteness of Power to accomplish his
Word, as well as an Infiniteness of Goodness to make and utter his Word. That
Might whereby he made Heaven and Earth, and his keeping Truth for ever, are
joined together, Psalm. 146.5, 6. His Fathers Faithfulness, and His Creative
Power are linked together. It Is upon this Basis the Covenant, and every part of
it, is established, and stands as firm as the Almightiness of God, whereby he
sprung up the Earth, and reared the Heavens. No power can resist his will, Romans
9.19. Who can disannul his purpose, and turn back his hand when it is stretched
out? Isai, 14.27. His Word is unalterable, and his Power is invincible. He
could not deceive himself, for he knew his own strength when he promised: No
unexpected event can change his Resolution, because nothing can happen without
the compass of his Foresight. No Created Strength can stop him in his Action,
because all Creatures are ready to serve him at his Command; not the Devils in
Hell, nor all the Wicked men on Earth, since he has strength to restrain them,
and an Arm to punish them. What can be too hard for him that created Heaven and
Earth? Hence it was, that when God Promised any thing anciently to his People,
he used often the Name of the Almighty, the Lord that created Heaven and Earth,
as that which was an undeniable Answer to any Objection, against any thing that
might be made against the greatness and stupendiousness of any Promise; by that
Name in all his Works of Grace was he known to them, Exodus 6.3. When we are
sure of his Will, we need not question his Strength, since he never
over-engageth himself above his Ability. He that could not be resisted by
nothing in Creation, nor vanquished by Devils in Redemption, can never want
Power to glorify his Faithfulness in his Accomplishment of whatsoever he has
promised.

4. From this Infiniteness of Power in God we have ground of Assurance for
Perseverance. Since Conversion is resembled to the Works of Creation and
Resurrection, two great Marks of his Strength, he does not surely employ
himself in the first work of Changing the Heart, to let any Created strength
baffle that Power which he began and intends to glorify. It was this Might
that struck off the Chain, and expelled that strong one that possessed you.
What if you are too weak to keep him out of his lost possession, will God lose
the glory of his first strength, by suffering his foiled Adversary to make a
re-entry, and regain his former usurpation? His Outstretched Arm will not do
less by his Spiritual, than it did by his National Israel: It guarded them all
the way to Canaan, and left them not to shift for themselves, after he had
struck off the Fetters of Egypt, and buried their Enemies in the Red Sea, Deuteronomy.
1.31. This Greatness of the Father above all, our Savior makes the ground of
Believers continuance for ever, against the blasts of Hell and engines of the
World, John 10.29. My Father is greater than all, and none is able to pluck
them out of my Fathers hands. Our keeping is not in our own weak hands, but in
the hands of him who is mighty to save. That Power of God keeps us which
intends our salvation. In all fears of falling away, shelter your selves in the
Power of God: He shall be holden up, says the Apostle, speaking concerning one
weak in Faith; and no other Reason is rendered by him but this, for God is able
to make him to stand, Romans 14.4.

5. From this Attribute of the Infinite Power of God, we have a ground of
comfort in the lowest estate of the Church. Let the state of the Church be
never so deplorable, the condition never so desperate, that Power that created
the World, and shall raise the Bodies of men, can create a happy state for the
Church, and raise her from an overwhelming Grave: Though the Enemies trample
upon her, they cannot upon the Arm that holds her, which by the least motion of
it, can lift her up above the heads of her Adversaries, and make them feel the
thunder of that Power that none can understand: By the blast of God they
perish, and by the breath of his nostrils they are consumed, Job 4.9. they
shall be scattered as Chaff before the wind: If once he draw his hand out of
his bosom, all must fly before him, or sink under him Psalm. 74.11.
: And when there is none to help, his own Arm sustains him, and brings
salvation Isa. 63.5.
, and his fury does uphold him. What if the Church totter under the
underminings of Hell? What if it has a sad heart and wet eyes? In what a
little moment can he make the night turn into day, and make the Jews that were
preparing for death in Shushan, triumph over the necks of their Enemies, and
march in one hour with Swords in their hands, that expected the last hour ropes
about their necks? Esth. 9.1.5. If Israel be pursued by Pharaoh, the Sea shall
open its arms to protect them: If they be thirsty, a Rock shall spout out Water
to refresh them: If they be hungry, Heaven shall be their Granary for Manna: If
Jerusalem be besieged, and has not Force enough to encounter Senacherib, an
Angel shall turn the Camp into an Aceldema, a Field of Blood. His People shall
not want deliverances, till God want a power of working Miracles for their
security: He is more jealous of his Power, than the Church can be of her
Safety. And if we should want other Arguments to press him, we may implore him
by virtue of his Power: For when there is nothing in the Church as a Motive to
him to save it, there is enough in his own Name, and the illustration of his
Power, Psalm. 106.8. Who can grapple with the Omnipotency of that God, who is
jealous of, and zealous for the honor of it? And therefore God, for the most
part, takes such opportunities to deliver, wherein his Almightiness may be most
conspicuous, and his Counsels most admirable. He awakened not himself to
deliver Israel, till they were upon the brink of the Red Sea; nor to rescue the
three Children, till they were in the fiery Furnace; nor Daniel, till he was in
the Lions Den. It Is in the weakness of his Creature that his strength is
perfected; not in a way of addition of perfectness to it, but in a way of
manifestation of the perfection of it. As it is the perfection of the Sun to
shine and enlighten the World, not that the Sun receives an increase of light
by the darting of his Beams, but discovers his Glory to the admiration of Men,
and pleasure of the World. If it were not for such occasions, the World would
not regard the Mightiness of God, nor know what Power were in him. It traverses
the Stage in its fullness and liveliness upon such occasions, when the Enemies
are strong, and their strength edged with an intense hatred, and but little
time between the contrivance and execution. It Is a great comfort that the
lowest Distresses of the Church are a fit Scene for the discovery of this
Attribute, and that the Glory of God's Omnipotence, and the Churches Security,
are so straightly linked together. It Is a promise that will never be forgotten by
God, and ought never to be forgotten by us, that in this Mountain, the hand of
the Lord shall rest Isa. 25.10.
; that is, the Power of the Lord shall abide; and Moab shall be trodden under
him, even as Straw is trodden down for the Dunghill. And the Plagues of Babylon
shall come in one day, death and mourning and famine; for strong is the Lord
who judges her, Rev. 18.8.

Third Use is for Exhortation.

1. Meditate on this Power of God, and press it often upon your Minds. We
conclude many things of God that we do not practically suck the comfort of, for
want of deep thoughts of it, and frequent inspection into it. We believe God to
be true, yet distrust him; we acknowledge him powerful, yet fear the motion of
every straw. Many Truths, though assented to in our Understandings, are kept
under hatches by corrupt Affections, and have not their due influence, because
they are not brought forth into the open air of our Souls by meditation. If we
will but search our hearts; we shall find it is the Power of God we often doubt
of. When the heart of Ahaz and his Subjects trembled at the Combination of the
Syrian and Israelitish Kings against him, for want of a confidence in the Power
of God, God sends his Prophet with Commission to work a miraculous sign at his
own choice, to rear up his fainting heart; and when he refused to ask a sign
out of diffidence of that Almighty Power, the Prophet complains of it as an
affront to his Master Isa. 7.12, 13.
. Moses so great a Friend of God, was overtaken with this kind of unbelief,
after all the Experiments of God's miraculous Acts in Egypt; the Answer God
gives him, manifests this to be at the Core: Is the Lord's hand waxed short?
Numb. 11.23.

For want of actuated thoughts of this, we are many times turned from our known
duty by the blast of a Creature; as though man had more power to dismay us,
than God has to support us in his commanded way. The belief of God's Power is
one of the first steps to all Religion; without settled thoughts of it, we
cannot pray lively and believingly, for the obtaining the Mercies we want, or
the averting the Evils we fear; we should not love him, unless we are persuaded
he has a Power to bless us; nor fear him, unless we were persuaded of his
Power to punish us. The frequent thoughts of this would render our Faith more
stable, and our Hopes more steadfast; it would make us more feeble to sin, and
more careful to obey. When the Virgin staggered at the Message of the Angel,
that she should bear a Son, he in his Answer turns her to the Creative power of
God, Luke 1.35. The Power of the highest shall over-shadow thee. Which seems to
be in allusion to the Spirits moving upon the face of the Deep, and bringing a
comely World out of a confused Mass. Is it harder for God to make a Virgin
conceive a Son by the power of his Spirit, than to make a World? Why does he
reveal himself so often under the title of Almighty, and press it upon us, but
that we should press it upon our selves? And shall we be forgetful of that,
which every thing about us, every thing within us is a mark of? How come we by
a power of seeing and hearing, a faculty and act of understanding and will, but
by this Power framing us, this Power assisting us? What though the Thunder of
his Power cannot be understood, no more can any other Perfection of his Nature;
shall we therefore seldom think of it? The Sea cannot be fathomed, yet the
Merchant excuses not himself from sailing upon the Surface of it. We cannot
glorify God, without due consideration of this Attribute; for his Power is his
Glory as much as any other, and called both by the Name of Glory, Romans 6.4.
speaking of Christ's Resurrection by the Glory of the Father; and also the
riches of his Glory, Ephesians. 3.16. Those that have strong Temptations in their
course and over-pressing Corruptions in their hearts, have need to think of it
out of Interest, since nothing but this can relieve them. Those that have
experimented the working of it in their new Creation, are obliged to think of
it out of gratitude. It was this mighty Power over himself that gave rise to
all that pardoning Grace already conferred, or hereafter expected; without it
our Souls had been consumed, the World overturned; we could not have expected a
happy Heaven, but have layen yelling in an eternal Hell; had not the Power of
his Mercy exceeded that of his Justice, and his Infinite Power executed what
his Infinite Wisdom had contrived for our Redemption. How much also should we
be raised in our admirations of God, and ravish our selves in contemplating
that Might that can raise innumerable Worlds in those Infinite imaginary Spaces
without this Globe of Heaven and Earth, and exceed unconceivably what he has
done in the Creation of this?

2. From the pressing the consideration of this upon our selves, Let us be
induced to trust God upon the account of his Power. The main end of the
revelation of his Power to the Patriarchs, and of the miraculous Operations of
it in Egypt, was to induce them to an entire reposing themselves in God: And
the Psalmist does scarce speak of the Divine Omnipotence without making this
Inference from it; and scarce exhorts to a trust in God, but backs it with a
Consideration of his Power in Creation, it being the chief support of the Soul,
Psalm. 146.1. Happy is he whose hope is in the Lord his God, which made Heaven
and Earth, the Sea and all that therein is. That Power is invincible that drew
the World out of nothing: Nothing can happen to us harder than the making the
World without the concurrence of Instruments: No difficulty can nonplus that
strength, that has drawn all things out of nothing, or out of a confused
Matter next to nothing: No Power can rifle what we commit to him, 2 Timothy 1.12.
He is all Power, above the reach of all Power; all other Powers in the World
flowing from him, or depending on him. He is worthy to be trusted, since we
know him true, without ever breaking his word, and Omnipotent, never failing of
his purpose; and a confidence in it is the chief act whereby we can glorify
this Power, and credit his Arm. A strong God, and a weak Faith in Omnipotence,
do not suit well together. Indeed we are more engaged to a trust in Divine
Power than the Ancient Patriarchs were: They had the Verbal Declaration of his
Power, and many of them little other Evidence of it, than in the Creation of
the World; and their Faith in God being established in this first discovery of
his Omnipotence, drew out it self further to believe, That whatsoever God
promised by his Word, he was able to perform, as well as the Creation of the
World out of nothing; which seems to be the intendment of the Apostle, Hebr.
11.3. Not barely to speak of the Creation of the World by God, which was a
thing the Hebrews understood well enough from their Ancient Oracles; but to
show the Foundation of the Patriarchs Faith, viz. God making the World by his
Word, and what use they made of the Discovery of his Power in that, to lead
them to believe the Promise of God concerning the Seed of the Woman to be
brought into the World. But we have not only the same Foundation, but
superadded Demonstrations of this Attribute in the Conception of our Savior,
the Union of the two Natures, the glorious Redemption, the Propagation of the
Gospel, and the new Creation of the World. They relied upon the naked Power of
God, without those more illustrious Appearances of it, which have been in the
Ages since, and arrived to their notice: We have the wonderful Effects of that
which they had but obscure Expectations of.

1. Consider, Trust in God can never be without taking in God's Power as a
concurrent Foundation with his Truth. It Is the main ground of Trust, and so set
forth in the Prophet, Isa. 26.4. Trust ye in the Lord for ever, for in the Lord
Jehovah is everlasting strength. And the Faith of the Ancients so recommended
Hebr. 11. had this chiefly for its ground; and the Faith in Gospel Times is
called a Trusting on his Arm, Isa. 51.5. All the Attributes of God are the
Objects of our Veneration, but they do not equally contribute to the producing
Trust in our hearts; his Eternity, Simplicity, Infiniteness, Amyrant. Moral.
Tom. 5. p. 170.
ravish and astonish our Minds when we consider them: But there is no immediate
tendency in their Nature to allure us to a confidence in him, no not in an
innocent State; much less in a lapsed and revolted Condition: But the other
Perfections of his Nature, as his Holiness, Righteousness, Mercy, are amiable
to us in regard of the immediate Operations of them upon and about the
Creature, and so have something in their own Nature to allure us to repose our
selves in him: But yet those cannot engage to an entire trust in him, without
reflecting upon his Ability, which can only render those useful and successful
to the Creature. For whatsoever bars stand in the way of his holy, righteous,
and merciful proceedings toward his Creatures, are not overmaster'd by those
Perfections, but by that Strength of his which can only relieve us in
concurrence with the other Attributes. How could his Mercy succor us without
his Arm, or his Wisdom guide us without his Hand, or his Truth perform Promises
to us without his strength? As no Attribute can act without it, so in our
addresses to him upon the account of any particular Perfection in the Godhead
according to our indigency, one eye must be perpetually fixed upon this of his
Power; and our Faith would be feeble and dispirited without eying this: Without
this, his Holiness, which hates sin, would not be regarded; and his Mercy,
pitying a grieving sinner, would not be valued. As this Power is the ground of
a wicked man's fear, so it is the ground of a good man's trust. This was that
which was the principal support of Abraham, not barely his promise, but his
ability to make it good, Romans 4.21. And when he was commanded to sacrifice
Isaac, the ability of God to raise him up again, Heb. 11.19. All Faith would
droop, and be in the mire, without leaning upon this. All those Attributes
which we consider as Moral in God, would have no influence upon us, without
this, which we consider Physically in God. Though we value the kindness men may
express to us in our Distresses, yet we make them not the Objects of our
Confidence, unless they have an ability to act what they express. There can be
no trust in God without an eye to his Power.

2. Sometimes the Power of God is the sole Object of trust. As when we have no
promise to assure us of his Will, we have nothing else to pitch upon but his
Ability; and that not his absolute Power, but his ordinate, in the way of his
Providence; we must not trust in it so, as to expect he should please our
humor with fresh Miracles, but rest upon his Power, and leave the manner to
his Will. Asa, when ready to Conflict with the vast Ethiopian Army, pleaded
nothing else but this Power of God Chron. 14.11.
. And the three Children, who had no particular promise of deliverance (that we
read of) stuck to God's Ability to preserve them against the Kings threatening,
and owned it in the face of the King, yet with some kind of inward intimations
in their own Spirits that he would also deliver them; Dan. 3.17. Our God whom
we serve is able to deliver us from the burning fiery Furnace. And accordingly
the fire burnt the Cords that tied them, without singing any thing else about
them. But when this Power has been exercised upon like occasions, it is a
President he has given us to rest upon. Presidents in Law are good pleas, and
strong encouragements to the Clyent to expect success in his Suit. Our Fathers
trusted in thee, and thou did deliver them, says David, Psalm. 22.4. And
Jehosaphat in a case of distress, 2 Chronicles. 20.7. Art not thou our God, that
did drive out the Inhabitants of this Land before thy People Israel? When we
have not any Statute Law and Promise to plead, we may plead his Power, together
with the former Presidents and Acts of it. The Centurion had nothing else to
act his Faith upon, but the Power of Christ, and some Evidences of it in the
Miracles reported of him; but he is silent in the latter, and casts himself
only upon the former, acknowledging that Christ had the same command over
Diseases, as himself had over his Soldiers Mat^h. 8.10.
. And our Savior when he receives the Petition of the blind men, requires no
more of them in order to a Cure, but a belief of his Ability to perform it;
Matthew. 9.28. Believe you that I am able to do this? His Will is not known but
by Revelation, but his Power is apprehended by Reason, as essentially and
eternally linkt with the Notion of a God. God also is jealous of the Honor of
this Attribute; and since it is so much virtually discredited, he is pleased
when any do cordially own it, and entirely resign themselves to the assistance
of it.

Well then, in all Duties where Faith is particularly to be acted, forget not
this as the main prop of it: Do you pray for a flourishing and triumphing
Grace? Consider him as able to make all Grace to abound in you, 2 Cor. 9.8. Do
you want comfort and reviving under your Contritions and godly Sorrow? Consider
him as he declares himself, The high and lofty One, Isa. 57.15. Are you under
pressing distresses? Take Eliphaz his advice to Job, when he tells him what he
himself would do if he were in his case; Job 5.8. I would seek unto God, and
unto God would I commit my cause: But observe under what consideration, Verse.
9. as to one that does great things and unsearchable; mavelous things without
number. When you beg of him the melting your rocky hearts, the dashing in
pieces your strong Corruptions, the drawing his beautiful Image in your Soul,
the quickening your dead hearts, and reviving your drooping Spirits, and
supplying your Spiritual wants, consider him as one able to do abundantly, not
only above what you can ask, but above what you can think, Ephesians. 3.20. Faith
will be spiritless, and Prayer will be liveless, if Power be not eyed by us in
those things which cannot be done without an Arm of Omnipotence.

3. This Doctrine teaches us Humility and Submission. The vast disproportion
between the mightiness of God, and the meaness of a Creature, inculcates the
Lesson of Humility in his Presence: How becoming is Humility under a mighty
hand? 1 Pet. 5.6. What is an Infant in a Giants hand, or a Lamb in a Lions paw?
Submission to irresistible Power is the best policy, and the best security:
This gratifies and draws out Goodness, whereas murmuring and resistance
exasperates and sharpens Power. We sanctify his Name, and glorify his
strength by falling down before it; it is an acknowledgment of his invisible
strength, and our inability to match it. How low should we therefore lie before
him, against whose Power our Pride and Murmuring can do no good, who can
out-wrestle us in our Contests, and always overcome when he judges? Romans 3.4.

4. This Doctrine teaches us not to fear the pride and force of man. How
unreasonable is it to fear a limited above an unbounded Power? How unbecoming
is the fear of man in him, who has an interest in a Strength able to curb the
strongest Devils? Who would tremble at the threats of a Dwarf, that has a
mighty and watchful Giant for his Guard? If God does but arise, his enemies are
scattered, Psalm. 68.1. the least motion makes them fly before him: It Is no
difficult thing for him, that made them by a word, to unmake their designs, and
shiver them in pieces by the breath of his mouth: He brings Princes to nothing,
and makes the Judges of the Earth vanity; they wither when he blows upon them,
and their stock shall not take root in the Earth. He can command a Whirlwind to
take them away as stubble, Isa. 40.23, 24. yea, with the shaking of his hand he
makes Servants to become Rulers of those that were their Masters, Zach. 2.9.
Whole Nations are no more in his hands than a morning Cloud, or the dew upon
the ground, or the chaff before the wind, or the smoke against the motion of
the Air, which though it appear out of a Chimney like a black invincible Cloud,
is quickly dispersed, and becomes invisible Hos. 13.3.
. How inconsiderable are the most Mighty to this Strength, which can puff away
a whole World of proud Grasshoppers, and a whole Sky of daring Clouds? He that
by his word masters the rage of the Sea, can overruled the Pride and Power of
Men. Where is the Fury of the Oppressor? It cannnot overleap the Bounds he has
set it, nor march an inch beyond the point he has prescribed it. Fear not the
confederacies of man, but sanctify the Lord of Hosts, let him be your fear,
and let him be your dread, Isa. 8.13. To fear men is to dishonor the Name of
God, and regard him as a feeble Lord, and not as the Lord of Hosts, who is
mighty in strength, so that they that harden themselves against him shall not
prosper.

5. Therefore this Doctrine teaches us the fear of God. The Prophet Jeremiah
counts it as an impossible thing for men to be destitute of the fear of God,
when they seriously consider his Name to be great and mighty. Jer. 10.6, 7.
Thou art great, and thy Name is great in might; who would not fear thee, O thou
King of Nations? Shall we not tremble at his Presence, who has placed the Sand
for the bound of the Sea by a perpetual decree; that though the Waves thereof
toss themselves, yet they cannot prevail, Jer. 5.22. He can Arm the weakest
Creature for our destruction, and disarm the strongest Creatures which appear
for our preservat^on. He can command a hair, a crumb, a kernel to go awry, and
strangle us. He can make the Heavens brass over our head, stop close the
Bottels of the Clouds, and make the fruit of the Fields droop, when there is a
small distance to the Harvest; he can arm men's wit, wealth, hands against
themselves: He can turn our sweet morsels into bitter, and our own Consciences
into devouring Lions: He can root up Cities by Moles, and conquer the proudest
by Lice and Worms. The Omnipotence of God is not only the Object of a
Believer's trust, but a Believer's fear. It Is from the consideration of this
Power only, that our Savior presses his Disciples, whom he intitles his
Friends, to fear God; which Lesson he presses by a double repetition, and with
a kind of Asseveration, without rendering any other Reason than this of the
ability of God to cast into Hell, Luke 12.5. We are to fear him because he can;
but bless his goodness because he will not. In regard of his Omnipotence, he is
to be reverenced, not only by mortal Men, but by the blessed Angels, who are
past the fear of any danger by his Power, being confirmed in a happy state by
his unalterable Grace: When they adore him for his holiness, they reverence him
for his Power with covered Faces: The Title of the Lord of Hosts is joined in
their reverential praise with that of his Holiness, Isa. 6.3. Holy, holy, holy
is the Lord of Hosts. How should we adore that Power which can preserve us,
when Devils and Men conspire to destroy us? How should we stand in awe of that
Power which can destroy us, though Angels and Men should combine to preserve
us? The parts of his ways which are discovered, are sufficient Motives to an
humble and reverential Adoration: But who can fear and adore him according to
the vastness of his Power, and his excellent Greatness, since the Thunder of
his Power who can understand?

A DISCOURSE UPON THE Holiness of God.
Exodus 15.11. Who is like unto thee, Oh Lord, among the gods? Who is like
thee, glorious in Holness, fearful in praises, doing wonders?


THis Verse is one of the loftiest descriptions of the Majesty and Excellency
of God in the whole Scripture Trap. in loc.
. It Is a part of Moses's (...), or Triumphant Song, after a great and real, and
a Typical Victory; in the womb of which all the Deliverances of the Church were
couched. It Is the first Song upon Holy Record, and it consists of Gratulatory
and Prophetic matter: It casts a look backward, to what God did for them in
their Deliverance from Egypt; and a look forward, to what God shall do for the
Church in future Ages. That Deliverance was but a rough draught of something
more excellent to be wrought toward the closing up of the World; when his
Plagues shall be poured out upon the Antichristian Powers, which should revive
the same Song of Moses in the Church, as fitted so many Ages before for such a
Scene of Affairs Rev. 15.2, 3.
. It Is observed therefore, that many words in this Song are put in the Future
Tense, noting a Time to come; and the very first word, ver. 1. Then sang Moses
and the Children of Israel this Song: (...) shall sing; implying, that it was
composed and calculated for the celebrating some greater Action of Gods, which
was to be wrought in the World Manass. ben Israel, de Resur. lib. 1. cap. 1. p.
7.
. Upon this account some of the Jewish Rabbis, from the consideration of this
Remark, asserted the Doctrine of the Resurrection to be meant in this place;
That Moses and those Israelites should rise again to sing the same Song, for
some greater Miracles God should work, and greater Triumphs he should bring
forth, exceeding those Wonders at their Deliverance from Egypt.

Pareus in Exodus 15.
It consists of, 1. A Preface, verse. 1. I will sing unto the Lord.

2. An Historical narration of matter of fact, verse. 3, 4. Pharaohs Chariots
and his Host has he cast into the Red Sea; which he solely ascribes to God, v.
6. Thy right hand, oh Lord, is become glorious in power: thy right hand, oh
Lord, has dashed in pieces the Enemy; which he does Prophetically, as
respecting something to be done in After times; or further, for the completing
of that Deliverance; or as Others think, respecting their entering into Canaan,
for the words in these two Verses are put in the Future Tense. The manner of
the Deliverance is described verse 8. The Floods stood upright as an heap, and
the depths were congealed in the heart of the Sea. In the 9 th Verse, he
magnifies the Victory from the Vainglory and security of the Enemy; The Enemy
said, I will pursue, I will overtake, I will divide the spoil, etc. And Verse
16, 17. he Prophetically describes the fruit of this Victory, in the influence
it shall have upon those Nations, by whose Confines they were to Travel to the
Promised Land; Fear and dread shall fall upon them: By the greatness of thy Arm
they shall be as still as a stone, till thy People pass over which thou have
purchased. The phrase of this, and the 17 th and 18 th Verses, seems to be more
magnificent, than to design only the bringing the Israelites to the Earthly
Canaan; but seems to respect the gathering his Redeemed Ones together, to place
them in the Spiritual Sanctuary which he had established, wherein the Lord
should Reign for ever and ever, without any Enemies to disturb his Royalty; The
Lord shall reign for ever and ever, v. 18. The Prophet, in the midst of his
Historical Narrative, seems to be in an ecstasy, and breaks out in a stately
exaltation of God in the Text.

Who is like unto thee, oh Lord, among the gods, etc.] Interrogations are in
Scripture the strongest Affirmations or Negations: It Is here a strong
affirmation of the Incomparableness of God, and a strong denial of the
worthiness of all Creatures to be partners with him in the degrees of his
Excellency: It Is a preference of God before all Creatures in Holiness, to which
the purity of Creatures is but a shadow; in desert of Reverence and Veneration,
he being Fearful in praises. The Angels cover their Faces when they adore him
in his particular Perfections.

Amongst the gods.] Among the Idols of the Nations, say some; Others say River.
, It Is not to be found that the Heathen Idols are ever dignified with the Title
of Strong or Mighty, as the word translated Gods, does import; and therefore
understand it of the Angels, or other Potentates of the World; or rather
inclusively, of all that are noted for, and can lay claim to the Title of
Strength and Might upon the Earth or in Heaven. God is so great and Majestic,
that no Creature can share with him in his Praise.

Fearful in praises.] Various are the Interpretations of this passage: To be
reverenced in praises; his Praise ought to be celebrated with a Religious Fear.
Fear is the product of his Mercy as well as his Justice; He has forgiveness
that he may be feared, Psalm. 130.4. Or, Fearful in praises; whom none can
praise without Amazement at the considerations of his works. Calvin.
None can truly praise him without being affected with Astonishment at his
Greatness. Or, Fearful in praises; Munster.
whom no Mortal can sufficiently praise, since he is above all Praise.
Whatsoever a Human Tongue can speak, or an Angelical Understanding think of the
Excellency of his Nature and the Greatness of his Works, falls short of the
vastness of the Divine Perfection. A Creatures Praises of God are as much below
the transcendent Eminency of God, as the meaness of a Creatures Being is below
the Eternal Fullness of the Creator. Or rather, Fearful, or Terrible, in
praises; that is, in the Matter of thy Praise: And the Learned Rivet concurs
with me in this sense. The Works of God celebrated in this Song were Terrible:
It was the Miraculous overthrow of the Strength and Flower of a Mighty Nation:
His Judgments were severe, as well as his Mercy was seasonable. The word (...)
signifies Glorious and Illustrious, as well as Terrible and Fearful. No Man can
hear the Praise of thy Name, for those great Judicial Acts, without some
Astonishment at thy Justice, the stream, and thy Holiness the Spring of those
Mighty Works. This seems to be the sense of the following words, Doing wonders:
Fearful in the Matter of thy Praise, they being Wonders which thou have done
among us and for us.

Doing wonders.] Congealing the Waters by a Wind, to make them stand like Walls
for the rescue of the Israelites; and melting them by a Wind, for the overthrow
of the Egyptians, are Prodigies that challenge the greatest Adorations of that
Mercy which delivered the one, and that Justice which punished the other; and
of the Arm of that Power whereby he effected both his Gracious and his
Righteous Purposes.

the Judgments of God upon his Enemies, as well as his Mercies to his People,
are matter of Praise. The Perfections of God appear in both. Justice and Mercy
are so linkt together in his acts of Providence, that the one cannot be
forgotten whiles the other is acknowledged. He is never so Terrible as in the
Assemblies of his Saints, and the Deliverance of them, Psalm. 89.7. As the
Creation was erected by him for his Glory; so all the Acts of his Government
are designed for the same end: And his Creatures deny him his due, if they
acknowledge not his Excellency in whatsoever dreadful, as well as pleasing
Garbs, it appears in the World. His Terror as well as his Righteousness
appears, when he is a God of Salvation. Psalm. 65.5. By terrible things in
righteousness will thou answer us, oh God of our Salvation.

But the Expression I pitch upon in the Text to handle, is Glorious in
Holiness. He is Magnified or Honorable in Holiness; so the word (...) is
translated Isai. 42.21. He will magnify the Law and make it honorable. Thy
Holiness has shone forth admirably in this last Exploit, against the Enemies
and Oppressors of thy People. The Holiness of God is his Glory, as his Grace is
his Riches: Holiness is his Crown, and his Mercy is his Treasure. This is the
Blessedness and Nobleness of his Nature; it renders him Glorious in himself,
and Glorious to his Creatures, that understand any thing of this lovely
Perfection.

Holiness is a glorious Perfection belonging to the Nature of God. Hence he is
in Scripture styled often the Holy one, the Holy one of Jacob, the Holy one of
Israel; and oftener entitled Holy, than Almighty, and set forth by this part of
his Dignity more than by any other. This is more affixed as an Epithete to his
Name than any other: You never find it expressed, his Mighty Name, or his Wise
Name; but his Great Name, and most of all, his Holy Name. This is his greatest
Title of Honor, in this does the Majesty and Venerableness of his Name appear.
When the Sinfulness of Senacherib is aggravated, the Holy Ghost takes the rise
from this Attribute, 2 Kings 19.22. Thou have lift up thine eyes on high, even
against the Holy one of Israel; not against the Wise, Mighty, etc. but against
the Holy one of Israel, as that wherein the Majesty of God was most
illustrious. It Is upon this account he is called Light, as Impurity is called
Darkness; both in this sense are opposed to one another: He is a pure and
unmixt Light, free from all blemish in his Essence, Nature, and Operations.

1. Heathens have owned it. Proclus calls him, the Undefiled Governor of the
World (...).
. The Poetical Transformations of their False gods, and the Extravagancies
committed by them, was (in the account of the wisest of them) an unholy thing
to report and hear (...). Ammon. in Plut. de (...). apud Delphos, p. 393.
. Gassend. Tom. 1. Phys.. 1. lib. 4. cap. 2. p. 289.
And some vindicate Epicurus from the Atheism wherewith he was commonly
charged; that he did not deny the Being of God, but those Adulterous and
contentious Deities the People worshipped, which were Practices unworthy and
unbecoming the Nature of God. Hence they asserted, that Virtue was an Imitation
of God, and a Virtuous Man bore a resemblance to God: If Virtue were a Copy
from God, a greater Holiness must be owned in the Original. And when some of
them were at a loss, how to free God from being the Author of Sin in the World,
they ascribe the birth of Sin to Matter, and run into an absurd Opinion,
fancying it to be uncreated, that thereby they might exempt God from all
mixture of Evil; so Sacred with them was the Conception of God, as a Holy God.

2. The Absurdest Heretics have owned it. Petav. Theol. Dogmat. Tom. 1. lib.
6. cap. 5. p. 415.
The Manichees and Marchionites, that thought Evil came by Necessity, yet would
salve Gods being the Author of it, by asserting two distinct Eternal
Principles, One the Original of Evil, as God was the Fountain of good: So
rooted was the Notion of this Divine Purity, that none would ever slander
Goodness it self with that which was so disparaging to it.

3. The Nature of God cannot rationally be conceived without it. Though the
Power of God be the first Rational conclusion, drawn from the sight of his
Works; Wisdom the next, from the order and connection of his Works: Purity must
result from the beauty of his Works: That God cannot be deformed by Evil, who
has made every thing so Beautiful in its time. The Notion of a God cannot be
entertained without separating from him whatsoever is impure and bespotting
both in his Essence and Actions. Though we conceive him Infinite in Majesty,
Infinite in Essence, Eternal in Duration, Mighty in Power, and Wise and
Immutable in his Counsels; Merciful in his proceedings with Men, and whatsoever
other Perfections may dignifie so Sovereign a Being; yet if we conceive him
destitute of this excellent Perfection, and imagine him possessed with the
least contagion of Evil, we make him but an Infinite Monster, and fully all
those Perfections we ascribed to him before; we rather own him a Devil, than a
God. It Is a contradiction to be God and to be Darkness, or to have one Mote of
Darkness mixed with his Light. It Is a less Injury to him to deny his Being,
than to deny the Purity of it; the one makes him no God, the other a deformed,
unlovely, and a detestable God.

Plutarch said not amiss, That he should count himself less injured by that
Man, that should deny that there was such a Man as Plutarch, than by him that
should affirm that there was such a one indeed, but he was a debauched Fellow,
a loose and vicious Person. It Is a less wrong to God to discard any
acknowledgments of his Being, and to count him Nothing; than to believe him to
exist, but imagine a base and unholy Deity: He that says, God is not Holy,
speaks much worse than he that says, There is no God at all.

Let these two Things be considered:

I. If any, this Attribute has an excellency above his other Perfections.
There are some Attributes of God we prefer, because of our Interest in them,
and the relation they bear to us: As we esteem his Goodness before his Power;
and his Mercy whereby he relieves us, before his Justice whereby he punishes
us. As there are some we more delight in, because of the goodness we receive by
them; so there are some that God delights to honor, because of their
Excellency.

1. None is sounded out so loftily with such solemnity, and so frequently by
Angels that stand before his Throne, as this. Where do you find any other
Attribute trebled in the Praises of it, as this? Isai. 6.3. Holy, Holy, Holy is
the Lord of Hosts, the whole Earth is full of his Glory; and Rev. 4.8. The four
Beasts rest not day and night, saying, Holy, Holy, Holy Lord God, Almighty,
etc. His Power or Sovereignty, as Lord of Hosts, is but once mentioned; but
with a ternal repetition of his Holiness. Do you hear in any Angelical Song any
other Perfection of the Divine Nature thrice repeated? Where do we read of the
crying out Eternal, Eternal, Eternal; or Faithful, Faithful, Faithful Lord God
of Hosts? Whatsoever other Attribute is left out, this God would have to fill
the Mouths of Angels and Blessed Spirits for ever in Heaven.

2. He singles it out to swear by. Psalm. 89.35. Once have I sworn by my
Holiness, that I will not lie unto David: And Amos 4.2. The Lord will swear by
his Holiness: He twice swears by his Holiness; once by his Power, Isai. 62.8.
once by all, when he swears by his Name, Jer. 44.26. He lays here his Holiness
to pledge for the assurance of his Promise, as the Attribute most dear to him,
most valued by him, as though no other could give an assurance parallel to it
in this concern of an Everlasting Redemption which is there spoken of: He that
swears, swears by a greater than himself; God having no greater than himself,
swears by himself: And swearing here by his Holiness, seems to equal that
single one to all his other Attributes; as if he were more concerned in the
Honor of it, than of all the rest. It Is as if he should have said, since I
have not a more excellent Perfection to swear by, than that of my Holiness, I
lay this to pawn for your Security, and bind my self by that which I will never
part with, were it possible for me to be stripped of all the rest. It Is a tacit
Imprecation of himself, If I lie unto David, let me never be counted holy, or
thought righteous enough to be trusted by Angels or Men. This Attribute he
makes most of.

3. It Is his glory and beauty. Holiness is the Honor of the Creature,
sanctification and honor are linkt together, 1 Thessalonians. 4.4. much more is it the
honor of God; it is the Image of God in the Creature Ephesians. 4.24.
: When we take the Picture of a Man, we draw the most beautiful part, the Face,
which is a Member of the greatest excellency. When God would be drawn to the
Life, as much as can be, in the Spirit of his Creatures, He is drawn in this
Attribute, as being the most beautiful Perfection of God, and most valuable
with him. Power is his Hand and Arm, Omniscience, his Eye; Mercy, his Bowels;
Eternity, his Duration; his Holiness is his Beauty; 2 Chronicles. 20, 21. -- should
praise the Beauty of Holiness. In the 27 th Psalm and the 4 th Verse, David
desires to behold the Beauty of the Lord, and enquire in his Holy Temple; that
is, the Holiness of God manifested in his hatred of Sin in the daily
Sacrifices. Holiness was the Beauty of the Temple, Isai. 46.11. Holy and
Beautiful House are joined together; much more the Beauty of God that dwelt in
the Sanctuary.

This renders him lovely to all his Innocent Creatures, though formidable to
the Guilty ones. Plutarch. Eugubin. de Perenni Phil. lib. 6. cap. 6.
A Heathen Philosopher could call it, the Beauty of the Divine Essence, and
say, That God was not so happy by an Eternity of Life, as by an Excellency of
Virtue. And the Angels Song intimate it to be his glory, Isaiah 6.3. The whole
Earth is full of thy Glory; that is, of his Holiness in his Laws, and in his
Judgments against Sin; that being the Attribute applauded by them before.

4. It Is his very life. So it is called Ephesians. 4.18. Alienated from the Life of
God, that is, from the Holiness of God; speaking of the opposite to it, the
Vncleaness and Profaneness of the Gentiles. We are only alienated from that
which we are bound to imitate; but this is the Perfection, always set out as the
Pattern of our Actions, Be you holy, as I am Holy; no other is proposed as our
Copy. Alienated from that Purity of God, which is as much as his Life, without
which he could not live. If he were stripped of this, he would be a dead God
more, than by the want of any other Perfection. His Swearing by it intimates as
much; He Swears often by his own Life, As I live, says the Lord: so he Swears
by his Holiness, as if it were his Life, and more his Life than any other. Let
me not live, or Let me not be Holy, are all one in his Oath. His Deity could
not outlive the Life of his Purity.

II. As it seems to challenge an Excellency above all his other Perfections, so
it is the glory of all the rest. As it is the glory of the Godhead, so it is the
glory of every Perfection in the Godhead. As his Power is the Strength of them,
so his Holiness is the Beauty of them. As all would be weak without
Almightiness to back them; so all would be uncomly without Holiness to adorn
them. Should this be sullied, all the rest would lose their Honor and their
comfortable Efficacy. As at the same instant that the Sun should lose its
Light, it would lose its Heat, its Strength, its generative and quickening
virtue. As Sincerity is the luster of every Grace in a Christian; so is Purity
the splendour of every Attribute in the Godhead. His Justice, is a holy Justice;
his Wisdom, a holy Wisdom; his Arm of Power, a Holy Arm, Psalm. 98.1. his Truth
or Promise, a Holy Promise, Psalm. 105.42. Holy and True go hand in hand, Revel.
6.10. His Name, which signifies all his Attributes in conjunction, is Holy,
Psalm. 103.1. Yea, he is R^ghteous in all his ways, and Holy in all his works,
Psalm. 145, 17. It Is the Rule o^ all his Acts, the Source of all his
Punishments. If every Attribute of the Deity were a distinct Member, Purity
would be the Form, the Soul, the Spirit to animate them. Without it, his
Patience would be an Indulgence to Sin, his Mercy a Fondness, his Wrath a
Madness, his Power a Tyranny, his Wisdom an unworthy Subtilty. It Is this gives
a Decorum to all. His Mercy is not exercised without it, since he pardons none
but those that have an Interest, by Union, in the Obedience of a Mediator,
which was so delightful to his Infinite Purity. His Justice, which Guilty man
is apt to tax with Cruelty and Violence in the exercise of it, is not acted out
of the compass of this Rule. In Acts of Man's vindictive Justice there is
something of Impurity, Perturbation, Passion, some mixture of Cruelty; but none
of these fall upon God in the severest Acts of Wrath. When God appears to
Ezekiel in the resemblance of Fire, to signify his Anger against the House of
Judah for their Idolatry, from his Loins downward there was the appearance of
Fire; but from the Loins upward, the appearance of Brightness, as the color of
Amber, Ezekiel. 8.2. His Heart is clear in his most Terrible acts of Vengeance,
it is a pure Flame wherewith he scorcheth and burns his Enemies: He is Holy in
the most fiery appearance.

This Attribute therefore is never so much applauded, as when his Sword has
been drawn, and he has manifested the greatest fierceness against his Enemies.
The Magnificent and Triumphant expression of it in the Text, follows just upon
Gods Miraculous defeat and ruin of the Egyptian Army, The Sea covered them;
they sank as Lead in the mighty waters: Then it follows, Who is like unto thee,
oh Lord, glorious in Holiness? And when it was so celebrated by the Seraphims,
Isai. 6.3. it was when the Posts moved, and the House was filled with smoke, v.
4. which are signs of Anger, Psalm. 18.7, 8. And when he was about to send
Isaiah upon a Message of Spiritual and Temporal Judgments, that he would make
the heart of that people fat, and their ears heavy, and their eyes shut; waste
their Cities without Inhabitant, and their Houses without Man, and make the
Land desolate, Verses 9, 10, 11, 12. and the Angels which here applaud him for
his Holiness, are the Executioners of his Justice; and here called Seraphims,
from burning, or fiery Spirits, as being the Ministers of his Wrath. His
Justice is part of his Holiness, whereby he does reduce into order those things
that are out of order. When he is consuming Men by his Fury, he does not
diminish, but manifest Purity; Zephany 3.5. The just Lord is in the midst of
her, he will do no Iniquity. Every Action of his is free from all tincture of
Evil. It Is also celebrated with Praise by the four Beasts about his Throne,
when he appears in a Covenant garb, with a Rainbow about his Throne. and yet
with Thundrings and Lightnings shot out against his Enemies, Revel. 4.8.
compared with verse. 3.5. to show, that all his Acts of Mercy as well as
Justice, are clear from any stain.

This is the Crown of all his Attributes, the Life of all his Decrees, the
Brightness of all his Actions: Nothing is Decreed by him, nothing is acted by
him but what is worthy of the Dignity, and becoming the Honor of this
Attribute.

For the better understanding this Attribute* observe, 1. The Nature of this
Holiness. 2. The Demonstration of it. 3. The Purity of his Nature in all his
Acts about Sin. 4. The Use of all to our selves.


First, The Nature of Divine Holiness.

In General.

The Holiness of God Negatively, is a perfect and unpolluted freedom from all
Evil. As we call Gold pure that is not embased by any Dross, and that Garment
clean that is free from any Spot; so the Nature of God is estranged from all
shadow of Evil, all imaginable contagion.

Positively, It Is the Rectitude or Integrity of the Divine Nature, or that
conformity of it in Affection and Action to the Divine Will, as to his Eternal
Law, whereby he works with a becomingness to his own Excellency, and whereby he
has a delight and complacency in every thing agreeable to his Will, and an
abhorrency of every thing contrary thereunto.

As there is no darkness in his Understanding, so there is no spot in his Will:
As his Mind is possessed with all Truth, so there is no deviation in his Will
from it. He loves all Truth and Goodness; He hates all falsity and Evil. In
regard of his Righteousness, he loves Righteousness; Psalm. 11.7. The righteous
Lord loves righteousness; and, has no pleasure in wickedness, Psalm. 5.4. He
values Purity in his Creatures, and detests all Impurity, whether inward or
outward. Martin. de Deo, p. 86.
We may indeed distinguish the Holiness of God from his Righteousness in our
Conceptions: Holiness is a Perfection absolutely considered in the Nature of
God; Righteousness, a Perfection as referred to others in his Actions toward
them and upon them.

In Particular.

This Property of the Divine Nature is,

First, An essential and necessary Perfection: He is essentially and
necessarily Holy. It Is the essential glory of his Nature: His Holiness is as
necessary as his Being; as necessary as his Omniscience: As he cannot but know
what is right, so he cannot but do what is just. His Understanding is not as
Created Understandings, capable of Ignorance as well as Knowledge; so his Will
is not as Created Wills, capable of Unrighteousness, as well as Righteousness.
There can be no contradiction or contrariety in the Divine Nature, to know what
is right, and to do what is wrong: If so, there would be a diminu ion of his
Blessedness, he would not be a God always blessed, Blessed for ever, as he is
Romans 9 5.
. He is as necessarily Holy, as he is necessarily God; as necessarily without
Sin, as without Change. As he was God from Eternity, so he was Holy from
Eternity. Turre^in. de Satisfact. p. 28.
He was Gracious, Merciful, Just in his own Nature, and also Holy; though no
Creature had been framed by him to exercise his Grace, Mercy, Justice, or
Holiness upon. If God had not created a World, he had in his own Nature been
Almighty, and able to Create a World. If there never had been any thing but
himself, yet he had been Omniscient, knowing every thing that was within the
verge and compass of his Infinite Power; so he was Pure in his own Nature,
though he never had brought forth any Rational Creature whereby to manifest
this Purity. These Perfections are so necessary, that the Nature of God could
not subsist without them. And the acts of those ad intra, or within himself,
are necessary; for being Omniscient in Nature, there must be an act of
knowledge of himself and his own Nature. Being Infinitely Holy, an act of
Holiness in Infinitely loving himself, must necessarily flow from this
Perfection Ochino, Predic. part 3. Bodic. 51. p. 347, 348.
. As the Divine Will cannot but be perfect; so it cannot be wanting to render
the highest Love to it self, to its Goodness, to the Divine Nature, which is
due to him. Indeed the acts of those ad extra are not necessary, but upon a
condition. To love Righteousness without himself, or to detest Sin, or inflict
Punishment for the committing of it, could not have been, had there been no
Righteous Creature for him to love, no Sinning Creature for him to loath, and
to exercise his Justice upon as the Object of Punishment.

Some Attributes require a Condition to make the Acts of them necessary. As it
is at Gods liberty, whether he will create a Rational Creature, or no: But when
he decrees to make either Angel or Man, it is necessary from the Perfection of
his Nature to make them Righteous. It Is at Gods liberty whether he will speak
to Man, or no; but if he does, it is impossible for him to speak that which is
false, because of his Infinite Perfection of Veracity. It Is at his liberty
whether he will permit a Creature to Sin; but if he sees good to suffer it,
it is impossible but that he should detest that Creature that goes cross to his
Righteous Nature. His Holiness is not solely an Act of his Will, for then he
might be Unholy as well as Holy; he might love Iniquity and hate Righteousness;
he might then command that which is good, and afterward command that which is
bad and unworthy: For what is only an Act of his Will, and not belonging to his
Nature, is indifferenr to him. As the positive Law he gave to Adam, of not
eating the Forbidden Fruit, was a pure Act of his Will; he might have given him
liberty to eat of it, if he had pleased, as well as prohibited him. But what is
Moral and good in its own Nature, is necessarily willed by God, and cannot be
changed by him, because of the transcendent Eminency of his Nature, and
Righteousness of his Will. As it is impossible for God to command his Creature
to hate him, or to dispense with a Creature for not loving him; for this would
be to command a thing intrinsically Evil, the highest Ingratitude, the very
Spirit of all Wickedness, which consists in the hating God. Yet though God be
thus necessarily Holy, he is not so by a bare and simple necessity, as the Sun
shines, or the Fire burns; but by a free necessity, not compelled thereunto,
but inclined from the fullness of the Perfection of his own Nature and Will; so
as by no means he can be Unholy, because he will not be Unholy; it is against
his Nature to be so.

2. God is only absolutely Holy. There is none Holy as the Lord. 1 Samuel 2.2.
It Is the peculiar glory of his Nature. As there is none Good but God, so none
Holy but God. No Creature can be essentially Holy, because Mutable: Holiness is
the substance of God; but a Quality and Accident in a Creature. God is
Infinitely Holy, Creatures Finitely Holy. He is holy from Himself, Creatures
are holy by derivation from him. He is not only Holy, but Holiness; Holiness,
in the highest degree, is his sole Prerogative. As the highest Heaven is called
the Heaven of Heavens, because it embraces in its Circle all the Heavens, and
contains the Magnitude of them, and has a greater vastness above all that it
incloseth; so is God the Holy of Holies, He contains the Holiness of all
Creatures put together, and Infinitely more. As all the Wisdom, Excellency, and
Power of the Creatures, if compared with the Wisdom, Excellency, and Power of
God, is but Folly Vileness, and Weakness; so the highest created Purity, if set
in parallel with God, is but Impurity and Uncleaness. Revel. 15.4. Thou only
art Holy: It Is like the light of a Glowworm to that of the Sun Job 15.15.
; The Heavens are not pure in his sight, and his Angels he charged with folly,
Job 4 18. Though God has Crowned the Angels with an unspotted Sanctity, and
placed them in a habitation of Glory; yet as Illustrious as they are, they have
an Unworthiness in their own Nature to appear before the Throne of so Holy a
God; Their holiness grows dim and pale in his Presence. It Is but a weak shadow
of that Divine Purity, whose Light is so glorious, that it makes them cover
their faces out of weakness to behold it, and cover their Feet out of shame in
themselves. They are not pure in his sight, because though they love God (which
is a Principle of Holiness) as much as they can, yet not so much as he
deserves: They love him with the intensest degree, according to their Power;
but not with the intensest degree, according to his own Amiableness: For they
cannot infinitely love God, unless they were as Infinite as God, and had an
understanding of his Perfections equal with himself, and as immense as his own
Knowledge. God having an Infinite Knowledge of himself, can only have an
Infinite Love to himself, and consequently an Infinite Holiness without any
defect; because he loves himself according to the vastness of his own
Amiableness, which no finite Being can. Therefore, though the Angels be exempt
from Corruption and Soil, they cannot enter into comparison with the Purity of
God, without acknowledgment of a dimness in themselves. Besides, He charges
them with folly, and puts no trust in them; because they have the power of
sinning, though not the act of sinning: They have a possible Folly in their own
Nature to be charged with. Holiness is a quality separable from them, but it is
inseparable from God. Had they not at first a mutability in their Nature, none
of them could have sinned, there had been no Devils; but because some of them
sinned, the rest might have sinned: And though the standing Angels shall never
be changed, yet they are still changeable in their own Nature, and their
standing is due to Grace, not to Nature; and though they shall be for ever
preserved, yet they are not, nor ever can be Immutable by Nature, for then they
should stand upon the same bottom with God himself; but they are supported by
Grace against that Changeableness of Nature which is essential to a Creature:
The Creator only has Immortality, that is, Immutability 1. Tim. 3.16.
.

It Is as certain a Truth, that no Creature can be naturally Immutable and
Impeccable, as that God cannot create any thing actually polluted and
imperfect. It Is as possible that the highest Creature may sin, as it is
possible that it may be annihilated: It may become not holy, as it may become
not a Creature, but Nothing. The Holiness of a Creature may be reduced into
Nothing, as well as his Substance: But the Holiness of the Creator cannot be
diminished, dimmed, or overshadowed; James 1.17. He is the Father of lights,
with whom is no variableness or shadow of turning. It Is as impossible his
Holiness should be blotted, as that his Deity should be extinguished: For
whatsoever Creature has essentially such or such qualities, cannot be stripped
of them, without being turned out of its Essence. As a Man is essentially
Rational; and if he cease to be Rational, he cease to be Man. The Sun is
essentially Luminous; if it should become dark in its own Body, it would cease
to be the Sun. In regard of this absolute and only Holiness of God, it is thrice
repeated by the Seraphims, Isai. 6.3. The Threefold Repetition of a word notes
the Certainty or Absoluteness of the thing, or the Irreversibleness of the
Resolve; as Ezekiel. 21.27. I will overturn, overturn, overturn, notes the
Certainty of the Judgment; also Revel. 8.8. Woe, woe, woe, Three times
repeated, signifies the same. The Holiness of God is so absolutely peculiar to
him, that it can no more be expressed in Creatures, than his Omnipotence, whereby
they may be able to create a World; or his Omniscience, whereby they may be
capable of knowing all things, and knowing God as he knows himself.

3. God is so holy, that he cannot possibly approve of any Evil done by
another, but does perfectly abhor it; it would not else be a glorious holiness:
Psalm. 5.3. He has no pleasure in wickedness. He does not only love that which
is just, but abhor with a perfect hatred, all things contrary to the Rule of
Righteousness. Holiness can no more approve of sin than it can commit it: To be
delighted with the evil in another act, contracts a Guilt, as well as the
Commission of it; for approbation of a thing is a consent to it: Sometime the
approbation of an evil in another is a more grievous Crime than the act it
self, as appears in Romans 1.32. who knowing the Judgment of God, not only do the
same, but have pleasure in them that do it: Where the (not only) manifests it
to be a greater guilt to take pleasure in them. Every sin is aggravated by the
delight in it; to take pleasure in the evil of another Act on, shows a more
ardent affection and love to sin, than the Committer himself may have. This
therefore can as little fall upon God, as to do an evil act himself; yet as a
man may be delighted with the Consequences of another sin, as it may occasion
some public good, or private good to the guilty person; as sometimes it may be
an occasion of his repentance, when the horridness of a fact stares him in the
face, and occasions a self-reflection for that, and other Crimes, which is
attended with an indignation against them, and sincere remorse for them; so God
is pleased with those good things his Goodness and Wisdom bring forth upon the
occasion of sin. But in regard of his Holiness, he cannot approve of the evil,
whence his Infinite Wisdom drew forth his own glory, and his Creatures good:
His Pleasure is not in the sinful act of the Creature, but in the act of his
own goodness and skill turning it to another end than what the Creature aimed
at.

1. He abhors it necessarily. Holiness is the glory of the Deity, therefore
necessary. The Nature of God is so holy, that he cannot but hate it. Hab. 1.13.
Thou art of purer eyes than to behold evil, and can not look on iniquity: He
is more opposite to it, than light to darkness, and therefore it can expect no
countenance from him: A love of holiness cannot be without a hatred of every
thing that is contrary to it: As God necessarily loves himself, so he must
necessarily hate every thing that is against himself: And as he loves himself
for his own excellency and holiness, he must necessarily detest whatsoever is
repugnant to his holiness, because of the evil of it: Since he is infinitely
good, he cannot but love goodness, as it is a resemblance to himself, and
cannot but abhor unrighteousness, as being most distant from him, and contrary
to him. If he have any esteem for his own Perfections, he must needs have an
implacable aversion to all that is so repugnant to him, that would, if it were
possible, destroy him, and is a point directed, not only against his glory, but
against his life. If he did not hate it, he would hate himself: For since
Righteousness is his Image, and Sin would deface his Image; if he did not love
his Image, and loath what is against his Image, he would loath himself, he
would be an Enemy to his own Nature: Turretin. de satisfact. p. 35.36.
Nay, if it were possible for him to love it, it were possible for him not to
be holy, it were possible then for him to deny himself, and will that he were
no God, which is a palpable Contradiction. Yet this necessity in God of hating
sin, is not a brutish necessity, such as is in mere Animals, that avoid by a
natural Instinct, not of choice, what is prejudicial to them; but most free, as
well as necessary, arising from an infinite knowledge of his own Nature, and of
the evil nature of Sin, and the contrariety of it to his own Excellency, and
the order of his works.

2. Therefore intensely. Nothing do men act for more than their glory. As he
does infinitely, and therefore perfectly know himself, so he infinitely, and
therefore perfectly knows what is contrary to himself, and, as according to the
manner and measure of his knowledge of himself, is his love to himself, as
infinite as his knowledge, and therefore unexpressible and unconceivable by us:
So from the perfection of his knowledge of the evil of Sin, which is infinitely
above what any Creature can have, does arise a displeasure against it suitable
to that knowledge. In Creatures the degrees of affection to, or aversion from a
thing, are suited to the strength of their apprehensions of the good or evil in
them. God knows not only the workers of wickedness, but the wickedness of their
works Job 11.11.
, for he knows vain men, he sees wickedness also. The vehemence of this hatred
is expressed variously in Scripture; he loathes it so, that he is impatient of
beholding it; the very sight of it affects him with detestation, Hab. 1.13. he
hates the first spark of it in the imagination, Zach. 8.17. with what variety
of expressions does he repeat his indignation at their polluted Services; Amos
5.21, 22. I hate, I detest, I despise, I will not smell, I will not accept, I
will not regard; take away from me the noise of thy Songs, I will not hear. So
Isai. 1.14. My Soul hates, they are a trouble to me, I am weary to bear them.
It Is the abominable thing that he hates, Jer. 44.4. he is vexed and fretted at
it, Isai. 63.10. Ezekiel. 16.43. He abhors it so, that his hatred redounds upon
the Person that commits it. Psalm. 5.5. He hates all workers of Iniquity. Sin is
the only primary Object of his Displeasure: He is not displeased with the
Nature of man as man, for that was derived from him; but with the Nature of man
as sinful, which is from the sinner himself. When a man has but one Object for
the exercise of all his Anger, it is stronger than when diverted to many
Objects: A mighty Torrent, when diverted into many Streams is weaker than when
it comes in a full Body upon once place only. The Infinite anger and hatred of
God, which is as infinite as his love and mercy, has no other Object, against
which he directs the mighty force of it, but only Unrighteousness. He hates no
Person for all the penal Evils upon him, though they were more by ten thousand
times than Job was struck with, but only for his sin. Again, Sin being only
evil, and an unmixt evil, there is nothing in it that can abate the detestation
of God, or balance his hatred of it; there is not the least grain of goodness
in it, to incline him to the least affection to any part of it. This hatred
cannot but be intense; for as the more any Creature is sanctified, the more is
he advanced in the abhorrence of that which is contrary to Holiness; therefore
God being the Highest, most Absolute and Infinite Holiness, does infinitely,
and therefore intensly, hate unholiness; being infinitely righteous, does
infinitely abhor unrighteousness; being infinitely true, does infinitely abhor
falsity, as it is the greatest and most deformed evil. As it is from the
righteousness of his Nature, that he has a content and satisfaction in
righteousness: Psalm. 11.7. The righteous Lord loves righteousness. So it is
from the same righteousness of his Nature, that he detests whatsoever is
morally evil: As his Nature therefore is Infinite, so must his abhorrence be.

3. Therefore universally, because necessarily and intensly. He does not hate
it in one, and indulge it in another, but loathes it wherever he finds it; not
one worker of Iniquity is exempt from it: Psalm. 5.5. Thou hate all workers of
iniquity. For it is not sin, as in this or that person, or as great or little;
but sin, as sin is the Object of his hatred: And therefore let the person be
never so great, and have particular Characters of his Image upon him, it
secures him not from God's hatred of any evil action he shall commit. He is a
jealous God, jealous of his Glory Exodus 20.5.
; a Metaphor taken from jealous Husbands, who will not endure the least
Adultery in their Wives, nor God the least defection of man from his Law. Every
act of sin is a spiritual Adultery, denying God to be the chief Good, and
giving that Prerogative by that Act to some vile thing. He loves it no more in
his own People than he does in his Enemies; he frees them not from his Rod, the
testimony of his loathing their Crimes: Whosoever sows Iniquity, shall reap
Affliction. It might be thought that he affected their Dross, if he did not
refine them, and loved their filth, if he did not cleanse them; because of his
detestation of their sin, he will not spare them from the Furnace, though
because of love to their persons in Christ, he will exempt them from Tophet.
How did the Sword ever and anon drop down upon David's Family after his
unworthy dealing in Vriah's Case, and cut off ever and anon some of the
Branches of it? He does sometimes punish it more severely in this Life in his
own People, than in others: Upon Jonah's Disobedience a Storm pursues him, and
a Whale devours him, while the Profane World lived in their Lusts without
control. Moses for one act of Unbelief is excluded from Canaan, when greater
Sinners attained that happiness. It Is not a light punishment, but a vengeance
he takes on their Inventions Psalm. 99 8.
, to manifest that he hates sin as sin, and not because the worst persons
commit it. Perhaps, had a profane Man touched the Ark, the hand of God had not
so suddenly reached him: But when Vzzah, a man zealous for him, as may be
supposed by his care for the support of the tottering Ark, would step out of
his place, he strikes him down for his disobedient Action, by the side of the
Ark, which he would indirectly (as not being a Levite) sustain 2 Samuel 6.7
. Nor did our Savior so sharply reprove the Pharisees, and turn so short from
them as he did from Peter, when he gave a carnal advise, and contrary to that
wherein was to be the greatest manifestation of God's Holiness, viz. the Death
of Christ (...)
. He calls him Satan, a name sharper than the title of the Devil's Children
wherewith he marked the Pharisees, and given (besides him) to none but Judas,
who made a profession of love to him, and was outwardly ranked in the number of
his Disciples. A Gardener hates a Weed the more for being in the bed with the
most precious Flowers. God's hatred is universally fixed against sin, and he
hates it as much in those whose Persons shall not fall under his eternal Anger,
as being secured in the Arms of a Redeemer, by whom the Guilt is wiped of, and
the filth shall be totally washed away: Though he hates their sin, and cannot
but hate it, yet he loves their Persons, as being united as Members to the
Mediator and Mystical Head. A man may love a gangrened Member, because it is a
Member of his own Body, or a Member of a dear Relation, but he loathes the
gangrene in it more than in those wherein he is not so much concerned.

Though God's hatred of Believers Persons is removed by Faith in the
Satisfactory Death of Jesus Christ; yet his Antipathy against sin was not taken
away by that Blood; nay, it was impossible it should: It was never designed,
nor had it any capacity to alter the unchangeable Nature of God, but to
manifest the unspottedness of his Will, and his eternal Aversion to any thing
that was contrary to the Purity of his Being, and the Righteousness of his Laws.

4. Perpetually: This must necessarily follow upon the others. He can no more
cease to hate Impurity, than he can cease to love Holiness: If he should in the
least instant approve of any thing that is filthy, in that moment he would
disapprove of his own Nature and Being; there would be an interruption in his
love of himself, which is as Eternal as it is Infinite. How can he love any
sin, which is contrary to his Nature, but for one moment, without hating his
own Nature, which is essentially contrary to sin? Two Contraries cannot be
loved at the same time; God must first begin to hate himself, before he can
approve of any evil which is directly opposite to himself. We indeed are
changed with a Temptation, sometimes bear an affection to it, and sometimes
testify an indignation against it; but God is always the same without any
shadow of change, and is angry with the wicked every day, Psalm. 7.11. that is,
uninterruptedly in the nature of his Anger, though not in the effects of it.
God indeed may be reconciled to the Sinner, but never to the sin; for then he
should renounce himself, deny his own Essence and his own Divinity, if his
inclinations to the love of Goodness, and his aversion from Evil could be
changed; if he suffered the Contempt of the one, and encouraged the Practice of
the other.

4. God is so holy, that he cannot but love Holiness in others. Not that he
owes any thing to his Creature, but from the unspeakable holiness of his
Nature, whence affections to all things that bear a resemblance of him do flow;
as Light shoots out from the Sun, or any glittering Body: It Is essential to the
infinite Righteousness of his Nature to love Righteousness wherever he beholds
it: Psalm. 11.7. The righteous Lord loves righteousness. He cannot, because of
his Nature, but love that which bears some agreement with his Nature, that
which is the curious Draught of his own Wisdom and Purity: He cannot but be
delighted with a Copy of himself: He would not have a holy Nature, if he did
not love Holiness in every Nature: His own Nature would be denied by him, if he
did not affect every thing that had a Stamp of his own Nature upon it. There
was indeed nothing without God, that could invite him to manifest such Goodness
to man, as he did in Creation: But after he had stamped that rational Nature
with a Righteousness convenient for it, it was impossible but that he should
ardently love that Impression of himself, because he loves his own Deity, and
consequently all things which are any Sparks and Images of it: And were the
Devils capable of an act of Righteousness, the Holiness of his Nature would
incline him to love it, even in those dark and revolted Spirits.

5. God is so holy, that he cannot positively will or encourage sin in any. How
can he give any Encouragement to that, which he cannot in the least approve of,
or look upon without loathing, not only the Crime but the Criminal? Light may
sooner be the cause of Darkness, than Holiness it self be the cause of
Unholiness, absolutely contrary to it: It Is a Contradiction, that he that is
the Fountain of Good, should be the source of Evil; as if the same Fountain
should bubble up both sweet and bitter Streams; salt and fresh Jam. 3.11.
. Since whatsoever Good is in man, acknowledges God for its Author, it follows
that men are Evil by their own fault. There is no need for men to be incited to
that, to which the Corruption of their own Nature does so powerfully bend them.
Water has a forcible principle in its own Nature to carry it downward; it
needs no force to hasten the motion: God tempts no man, but every man is drawn
away by his own Lust, Jam. 1 13.14. All the preparations for glory are from
God, Romans 9.23. but men are said to be fitted to destruction, Verse 22. but God
is not said to fit them; they by their Iniquities fit themselves for ruin, and
he by his long suffering keeps the destruction from them for a while.

1. First, God cannot command any Unrighteousness. As all Virtue is summed up
in a love to God, so all Iniquity is summed up in an enmity to God: Every
wicked Work declares a man an Enemy to God: Col. 1.21. Enemies in your minds by
wicked Works. If he could command his Creature any thing which bears an enmity
in its Nature to himself, he would then implicitly command the hatred of
himself, and he would be in some measure a hater of himself: He that commands
another to deprive him of his Life, cannot be said to bear any love to his own
Life. God can never hate himself, and therefore cannot command any thing that
is hateful to him, and tends to a hating of him, and driving the Creature
further from him. In that very moment that God should command such a thing, he
would cease to be Good. What can be more absurd to imagine, then that infinite
Goodness should enjoin a thing contrary to it self, and contrary to the
essential Duty of a Creature, and order him to do any thing that bespeaks an
enmity to the Nature of the Creator, or a deflouring and disparaging his Works?
God cannot but love himself, and his own Goodness, he were not otherwise Good;
and therefore cannot order the Creature to do any thing opposite to this
Goodness, or any thing hurtful to the Creature it self, as Unrighteousness is.

2. Nor can God secretly inspire any Evil into us. It Is as much against his
Nature to incline the heart to sin, as it is to command it: As it is impossible
but that he should love himself, and therefore impossible to enjoin any thing
that tends to a hatred of himself; by the same reason it is as impossible that
he should infuse such a Principle in the heart, that might carry a man out to
any act of Enmity against him. To enjoin one thing, and incline to another,
would be an Argument of such insincerity, unfaithfulness, contradiction to it
self, that it cannot be conceived to fall within the Compass of the Divine
Nature Deuteronomy. 32.4.
, who is a God without iniquity, because a God of truth and sincerity, just and
right is he. To bestow excellent Faculties upon Man in Creation, and incline
him by a sudden impulsion to things contrary to the true end of him, and
induce an inevitable ruin upon that Work, which he had composed with so much
Wisdom and Goodness, and pronounced good with so much delight and Pleasure, is
inconsistent with that love which God bears to the Creature of his own framing:
To incline his Will to that which would render him the Object of his hatred,
the Fuel for his Justice, and sink him into deplorable Misery, it is most
absurd, and unchristian-like to imagine.

3. Nor can God necessitate man to sin. Indeed sin cannot be committed by
force; there is no sin but is in some sort voluntary: Voluntary in the root, or
voluntary in the branch; voluntary by an immediate act of the Will, or
voluntary by a general or natural inclination of the Will. That is not a Crime,
to which a man is violenc'd, without any concurrence of the Faculties of the
Soul to that act; it is indeed not an act, but a passion; a man that is forced,
is not an Agent, but a Patient under the force: But what necessity can there be
upon Man from God, since he has implanted such a Principle in him, that he
cannot desire any thing but what is good, either really or apparently; and if a
man mistakes the Object, it is his own fault; for God has endowed him with
Reason to discern, and liberty of Will to choose upon that Judgment.

And though it is to be acknowledged that God has an Absolute Sovereign
Dominion over his Creature, without any Limitation, and may do what he pleases,
and dispose of it according to his own Will, as a Potter does with his Vessel,
Romans 9.21. according as the Church speaks, Isa. 64.8. We are the Clay, and thou
our Potter; and we all are the work of thy hand: Yet he cannot pollute any
undefiled Creature by virtue of that Sovereign Power, which he has to do what
he will with it; because such an act would be contrary to the Foundation and
Right of his Dominion, which consists in the excellency of his Nature, his
immense Wisdom and unspotted Purity: If God should therefore do any such act,
he would expunge the right of his Dominion, by blotting out that nature which
renders him fit for that Dominion, and the exercise of it Amyrald. disert. pa*
103, 104.
. Any Dominion which is exercised without the Rules of goodness, is not a true
Sovereignty, but an insupportable Tyranny. God would cease to be a rightful
Sovereign, if he ceased to be good; and he would cease to be good, if he did
command, necessitate, or by any positive operation incline inwardly the heart
of a Creature, directly to that which were morally evil, and contrary to the
eminency of his own Nature.

But that we may the better conceive of this, let us trace Man in his first
fall, whereby he subjected himself and all his Posterity to the Curse of the
Law and hatred of God; we shall find no footsteps, either of Precept, outward
force, or inward impulsion Amyrald. defens. de Calvin. p. 151. 152
. The plain story of Man's Apostasy discharges God from any interest in the
Crime as an encouragement, and excuses him from any appearance of suspicion,
when he showed him the Tree he had reserved, as a mark of his Sovereignty, and
forbad him to eat of the Fruit of it: He backed the Prohibition with the
threatening the greatest Evil, viz. Death; which could be understood to imply
nothing less than the loss of all his happiness; and in that couched an
assurance of the perpetuity of his felicity, if he did not rebelliously reach
forth his hand to take and eat of the Fruit Genesis 2.16, 17
. It Is true, God had given that Fruit an excellency, a goodness for food, and a
pleasantness to the eye Genesis 3.6.
. He had given Man an appetite, whereby he was capable of desiring so pleasant
a Fruit; but God had by Creation ranged it under the Command of Reason, if man
would have kept it in its due Obedience; he had fixed a severe Threatening to
bar the unlawful Excursions of it: He had allowed him a multitude of other
Fruits in the Garden, and given him liberty enough to satisfy his Curiosity in
all except this only. Could there be any thing more obliging to Man, to let God
have his reserve of that one Tree, than the grant of all the rest: and more
deterring from any disobedient Attempt than so strict a Command, spirited with
so dreadful a Penalty? God did not solicit him to rebel against him: A
solicitation to it, and a command against it, were inconsistent. The Devil
assaults him, and God permitted it, and stands as it were a Spectator of the
issue of the Combat. There could be no necessity upon Man to listen to, and
entertain the Suggestions of the Serpent: He had a power to resist him, and he
had an answer ready for all the Devils Arguments, had they been multiplied to
more than they were; the opposing the Order of God, had been a sufficient
Confutaion of all the Devils plausible reasonings: That Creator who has given
me my being, has ordered me not to eat of it. Though the pleasure of the Fruit
might allure him, yet the force of his Reason might have quelled the
liquorishness of his Sense: The perpetual thinking of, and sounding out the
command of God, had silenced both Satan and his own Appetite; had disarmed the
Tempter, and preserved his Sensitive part in its due subjection. What
inclination can we suppose there could be from the Creator, when upon the very
first offer of the Temptation, Eve opposes to the Tempter the Prohibition and
Threatening of God, and strains it to a higher peg than we find God had
delivered it in? For in Genesis 2.17. it is you shall not eat of it; but she adds,
Genesis 3.3. neither shall you touch it: which was a Remark that might have had
more influence to restrain her. Had our first Parents kept this fixed upon
their Understandings and Thoughts, that God had forbidden any such act as the
Eating of the Fruit, and that he was true to execute the Threatening he had
uttered, of which Truth of God they could not but have a natural Notion, with
what ease might they have withstood the Devils attacked, and defeated his
Design? And it had been easy with them, to have kept their Understandings by
the force of such a thought, from entertaining any contrary Imagination. There
is no ground for any jealousy of any Encouragements, inward Impulsions, or
necessity from God in this Affair. A discharge of God from this first sin will
easily induce a freedom of him from all other sins which follow upon it.

God does not then Encourage or Excite or Incline to sin. How can he excite to
that, which when it is done, he will be sure to condemn? How can he be a
Righteous Judge to sentence a sinner to Misery for a Crime acted by a secret
Inspiration from himself? Iniquity would deserve no reproof from him, if he
were any way positively the Author of it. Were God the Author of it in us, what
is the reason our own Consciences accuse us for it, and convince us of it?
that, being God's Deputy, would not accuse us of it, if the Sovereign Power by
which it acts, did incline us to it: How can he be thought to excite to that
which he has enacted such severe Laws to restrain, or incline Man to that
which he has so dreadfully punished in his Son, and which it is impossible but
the excellency of his Nature must incline him eternally to hate? We may sooner
imagine that a pure Flame shall engender Cold, and Darkness be the Offspring
of a Sunbeam, as imagine such a thing as this. What shall we say, is there
unrighteousness with God? God forbid. The Apostle execrates such a thought;
Romans 9.14.

6. God cannot act any Evil, in or by himself. If he cannot approve of sin in
others, nor excite any to iniquity, which is less, he cannot commit Evil
himself, which is greater: What he cannot positively will in another, can never
be willed in himself; he cannot do evil through Ignorance, because of his
Infinite Knowledge; nor through Weakness, because of his Infinite Power; nor
through Malice, because of his Infinite Rectitude. He cannot will any unjust
thing, because having an infinitely perfect Understanding, he cannot judge that
to be true which is false; or that to be good, which is evil; his Will is
regulated by his Wisdom: If he could will any unjust and irrational thing, his
Will would be repugnant to his Understanding; there would be a disagreement in
God, Will against Mind, and Will against Wisdom: He being the highest Reason,
the first Truth, cannot do an unreasonable, false, defective Action. It Is not a
defect in God that he cannot do Evil, but a fullness and excellency of Power: As
it is not a weakness in the Light, but the perfection of it, that it is unable
to produce Darkness: God is the Father of Lights, with whom is no variableness,
James 1.17. Nothing pleases him, nothing is acted by him, but what is beseeming
the Infinite excellency of his own Nature: The voluntary necessity whereby God
cannot be unjust, renders him a God blessed for ever: He would hate himself as
the chief Good, if in any of his Actions he should disagree with his Goodness.
He cannot do any unworthy thing, not because he wants an Infinite Power, but
because he is possessed of an Infinite Wisdom, and adorned with an Infinite
Purity; and being infinitely pure, cannot have the least mixture of impurity.
As if you can suppose Fire infinitely hot, you cannot suppose it to have the
least mixture of Coldness: The better any thing is, the more unable it is to do
evil: God being the only Goodness, can as little be changed in his Goodness, as
in his Essence.



2. The next enquiry is, The Proof that God is holy, or the manifestation of
it. Purity is as requisite to the blessedness of God, as to the Being of God:
As he could not be God without being blessed, so he could not be blessed
without being holy. He is called by the title of blessed, as well as by that of
holy, Mark 14.61. Art thou the Christ, the Son of the Blessed? Unrighteousness
is a misery and turbulency in any Spirit wherein it is: For it is a privation
of an excellency which ought to be in every intellectual Being, and what can
follow upon the privation of an excellency but unquietness and grief, the moth
of Happiness? An unrighteous man, as an unrighteous man, can never be blessed,
though he were in a local Heaven. Had God the least Spot upon his Purity, it
would render him as miserable in the midst of his Infinite Sufficiency, as
Iniquity renders a man in the confluence of his earthly Enjoyments. The
Holiness and Felicity of God are inseparable in him. The Apostle intimates that
the Heathen made an attempt to sully his Blessedness, when they would liken him
to corruptible, mutable, impure man; Romans 1.23, 25. They changed the Glory of
the Incorruptible God into an Image made like to Corruptible Man: And after, he
entitles God, a God blessed for ever. The Gospel is therefore called, The
glorious Gospel of the blessed God, 1 Timothy 1.11. In regard of the holiness of
the Gospel Precepts, and in regard of the Declaration of the holiness of God in
all the Streams and Branches, wherein his Purity, in which his Blessedness
consists, is as illustrious as any other Perfection of the Divine Being. God
has highly manifested this Attribute in the state of Nature; in the Legal
Administration; in the dispensation of the Gospel. His Wisdom, Goodness, and
Power are declared in Creation; his Sovereign Authority in his Law; his Grace
and Mercy in the Gospel; and his Righteousness in all. Suitable to this
threefold state, may be that ternal Repetition of his Holiness in the Prophecy,
Isai. 6.3. holy as Creator and Benefactor; holy as Lawgiver and Judge; holy as
Restorer and Redeemer.

1. His holiness appears as he is Creator, in framing man in a perfect
Vprightness. Angels, as made by God, could not be evil; for God beheld his own
Works with pleasure, and could not have pronounced them all good, had some been
created pure, and others impure: Two Moral Contrarieties could not be good. The
Angels had a first estate, wherein they were happy Jude 6.
; and had they not left their own habitation and state, they could not have
been miserable. But because the Scripture speaks only of the Creation of man,
we will consider, that the Humane Nature was well strung and tuned by God,
according to the Note of his own Holiness: Eccl. 7.29. God has made man
upright: He had declared his Power in other Creatures, but would declare in his
Rational Creature, what he most valued in himself; and therefore created him
upright, with a Wisdom which is the rectitude of the Mind, with a Purity which
is the rectitude of the Will and Affections. He had declared a purity in other
Creatures, as much as they were capable of, viz. in the exact tuning them to
answer one another. And that God, who so well tuned and composed other
Creatures, would not make Man a Jarring Instrument, and place a cracked Creature
to be Lord of the rest of his earthly Fabric. God being holy, could not set
his Seal upon any Rational Creature, but the Impression would be like himself,
pure and holy also: He could not be created with an Error in his Understanding;
that had been inconsistent with the Goodness of God to his Rational Creature;
if so, the erroneous motion of the Will, which was to follow the dictates of
the Understanding, could not have been imputed to him as his Crime, because it
would have been, not a voluntary, but a necessary effect of his Nature; had
there been an error in the first Wheel, the error of the next could not have
been imputed to the Nature of that, but to the irregular motion of the first
Wheel in the Engine. The sin of Men and Angels proceeded not from any natural
defect in their Understandings, but from Inconsideration: He that was the
Author of Harmony in his other Creatures, could not be the Author of Disorder
in the chief of his Works: Other Creatures were his Footsteps, but man was his
Image Genesis 1.26, 27.
; Let us make man in our image, after our likeness: Which though it seems to
imply no more in that place, than an Image of his Dominion over the Creatures,
yet the Apostle raises it a peg higher, and gives us a larger Interpretation of
it, Col. 3.10. And have put on the New-man, which is renewed in knowledge after
the Image of him that created him; making it to consist in a resemblance to his
Righteousness. Image, say some, notes the form, as Man was a Spirit in regard
of his Soul: Likeness notes the quality implanted in his Spiritual Nature: The
Image of God was drawn in him, both as he was a Rational, and as he was a holy
Creature. The Creatures manifested the being of a Superior Power, as their
Cause, but the Righteousness of the first Man evidenced, not only a Sovereign
Power, as the Donor of his being; but a holy Power, as the Pattern of his Work:
God appeared to be a holy God in the Righteousness of his Creature, as well as
an Understanding God in the Reason of his Creature, while he formed him with
all necessary knowledge in his Mind, and all necessary uprightness in his Will:
The Law of Love to God, with his whole soul, his whole mind, his whole heart
and strength, was originally writ upon his Nature: All the parts of his Nature
were framed in a Moral Conformity with God, to answer this Law, and imitate God
in his Purity, which consists in a love of himself, and his own Goodness and
Excellency. Thus does the clearness of the Stream point us to the purer
Fountain, and the brightness of the Beam evidence a greater splendour in the Sun
which shot it out.

2. His Holiness appears in his Laws, as he is a Lawgiver and a Judge. Since
Man was bound to be subject to God, as a Creature, and had a capacity to be
ruled by the Law, as an understanding and willing Creature, God gave him a Law
taken from the depths of his holy Nature, and suited to the Original Faculties
of Man. The Rules which God has fixed in the World, are not the Resolves of
bare Will, but result particularly from the Goodness of his Nature: They are
nothing else but the Transcripts of his Infinite detestation of sin, as he is
the unblemisht Governor of the World. This being the most adorable Property of
his Nature, he has impressed it upon that Law which he would have inviolably
observed as a perpetual Rule for our Actions, that we may every moment think of
this beautiful Perfection. God can command nothing, but what has some
similitude with the rectitude of his own Nature: All his Laws, every Paragraph
of them therefore scent of this, and glitter with it. Deuteronomy. 4.8. What Nation
has Statutes and Judgments so righteous as all this Law I set before you this
day? and therefore they are compared to fine Gold that has no speck or dross
Psalm. 19.10.
.

This Purity is evident 1. In the Moral Law, or Law of Nature. 2. In the
Ceremonial Law. 3. In the Allurements annexed to it for keeping it, and the
Affrightments to restrain from the breaking of it. 4. In the Judgments
inflicted for the Violation of it.


1. In the Moral Law: Which is therefore dignified with the title of holy twice
in one Verse, Romans 7.12. Wherefore the Law is holy, and the Commandment is
holy, just, and good: It being the express Image of God's Will, as our Savior
was of his Person, and bearing a resemblance to the Purity of his Nature. The
Tables of this Law were put into the Ark, that as the Mercy Seat was to
represent the Grace of God, so the Law was to represent the Holiness of God
Psalm. 19.1.
. The Psalmist, after he had spoken of the Glory of God in the Heavens, wherein
the Power of God is exposed to our view, introduces the Law, wherein the
Purity of God is evidenced to our Minds Verse. 7, 8. etc.
; perfect, pure, clean, righteous are the titles given to it. It Is clearer in
Holiness, than the Sun is in brightness; and more mighty in it self to command
the Conscience, than the Sun is to run its Race. As the Holiness of the
Scripture demonstrates the Divinity of its Author; so the Holiness of the Law
does the Purity of the Lawgiver.

1. The purity of this Law is seen in the Matter of it. It prescribes all that
becomes a Creature toward God, and all that becomes one Creature toward
another of his own rank and kind. The Image of God is complete in the Holiness
of the first Table, and the Righteousness of the second; which is intimated by
the Apostle, Ephesians. 4.24. the one being the Rule of what we owe to God; the other
being the Rule of what we owe to man: There is no good but it enjoins, and no
evil but it disowns. It Is not sickly and lame in any part of it; not a good
action, but it gives it its due praise; and not an evil action, but it sets a
condemning mark upon. The Commands of it are frequently in Scripture called
Judgments, because they rightly judge of good and evil, and are a clear light
to inform the Judgment of Man in the knowledge of both. By this was the
Understanding of David enlightened to know every false way, and to hate it Psalm.
119.104.
. There is no Case can happen, but may meet with a determination from it; It
teaches men the noblest manner of living, a life like God himself; honorably
for the Lawgiver, and joyfully for the subject. It directs us to the highest
End; sets us at a distance from all base and sordid Practices; it proposes
Light to the Understanding, and Goodness to the Will. It would Tune all the
Strings, set right all the Orders of Mankind: It censures the least Mote,
countenanceth not any stain in the Life. Not a wanton Glance can meet with any
justification from it Mat. 5.28.
: not a rash Anger, but it frowns upon Mat. 5.22.
. As the Lawgiver wants nothing, as an Addition to his Blessedness; so his Law
wants nothing as a Supplement to its perfection, Deuteronomy. 4 2. What our Savior
seems to add, is not an Addition to mend any defects; but a restoration of it
from the corrupt Glosses, wherewith the Scribes and Pharisees had eclipst the
brightness of it: They had curtailed it, and diminished part of its Authority,
cutting off its empire over the least Evil, and left its power only to check
the grosser Practices. But Christ restores it to the due extent of its
Sovereignty, and shows it in those dimensions in which the Holy Men of God
considered it, as exceeding broad, Psalm. 119.96. reaching to all Actions, all
Motions, all Circumstances attending them; full of inexhaustible Treasures of
Righteousness. And though this Law, since the Fall, does irritate Sin, it is no
disparagement, but a Testimony to the Righteousness of it; which the Apostle
manifests by his Wherefore, Romans 7.8. Sin taking occasion by the Commandment,
wrought in me all manner of Concupiscence; and repeating the same sense verse
11. subjoyns a Wherefore, verse 12. Wherefore the Law is holy. The rising of
Men's sinful hearts against the Law of God, when it strikes with its Preceptive
and Minatory parts upon their Consciences, evidenceth the Holiness of the Law
and the Lawgiver.

In its own Nature it is a Directing Rule, but the malignant Nature of Sin is
exasperated by it; as an hostile quality in a Creature, will awaken it self at
the appearance of its Enemy. The Purity of this Beam, and Transcript of God,
bears witness to a greater clearness and beauty in the Sun and Original.
Undefiled Streams manifest an untainted Fountain.

2. It is seen in the manner of its Precepts. As it prescribes all Good, and
forbids all Evil; so it does enjoin the one, and banish the other as such. The
Laws of Men command Virtuous things; not as Virtuous in themselves, but as
useful for Human Society; which the Magistrate is the Conservator of, and the
Guardian of Justice Ames, de Consc. lib. 5 cap. 1. que^t. ^
. The Laws of Men contain not all the Precepts of Virtue, but only such as are
accommodated to their Customs, and are useful to preserve the Ligaments of
their Government. The design of them is not so much to render the Subjects good
Men, as good Citizens: They order the Practice of those Virtues that may
strengthen Civil Society, and discountenance those Vices only which weaken the
Sinews of it: But God, be^^^ the Guardian of Universal Righteousness, does not
only enact the Observance of all Righteousness, but the observance of it as
Righteousness. He Commands that which is Just in it self; enjoins Virtues as
Virtues, and prohibits Vices as Vices; as they are profitable or injurious to
our selves, as well as to Others.

Men command Temperance and Justice; not as Virtues in themselves, but as they
prevent Disorder and Confusion in a Common Wealth: And forbid Adultery and
Theft; not as Vices in themselves, but as they are Intrenchments upon Property:
Not as hurtful to the Person that commits them, but as hurtful to the Person
against whose Right they are committed. Upon this account perhaps Paul applauds
the Holiness of the Law of God in regard of its own Nature, as considered in it
self, more than he does the Justice of it in regard of Man, and the goodness
and convenience of it to the World; Romans 7.12. the Law is Holy twice, and Just
and Good but once.

3. In the Spiritual extent of it. The most Righteous Powers of the World, do
not so much regard in their Laws what the Inward Affections of their Subjects
are: The External Acts are only the Objects of their Decrees, either to
encourage them if they be useful, or discourage them if they be hurtful to the
Community. And indeed they can do no other, for they have no Power proportioned
to Inward Affections, since the Inward disposition falls not under their
Censure; and it would be foolish for any Legislative Power to make such Laws,
which it is impossible for it to put in Execution. They can prohibit the
Outward Acts of Theft and Murder, but they cannot command the Love of God, the
Hatred of Sin, the Contempt of the World; they cannot prohibit Unclean
Thoughts, and the Atheism of the Heart. But the Law of God surmounts in
Righteousness all the Laws of the best regulated Common Wealths in the World:
It restrains the Licentious Heart, as well as the Violent Hand; it damps the
very first bubblings of Corrupt Nature, orders a Purity in the Spring; commands
a clean Fountain, clean Streams, clean Vessels. It would frame the Heart to an
Inward, as well as the Life to an Outward Righteousness, and make the Inside
purer than the Outside. It forbids the first Belchings of a Murderous or
Adulterous intention: It obliges Man as a Rational Creature, and therefore
exacts a conformity of every Rational Faculty, and of whatsoever is under the
Command of them. It commands the Private Closet to be free from the least
Cobweb, as well as the Outward Porch to be clean from Mire and Dirt. It frowns
upon all stains and pollutions of the most retired Thoughts: Hence the Apostle
calls it a Spiritual Law, Romans 7.14. as not Political, but extending its force
further than the Frontiers of the Man; placing its Ensigns in the Metropolis of
the Heart and Mind, and curbing with its Scepter the Inward motions of the
Spirit, and commanding over the Secrets of every Man's Breast.

4. In regard of the perpetuity of it. The Purity and perpetuity of it are
linked together by the Psalmist, Psalm. 19.9. The fear of the Lord is clean,
enduring for ever; the Fear of the Lord, that is, that Law which commands the
Fear and Worship of God, and is the Rule of it. And indeed God values it at
such a rate, that rather than part with a tittle, or let the honor of it lie
in the Dust, he would not only let Heaven and Earth pass away, but expose his
Son to death for the reparation of the wrong it had sustained. So holy it is,
that the Holiness and Righteousness of God cannot dispense with it, cannot
abrogate it, without despoiling himself of his own Being: It Is a Copy of the
Eternal Law. Can he ever abrogate the command of Love to himself, without
showing some contempt of his own Excellency and very Being? Before he can
enjoin a Creature not to love him, he must make himself unworthy of Love, and
worthy of Hatred; this would be the highest Unrighteousness, to order us to
hate that which is only worthy of our highest Affections. Suarez.
So God cannot change the first Command, and order us to worship many Gods;
this would be against the Excellency and Unity of God: For God cannot
constitute another God, or make any thing worthy of an Honor equal with
himself. Those things that are good, only because they are Commanded, are
alterable by God: Those things that are intrinsically and essentially Good, and
therefore Commanded, are unalterable as long as the Holiness and Righteousness
of God stand firm* The intrinsic Goodness of the Moral Law, the concern God
has for it; the perpetuity of the Precepts of the first Table, and the care he
has had to imprint the Precepts of the Second upon the Minds and Consciences
of Men, as the Author of Nature for the preservation of the World; manifests
the Holiness of the Lawmakers and Governor.

2. His Holiness appears in the Ceremonial Law. In the variety of Sacrifices
for Sin, wherein he writ his detestation of Unrighteousness in bloody
Characters. His Holiness was more constantly expressed in the continual
Sacrifices, than in those rarer sprinklings of Judgments now and then upon the
World; which often reached not the worst, but the most moderate Sinners, and
were the occasions of the questioning of the Righteousness of his Providence
both by Jews and Gentiles. In Judgments his Purity was only now and then
manifest: By his long Patience, he might be imagined by some reconciled to
their Crimes, or not much concerned in them; but by the Morning and Evening
Sacrifice he witnessed a perpetual and uninterrupted Abhorrence of whatsoever
was Evil.

Besides those, the occasional Washings and Sprinklings upon Ceremonial
Defilements, which polluted only the Body, gave an evidence, that every thing
that had a resemblance to Evil, was loathsome to him. Add also the Prohibitions
of eating such and such Creatures that were filthy; as the Swine that wallowed
in the Mire, a fit Emblem for the profane and brutish Sinner; which had a
Moral signification, both of the loathsomness of Sin to God, and the aversion
themselves ought to have to every thing that was filthy.

3. This Holiness appears in the Allurements annexed to the Law for keeping it;
and the Affrightments to restrain from the breaking of it. Both Promises and
Threatenings have their Fundamental Root in the Holiness of God, and are both
Branches of this peculiar Perfection. As they respect the Nature of God, they
are Declarations of his hatred of Sin, and his love of Righteousness; the one
belong to his Threatenings, the other to his Promises; both join together to
represent this Divine Perfection to the Creature, and to excite to an imitation
in the Creature. In the one God would render Sin odious, because dangerous; and
curb the practice of Evil, which would otherwise be Licentious: In the other,
he would commend Righteousness, and excite a love of it, which would otherwise
be cold. By these God suits the two great Affections of Men, Fear and Hope;
both the branches of Self-love in Man: The Promises and Threatenings are both
the Branches of Holiness in God. The end of the Promises is the same with the
Exhortation the Apostle concludes from them, 2 Cor. 7.1. Having these Promises,
let us cleanse our selves from all filthiness of Flesh and Spirit, perfecting
Holiness in the fear of God. As the end of Precepts, is to direct; the end of
Threatenings, is to deter from Iniquity; so that of the Promises, is to allure
to Obedience. Thus God breaths out his Love to Righteousness in every Promise,
his Hatred of Sin in every Threatening. The Rewards offered in the one, are the
Smiles of pleased Holiness; and the Curses thundered in the other, are the
Sparklings of enraged Righteousness.

4. His Holiness appears in the Judgments inflicted for the violation of this
Law. Divine Holiness is the Root of Divine Justice, and Divine Justice is the
Triumph of Divine Holiness. Hence both are expressed in Scripture by one word
of Righteousness, which sometimes signifies the rectitude of the Divine Nature,
and sometimes the vindicative stroke of his Arm; Psalm. 103.6. The Lord
executes Righteousness and Judgment for all that are oppressed. So Dan. 9.7.
Righteousness (that is, Justice) belongs to thee. The Vials of his Wrath are
filled from his implacable aversion to Iniquity. All Penal Evils showred down
upon the heads of Wicked men, spread their root in, and branch out from this
Perfection. All the dreadful Storms and Tempests in the World are blown up by
it. Why does he rain Snares, Fire and Brimstone, and a horrible Tempest?
because the righteous Lord loves Righteousness, Psalm. 11.6, 7. And (as was
observed before) when he was going about the dreadfullest Work that ever was in
the World; the overturning the Jewish State, hardening the Hearts of that
Unbelieving People, and casheiring a Nation (once dear to him) from the honor
of his Protection; His Holiness, as the Spring of all this, is applauded by the
Seraphims, Isai. 6.3. compared with Verse. 9, 10, 11, etc. Impunity argues the
approbation of a Crime, and Punishment the abhorrency of it. The greatness of
the Crime, and the Righteousness of the Judge, are the first Natural Sentiments
that arise in the Minds of Men upon the appearance of Divine Judgments in the
World, by those that are near them Amirant. Moral. Tom. 5. p. 388.
. As when Men see Gibbets erected, Scaffolds prepared, Instruments of Death and
Torture provided, and grievous Punishments inflicted; the first reflection in
the Spectators, is the malignity of the Crime, and the detestation the
Governors are possessed with.

1. How severely has he punished his most Noble Creatures for it? The once
glorious Angels, upon whom he had been at greater cost than upon other
Creatures, and drawn more lively Lineaments of his own Excellency, upon the
Transgression of his Law, are thrown into the Furnace of Justice without any
Mercy to pity them, Jude 6. And though there were but one sort of Creatures
upon the Earth that bore his Image, and were only fit to publish and keep up
his Honor below the Heavens; yet upon their Apostasy (though upon a Temptation
from a subtle and insinuating Spirit) the Man, with all his Posterity, is
sentenced to Misery in Life, and Death at last; and the Woman, with all her
Sex, have standing Punishments inflicted on them; which as they begun in their
Persons, were to reach as far as the last Member of their successive
Generations. So Holy is God, that he will not endure a Spot in his choicest
Work. Men indeed, when there is a crack in an excellent piece of Work, or a
stain upon a rich Garment, do not cast it away; they value it for the remaining
Excellency, more than hate it for the contracted Spot: But God saw no
Excellency in his Creature worthy regarding, after the Image of that which he
most esteemed in himself, was defaced.

2. How detestable to him are the very Instruments of Sin? For the Ill use, the
Serpent (an Irrational Creature,) was put to by the Devil, as an Instrument in
the Fall of Man, the whole brood of those Animals are Cursed, Genesis 3.14. Cursed
above all Cattle, and above every Beast of the field. Not only the Devils Head
is threatened to be for ever bruised, and (as some think) rendered irrecoverable
upon this further Testimony of his Malice in the Seduction of Man; who perhaps
without this new Act, might have been admitted into the Arms of Mercy,
notwithstanding his first Sin; [though the Scripture gives us no account of
this, only this is the only Sentence we read of pronounced against the Devil,
which puts him into an irrecoverable state by a Mortal bruising of his Head.]
But, I say, He is not only punished, but the Organ whereby he blew in his
Temptation, is put into a worse condition than it was before. Thus God hated
the Sponge, whereby the Devil deformed his beautiful Image: Thus God, to
manifest his detestation of Sin, ordered the Beast whereby any Man was slain,
to be slain as well as the Malefactor, Levit. 20.15. The Gold and Silver that
had been abused to Idolatry, and were the Ornaments of Images; though good in
themselves, and incapable of a Criminal Nature, were not to be brought into
their Houses, but detested and abhorred by them, because they were cursed, and
an abomination to the Lord. See with what loathing Expressions this Law is
enjoined to them, Deuteronomy. 7.25, 26. So contrary is the holy Nature of God to
every Sin, that it curses every thing that is Instrumental in it.

3. How detestable is every thing to him that is in the Sinners possession? The
very Earth, which God had made Adam the Proprietor of, was Cursed for his sake,
Genesis 3.17, 18. It lost its Beauty, and lies languishing to this day; and
notwithstanding the Redemption by Christ, has not recovered its health, nor is
it like to do, till the completing the Fruits of it upon the Children of God,
Romans 8.20, 21, 22. The whole Lower Creation was made subject to Vanity, and put
into Pangs upon the Sin of Man, by the Righteousness of God detesting his
Offense. How often has his implacable Aversion from Sin been shown; not only
in his Judgments upon the Offenders Person, but by wrapping up in the same
Judgment those which stood in a near relation to them? Achan, with his Children
and Cattle, are overwhelmed with Stones, and burned together, Josh. 7.24, 25.
In the destruction of Sodom; not only the grown Malefactors, but the young
Spawn, the Infants (at present incapable of the same Wickedness) and their
Cattle were burned up by the same Fire from Heaven; and the Place where their
Habitations stood, is at this day, partly a heap of Ashes, and partly an
Infectious Lake, that choaks any Fish that swim into it from Jordan, and
stifles (as is related) by its Vapor any Bird that attempts to fly over it. Oh,
how detestable is Sin to God, that causes him to turn a pleasant Land, as the
Garden of the Lord (as it is styled Genesis 13.10.) into a Lake of Sulphur; to
make it both in his Word and Works, as a lasting Monument of his abhorrence of
Evil!

4. What design has God in all these Acts of Severity and Vindictive Justice,
but to set off the luster of his Holiness? He testifies himself concerned for
those Laws, which he has set as Hedges and Limits to the Lusts of Men; and
therefore when he breaths forth his fiery Indignation against a People, he is
said to get himself Honor: As when he intended the Red Sea should swallow up
the Egyptian Army, Exodus 14.17, 18. which Moses in his Triumphant Song Echoes
back again, Exodus 15.1. Thou have triumphed gloriously; gloriously in his
Holiness, which is the glory of his Nature; as Moses himself interprets it in
the Text. When Men will not own the Holiness of God in a way of Duty, God will
vindicate it in a way of Justice and Punishment. In the destruction of Aarons
Sons, that were Will-worshippers, and would take Strange Fire, Sanctified and
Glorified are coupled, Lev. 10.3. He glorified himself in that Act, in
vindicating his Holiness before all the People, declaring, that he will not
endure Sin and Disobedience. He does therefore in this Life more severely
punish the Sins of his People, when they presume upon any act of Disobedience;
for a Testimony, that the nearness and dearness of any Person to him, shall not
make him unconcerned in his Holiness, or be a plea for Impurity. The End of all
his Judgments, is to witness to the World his Abominating of Sin. To Punish and
Witness against Men, are one and the same thing, Micah 1.2. The Lord shall
witness against you; and it is the Witness of Gods Holiness, Hos. 5.5. And the
Pride of Israel does testify to his face: One renders it, the Excellency of
Israel, and understands it of God; the word (...) which is here in our
Translation Pride, is rendered Excellency, Amos 8.7. The Lord God has sworn by
his Excellency; which is Interpreted Holiness, Amos 4.2. The Lord God has
sworn by his Holiness. What is the issue or end of this Swearing by Holiness,
and of his Excellency testifying against them? In all those Places you will
find them to be sweeping Judgments: In one, Israel and Ephraim shall fall in
their Iniquity; in another, He will take them away with Hooks, and their
Posterity with Fish-hooks, and in another, He would never forget any of their
works. He that punishes Wickedness in those he before used with the greatest
Tenderness, furnishes the World with an undeniable Evidence of the
Detestableness of it to him. Were not Judgments sometimes poured out upon the
World, it would be believed, that God were rather an Approver, than an Enemy to
Sin.

To Conclude, Since God has made a stricter Law to guide Men; annexed Promises
above the merit of Obedience, to allure them; and Threatenings, dreadful enough
to affright Men from Disobedience. He cannot be the Cause of Sin, nor a lover
of it. How can he be the Author of that which he so severely forbids; or love
that which he delights to punish; or be fondly Indulgent to any Evil, when he
hates the Ignorant Instruments in the Offenses of his Reasonable Creatures?

III. The Holiness of God, appears in Our Restoration. It Is in the Glass of the
Gospel we behold the Glory of the Lord 2 Cor. 3.18.
, that is, the Glory of the Lord, into whose Image we are changed; but we are
changed into nothing, as the Image of God, but into Holiness: We bore not upon
us by Creation, nor by Regeneration, the Image of any other Perfection: We
cannot be changed into his Omnipotence, Omniscience, etc. but into the Image of
his Righteousness. This is the pleasing and glorious sight the Gospel Mirror
darts in our eyes. The whole Scene of Redemption, is nothing else but a
discovery of Judgment and Righteousness, Isai. 1.27. Zion shall be redeemed
with Judgment, and her Converts with Righteousness.

1. This Holiness of God, appears in the manner of our Restoration, viz. by the
Death of Christ. Not all the Vials of Judgments, that have, or shall be poured
out upon the wicked World, nor the flaming Furnace of a Sinners Conscience, nor
the Irreversible Sentence pronounced against the Rebellious Devils, nor the
Groans of the Damned Creatures, give such a demonstration of Gods Hatred of
Sin, as the Wrath of God let loose upon his Son. Never did Divine Holiness
appear more beautiful and lovely, than at the time our Saviors Countenance was
most marred in the midst of his Dying Groans. This himself acknowledges in that
Prophetical Psalm, Psalm. 22.1, 2. when God had turned his Smiling Face from
him, and thrust his sharp Knife into his heart, which forced that Terrible cry
from him, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? he adores this Perfection
of Holiness, v. 3. But thou art holy: Thy Holiness is the Spring of all this
sharp Agony, and for this thou Inhabitest, and shall for ever inhabit the
Praises of all thy Israel. Holiness drew the Vail between Gods Countenance and
our Saviors Soul. Justice indeed gave the stroke, but Holiness ordered it. In
this his Purity did sparkle, and his Irreversible Justice manifested, that all
those that commit Sin are worthy of death; this was the perfect Index of his
Righteousness Rom 3.2^.
, that is, of his Holiness and Truth; then it was that God that is Holy, was
sanctified in Righteousness, Isai. 5.16.

It appears the more, if you consider,

1. The Dignity of the Redeemers Person. One that had been from Eternity; had
laid the Foundations of the World; had been the Object of the Divine Delight:
He that was God blessed for ever, becomes a Curse: He who was blessed by
Angels, and by whom God blessed the World, must be seized with Horror: The Son
of Eternity must bleed to death. Where did ever Sin appear so irreconcilable
to God? Where did God ever break out so furiously in his detestation of
Iniquity? The Father would have the most Excellent Person, one next in order to
himself, and Equal to him in all the glorious Perfections of his Nature Phil
2.6.
, Die on a Disgraceful Cross, and be exposed to the flames of Divine Wrath,
rather than Sin should live, and his Holiness remain for ever disparaged by the
Violations of his Law.

2. The near Relation he stood in to the Father. He was his own Son that he
delivered up, Romans 8.32. His Essential Image, as dearly beloved by him as
himself; yet he would abate nothing of his Hatred of those Sins imputed to one
so dear to him, and who never had done any thing contrary to his Will. The
strong Cries uttered by him, could not cause him to cut off the least Fringe of
this Royal Garment, nor part with a Thread, the Robe of his Holiness was woven
with. The Torrent of Wrath is opened upon him, and the Fathers Heart beats not
in the least notice of Tenderness to Sin, in the midst of his Sons Agonies.
Lingend. Tom. 3. p. 699, 700.
God seems to lay aside the Bowels of a Father, and put on the garb of an
Irreconcilable Enemy. Upon which account, probably, our Savior in the midst
of his Passion gives him the Title of God; not of Father, the Title he usually
before Addressed to him with, Math. 27.46. My God, my God; not, My Father, my
Father; why have thou forsaken me? He seems to hang upon the Cross like a
disinherited Son, while he appeared in the garb and rank of a Sinner. Then was
his Head loaded with Curses, when he stood under that Sentence of Cursed is
every one that hangs upon a Tree, Gal. 3.13. and looked as one forlorn and
rejected by the Divine Purity and Tenderness. God dealt not with him, as if he
had been one in so near a Relation to him. He left him not to the Will only of
the Instruments of his Death, he would have the chiefest blow himself of
bruising of him, Isai. 53.10. It pleased the Lord to bruise him: the Lord,
because the power of Creatures could not strike a blow strong enough, to
satisfy and secure the Rights of Infinite Holiness. It was therefore a Cup
tempered and put into his hands by his Father; a Cup given him to drink. In
other Judgments he lets out his Wrath against his Creatures; in this he lets
out his Wrath (as it were) against Himself, against his Son, One as dear to him
as himself. As in his making Creatures, his Power over Nothing to bring it into
Being appeared; but in pardoning Sin he has power over himself; so in
punishing Creatures, his Holiness appears in his Wrath against Creatures,
against Sinners by inherency: But by punishing Sin in his Son, his Holiness
sharpens his Wrath against him who was his Equal, and only a reputed Sinner: As
if his Affection to his own Holiness, surmounted his Affection to his Son: For
he chose to suspend the breakings out of his Affections to his Son, and see him
plunged in a sharp and Ignominious Misery, without giving him any visible Token
of his Love; rather than see his Holiness lie groaning under the Injuries of a
Transgressing World.

3. The Value he puts upon his Holiness, appears further, in the Advancement of
this Redeeming Person, after his Death. Our Savior was Advanced, not barely
for his Dying, but for the respect he had in his Death to this Attribute of
God. Heb. 1.9. Thou have loved Righteousness, and hated Iniquity: therefore
God, even thy God, has Anointed thee with the Oil of Gladness, etc. By
Righteousness is meant this Perfection, because of the opposition of it to
Iniquity. Some think [Therefore] to be the final Cause; as if this were the
sense, Thou art anointed with the Oil of Gladness, that thou might love
Righteousness, and hate Iniquity. But the Holy Ghost seeming to speak in this
Chapter, not only of the Godhead of Christ, but of his Exaltation; the Doctrine
whereof he had begun in Verse 3. and prosecutes in the following Verses; I
would rather understand [Therefore,] For this cause, or reason, has God
anointed thee; not, to this end. Christ indeed had an Unction of Grace, whereby
he was fitted for his Mediatory Work; He had also an Unction of Glory, whereby
he was rewarded for it. In the first regard, it was a qualifying him for his
Office; in the second regard, it was a solemn Inaugurating him in his Royal
Authority. And the Reason of his being settled upon a Throne for ever and ever,
is, because he loved Righteousness. He suffered himself to be pierced to Death,
that Sin, the Enemy of Gods Purity, might be destroyed; and the Honor of the
Law, the Image of Gods Holiness, might be repaired and fulfilled in the Fallen
Creature. He restored the Credit of Divine Holiness in the World, in
manifesting by his Death, God an irreconcilable Enemy to all Sin; in
abolishing the Empire of Sin, so hateful to God, and restoring the rectitude of
Nature, and new framing the Image of God in his chosen Ones.

And God so valued this Vindication of his Holiness, that he confers upon him,
in his Humane Nature, an Eternal Royalty and Empire over Angels and Men.
Holiness was the great Attribute respected by Christ in his dying, and
manifested in his Death; and for his Love to this God would bestow an Honor
upon his Person, in that Nature wherein he did vindicate the Honor of so dear
a Perfection. In the Death of Christ, he showed his Resolution to preserve its
Rights. In the Exaltation of Christ, he evidenced his mighty pleasure for the
Vindication of it. In both, the Infinite value he had for it, as dear to him as
his Life and Glory.

4. It may be further considered, that in this way of Redemption, his Holiness
in the hatred of Sin, seems to be valued above any other Attribute. He
proclaims the value of it above the Person of his Son; since the Divine Nature
of the Redeemer is disguised, obscured and veiled, in order to the restoring
the Honor of it. And Christ seems to value it above his own Person, since he
submitted himself to the Reproaches of Men, to clear this Perfection of the
Divine Nature, and make it Illustrious in the eyes of the World. You heard
before, at the beginning of the handling this Argument; It was the Beauty of
the Deity, the Luster of his Nature, the Link of all his Attributes, his very
Life; he values it equal with Himself, since he swears by it, as well as by his
Life. And none of his Attributes would have a due Decorum without it: It Is the
glory of Power, Mercy, Justice, Wisdom, that they are all Holy. So that though
God had an Infinite tenderness and compassion to the Fallen Creature, yet it
should not extend it self in his relief to the prejudice of the Rights of his
Purity: He would have this triumph in the Tenderness of his Mercy, as well as
the Severities of his Justice. His Mercy had not appeared in its true colors,
nor attained a regular End, without Vengeance on Sin. It would have been a
Compassion, that would (in sparing the Sinner) have encouraged the Sin, and
affronted Holiness in the Issues of it: Had he dispersed his Compassions about
the World without the regard to his Hatred of Sin, his Mercy had been too
cheap, and his Holiness had been contemned. His Mercy would not have Triumphed
in his own Nature, whilst his Holiness had suffered: He had exercised a Mercy
with the impairing his own Glory.

But now in this way of Redemption, the Rights of both are secured, both have
their due luster: The Odiousness of Sin is equally discovered with the greatest
of his Compassions; an Infinite Abhorrence of Sin, and an Infinite Love to the
World march hand in hand together: Never was so much of the Irreconcileableness
of Sin to him, set forth, as in the moment he was opening his Bowels in the
Reconciliation of the Sinner. Sin is made the chiefest Mark of his Displeasure,
while the Poor Creature is made the highest Object of Divine Pity. There could
have been no motion of Mercy, with the least Injury to Purity and Holiness. In
this way Mercy and Truth, Mercy to the Misery of the Creature, and Truth to the
Purity of the Law, have met together; the Righteousness of God, and the Peace
of the Sinner, have kissed each other, Psalm. 85.10.

II. The Holiness of God in his Hatred of Sin, appears in our Justification,
and the Conditions he requires of all that would enjoy the benefit of
Redemption. His Wisdom has so tempered all the Conditions of it, that the
Honor of his Holiness is as much preserved, as the Sweetness of his Mercy is
experimented by us. All the Conditions are Records of his exact Purity, as well
as of his condescending Grace. Our Justification is not by the Imperfect works
of Creatures, but by an exact and Infinite Righteousness, as great as that of
the Deity, which had been Offended: It being the Righteousness of a Divine
Person, upon which account it is called the Righteousness of God; not only in
regard of Gods appointing it, and Gods accepting it, but as it is a
Righteousness of that Person that was God, and is God. Faith is the Condition
God requires to Justification; but not a dead, but an active Faith, such a
Faith as purifies the heart James 2.22. Acts 15.9.
. He calls for Repentance, which is a Moral retracting our Offenses, and an
approbation of contemned Righteousness and a violated Law; an endeavor to
regain what is lost, and to pluck out the heart of that Sin we have committed.
He requires Mortification, which is called Crucifying; whereby a Man would
strike as full and deadly a blow at his Lusts, as was struck at Christ upon the
Cross, and make them as certainly die, as the Redeemer did.

Our own Righteousness must be condemned by us, as impure and imperfect: We
must disown every thing that is our own, as to Righteousness, in reverence to
the Holiness of God, and the valuation of the Righteousness of Christ. He has
resolved, not to bestow the Inheritance of Glory, without the Root of Grace.
None are partakers of the Divine Blessedness, that are not partakers of the
Divine Nature: There must be a renewing of his Image, before there be a vision
of his face He^. 12.14.
. He will not have Men brought only into a Relative state of Happiness by
Justification, without a Real state of Grace by Sanctification. And so resolved
he is in it, that there is no admittance into Heaven of a starting, but a
persevering Holiness; Romans 2.7. a patient continuance in well doing: Patient
under the sharpness of Affliction, and continuing under the Pleasures of
Prosperity. Hence it is that the Gospel, the restoring Doctrine, has not only
the motives of Rewards to allure us to Good, and the danger of Punishments to
scare us from Evil, as the Law had; but they are set forth in a higher strain,
in a way of stronger engagement, the Rewards are Heavenly, and the Punishments
Eternal: And more powerful Motives besides, from the choicer Expressions of
Gods Love in the Death of his Son. The whole Design of it is to re-instate us
in a resemblance to this Divine Perfection; whereby he shows what an Affection
he has to this Excellency of his Nature, and what a detestation he has of
Evil, which is contrary to it.

3. It appears in the actual Regeneration of the Redeemed Souls, and a carrying
it on to a full perfection. As Election is the effect of Gods Sovereignty, our
Pardon the fruit of his Mercy, our Knowledge a stream from his Wisdom, our
Strength an impression of his Power; so our Purity is a beam from his Holiness.
The whole work of Sanctification, and the preservation of it, our Savior begs
for his Disciples of his Father, under this Title, John 17.11, 17. Holy Father,
keep them through thy own name, and sanctify them through thy Truth; as the
proper Source whence Holiness was to flow to the Creature: As the Sun is the
proper Fountain whence Light is derived, both to the Stars above, and Bodies
here below. Whence He is not only called Holy, but the Holy One of Israel,
Isai. 43.15. I am the Lord your Holy One, the Creator of Israel: Displaying his
Holiness in them, by a new Creation of them as his Israel. As the rectitude of
the Creature at the first Creation was the effect of his Holiness; so the
Purity of the Creature, by a New Creation, is a draught of the same Perfection.
He is called the Holy One of Israel more in Isaiah, that Evangelical Prophet,
in erecting Zion, and forming a People for himself, than in the whole Scripture
besides. As he sent Jesus Christ to satisfy his Justice for the expiation of
the Guilt of Sin; so he sends the Holy Ghost for the cleansing the filth of
Sin, and overmastering the power of it: Himself is the Fountain, the Son is the
Pattern, and the Holy Ghost the immediate Imprinter of this stamp of Holiness
upon the Creature. God has such a value for this Attribute, that he designs
the glory of this in the renewing the Creature, more than the happiness of the
Creature; though the one does necessarily follow upon the other, yet the one is
the principal Design, and the other the consequent of the former: Whence our
Salvation is more frequently set forth, in Scripture, by a Redemption from Sin,
and Sanctification of the Soul, than by a Possession of Heaven Tit. 2.11, 12,
13, 14, and many other places.
.

Indeed, as God could not create a Rational Creature, without interesting this
Attribute in a special manner; so he cannnt restore the Fallen Creature without
it. As in creating a Rational Creature, there must be Holiness to adorn it, as
well as Wisdom to form the design, and Power to effect it; so in the
restoration of the Creature, as he could not make a Reasonable Creature unholy;
so he cannot restore a Fallen Creature, and put him in a meet posture to take
pleasure in him, without communicating to him a resemblance of himself. As God
cannot be Blessed in himself without this Perfection of Purity; so neither can
a Creature be blessed without it. As God would be Unlovely to himself without
this Attribute; so would the Creature be unlovely to God, without a stamp and
mark of it upon his Nature. So much is this Perfection one with God, valued by
him, and interested in all his Works and Ways.

third Thing I am to do, is to lay down some Propositions in the defense of
God's holiness in all his acts, about or concerning sin. It was a prudent and
pious advice of Camero, Not to be too busy and rash in Inquiries and
Conclusions about the reason of God's Providence in the matter of sin. The
Scripture has put a bar in the way of such Curiosity, by telling us, that the
ways of God's Wisdom and Righteousness in his Judgments are unsearchable Romans
11.33.
: Much more the ways of God's Holiness, as he stands in relation to Sin, as a
Governor of the World; we cannot consider those things without danger of
flipping: Our Eyes are too weak to look upon the Sun without being dazzled: Too
much Curiosity met with a just check in our first Parent. To be desirous to
know the reason of all God's proceedings in the matter of Sin, is to second the
Ambition of Adam, to be as wise as God, and know the reason of his actings
equally with himself. It Is more easy, as the same Author says, to give an
Account of God's Providence since the Revolt of Man, and the Poison that has
universally seized upon Human Nature, than to make guesses at the manner of the
fall of the first Man. The Scripture has given us but a short Account of the
manner of it, to discourage too curious Inquiries into it.

It Is certain that God made Man upright; and when Man sinned in Paradise, God
was active in sustaining the substantial nature and act of the Sinner while he
was sinning, though not in supporting the sinfulness of the Act: He was
permissive in suffering it: He was Negative in withholding that Grace which
might certainly have prevented his Crime, and consequently his Ruin; though he
withheld nothing that was sufficient for his Resistance of that Temptation
wherewith he was assaulted. And since the Fall of Man, God as a wise Governor
is directive of the Events of the Transgression, and draws the choicest Good
out of the blackest Evil, and limits the sins of men, that they creep not so
far as the evil Nature of men would urge them to; and as a righteous Judge, he
takes away the talent from idle Servants, and the Light from wicked ones,
whereby they stumble and fall into Crimes, by the inclinations and proneness of
their own corrupt Natures, leaves them to the Byas of their own vicious habits,
denies that grace which they have forfeited, and have no right to challenge;
and turns their sinful actions into punishments, both to the Committers of
them, and others.

1. Proposition. God's holiness is not chargeable with any blemish for his
creating man in a mutable state. It Is true, Angels and Men were created with a
changeable Nature; and though there was a rich and glorious stamp upon them by
the Hand of God, yet their Natures were not incapable of a base and vile Stamp
from some other Principle. As the Silver which bears upon it the Image of a
great Prince, is capable of being melted down, and imprinted with no better an
Image than that of some vile and monstrous Beast. Though God made Man upright,
yet he was capable of seeking many inventions, Eccl. 7.29. yet the hand of God
was not defiled by forming Man with such a Nature. It was suitable to the Wisdom
of God to give the Rational Creature, whom he had furnished with a power of
acting righteously, the liberty of choice, and nor fix him in an unchangeable
state without a trial of him in his Natural; that if he did obey, his obedience
might be the more valuable; and if he did freely offend, his offense might be
more inexcusable.

1. No Creature can be capable of immutability by Nature. Mutability is so
essential to a Creature, that a Creature cannot be supposed without it: You
must suppose it a Creator, not a Creature, if you allow it to be of an
Immutable Nature. Immutability is the property of the Supreme Being. God only
has immortality, 1 Timothy 6.16. Immortality, as opposed not only to a natural,
but to a sinful death; the word only appropriates every sort of Immortality to
God, and excludes every Creature, whether Angel or Man, from a Partnership with
God in this by Nature. Every Creature therefore is capable of a Death in sin.
None is good but God, and none is naturally free from change but God; which
excludes every Creature from the same Prerogative; and certainly if one Angel
sinned, all might have sinned, because there was the same root of Mutability in
one as well as another. It Is as possible for a Creature to be Creator, as for a
Creature to have naturally an incommunicable property of the Creator. All
things, whether Angels or Men, are made of nothing, and therefore capable of
defection Suarez. V^l. 2. p. 5.8.
; because a Creature being made of nothing, cannot be good per essentiam, or
essentially good, but by participation from another. Aga^n, every Rational
Creature, being made of nothing, has a Superior which created him and governs
him, and is capable of a Precept; and consequently capable of Disobedience as
well as Obedience to the Precept, to transgress it as well as obey it. God
cannot sin, because he can have no Superior to impose a Precept on him. A
Rational Creature, with a liberty of Will and power of Choice, cannot be made
by Nature of such a mould and temper, but he must be as well capable of choosing
wrong, as of choosing right; and therefore the standing Angels, and glorified
Saints, though they are Immutable, it is not by Nature that they are so, but by
Grace, and the good pleasure of God; for though they are in Heaven, they have
still in their Nature a remote power of sinning, but it shall never be brought
into act, because God will always incline their Wills to love him, and never
concur with their Wills to any evil act. Since therefore Mutability is
essential to a Creature, as a Creature, this changeableness cannot properly be
charged upon God as the Author of it; for it was not the term of God's creating
act, but did necessarily result from the Nature of the Creature, as
unchangeableness does result from the Essence of God. The brittleness of a
Glass is no blame to the Art of him that blew up the Glass into such a fashion;
that imperfection of brittleness is not from the Workman, but the Matter: So
though changeableness be an Imperfection, yet it is so necessary a one, that no
Creature can be naturally without it: Besides, though Angels and Men were
mutable by Creation, and capable to exercise their Wills, yet they were not
necessitated to evil; and this mutability did not infer a necessity that they
should fall; because some Angels, which had the same root of changeableness in
their Natures with those that fell, did not fall, which they would have done,
if capableness of changing, and necessity of changing were one and the same
thing.

2. Though God made the Creature mutable, yet he made him not evil. There could
be nothing of evil in him that God created after his own Image, and pronounced
good, Genesis 1.27, 31. Man had an ability to stand, as well as a capacity to
fall: He was created with a principle of acting freely, whereby he was capable
of loving God as his chief Good, and moving to him as his last end; there was a
beam of Light in man's Understanding to know the Rule he was to conform to, a
harmony between his Reason and his Affections, an original Righteousness: So
that it seemed more easy for him to determine his Will to continue in
Obedience to the Precept, than to swerve from it; to adhere to God as his chief
Good, than to listen to the Charms of Satan. God created him with those
advantages, that he might with more facility have kept his eyes fixed upon the
Divine Beauty, than turn his back upon it; and with greater ease have kept the
Precept God gave him than have broken it. The very first thought darted, or
impression made by God upon the Angelical or Human Nature, was the knowledge of
himself as their Auhtor, and could be no other than such whereby both Angels
and Men might be excited to a love of that adorable Being that had framed them
so gloriously out of nothing: And if they turned their Wills and Affections to
another Object, it was not by the direction of God, but contrary to the
impression God had made upon them, or the first thought he flasht into them:
They turned themselves to the admiring their own Excellency, or affecting an
advantage distinct from that which they were to look for only from God. 1 Timothy
3.6. Pride was the cause of the Condemnation of the Devil. Though the Wills of
Angels and Men were created mutable, and so were imperfect, yet they were not
created evil. Though they might sin, yet they might not sin, and therefore were
not evil in their own Nature. What reflection then could this Mutability of
their Nature be upon God? So far is it from any, that he is fully cleared, by
storing up in the Nature of Man sufficient Provision against his departure from
him. God was so far from creating him evil, that he fortified him with a
knowledge in his Understanding, and a strength in his Nature to withstand any
Invasion. The Knowledge was exercised by Eve in the very Moment of the Serpents
assaulting her; Genesis 3.3. Eve said to the Serpent, God has said, ye shall not
eat of it: And had her thoughts been intent upon this God has said, and not
diverted to the motions of the Sensitive Appetite and Liquorish Palate, it had
been sufficient to put by all the Passes the Devil did, or could have made at
her. So that you see, though God made the Creature Mutable, yet he made him not
evil. This clears the Holiness of God.

3. Therefore it follows, That though God created man changeable, yet he was
not the cause of his change by his fall. Though Man was created defectible, yet
he was not determined by God, influencing his Will by any positive act to that
change and apostasy. God placed him in a free posture, set life and happiness
before him on the one hand, misery and death on the other: As he did not draw
him into the Arms of perpetual Blessedness, so he did not drive him into the
Gulf of his Misery Amyral. M^^a^. Tom. 1. p. 615, 616.
: He did not incline him to Evil. It was repugnant to the Goodness of God to
corrupt the Righteousness of those Faculties he had so lately beautified him
with. It was not likely he should deface the beauty of that Work he had
composed with so much Wisdom and Skill. Would he by any Act of his own make
that had, which but a little before he had acquiesced in as good? Angels and
Men were left to their liberty and conduct of their Natural Faculties; and if
God inspired them with any Motions, they could not but be Motions to good, and
suited to that righteous Nature he had endued them with. But it is most probable
that God did not in a Supernatural way act inwardly upon the Mind of Man, but
left him wholly to that Power which he had in Creation furnished him with. The
Scripture frees God fully from any blame in this, and lays it wholly upon Satan
as the Tempter, and upon Man as the Determiner of his own Will. Genesis 3.6. Eve
took of the Fruit, and did eat; and Adam took from her of the Fruit, and did
eat. And Solomon, Eccl 7.29. distinguishes God's Work in the Creation of Man
upright, from Man's Work in seeking out those ruining inventions. God created
Man in a righteous state, and Man cast himself into a forlorn state. As he was
a Mutable Creature, he was from God; as he was a changed and corrupted
Creature, it was from the Devil seducing, and his own pliableness in admitting.
As Silver and Gold and other Metals, were created by God in such a form and
figure, yet capable of receiving other forms by the industrious Art of Man:
When the Image of a Man is put upon a piece of Metal, God is not said to create
that Image, though he created the Substance with such a Property, that it was
capable of receiving it: This Capacity is from the nature of the Metal by God's
Creation of it, but the carving the Figure of this or that Man is not the Act
of God, but the Act of Man. As Images in Scripture are called the Work of men's
hands, in regard of the imagery, though the Matter, Wood or Stone, upon which
the Image was carved, was a Work of God's Creative Power. When an Artificer
frames an excellent Instrument, and a Musician exactly tunes it, and it comes
out of their hands without a blemish, but capable to be untuned by some rude
hand, or receive a crack by a sudden fall, if it meet with a Disaster; is
either the Workman or Musician to be blamed? The ruin of a House, caused by the
wastfulness or carelessness of the Tenant, is not to be imputed to the Workman
that built it strong, and left it in a good Posture.

2. Proposition, God's Holiness is not blemished by enjoining Man a Law, which
he knew he would not observe.

1. The Law as not above his strength. Had the Law been impossible to be
observed, no Crime could have been imputed to the Subject, the fault had layn
wholly upon the Governor; the Non-observance of it had been from a want of
strength, and not from a want of will. Had God commanded Adam to fly up to the
Sun, when he had not given him Wings, Adam might have a will to obey it, but
his Power would be too short to perform it. But the Law set him for a Rule, had
nothing of impossibility in it; it was easy to be observed; the Command was
rather below, than above his strength; and the sanction of it was more apt to
restrain and fear him from the breach of it, than encourage any daring Attempts
against it: He had as much power, or rather more, to conform to it, than to
warp from it; and greater arguments and interest to be observant of it, than to
violate it; his All was secured by the one, and his Ruin ascertained by the
other. 1 John 5.3.
The Commands of God are not grievous; from the first to the last Command, there
is nothing impossible, nothing hard to the original and created Nature of Man,
which were all summed up in a love to God, which was the pleasure and delight
of Man, as well as his Duty, if he had not by inconsiderateness neglected the
dictates and resolves of his own Understanding. The Law was suited to the
strength of Man, and fitted for the Improvement and Perfection of his Nature:
In which respect the Apostle calls it good, as it refers to Man, as well as
holy, as it refers to God Romans 7.12.
. Now since God Created man a Creature capable to be governed by a Law, and as
a Rational Creature endued with Understanding and Will, not to be governed
according to his Nature without a Law; was it congruous to the Wisdom of God to
respect only the future state of Man, which from the Depth of his Infinite
Knowledge, he did infallibly foresee would be miserable, by the wilful
defection of Man from the Rule? Had it been agreeable to the Wisdom of God to
respect only this future state, and not the present state of the Creature; and
therefore leave him lawless, because he knew he would violate the Law? Should
God forbear to act like a wise Governor, because he foresaw that Man would
cease to act like an obedient Subject? Shall a righteous Magistrate forbear to
make just and good Laws, because he foresees, either from the dispositions of
his Subjects, their ill humor, or some Circumstances which will intervene,
that Multitudes of them will incline to break those Laws, and fall under the
Penalty of them? No blame can be upon that Magistrate who minds the Rule of
Righteousness, and the necessary Duty of his Government, since he is not the
Cause of those turbulent Affections in Men, which he wisely foresees will rise
up against his just Edicts.

2. Though the Law now be above the strength of man, yet is not the holiness of
God blemished by keeping it up. It Is true, God has been graciously pleased to
mitigate the severity and rigor of the Law by the entrance of the Gospel; yet
where men refuse the terms of the Gospel, they continue themselves under the
Condemnation of the Law, and are justly guilty of the breach of it, though they
have no strength to observe it. The Law, as I said before, was not above man's
strength, when he was possessed of Original Righteousness, though it be above
man's strength, since he was stripped of Original Righteousness. The Command was
dated before man had contracted his Impotency, when he had a power to keep it
as well as to break it. Had it been enjoined to man only after the fall, and
not before, he might have had a better pretense to excuse himself, because of
the impossibility of it; yet he would not have had sufficient excuse, since the
impossibility did not result from the Nature of the Law, but from the corrupted
Nature of the Creature. It was weak through the Flesh, Romans 8.3. but it was
promulg'd when man had a strength proportioned to the Commands of it. And now
since man has unhappily made himself incapable of obeying it, must God's
Holiness in his Law be blemished for enjoining it? Must he abrogate those
Commands, and prohibit what before he enjoined, for the satisfaction of the
corrupted Creature? would not this be his ceasing to be holy, that his Creature
might be unblameably unrighteous? Must God strip himself of his Holiness,
because man will not discharge his Iniquity? He cannot be the cause of sin, by
keeping up the Law, who would be the cause of all the unrighteousness of men,
by removing the Authority of it. Some things in the Law that are intrinsecally
good in their own Nature are indispensable, and it is repugnant to the Nature
of God not to Command them. If he were not the Guardian of his indispensable
Law, he would be the Cause and Countenancer of the Creatures Iniquity. So
little reason have men to charge God with being the Cause of their sin, by not
repealing his Law to gratify their Impotence, that he would be unholy if he
did. God must not lose his Purity, because man has lost his, and cast away the
Right of his Sovereignty, because man has cast away his Power of Obedience.

3. God's foreknowledge that his Law would not be observed, lays no blame upon
him. Though the foreknowledge of God be infallible, yet it does not necessitate
the Creature in acting. It was certain from Eternity, that Adam would fall,
that men would do such and such Actions, that Judas would betray our Savior;
God foreknew all those things from Eternity; but it is as certain that this
foreknowledge did not necessitate the will of Adam, or any other Branch of his
Posterity, in the doing those Actions that were so foreseen by God; they
voluntarily run into such Courses, not by any impulsion. God's Knowledge was
not suspended between certainty and uncertainty: He certainly foreknew that his
Law would be broken by Adam; he foreknew it in his own Decree of not hindering
him, by giving Adam the efficacious Grace which would in^allibly have prevented
it; yet Adam did freely break this Law, and never imagined that the
foreknowledge of God did necessitate him to it: He could find no cause of his
own sin, but the liberty of his own will: He charges the occasion of his sin
upon the woman, and consequently upon God in giving the woman to him Genesis 3.12.
. He could not be so ignorant of the Nature of God, as to imagine him without a
foresight of future things, since his knowledge of what was to be known of God
by Creation, was greater than any man's since, in all probability. But however,
if he were not acquainted with the Notion of God's foreknowledge, he could not
be ignorant of his own act; there could not have been any necessity upon him,
any kind of constraint of him in his action that could have been unknown to
him; and he would not have omitted a Plea of so strong a nature, when he was
upon his Trial for Life or Death; especially when he urges so weak an Argument
to impute his Crime to God, as the gift of the Woman; as if that which was
designed him for a help, were intended for his ruin. If God's prescience takes
away the liberty of the Creature, there is no such thing as a free action in
the World, (for there is nothing done but is foreknown by God, else we render
God of a limited understanding,) nor ever was, no not by God himself ad extra:
For whatsoever he has done in Creation, whatsoever he has done since the
Creation, was foreknown by him; he resolved to do it, and therefore foreknew
that he would do it: Did God do it therefore necessarily, as necessity is
opposed to liberty? As he freely decrees what he will do, so he effects what he
freely decreed. Foreknowledge is so far from intrenching upon the liberty of
the will, that predetermination, which in the notion of it speaks something
more, does not dissolve it: God did not only foreknow, but determine the
suffering of Christ Acts 4.27, 28.
. It was necessary therefore that Christ should suffer, that God might not be
mistaken in his foreknowledge, or come short of his determinate decree: But did
this take away the liberty of Christ in suffering? Ephesians. 5.2. Who offered
himself up to God; that is, by a voluntary act, as well as designed to do it by
a determinate Counsel. It did infallibly secure the event, but did not
annihilate the liberty of the Action, either in Christ's willingness to suffer,
or the Crime of the Jews that made him suffer. God's prescience is God's
prevision of things arising from their proper Causes: As a Gardener foresees in
his Plants the Leaves and the Flowers that will arise from them in the Spring,
because he knows the strength and nature of their several Roots which lie under
ground, but his foresight of these things is not the cause of the rise and
appearance of those Flowers. If any of us see a Ship moving toward such a Rock
or Quick-sand, and know it to be governed by a negligent Pilot, we shall
certainly foresee that the Ship will be torn in pieces by the Rock, or
swallowed up by the Sands; but is this foresight of ours from the Causes, any
cause of the effect, or can we from hence be said to be the Authors of the
miscarriage of the Ship, and the loss of the Passengers and Goods? The fall of
Adam was foreseen by God to come to pass by the consent of his Freewill in the
choice of the proposed Temptation: God foreknew Adam would sin, and if Adam
would not have sinned, God would have foreknown that he would not sin. Adam
might easily have detected the Serpents fraud, and made a better Election; God
foresaw that he would not do it; God's foreknowledge did not make Adam guilty
or innocent; whether God had foreknown it or no, he was guilty by a free
choice, and a willing neglect of his own Duty. Adam knew that God foreknew that
he might eat of the Fruit, and fall and dye, because God had forbidden him; the
foreknowledge that he would do it, was no more a cause of his Action, than the
foreknowledge that he might do it. Judas certainly knew that his Master
foreknew that he should betray him, for Christ had acquainted him with it, John
13.21, 26. yet he never charged this foreknowledge of Christ with any guilt of
his Treachery.

3. The third Proposition. The Holiness of God is not blemished by decreeing the
eternal Rejection of some men. Reprobation in its first Notion is an act of
preterition, or passing by. A man is not made wicked by the act of God; but it
supposes him wicked; and so it is nothing else but God's leaving a man in that
guilt and filth wherein he beholds him. In its second Notion it is an
Ordination, not to a Crime, but to a Punishment; Jude 4. An ordaining to
Condemnation. And though it be an eternal act of God, yet in order of Nature it
follows upon the foresight of the Transgression of Man, and supposes the
Crime. God considers Adam's Revolt, and views the whole Mass of his corrupted
Posterity, and chooses some to reduce to himself by his Grace, and leaves others
to lie sinking in their Ruins. Since all Mankind fell by the fall of Adam, and
have Corruption conveyed to them successively by that Root whereof they are
Branches: All men might justly be left wallowing in that miserable Condition to
which they were reduced by the Apostasy of their Common Head; and God might
have passed by the whole Race of Man, as well as he did the fallen Angels
without any hope of Redemption. He was no more bound to restore Man, than to
restore Devils, nor bound to repair the Nature of any one Son of Adam; and had
he dealt with Men as he dealt with the Devils, they had had all of them as
little just ground to complain of God; for all Men deserved to be left to
themselves, for all were concluded under sin: But God calls out some to make
Monuments of his Grace, which is an act of the Sovereign Mercy of that Dominion
whereby he has mercy on whom he will have mercy, Romans 9.18. Others he passes
by, and leaves them remaining in that Corruption of Nature wherein they were
born. If men have a power to dispose of their own Goods, without any
unrighteousness, why should not God dispose of his own Grace, and bestow it
upon whom he pleases, since it is a Debt to none, but a free gift to any that
enjoy it? Amyral. defense de Calv. p. 145.
God is not the cause of sin in this, because his operation about this is
negative; it is not an action, but a denial of action, and therefore cannot be
the cause of the evil actions of men. God acts nothing, but withholds his
Power; he does not enlighten their minds, nor incline their wills so
powerfully, as to expel their darkness, and root out those evil Habits which
possess them by Nature. God could, if he would, savingly enlighten the minds of
all men in the World, and quicken their hearts with a new Life by an invincible
Grace; but in not doing it, there is no positive act of God, but a cessation of
Action: We may with as much reason say, that God is the Cause of all the sinful
Actions that are committed by the Corporation of Devils, since their first
Rebellion, because he leaves them to themselves, and bestows not a new Grace
upon them: As say God is the Cause of the sins of those that he overlooks and
leaves in that state of Guilt wherein he found them. God did not pass by any
without the consideration of sin; so that this act of God is not repugnant to
his Holiness, but conformable to his Justice.

4. Proposition. The Holiness of God is not blemished by his secret will to
suffer sin to enter into the World. God never willed sin by his preceptive
Will. It was never founded upon, or produced by any word of his, as the
Creation was. He never said, Let there be sin under the Heaven, as he said, Let
there be Water under the Heaven. Nor does he will it by infusing any Habit of
it, or stirring up Inclinations to it; no, God tempts no man, James 1.13. Nor
does he will it by his approving Will; it is detestable to him, nor ever can be
otherwise: He cannot approve it either before Commission or after.

1. The Will of God is in some sort concurrent with sin. He does not properly
will it, but he wills not to hinder it, to which by his Omnipotence he could
put a bar. If he did positively will it, it might be wrought by himself, and so
could not be evil. If he did in no sort will it, it would not be committed by
his Creature: Sin entered into the World, either God willing the permission of
it, or not willing the permission of it. The latter cannot be said; for then
the Creature is more powerful than God, and can do that which God will not
permit. God can, if he be pleased, banish all sin in a moment out of the World:
He could have prevented the Revolt of Angels, and the Fall of Man; they did not
sin whether he would or no: He might by his Grace have stepped in the first
Moment, and made a special impression upon them of the Happiness they already
possessed, and the Misery they would incur by any wicked attempt. He could as
well have prevented the sin of the fallen Angels, and confirmed them in Grace,
as of those that continued in their happy state: He might have appeared to man,
informed him of the Issue of his Design, and made secret impressions upon his
heart, since he was acquainted with every avenue to his Will. God could have
kept all sin out of the world, as well as all Creatures from breathing in it;
he was as well able to bar sin for ever out of the World, as to let Creatures
lie in the Womb of nothing, wherein they were first wrapped. To say God does
will sin as he does other things, is to deny his Holiness; to say it entered
without any thing of his Will, is to deny his Omnipotence. If he did
necessitate Adam to fall, what shall we think of his Purity? If Adam d^d fall
without any concern of God's Will in it, what shall we say of his Sovereignty?
The one taints his Holiness, and the other clips his Power. If it came without
any thing of his Will in it, and he did not foresee it, where is his
Omniscience? If it entered whether he would or no, where is his Omnipotence.
Romans 9.19. Who has resisted his Will? There cannot be a lustful Act in
Abimelech, if God will withhold his Power; Genesis 20.6. I withheld thee: Nor a
cursing word in Balaam's Mouth, unless God give power to speak it; Numb. 22.38.
Have I now any power at all to say any thing? The Word that God puts in my
mouth, that shall I speak. As no Action could be sinful, if God had not
forbidden it; so no sin could be committed, if God did not will to give way to
it.

2. God does not will sin directly, and by an efficacious Will. He does not
directly will it, because he has prohibited it by his Law, which is a
discovery of his Will: So that if he should directly will sin, and directly
prohibit it, he would will good and evil in the same manner, and there would
be Contradictions in God's Will: To will sin absolutely, is to work it. Psalm.
115.3. God has done whatsoever he pleased. God cannot absolutely will it,
because he cannt work it. Rispolis.
God wills good by a positive decree, because he has decreed to effect it. He
wills evil by a privative decree., because he has decreed not to give that
Grace which would certainly prevent it. Bradward. lib. 1 cap. 34. God wills it
secundum quid.
God does not will sin simply, for that were to approve it, but he wills it, in
order to that Good his Wisdom will bring forth from it. He wills not sin for it
self, but for the event. To will sin as sin, or as purely evil, is not in the
capacity of a Creature, neither of Man nor Devil. The Will of a Rational
Creature cannot will any thing but under the appearance of good, of some good
in the sin it self, or some good in the issue of it. Much more is this far from
God, Aquin. cont. Gent. l. 1. c. 95.
who being infinitely good, cannot will evil as evil; and being infinitely
knowing, cannot will that for good which is evil. Infinite Wisdom can be under
no Error or Mistake: To will sin as sin, would be an unanswerable blemish on
God; but to will to suffer it in order to good, is the glory of his Wisdom: It
could never have peeped up its head, unless there had been some decree of God
concerning it. And there had been no decree of God concerning it, had he not
intended to bring good and glory out of it. If God did directly will the
discovery of his Grace and Mercy to the World, he did in some sort will sin, as
that without which there could not have been any appearance of Mercy in the
World: For an Innocent Creature is not the Object of Mercy, but a Miserable
Creature; and no Rational Creature but must be sinful before it be miserable.

3. God wills the permission of sin. He does not positively will sin, but he
positively wills to permit it. And though he does not approve of sin, yet he
approves of that act of his Will, whereby he permits it. For since that sin
could not enter into the World without some concern of God's Will about it,
that act of his Will that gave way to it, could not be displeasing to him: God
could never be displeased with his own Act: He is not as man that he should
repent, 1 Samuel 15.29. What God cannot repent of, he cannot but approve of: It Is
contrary to the blessedness of God to disapprove of, and be displeased with any
act of his own Will. If he hated any act of his own Will, he would hate
himself, he would be under a torture: Every one that hates his own acts, is
under some disturbance and torment for them. That which is permitted by him, is
in it self, and in regard of the evil of it, hateful to him: But as the
prospect of that good which he aims at in the permission of it is pleasing to
him; so that act of his Will whereby he permits it, is ushered in by an
approving act of his Understanding. Either God approved of the permission, or
not; if he did not approve his own act of permission, he could not have decreed
an act of permission. It Is unconceivable that God should decree such an act
which he detested, and positively will that which he hated. Though God hated
sin, as being against his Holiness, yet he did not hate the permission of sin,
as being subservient by the Immensity of his Wisdom to his own Glory. He could
never be displeased with that which was the result of his Eternal Counsel, as
this decree of permitting sin was, as well as any other decree resolved upon in
his own Breast. For as God acts nothing in Time, but what he decreed from
Eternity, so he permits nothing in time but what he decreed from Eternity to
permit. To speak properly therefore, God does not will sin, but he wills the
permission of it, and this Will to permit is Active and positive in God.

4. This act of permission is not a mere and naked permission, but such an one
as is attended with a certainty of the event. The decrees of God to make use of
the sin of Man for the glory of his Grace in the Mission and Passion of his
Son, hung upon this entrance of sin. Would it consist with the Wisdom of God to
decree such great and stupendous things, the event whereof should depend upon
an uncertain Foundation which he might be mistaken in? God would have sat in
Council from Eternity to no purpose, if he had only permitted those things to
be done, without any knowledge of the event of this permission: God would not
have made such provision for Redemption to no purpose, or an uncertain purpose,
which would have been, if Man had not fallen; or if it had been an uncertainty
with God whether he would fall or no. Though the Will of God about sin was
permissive, yet the Will of God about that Glory he would promote by the defect
of the Creature, was positive; and therefore he would not suffer so many
positive acts of his Will to hang upon an uncertain Event; and therefore he did
wisely and righteously order all things to the accomplishment of his great and
gracious Purposes.

5. This act of permission does not taint the holiness of God. That there is
such an act as permission, is clear in Scripture; Acts 14.16. Who in times past
suffered all Nations to walk in their own ways. But that it does not blemish
the Holiness of God will appear,

1. From the nature of this permission.

1. It Is not a Moral permission, a giving liberty of toleration by any Law to
commit sin with impunity; when what one Law did forbid, another Law does leave
indifferent to be done or not, as a Man sees good in himself. As when there is
a Law made among Men, That no man shall go out of such a City or Country
without license; To go out without license is a Crime by the Law; but when that
Law is repealed by another, that gives liberty for men to go and come at their
pleasure: It does not make their going or coming necessary, but leaves those
which were before bound, to do as they see good in themselves. Such a
permission makes a Fact lawful, though not necessary; a man is not obliged to
do it, but he is left to his own discretion to do as he pleases, without being
chargeable with a Crime for doing it, Such a permission there was granted by
God to Adam of eating of the fruits of the Garden, to choose any of them for
Food, except the Tree of Knowledge of Good and Evil. It was a Precept to him,
not to eat of the fruit of the Tree of Knowledge of Good and Evil; but the
other was a Permission, whereby it was lawful for him to feed upon any other
that was most agreeable to his Appetite: But there is not such a Permission in
the case of Sin; this had been an Indulgence of it, which had freed Man from
any Crime, and consequently from Punishment; because by such a Permission by
Law, he would have had Authority to Sin, if he pleased. God did not remove the
Law, which he had before placed as a Bar against Evil, nor ceased that Moral
Impediment of his Threatening: Such a Permission as this, to make Sin Lawful or
Indifferent, had been a blot upon Gods Holiness.

2. But this Permission of God in the case of Sin, is no more than the not
hindering a sinful Action, which he could have prevented. It Is not so much an
Action of God, as a suspension of his Influence, which might have hindered an
Evil Act, and a forbearing to restrain the Faculties of Man from Sin; it is
properly the not exerting that Efficacy, which might change the Counsels that
are taken, and prevent the Action intended. As when one Man sees another ready
to fall, and can preserve him from falling by reaching out his hand; he permits
him to fall, that is, he hinders him not from falling. So God describes his Act
about Abimelech, Gen, 20.6. I withheld thee from sinning against me, therefore
suffered I thee not to touch her. If Abimelech had sinned, he had sinned by
Gods permission; that is, by Gods not hindering, or not restraining him by
making any Impressions upon him. So that Permission is only a withholding that
Help and Grace, which (if bestowed) would have been an effectual Remedy to
prevent a Crime: And it is rather a Suspension or Cessation, than properly a
Permission; and Sin may be said to be committed not without Gods permission,
rather than by his Permission.

Thus in the Fall of Man, God did not hold the Reins strict upon Satan to
restrain him from laying the Bait, nor restrain Adam from swallowing the Bait:
He kept to himself that Efficacious Grace, which he might have darted out upon
Man to prevent his Fall. God left Satan to his Malice of Tempting, and Adam to
his liberty of Resisting, and his own strength, to use that sufficient Grace he
had furnished him with, whereby he might have resisted and overcome the
Temptation. As he did not drive Man to it, so he did not secretly restrain him
from it. So in the Jews Crucifying our Savior; God did not imprint upon their
Minds by his Spirit, a consideration of the greatness of the Crime, and the
horror of his Justice due to it: And being without those Impediments, they run
furiously of their own accord to the Commission of that Evil. As when a Man
lets a Wolf or Dog out upon his Prey, he takes off the Chain which held them,
and they presently act according to their Natures Lawson, page 64.
. In the Fall of Angels and Men, Gods Act was a leaving them to their own
strength: In Sins after the Fall, it is Gods giving them up to their own
Corruption. The first is a pure suspension of Grace; the other has the nature
of a Punishment, Psalm. 81.12. So I gave them up to their own hearts lusts. The
first Object of this Permissive Will of God was, to leave Ang^ls and Men to
their own liberty, and the use of their Free Will, which was Natural to them
Suarez, Vol. 4. p. 414.
, not adding that Supernatural Grace, which was necessary, not that they should
not at all sin, but that they should infallibly not sin: They had a strength
sufficient to avoid Sin, but not sufficient infallibly to avoid Sin; a Grace
sufficient to preserve them, but not sufficient to confirm them.

3. Now this Permission is not the cause of Sin, nor does blemish the Holiness
of God. It does not entrench upon the Freedom of Men, but supposes it,
establishes it, and leaves Man to it. God acted nothing, but only ceased to
Act; and therefore could not be the Efficient cause of Man's Sin. As God is not
the Author of good, but by willing and effecting it; so he is not the Author of
Evil but by willing and effecting it: But he does not positively will Evil, nor
effect it by any Efficacy of his own. Permission is no Action, nor the cause of
that Action which is permitted; but the will of that Person who is permitted to
do such an Action, is the cause Suarez, de Legib. p. 43.
. God can no more be said to be the cause of Sin, by suffering a Creature to
act as it will; than he can be said to be the cause of the not Being of any
Creature, by denying it Being, and letting it remain Nothing: It Is not from God
that it is Nothing, it is Nothing in it self. Though God be said to be the Cause
of Creation, yet he is never by any said to be the Cause of that Nothing which
was before Creation. This Permission of God is not the Cause of Sin, but the
cause of not hindering Sin. Man and Angels had a Physical Power of sinning from
God, as they were created with Free Will, and supported in their Natural
strength; but the Moral power to sin was not from God: He counseled them not
to it, laid no obligation upon them to use their Natural power for such an end.
He only left them to their freedom, and not hindered them in their acting what
he was resolved to permit.

2. The Holiness of God is not tainted by this, because he was under no
obligation to hinder their Commission of sin. Ceasing to act, whereby to
prevent a Crime or mischief, brings not a Person permitting it, under guilt,
unless where he is under an obligation to prevent it: But God in regard of his
Absolute Dominion cannot be charged with any such Obligation. One Man that does
not hinder the Murder of another, when it is in his power, is guilty of the
Murder in part; but it is to be considered, that he is under a Tie by Nature,
as being of the same kind, and being the others Brother by a communion of
Blood; also under an obligation of the Law of Charity, enacted by the Common
Sovereign of the World: But what tie was there upon God? since the Infinite
Transcendency of his Nature, and his Sovereign Dominion frees him from any such
obligation; Job 9.12. If he takes away, who shall say, What do thou? God
might have prevented the Fall of Men and Angels, he might have confirmed them
all in a state of perpetual Innocence; but where is the Obligation? He had made
the Creature a Debtor to himself, but he owed nothing to the Creature. Before
God can be charged with any guilt in this case, it must be proved, not only
that he could, but that he was bound to hinder it. No Person can be justly
charged with another Fault, merely for not preventing it, unless he be bound
to prevent it; else not only the First sin of Angels and Man would be imputed
to God, as the Author, but all the sins of Men. He could not be obliged by any
Law, because he had no Supeiour to impose any Law upon him; and it will be hard
to prove, that he was obliged from his own Nature to prevent the entrance of
Sin, which he would use as an occasion to declare his own Holiness so
transcendent a Perfection of his Nature, more than ever it could have been
manifested by a total exclusion of it, viz. in the Death of Christ. He is no
more bound in his own Nature, to preserve by Supernatural Grace his Creature
from Falling, after he had framed him with a sufficient strength to stand; than
he was obliged in his own Nature to bring his Creature into Being, when it was
Nothing. He is not bound to create a Rational Creature, much less bound to
create him with Supernatural gifts; though since God would make a Rational
Creature, he could not but make him with a Natural Uprightness and rectitude.

God did as much for Angels and Men, as became a Wise Governor: He had
published his Law, backed it with severe Penalties, and the Creature wanted not
a Natural strength to observe and obey it. Had not Man a power to obey all the
Precepts of the Law, as well as one? How was God bound to give him more Grace,
since what he had already was enough to shield him, and keep up his Resistance
against all the Power of Hell? It had been enough to have pointed his Will
against the Temptation, and he had kept off the force of it. Was there any
Promise past to Adam of any further Grace, which he could plead as a tie upon
God? No such voluntary Limit upon Gods Supreme Dominion appears upon Record.
Was any thing due to Man, which he had not? Any thing promised him, which was
not performed? What Action of Debt then can the Creature bring against God?
Indeed, when Man began to neglect the light of his own Reason, and became
Inconsiderate of the Precept, God might have enlightened his Understanding by a
special flash, a Supernatural beam, and imprinted upon him a particular
consideration of the Necessity of his Obedience, the Misery he was approaching
to by his Sin, the folly of any such Apprehension of an equality in Knowledge;
he might have convinced him of the falsity of the Serpents Arguments, and
uncas'd to him the Venom that lay under those Baits. But how does it appear
that God was bound to those Additional Acts, when he had already lighted up in
him a Spirit, which was the Candle of the Lord, Prove. 20.27. whereby he was
able to discern all, if he had attended to it. It was enough that God did not
necessitate Man to sin, did not counsel him to it; that he had given him
sufficient warning in the Threatening, and sufficient strength in his Faculties,
to fortify him against Temptation. He gave him what was due to him as a
Creature of his own framing; he withdrew no help from him, that was due to him
as a Creature, and what was not due he was not bound to impart. Man did not beg
Preserving Grace of God, and God was not bound to offer it, when he was not
Petitioned for it especially: Yet if he had begged it, God having before
furnished him sufficiently, might by the right of his Sovereign Dominion have
denied it without any Impeachment of his Holiness and Righteousness. Though he
would not in such a case have dealt so bountifully with his Creature, as he
might have done; yet he could not have been impleaded, as dealing Unrighteously
with his Creature. The single word that God had already uttered, when he gave
him his Precept, was enough to oppose against all the Devils Wiles, which
tended to invalidate that Word: The Understanding of Man could not imagine,
that the Word of God was vainly spoken; and the very suggestion of the Devil,
as if the Creator should envy his Creature, would have appeared ridiculous, if
he had attended to the Voice of his own Reason. God had done enough for him,
and was obliged to do no more, and dealt not Unrighteously in leaving him to
act according to the Principles of his Nature.

To Conclude, If Gods Permission of Sin were enough to charge it upon God, or
if God had been obliged to give Adam Supernatural Grace: Adam, that had so
capacious a Brain, could not be without that Plea in his Mouth, Lord, thou
might have prevented it; the commission of it by me could not have been
without thy permission of it: Or, Thou have been wanting to me, as the Author
of my Nature. No such Plea is brought by Adam into the Court, when God Tried
and Cast him: No such Pleas can have any strength in them. Adam had reason
enough to know, that there was sufficient Reason to overruled such a Plea.

Since the Permission of Sin casts no Dirt upon the Holiness of God, as I think
has been cleared, we may under this Head consider Two things more.

1. That Gods Permission of Sin, is not so much as his Restraint or Limitation
of it. Since the entrance of the First sin into the World by Adam, God is more
a hinderer than a permitter of it. If he has permitted that which he could
have prevented, he prevents a world more, that he might, if he pleased, permit:
The Hedges about Sin are larger than the Outlets; they are but a few Streams
that glide about the World, in comparison of that mighty Torrent he dams up
both in Men and Devils. He that understands, what a Lake of Sodom is in every
Man's Nature, since the universal Infection of Humane Nature, as the Apostle
describes it Romans 3.9, 10, etc. must acknowledge, That if God should cast the
Reins upon the Necks of Sinful men, they would run into Thousands of abominable
Crimes, more than they do: The impression of all Natural Laws would be razed
out, the World would be a public Stews, and a more bloody Slaughterhouse;
Humane Society would sink into a Chaos; no Starlight of commendable Morality
would be seen in it; the World would be no longer an Earth, but an Hell, and
have lain deeper in Wickedness than it does. If God did not limit Sin, as he
does the Sea, and put Bars to the Waves of the Heart, as well as those of the
Waters, and say of them, Hitherto you shall go, and no further; Man has such a
furious Ocean in him, as would overflow the Banks; and where it makes a breach
in one place, it would in a Thousand, if God should suffer it to act according
to its impetuous Current.

As the Devil has Lust enough to destroy all Mankind, if God did not bridle
him; deal with every Man, as he did with Job, ruin their Comforts, and deform
their Bodies with Scabs; infect Religion with a Thousand more Errors; fling
Disorders into Commonwealths, and make them as a Fiery Furnace, full of
nothing but Flame. If He were not Chained by that Powerful Arm, that might let
him loose to fulfill his Malicious Fury; what Rapines, Murders, Thefts, would be
committed, if he did not stint him? Abimelech would not only Lust after Sarah,
but deflow'r her; Laban not only pursue Jacob, but rifle him; Saul not only
hate David, but murder him; David not only threaten Nabal, but root him up, and
his Family, did not God girdle in the Wrath of Man Psalm. 76.1^. a^ t^^ word
Restrain signifies.
: A greater remainder of Wrath is pent in, than flames out, which yet swells
for an Outlet. God may be concluded more Holy in Preventing Men's sins, than the
Author of Sin in Permitting some; since were it not for his Restraints by the
pull-back of Conscience, and infused Motions and outward Impediments, the World
would swarm more with this Cursed Brood.

2. His Permission of Sin is in order to his own Glory, and a greater Good.
It Is no reflection upon the Divine Goodness to leave Man to his own Conduct,
whereby such a Deformity as Sin sets foot in the World; since he makes his
Wisdom illustrious in bringing Good out of Evil, and a Good greater than that
Evil he suffered to spring up Ma^us bonum, ^aith Bradward.
. God did not permit Sin, as Sin, or permit it barely for it self. As Sin is
not lovely in its own Nature; so neither is the Permission of Sin intrinsically
good or amiable for it self, but for those ends aimed at in the Permission of
it. God permitted Sin, but approved not of the Object of that Permission, Sin;
because, that considered in its own Nature is solely Evil: Nor can we think,
that God could approve of the Act of Permission, considered only in it self as
an Act; but as it respected that Event which his Wisdom would order by it. We
cannot suppose that God should permit Sin, but for some great and glorious End;
for it is the manifestation of his own glorious Perfections he intends in all
the Acts of his Will. Prove. 16.4. The Lord has made all things for himself;
(...) has wrought all things; which is not only his act of Creation, but
Ordination: [For Himself,] that is, for the discovery of the Excellency of his
Nature, and the Communication of himself to his Creature. Sin indeed in its own
Nature has no tendency to a good End, the Womb of it Teems with nothing but
Monsters; it is a spurn at Gods Sovereignty, and a slight of his Goodness: It
both deforms and torments the Person that acts it; it is black and abominable,
and has not a mite of Goodness in the Nature of it. If it ends in any good,
it is only from that Infinite Transcendency of skill, that can bring Good out of
Evil, as well as Light out of Darkness.

Therefore God did not permit it as Sin, but as it was an occasion for the
manifestation of his own Glory. Though the Goodness of God would have appeared
in the Preservation of the World, as well as it did in the Creation of it; yet
his Mercy could not have appeared without the Entrance of Sin, because the
Object of Mercy is a Miserable Creature; but Man could not be Miserable as long
as he remained Innocent. The Reign of Sin opened a door for the Reign and
Triumph of Grace, Romans 5.21. As sin has reigned unto death, so might grace
reign through righteousness to eternal life: Without it, the Bowels of Mercy
had never sounded, and the ravishing Music of Divine Grace could never have
been heard by the Creature. Mercy, which renders God so amiable, could never
else have beamed out to the World. Angels and Men upon this occasion beheld the
stirrings of Divine Grace, and the Tenderness of Divine Nature, and the glory
of the Divine Persons in their several Functions about the Redemption of Man,
which had else been a Spring shut up and a Fountain sealed; the Song of Glory
to God, and Good will to Men in a way of Redemption had never been Sung by
them. It appears in his dealings with Adam, that he permitted his Fall, not
only to show his Justice in punishing, but principally his Mercy in rescuing;
since he proclaims to him first the Promise of a Redeemer to bruise the
Serpents head, before he settled the Punishment he should smart under in the
World Genesis 3.15, 16, 17.
. And what fairer prospect could the Creature have of the Holiness of God, and
his Hatred of Sin, than in the edge of that Sword of Justice, which punished it
in the Sinner; but glittered more in the Punishment of a Surety so near Allied
to him. Had not Man been Criminal, he could not have been Punishable, nor any
been punishable for him: And the Pulse of Divine Holiness could not have beaten
so quick, and been so visible, without an exercise of his Vindicative Justice.
He left Man's mutable Nature, to fall under Unrighteousness, that thereby he
might commend the Righteousness of his own Nature Romans 3.7.
. Adams Sin in its Nature tended to the ruin of the World, and God takes an
occasion from it for the glory of his Grace in the Redemption of the World: He
brings forth thereby a new Scene of Wonders from Heaven, and a surprising
Knowledge on Earth: As the Sun breaks out more strongly after a Night of
Darkness and Tempest. As God in Creation framed a Chaos by his Power, to
manifest his Wisdom in bringing Order out of Disorder, Light out of Darkness,
Beauty out of Confusion and Deformity; when he was able by a Word to have made
all Creatures stand up in their Beauty, without the precedence of a Chaos: So
God permitted a Moral Chaos, to manifest a greater Wisdom in the repairing a
broken Image, and restoring a deplorable Creature, and bringing out those
Perfections of his Nature, which had else been wrapped up in a perpetual silence
in his own bosom But of the Wisdom of God in the permitting Sin in order to
Redemption, I have handled in the Attribute of Wisdom.
. It was therefore very congruous to the Holiness of God, to permit that which
he could make subservient for his own glory, and particularly for the
manifestation of this Attribute of Holiness, which seems to be in opposition to
such a permission.

5. Proposition: The Holiness of God is not blemished by his concurrence with
the Creature in the material part of a sinful Act. Some to free God from having
any hand in Sin, deny his concurrence to the Actions of the Creature; because,
if he concurs to a sinful Action, he concurs to the Sin also: Not
understanding, how there can be a distinction between the Act, and the
Sinfulness or Viciousness of it; and how God can concur to a Natural Action,
without being stained by that Moral Evil which cleaves to it.

For the understanding of this, observe

1. There is a concurrence of God to all the acts of the Creature; Acts 17.28.
In him we live, and move, and have our being. We depend upon God in our Acting,
as well as in our Being: There is as much an efficacy of God in our Motion, as
in our Production; as none have life without his Power in producing it, so none
have any operation without his Providence concurring with it. In him, or by
him, that is, by his Virtue preserving and governing our Motions, as well as by
his Power bringing us into Being. Hence Man is compared to an Ax, Isai. 10.15.
an Instrument that has no action, without the cooperation of a Superior Agent
handling it: And the Actions of the Second Causes are ascribed to God; the
Grass, that is the product of the Sun, Rain, and Earth, he is said to make to
grow upon the Mountains, Psalm. 147.8. and the Skin and Flesh, which is by
Natural generation, he is said to cloth us with, Job 10.5. in regard of his
co-working with Second Causes, according to their Natures. As nothing can
exist, so nothing can operate without him; let his Concurrence be removed, and
the Being and Action of the Creature cease: Remove the Sun from the Horizon, or
a Candle from a Room, and the Light which flowed from either of them cease.
Without Gods preserving and concurring Power, the course of Nature would sink,
and the Creation be in vain. Suarez, Metaph. part. 1. p. 552.
All Created things depend upon God as Agents, as well as Beings, and are
subordinate to him in a way of Action, as well as in a way of Existing. If God
suspend his Influence from their Action, they would cease to act, (as the Fire
did from burning the Three Children) as well as if God suspend his Influence
from their Being, they would cease to be. God supports the Nature whereby
Actions are wrought, the Mind where Actions are consulted, and the Will where
Actions are determined, and the Motive power whereby Actions are produced. The
Mind could not contrive, nor the Hand act a Wickedness, if God did not support
the Power of the one in designing, and the Strength of the other in executing a
wicked Intention. Every faculty in its Being, and every faculty in its Motion,
has a dependence upon the Influence of God. To make the Creature Independent
upon God in any thing which speaks Perfection, as Action considered as Action
is, is to make the Creature a Sovereign Being. Indeed we cannot imagine the
Concurrence of God to the good Actions of Men since the Fall, without granting
a Concurrence of God to evil Actions; because there is no Action so purely
Good, but has a mixture of Evil in it, though it takes its denomination of
Good from the better part, Eccles. 7.20. There is no man that does good and
sins not.

2. Though the Natural virtue of doing a sinful Action be from God, and
supported by him, yet this does not blemish the Holiness of God; while God
concurs with them in the Act, he instills no Evil into Men.

1. No Act in regard of the substance of it is Evil. Most of the Actions of our
Faculties, as they are Actions, might have been in the state of Innocence.
Eating is an act Adam would have used, if he had stood firm, but not Eating to
excess. Worship was an act that should have been performed to God in Innocence,
but not hypocritically. Every Action is good by a physical goodness, as it is
an act of the Mind or hand, which have a Natural goodness by Creation; but
every Action is not Morally good: The Physical goodness of the Action depends
on God, the Moral Evil on the Creature. ^^^rald. de ^ibero a^bit. p. 98, 99.
There is no Action, as a Corporeal action, is prohibited by the Law of God;
but as it springs from an Evil disposition, and is tainted by a venomous temper
of Mind. There is no action so bad, as attended with such Objects and
Circumstances; but if the Objects and Circumstances were changed, might be a
brave and commendable Action: So that the Moral goodness or badness of an Act
is not to be esteemed from the substance of the act, which has always a
Physical goodness; but from the Objects, Circumstances, and Constitution of the
Mind in the doing of it. Worship is an Act good in it self, but the worship of
an Image is bad in regard of the Object. Were that act of Worship directed to
God, that is paid to a Statue, and offered up to him with a sincere frame of
Mind, it would be Morally good. The Act in regard of its substance is the same
in both, and considered as separated from the Object to which the Worship is
directed, has the same real goodness in regard of its substance; but when you
consider this action in relation to the different Objects, the one has a Moral
Goodness and the other a Moral Evil. So in Speaking; Speaking being a motion of
the Tongue in the forming of words, is an excellency belonging to a Reasonable
Creature; an Endowment bestowed, continued, and supported by God. Now if the
same Tongue forms words whereby it curses God this minute, and forms words
whereby it blesses and praises God the next minute; the faculty of Speaking is
the same, the motion of the Tongue is the same in pronouncing the Name of God
either in a way of Cursing or Blessing, James 3.9, 10. it is the same mouth that
blesses and curses; and the motion of it is naturally good in regard of the
substance of the Act in both; it is the use of an excellent Power God has
given, and which God preserves in the use of it. But the estimation of the
Moral Goodness or Evil is not from the act it self, but from the disposition of
the Mind. Once more, Killing as an act is good, nor is it unlawful as an Act:
For if so, God would never have commanded his People Israel to wage any War,
and Justice could not be done upon Malefactors by the Magistrate. A Man were
bound to sacrifice his life to the fury of an Invader, rather than secure it by
dispatching that of an Enemy. But killing an Innocent, or killing without
Authority, or out of revenge, is bad. It Is not the Material part of the act,
but the Object, Manner, and Circumstance, that makes it good or evil. It Is no
blemish to Gods Holiness to concur to the substance of an Action, without
having any hand in the Immorality of it, because whatsoever is real in the
substance of the Action might be done without Evil. It Is not Evil as it is an
act, as it is a motion of the Tongue or Hand, for then every motion of the
Tongue or Hand would be Evil.

2. Hence it follows, that an Act as an Act is one thing, and the Viciousness
another. Amyrald. p. 321, 322.
The Action is the efficacy of the Faculty, extending it self to some outward
Object; but the Sinfulness of an act consists in a privation of that Comeliness
and Righteousness, which ought to be in an Action; in a want of conformity of
the act with the Law of God, either written in Nature, or revealed in the Word.
Now the Sinfulness of an Action is not the act it self, but is considered in it
as it is related to the Law, and is a deviation from it; and so it is something
cleaving to the Action, and therefore to be distinguished from the act it self,
which is the Subject of the Sinfulness. When we say, such an Action is sinful,
the Action is the Subject, and the Sinfulness of the Action is that which
adheres to it. The Action is not the Sinfulness, nor the Sinfulness the Action;
they are distinguished as the Member, and a disease in the Member, the Arm and
the Palsy in it: The Arm is not the Palsy, nor is the Palsy the Arm; but the
Palsy is a Disease that cleaves to the Arm: So Sinfulness is a deformity that
cleaves to an Action.

The Evil of an Action is not the effect of an Action, nor attends it as it is
an Action, but as it is an Action so circumstantiated, and conversant about
this or that Object; for the same Action done by two several Persons, may be
good in one, and bad in the other. As when two Judges are in joint Commission
for the Trial of a Malefactor, both upon the appearance of his Guilt condemn
him. This Action in both, considered as an Action, is good; for it is an
adjudging a Man to death, whose Crime deserves su^^ ^ punishment. But this same
Act, which is but one joint Act of both, may be Morally good in one Judge, and
Morally evil in the other: Morally good in him that Condemns him out of an
unbyassed consideration of the Demerit of his Fact, Obedience to the Law, and
Conscience of the Duty of his place; and Morally evil in the other, who has no
respect to those Considerations, but joins in the act of Condemnation,
principally moved by some private Animosity against the Prisoner, and desire of
revenge for some Injury he has really received, or imagines that he has
received from him. The Act in it self is the same materially in both; but in
one it is an Act of Justice, and in the other an Act of Murder, as it respects
the Principles and Motives of it in the two Judges; take away the respect of
private Revenge, and the Action in the Ill Judge had been as laudable as the
Action of the other. The substance of an Act, and the sinfulness of an Act, are
separable and distinguishable; and God may concur with the substance of an Act,
without concurring with the sinfulness of the Act: As the good Judge, that
Condemned the Prisoner out of Conscience, concurred with the evil Judge, who
condemned the Prisoner out of private Revenge; not in the Principle and Motive
of Condemnation, but in the Material part of Condemnation. So God assists in
that Action of a Man wherein Sin is placed, but not in that which is the Formal
reason of Sin, which is a privation of some Perfection the Action ought Morally
to have.

3. It will appear further in this, that hence it follows that the Action, and
the viciousness of the Action, may have two distinct Causes. That may be a
cause of the one that is not the cause of the other, and has no hand in the
producing of it. God concurs to the Act of the Mind as it Counsels, and to the
external Action upon that Counsel, as he preserves the Faculty, and gives
strength to the Mind to consult, and the other parts to execute; yet he is not
in the least tainted with the Viciousness of the Action. Though the Action be
from God as a concurrent Cause, yet the ill quality of the Action is solely
from the Creature with whom God concurs. The Sun and the Earth concur to the
production of all the Plants, that are formed in the womb of the one, and
Midwiv'd by the other: The Sun distributes Heat, and the Earth communicates
Sap; it is the same Heat dispersed by the one, and the same Juice bestowed by
the other: It has not a sweet Juice for one, and a sour Juice for another.
This general Influx of the Sun and Earth is not the immediate cause that one
Plant is poisonous, and another wholesome; but the Sap of the Earth is turned by
the Nature and quality of each Plant: If there were not such an Influx of the
Sun and Earth, no Plant could exert that poison which is in its Nature; but yet
the Sun and Earth are not the cause of that poison which is in the Nature of
the Plant. If God did not concur to the motions of Men, there could be no
sinful Action, because there could be no Action at all; yet this Concurrence is
not the cause of that Venom that is in the Action, which arises from the
Corrupt Nature of the Creature, no more than the Sun and Earth are the cause of
the Poison of the Plant, which is purely the effect of its own Nature upon that
general Influx of the Sun and Earth. The Influence of God pierces through all
Subjects; but the Action of Man done by that Influence is vitiated according to
the Nature of its own Corruption. As the Sun equally shines through all the
Quarrels in the Window; if the Glass be bright and clear, there is a pure
splendour; if it be Red or Green the splendour is from the Sun, but the
discoloring of that Light upon the Wall, is from the quality of the Glass.
Zanch. Tom. 2. lib. 3. cap. 4. qu. 4. p. 226.
But to be yet plainer; The Soul is the Image of God, and by the Acts of the
Soul, we may come to the knowledge of the Acts of God; the Soul gives motion to
the Body and every Member of it, and no Member could move without a concurrent
virtue of the Soul; if a Member be Paralitick or Gouty, whatsoever motion that
Gouty Member has, is derived to it from the Soul; but the Goutyness of the
Member, was not the Act of the Soul, but the fruit of Ill humors in the Body;
the lameness of the Member, and the motion of the Member, have two distinct
causes, the motion is from one cause, and the Ill motion from another. As the
Member could not move irregularly without some Ill humor or cause of that
distemper; so it could not move at all without the activity of the Soul: So
though God concur to the act of Understanding, Willing, and Execution, why can
he not be as free from the Irregularity in all those, as the Soul is free from
the Irregularity of the m^^ion of the Body, while it is the cause of the motion
it self? There are two Illustrations generally used in this case, that are not
unfit; the motion of the Pen in writing is from the hand that holds it, but the
Blurs by the Pen are from some fault in the Pen it self: And the Music of the
Instrument is from the hand that touches it, but the Jarring from the
faultiness of the Strings; both are the causes of the motion of the Pen and
Strings, but not the blurs or jarrings.

4. It Is very congruous to the Wisdom of God, to move his Creatures according
to their particular Natures; but this Motion makes him not the cause of Sin.
Had our Innocent Nature continued, God had moved us according to that Innocent
Nature; but when the state was changed for a Corrupt one, God must either
forbear all concourse, and so annihilate the World, or move us according to
that Nature he finds in us. If he had overthrown the World upon the entrance of
Sin, and created another upon the same terms, Sin might have as soon defaced
his second Work, as it did the first; and then it would follow, that God would
have been always building and demolishing. It was not fit for God to cease from
acting as a Wise Governor of his Creature, because Man did cease from his
Loyalty as a Subject. Is it not more agreeable to Gods Wisdom as a Governor,
to concur with his Creature according to his Nature, than to deny his
concurrence upon every Evil determination of the Creature? God concurred with
Adams mutable Nature in his first act of Sin; he concurred to the act and left
him to his Mutability. If Adam had put out his hand to eat of any other
unforbidden Fruit, God would have supported his Natural faculty then, and
concurred with him in his motion.

When Adam would put out his hand to take the Forbidden Fruit, God concurred to
that Natural action; but left him to the choice of the Object, and to the use
of his mutable Nature: And when Man became Apostate, God concurs with him
according to that condition wherein he found him, and cannot move him
otherwise, unless he should alter that Nature Man had contracted. God moving
the Creature as he found him, is no cause of the Ill motion of the Creature: As
when a Wheel is broken the space of a foot, it cannot but move ill in that part
till it be mended. He that moves it, uses the same motion (as it is his Act)
which he would have done had the Wheel been sound; the motion is good in the
Mover, but bad in the Subject: It Is not the fault of him that moves it, but the
fault of that Wheel that is moved, whose breaches came by some other cause. A
Man does not use to lay aside his Watch for some Irregularity, as long as it is
capable of motion, but winds it up: Why should God cease from concurring with
his Creature in its vital Operations and other actions of his Will, because
there was a flaw contracted in that Nature, that came right and true out of his
hand? And as he that winds up his disordered Watch, is in the same manner the
cause of its motion then, as he was when it was regular; yet by that act of
his, he is not the cause of the false motion of it, but that is from the
deficiency of some part of the Watch it self: So though God concurs to that
Action of the Creature, whereby the Wickedness of the Heart is drawn out; yet
is not God therefore as Unholy as the Heart.

5. God has one End in his Concurrence, and Man another in his Action. So that
there is a Righteous, and often a gracious End in God, when there is a base and
unworthy End in Man. God concurs to the substance of the Act; Man produces the
circumstance of the Act, whereby it is Evil. God orders both the Action wherein
he concurs, and the Sinfulness over which he presides, as a Governor, to his
own Ends. In Joseph's case, Man was sinful, and God merciful; his Brethren acted
Envy, and God designed Mercy, Genesis 45.4, 5. They would be rid of him as an
Eyesore, and God concurred with their Action to make him their Preserver, Genesis
50.20. Ye thought evil against me, but God meant it unto good. God concurred to
Judas his action of betraying our Savior; he supported his Nature while he
contracted with the Priests, and supported his Members while he was their Guide
to apprehend him; God's end was the manifestation of his choicest love to Man,
and Judas his end was the gratification of his own Covetousness. The Assyrian
did a Divine Work against Jerusalem, but not with a Divine end Isa. 10.5.6.^.
. He had a mind to enlarge his Empire, enrich his Coffers with the Spoil, and
gain the Title of a Conqueror; he is desirous to Invade his Neighbors, and God
employs him to punish his Rebels; but he means not so, nor does his heart think
so: He intended not as God intended. The Axe does not think what the Carpenter
intends to do with it. But God used the rapine of an Ambitious Nature as an
Instrument of his Justice: As the exposing Malefactors to wild Beasts was an
ancient Punishment, whereby the Magistrate intended the execution of Justice,
and to that purpose used the natural fierceness of the Beasts to an end
different from what those ravaging Creatures aimed at. God concurred with Satan
in spoiling Job of his Goods, and scarifying his Body; God gave Satan license
to do it, Job 1.12, 21.
and Job acknowledges it to be God's act: But their ends were different; God
concurred with Satan for the clearing the Integrity of his Servant, when Satan
aimed at nothing but the provoking him to Curse his Creator. The Physician
applies Leeches to suck the superfluous blood, but the Leeches suck to glut
themselves, without any regard to the intention of the Physician, and the
welfare of the Patient. In the same act where men intend to hurt, God intends
to correct; so that his concurrence is in a holy manner, while men commit
unrighteous actions. A Judge commands the Executioner to execute the Sentence
of Death which he has justly pronounced against a Malefactor, and admonishes
him to do it out of love to Justice; the Executioner has the Authority of the
Judge for his Commission, and the protection of the Judge for his Security: The
Judge stands by to countenance and secure him in the doing of it; but if the
Executioner has not the same intention as the Judge, viz. a love to Justice in
the performance of his Office, but a private hatred to the Offender; the Judge,
though he commanded the fact of the Executioner, yet did not command this Error
of his in it; and though he protects him in the Fact, yet he owns not this
corrupt disposition in him in the doing of what was enjoined him, as any act of
his own.

To Conclude this. Since the Creature cannot act without God, cannot lift up a
Hand, or move his Tongue, without God's preserving and upholding the Faculty,
and preserving the power of Action, and preserving every Member of the Body in
its actual Motion, and in every circumstance of its Motion, we must necessarily
suppose God to have such a way of concurrence as does not entrench upon his
Holiness. We must not equal the Creature to God, by denying its dependence on
him: Nor must we imagine such a concurrence to the sinfulness of an act, as
stains the Divine Purity, which is I think, sufficiently salv'd by
distinguishing the matter of the act from the evil adhering to it: For since
all evil is founded in some good; the evil is distinguishable from the good,
and the deformity of the action from the action it self, which as it is a
created act, has a dependence on the will and influence of God: And as it is a
sinful act, is the product of the will of the Creature.

6. Proposition. The holiness of God is not blemished by proposing Objects to a
man, which he makes use of to sin. There is no Object proposed to man, but is
directed by the Providence of God, which influenceth all motions in the World;
and there is no Object proposed to man, but his active Nature may, according to
the goodness or badness of his disposition, make a good or an ill use of. That
two men, one of a charitable, the other of a hard-hearted disposition, meet
with an indigent and necessitous Object, is from the Providence of God; yet
this indigent person is relieved by the one, and neglected by the other. There
could be no action in the World, but about some Object; there could be no
Object offered to us but by Divine Providence; the active Nature of man would
be in vain, if there were not Objects about which it might be exercised.
Nothing could present it self to man as an Object, either to excite his Grace,
or awaken his Corruption, but by the conduct of the Governor of the World.
That David should walk upon the Battlements of his Palace, and Bathsheba be in
the Bath at the same time, was from the Divine Providence which orders all the
affairs of the World 2 Samuel 117.
; and so some understand Jer. 6.21. Thus says the Lord, I will lay stumbling
blocks before this People, and the Fathers and Sons together shall fall upon
them. Since they have offered Sacrifices without those due qualifications in
their hearts, which were necessary to render them acceptable to me. I will lay
in their way such Objects, which their Corruption will use ill to their further
sin and ruin; so Psalm. 105.25. He turned their heart to hate his people; that
is, by the multiplying his People, he gave occasion to the Egyptians of hating
them, instead of caressing them as they had formerly done.

But God's Holiness is not blemished by this; for,

1. This proposing or presenting of Objects invades not the liberty of any man:
The Tree of the Knowledge of Good and Evil set in the midst of the Garden of
Eden, had no violent influence on man to force him to eat of it; his liberty to
eat of it, or not, was reserved entire to himself; no such Charge can be
brought against any Object whatsoever. If a man meet accidentally at a Table
with Meat that is grateful to his Palate, but hurtful to the present temper of
his Body; does the presenting this sort of Food to him strip him of his liberty
to decline it, as well as to feed of it? Can the Food have any internal
influence upon his will, and lay the freedom of it asleep whether he will or
no? Is there any Charm in that, more than in other sorts of Diet? No; but it is
the habit of love which he has to that particular Dish, the curiosity of his
Fancy, and the strength of his own Appetite, whereby he is brought into a kind
of slavery to that particular Meat, and not any thing in the food it self. When
the word is proposed to two persons, it is embraced by the one, rejected by the
other; is it from the word it self, which is the Object that these two persons
perform different acts? The Object is the same to both, but the manner of
acting about the Object is not the same: Is there any invasion of their liberty
by it? Is the one forced by the word to receive it, and the other forced by the
word to reject it? Two such contrary effects cannot proceed from one and the
same Cause: Outward things have only an objective influence, not an inward:
Amyral. de libero arbit. p. 224.
If the mere proposal of things did suspend or strike down the liberty of Man,
no Angels in Heaven, no Man upon Earth, no not our Savior himself, could do
any thing freely, but by force: Objects that are ill used are of God's
Creation, and though they have allurements in them, yet they have no compulsive
power over the will. The Fruit of the Tree of Knowledge of Good and Evil was
pleasing to the sight; it had a quality to allure, there had not else needed a
Prohibition to bar the eating of it; but it could not have so much power to
allure as the Divine threatening to deter.

2. The Objects are good in themselves, but the ill use of them is from man's
corruption. Bathsheba was by God's Providence presented to David's sight, but
it was David's disposition moved him to so evil an act: What if God knew that he
would use that Object ill? yet he knew he had given him a power to refrain from
any ill use of it: The Objects are innocent, but our Corruption poisons them.
The same Object has been used by one to holy purposes and holy improvements,
that has been used by another to sinful ends; when a charitable Object is
presented to a good man and a cruel man, one relieves him, the other reviles
him: The Object was rather an occasion to draw out the Charity of one, as well
as the other; but the refusing to reach out a helping hand, was not from the
person in Calamity, but the disposition of the Refuser to whom he was
presented: It Is not from the nature of the Object that men do good or evil, but
from the disposition of the person; what is good in it self, is made bad by our
Corruption. As the same Meat which nourishes and strengthens a sound
Constitution, cherishes the Disease of another that eats at the same Table,
not from any unwholsom quality in the Food, but the vicious quality of the
humors lodging in the Stomach, which turn the Diet into fuel for themselves,
which in its own nature was apt to engender a wholesome juice. Some are perfected
by the same things whereby others are ruined. Riches are used by some, not only
for their own, but the advantage of others in the World; by others only for
themselves, and scarcely so much as their necessities require. Is this the
fault of the wealth, or the dispositions of the Persons, who are covetous
instead of being Generous? It Is a Calumny therefore upon God to charge him with
the sin of man upon this account: The rain that drops from the Clouds upon the
Plants, is sweet in it self, but when it moystens the root of any venomous
Plant, it is turned into the juice of the Plant, and becomes venomous with it.
The Miracles that our Savior wrought, were applauded by some, and envied by
the Pharisees; the sin arose not from the nature of the Miracles, but the
Malice of their spirits: The Miracles were sitter in their own nature to have
induced them to an adoration of our Savior, than to excite so vile a Passion
against one that had so many marks from Heaven to dignifie him, and proclaim
him worthy of their respect. The Person of Christ was an Object proposed to the
Jews; some worship him, others condemn and crucify him, and according to their
several Vices and base ends they use this object. Judas to content his
Covetousness, the Pharisees to glut their Revenge, Pilate for his Ambition, to
preserve himself in his Government, and avoid the Articles the People might
charge him with of Countenancing an Enemy to Caesar. Amyrald. Ironic. p. 337.
God at that time put into their minds a rational and true Proposition which
they apply to ill purposes. Caiphas said, that it was expedient for one man to
dye for the people, which he spoke not of himself, Joh. 11.50, 51. God put it
into his mind, but he might have applied it better than he did, and considered,
though the Maxim was commendable, whether it might justly be applied to Christ,
or whether there was such a necessity that he must dye, or the Nation be
destroyed by the Romans: The Maxim was sound and holy, decreed by God; but what
an ill use did the High Priest make of it to put Christ to death as a seditious
Person, to save the Nation from the Roman Fury?

3. Since the natural Corruption of men will use such Objects ill, may not God
without tainting himself, present such Objects to them in subserviency to his
gracious Decrees? Whatsoever God should present to men in that state, they
would make an ill use of; has not God then the Sovereign Prerogative to
present what he pleases, and suppress others? To offer that to them which may
serve his holy purpose, and hide other things from them which are not so
conducing to his gracious ends, which would be as much the occasions of
exciting their sin, as the others which he does bring forth to their view? The
Jews, at the time of Christ, were of a turbulent and seditious humor, they
expected a Messiah, a Temporal King, and would readily have embraced any
occasion to have been up in arms to have delivered themselves from the Roman
yoke; to this purpose the People attempted once to make him King: And probably
the expectation they had that he had such a Design to Head them, might be one
reason of their Hosannas, because without some such conceit it was not probable
they should so soon change their note, and vote him to the Cross in so short a
time, after they had applauded him as if he had been upon a Throne; but their
being defeated of strong Expectations, usually ended in a more ardent Fury.
This turbulent and seditious humor God directs in another Chanel, suppresseth
all Occurrences that might excite them to a Rebellion against the Romans, which
if he had given way to, the crucifying Christ, which was God's design to bring
about at that time, had not probably been effected, and the Salvation of
Mankind been hindered or stood at a stay for a time. God therefore orders such
Objects and Occasions, that might direct this seditious Humor to another
Chanel, which would else have run out in other Actions, which had not been
conducing to the great Design he had then in the World. Is it not the right of
God, and without any blemish to his Holiness, to use those Corruptions which he
finds sown in the Nature of his Creature by the hand of Satan, and to propose
such Objects as may excite the exercise of them for his own service? Sure God
has as much right to serve himself of the Creature of his own framing, and
what Natures soever they are possessed with, and to present Objects to that
purpose, as a Faulconer has to offer this or that Bird to his Hawk to exercise
his courage, and excite his ravenousness, without being termed the Author of
that ravenousness in the Creature. God planted not those Corruptions in the
Jews, but finds them in those Persons over whom he has an absolute Sovereignty
in the right of a Creator, and that of a Judge for their sins: And by the right
of that Sovereignty may offer such Objects and Occasions, which, though
innocent in themselves, he knows they will make use of to ill purposes, but
which by the same decree that he resolves to present such Occasions to them, he
also resolves to make use of them for his own glory. This I have spoken of
before, but it is necessary now.
It Is not conceivable by us what way that Death of Christ, which was necessary
for the Satisfaction of Divine Justice, could be brought about without ordering
the evil of some men's hearts by special Occasions to effect his purpose; we
cannot suppose that Christ can be guilty of any Crime that deserved Death by
the Jewish Law; had he been so a Criminal, he could not have been a Redeemer: A
perfect Innocence was necessary to the design of his coming. Had God himself
put him to that Death, without using Instruments of Wickedness in it, by some
remarkable hand from Heaven, the Innocence of his Nature had been for ever
eclipsed, and the voluntariness of his Sacrifice had been obscured: The
strangeness of such a Judgment would have made his innocence incredible; he
could not reasonably have been proposed as an Object of Faith; What, to believe
in one that was struck dead by a hand from Heaven? The propagation of the
Doctrine of Redemption had wanted a Foundation; and though God might have
raised him again, the certainty of his Death had been as questionable as his
Innocence in dying, had he not been raised. But God orders every thing so, as
to answer his own most wise and holy ends, and maintain his Truth, and the
fulfilling the Predictions of the minutest Concerns about them, and all this by
presenting Occasions innocent in themselves, which the Corruptions of the Jews
took hold of, and whereby God, unknown to them, brought about his own Decrees:
And may not this be conceived without any taint upon God's Holiness; for when
there are Seeds of all sin in man's Nature, why may not God hinder the sprouting
up of this or that kind of Seed, and leave liberty to the growth of the other,
and shut up other ways of sinning, and restrain men from them, and let them
loose to that Temptation which he intends to serve himself of, hiding from them
those Objects which were not so serviceable to his purpose, wherein they would
have sinned, and offer others, which he knew their Corruption would use ill,
and were serviceable to his ends; since the depravation of their Natures would
necessarily hurry them to evil without restraining Grace, as a Scale will
necessarily rise up when the weight in it, which kept it down, is taken away?

7. Proposition: The Holiness of God is not blemished by withdrawing his Grace
from a sinful Creature, whereby he falls into more sin. That God withdraws his
Grace from men, and gives them up sometimes to the fury of their Lusts, is as
clear in Scripture as any thing; Deuteronomy. 29.4. Yet the Lord has not given you a
heart to perceive, and eyes to see, and ears to hear, etc. Judas was delivered
to Satan after the Sop, and put into his power for despising former
Admonitions. He often leaves the Rains to the Devil, that he may use what
efficacy he can in those that have offended the Majesty of God; he withholds
further influences of Grace, or withdraws what before he had granted them. Thus
he withheld that Grace from the Sons of Eli, that might have made their Fathers
pious Admonitions effectual to them, 1 Samuel 2.25. They hearkened not to the
voice of their Father, because the Lord would slay them. He gave Grace to Eli
to reprove them, and withheld that Grace from them, which might have enabled
them against their natural Corruption and obstinacy to receive that Reproof.

But the Holiness of God is not blemished by this.

1. Because the act of God in this is only negative Testard. d^ nature. and
great. These. 150, 151. Amy. on diverse Texts, p. 311.
. Thus God is said to harden men: Not by positive hardening, or working any
thing in the Creature, but by not working, not softening, leaving a man to the
hardness of his own heart, whereby it is unavoidable by the depravation of man's
Nature, and the fury of his Passions, but that he should be further hardened,
and increase unto more ungodliness, as the Expression is 2 Timothy 2.16. As a man
is said to give another his life, when he does not take it away when it lay at
his mercy; so God is said to harden a man, when he does not mollify him when
it was in his power, and inwardly quicken him with that Grace whereby he might
infallibly avoid any further provoking of him. God is said to harden men, when
he removes not from them the Incentives to sin, curbs not those Principles,
which are ready to comply with those Incentives, withdraws the common
assistances of his Grace, concurs not with counsels and admonitions to make
them effectual; flasheth not in the convincing light which he darted upon them
before. If hardness follows upon God's withholding his softening Grace, it is
not by any positive act of God, but from the natural hardness of Man. If you
put Fire near to Wax or Rosin, both will melt, but when that Fire is removed,
they return to their natural quality of hardness and brittleness; the positive
act of the Fire is to melt and soften, and the softness of the Rosin is to be
ascribed to that, but the hardness is from the Rosin it self, wherein the Fire
has no influence, but only a negative act by a removal of it: So when God
hardens a man, he only leaves him to that stony heart which he derived from
Adam, and brought with him into the world. All men's understandings being
blinded, and their wills perverted in Adam, God's withdrawing his Grace, is but
a leaving them to their natural pravity, which is the cause of their further
sinning, and not God's removal of that special light he before afforded them,
or restraint he held over them. As when God withdraws his preserving Power from
the Creature, he is not the efficient, but deficient cause of the Creatures
destruction; so in this case, God only cease to bind and damm up that sin
which else would break out.

2. The whole positive cause of this hardness is from man's corruption. God
infuseth not any sin into his Creatures, but forbears to infuse his Grace and
restrain their Lusts, which upon the removal of his Grace work impetuously: God
only gives them up to that, which he knows will work strongly in their hearts.
And therefore the Apostle wipes off from God any positive act in that
uncleaness the Heathens were given up to ( Romans 1.24. Wherefore God gave them
up to uncleaness, through the lusts of their own hearts. And verse 26. God gave
them up to vile affections; but they were their own affections, none of Gods
inspiring) by adding, through the lusts of their own Hearts: Gods giving them
up was the Logical cause, or a cause by way of Argument; their own Lusts were
the true and natural cause; their own they were, before they were given up to
them; and belonging to none as the Author, but themselves, after they were
given up to them. The Lust in the Heart, and the temptation without, easily
close and mix interests with one another: As the Fire in a Coal pit will with
the fuel, if the streams derived into it for the quenching it, be damned up:
The natural Passions will run to a temptation, as the Waters of a River tumble
toward the Sea. When a man that has bridled in a high mettled-Horse from
running out, gives him the Rains; or a Huntsman takes off the string that held
the Dog, and lets him run after the Hare; are they the immediate cause of the
motion of the one, or the other? no, but the mettle and strength of the Horse,
and the natural inclination of the Hound, both which are left to their own
motions to pursue their own natural instincts. Man does as naturally tend to
sin as a stone to the Center, or as a weighty thing inclines to a motion to the
Earth: T^s from the propension of man's nature that he drinks up iniquity like
water; and God does no more when he leaves a man to sin, by taking away the
Hedge which stopped him, but leave him to his natural Inclination. As a man that
breaks up a damm he has placed, leaves the Streams to run in their natural
Chanel; or one that takes away a prop from a Stone to let it fall, leaves it
only to that nature which inclines it to a descent; both have their motion from
their own Nature, and man his Sin from his own Corruption. Amyrald. de predest.
p. 107.
The withdrawing the Sunbeams, is not the cause of Darkness, but the Shadiness
of the Earth; nor is the departure of the Sun the cause of Winter, but the
coldness of the Air and Earth, which was tempered and beaten back into the
bowels of the Earth by the vigor of the Sun, upon whose departure they return
to their natural state: The Sun only leaves the Earth and Air as it found them
at the beginning of the Spring, or the beginning of the Day. If God do not give
a man Grace to melt him, yet he cannot be said to communicate to him that
nature which hardens him, which man has from himself. As God was not the cause
of the first sin of Adam, which was the root of all other, so he is not the
cause of the following sins, which as branches spring from that root; man's
free will was the cause of the first sin, and the corruption of his nature by
it the cause of all succeeding sins. God does not immediately harden any man,
but does propose those things, from whence the natural Vice of man takes an
occasion to strengthen and nourish itself: Hence God is said to harden
Pharao'hs Heart Exodus 7.13.
, by concurring with the Magicians in turning their rods into Serpents, which
stiffened his Heart against Moses, conceiving him by reason of that to have no
more power than other men, and was an occasion of his further hardening: And
Pharaoh is said to harden himself Exodus 8.32.
, that is, in regard of his own natural passion.

3. God is holy and righteous, because he does not withdraw from man, till man
deserts him: To say that God withdrew that Grace from Adam, which he had
afforded him in Creation, or any thing that was due to him, till he had abused
the Gifts of God, and turned them to an end contrary to that of Creation, would
be a reflection upon the Divine Holiness: God was first deserted by man before
man was deserted by God; and man does first contemn and abuse the common Grace
of God, and those relics of natural light that enlighten every man that comes
into the World John. 1:9.
, before God leaves him to the hurry of his own Passions Ephraim was first
joined to Idols, before God pronounced the fatal sentence, Let him alone Hos.
4.17.
: And the Heathens first changed the glory of the incorruptible God, before God
withdrew his common Grace from the corrupted creature Romans 1.23, 24.
; and they first served the Creature more then the Creator, before the Creator
gave them up to the slavish Chains of their vile affections Ver. 25, 26.
. Israel first cast off God before God cast off them, but then he gave them up
to their own Hearts Lusts, and they walked in their own Counsels, Psa. 81.11,
12. Since sin entered into the World by the fall of Adam, and the blood of all
his posterity was tainted, Man cannot do any thing that is formally good; not
for want of faculties, but for the want of a righteous habit in those
faculties, especially in the Will; yet God discovers himself to man in the
works of his hands; he has left in him footsteps of natural reason, he does
attend him with common motions of his Spirit, corrects him for his faults with
gentle Chastisements. He is near unto all in some kind of Instructions: He puts
many times providential bars in their way of sinning; but when they will rush
into it as the Horse into the battle, when they will rebel against the light,
God does often leave them to their own course, sentence him that is filthy to
be filthy still Reve. 22.11.
, which is a righteous act of God, as he is Rector and Governor of the World.
Man's not receiving, or not improving what God gives, is the cause of Gods not
giving further, or taking away his own, which before he had bestowed; This is
so far from being repugnant to the Holiness and Righteousness of God, that it
is rather a commendable act of his Holiness and Righteousness, as the Rector of
the World, not to let those gifts continue in the hand of a man who abuses them
contrary to his glory. Who will blame a Father, that after all the good
Counsels he has given his Son to reclaim him, all the Corrections he has
inflicted on him for his irregular practice, leaves him to his own courses and
withdraws those assistances which he scoft at and turned the deaf Ear unto? Or
who will blame the Physician for deserting the Patient, who rejects his
Counsel, will not follow his Prescriptions, but dasheth his Physic against the
Wall? No man will blame him, no man will say that he is the cause of the
Patients death, but the true cause is the fury of the Distemper, and the
obstinacy of the diseased Person to which the Physician left him. And who can
justly blame God in this case, who yet never denied supplies of Grace to any
that sincerely sought it at his hands; and what man is there that lies under a
hardness, but first was guilty of very provoking sins? What unholiness is it to
deprive men of those assistances because of their sin, and afterward to direct
those counsels and practices of theirs which he has justly given them up unto,
to serve the ends of his own glory in his own methods?

4. Which will appear further by considering, that God is not obliged to
continue his Grace to them. It was at his liberty whither he could give any
renewing Grace to Adam after his fall, or to any of his Posterity: He was at
his own liberty to withold it or communicate it: But if he were under any
Obligation then, surely he must be under less now, since the multiplication of
Sin by his Creatures: But if the Obligation were none just after the fall,
there is no pretense now to fasten any such Obligation on God. That God had no
Obligation at first has been spoken to before: He is less obliged to continue
his Grace after a repeated refusal, and a peremptory abuse, than he was bound
to proffer it after the first Apostasy. God cannot be charged with unholiness
in withdrawing his Grace after we have received it, unless we can make it
appear that his Grace was a thing due to us, as we are his Creatures, and as he
is Governor of the World. What Prince looks upon himself as obliged to reside
in any particular place of his Kingdom? But suppose he be bound to inhabit in
one particular City, yet after the City rebels against him, is he bound to
continue his Court there, spend his Revenue among Rebels, endanger his own
Honor and Security, enlarge their Charter, or maintain their Ancient
Privileges? Is it not most just and righteous for him to withdraw himself and
leave them to their own Tumultuousness and Sedition, whereby they should eat
the fruit of their own doings? If there be an Obligation on God as a Governor,
it would rather lie on the side of Justice, to leave Man to the Power of the
Devil whom he courted, and the prevalency of those Lusts he has so often
caressed, and wrap up in a Cloud all his common Illuminations, and leave him
destitute of all common workings of his Spirit.

8. Proposition. Gods Holiness is not blemished, by his commanding those things
sometimes which seem to be against Nature, or thwart some other of his
Precepts. As when God commanded Abraham with his own hand to Sacrifice his Son
Genesis 22.2.
, there was nothing of Unrighteousness in it. God has a Sovereign Dominion
over the lives and beings of his creatures, whereby as he creates one day, he
might annihilate the next; and by the same right that he might demand the life
of Isaac, as being his Creature, he might demand the Obedience of Abraham in a
ready return of that to him, which he had so long enjoyed by his grant. It Is
true, killing is unjust when it is done without cause, and by a private
Authority: But the Authority of God surmounts all private and Public Authority
whatsoever. Our lives are due to him when he calls for them, and they are more
than once forfeit to him by reason of Transgression. But howsoever the case is,
God commanded him to do it for the trial of his Grace, but suffered him not to
do it in favor to his ready Obedience: But had Isaac been actually slain and
offered, how had it been unrighteous in God, who enacts Laws for the Regulation
of his Creature, but never intended them to the prejudice of the Rights of his
Sovereignty? Another Case is that of the Israelites borrowing Jewels of the
Egyptians by the order of God Exodus 11.2.3 Exodus 12.36
. Is not God Lord of man's goods, as well as their lives? What have any, they
have not received? and that not as Proprietors independent on God, but his
Stewards, and may not he demand a portion of his Steward to bestow upon his
Favorite? He that had power to dispose of the Egyptians Goods, had power to
order the Israelites to ask them. Besides, God acted the part of a just Judge
in ordering them their wages for their Service in this method, and making their
Taskmasters give them some recompense for their unjust oppression so many
years: It was a Command from God therefore, rather for the preservation of
Justice, (the Basis of all those Laws which link human Society) than any
infringement of it. It was a material recompense in part, though not a formal
one in the intention of the Egyptians: It was but in part a recompense; It must
needs come short of the damage the poor Captives had sustained by the tyranny
of their Masters, who had enslaved them contrary to the rules of hospitality;
and could not make amends for the lives of the poor Infants of Israel, whom
they had drowned in the River. He that might for the unjust oppression of his
People have taken away all their Lives, destroyed the whole Nation, and put the
Israelites into the possession of their Lands, could without any
unrighteousness dispose of part of their Goods: And it was rather an act of
Clemency to leave them some part, who had doubly forfeited all. Again, the
Egyptians were as ready to lend by Gods influence, as the Israelites were to
ask by Gods order: And though it was a loan, God as Sovereign of the World, and
Lord of the Earth and the fullness thereof, alienated the property by assuming
them to the use of the Tabernacle, to which service most, if not all of them,
were afterward dedicated. God who is Lawgiver has power to dispense with his
own Law, and make use of his own Goods and dispose of them as he pleases. It Is
no unholiness in God to dispose of that which he has a right unto. Indeed God
cannot command that which is in its own nature intrinsically evil; as to
command a rational Creature not to love him, not to worship him, to call God to
witness to a Lie; these are intrinsically evil; but for the disposing of the
Lives and Goods of his Creatures, which they have from him in right, and not in
absolute propriety, is not evil in him, because there is no repugnancy in his
own Nature to such acts, nor is it any thing inconsistent with the natural duty
of a Creature, and in such cas^s he may use what instruments he please.

The Point was, That Holiness is a glorious perfection of the nature of God. We
have showed the Nature of this Holiness in God; what it is, and we have
demonstrated it, and proved that God is holy, and must needs be so, and also
the purity of his Nature in all his acts about sin: Let us now improve it by
way of Use.

holiness a transcendent perfection belonging to the Nature of God? The first
Use shall be of Instruction and Information.

1. How great and how freque^^ is the contempt of this eminent perfection in
the Deity? Since the fall, this attribute, which renders God most amiable in
himself, renders him most hateful to his Apostate Creature. It Is impossible
that he that loves iniquity, can affect that which is irreconcileably contrary
to the iniquity he loves. Nothing so contrary to the sinfulness of man as the
Holiness of God, and nothing is thought of by the sinner with so much
detestation. How do Men account that which is the most glorious perfection of
the divinity, unworthy to to be regarded as an accomplishment of their own
Souls? And when they are pressed to an imitation of it, and a detestation of
what is contrary to it, have the same sentiments in their Heart which the Devil
had in his Language to Christ. Why art thou come to torment us before our time?
What an enmity the World naturally has to this perfection, I think is visible
in the practice of the Heathen, who among all their Heroes which they deified,
elevated none to that dignity among them for this or that moral Virtue that
came nearest to it, but for their valor or some usefulness in the concerns of
this Life. Aesculapius was deified for his skill in the cure of Diseases;
Bacchus for the use of the grape; Vulcan for his operations by Fire; Hercules
for his destroying of Tyrants and Monsters; but none for their mere Virtue: As
if any thing of purity were unworthy their consideration in the frame of a
Deity, when it is the glory of all other Perfections: So essential it is, that
when Men reject the imitation of this, God regards it as a total rejection of
himself, though they own all the other attributes of his Nature; Psalm. 81.11.
Israel would none of me; why? because they walked not in his ways, Verse. 13.
those ways wherein the purity of the Divine nature was most conspicuous: They
would own him in his Power, when they stood in need of a Deliverance; they
would own him in his Mercy, when they were plunged in Distress; but they would
not imitate him in his Holiness. This being the luster of the Divine Nature,
the contempt of it is an obscuring all his other Perfections, and a dashing a
blot upon his whole Scutcheon. To own all the rest, and deny him this, is to
frame him as an unbeautiful Monster, a Deformed power. Indeed, all sin is
against this attribute; all sin aims in general at the being of God, but in
particular at the Holiness of his Being: All sin is a violence to this
perfection: There is not an Iniquity in the World, but directs its venomous
sting against the divine purity: Some sins are directed against his
Omniscience, as secret Wickedness; some against his Providence, as distrust;
some against his Mercy, as unbelief; some against his Wisdom, as neglecting the
means instituted by him, censuring his ways and actings; some against his
Power, as trusting in means more than in God, and the immoderate fear of Men
more than of God; some against his Truth, as distrusting his Promise, or not
fearing his Threatening; but all agree together in their enmity against this,
which is the peculiar glory of the Deity. Every one of them is a receding from
the Divine Image; and the blackness of every one is the deeper, by how much the
distance of it from the holiness of God is the greater. This contrariety to the
Holiness of God is the cause of all the absolute Atheism (if there be any such)
in the World; What was the reason the Fool has said in his heart, there is no
God? but because the Fool is corrupt and has done abominable works Psalm. 14.1.
. If they believe the being of a God, their own Reason will enforce them to
imagine him holy: Therefore rather then fancy a holy God, they would fain fancy
none at all.

In particular,

1. The Holiness of God is injured, in unworthy representations of God, and
imaginations of him in our own minds. The Heathen fell under this guilt, and
ascribed to their Idols those Vices which their own Sensuality inclined them
to, unworthy of a man, much more unworthy of a God, that they might find a
protection of their Crimes in the practice of their Idols. But is this only the
notion of the Heathens? may there not be many among us whose love to their
Lusts, and desires of sinning without control, move them to slander God in
their thoughts rather than reform their lives, and are ready to frame by the
power of their imaginative faculty, a God not only winking, but smiling at
their Impurities? I am sure God charges the Impieties of Men upon this score,
in that Psalm, (Psa. 50.21.) which seems to be a representation of the day of
Judgment, as some gather from Verse 6. When God ^ums up all together. These
things have thou done, and I kept silence, thou thoughtest that I was
altogether such an one as thy self; not a detester, but approver of thy crimes.
And the Psalmist seems to express Gods loathing of sin in such a manner, as
intimates it to be contrary to the Ideas and Resemblances Men make of him in
their minds, Psalm. 5.4 For thou art not a God that have pleasure in wickedness.
As we say in vindication of a man, he is not such a man as you imagine him to
be; Thou art not such a God as the World commonly imagines Thee to be, a God
taking pleasure in iniquity. It Is too common for men to fancy God not as he is,
but as they would have him; strip him of his excellency for their own security.
As God made man after his Image, man would dress God after his own Modes, as
may best suit the content of his Lusts, and encourage him in a course of
sinning; For when they can frame such a notion of God, as if he were a
Countenancer of sin, they will derive from thence a reputation to their Crimes,
commit Wickedness with an unbounded licentiousness, and crown their Vices with
the name of Virtues, because they are so like to the Sentiments of that God
they fancy: From hence, as the Psalmist in the Psalm before mentioned, arises
that mass of Vice in the World; such Conceptions are the Mother and Nurse of
all Impiety, I question not but the first Spring is some wrong notion of God in
regard of his holiness: We are as apt to imagine God as we would have him, as
the black Ethiopians were to draw the Image of their Gods after their own dark
hue, and paint him with their own Color: As a Philosopher in Theodoret speaks;
if Oxen and Lions had hands, and could paint as men do, they would frame the
Images of their Gods according to their own likeness and complexion: Such
notions of God render him a Swinish Being, and worse than the vilest Idols
adored by the Egyptians, when Men fancy a God indulgent to their Appetites, and
most sordid Lusts.

2. In defacing the Image of God in our own Souls. God in the first draught of
man conformed him to his own Image, or made him an Image of himself: Because we
find that in Regeneration this Image is renewed, Ephesians. 4.24. The new Man, which
after God is created in Righteousness and true Holiness. He did not take Angels
for his Pattern in the first polishing the Soul, but himself. In defaceing this
Image we cast dirt upon the Holiness of God, which was his pattern in the
framing of us; and rather choose to be conformed to Satan, who is Gods grand
Enemy, to have Gods Image wiped out of us, and the Devils pictured in us:
Therefore natural men in an unregenerate state may justly be called Devils,
since our Savior called the worst man, Judas, so John 6.1.
, and Peter, one of the best Mat. 16.23.
: And if this title be given by an infallible Judge to one of the worst, and
one of the best, it may without wrong to any be ascribed to all men that wallow
in their sin, which is directly contrary to that illustrious Image God did
imprint upon them. How often is it seen that men control the light of their
own Nature, and stain the clearest beams of that Candle of the Lord in their
own spirits, that fly in the face of their own Consciences, and say to them, as
Ahab to Micaiah, thou did never prophecy good to me; thou did never encourage
me in those things that are pleasing to the Flesh; and use it at the same rate
as the wicked King did the Prophet, imprison it in unrighteousness Romans 1.18.
; because it starts up in them sometimes Sentiments of the Holiness of God,
which it represents in the Soul of man. How jolly are many men when the
exhalations of their Sensitive part rise up to Cloud the exactest Principle of
moral Nature in their minds, and render the monstrous Principles of the Law of
Corruption more lively? Whence arises the wickedness which has been committed
with an open face in the World, and the applause that has been often given to
the worst of villainies? Have we not known among our selves, men to glory in
their shame, and esteem that a most gentile accomplishment of man, which is the
greatest blot upon his Nature, and which if it were upon God, would render him
no God, but an impure Devil, so that to be a Gentleman among us has been the
same as to be an incarnate Devil? and to be a man, was to be no better, but
worse than a Bruit? Vile Wretches! Is not this a contempt of Divine holiness,
to kill that Divine seed which lies languishing in the midst of corrupted
Nature; to cut up any Sprouts of it as weeds unworthy to grow in their gardens,
and cultivate what is the Seed of Hell? prefer the rotten fruits of Sodom,
marked with a Divine curse, before those Relics of the fruits of Eden, of Gods
own planting?

3. The Holiness of God is injured in charging our sin upon God. Nothing is
more, natural to men, than to seek excuses for their sin, and transfer it from
themselves to the next at hand; and rather than fail, shift it upon God
himself; and if they can bring God into a society with them in sin, they will
hug themselves in a security that God cannot punish that guilt, wherein he is a
Partner: Adam's Children are not of a different disposition from Adam himself,
who after he was Arraigned and brought to his Trial, boggles not at flinging
his dirt in the face of God his Creator, and accuses him as if he had given
him the Woman, not to be his help, but his ruin Genesis 3.12. And the man said,
the woman whom thou gave to be with me, she gave me of the Tree and I did
eat. He never supplicates for Pardon, nor seeks a remedy, but reflects his
Crime upon God; Had I been alone, as I was first created, I had not eaten, but
the woman whom I received as a special gift from thee, has proved my tempter
and my bane. When man could not be like God in Knowledge, he endeavored to
make God like him in his Crime; and when his Ambition failed of equallizing
himself with God, he did with an insolence too common to corrupted Nature,
attempt by the imputation of his sin, to equal the Divinity with himself. Some
think Cain had the same sentiment in his answer to Gods demand, Where his
brother was, Genesis 2.9. Am I my brother's keeper? Art not thou the Keeper and
Governor of the World, why did not thou take care of him, and hinder my
killing him, and drawing this guilt upon my self, and terror upon my
Conscience? David was not behind, when after the murder of Vriah, he sweeps the
dirt from his own door to Gods, Sam. 2.11.25. The sword devoureth one as well
as another; Fathering that solely upon Divine Providence, which was his own
wicked Contrivance: Though afterward he is more ingenuous in clearing God, and
charging himself, Psalm. 51.4. Against thee, thee only have I sinned; and he
clears God in his Judgment too. It Is too common for the foolishness of man to
pervert his way, and then his heart frets against the Lord, Pro. 19.3. He
studies mischief, runs in a way of sin, and when he has conjured up troubles
to himself by his own folly, he excuses himself, and with indignation charges
God as the Author both of his sin and misery, and sets his mouth against the
Heavens. It Is a more horrible thing to accuse God as a Principal or Accessory
in our guilt, than to conceive him to be a favourer of our iniquity; yet both
are bad enough.

4. The Holiness of God is injured, when men will study Arguments from the holy
word of God to Color and shelter their Crimes. When men will seek for a
shelter for their Lies, in that of the Midwifes to preserve the Children, or in
that of Rahab to save the Spies; as if because God rewarded their fidelity, he
countenanced their sin. How often is Scripture wrested to be a plea for
unbecoming practices, that God in his Word may be imagined a Patron for their
Iniquity? It Is not unknown that some have maintained their quaffing and
carowsing from Eccles. 8.11. That a man has no better thing under the Sun,
than to eat and drink and be merry: And their Gluttony from Matthew. 5.11 That
which goes into the belly, defiles not a man. The Jesuits morals are a
transcript of this. How often has the Passion of our Savior, the highest
expression of Gods holiness, been employed to stain it, and encourage the most
debauched practices? Grace has been turned into wantonness and the abundance
of grace been used as a blast to increase the flames of sin; as if God had no
other aim in that work of Redemption, but to discover himself more indulgent to
our Sensual Appetites, and by his Severity with his Son, become more gracious
to our Lusts: This is to feed the Roots of Hell with the Dews of Heaven, to
make Grace a Pandor for the abuse of it, and to employ the Expressions of his
Holiness in his Word to be a Sword against the essential Holiness of his
Nature: As if a man should draw an Apology for his Treason out of that Law that
was made to forbid, not to protect his Rebellion. Not the meanest Instrument in
the Temple was to be alienated from the use it was by Divine Order appointed
to, nor was it to be employed in any common use; and shall the Word of God,
which is the Image of his Holiness, be transferred by base Interpretations to be
an Advocate for Iniquity? such an ill use of his Word reflects upon that Hand
which imprinted those Characters of Purity and Righteousness upon it: As the
mis-interpretation of the wholesome Laws of a Prince, made to discourage
Debauchery, reflects upon his righteousness and sincerity in enacting them.

5. The Holiness of God is injured, when men will put up Petitions to God to
favor them in a wicked Design. Such there are, and taxt by the Apostle, James
4.3. Ye ask amiss, that you may consume it upon your Lusts: who desired Mercies
from God, with an intent to make them Instruments of Sin, and Weapons of
Unrighteousness; as it is reported of a Thief, that he always prayed for the
success of his Robery. It has not been rare in the World to appoint Fasts and
Prayers for success in Wars manifestly unjust, and commenced upon breaches of
Faith. Many Covetous men petition God to prosper them in their unjust gain; as
if the blessed God sat in his pure Majesty upon a Throne of Grace, to espouse
unjust practices, and make Iniquity prosperous. There are such as offer
Sacrifice with an evil mind Prove. 21.27.
, to barter with God for a Divine Blessing to spirit a wicked contrivance. How
great a contempt of the Holiness of God is this? How inexcusable would it be
for a Favorite to address himself to a just Prince with this Language? Sir, I
desire a Boon of such Lands that lie near me, for an addition to my Estate,
that I may have supports for my Debauchery, and be able to play the Villain
more powerfully among my Neighbors. Hereby he implies that his Prince is a
Friend to such Crimes and Wickedness he intends his Petition for. Is not this
the language of many men's hearts in the immediate presence of God? The Order of
Prayer runs thus, Hallowed be thy Name; first to have a deep sense of the
Holiness of the Divine Nature, and an ardent desire for the glory of it: This
Order is inverted by asking those things which are not agreeable to the Will of
God; not meet for us to ask, nor meet for God to give; or asking things
agreeable to the Will of God, but with a wicked intention: This is, in effect,
to desire God to strip himself of his Holiness, and commit Sacrilege upon his
own Nature to gratify our Lusts.

6. The Purity of God is contemned, in hating and scoffing at the holiness
which is in a Creature. Whoever looks upon the holiness of a Creature as an
unlovely thing, can have no good Opinion of the amiableness of Divine Purity.
Whosoever hates those qualities and graces that resemble God in any person,
must needs contemn the Original Pattern, which is more eminent in God. If there
be no comeliness in a Creature's holiness, to render it grateful to us, we
should say of God himself, were he visible among us, with those in the Prophet,
Isa. 53. There is no beauty in him that we should desire him: Holiness is
beautiful in it self. If God be the most lovely Being, that which is a likeness
to him, so far as it does resemble him, must needs be amiable, because it
partakes of God: And therefore those that see no beauty in an inferior
holiness, but contemn it because it is a Purity above them, contemn God much
more: He that hates that which is imperfect merely for that excellency which is
in it, does much more hate that which is perfect, without any mixture or stain.
Holiness being the glory of God, the peculiar Title of the Deity, and from him
derived unto the Nature of a Creature; he that mocks this in a Person, derides
God himself; and when he cannot abuse the Purity in the Deity, he will do it in
his Image. As Rebels that cannot wrong the King in his Person, will do it in
his Picture, and his Subjects that are Loyal to him: He that hates the Picture
of a Man, hates the Person represented by it much more; he that hates the
Beams, hates the Sun; the holiness of a Creature is but a Beam from that
Infinite Sun, a Stream from that Eternal Fountain. Where there is a derision of
the Purity of any Creature, there is a greater reflection upon God in that
derision, as he is the Author of it. If a mixed and stained holiness be more
the subject of any man's Scoff, than a great deal of Sin, that Person has a
disposition more roundly to scoff at God himself, should he appear in that
unblemisht and unspotted Purity which infinitely shines in his Nature. O! it is
a dangerous thing to scoff and deride holiness in any person, though never so
mean; Such do deride and scoff at the most holy God.

7. The Holiness of God is injured by our unprepared addresses to him, when
like Swine, we come into the presence of God with all our mire reeking and
steaming upon us. A holy God requires a holy Worship: And if our best Duties,
having filth in every part, as performed by us, are unmeet for God; how much
more unsuitable are dead and dirty Duties to a living and immense Holiness?
Slight approaches and drossy frames speak us to have imaginations of God as of
a slight and sottish Being: This is worse than the Heathens practiced, who
would purge their Flesh before they Sacrificed, and make some preparations in a
seeming Purity, before they would enter into their Temples. God is so holy,
that were our Services as refined as those of Angels, we could not present him
with a Service meet for his holy Nature Josh. 24.19.
. We contemn then this Perfection when we come before him without due
preparation; as if God himself were of an impure Nature, and did not deserve
our purest thoughts in our applications to him; as if any blem^sht and polluted
Sacrifice were good enough for him, and his Nature deserved no better. When we
excite not those elevated Frames of Spirit which are due to such a Being; when
we think to put him off with a lame and imperfect Service, we worship him not
according to the excellency of his Nature, but put a slight upon his Majestic
Sanctity: When we nourish in our Duties those foolish Imaginations which creep
upon us; when we bring into, and continue our worldly, carnal, debauched
Fancies in his Presence, worse than the nasty Servants, or bemired Dogs, a man
would blush to be attended with in his Visits to a neat Person. To be
conversing with sordid Sensualities, when we are at the feet of an Infinite
God, sitting upon the Throne of his Holiness, is as much a contempt of him, as
it would be of a Prince, to bring a Vessel full of nasty Dung with us, when we
come to present a Petition to him clothed in his Royal Robes. Or as it would
have been to God, if the High Priest should have swept all the Blood and
Excrements of the Sacrifices from the Foot of the Altar into the Holy of
Holies, and heapt it up before the Mercy Seat, where the Presence of God dwelt
between the Cherubims, and afterward shovel'd it up into the Ark, to be lodged
with Aarons Rod and the Pot of Manna.

8. God's Holiness is slighted in depending upon our imperfect Services to bear
us out before the Tribunal of God. This is too ordinary: The Jews were often
infected with it Romans 3.10.
, who not well understanding the enormity of their Transgressions, the
interweaving of Sin with their Services, and the unspottedness of the Divine
Purity, mingled an Opinion of Merit with their Sacrifices, and thought by the
cutting the Throat of a Beast, and offering it upon God's Altar, they had made
a sufficient Compensation to that Holiness they had offended. Not to speak of
many among the Romanists, who have the same notion, thinking to make
satisfaction to God, by erecting an Hospital, or endowing a Church, as if this
injured Perfection could be contented with the Dregs of their Purses, and the
offering of an unjust Mammon, more likely to mind God of the Injury they have
done him, than contribute to the appeasing of him. But is it not too ordinary
with miserable men, whose Consciences accuse them of their Crimes, to rely upon
the mumbling of a few formal Prayers, and in the strength of them to think to
stand before the tremendous Tribunal of God, and meet with a Discharge upon
this account from any Accusation this Divine Perfection can present against
them? Nay, do not the best Christians sometimes find a Principle in them, that
makes them stumble in their goings forth to Christ, and glorifying the Holiness
of God in that method which he has appointed? Sometimes casting an eye at
their Grace, and sticking a while to this or that Duty, and gazing at the glory
of the Temple-building, while they should more admire the glorious Presence
that fills it. What is all this but a vilifying of the Holiness of the Divine
Nature, as though it would be well enough contented with our Impurities and
Imperfections, because they look like a Righteousness in our estimation? As
though Dross and Dung, which are the Titles the Apostle gives to all the
Righteousness of a Fallen Creature Phil. 3.8*
, were valuable in the sight of God, and sufficient to render us comely before
him. It Is a Blasphemy against this Attribute, to pretend that any thing so
imperfect, so daubed, as the best of our Services are, can answer to that which
is Infinitely Perfect, and be a ground of demanding Eternal Li^e: It Is at best,
to set up a gilded Dagon as a fit Companion for the Ark of his Holiness; our
own Righteousness as a suitable Mate for the Righteousness of God: As if he had
repented of the Claim he made by the Law to an exact conformity, and thrown off
the Holiness of his Nature for the fondling of a Corrupted Creature. Rude and
foolish Notions of the Divine Purity, are clearly evidenced by any confidence
in any Righteousness of our own, though never so splendid. It Is a rendering the
Righteousness of God, as dull and obscure as that of Men; a mere Outside, as
their own: As blind as the Heathens pictured their Fortune, that knew as little
how to discern the Nature and value of the Offerings made to her, as to
distribute her gifts, as if it were all one to them, to have a Dog or a Lamb
presented in Sacrifice. As if God did not well understand his own Nature, when
he enacted so Holy a Law, and strengthened it with so severe a Threatening; which
must follow upon our Conceit, that he will accept a Righteousness lower than
that, which bears some sutableness to the Holiness of his own Nature, and that
of his Law; and that he could easily be put off with a pretended and
counterfeit Service. What are the Services of the generality of Men, but
Suppositions, that they can bribe God to an Indulgence of them in their Sins,
and by an Oral Sacrifice, cause him to divest himself of his Hatred of their
former Iniquities, and countenance their following Practices. As the Harlot,
that would return fresh to her Uncleanness, upon the confidence that her Peace
Offerings had contented the Righteousness of God Prove. 7.14.
: As though a small Service could make him wink at our Sins, and lay aside the
Glory of his Nature; when alas, the best Duties in the most gracious Persons in
this life, are but as the steams of a Spiced Dunghill, a composition of Myrrh
and Froth, since there are swarms of Corruptions in their Nature, and secret
Sins that they need a cleansing from.

9. It Is a contemning the Holiness of God, when we charge the Law of God with
rigidness. We cast Dirt upon the Holiness of God, when we blame the Law of God,
because it shackles us, and prohibits our desired Pleasures; and hate the Law
of God, as they did the Prophets, because they did not Prophesy smooth things;
but called to them, to get them out of the way, and turn aside out of the path,
and cause the Holy One of Israel to cease from before them, Isai. 30.10, 11.
Put us no more in mind of the Holiness of God, and the Holiness of his Law;
it is a troublesome thing for us to hear of it: Let him be gone from us, since he
will not countenance our Vices, and indulge our Crimes; We would rather hear
there is no God, than you should tell us of a Holy one. We are contrary to the
Law, when we wish it were not so exact; and therefore contrary to the Holiness
of God, which set the stamp of Exactness and Righteousness upon it. We think
him Injurious to our Liberty, when by his Precept he thwarts our Pleasure; we
wish it of another frame, more mild, more suitable to our Minds: It Is the same,
as if we should openly blame God for consulting with his own Righteousness, and
not with our Humors, before he settled his Law; that he should not have drawn it
from the depths of his Righteous Nature, but squared it to accommodate our
Corruption.

This being the language of such Complaints, is a reproving God, because he
would not be Unholy, that we might be Unrighteous with Impunity. Had the Divine
Law been suited to our Corrupt state, God must have been Unholy to have complied
with his Rebellious Creature. To charge the Law with rigidness, either in
Language or Practice, is the highest contempt of Gods Holiness; for it is an
Implicit Wish, that God were as defiled, polluted, disorderly, as our Corrupted
Selves.

10, The Holiness of God is injured Opinionatively.

(1.) In the Opinion of Venial sins. The Romanists divide Sins into Venial and
Mortal: Mortal, are those which deserve Eternal Death; Venial, the lighter sort
of Sins, which rather deserve to be pardoned than punished; or if punished, not
with an Eternal, but Temporal Punishment. This Opinion has no foundation in,
but is contrary to Scripture. How can any Sin be in its own nature Venial, when
the due Wages of every Sin is death, Romans 6.23. and he, who continues not in
every thing that the Law commands, falls under a Curse? Gal. 3.10. It Is a mean
thought of the Holiness and Majesty of God to imagine, that any Sin which is
against an Infinite Majesty, and as Infinite a Purity both in the Nature of God
and the Law of God, should not be considered as infinitely heinous. All Sins
are Transgressions of the Eternal Law, and in every one the Infinite Holiness
of God is some way slighted.

(2.) In the Opinion of Works of Supererogation. That is, such Works as are not
commanded by God, which yet have such a dignity and worth in their own nature,
that the Performers of them do not only merit at Gods hands for themselves, but
fill up a Treasure of Merits for others, that come short of fulfilling the
Precepts God has enjoined. It Is such a mean thought of Gods Holiness, that the
Jews, in all the Charges brought against them in Scripture, were never guilty
of. And if you consider what pitiful things they are, which are within the
compass of such Works, you have sufficient reason to bewail the Ignorance of
Man, and the low esteem he has of so glorious a Perfection. The Whipping
themselves often in a Week, extraordinary Watchings, Fastings, Macerating their
Bodies, wearing a Capuchins Habit, etc. are pitiful things to give content to
an Infinite Purity. As if the Precept of God required only the Inferior
degrees of Virtue, and the Counsels the more high and excellent; as if the Law
of God, which the Psalmist counts perfect Psalm. 19.7.
, did not command all Good, and forbid all Evil; as if the Holiness of God had
forgotten it self in the framing the Law, and made it a scanty and defective
Rule; and the Righteousness of a Creature were not only able to make an Eternal
Righteousness, but surmount it. As Man would be at first as knowing as God, so
some of his Posterity would be more holy than God; set up a Wisdom against the
Wisdom of God, and a Purity above the Divine Purity. Adam was not so
presumptuous, he intended no more than an equalling God in Knowledge; but those
would exceed him in Righteousness, and not only presume to render a
Satisfaction for themselves to the Holiness they have injured, but to make a
Purse for the supply of others that are Indigent, that they may stand before
the Tribunal of God with a Confidence in the Imaginary Righteousness of a
Creature. How horrible is it for those that come short of the Law of God
themselves, to think that they can have enough for a Loan to their Neighbors?
An unworthy Opinion.

2. Information. It may Inform us, how great is our Fall from God, and how
distant we are from him. View the Holiness of God, and take a prospect of the
Nature of Man, and be astonished to see a Person created in the Divine Image,
degenerated into the Image of the Devil. We are as far fallen from the Holiness
of God, which consists in a Hatred of Sin, as the lowest Point of the Earth is
from the highest Point of the Heavens. The Devil is not more fallen from the
rectitude of his Nature and likeness to God, than we are; and that we are not
in the same condition with those Apostate Spirits, is not from any thing in our
Nature, but from the Mediation of Christ, upon which account God has indulged
in us a continuance of some Remainders of that which Satan is wholly deprived
of. We are departed from our Original Pattern; we were created to live the life
of God, that is, a life of Holiness; but now we are alienated from the life of
God Ephesians. 4.18.
, and of a beautiful piece we are become deformed, daubed over with the most
defiling Mud: We work uncleaness with greediness, according to our ability, as
Creatures; as God does work Holiness with affection and ardency, according to
his Infiniteness, as Creator. More distant we are from God by reason of Sin,
than the vilest Creature, the most deformed Toad or poisonous Serpent is from
the highest and most glorious Angel. By forsaking our Innocence, we departed
from God as our Original Copy. The Apostle might well say, Romans 3.23. that by
Sin we are come short of the glory of God. Interpreters trouble themselves much
about that place, Man is come short of the glory of God, that is, of the
Holiness of God, which is the glory of the Divine Nature, and was pictured in
the Rational, Innocent Creature. By the Glory of God, is meant the Holiness of
God: As 1 Cor. 3.18. Beholding, as in a glass, the Glory of the Lord, we are
changed into the same Image from glory to glory; that is the Glory of God in
the Text, into the Image of which we are changed; but the Scripture speaks of
no other Image of God, but that of Holiness: We are come short of the glory of
God; of the Holiness of God, which is the glory of God; and the Image of it,
which was the glory of Man. By Sin, which is particular in opposition to the
Purity of God, Man was left many Leagues behind any resemblance to God; he
stripped off that which was the glory of his Nature, and was the only means of
glorifying God as his Creator. The word (...), the Apostle uses, is very
significant, Postpon'd by Sin an infinite distance from any imitation of Gods
Holiness, or any appearance before him in a garb of Nature pleasing to him. Let
us lament our Fall, and distance from God.

3. Information. All Unholiness is vile and opposite to the Nature of God. It Is
such a loathsome thing, that the Purity of Gods eye is averse from beholding,
Hab. 1.3. It Is not said there, that he will not, but he cannot look on Evil;
there cannot be any amicableness between God and Sin, the Natures of both are
so directly and unchangeably contrary to one another. Holiness is the Life of
God, it endures as long as his Life; He must be Eternally averse from Sin, he
can live no longer than he lives in the hatred and loathing of it. If he should
for one instant cease to hate it, he would cease to live. To be a Holy God is
as Essential to him, as to be a Living God; and he would not be a living, but a
dead God, if he were in the least point of Time an Unholy God. He cannot look
on Sin without loathing it, he cannot look on Sin but his Heart rises against
it: It must needs be most odious to him, as that which is against the glory of
his Nature, and directly opposite to that which is the luster and varnish of
all his other Perfections. It Is the Abominable thing which his Soul hates, Jer.
44.4. the vilest terms imaginable are used to signify it: Do you understand
the loathsomness of a miry Swine, or the nauseousness of the vomit of a Dog?
These are Emblems of Sin 2 Pet. 2.22.
. Can you endure the steams of putrified Carcasses from an open Sepulcher Romans
3.23.
? Is the smell of the stinking sweat or Excrements of a Body delightful? the
word (...) in James 1.21. signifies as much. Or is the sight of a Body
overgrown with Scabs and Leprosy grateful to you? So vile, so odious is Sin in
the sight of God. It Is no light thing then to fly in the Face of God, to break
his Eternal Law, to dash both the Tables in pieces, to trample the Transcript
of Gods own Nature under our feet, to cherish that which is inconsistent with
his Honor, to lift up our heels against the glory of his Nature, to join Issue
with the Devil in stabbing his Heart, and depriving him of his life. Sin in
every part of it is an opposition to the Holiness of God, and consequently an
envying him a Being and Life, as well as a Glory. If Sin be such a thing, ye
that love the Lord, hate Evil.

4. Information. Sin cannot escape a due Punishment. A hatred of
Unrighteousness, and consequently a will to punish it, is as Essential to God
as a love of Righteousness. Since he is not as an Heathen Idol, but has Eyes
to see, and Purity to hate every Iniquity, he will have an Infinite Justice to
punish whatsoever is against Infinite Holiness. As he loves every thing that is
amiable, so he loathes every thing that is filthy, and that constantly without
any change; his whole Nature is set against it, he abhors nothing but this.
It Is not the Devils knowledge or activity that his Hatred is terminated in, but
the Malice and Unholiness of his Nature; it is this only is the Object of his
Severity: It Is in the recompense of this only, that there can be a
manifestation of his Justice.

Sin must be punished; for,

1. This Detestation of Sin must be manifested. How should we certainly know
his loathing of it, if he did not manifest by some act how ungrateful it is to
him? As his love to Righteousness would not appear, without rewarding it; so
his hatred of Iniquity would be as little evidenced, without punishing it: His
Justice is the great Witness to his Purity. The Punishment therefore inflicted
on the Wicked shall be, in some respect, as great as the Rewards bestowed upon
the Righteous. Since the hatred of Sin is natural to God, it is as natural to
him to show one time or other his hatred of it. And since Men have a conceit
that God is like them in Impurity, there is a necessity of some manifestation
of himself to be Infin^tely distant from those Conceits they have of him, Psalm.
50.21. I will reprove thee, and set them in order before thine eyes. He would
else encourage the Injuries done to his Holiness, favor the Extravagances of
the Creature, and condemn, or at least slight the Righteousness, both of his
own Nature and his Sovereign Law. What way is there for God to manifest this
Hatred, but by Threatening the Sinner? and what would this be but a vain
Affrightment, and ridiculous to the Sinner, if it were never to be put in
execution? There is an indissoluble connection between his Hatred of Sin, and
Punishment of the Offender, Psalm. 11.5, 6. The wicked his Soul hates: Upon the
wicked he shall rain snares, fire, and brimstone, etc. He cannot approve of it
without denying himself, and a total Impunity would be a degree of Approbation.

The Displeasure of God is Eternal and Irreconcilable against Sin; for Sin
being absolutely contrary to his holy Nature, He is Eternally contrary to it:
If there be not therefore a way to separate the Sin from the Sinner, the Sinner
must lie under the Displeasure of God; no displeasure can be manifested without
some marks of it upon the Person that lies under that Displeasure. The Holiness
of God will right it self of the wrongs done to it, and scatter the Prophaners
of it at the greatest distance from him, which is the greatest Punishment that
can be inflicted; to be removed far from the Fountain of Life is the worst of
Deaths: God can as soon lay aside his Purity, as always forbear his Displeasure
against an Impure Person; it is all one, not to hate it, and not to manifest his
Hatred of it.

2. As his Holiness is natural and necessary, so is the punishment of
Unholiness necessary to him. It Is necessary that he should abominate Sin, and
therefore necessary he should discountenance it. The Severities of God against
Sin are not vain Scare-crows, they have their foundation in the Righteousness
of his Nature; it is because he is a Righteous and Holy God, that he will not
forgive our Transgressions and Sins, Josh. 24.19. that is, that he will punish
them. The Throne of his Holiness is a fiery flame, Dan. 7.9. there is both a
pure light and a scorching heat. Whatsoever is contrary to the Nature of God,
will fall under the Justice of God; he would else violate his own Nature, deny
his own Perfection, seem to be out of love with his own Glory and Life. He does
not hate it out of choice, but from the Immutable propension of his Nature;
it is not so free an act of his Will, as the Creation of Man and Angels, which
he might have forborne as well as effected. As the detestation of Sin results
from the universal rectitude of his Nature, so the punishment of Sin follows
upon that, as he is the Righteous Governor of the World: It Is as much against
his Nature not to punish it, as it is against his Nature not to loath it; He
would cease to be Holy if he ceased to hate it, and he would cease to hate it
if he ceased to punish it. Neither the Obedience of our Saviors Life, nor the
strength of his Cries, could put a bar to the Cup of his Passion: God so hated
Sin, that when it was but imputed to his Son, without any commission of it, he
would bring a Hell upon his Soul. Certainly if God could have hated Sin without
punishing it, his Son had never felt the smart of his Wrath: His love to his
Son had been strong enough to have caused him to forbear, had not the Holiness
of his Nature been stronger to move him to inflict a Punishment according to
the demerit of the Sin. God cannot but be Holy, and therefore cannot but be
Just, because Injustice is a part of Unholiness.

3. Therefore there can be no Communion between God and Unholy spirits. How is
it conceivable, that God should hate the Sin, and cherish the Sinner with all
his filth in his bosom; that he should Eternally detest the Crime, and
Eternally fold the S^nner in his Arms? Can less be expected from the Purity of
his Nature, than to separate an impure Soul, as long as it remains so? Can
there be any delightful Communion between those whose Natures are contrary?
Darkness and Light may as soon kiss each other, and become one Nature; God and
the Devil may as soon enter into an Eternal League and Covenant together: For
God to have pleasure in wickedness, and to admit Evil to dwell with him, are
things equally impossible to his Nature Psalm. ^.4.
; while he hates Impurity, he cannot have Communion with an impure Person. It
may as soon be expected, that God should hate himself, offer Violence to his
own Nature, lay aside his Purity as an Abominable thing, and blot his own
Glory, as love an Impure Person, entertain him as his delight, and set him in
the same Heaven and Happiness with himself, and his holy Angels: He must needs
loath him, he must needs banish him from his Presence, which is the greatest
Punishment. Gods Holiness and Hatred of Sin, necessarily infer the Punishment
of it.

5. Information. There is therefore a necessity of the satisfaction of the
Holiness of God by some sufficient Mediator. The Divine Purity could not meet
with any acquiescence in all Mankind after the Fall: Sin was hated, the Sinner
would be ruined, unless some way were found out to repair the Wrongs done to
the Holiness of God; either the Sinner must be condemned for ever, or some
Satisfaction must be made, that the Holiness of the Divine Nature might
Eternally appear in its full luster. That it is Essential to the Nature of God
to hate all Unrighteousness, as that which is absolutely repugnant to his
Nature, none do question. That the Justice of God is so Essential to him, as
that Sin could not be pardoned without Satisfaction, some do question; though
this latter seems rationally to follow upon the former Turretin. de Sati^fac.
p. 8.
. That Holiness is Essential to the Nature of God is evident, because else God
may as much be conceived without Purity, as he might be conceived without the
creating the Sun or Stars. No Man can in his right Wits frame a right Notion of
a Deity, without Purity. It would be a less Blasphemy against the Excellency of
God, to conceit him not Knowing, than to imagine him not Holy: And for the
Essentialness of his Justice, Joshua joins both his Holiness and his Jealousy
as going hand in hand together, Josh. 24.19. He is a Holy God, he is a Jealous
God, he will not forgive your sin.

But consider only the Purity of God, since it is contrary to Sin, and
consequently hating the Sinner; the guilty Person cannot be reduced to God, nor
can the Holiness of God have any complacency in a filthy Person, but as Fire
has in Stubble, to consume it. How the Holy God should be brought to delight
in Man without a Salvo for the Rights of his Holiness, is not to be conceived
without an impeachment of the Nature of God. The Law could not be abolished;
that would reflect indeed upon the Righteousness of the Lawgiver; to abolish
it because of Sin, would imply a change of the Rectitude of his Nature: Must be
change his Holiness for the sake of that which was against his Holiness, in a
compliance with a profane and unrighteous Creature? This should engage him
rather to maintain his Law, than to null it. And to abrogate his Law as soon as
he had enacted it, since Sin stepped into the World presently after it, would be
no credit to his Wisdom.

There must be a reparation made of the Honor of Gods Holiness; by our selves
it could not be without Condemnation; by another it could not be without a
sufficiency in the Person: No Creature could do it. All the Creatures being of
a finite Nature, could not make a compensation for the disparagements of
Infinite Holiness. He must have despicable and vile Thoughts of this Excellent
Perfection, that imagines that a few Tears, and the glavering Fawnings at the
death of a Creature, can be sufficient to repair the Wrongs, and restore the
Rights of this Attribute. It must therefore be such a compensation as might be
commensurate to the Holiness of the Divine Nature and the Divine Law, which
could not be wrought by any, but him that was possessed of a Godhead, to give
efficacy and exact congruity to it. The Person designed and appointed by God
for so great an affair, was one in the form of God, one equal with God, Phil.
2.6. who could not be termed by such a Title of Dignity, if he had not been
equal to God in the universal rectitude of the Divine Nature, and therefore in
his Holiness. The Punishment due to Sin is translated to that Person for the
righting Divine Holiness, and the Righteousness of that Person is communicated
to the Sinner for the Pardon of the Offending Creature.

If the Sinner had been Eternally damned, Gods hatred of Sin had been evidenced
by the strokes of his Justice; but his Mercy to a Sinner had lain in obscurity.
If the Sinner had been Pardoned and Saved without such a reparation, Mercy had
been evident; but his Holiness had hid its head for ever in his own bosom.
There was therefore a necessity of such a way to manifest his Purity, and yet
to bring forth his Mercy: That Mercy might not always sigh for the destruction
of the Creature, and that Holiness might not mourn for the neglect of its
Honor.

6. Information. Hence it will follow, There is no justification of a Sinner by
any thing in himself. After Sin had set foot in the World, Man could present
nothing to God acceptable to him, or bearing any proportion to the Holiness of
his Law, till God set forth a Person, upon whose account the Acceptance of our
Persons and Services is founded, Ephesians. 1.6. Who has made us accepted in the
Beloved. The Infinite Purity of God is so glorious, that it shames the Holiness
of Angels, as the light of the Sun dims the light of the Fire: Much more will
the Righteousness of Fallen Man, who is Vile, and drinks up Iniquity like
water, vanish into Nothing in his Presence. With what Self-abasement and
Abhorrence ought he to be possessed that comes as short of the Angels in
Purity, as a Dunghill does of a Star? The highest Obedience that ever was
performed by any mere Man, since Lapsed Nature, cannot challenge any acceptance
with God, or stand before so exact an Inquisition. What Person has such a
clear Innocence, and unspotted Obedience in such a Perfection, as in any degree
to suit the Holiness of the Divine Nature? Psalm. 143.2. Enter not into judgment
with thy Servant, for in thy sight shall no man living be justified. If God
should debate the case simply with Man in his own Person, without respecting
the Mediator, he were not able to answer one of a thousand. Though we are his
Servants, as David was, and perform a sincere Service, yet there are many
little Motes and Dust of Sin in the best Works, that cannot lie undiscovered
from the Eye of his Holiness: And if we come short in the least of what the Law
requires, we are guilty of all James 2.10.
. So that in thy sight shall no man living be justified: In the sight of thy
Infinite Holiness, which hates the least spot; in the sight of thy Infinite
Justice, which punishes the least Transgression.

God would descend below his own Nature, and vilify both his Knowledge and
Purity, should he accept that for a Righteousness and Holiness which is not so
in it self; and nothing is so, which has the least stain upon it contrary to
the Nature of God. The most holy Saints in Scripture, upon a prospect of his
Purity, have cast away all confidence in themselves; every flash of the Divine
Purity has struck them into a deep sense of their own Impurity and shame for
it, Job 42.6. Wherefore I abhor my self in dust and ashes. What can the
language of any Man be that lies under a sense of Infinite Holiness and his own
Defilement in the least, but that of the Prophet, Isai. 6.5. Woe is me, I am
undone? And what is there in the World can administer any other thought than
this, unless God be considered in Christ, reconciling the World to himself? As
a Holy God, so righted, as that he can dispense with the Condemnation of a
Sinner, without dispensing with his Hatred of Sin; pardoning the Sin in the
Criminal, because it has been punished in the Surety. That Righteousness which
God has set forth for Justification, is not our own, but a Righteousness which
is of God, Phil. 3.9, 10. of Gods appointing, and of Gods performing; appointed
by the Father, who is God, and performed by the Son, who is one with the
Father. A Righteousness surmounting that of all the glorious Angels, since it
is an Immutable one which can never fail, an Everlasting Righteousness, Dan.
9.24. A Righteousness wherein the Holiness of God can acquiesce, as considered
in it self, because it is a Righteousness of one equal with God. As we
therefore dishonor the Divine Majesty, when we insist upon our own bemir'd
Righteousness for our Justification; (as if a Mortal Man were as just as God,
and a Man as pure as his Maker, Job 4.17.) So we highly honor the Purity of
his Nature, when we charge our Selves with Folly, acknowledge our selves
Unclean, and accept of that Righteousness which gives a full content to his
Infinite Purity. There can be no Justification of a Sinner by any thing in
himself.

7. It In^orms us, If Holiness be a glorious Perfection of the Divine Nature,
then the Deity of Christ might be argued from hence. He is indeed dignified
with the Title of the Holy One, Acts 3.14, 16. a Title often given to God in
the Old Testament; and he is called the Holy of Holies, Dan. 9.24. but because
the Angels seemed to be termed holy Ones, Dan. 4.13, 17. and the most Sacred
place in the Temple was also called the Holy of Holies, I shall not insist upon
that. But you find our Savior particularly applauded by the Angels, as Holy;
when this Perfection of the Divine Nature, together with the Incommunicable
Name of God, are linked together, and ascribed to him. Isai. 6.3. Holy, Holy,
Holy is the Lord of Hosts, and the whole Earth is full of his glory, which the
Apostle interprets of Christ, John 12.39, 41. Isaiah again, He has blinded
their Eyes, and hardened their Hearts, that they should not see with their Eyes,
nor understand with their Hearts, and be converted, and I should heal them.
These things said Isaiah, when he saw his glory, and spoke of him. He that
Isaiah saw environed with the Seraphims in a Reverential posture before his
face, and praised as most Holy by them, was the True and Eternal God; such
Acclamations belong to none, but the great Jehovah, God Blessed for ever: But,
says John, It was the glory of Christ that Isaiah saw in this Vision; Christ
therefore is God blessed for ever, of whom it was said, Holy, Holy, Holy Lord
God of Hosts Placeus, de Deitat. Chri^ti in locum.
. The Evangelist had been speaking of Christ, the Miracles which he wrought,
the obstinacy of the Jews against believing on him; his Glory therefore is to
be referred to the Subject he had been speaking of. The Evangelist was not
speaking of the Father, but of the Son, and cites those words out of Isaiah;
not to teach any thing of the Father, but to show that the Jews could not
believe in Christ. He speaks of Him that had wrought so many Miracles; but
Christ wrought those Miracles: He speaks of him whom the Jews refused to
believe on; but Christ was the Person they would not believe on, while they
acknowledged God. It was the Glory of this Person Isaiah saw, and this Person
Isaiah spoke of, if the Words of the Evangelist be of any credit. The Angels
are too holy to give Acclamations belonging to God, to any but Him that is God.

8. It Informs us, that God is fully fit for the Government of the World. The
Righteousness of Gods Nature qualifies Him to be Judge of the World: If he were
not perfectly Righteous and Holy, he were incapable to govern and Judge the
World; Romans 3.5. If there be unrighteousness with God, how shall he judge the
World? God will not do wickedly, neither will the Almighty pervert judgment,
Job 34.12. How despicable is a Judge that wants Innocence? As Omniscience fits
God to be a Judge, so Holiness fits him to be a Righteous Judge; Psalm. 1.6. The
Lord knows, that is, loves the way of the Righteous: but the way of the ungodly
shall perish.

9. Information. If Holiness be an eminent Perfection of the Divine Nature, The
Christian Religion is of a Divine Extraction. It discovers the Holiness of God,
and forms the Creature to a conformity to him. It gives us a prospect of his
Nature, represents him in the Beauty of Holiness, Psalm. 110.3. more than the
whole Glass of the Creation. It Is in this Evangelical Glass the Glory of the
Lord is beheld, and rendered amiable and imitable 2 Cor. 3.18.
. It Is a Doctrine according to Godliness, 1 Timothy 6.3. directing us to live the
Life of God; a life worthy of God, and worthy of our first Creation by his
hand. It takes us off from our selves, fixes us upon a Noble End, points our
Actions and the scope of our lives to God. It quells the Monsters of Sin,
discountenanceth the Motes of Wickedness; and it is no mean Argument for the
Divinity of it, that it sets us no lower a Pattern for our Imitation, than the
Holiness of the Divine Majesty. God is exalted upon the Throne of his Holiness
in it, and the Creature advanced to an Image and resemblance of it, 1 Pet.
1.16. Be ye holy, for I am holy.

Use. 2. The Second use is for Comfort. This Attribute frowns upon Lapsed
Nature, but smiles in the Restorations made by the Gospel. Gods Holiness, in
conjunction with his Justice, is Terrible to a guilty Sinner; but now, in
conjunction with his Mercy, by the Satisfaction of Christ, it is sweet to a
Believing Penitent. In the first Covenant, the Purity of his Nature was joined
with the Rigours of his Justice: In the second Covenant, the Purity of his
Nature is joined with the Sweetness and Tenderness of his Mercy. In the one,
Justice flames against the Sinner in the right of Injured Holiness: In the
other, Mercy yearns toward a Believer, with the consent of Righted Holiness.
To rejoice in the Holiness of God, is the true and genuine Spirit of a Renewed
Man: My heart rejoices in the Lord; what follows? There is none holy as the
Lord, 1 Samuel 2.1, 2. Some Perfections of the Divine Nature are Astonishing,
some Affrighting; but this may may fill us both with Astonishment at it, and a
Joy in it.

1. By Covenant we have an Interest in this Attribute, as well as any other. In
that Clause of Gods being our God, entire God with all his Glory, all his
Perfections are past over as a portion, and a gracious Soul is brought into
Union with God, as his God: Not with a part of God, but with God in the
Simplicity, Extent, Integrity of his Nature; and therefore in this Attribute.
And upon some account it may seem more in this Attribute, than in any other;
for if he be our God, he is our God in his Life and Glory, and therefore in his
Purity especially, without which he could not live, he could not be happy and
blessed. Little comfort will it be to have a dead God, or a vile God made over
to us: And as by this Covenant he is our Father, so he gives us his Nature, and
communicates his Holiness in all his Dispensations; and in those that are
severest, as well as those that are sweetest; Heb. 12.10. But he corrects us
for our profit, that we might be partakers of his Holiness. Not simply,
partakers of Holiness, but of his Holiness; to have a Portrayture of it in our
Nature, a Meddal of it in our hearts, a spark of the same Nature with that
Immense splendour and flame in himself. The Holiness of a Covenant Soul is a
resemblance of the Holiness of God, and formed by it: As the Picture of the Sun
in a Cloud is a fruit of his Beams, and an Image of its Author. The fullness of
the Perfection of Holiness remains in the Nature of God, as the fullness of the
Light does in the Sun; yet there are transmissions of Light from the Sun to the
Moon, and it is a Light of the same Nature both in the one and in the other.
The Holiness of a Creature, is nothing else but a reflection of the Divine
Holiness upon it; and to make the Creature capable of it, God takes various
methods, according to his Covenant Grace.

2. This Attribute renders God a fit Object for Trust and Dependence. The
Notion of an Unholy and Unrighteous God, is an uncomfortable Idea of him, and
beats off our hands from laying any hold of him. It Is upon this Attribute the
Reputation and Honor of God in the World is built: What encouragement can we
have to believe him, or what Incentives could we have to serve him, without the
luster of this in his Nature? The very thought of an Unrighteous God, is enough
to drive Men at the greatest distance from him: As the Honesty of a Man gives a
reputation to his Word; so does the Holiness of God give credit to his Promise.
It Is by this he would have us stifle our Fears, and fortify our Trust, Isai.
41.14. Fear not thou worm Jacob, and ye men of Israel; I will help thee, says
the Lord, and thy Redeemer, the holy one of Israel: He will be in his Actions,
what he is in his Nature. Nothing shall make him defile his own Excellency:
Unrighteousness is the ground of Mutability; but the Promise of God does never
fail, because the rectitude of his Nature does never languish: Were his
Attributes without the conduct of this, they would be altogether formidable. As
this is the glory of all his other Perfections; so this only renders him
comfortable to a Believing Soul, Might we not fear his Power to crush us, his
Mercy to overlook us, his Wisdom to design against us, if this did not
influence them? What an oppression is Power without Righteousness in the hand
of a Creature, destructive instead of protecting? The Devil is a mighty Spirit,
but not fit to be trusted, because he is an Impure Spirit. When God would give
us the highest Security of the sincerity of his Intentions, he swears by this
Attribute Psalm. 8.35.
: His Holiness as well as his Truth is laid to pawn for the Security of his
Promise. As we make God the Judge between us and others, when we swear by him;
so he makes his Holiness the Judge between himself and his People, when he
swears by it.

1. It Is this renders him fit to be confided in for the answer of our Prayers.
This is the ground of his readiness to give. Matthew. 7.11.
If you, being evil, know how to give good gifts; how much more shall your
Father which is in Heaven give good th^ng^ to them that ask him? Though the
holiness of God be not mentioned, yet it is to be understood; the Emphasis lies
in those words if you being evil: God is then considered in a disposition
contrary to this, which can be nothing but his Righteousness. If you that are
unholy, and have so much Corruption in you, to render you cruel, can bestow
upon your Children the good things they want, how much more shall God, who is
holy, and has nothing in him to check his mercifulness to his Creatures, grant
the Petitions of his Suppliants? 'Twas this Attribute edged the siduciary
importunity of the Souls under the Altar for the revenging their blood unjustly
shed upon the Earth; Rev. 6.10. How long, O Lord, holy and true, do thou not
avenge our blood on them that dwell on the Earth? Let not thy holiness stand
with folded Arms as careless of the eminent Sufferings of those that fear thee;
we implore thee by the holiness of thy Nature, and the truth of thy Word.

2. This renders him fit to be confided in for the comfort of our Souls in a
broken condition. The reviving the hearts of the spiritually afflicted, is a
part of the holiness of his Nature; Isa. 57.15. Thus says the high and lofty
one that inhabits eternity, whose name is holy; I dwell in the high and holy
place, with him also that is of a contrite and humble spirit, to revive the
spirit of the humble. He acknowledges himself the lofty One, they might
therefore fear, he would not revive them; but he is also the holy One, and
therefore he will refresh them; he is not more lofty than he is holy; besides
the argument of the immutability of his Promise, and the might of his Power,
here is the holiness of his Nature moving him to pity his drooping Creature:
His Promise is ushered in with the name of power, high and lofty One, to bar
their distrust of his strength; and with a declaration of his holiness, to
check any despair of his Will* There is no ground to think I should be false to
my word, or misemploy my Power, since that cannot be, because of the holiness
of my Name and Nature.

3. This renders him fit to be confided in for the maintenance of grace, and
protection of us against our spiritual Enemies. What our Savior thought an
argument in Prayer, we may well take as a ground of our confidence. In the
strength of this he puts up his suit, when in his mediatory Capacity he
intercedes for the preservation of his People; John 17.11. Holy Father, keep
through thy own Name those that thou have given me that they may be one as we
are. Holy Father, not merciful Father, or powerful, or wise Father, but holy;
and Verse 25. righteous Father. Christ pleads that Attribute for the
performance of God's Word, which was laid to pawn when he past his word: For it
was by his Holiness that he swore, That his seed should endure for ever, and
his Throne as the Sun before him Psalm. 89.36.
; which is meant of the perpetuity of the Covenant which he made with Christ,
and is also meant of the preservation of the mystical Seed of David, and the
perpetuating his loving kindness to them Verse. 32, 33.
. Grace is an Image of God's holiness, and therefore the holiness of God is
most proper to be used as an Argument to interest and engage him in the
preservation of it. In the midst of Church provocations, he will not utterly
extinguish, because he is the holy One in the midst of her Hos. 11.9.
: Nor in the midst of Judgments will he condemn his people to death, because he
is their holy one Hab. 1.12.
; but their Enemies shall be ordained for Judgment, and established for
Correction. One Prophet assures them in the Name of the Lord, upon the strength
of this Perfection; and the other upon the same ground is confident of the
protection of the Church, because of Gods holiness engaged in an inviolable
Covenant.

3. Comfort. Since holiness is a glorious Perfection of the Nature of God, he
will certainly value every holy Soul. It Is of a greater value with him than the
Souls of all men in the World, that are destitute of it: Wicked men are the
worst of vilenesses, mere dross and dunghill Psalm. 12.8. The vilest m^^. (...)
; Purity then, which is contrary to wickedness, must be the most precious thing
in his esteem; he must needs love that quality which he is most pleased with in
himself, as a father looks with most delight upon the child which is possessed
with those dispositions he most values in his own nature. His Countenance does
behold the upright, Ps. 11.7. He looks upon them with a full and open Face of
favor, with a countenance clear, unmaskt and smiling, with a Face full of
delight: Heaven it self is not such a pleasing Object to him, as the Image of
his own increated holiness in the created holiness of Men and Angels: As a man
esteems that most, which is most like him, of his own Generation, more than a
piece of Art, which is merely the product of his wit or strength. And he must
love holiness in the Creature, he would not else love his own Image, and
consequently would undervalue himself: He despises the Image the wicked bears
Psalm. 73.20.
, but he cannot disesteem his own stamp on the godly; he cannot but delight in
his own work, his choice work, the Masterpiece of all his works, the new
Creation of things; that which is next to himself, as being a Divine Nature
like himself 2 Pet. 1.4.
: When he overlooks strength, parts, knowledge, he cannot overlook this; He
sets apart him that is godly for himself, Psalm. 4.3. as a peculiar Object to
take pleasure in, he reserves such for his own complacency, when he leaves the
rest of the World to the Devils power; he is choice of them above all his other
works, and will not let any have so great a propriety in them as himself. If it
be so dear to him here in its imperfect and mixed condition, that he
appropriates it as a peculiar Object for his own delight; how much more will
the unspotted purity of glorified Saints be infinitely pleasing to him? So that
he will take less pleasure in the material Heavens than in such a Soul. Sin
only is detestable to God, and when this is done away, the Soul becomes as
lovely in his account, as before it was loathsome.

4. It Is comfort, upon this account, That God will perfect holiness in every
upright Soul. We many times distrust God, and despond in our selves, because of
the infinite holiness of the Divine Nature, and the dunghill Corruptions in our
own; but the holiness of God engages him to the preservation of it, and
consequently to the perfection of it; as appears by our Savior's Argument,
Joh. 17.11. Holy Father, keep through thy own name, those whom thou have given
me; to what end? that they may be one as we are; one with us, in the
resemblances of Purity. And the holiness of the Soul is used as an Argument by
the Psalmist. Psalm. 86.2. Preserve my soul for I am holy; that is, I have an
ardent desire to holiness: Thou have separated me from the mass of the
corrupted World, preserve and perfect me with the Assembly of the glorified
Quire. The more holy any are, the more communicative they are; God being most
holy, is most communicative of that which he most esteems in himself, and
delights to see in his Creature: He (...) therefore more ready to impart his
holiness to them, that beg for it, than to communicate his knowledge or his
power. Though he were holy, yet he let Adam fall, who never petitioned his
Holiness to preserve him; he let him fall, to declare the Holiness of his own
Nature, which had wanted its due manifestation without it: But since that
cannot be declared in a higher manner than it has been already in the death of
the Surety, that bore our Guilt, there is no fear he should cast the work out
of his hands, since the design of the permission of man's Apostasy, in the
discovery of the perfections of his Nature, has been fully answered. The
finishing the good work, he has begun, has a relation to the glory of Christ;
and his own glory in Christ to be manifested in the day of his Appearing Phil.
1.6.
, wherein the glory, both of his own holiness, and the holiness of the
Mediator, are to receive their full manifestation. As it is a part of the
holiness of Christ to sanctify his Church Ephesians. 5.26, 27.
, till not a wrinkle or spot be left; so it is the part of God not to leave
that work imperfect, which his holiness has attempted a second time to
beautify his Creature with. He will not cease exalting this Attribute, which
is the Believers by the new Covenant, till he utters that applauding Speech of
his own work, Cant. 4.7. Thou art all fair, my Love, there is no spot in thee.

Exhortation. Is holiness an eminent perfection of the Divine Nature, then

1. Let us get and preserve right and strong apprehensions of this Divine
Perfection. Without a due sense of it, we can never exalt God in our hearts;
and the more distinct Conceptions we have of this, and the rest of his
Attributes, the more we glorify him. When Moses considered God as his strength
and salvation, he would exalt him Exodus 15.2.
, and he could never break out in so admirable a Doxology as that in the Text,
without a deep sense of the glory of his Purity, which he speaks of with so
much admiration. Such a sense will be of use to us.

1. In promoting genuine Convictions. A deep consideration of the holiness of
God cannot but be followed with a deep consideration of our impure and
miserable Condition by reason of sin: We cannot glance upon it without
reflections upon our own Vileness. Adam no sooner heard the Voice of a holy God
in the Garden, but he considered his own nakedness with shame and fear Genesis
3.10.
: Much less can we fix our Minds upon it, but we must be touched with a sense
of our own uncleanness. The clear beams of the Sun discover that filthiness in
our Garments and Members, which was not visible in the darkness of the night.
Impure Metals are discerned by comparing them with that which is pure and
perfect in its kind. The sense of guilt is the first natural Result upon a
sense of this excellent Perfection; and the sense of the Imperfection of our
own Righteousness is the next. Who can think of it, and reflect upon himself as
an Object fit for Divine Love? Who can have a due thought of it without
regarding himself as stubble before a consuming Fire? Who can without a
confusion of heart and face, glance upon that pure Eye which beholds with
detestation, the foul Motes as well as the filthier and bigger Spots? When
Isaiah saw his glory, and heard how highly the Angels exalted God for this
Perfection, he was in a cold sweat, ready to swoon, till a Seraphim, with a
Coal from the Altar, both purged and revived him Isa. 6.5, 6, 7.
. They are sound and genuine Convictions, which have the prospect of Divine
Purity for their immediate Spring, and not a foresight of our own Misery; when
it is not the punishment we have deserved, but the holiness we have offended,
most grates our hearts. Such Convictions are the first rude Draughts of the
Divine Image in our Spirits; and grateful to God, because they are an
acknowledgment of the glory of this Attribute, and the first mark of honor
given to it by the Creature: Those that never had a sense of their own
Vileness, were always destitute of a sense of God's holiness. And by the way we
may observe, That those that scoff at any for hanging down the head under the
Consideration and Conviction of Sin, (as is too usual with the World) scoff at
them for having deeper Apprehensions of the Purity of God than themselves, and
consequently make a mock of the holiness of God, which is the ground of those
Convictions; a sense of this would prevent such a damnable reproaching.

2. A sense of this will render us humble in the possession of the greatest
holiness a Creature were capable of. We are apt to be proud with the Pharisee,
when we look upon others wallowing in the Mire of base and unnatural Lusts; but
let any clap their Wings, if they can, in a vain boasting and exaltation, when
they view the holiness of God. What Torch, if it had reason, would be proud and
swagger in its own light, if it compared it self with the Sun? Who can stand
before this holy Lord God, is the just reflection of the holiest Person, as it
was of those 1 Samuel 6.20. that had felt the marks of his jealousy after their
looking into the Ark, though likely out of affection to it, and triumphant joy
at its return. When did the Angels testify, by the covering of their Faces,
their weakness to bear the luster of his Majesty, but when they beheld his
glory? When did they signify by their covering their feet the shame of their
own Vileness, but when their hearts were fullest of the applaudings of this
Perfection Isa. 6.2, 3.
? Though they found themselves without spot, yet not with such a holiness, that
they could appear either with their faces or feet unvailed and unmask't in the
Presence of God. Does the immense splendour of this Attribute, engender shaming
reflections in those pure Spirits? What will it, ^h^^ should it do in us, that
dwell in Houses of Clay, and creep up and down with that Clay upon our backs,
and too much of it in our hearts? The Stars themselves which appear beautiful
in the night, are maskt at the awaking of the Sun: What a dimm light is that of
a Gloworm to that of the Sun? The apprehensions of this made the Elders humble
themselves in the midst of their glory, by casting down their Crowns before his
Throne Rev. 4.8, 10.
; a Metaphor taken from the triumphing Generals among the Romans, who hung up
their victorious Laurels in the Capitol, dedicating them to their Gods*
acknowledging them their Superiors in strength, and Authors of their victory.
This self-emptiness at the consideration of Divine Purity, is the note of the
true Church represented by the 24 Elders, and a note of a true Member of the
Church; whereas boasting of Perfection and Merit is the property of the
Antichristian tribe, that have mean thoughts of this adorable Perfection, and
think themselves more righteous than the unspotted Angels. What a self
annihilation is therein a good man, when the sense of Divine Purity is most
lively in him; yea, how detestable is he to himsel? There is as little
proportion between the holiness of the Divine Majesty, and that of the most
righteous Creature, as there is between a nearness of a Person that stands upon
a Mountain to the Sun, and of him that beholds him in a Vale, one is nearer
than the other, but it is an advantage not to be boasted of, in regard of the
vast distance that is between the Sun and the elevated Spectator.

3. This would make us full of an affectionate Reverence in all our approaches
to God. By this Perfection God is rendered venerable, and fit to be reverenced
by his Creature; and magnificent thoughts of it in the Creature would awaken
him to an actual reverence of the Divine Majesty. Psalm. 111.9. Holy and
reverend is his name; a good opinion of this would engender in us a sincere
respect toward him; we should then serve the Lord with fear, as the Expression
is Psalm. 2.11. that is, be afraid to cast any thing before him that may offend
the eyes of his Purity. Who would venture rashly and garishly into the presence
of an eminent Moralist, or of a righteous King upon his Throne? The fixedness
of the Angels arose from the continual prospect of this. What if we had been
with Isaiah when he saw the Vision, and beheld him in the same glory, and the
heavenly Quire in their reverential Posture in the Service of God; would it not
have barred our wanderings, and staked us down to our Duty? Would not the
fortifying an Idea of it in our Minds produce the same effect? It Is for want of
this we carry our selves so loosely and unbecomingly in the Divine Presence,
with the same, or meaner Affections than those wherewith we stand before some
vile Creature, that is our Superior in the World; as though a piece of filthy
Flesh were more valuable than this Perfection of the Divinity. How does the
Psalmist double his Exhortation to men to sing Praise to God, Psalm. 47.6. Sing
praise to God, sing praises; sing praise to our King, sing praise; because of
his Majesty, and the Purity of his Dominion: And verse 8. God reigns over the
Heathen, God sits upon the Throne of his Holiness. How would this elevate us in
Praise, and prostrate us in Prayer, when we praise and pray with an
understanding and insight of that Nature we bless or implore; as he speaks
verse 7. Sing ye praise with understanding. The holiness of God in his
Government and Dominion, the holiness of his Nature, and the holiness of his
Precepts, should beget in us an humble respect in our Approaches. The more we
grow in a sense of this, the more shall we advance in the true performance of
all our Duties. Amyrald. Moral. Tom. 5. p. 462.
Those Nations which adored the Sun, had they at first seen his Brightness
wrapped and maskt in a Cloud, and paid a veneration to it, how would their
Adorations have mounted to a greater point, after they had seen it in its full
brightness, shaking off those Vails, and chasing away the Mists before it; what
a profound reverence would they have paid it, when they beheld it in its Glory
and Meridian Brightness? Our reverence to God in all our Addresses to him will
arrive to greater degrees, if every act of Duty be ushered in, and seasoned
with the thoughts of God as sitting upon a Throne of Holiness; we shall have a
more becoming sense of our own Vileness, a greater ardor to his Service, a
deeper respect in his Presence, if our Understanding be more cleared, and
possessed with Notions of this Perfection. Thus take a view of God in this part
of his Glory, before you fall down before his Throne, and assure your selves
you will find your hearts and services quickened with a new and lively Spirit.

4. A due sense of this Perfection in God would produce in us a fear of God,
and arm us against Temptations and Sin. What made the Heathens so wanton and
loose, but the representations of their Gods as vicious? Who would stick at
Adulteries and more prodigious Lusts, that can take a Pattern for them from the
Person he adores for a Deity? Upon which account Plato would have Poets
banished from his Commonwealth, because by dressing up their Gods in wanton
garbs in their Poems, they encouraged wickedness in the People. But if the
thoughts of Gods holiness were impressed upon us, we should regard sin with the
same eye, mark it with the same detestation in our measures, as God himself
does. So far as we are sensible of the Divine Purity, we should account sin
vile as it deserves; we should hate it entirely, without a grain of love to it,
and hate it perpetually. Psalm. 119.104, Through thy Precepts I get
understanding, therefore I hate every false way. He looks into God's
Statute-Book, and thereby arrives to an understanding of the Purity of his
Nature, whence his hatred of Iniquity commenced. This would govern our Motion,
check our Vices; it would make us tremble at the hissing of a Temptation: When
a Corrup ion did but peep out, and put forth its head, a look to the Divine
Purity would be attended with a fresh Con^oy of Strength to resist it. There is
such Fortification, as to be wrapped up in the sense of this: This would fill
us with an awe of God; we should be ashamed to admit any filthy thing into us,
which we know is detestable to his pure Eye. As the approach of a grave and
serious Man makes Children hasten their Trifles out of the way; so would a
Consideration of this Attribute make us cast away our Idols, and fling away our
ridiculous thoughts and designs.

5. A due sense of this Perfection, would inflame us with a vehement desire to
be conformed to him. All our Desires would be ardent to regulate our selves
according to this Pattern of Holiness and Goodness, which is not to be
equalled; the Contemplating it as it shines forth in the Face of Christ, will
transform us into the same Image 2 Cor. 3.19.
. Since our lapsed state, we cannot behold the holiness of God in it self
without affrightment; nor is it an Object of Imitation, but as tempered in
Christ to our view. When we cannot without blinding our selves, look upon the
Sun in its Brightness, we may behold it through a colored Glass, whereby the
luster of it is moderated, without dazzling our eyes. The sense of it will
furnish us with a greatness of mind, that little things will be contemned by
us; Motives of a greater alloy would have little influence upon us; we should
have the highest Motives to every Duty, and Motives of the same strain which
influence ^he Angels above. It would change us, not only into an Angelical
Nature, but a Divine Nature: We should act like men of another Sphere; as if we
had received our Original in another World, and seen with Angels the ravishing
Beauties of Heaven. How little would the mean Employments of the World sink us
into dirt and mud? How often has the Meditation of the Courage of a Valiant
Man, or Acuteness and Industry of a Learned Person, spurred on some men to an
imitation of them, and transformed them into the same Nature? As the looking
upon the Sun imprints an Image of the Sun upon our eye, that we seem to behold
nothing but the Sun a while after. The view of the Divine Purity would fill us
with a holy generosity to imitate him, more than the Examples of the best men
upon Earth. It was a saying of a Heathen, That if Virtue were visible, it would
kindle a noble flame of Love to it in the heart, by its ravishing beauty. Shall
the Infinite Purity of the Author of all Virtue come short of the strength of a
Creature? Can we not render that visible to us by frequent Meditation, which
though it be invisible in his Nature, is made visible in his Law, in his Ways,
in his Son? It would make us ready to obey him, since we know he cannot Command
any thing that is sinful, but what is holy, just, and good: It would put all
our Aff ctions in their due place, elevate them above the Creature, and subject
them to the Creator.

6. It would make us patient and contented under all God's Dispensations. All
penal Evils are the Fruits of his Holiness, as he is Judge and Governor of the
World: He is not an Arbitrary Judge, nor does any Sentence pronounced, nor
Warrant for Execution issue from him, but what bears upon it a Stamp of the
Righteousness of his Nature; he does nothing by Passion or Unrighteousness, but
according to the Eternal Law of his own unstained Nature, which is the Rule to
him in his Works, the Basis and Foundation of his Throne and Sovereign
Dominion. Psalm. 89.14. Justice, or Righteousness, and Judgment are the
Habitation of thy Throne; upon these his Sovereign Power is established: So
that there can be no just Complaint or Indict^^^t brought against any of his
Proceedings with men. How does our Savior, who had the highest Apprehensions
of God's Holiness, justify God in his deepest Distresses, when he cried and
was not answered in the particular he desired, in that Prophetic Psalm of him,
Psalm. 22.2, 3. I cry day and night, but thou hear not. Thou seem to be
deaf to all my Petitions, afar off from the words of my roaring; but thou art
holy. I cast no blame upon thee: All thy dealings are squared by thy holiness,
this is the only Law to thee; in this I acquiesce. It Is part of thy holiness to
hide thy face from me, to show thereby thy detestation of sin. Our Savior
adores the Divine Purity in his sharpest Agony, and a like sense of it would
guide us in the same steps to acknowledge and glorify it, in our greatest
desertions and afflictions; especially since as they are the fruit of the
holiness of his Nature, so they are the means to impart to us clearer stamps of
holiness, according to that in himself, which is the original Copy Heb. 12.10.
. He melts us down as Gold, to fit us for the receiving a new Impression, to
mortify the Affections of the Flesh, and clothe us with the Graces of his
Spirit. The due sense of this would make us to submit to his stroke, and to
wait upon him for a good issue of his dealings.

2. Exhortation. Is holiness a Perfection of the Divine Nature? Is it the glory
of the Deity? Then let us glorify this holiness of God. Moses glorifies it in
the Text, and glorifies it in a Song, which was a Copy for all Ages. The whole
Corporation of Seraphims have their Mouths filled with the praises of it. The
Saints, whither Militant on Earth, or Triumphant in Heaven, are to continue the
same Acclamation, Holy, holy, holy, Lord God of Hosts Rev. 4.8.
. Neither Angels nor glorified Spirits exalt at the same rate, the Power which
formed them Creatures, nor Goodness which preserves them in a blessed
Immortality; As they do holiness, which they bear some beams of in their own
Nature, and whereby they are capacitated to stand before his Throne. Upon the
account of this, a Debt of Praise is demanded of all Rational Creatures by the
Psalmist, Psalm. 99.3. Let them praise thy great and terrible Name, for it is
holy. Not so much for the greatness of his Majesty, or the treasures of his
Justice; but as they are considered in conjunction with his holiness, which
renders them beautiful; for it is holy. Grandeur and Majesty simply in
themselves, are not Objects of Praise, nor do they merit the Acclamations of
men, when destitute of Righteousness: This only renders every thing else
adorable; and this adorns the Divine Greatness with an amiableness: Isa. 12.6.
Great is the holy One of Israel in the midst of thee; and makes his Might
worthy of Praise, Luke 1.49. In honoring this, which is the soul and spirit of
all the rest, we give a glory to all the Perfections which constitute and
beautify his Nature: And without the glorifying this, we glorify nothing of
them, though we should extol every other single Attribute a thousand times. He
values no other Adoration of his Creatures, unless this be interested, nor
accepts any thing as a glory from them; Levit. 10.3. I will be sanctified in
them that come near me, and I will be glorified. As if he had said, in
manifesting my Name to be holy, you truly, you only honor me. And as the
Scripture seldom speaks of this Perfection without a particular Emphasis, it
teaches us not to think of it without a special Elevation of heart: By this act
only, while we are on Earth, can we join consort with the Angels in Heaven; he
that does not honor it, delight in it, and in the meditation of it, has no
resemblance of it; he has none of the Image, that delights not in the
Original. Every thing of God is glorious, but this most of all. If he built the
World principally for any thing, it was for the communication of his Goodness,
and display of his Holiness. He formed the Rational Creature to manifest his
Holiness in that Law whereby he was to be governed: Then deprive not God of the
design of his own Glory.

We honor this Attribute,

1. When we make it the ground of our love to God. Not because he is gracious
to us, but holy in himself. As God honors it, in loving himself for it, we
should honor it, by pitching our Affections upon him chiefly for it. What
renders God amiable to himself, should render him lovely to all his Creatures.
Isa. 42.21. The Lord is well pleased for his righteousness sak^* If the hatred
of evil be the immediate result of a love to God, then the peculiar object or
term of our love to God, must be that Perfection which stands in direct
opposition to the hatred of evil. Psalm. 97.10. Ye that love the Lord, hate
evil. When we honor his holiness in every stamp and impression of it; his Law,
not principally because of its usefulness to us, its accommodateness to the
order of the World, but for its innate Purity, and his People not for our
interest in them, so much as for bearing upon them this glittering mark of the
Deity, we honor then the Purity of the Lawgiver, and the Excellency of the
Sanctifier.

2. We honor it, when we regard chiefly the illustrious appearance of this in
his Judgments in the World. In a case of Temporal Judgment, Moses celebrates it
in the Text: In a case of Spiritual Judgments, the Angels applaud it in Isaiah.
All his Severe proceedings are nothing but the strong breathings of this
Attribute. Purity is the flash of his revenging sword. If he did not hate evil,
his Vengeance would not reach the Committers of it: He is a Refiners fire in
the day of his Anger Mal. 3 ^.
: By his separating Judgments, he takes away the wicked of the earth like
Dross, Psalm. 119.119. How is his holiness honored, when we take notice of his
sweeping out the rubbish of the World: How he suits punishment to sin, and
discovers his hatred of the matter and circumstances of the Evil, in the matter
and circumstances of the Judgment. This Perfection is legible in every stroke
of his Sword; we honor it when we read the syllables of it, and not by
standing amazed only at the greatness and severity of the Blow, when we read
how holy he is in his most terrible Dispensations: For as in them God magnifies
the greatness of his Power, so he sanctifies himself; that is, declares the
Purity of his Nature as a Revenger of all Impiety. Ezekiel. 38.22, 23. And I will
plead against him with Pestilence, and with Blood; and I will rain upon him,
and upon his bands, and upon the people that are with him, an overflowing Rain
and great Hailstones, Fire and Brimstone. Thus will I magnify my self, and
sanctify my self.

3. We honor this Attribute, when we take notice of it in every accomplishment
of his Promise, and every grant of a Mercy. His Truth is but a branch of his
Righteousness, a slip from this Root. He is glorious in Holiness in the account
of Moses, because he led forth his People whom he had redeemed, Exodus 15.13.
His People by a Covenant with their Fathers, being the God of Moses, the God of
Israel, and the God of their Fathers: Verse 2. My God, and my Fathers God, I
will exalt thee. For what? for his faithfulness to his Promise. The holiness of
God, which Mary, Luke 1.49. magnifies, is summed up in this, the help he
afforded his Servant Israel in the remembrance of his mercy, as he spoke to our
Fathers, to Abraham and his Seed for ever, Verse 54, 55. The certainty of his
Co^enant Mercy depends upon an unchangeableness of his holiness. What are Isa.
55.3.
sure mercies, are holy mercies in the Septuagint; and in Acts 13.34. which
makes that Tr nslation Canonical. His nearness to answer us when we call upon
him for suc^ Mercies, is a fruit of the holiness of his Name and Nature. Psalm.
145.17. The Lord is holy in all his works; the Lord is nigh to all them that
call upon him. Hannah, after a return of Prayer, sets a particular mark upon
this in her Song, 1 Samuel 2.2. There is none holy as the Lord; separated from
all Dross, firm to his Covenant, and righteous in it to his Suppliants that
confide in him, and plead his Word. When we observe the workings of this in
every return of Prayer, we honor it; it is a sign the Mercy is really a return
of Prayer, and not a Mercy of course, bearing upon it only the Characters of a
common Providence. This was the Perfection David would bless for the Catalogue
of Mercies in Psalm. 103.1. etc, Bless his (holy) Name. Certainly one reason why
sincere Prayer is so delightful to him, is because it puts him upon the
exercise of this his beloved Perfection, which he so much delights to honor.
Since God acts in all those as the Governor of the World, we honor him not,
unless we take notice of that Righteousness which sits him for a Governor, and
is the inward Spring of all his Motions. Genesis 18.25. Shall not the Judge of all
the Earth do right? It was his design in his pity to Israel, as well as the
Calamities he intended against the Heathens, to be sanctified in them; that is,
declared holy in his Merciful, as well as his Judicial procedure Ez. 36.21, ^3.
. Hereby God credits his Righteousness, which seemed to be forgotten by the
one, and contemned by the other Sanct. in loc.
, he removes by this all suspicion of any unfaithfulness in him.

4. We honor this Attribute, when we trust his Covenant, and Promise against
outward Appearances. Thus our Savior in the Prophecy of him Psalm 22, 2, 3.4.
; when God seemed to bar up the Gates of his Palace against the entry of any
more Petitions, This Attribute proves the support of the Redeemers Soul; But
thou art holy, Oh thou that inhabitest the Praises of Israel: As it refers to
what goes before, it has been twice explained; as it refers to what follows, it
is a ground of trust, Thou inhabitest the Praises of Israel: Thou have had the
Praises of Israel for many Ages for thy holiness. How? Our Fathers trusted in
thee, and thou did deliver them; They honored thy holiness by their trust
and thou did honor their Faith by a deliverance; thou always had a Purity
that would not shame nor confound them. I will trust in thee as thou art holy,
and expect the breaking out of this Attribute for my good as well as my
Predecessors; Our Fathers trusted in thee etc.

5. We honor this Attribute, when we show a greater Affection to the marks of
his holiness in times of the greatest Contempt of it. As the Psalmist, Psalm.
119.126, 127. They have made void thy Law, therefore I love thy Commandments
above Gold. While they spurn at the Purity of thy Law, I will value it above
the Gold they possess; I Will esteem it as Gold, because others count it as
Dross: By their scorn of it, my love to it shall be the warmer, and my hatred
of iniquity shall be the sharper: The disdain of others should inflame us with
a zeal and fortitude to appear in the behalf of his despised Honor. We honor
this Holiness many other ways; by preparation for our addresses to him out of a
sense of his purity: When we imitate it; As he honors us by teaching us his
Statutes Psalm. 119.135.
; so we honor him by learning and observing them. When we beg of him to show
himself a Refiner of us, to make us more conformable to him in holiness, and
bless him for any communication of it to us, it render us beautiful and lovely
in his sight.

To conclude; To honor it is the way to engage it for us: To give it the glory
of what it has done by the arm of power for our rescue from Sin, and beating
down our Corruptions at his feet, is the way to see more of its mavelous
works, and behold a clearer brightness. As unthankfulness makes him withdraw
his Grace Romans 1.21, 24.
, so glorifying him causes him to impart it. God honors men in the same way
they honor him: When we honor him by acknowledging his Purity, he will honor
us by communicating of it to us. This is the way to derive a greater excellency
to our Souls.

3. Exhortation. Since holiness is an eminent Perfection of the Divine Nature,
let us labor after a Conformity to God in this Perfection. The Nature of God
is presented to us in the Scripture, both as a pattern to imitate, and a Motive
to persuade the Creature to holiness. i Joh. 3.3. Matthew. 5.48. Lev. 11.44. 1
Pet. 1.15, 16.
. Since it is therefore the Nature of God, the more our Natures are beautified
with it, the more like we are to the Divine Nature. It Is not the pattern of
Angels, or Archangels, that our Savior or his Apostle proposes for our
imitation, but the original of all Purity, God himself: The same that created
us, to be imitated by us. Nor is an equal degree of Purity enjoined us; though
we are to be pure, and perfect, and merciful as God is, yet not essentially so;
for that would be to command us an impossibility in itself; as much as to order
us to cease to be Creatures, and commence Gods. No Creature can be essentially
holy but by participation from the chief Fountain of holiness; but we must have
the same kind of holiness, the same truth of holiness. As a short line may be
as straight as another, though it parallel it not in the immense length of it:
A copy may have the likeness of the Original, though not the same Perfection:
We can not be good, without eying some exemplar of goodness as the Pattern. No
pattern is so suitable as that which is the highest Goodness and Purity. That
Limner that would draw the most excellent piece, fixes his eyes upon the most
perfect Pattern. He that would be a good Orator, or Poet, or Artificer,
considers some person most excellent in each kind, as the Object of his
imitation. Who so sit as God to be viewed, as the pattern of holiness, in our
intendment of, and endeavor after holiness? The Stoics, one of the best sects
of Philosophers, advised their Disciples to pitch upon some eminent example of
Virtue, according to which to form their lives; as Socrates etc. But true
holiness does not only endeavor to live the life of a good man, but chooses to
live a divine life: As before the man was alienated from the life of God Ephesians.
4.1^.
, so upon his return he aspires after the life of God. To endeavor to be like
a good man, is to make one Image like another; to set our Clocks by other
Clocks, without regarding the Sun: But true holiness consists in a likeness to
the most exact Sampler. God being the first Purity, is the Rule as well as the
Spring of all Purity in the Creature, the chief and first Object of Imitation.
We disown our selves to be his Creatures, if we breath not after a resemblance
to him in what he is imitable. There was in man, as created according to God's
Image, a natural appetite to resemble God: It was at first planted in him by
the Author of his Nature. The Devils temptation of him by that Motive to
transgress the Law, had been as an Arrow shot against a b azen Wall, had there
not been a desire of some likeness to his Creator engraven upon him Genesis 3.5.
: It would have had no more influence upon him, than it could have had upon a
mere Animal. But man mistook the term; he would have been like God in
knowledge, whereas he should have affected a greater resemblance of him in
Purity. O that we could exemplify God in our Nature! Precepts may instruct us
more, but Examples affect us more; one directs us, but the other attracts us.
What can be more attractive of our imitation, than that which is the Original
of all Purity both in Men and Angels?

This conformity to him consists in an imitation of him,

1. In his Law. The Purity of his Nature was first visible in this Glass; hence
it is called a holy Law, Romans 7.12. a pure Law, Psalm. 19.8. Holy and pure, as it
is a Ray of the pure Nature of the Lawgiver. When our Lives are a Comment upon
his Law, they are expressive of his Holiness: We conform to his Holiness, when
we regulate our selves by his Law, as it is a Transcript of his Holiness: We do
not imitate it, when we do a thing in the matter of it agreeable to that holy
Rule, but when we do it with respect to the Purity of the Lawgiver beaming in
it. If it be agreeable to God's will, and convenient for some design of our
own, and we do any thing only with a respect to that design, we make not God's
Hol^ness discovered in the Law our Rule, but our own convenience: It Is not a
conformity to God, but a conformity of our Actions to Self. As in abstinence
from intemperate Courses, not because the holiness of God in his Law has
prescribed it, but because the health of our Bodies, or some noble Contentments
of life require it; then it is not God's holiness that is our Rule, but our own
security, convenience, or some thing else which we make a God to our selves.

It must be a real conformity to the Law: Our holiness should shine as really
in the practice, as God's Purity does in the Precept. God has not a pretense
of Purity in his Nature, but a reality: It Is not only a sudden boiling up of
an admiration of him, or a starting wish to be like him, from some sudden
impression upon the Fancy, (which is a mere temporary blaze) but a settled
temper of Soul, loving every thing that is like him, doing things out of a firm
desire to resemble his Purity in the Copy he has set; not a resting in
Negatives, but aspiring to Positives; Holy and harmless are distinct things:
They were distinct qualifications in our High Priest in his Obedience to the
Law Heb. 7.26.
, so they must be in us.

2. In his Christ. As the Law is the Transcript, so Christ is the Image of his
Holiness: The glory of God is too dazzling to be beheld by us: The acute eye of
an Angel is too weak to look upon that bright Sun without covering his Face: We
are much too weak to take our Measures from that Purity which is infinite in
his Nature. But he has made his Son like us, that by the imitation of him in
that temper, and shadow of human Flesh, we may arrive to a resemblance of him 2
Cor. 3.18.
. Then there is a conformity to him, when that which Christ did is drawn in
lively Colors in the Soul of a Christian; when as he died upon the Cross we
dye to our sins; as he rose from the Grave, we rise from our Lusts; as he
ascended on high, we mount our Souls thither: When we express in our lives what
shined in his, and exemplify in our hearts what he acted in the world, and
become one with him, as he was separate from sinners. The holiness of God in
Christ is our ultimate pattern: As we are not only to believe in Christ, but by
Christ in God John 14.1.
, so we are not only to imitate Christ, but the holiness of God as discovered
in Christ.

And to enforce this upon us, let us consider

1. It Is this only wherein he commands our imitation of him. We are not
commanded to be mighty and wise, as God is mighty and wise; but be holy as I am
holy. The declarations of his power are to enforce our subjection; those of his
wisdom to encourage our direction by him; but this only to attract our
imita^ion. When he says, I am holy, the immediate inference he makes, is be
ye so too, which is not the proper instruction from any other Perfection In
(...) says (...) (...).
. Man was created by Divine Power, and harmoniz'd by Divine Wisdom, but not
after them, or according to them, as the true Image; this was the Prerogative
of Divine Holiness, to be the Pattern of his Rational Creature Ephesians. 4.24. Col.
3.1^.
: Wisdom and Power were subservient to this, the one as the Pensil, the other
as the Hand that moved it. The condition of a Creature is too mean to have the
communications of the Divine Essence, the true Impressions of his Righteousness
and Goodness we are only capable of. It Is only in those moral Perfections we
are said to resemble God. The Devils, those impure and ruined Sp^rits, are
nearer to him in strength and knowledge than we are; yet in regard of that
natural and intellectual Perfection, never counted like him, but at the
greatest distance from him, because at the greatest distance from his Purity.
God values not a natural Might, nor an acute Understanding, nor vouchsafes such
Perfections the glorious Title of that of his Image. Eugub. (...) de perenni
Philos. Lib. 6. cap 6.
Plutarch says, God is angry with those that imitate his Thunder or Lightning,
his works of Majesty, but delighted with those that imitate his Virtue. In this
only we can never incur any reproof from him, but for falling short of him and
his glory. Had Adam endeavored after an imitation of this, instead of that of
Divine Knowledge, he had escaped his fall, and preserved his standing; And had
Lucifer wished himself like God in this, as well as his Dominion, he had still
been a glorious Angel, instead of being now a ghastly Devil: To reach after a
Union with the Supreme Being in regard of holiness, is the only generous and
commendable Ambition.

2. This is the prime way of honoring God. We do not so glorify God by
elevated Admirations, or eloquent Expressions, or pompous Services of him, as
when we aspire to a conversing with him with unstained Spirits, and live to him
in living like him. The Angels are not called holy for applauding his Purity,
but conforming to it. The more perfect any Creature is in the rank of Beings,
the more is the Creator honored; As it is more for the honor of God to create
an Angel or Man, than a mere Animal; because there are in such, clearer
Characters of Divine power and goodness, than in those that are Inferior. The
more perfect any Creature is morally, the more is God glorified by that
Creature; it is a real declaration that God is the best and most amiable Being;
that nothing besides him is valuable, and worthy to be the Object of our
imitation. It Is a greater honoring of him, than the highest acts of Devotion,
and the most religious bodily Exercise, or the singing this Song of Moses in
the Text, with a triumphant spirit. As it is more the honor of a Father to be
imitated in his Virtues by his Son, than to have all the glavering
Commendations by the Tongue or Pen of a vicious and debauched Child. By this we
honor him in that Perfection which is dearest to him, and counted by him as
the chiefest glory of his Nature. God seems to accept the glorifying this
Attribute, as if it were a real addition to that holiness which is infinite in
his Nature, and because infinite, cannot admit of any increase: And therefore
the word sanctified is used instead of glorified. Isa. 8.13. Sanctify the Lord
of Hosts himself, and let him be your fear, and let him be your dread. And Isa.
29.23. They shall sanctify the holy One of Jacob, and fear the God of Israel.
This sanctification of God is by the fear of him, which signifies in the
Language of the Old Testament, a reverence of him, and a righteousness before
him. He does not say, when he would have his Power or Wisdom glorified, empower
me, or make me wise; but when he would have holiness glorified by the Creature,
it is sanctify me; that is, manifest the purity of my Nature by the holiness of
your lives: But he expresses it in such a term, as if it were an addition to
this infinite Perfection; so acceptable it is to him, as if it were a
contribution from his Creature for the enlarging an Attribute so pleasing to
him, and so glorious in his Eye. It Is as much as in the Creature lies, a
preserving the life of God, since this Perfection is his Life; and that he
would as soon part with his Life as part with his Purity. It keeps up the
Reputation of God in the World, and attracts others to a love of him; whereas
unworthy carriages defame God in the eyes of men, and bring up an ill report of
him, as if he were such a one as those that profess him, and walk unsutably to
their Profession, appear to be.

3. This is the excellency and beauty of a creature The title of beauty is
given to it in Psalm. 110.3. beauties in the plural number, as comprehending in
it all other beauties whatsoever. What is a Divine excellency can not be a
Creatures Deformity: The natural beauty of it is a representation of the
Divinity; and a holy man ought to esteem himself excellent, in being such in
his measure as his God is, and puts his principal felicity in the possession of
the same purity in Truth. This is the refined Complexion of the Angels that
stand before his Throne. The Devils lost their comeliness when they fell from
it. It was the honor of the humane Nature of our Savior, not only to be
united to the Deity, but to be sanctified by it. He was fairer than all the
Children of men, because he had a holiness above the Children of men: Grace was
poured into his lips, Psalm. 45.2. It was the Jewel of the reasonable Nature in
paradise: Conformity to God was man's original happiness in his created state,
and what was naturally so, cannot but be immutably so in its own Nature. The
beauty of every copyed thing consists in its likeness to the Original: Every
thing has more of loveliness, as it has greater impressions of its first
Pattern: In this regard holiness has more of beauty on it, than the whole
Creation, because it partakes of a greater excellency of God than the Sun,
Moon, and Stars No greater glory can be, than to be a conspicuous and visible
Image of the invisible, and holy, and blessed God. As this is the splendour of
all the Divine Attributes, so it is the flower of all a Christians Graces, the
Crown of all Religion: It Is the glory of the Spirit. In this regard the Kings
Daughter is said to be all glorious within Psalm. 45.13.
. It Is more excellent than the soul itself, since the greatest soul is but a
deformed piece without it: (A Diamond without luster Vaughan p. 4, 5.
.) What are the noble faculties of the Soul without it, but as a curious rusty
Watch, a delicate heap of Disorder and confusion? It Is impossible there can be
beauty, where th^re are a multitude of spots and wrinkles that blemish a
Countenance Ephesians. 5.27.
. It can never be in its true brightness, but when it is perfect in Purity,
when it regains what it was possessed of by Creation, and dispossessed of by
the fall, and recovers its primitive temper. We are not so beautiful by being
the work of God, as by having a stamp of God upon us. Worldly greatness may
make men honorable in the sight of creeping worms. Soft lives, ambitious
reaches, luxurious pleasures, and a pompous Religion render no man excellent
and noble in the sight of God: This is not the excellency and nobility of the
Deity which we are bound to resemble: Other lines of a Divine Image must be
drawn in us to render us truly excellent.

4. It Is our life. What is the life of God, is truly the life of a rational
Creature Amirald. in Heb. p. 101, 102.
. The life of the body consists not in the perfection of its Members, and the
integrity of its Organs, these remain when the body becomes a Carcass; but in
the presence of the Soul, and its vigorous animation of every part, to perform
the distinct offices belonging to each of them. The life of the Soul consists
not in its being, or spiritual substance, or the excellency of its Faculties of
understanding and will, but in the moral and becoming operations of them. The
spirit is only life because of righteousness Romans 8.10.
. The Faculties are turned by it, to acquit themselves in their functions,
according to the will of God; the absence of this does not only deform the
Soul, but in a sort annihilate it, in regard of its true essence and end: Grace
gives a Christian being, and a want of it is the want of a true being, Cor.
1.15.10. When Adam divested himself of his original righteousness, he came
under the force of the threatening, in regard of a spiritual death: Every person
is morally dead whiles he lives an unholy life 1. Tim. 5, 6.
. What life is to the body, that is righteousness to the Spirit; and the
greater measure of holiness it has, the more of life it has, because it is in
a greater nearness, and partakes more fully of the fountain of life. Is not
that the most worthy life, which God makes most account of, without which his
life could not be a pleasant and blessed life, but a life worse than death?
What a miserable life is that of the men of the World, that are carried with
greedy inclinations to all manner of unrighteousness, whither their interests
or their lusts invite them? The most beautiful body is a Carcass, and the most
honorable person has but a brutish life Psalm. 49.20.
; miserable Creatures when their life shall be extinct without a Divine
rectitude, when all other things will vanish as the shadows of the night at the
appearance of the Sun.

Holiness is our life.

5. It Is this only fits us for Communion with God. Since it is our beauty and
our life, without it, what Communion can an excellent God have with deformed
Creatures, a living God with dead Creatures? Without Holiness none shall see
God, Heb. 12.14. The Creature must be stripped of his Unrighteousness, or God of
his Purity, before they can come together. Likeness is the ground of Communion
and of Delight in it: The opposition between God and unholy Souls, is as great
as that between light and darkness 1 John 1.6.
. Divine fruition is not so much by a union of Presence, as a union of Nature.
Heaven is not so much an outward, as an inward life; the foundation of Glory is
laid in Grace; a resemblance to God is our vital happiness, without which the
Vision of God would not be so much as a cloudy and shadowy happiness, but
rather a torment than a felicity; unless we be of a like nature to God, we
cannot have a pleasing fruition of him. Some Philosophers think, that if our
Bodies were of the same nature with the Heavens, of an Ethereal Substance, the
nearness to the Sun would cherish, not scorch us. Were we partakers of a Divine
nature, we might enjoy God with delight; whereas remaining in our unlikeness to
him, we cannot think of him, and approach to him without terror. As soon as
sin had stripped man of the Image of God, he was an Exile from the comfortable
presence of God, unworthy for God to hold any correspondence with: He can no
more delight in a defiled person, than a man can take a Toad into intimate
converse with him; he would hereby discredit his own Nature, and justify our
Impurity. The holiness of a Creature only prepares him for an eternal
conjunction with God in glory. Enoch's walking with God, was the cause of his
being so soon wafted to the place of a full fruition of him; he has as much
delight in such, as in Heaven it self; one is his Habitation as well as the
other: The one is his habitation of Glory, and the other is the house of his
Pleasure: If he dwell in Zion, it must be a holy Mountain Joel 3.17.
, and the Members of Zion must be upheld in their rectitude and integrity,
before they be set before the face of God for ever Psalm. 41.12.
. Such are styled his Jewels, his Portion, as if he lived upon them, as a man
upon his Inheritance. As God cannot delight in us, so neither can we delight in
God without it. We must purify our selves as he is pure, if we expect to see
him as he is in the comfortable glory and beauty of his Nature 1 John 3.2, 3.
, else the sight of God would be terrible and troublesome: We cannot be
satisfied with the likeness of God at the Resurrection, unless we have a
righteousness wherewith to behold his face Psalm. 17.15.
. It Is a vain imagination in any to think that Heaven can be a place of
happiness to him, in whose eye the Beauty of Holiness, which fills and adorns
it, is an unlovely thing: Or that any can have a satisfaction in that Divine
Purity which is loathsome to him in the imitations of it. We cannot enjoy him,
unless we resemble him; nor take any pleasure in him if we were with him,
without something of likeness to him.

Holiness fits us for Communion with God.

6. We can have no evidence of our Election and Adoption without it. Conformity
to God in Purity, is the fruit of electing Love, Ephesians. 1.4. He has chosen us
that we should be holy. The goodness of the Fruit evidenceth the nature of the
Root: This is the Seal that assures us the Patent is the Authentic Grant of
the Prince. Whatsoever is holy, speaks itself to be from God; and whosoever is
holy, speaks himself to belong to God. This is the only evidence that we are
born of God 1 John 2.29.
. The subduing our souls to him, the forming us into a resemblance to himself,
is a more certain sign we belong to him, than if we had with Isaiah seen his
glory in the Vision with all his train of Angels about him. This justifies us
to be the seed of God, when he has as it were taken a slip from his own
Purity, and engrafted it in our Spirits: He can never own us for his Children
without his mark, the stamp of holiness. The Devils stamp is none of Gods
Badge. Our spiritual extraction from him is but pretended, unless we do things
worthy of so illustrious a Birth, and becoming the honor of so great a Father:
What evidence can we else have of any child-like love to God, since the proper
act of love is to imitate the Object of our Affections?

And that we may be in some measure like to God in this excellent Perfection;

1. Let us be often viewing and ruminating on the holiness of God, especially
as discovered in Christ: It Is by a believing meditation on him, that we are
changed into the same image Cor. 3.18.
. We can think often of nothing that is excellent in the World, but it draws
our Faculties to some kind of suitable operation; and why should not such an
excellent Idea of the holiness of God in Christ perfect our understandings, and
awaken all the powers of our Souls to be formed to actions worthy of him? A
Painter employed in the limning some excellent Piece, has not only his Pattern
before his eyes, but his eye frequently upon the Pattern, to possess his fancy
to draw forth an exact resemblance. He that would express the Image of God,
must imprint upon his Mind the purity of his Nature; Cherish it in his
thoughts, that the excellent beauty of it may pass from his Understanding to
his Affections, and from his Affections to his Practice. How can we arise to a
conformity to God in Christ, whose most holy nature we seldom glance upon, and
more rarely sink our Souls into the depths of it by meditation? Be frequent in
the meditation of the holiness of God.

2. Let us often exercise our selves in acts of love to God, because of this
Perfection. The more adoring thoughts we have of God, the more delightfully we
shall aspire to, and more ravishingly catch after any thing, that may promote
the more full draught of his Divine Image in our hearts. What we intensly
affect, we desire to be as near to as we can, and to be that very thing rather
than our selves. All imitations of others, arise from an intense love to their
persons or excellency. When the Soul is ravished with this Perfection of God, it
will desire to be united with it; to have it drawn in it, more than to have its
own being continued to it. It will desire and delight in its own being, in
order to this heavenly and spiritual work. The impressions of the Nature of God
upon it, and the imitations of the Nature of God by it, will be more desirable
than any natural perfection whatsoever. The Will in loving is rendered like the
object beloved; is turned into its nature Amor naturam induit and mores imbibit
rei amat^e.
, and imbibes its qualities. The Soul by loving God, will find it self more and
more transformed into the Divine Image, whereas slighted ensamples are never
thought worthy of Imitation.

3. Let us make God our end. Every man's mind forms itself to a likeness to that
which it makes its chief end. An earthy Soul is as drossy as the Earth he gapes
for: An ambitious Soul is as elevated as the honor he reaches at: The same
Characters that are upon the thing aimed at, will be imprinted upon the Spirit
of him that aims at it. When God and his glory are made our end, we shall find
a silent likeness pass in upon us; the Beauty of God will by degrees enter upon
our Souls.

4. In every deliberate action, let us reflect upon the Divine Purity as a
pattern. Let us examine whither any thing we are prompted unto, bear an
impression of God upon it: Whether it looks like a thing, that God himself
would do in that case, were he in our Natures and in our Circumstances. See
whether it has the livery of God upon it, how congruous it is to his Nature:
whether, and in what manner the holiness of God can be glorified thereby; and
let us be industrious in all this: For can such an imitation be easy which is
resisted by the constant assaults of the Flesh, which is discouraged by our own
ignorance, and deprest by our faint and languishing Desires after it? O! happy
we, if there were such a Heart in us.

4. A fourth Exhortation. If holiness be a Perfection belonging to the Nature
of God; then, where there is some weak conformity to the holiness of God, let
us labor to grow up in it, and breath after fuller measures of it. The more
likeness we have to him, the more love we shall have from him. Communion will
be suitable to our imitation; his love to himself in his Essence, will cast out
beams of love to himself in his Image. If God loves holiness in a lower
measure, much more will he love it in a higher degree, because then his Image
is more illustrious and beautiful, and comes nearer to the lively lineaments of
his own Infinite Purity. Perfection in any thing is more lovely and amiable
than Imperfection in any state; and the nearer any thing arrives to Perfection,
the further are those things separated from it which might Cool an affection to
it. An increase in holiness is attended with a manifestation of his love, Joh.
14.21. He that has my Commandments, and keeps them, he it is that loves me,
and he shall be loved of my Father, and I will love him, and I will manifest my
self to him: It Is a testimony of love to God, and God will not be behind hand
with the Creature in kindness: He loves a holy man for some resemblance to him
in his Nature; but when there is an abounding in Sanctified dispositions
suitable to it, there is an increase of savor: The more we resemble the
Original, the more shall we enjoy the blessedness of that Original: As any
partake more of the Divine likeness, they partake more of the Divine happiness.

5. Exhortation. Let us carry our selves holily in a spiritual manner in all
our religious approaches to God; Psalm. 93.5. Holiness becomes thy house, O
Lord, for ever. This Attribute should work in us a deep and reverential respect
to God. This is the reason rendered why we should worship at his footstool, in
the lowest posture of humility prostrate before him, because he is holy Psalm.
99.5.
. Shoes must be put off from our feet, Exodus 3.5. that is, Lusts from our
Affections, every thing that our souls are clogged and bemired with, as the
Shoe is with dirt. He is not willing we should offer to him an impure soul,
mired hearts, rotten carcasses, putrified in vice, rotten in iniquity: Our
Services are to be as free from profaneness, as the sacrifices of the Law were
to be free from sickliness or any blemish. Whatsoever is contrary to his Purity
is abhorred by him, and unlovely in his sight, and can meet with no other
success at his hands, but a disdainful turning away both of his eye and ear
Isa. 1.15.
. Since he is an Immense purity, he will reject from his presence, and from
having any communion with him, all that which is not conformable to him; as
light chases away the darkness of the night, and will not mix with it. If we
stretch out our hands toward him, we must put iniquity far away from us Job.
11.13, 14.
; the fruits of all Service will else drop off to nothing. Then shall the
offering of Judah and Jerusalem be pleasant to the Lord; When? when the heart
is purged by Christ sitting as a purifier of silver Mal. 3.3, 4.
. Not all the Incense of the Indies yield him so sweet a Savor, as one
spiritual act of worship from a heart estranged from the vileness of the World,
and ravished with an affection to, and a desire of imitating the Puririty of his
Nature.

6. Exhortation. Let us address for holiness to God the fountain of it. As he
is the Author of bodily life in the Creature, so he is the Author of his own
life, the life of God in the soul. By his holiness he makes men holy, as the
Sun by his light enlightens the Air. He is not only the Holy One, but our holy
One Isa. 43.15.
: The Lord that sanctifies us, Levit. 20.8. As he has mercy to pardon us, so
he has holiness to purify us, the excellency of being a Sun to comfort us and
a Shield to protect us, giving Grace and Glory Psalm 84.11.
. Grace whereby we may have Communion with him to our comfort, and strength
against our spiritual enemies for our defense; Grace as our preparatory to
glory, and Grace growing up till it ripen in Glory. He only can mould us into a
Divine frame. The great Original can only derive the excellency of his own
Nature to us. We are too low, too lame to lift up our selves to it; too much in
love with our own Deformity, to admit of this Beauty without a heavenly power
inclining our desires for it, our affections to it, our willingness to be
partakers of it. He can as soon set the beauty of Holiness in a deformed heart,
as the beauty of Harmony in a confused mass when he made the World. He can as
soon cause the light of Purity to rise out of the darkness of Corruption, as
frame glorious spirits out of the insufficiency of nothing. His beauty does not
decay, he has as much in himself now as he had in his eternity: He is as ready
to impart it, as he was at the Creation; only we must wait upon him for it, and
be content to have it by small measures and degrees. There is no fear of our
sanctification, if we come to him as a God of holiness, since he is a God of
peace, and the breach made by Adam is repaired by Christ, These. 1.5.23. And the
very God of peace sanctify you wholly, etc. He restores the sanctifying spirit
which was withdrawn by the Fall, as he is a God pacified and his holiness
righted by the Redeemer. The beauty of it appears in its smiles upon a man in
Christ, and is as ready to impart it self to the reconciled Creature, as before
Justice was to punish the rebellious one. He loves to send forth the streams of
this perfection into created Channels, more than any else. He did not design the
making the Creature so powerful as he might, because power is not such an
excellency in its own Nature, but as it is conducted and managed by some other
excellency. Power is indifferent and may be used well or ill according as the
possessor of it is righteous or unrighteous. God makes not the Creature so
powerful as he might, but he delights to make the Creature that waits upon him
as holy as it can be, beginning it in this world and ripening it in the other:
It Is from him we must expect it, and from him that we must beg it, and draw
Arguments from the holiness of his Nature to move him to work holiness in our
Spirits: We cannot have a stronger plea. Purity is the favorite of his own
Nature; and delights itself in the resemblances of it in the Creature. Let us
also go to God, to preserve what he has already wrought and imparted. As we
cannot attain it, so we cannot maintain it without him. God gave it Adam, and
he lost it: When God gives it us, we shall lose it without his influencing and
preserving Grace: The chanel will be without a Stream, if the Fountain do not
bubble it forth; and the streams will vanish, if the Fountain does not
constantly supply them. Let us apply our selves to him for holiness as he is a
God glorious in holiness: By this we honor God, and advantage our selves.

A DISCOURSE UPON THE Goodness of God.
Mark 10.18. And Jesus said unto him, Why call thou me good? There is none
good but one, that is God.


THE words are part of a Reply of our Savior to the Young-mans Petition to
him: A certain Person came in haste, running, as being eager for satisfaction,
to entreat his directions, what he should do, to inherit Everlasting Life; The
Person is described only in general, verse. 17. There came one, A certain Man:
But Luke describes him by his Dignity, Luke 18.18.
A certain Ruler; One of Authority among the Jews. He desires of him an Answer
to a legal Question, [What he should do?] Or, as Matthew has it, What good
thing shall I do, that I may have Eternal Life? Mat. 19.16.
He imagined Everlasting Felicity was to be purchased by the works of the Law;
He had not the least Sentiments of Faith: Christ's Answer implies, there was no
hopes of the happiness of another World by the works of the Law, unless they
were perfect, and answerable to every Divine Precept. He does not seem to have
any ill, or hypocritical intent in his Address to Christ; not to tempt him, but
to be instructed by him. He seems to come with an ardent desire, to be
satisfied in his Demand; he performed a solemn act of Respect to him, he
kneeled to him, (...), prostrated himself upon the ground; Besides Christ is
said, verse. 21. to love him, which had been inconsistent with the knowledge
Christ had of the hearts and thoughts of Men, and the abhorrence he had of
Hypocrites, had he been only a Counterfeit in this Question.

But the first Reply Christ makes to him, respects the Title of Good Master,
which this Ruler gave him in his Salutation.

1. Some think, that Christ hereby would draw him to an acknowledgment of him
as God; You acknowledge me good, How come you to salute me with so great a
Title, since you do not afford it to your greatest Doctors? Lightfoot in loc.
observes, that the Title of Rabbi bone is not in all the Talmud. You must own
me to be God, since you own me to be good: Goodness being a Title only due and
properly belonging to the Supreme Being.

If you take me for a Common-man, with what Conscience can you salute me in a
manner proper to God? Since no Man is good, no, not one, but the heart of Man
is evil continually. The Arrians used this place, to back their denying the
Deity of Christ: Because, say they, He did not acknowledge himself good,
therefore he did not acknowledge himself God. Erasm. in loc.
But he does not here deny his Deity, but reproves him for calling him Good,
when he had not yet confessed him to be more than a Man. Augustine.
You behold my Flesh, but you consider not the fullness of my Deity; If you
account me Good, account me God, and imagine me not to be a simple and a mere
Man. He disowns not his own Deity, but allures the Young Man to a confession of
it. Why call'st thou me good, since thou do not discover any apprehensions of
my being more than a Man? Though thou come with a greater Esteem to me, than
is commonly entertained of the Doctors of the Chair, why do thou own me to
(...), unless thou own me to be God? If Christ had denied himself in this
Speech to be good, he had rather entertained this Person with a frown and sharp
reproof for giving him a Title due to God alone, than have received him with
that, courtesy, and complaisance as he did Hensius in Matthew.
. Had he said there is none good but the Father, he had excluded himself; but
in saying, there is none good but God, he comprehends himself.

2. Others say, that Christ had no intention to draw him to an acknowledg^
(...) of his Deity, but only asserts his Divine Authority, or Mission from God.
Calvin in loc.
For which interpretation Maldonat calls Calvin an Arrianizer. He does not here
assert the Essence of his Deity, but the Authority of his Doctrine: As if he
should have said, you do without ground give me the Title of good, unless you
believe I have a Divine Commission for what I declare and act. Many do think me
an Impostor, an Enemy of God, and a friend to Devils; you must firmly believe,
that I am not so as your Rulers report me, but that I am sent of God, and
authorized by him; you cannot else give me the Title of good, but of wicked.
And the reason they give for this interpretation, is, because it is a question,
whether any of the Apostles understood him at this time, to be God, which seems
to have no great strength in it; since not only the Devil had publicly owned
him, to be the Holy One of God Luke 4.34.
, but John the Baptist had born Record, that he was the Son of God Joh. 1.32,
34.
; and before this time Peter had confessed him openly, in the hearing of the rest
of the Disciples, that he was the Christ the Son of the living God Mat. 16.16.
. But I think Paraeus his interpretation is best, which takes in both those;
Either you are serious or deceitful in this Address; if you are serious, Why do
you call me good, and make bold to fix so great a Title upon one you have no
higher thoughts of than of a mere Man? Christ takes occasion from hence, to
assert God to be only and Sovereignly good; Trismegist. Paemand. c^p. 2.
There is none good but God. God only has the honor of absolute goodness, and
none but God merits the name of good. Eugubin de Peren. Philos. lib. 5. cap. 9.
A Heathen could say much after the same manner: All other things are far from
the nature of good; call none else good but God, for this would be a profane
Error: Other things are only good in opinion, but have not the true Substance
of Goodness: He is Good in a more excellent way, than any Creature can be
denominated Good.

1. God is only Originally Good, Good of himself. All Created Goodness is a
Rivulet from this Fountain, but Divine Goodness has no Spring; God depends
upon no other for his Goodness, he has it in, and of himself: Man has no
Goodness from himself, God has no Goodness from without himself: His Goodness
is no more derived from another, than his Being: If he were Good by any
External thing, that thing must be in being before him, or after him; If before
him, he was not then himself from Eternity; If after him, he was not Good in
himself from Eternity. The End of his Creating things then, was not to confer a
Goodness upon his Creatures, but to partake of a Goodness from his Creatures.
God is Good by and in himself, since all things are only Good by him; and all
that Goodness which is in Creatures, is but the breathing of his own Goodness
upon them. They have all their loveliness from the same Hand they have their
Being from. Though by Creation God was declared Good, yet he was not made Good
by any, or by all the Creatures. He partakes of none, but all things partake of
him. He is so Good that he gives all, and receives nothing; Only Good because
nothing is Good but by him: Nothing has a Goodness but from him.

2. God only is Infinitely Good.

A boundless Goodness that knows no limits, a Goodness as infinite as his
Essence, not only Good, but best; not only Good, but Goodness it self, the
Supreme unconceivable Goodness. All things else are but little Particles of
God, small Sparks from this Immense Flame, Sips of Goodness to this Fountain.
Nothing that is good by his influence, can equal him, who is good by himself:
Derived goodness, can never equal Primitive goodness. Divine Goodness
communicates it self to a vast number of Creatures in various degrees; to
Angels, Glorified Spirits, Men on Earth, to every Creature; and when it has
communicated all that the present World is capable of, there is still less
displayed, than left to enrich another World. All possible Creatures are not
capable of exhausting the Wealth, and Treasures, that Divine Bounty is filled
with.

3. God is only perfectly good, because only Infinitely good.

He is good without indigence, because he has the whole Nature of goodness,
not only some beams that may admit of increase of degree. As in him is the
whole Nature of Entity, so in him is the whole Nature of Excellency. As nothing
has an absolute perfect Being but God, so nothing has an absolutely perfect
goodness but God. As the Sun has a perfection of heat in it, but what is
warmed by the Sun, is but imperfectly hot, and equals not the Sun in that
perfection of heat, wherewith it is naturally endued. The goodness of God is
the measure and rule of goodness in every thing else.

4. God only is Immutably good.

Other things may be perpetually good by Supernatural Power, but not Immutably
good in their own Nature. Other things are not so good, but they may be bad;
God is so good, that he cannot be bad. Eugubin. Peren. Philos. lib. 5. cap. 9.
p. 97. col. 1.
It was the Speech of a Philosopher, That it was a hard thing to find a good
Man, yea impossible; but though it were possible to find a good Man, he would
be good but for some moment, or a short time: For though he should be good at
this instant, it was above the Nature of Man to continue in a habit of
goodness, without going awry and warping. But the goodness of God endures for
ever Psalm. 52.1.
. God always glitters in goodness, as the Sun, which the Heathens called the
visible Image of the Divinity, does with light. There is not such a perpetual
light in the Sun, as there is a fullness of goodness in God; no variableness in
him, as he is the Father of Lights. 1 James 17.


Before I come to the Doctrine, that is the chief scope of the words, some
remarks may be made upon the Young-mans Question and Carriage, What must I do,
to inherit Eternal Life?

1. The opinion of gaining Eternal Life by the outward observation of the Law,
will appear very unsatisfactory to an inquisitive Conscience. This Ruler
affirmed, and certainly did confidently believe, that he had fulfilled the Law:
Verse. 20.
All this have I observed from my youth; yet he had not any full satisfaction
in his own Conscience; his heart misgave, and started upon some Sentiments in
him, that something else was required, and what he had done might be too weak,
too short to shoot Heavens lock for him. And to that purpose he comes to
Christ, to receive Instructions for the piercing up whatsoever was defective.
Whosoever will consider the Nature of God, and the Relation of a Creature,
cannot with reason think, that Eternal Life was of it self due from God as a
Recompense to Adam, had he persisted in a State of Innocence: Who can think so
great a Reward due, for having performed that, which a Creature in that
Relation was obliged to do? Can any Man think another obliged to convey an
Inheritance of 1000 l. per annum upon his payment of a few Farthings, unless
any compact appears to support such a conceit? And if it were not to be
expected in the integrity of Nature, but only from the goodness of God, how can
it be expected since the Revolt of Man, and the Universal Deluge of Natural
Corruption? God owes nothing to the holiest Creature; what he gives is a
present from his Bounty, not the Reward of the Creatures Merit. And the Apostle
defies all Creatures from the greatest to the least, from the tallest Angel to
the lowest Shrub, to bring out any one Creature, that has first given to God;
Romans 11.35.
Who has first given to him; And it shall be Recompensed to him again? The
Duty of the Creature, and Gods gift of Eternal Life is not a Bargain and Sale.

God gives to the Creature, he does not properly repay: For he that repays has
received something of an equal value, and worth before. When God Crowns Angels
and Men, he bestows upon them purely what is his own, not what is theirs by
Merit and Natural Obligation: Though indeed what God gives by virtue of a
Promise made before, is upon the performance of the Condition due by gracious
Obligation. God was not indebted to Man in Innocence, but every Man's Conscience
may now mind him, that he is not upon the same level as in the State of
Integrity; And that he cannot expect any thing from God, as the Salary of his
Merit, but the free gift of Divine Liberality. Amyraut Morale.
Man is obliged to the practice of what is good, both from the Excellency of
the Divine Precepts, and the Duty he owes to God, and cannot without some
Declaration from God, hope for any other Reward, than the satisfaction of
having well acquitted himself.

2. It Is the Disease of Humane Nature since its Corruption, to hope for Eternal
Life by the tenor of the Covenant of Works.

Though this Rulers Conscience was not thoroughly satisfied with what he had
done, but imagined he might for all that, fall short of Eternal Life, yet he
still huggs the imagination of obtaining it by doing, Verse. 17.
What shall I do, that I may inherit Eternal Life? This is natural to Corrupted
Man: Cain thought to be accepted for the sake of his Sacrifice; and when he
found his mistake, he was so weary of seeking Happiness by doing, that he would
court Misery by Murdering. All Men set too high a value upon their own
Services: Sinful Creatures would fain make God a Debtor to them, and be
Purchasers of Felicity; They would not have it conveyed to them by Gods
Sovereign Bounty, but by an obligation of Justice upon the value of their
Works. The Heathens thought God would treat Men according to the Merit of their
Services; and it is no wonder they should have this Sentiment, when the Jews
Educated by God in a wiser School, were wedded to that Notion. The Pharisees
were highly fond of it, it was the only Argument they used in Prayer, for
Divine Blessing: You have one of them boasting of his frequency in Fasting, and
his exactness in paying his Tithes Luke 19.12.
; as if God had been beholding to him, and could not without manifest wrong
deny him his demand. And Paul confesses it to be his own Sentiment before his
Conversion, he accounted this Righteousness of the Law gain to him Phil. 3.7.
; he thought by this to make his Market with God. The whole Nation of the Jews
affected it, Romans 10.3. Going about to Establish their own Righteousness.
compassing Sea and Land to make out a Righteousness of their own, as the
Pharisees did to make Proselytes.

The Papists follow their Steps, and Dispute for Justification by the Merit of
Works, and find out another Key of Works of Supererogation, to unlock Heavens
Gate, than what ever the Scripture informed us of: It Is from hence also, that
Men are so ready to make Faith as a Work, the cause of our Justification. Man
foolishly thinks he has enough to set up himself after he has proved
Bankrupt, and lost all his Estate. This Imagination is born with us, and the
best Christians may find some sparks of it in themselves, when there are
springings up of joy in their Hearts, upon the more close performance of one
Duty than of another, as if they had wiped off their Scores, and given God a
satisfaction for their former neglects. We have forsaken all and followed thee,
was the boast of his Disciples: What shall we have therefore? was a Branch of
this Root Mat. 19.27.
. Eternal Life is a gift not by any Obligation of Right, but an abundance of
goodness; it is owing not to the dignity of our Works, but the magnificent
Bounty of the Divine Nature, and must be sued for by the Title of God's
Promise, not by the Title of the Creatures Services. We may observe,

3. How insufficient are some Assents to Divine Truth, and some Expressions of
Affection to Christ, without the Practice of Christian Precepts. This Man
Addressed to Christ with a profound Respect, acknowledging him more than an
ordinary Person, with a more Reverential Carriage than we read any of his
Disciples paid to him in the day of his Flesh; he fell down at his Feet, kissed
his Knees, as the Custom was, when they would testify the great Respect, they
had to any eminent Person, especially to their Rabbis. All this some think to
be included in the word (...); Verse. 17. Lightfoot in loc.
He seems to acknowledge him the Messiah by giving him the Title of Good, a
Title they did not give to their Doctors of the Chair; He breaths out his
opinion, that he was able to instruct him beyond the ability of the Law; He
came with a more than ordinary Affection to him, and expectation of advantage
from him, evident by his departing sad, when his expectations were frustrated
by his own perversity; it was a sign he had a high esteem of him, from whom he
could not part without marks of his Grief. What was the cause of his refusing
the instructions, he pretended such an affection to receive? He had Possessions
in the World. How soon do a few drops of Wordly advantages quench the first
Sparks of an ill grounded love to Christ? How vain is a complemental and
cringing devotion, without a supreme preference of God, and valuation of Christ
above every outward allurement? We may observe this,

4. We should never admit any thing to be ascribed to us, which is proper to
God. Why call thou me Good? There is none Good but One, that is God. If you
do not acknowledge me God, ascribe not to me the Title of Good. It takes off
all those Titles which fawning Flatterers give to Men, Mighty, Invincible to
Princes, Holiness to the Pope. We call one another Good, without considering
how Evil; and Wise, without considering how Foolish; Mighty, without
considering how Weak; and Knowing without considering how Ignorant. No man but
has more of Wickedness than Goodness; of Ignorance than Knowledge; of Weakness
than Strength. God is a jealous God of his own Honor, he will not have the
Creature share with him in his Royal Titles. It Is a part of Idolatry to give
Men the Titles which are due to God; a kind of a Worship of the Creature
together with the Creator. Worms will not stand out, but assault Herod in his
Purple, when he Usurps the Prerogative of God; and prove stiff and invincible
Vindicators of their Creators Honor, when summoned to Arms by the Creators Word
12 Acts 22.23.
.

The Observation which I intend to prosecute is this:

Pure and Perfect Goodness is only the Royal Prerogative of God: Goodness is a
choice Perfection of the Divine Nature.

This is the true and genuine Character of God; He is Good, He is Goodness,
Good in Himself, Good in his Essence, Good in the Highest Degree, possessing
whatsoever is Comely, Excellent, Desirable; the Highest Good, because the First
Good; whatsoever is perfect Goodness, is GOD; whatsoever is truly Goodness in
any Creature, is a resemblance of God Ficin. in Dionys. de divin. nom. cap 511.
. All the Names of God are comprehended in this one of Good. All Gifts, all
variety of Goodness, are contained in him as one common Good. He is the
efficient cause of all Good, by an overflowing Goodness of his Nature; He
refers all things to Himself as the end, for the representation of his own
Goodness; Truly God is Good Psalm. 73.1.
. Certainly it is an undoubted Truth, it is written in his Works of Nature; and
his Acts of Grace Exodus 34.6.
, He is abundant in Goodness.

And every thing is a Memorial, not of some few Sparks, but of his greater
Goodness Psalm. 145.7.
. This is often celebrated in the Psalms, and Men invited more than once, to
Sing forth the Praises of it Psalm. 107.8.15.21.31.
. It may better be admired than sufficiently spoken of or thought of, as it
Merits. It Is discovered in all his Works, as the Goodness of a Tree in all its
Fruits; it is easy to be seen, and more pleasant to be contemplated. In General,

1. All Nations in the World have acknowledged GOD Good, (...) was one of the
Names the Platonists expressed him by, and Good, and God are almost the same
words in our Language. All as readily consented in the Notion of his Goodness,
as in that of his Deity. Whatsoever divisions or disputes there were among them
in the other Perfections of God, they all agreed in this without dispute, says
Synesius Empedocles
. One calls him Venus, in regard of his Loveliness Hesiod.
. Another calls him (...), Love, as being the Band which ties all things
together. No Perfection of the Divine Nature is more eminently, nor more
speedily visible in the whole Book of the Creation than this. His Greatness
shines not in any part of it, where his Goodness does not as gloriously
glister. Whatsoever is the Instrument of his Work, as his Power; Whatsoever is
the Orderer of his Work, as his Wisdom; yet nothing can be Adored as the Motive
of his Work, but the Goodness of his Nature. This only could induce him, to
resolve to Create: His Wisdom then steps in, to dispose the Methods of what he
resolved; And his Power follows to execute, what his Wisdom has disposed, and
his Goodness designed. His Power in making, and his Wisdom in ordering, are
subservient to his Goodness; and this Goodness which is the end of the
Creation, is as visible to the Eyes of Men, as legible to the Understanding of
Men, as his Power in forming them, and his Wisdom in tuning them. And as the
Book of Creation, so the Records of his Government must needs acquaint them
with a great part of it, when they have often beheld him, stretching out his
Hand, to supply the Indigent, relieve the Oppressed, and punish the Oppressors,
and give them in their Distresses, what might fill their Hearts with Food and
Gladness. It Is this the Apostle 1 Romans 20, 21.
means by his Godhead, which he links with his Eternity and Power, as clearly
seen in the things that are made, as in a pine Glass. For the invisible things
of him from the Creation of the World, are clearly seen, being understood by
the things that are made, even his Eternal Power and Godhead. The Godhead,
which comprehends the whole Nature of God as discoverable to his Creatures, was
not known, yea was impossible to be known by the Works of Creation. There had
been nothing then reserved to be manifested in Christ. But his Goodness, which
is properly meant there by his Godhead, was as clearly visible as his Power.
The Apostle upbraids them with their Unthankfulness, and argues their
inexcusableness, because the Arm of his Power in Creation made no due
impressions of fear upon their Spirits, nor the Beams of his Goodness wrought
in them sufficient sentiments of Gratitude. Their not glorifying God, was a
contempt of the former, and their not being thankful, was a slight of the
later. God is the Object of Honor, as he is Powerful, and the Object of
Thankfulness properly, as he is bountiful.

All the Idolatry of the Heathens, is a clear testimony of their common
sentiment of the Goodness of God: Since the more eminently useful any person
was in some advantageous Invention for the benefit of Mankind, they thought he
merited a Rank in the number of their Deities. The Italians esteemed Pythagoras
a God because he was (...) Iamblych vit. Pythag. lib. 1. col. 6. p, 43.
: To be Good and Useful, was an Approximation to the Divine Nature: Hence it
was, that when the Lystrians saw a resemblance of the Divine Goodness in the
charitable and miraculous Cure of one of their Crippled Citizens, presently
they mistook Paul and Barnabas for Gods, and inferred from thence their right
to Divine Worship, inquiring into nothing else but the visible Character of
their goodness, and usefulness, to capacitate them for the Honor of a Sacrifice
Acts 14 8, 9, 10, 11.
. Hence it was that they adored those Creatures, that were a common Benefit, as
the Sun, and Moon, which must be founded upon a praeexistent Notion not only of
the Being, but of the Bounty, and Goodness of God, which was naturally
implanted in them, and legible in all Gods Works. And the more beneficial any
thing was to them, and the more sensible advantages they received from it, the
higher station they gave it in the rank of their Idols, and bestowed upon it a
more solemn Worship. An absurd mistake to think every thing that was sensibly
good to them, to be God, clothing himself in such a form, to be adored by
them. And upon this account the Egyptians worshipped God under the figure of
an Ox, and the East Indians in some parts of their Country Deifie a Heyfer,
intimating the Goodness of God as their Nourisher and Preserver, in giving them
Corn, whereof the Ox is an instrument in serving for Plowing, and preparing the
Ground.

2. The Notion of Goodness is inseparable from the Notion of a God.

We cannot own the Existence of God, but we must confess also the Goodness of
his Nature. Hence the Apostle gives to his Goodness the Title of his Godhead,
as if Goodness and Godhead were convertible terms Romans 1.20.
. As it is indissoluby linkt with the Being of a Deity, so it cannot be severed
from the Notion of it: We as soon Undeify him by denying him Good, as by
denying him Great: Optimus, Maximus, the Best, Greatest, was the name whereby
the Romans entitled Him. His Nature is as Good, as it is Majestic; so does the
Psalmist join them Psalm. 145.6, 7.
. I will declare thy Greatness, they shall abundantly utter the memory of thy
great Goodness. They considered his Goodness before his Greatness, in putting
Optimus before Maximus; Greatness without Sweetness, is an unruly and
affrighting Monster in the World; like a vast turbulent Sea, always casting
out Mire, and Dirt. Goodness is the brightness, and loveliness of our
Majestical Creator. To fancy a God without it, is to fancy a miserable, scanty,
narrow-hearted savage God, and so an unlovely, and horrible Being: For he is
not a God that is not Good, he is not a God that is not the highest Good:
Infinite Goodness is more necessary to, and more straightly joined with an
infinite Deity, than infinite Power, and infinite Wisdom: We cannot conceive
him God, unless we conceive him the highest Good, having nothing superior to
Himself in Goodness, as he has nothing Superior to Himself, in Excellency,
and Perfection. No man can possibly form a Notion of God in in his Mind, and
yet form a Notion of something better than God: for whoever thinks any thing
better than God, fancieth a God with some defect: By how much the better he
thinks that thing to be, by so much the more imperfect he makes God in his
thoughts. This Notion of the Goodness of God was so natural, that some
Philosophers and others, being startled at the Evil they saw in the World,
fancied besides a good God, an evil Principle, the Author of all Punishments in
the World. This was ridiculous; for those two must be of equal Power, or one
inferior to the other; If Equal, the Good could do nothing, but the Evil one
would restrain him; and the Evil one could do nothing, but the Good one would
contradict him: So they would be always contending and never conquering: If one
were inferior to the other, then there would be nothing but what that
Superior ordered. Good, if the Good one were Superior, and nothing but Evil,
if the Bad one were Superior. In the prosecution of this let us see, 1. What
this Goodness is. 2. Some Propositions concerning the nature of it. 3. That God
is Good. 4. The manifestation of it, in Creation, Providence, and Redemption.
5. The Use.


1. What this Goodness is?

There is a Goodness of Being, which is the natural perfection of a thing;
There is the Goodness of Will, which is the Holiness, and Righteousness of a
Person; There is the Goodness of the Hand, which we call Liberality, or
Beneficence, a doing good to others.

1. We mean not by this, The Goodness of his Essence, or the Perfection of his
Nature. God is thus Good, because his Nature is infinitely Perfect, He has all
things requisite to the completing of a most Perfect and Sovereign Being. All
Good meets in his Essence, as all Water meets in the Ocean. Under this Notion
all the Attributes of God, which are requisite to so illustrious a Being, are
comprehended. All things that are, have a goodness of being in them, derived to
them by the Power of God, as they are Creatures; so the Devil is good, as he is
a Creature of Gods making: He has a natural goodness, but not a moral
goodness: when he fell from God, he retained his natural goodness as a
Creature; because he did not cease to be, he was not reduced to that nothing,
from whence he was drawn; but he ceased to be morally good, being stripped of his
Righteousness by his Apostasy; as a Creature he was Gods Work, as a Creature
he remains still Gods Work, and therefore as a Creature remains still good, in
regard of his created Being. The more of Being any thing has, the more of this
sort of natural goodness it has; and so the Devil has more of this natural
goodness than Men have; because he has more marks of the Excellency of God
upon him, in regard of the greatness of his knowledge. and the extent of his
power, the largeness of his capacity, and the acuteness of his understanding,
which are natural perfections belonging to the nature of an Angel; though he
has lost his moral perfections. God is Soveraignly, and infinitely Good in
this sort of Goodness. He is unsearchably perfect, Job 11.7.
nothing is wanting to his Essence, that is necessary to the Perfection of it;
yet this is not that which the Scripture expresses under the term of Goodness,
but a Perfection of Gods Nature as related to us, and which he pours forth
upon all his Creatures, as Goodness which flows from this Natural Perfection of
the Deity.

2. Nor is it the same with the Blessedness of God, but something flowing from
his Blessedness. Were he not first infinitely Blessed, and Full in Himself, he
could not be infinitely Good and Diffusive to us; had he not an infinite
abundance in his own Nature, he could not be overflowing to his Creatures.

Had not the Sun a fullness of Light in it self, and the Sea a vastness of
Water, the one could not enrich the World with its Beams, nor the other fill
every Creek with its Waters.

3. Nor is it the same with the Holiness of God. The Holiness of God is the
rectitude of his Nature, whereby he is Pure, and without Spot in himself. The
Goodness of God is the efflux of his Will, whereby he is beneficial to his
Creatures. The Holiness of God is manifest in his rational Creatures; but the
Goodness of God extends to all the Works of his Hands. His Holiness beams most
in his Law, his Goodness reaches to every thing that had a Being from him
Psalm. 145.9.
. The Lord is Good to all. And though he be said in the same Psalm, v. 17. to
be Holy in all his Works, it is to be understood of his Bounty, Bountiful in all
his Works; The Hebrew word signifying both Holy and Liberal, and the Margent
of the Bible reads it Merciful or Bountiful.

4. Nor is this Goodness of God the same with the Mercy of God. Goodness
extends to more Objects than Mercy; Goodness stretches it self out to all the
Works of his Hands; Mercy extends only to a miserable Object; for it is joined
with a sentiment of Pity, occasioned by the Calamity of another. The Mercy of
God is exercised about those that Merit Punishment; the Goodness of God is
exercised upon Objects that have not merited any thing contrary to the acts of
his Bounty. Creation is an act of Goodness, not of Mercy; Providence in
governing some part of the World, is an act of Goodness, not of Mercy Lombard
lib. 1. distinct. 46. p. 286.
. The Heavens, says Austin, need the Goodness of God to govern them, but not
the Mercy of God to relieve them; The Earth is full of the Misery of Man, and
the Compassions of God; but the Heavens need not the Mercy of God to pity them,
because they are not miserable; though they need the Goodness, and Power of God
to sustain them; because as Creatures they are impotent without him. Gods
Goodness extends to the Angels, that kept their standing, and to Man in
Innocence, who in that state stood not in need of Mercy. Goodness and Mercy are
distinct, though Mercy be a Branch of Goodness; There may be a manifestation of
Goodness, though none of Mercy. Some think Christ had been Incarnate, had not
Man fallen: Had it been so, there had been a manifestation of Goodness to our
Nature, but not of Mercy; because Sin had not made our Natures miserable. The
Devils are Monuments of Gods creating Goodness, but not of his Pardoning
Compassions. The Grace of God respects the rational Creature, Mercy the
miserable Creature, Goodness all his Creatures, Brutes, and the senseless
Plants, as well as reasonable Man.

5. By Goodness is meant the Bounty of God. This is the Notion of goodness in
the World; when we say a good Man, we mean either a holy Man in his life, or a
charitable and liberal Man in the management of his Goods. A righteous Man, and
a good Man are distinguished Romans 5.7.
. For scarcely for a righteous Man will one die; yet for a good Man one would
even dare to die. For an innocent Man, one as innocent of the Crime as Himself
would scarce venture his Life; but for a good Man, a liberal tenderhearted
Man, that had been a common Good in the place where he lived, or had done
another as great a benefit as life it self amounts to, a Man out of gratitude
might dare to die. The Goodness of God is his inclination to deal well and
bountifully with his Creatures Coccei. sum. p. 50.
. It Is that whereby he wills, there should be something besides Himself for his
own Glory. God is good in Himself, and to Himself, i. e. highly amiable to
Himself; and therefore some define it a Perfection of God, whereby he loves
himself and his own Excellency; but as it stands in Relation to his Creatures,
it is that Perfection of God, whereby he delights in his Works, and is
beneficial to them. God is the highest Goodness, because he does not act for
his own profit, but for his Creatures welfare, and the manifestation of his own
Goodness. He sends out his Beams, without receiving any addition to himself, or
substantial advantage from his Creatures. It Is from this Perfection that he
loves whatsoever is good, and that is, whatsoever he has made, For every
Creature of God is good 1 Timothy 4.4.
; Every Creature has some Communications from him, which cannot be without
some Affection to them; Every Creature has a Footstep of Divine Goodness upon
it; God therefore loves that goodness in the Creature, else he would not love
himself. Cajetan in secund' secundae Qu. 34. Ar. 3.
God hates no Creature, no not the Devils, and Damned, as Creatures; he is not
an Enemy to them, as they are the Works of his Hands: He is properly an Enemy,
that does simply and absolutely wish Evil to another; but God does not
absolutely wish Evil to the Damned; that Justice that he inflicts upon them,
the deserved Punishment of their Sin, is part of his Goodness, (as shall
afterward be shown.)

This is the most pleasant Perfection of the Divine Nature; His Creating Power
amazes us, His Conducting Wisdom astonisheth us, His Goodness, as furnishing us
with all Conveniences, delights us, and renders both his amazing Power, and
astonishing Wisdom delightful to us.

As the Sun by effecting things, is an Emblem of Gods Power, by discovering
things to us, is an Emblem of his Wisdom, but by refreshing and comforting us,
is an Emblem of his Goodness; And without this refreshing Virtue it
communicates to us, we should take no pleasure in the Creatures it produces,
nor in the Beauties it discovers. As God is Great and Powerful, he is the
Object of our Understanding; but as Good and Bountiful, he is the Object of our
Love and Desire.

6. The Goodness of God comprehends all his Attributes. All the Acts of God are
nothing else but the Effluxes of his Goodness, distinguished by several names,
according to the Objects it is exercised about. As the Sea, though it be one
Mass of Water, yet we distinguish it by several names, according to the Shores
it washes, and beats upon, as the British and German Ocean, though all be one
Sea. When Moses longed to see his Glory, God tells him, he would give him a
prospect of his Goodness; Exodus 33.19.
I will make all my goodness to pass before thee. His Goodness is his Glory and
Godhead, as much as is delightfully visible to his Creatures, and whereby he
does benefit Man; I will cause my Goodness or Comeliness, as Calvin renders it,
to pass before thee; what is this, but the Train of all his lovely Perfections
springing from his Goodness? Exodus 34.6.
The whole Catalogue of Mercy, Grace, long-suffering, abundance of truth,
summed up in this one word. All are Streams from this Fountain; he could be
none of this, were he not first Good. When it confers Happiness without Merit,
it is Grace; when it bestows Happiness against Merit, it is Mercy; when he bears
with provoking Rebels, 'its long-suffering; when he performs his Promise, it is
Truth; when it meets with a person, to whom it is not obliged, it is Grace; when
he meets with a person in the World, to which he has obliged himself by
Promise, it is Truth Herle upon Wisdom, cap. 5. p. 41. 42.
; when it Commiserates a Distressed Person, it is Pity; when it supplies an
Indigent Person, it is Bounty; when it succors an Innocent Person, it is
Righteousness, and when it pardons a Penitent Person, it is Mercy; all summed up
in this one name of Goodness: And the Psalmist expresses the same Sentiment in
the same words: Ps. 145.7, 8.
They shall abundantly utter the memory of thy great goodness, and shall sing
of thy righteousness. The Lord is gracious and full of compassion, slow to
anger, and of great mercy: the Lord is good to all, and his tender mercies are
over all his works. He is first Good, and then Compassionate. Righteousness is
often in Scripture taken, not for Justice, but Charitableness: This Attribute,
says one, Ingelo Bentivolio, and Vran, Book 4. p. 260, 261.
is so full of God, that it does defy all the rest, and verify the
Adorableness of him. His Wisdom might contrive against us, His Power bear too
hard upon us; one might be too hard for an Ignorant, and the other too mighty
for an Impotent Creature; His holiness would scare an impure and guilty
Creature, but his goodness conducts them all for us, and makes them all amiable
to us; Whatever Comeliness they have in the Eye of a Creature, whatever Comfort
they afford to the Heart of a Creature, we are obliged for all to his goodness.
This puts all the rest upon a delightful Exercise, this makes his Wisdom design
for us, and this makes his Power to act for us: This Vails his Holiness from
affrighting us, and this Spirits his Mercy to relieve us: Daille Melang part 2.
p. 704, 705.
All his acts toward Man, are but the Workmanship of this. What moved him at
first to Create the World out of nothing, and erect so noble a Creature as Man,
endowed with such excellent gifts; was it not his goodness? What made him
separate his Son to be a Sacrifice for us, after we had endeavored to raze out
the first marks of his favor; Was it not a strong bubling of goodness? What
moves him, to reduce a Fallen Creature to the due sense of his Duty, and at
last bring him to an Eternal Felicity; is it not only his goodness? This is the
Captain Attribute that leads the rest to act. This attends them, and Spirits
them in all his ways of acting. This is the Complement and Perfection of all
his Works; had it not been for this, which set all the rest on work, nothing of
his Wonders had been seen in Creation, nothing of his Compassions had been seen
in Redemption. The Second thing is some Propositions to explain the Nature of
this Goodness;

1. He is good by his own Essence. God is not only good in his Essence, but
good by his Essence: The Essence of every created thing is good, so the
unerring God pronounced every thing which he had made Genesis 1.31.
. The Essence of the worst Creatures, yea, of the impure and Savage Devils is
good, but they are not good per essentiam, for then they could not be bad,
Malicious, and Oppressive. God is good as he is God, and therefore good by
himself, and from himself, not by participation from another; He made every
thing good, but none made him good: Since his goodness was not received from
another, he is good by his own Nature. He could not receive it from the things
he Created, they are later than he: Since they received all from him, they
could bestow nothing on him, and no God preceded him, in whose Inheritance and
Treasures of Goodness, he could be a Successor: He is absolutely his own
goodness, he needed none to make him good; but all things needed him, to be
good by him. Creatures are good by being made so by him, and cleaving to him:
He is good without cleaving to any goodness without him. Goodness is not a
Quality in him, but a Nature, Ficini epist. lib. 11. epist. 30.
not a Habit added to his Essence, but his Essence it self; He is not first
God, and then afterward Good, but he is Good as he is God, his Essence being
one and the same, is formally and equally God and Good. (...), good of himself,
was one of the Names the Platonists gave him. He is Essentially Good in his own
Nature, and not by any outward action which follows his Essence. He is an
Independent Being, and has nothing of goodness or happiness from any thing
without him, or any thing he does act about. If he were not good by his
Essence, he could not be Eternally good, he could not be the first good, he
would have something before him, from whence he derived that Goodness,
wherewith he is possessed; Nor could he be perfectly good, for he could not be
equally good to that, from whom he derived his Goodness: No Star, no splendid
Body that derives light from the Sun, does equal that Sun by which it is
enlightened.

Hence his goodness must be infinite, and circumscribed by no limits: The
Exercise of his goodness may be limited by himself, but his Goodness, the
Principle, cannot; For since his Essence is Infinite, and his Goodness is not
distinguished from his Essence, it is Infinite also; If it were limited, it were
Finite; he cannot be bounded by any thing without him; if so, then he were not
God, because he would have something Superior to him, to put bars in his way;
If there were any thing to fix him, it must be a good or evil Being; Good it
cannot be, for it is the property of goodness to encourage goodness, not to
bound it; Evil it cannot be, for then it would extinguish goodness, as well as
limit it; it would not be content with the circumscribing it, without
destroying it; for it is the nature of every Contrary, to endeavor the
destruction of its Opposite. He is Essentially good by his own Essence,
therefore good of himself, therefore Eternally good, and therefore abundantly
good.

2. God is the prime and chief Goodness. Being good per se, and by his own
Essence, he must needs be the chief Goodness, in whom there can be nothing but
good, from whom there can proceed nothing but good, to whom all good whatsoever
must be referred as the final cause of all good. As he is the chief Being, so
he is the chief Good. And as we rise by steps from the Existence of Created
things, to acknowledge one Supreme Being, which is God; so we mount by Steps
from the Consideration of the Goodness of Created things, to acknowledge one
Infinite Ocean of Sovereign Goodness, whence the Streams of Created Goodness
are derived. When we behold things that partake of Goodness from another, we
must acquiesce in one that has Goodness by participation from no other, but
Originally from himself, and therefore Supreamly in himself above all other
things. So that as nothing greater and more Majestic can be imagined, so also
nothing Better and more Excellent can be conceived than God. Nothing can add to
him, or make him better than he is, nothing can detract from him, to make him
worse, nothing can be added to him, nothing can be severed from him; No Created
Good can render him more Excellent; No Evil from any Creature, can render him
less Excellent. Psalm. 16.2.
Our goodness extends not to him; Wickedness may hurt a Man, as we are, and our
Righteousness may profit the Son of Man, but if we be Righteous, what give we
to him, or what receives he at our hands? Job 35.7, 8.
As he has no Superior in place above him, so being chief of all, he cannot be
made better by any Inferior to him. How can he be made better by any, that has
from himself, all that he has? The Goodness of a Creature may be changed, but
the Goodness of the Creator is immutable; He is always like himself, so Good
that he cannot be Evil, as he is so Blessed, that he cannot be Miserable.

Nothing is good but God, because nothing is of it self but God: As all things
being from nothing, are nothing in comparison of God, so all things being from
nothing, are scanty and evil in comparison of God. If any thing had been ex
Deo, God being the Matter of it, it had been as good as God is; but since the
Principle whence all things were drawn, was nothing, though the Efficient Cause
by which they were extracted from nothing was God, they are as nothing in
goodness, and not esteemable in comparison of God. Psalm. 73.25.
Whom have I in Heaven but thee, etc. God is all good, every Creature has a
distinct variety of goodness. God distinctly pronounced every days work in the
Creation good. Food communicates the goodness of its Nourishing Virtue to our
Bodies, Flowers the goodness of their Odors to our Smell, every Creature a
goodness of Comeliness to our Sight; Plants the goodness of Healing Qualities
for our Cure. And all derive from themselves a goodness of Knowledge,
objectively to our Understandings. The Sun by one sort of goodness warms us,
Metals enrich us, living Creatures sustain us, and delight us by another; All
those have distinct kinds of Goodness, which are eminently summed up in God,
and are all but parts of his Immense Goodness. It Is he that enlightens us by
his Sun, nourishes us by Bread. Matthew. 4.4.
It Is not by Bread alone, that we live, but by the Word of God. It Is all but
his own Supreme Goodness, conveyed to us through those varieties of
Conduit-pipes. God is all Good, other things are good in their kind, as a Good
Man, a Good Angel, a Good Tree, a Good Plant; but God has a Good of all kinds
eminently in his Nature. He is no less All-good, than he is Almighty, and
All-knowing: As the Sun contains in it all the Light, and more Light than is in
all the clearest Bodies in the World; so does God contain in himself all the
Good, and more Good than is in the Richest Creatures. Nothing is Good, but as
it Resembles him; as nothing is Hot, but as it Resembles Fire, the Prime
Subject of Heat.

God is Omnipotent, therefore no Good can be wanting to him. If he were
destitute of any which he could not have, he were not Almighty: He is so Good
that there is no mixture of any thing, which can be called not Good in him;
every thing besides him wants some Good, which others have. Nothing can be so
Evil as God is Good. There can be no Evil, but there is some mixture of Good
with it. No Nature so Evil, but there is some spark of Goodness in it: But God
is a Good which has no taint of Evil; nothing can be so Supreme an Evil, as
God is Supreme Goodness.

He is only Good without capacity of increase: He is all Good, and unmixedly
Good; none Good but God. A Goodness like the Sun, that has all Light, and no
Darkness. That is the second thing, He is the Supreme and chief Goodness.

3. This Goodness is Communicative. None so Communicatively Good as God. As the
Notion of God includes Goodness, so the Notion of Goodness includes
Diffusiveness; without Goodness he would cease to be a Deity, and without
Diffusiveness he would cease to be Good. The being Good is necessary to the
being God: For Goodness is nothing else in the Notion of it, but a strong
inclination to do Good; either to find, or make an Object, wherein to exercise
it self, according to the Propension of its own Nature; And it is an
Inclination of Communicating it self, not for its own interest, but the good of
the Object it pitcheth upon. Thus God is good by Nature, and his Nature is not
without activity, he acts conveniently to his own Nature. Ps. 119.68.
Thou art good, and do good. And nothing accrues to him, by the
Communications of himself to others, since his blessedness was as great before
the frame of any Creature, as ever it was since the Erecting of the World; so
that the Goodness of Christ himself increases not the luster of his Happiness:
Psalm. 16.2.
My Goodness extends not to thee. He is not of a Niggardly and Envious Nature;
He is too Rich to have any cause to envy, and too Good to have any will to
envy: He is as liberal as he is Rich, according to the capacity of the Object
about which his Goodness is exercised. The Divine Goodness being the Supreme
Goodness, is Goodness in the highest Degree of Activity; Not an idle, enclosed,
pent up Goodness, as a Spring shut up, or a Fountain sealed, bubling up within
it self, but bubling out of it self. A Fountain of Gardens to water every part
of his Creation; He is an Ointment powered forth: Cant. 1.5.
Nothing spreads it self more than Oil, and takes up a larger space,
wheresoever it drops. It may be no less said of the Goodness of God, as it is
of the fullness of Christ, Ephesians. 1.23.
He fills all in all: He fills Rational Creatures with Understanding, Sensitive
Nature with Vigor and Motion, the whole World with Beauty and Sweetness. Every
Taste, every Touch of a Creature is a Taste and Touch of Divine Goodness. Divine
Goodness offers it self in one spark in this Creature, in another spark in the
other Creature, and altogether make up a Goodness inconceivable by any
Creature. The whole Mass and extracted Spirit of it is infinitely short of the
Goodness of the Divine Nature, imperfect shadows of that Goodness which is in
himself.

Indeed the more excellent any thing is, the more nobly it acts; How remotely
does Light, that excellent brightness of the Creation, disperse it self? How
does that glorious Creature, which God has set in the Heavens, spread its
Wings over Heaven and Earth, roll it self about the World, cast its Beams
upward and downward, insinuate into all Corners, pierce the Depths, and shoot
up its Rays into the Heigths, encircle the higher and lower Creatures in its
Arms, reach out its Communications to influence every thing under the Earth, as
well as dart its Beams of light and heat on things above, or upon the Earth?
Nothing is hid from it; Psalm. 19.6.
not from its power, nor from its sweetness. How Communicative also is Water, a
necessary and excellent Creature? How active is it in a River, to nourish the
living Creatures engendered in its Womb? Refreshes every Shore it runs by,
promotes the propagation of Fruits for the Nourishment, and bestows a Verdure
upon the Ground for the delight of Man; and where it cannot reach the higher
Ground in its Substance, it does by its Vapors mounted up, and concocted by
the Sun, and gently distilled upon the Earth, for the opening its Womb to bring
forth its Fruits. Tom. 2. p. 926.
God is more prone to communicate himself, than the Sun to spread its Wings, or
the Earth to mount up its Fruits, or the Water to multiply living Creatures.
Goodness is his Nature. Hence were there internal Communications of himself
from Eternity; Diffusions of himself without himself in time, in the Creation
of the World, like a full Vessel running over. He Created the World that he
might impart his Goodness to something without him, and diffuse larger measures
of his Goodness, after he had laid the first Foundation of it in its Being; And
therefore he Created several sorts of Creatures, that they might be capable of
various, and distinct measures of his Liberality, according to the distinct
capacities of their Nature; but imparted most to the Rational Creature, because
that is only capable of an Understanding to know him, and Will to embrace him.
He is the highest Goodness, and therefore a Communicative Goodness, and acts
excellently according to his Nature.

4. God is necessarily good. None is necessarily Good but God; he is as
necessarily Good, as he is necessarily God. His Goodness is as inseparable from
his Nature as his Holiness. He is Good by Nature, not only by will; as he is
Holy by Nature, not only by will; he is Good in his Nature, and Good in his
Actions; and as he cannot be bad in his Nature, so he cannot be bad in his
Communications: He can no more act contrary to this Goodness in any of his
actions, than he can un-God himself. It Is not necessary that God should Create
a World; he was at his own choice whether he would Create or no: But when he
resolves to make a World, it is necessary that he should make it good, because
he is Goodness it self, and cannot act against his own Nature. He could not
Create any thing without Goodness in the very act: The very act of Creation, or
Communicating being to any thing without himself, is in it self an act of
Goodness, as well as an act of Power: Had he not been Good in himself, nothing
could have been endued with any Goodness by him. In the act of giving Being, he
is Liberal, the Being he bestows is a Displaying his own Liberality: He could
not confer what he needs not, and which could not be deserved, without being
Pountiful. Since what was nothing, could not Merit to be brought into Being,
the very act of giving to nothing a Being, was an act of choice Goodness.

He could not Create any thing without Goodness as the Motive, and the
necessary Motive: His Goodness could not necessitate him to make the World, but
his Goodness could only move him to resolve to make a World; He was not bound
to erect and fashion it because of his Goodness, but he could not frame it
without his Goodness as the moving cause.

He could not Create any thing, but he must Create it Good. It had been
inconsistent with the Supreme Goodness of his Nature, to have Created only
Murderous, Ravenous, Injurious Creatures: To have Created a Bedlam rather than
a World. A mere heap of Confusion would have been as inconsistent with his
Divine Goodness, as with his Divine Wisdom.

Again when his Goodness had moved him to make a Creature, his Goodness would
necessarily move him to be beneficial to his Creature; not that this necessity
results from any Merit in the Creature, which he had framed; but from the
Excellency and Diffusiveness of his own Nature, and his own Glory, the end for
which he formed it, which would have been obscure, yea, nothing, without some
degrees of his Bounty. What occasion of acknowledgments and praise could the
Creature have for its Being, if God had given him only a miserable Being, while
it was innocent in action? The Goodness of God would not suffer him to make a
Creature, without providing conveniences for it, so long as he thought good to
maintain its Being, and furnishing it with that which was necessary to answer
that End for which he Created it; And his own Nature would not suffer him to be
unkind to his Rational Creature, while it was Innocent. It had been injustice
to inflict Evil upon the Creature, that had not offended, and had no relation
to an offending Creature; The Nature of God could not have brought forth such
an act. Cocceii sum. Theolog. p. 91.
And therefore some say, that God after he had Created Man, could not presently
annihilate him, and take away his Life and Being. As a Sovereign he might do
it, as Almighty he was able to do it, as well as Create him; but in regard of
his Goodness, he could not Morally do it: For had he annihilated Man as soon as
ever he had made him, he had not made Man for himself, and for his own Glory;
to be loved, worshipped, sought, and acknowledged by him: He would not then
have been the end of Man; He had Created him in vain, and the World in vain,
which he assures us he did not Isa. 45.18, 19.
. And certainly if the Gifts of God be without Repentance, Man could not have
been annihilated after his Creation without Repentance in God, without any
Cause, had not Sin entered into the World. If God did not say to Man, after Sin
had made its entrance into the World, seek ye me in vain, he could not because
of his Goodness, have said so to Man in his Innocence. As God is necessarily
Mind, so he is necessarily Will; as he is necessarily Knowing, so he is
necessarily Loving. He could not be Blessed, if he did not know Himself, and
his own Perfection: Nor Good, if he did not delight in Himself, and his own
Perfections. And this Goodness whereby he delights in Himself, is the source of
his delight in his Creatures, wherein he sees the footsteps of Himself. If he
loves Himself, he cannot but love the Resemblance of Himself, and the Image of
his own Goodness. He loves himself, because he is the highest Goodness, and
Excellency; and loves every thing as it resembles Himself; because it is an
efflux of his own Goodness: And as he does necessarily love Himself, and his
own Excellency, so he does necessarily love any thing, that resembles that
Excellency, which is the Primary Object of his Esteem. But,

5. Though he be necessarily Good, yet he is also freely Good. The necessity of
the Goodness of his Nature hinders not the liberty of his Actions: The matter
of his acting is not at all necessary, but the manner of his acting in a good
and bountiful way, is necessary, as well as free Gilbert de Dei Dominio, p. 6.
. He Created the World and Man freely, because he might choose whether he would
Create it, but he Created them good necessarily, because he was first
necessarily good in his Nature, before he was freely a Creator. When he Created
Man, he freely gave him a positive Law, but necessarily a Wise and Righteous
Law; because he was necessarily Wise, and Righteous, before he was freely a
Lawgiver. When he makes a Promise, he freely lets the Word go out of his Lips,
but when he has made it, he is necessarily a faithful Performer; because he
was necessarily True and Righteous in his Nature, before he was freely a
Promiser. God is necessarily good in his Nature, but free in his Communications
of it: To make him necessarily to communicate his Goodness in the first
Creation of the Creature, would render him but impotent, good without liberty,
and without will: If the Communications of it be not free, the Eternity of the
World must necessarily be concluded, which some Anciently asserted from the
Naturalness of Gods Goodness, making the World flow from God as Light from the
Sun.

God indeed is necessarily good Affective in regard of his Nature, but freely
good Effective in regard of the Effluxes of it to this or that particular
Subject he pitcheth on. He is not so necessarily communicative of his Goodness
as the Sun of his light, or a Tree of its cooling shade, that chooses not its
Objects, but enlightens all indifferently, without any variation or
distinction: This were to make God of no more Understanding than the Sun, to
shine not where it pleases, but where it must. He is an understanding Agent,
and has a Sovereign Right to choose his own Subjects. It would not be a
Supreme Goodness, if it were not a voluntary Goodness. It Is agreeable to the
Nature of the highest Good, to be absolutely free, to dispense his Goodness in
what methods, and measures he pleases, according to the free determinations of
his own Will, guided by the Wisdom of his Mind, and regulated by the Holiness
of his Nature. He is not to give an account of any of his matters Job 33.13.
. He will have mercy, on whom he will have mercy, and he will have compassion
on whom he will have compassion Romans 9.15.
. And he will be good, to whom he will be good: When he does act, he cannot but
act well, so it is necessary; yet he may act this good, or that good to this or
that degree, so it is free. As it is the Perfection of his Nature, it is
necessary; as it is the communication of his Bounty, it is voluntary. The Eye
cannot but see if it be open, yet it may glance upon this or that color, fix
upon this or that object, as it is conducted by the Will. God necessarily
loves Himself, because he is good, yet not by constraint, but freedom; because
his affection to Himself is from a knowledge of Himself: He necessarily loves
his own Image; because it is his Image, yet freely, because not blindly, but
from motions of understanding and will. What necessity could there be upon
him, to resolve to communicate his Goodness? It could not be to make Himself
better by it; for he had a Goodness incapable of any addition: He confers a
goodness on his Creatures, but reaps not a Harvest of goodness to his own
Essence from his Creatures. What obligation could there be from the Creature,
to confer a goodness on Him to this or that degree, for this or that duration?
If he had not Created a Man, nor Angel, he had done them no wrong. If he had
given them only a simple Being, he had manifested a part of his Goodness,
without giving them a right to challenge any more of him. If he had taken away
their Beings after a time when he had answered his End, he had done them no
Injury: For what Law obliged him, to enrich them, and leave them in that Being
wherein he had invested them, but his sole Goodness? Whatever sparks of
goodness any Creature has, are the free effusions of Gods Bounty, the
Offspring of his Own inclination to do well, the Simple favor of the Donor; not
purchased, not merited by the Creature. God is as unconstrained in his Liberty
in all his Communications, as infinite in his Goodness, the Fountain of them.

6. This Goodness is Communicative with the greatest Pleasure. Moses desired to
see his Glory, God assures him, he should see his Goodness Exodus 33, 18, 19.
, intimating that his Goodness is his Glory, and his Glory his delight also. He
sends not forth his Blessings with an ill Will; He does not stay till they are
squeezed from him; He prevents Men with his Blessings of Goodness Psalm. 21.3.
; He is most delighted, when he is most diffusive, and his pleasure in
bestowing, is larger than his Creatures in possessing; He is not covetous of
his own Treasures; He lays up his Goodness in order to laying it out with a
complacency wholly Divine. The jealousy Princes have of their Subjects, makes
them sparing of their Gifts, for fear of giving them Materials for Rebellion.
Gods foresight of the ill use Men would make of his Benefits, dampt him not in
bestowing his Largesses. He is incapable of Envy: His own Happiness can no more
be diminished, than it can be increased. None can overtop him in Goodness,
because nothing has any Good, but what is derived from him; his Gifts are
without Repentance: Sorrow has no footing in him, who is infinitely Happy, as
well as infinitely Good. Goodness and Envy are inconsistent. How unjustly then
did the Devil accuse God? What God gives out of Goodness, he gives with joy and
gladness. He did not only will that we should be, but rejoice, that he had
brought us into Being. He rejoiced in his Works Psalm. 104.31.
. And his Wisdom stood by him, delighting in the habitable parts of the Earth
Prove. 8.31.
. He beheld the World after its Creation with a complacency, and still governs
it with the same pleasure wherewith he reviewed it. Infinite Cheerfulness
attends infinite Goodness. He would not give, if he had not a pleasure that
others should enjoy his Goodness; Since he is better than any thing, and more
communicative than any thing; He is more joyful in giving out, than the Sun can
be to run its Race, in pouring forth Light. He is said only to repent, and
grieve, when Men answer not the obligations and ends of his Goodness; which
would be their own Felicity as well as his Glory. Though he does not force
greater degrees of his Goodness upon those that neglect it, yet he denies them
not to those that solicit him for it. It Is always greater pleasure to him to
impart upon the importunities of the Creatures, than it is to a Mother to reach
out her Breast to her crying and longing Infant. He is not wearied by the
sollications of Men, he is pleased with their Prayers; because he is pleased
with the imparting of his own Goodness. He seems to be in travel with it,
longing to be delivered of it into the lap of his Creature. He is as much
delighted with Petitions for his Liberality in bestowing his best Goodness, as
Princes are weary of the craving of their Subjects. None can be so desirous to
squeeze those that are under them, as God is delighted to enlarge his hand
toward them. It Is the nature of his Goodness to be glad of Men's solicitations
for it: because they are significant valuations of it, and therefore fit
occasions for him to bestow it. Since he does not delight in the unhappiness of
any of his Creatures, he certainly delights in what may conduce unto their
felicity. He does with the same delight multiply the effects of his Goodness,
where his Wisdom sees it convenient, as he beheld the first Fruits of his
Goodness with a complacency upon the laying the top-stone of the Creation.

7. The displaying of this Goodness was the Motive and End of all his Works of
Creation and Providence Amyral Moral Tom. 1. p. 260.
. God being infinitely Wise, could not act without the highest Reason, and for
the highest End: The reason that induced him to Create, must be of as great an
Eminency as Himself: The Motive could not be taken from without him; because
there was nothing but Himself in Being: It must be taken therefore from within
Himself, and from some one of those most Excellent Perfections, whereby we
conceive him. But upon the exact consideration of all of them, none can seem to
challenge that Honor of being the Motive of them, to resolve the setting forth
any work, but his own Goodness; This being the first thing manifest in his
Creation, seems to be the first thing moving him to a Resolution to Create;
Wisdom may be considered as directing; Power considered as Acting; but it is
natural to reflect upon Goodness as Moving the one to direct, and the other to
act: Power was the Principle of his Action, Wisdom the Rule of his Action,
Goodness the Motive of his Action; Principle and Rule are awakened by the
Motive, and subservient to the End. That which is the most amiable Perfection
in the Divine Nature, and that which he first took notice of as the Footsteps
of them in the distinct view of every days work, and the general view of the
whole Frame, seems to claim the best right to be entitled the Motive and End of
his Creation of things.

God could have no End but himself, because there was nothing besides himself.
Again, the End of every Agent is that which he esteems good, and the best good
for that kind of action. Since nothing is to be esteemed good but God, nothing
can be the ultimate End of God but himself, and his own Goodness: What a Man
wills chiefly is his End; but God cannot will any other thing but himself as
his End, because there is nothing Superior to himself in Goodness. He cannot
will any thing, that Supreamly serves himself and his own Goodness as his End:
for if he did, that which he wills, must be Superior to himself in Goodness,
and then he is not God; or Inferior to them in Goodness, and then he would not
be Righteous, in willing that which is a lower Good before a higher. God cannot
will any thing as his End of acting but himself, without undeifying himself.
Gods Will being Infinitely Good, cannot move for any thing but what is
Infinitely Good; and therefore whatsoever God made, he made for himself, Prove.
16.4.
that whatsoever he made might bear a badge of this Perfection upon it, and be
a discovery of his wonderful Goodness; For the making things for himself does
not signify any indigence in God, that he made any thing to increase his
Excellency (for that is capable of no addition) but to manifest his Excellency.
God possessing every thing eminently in himself, did not Create the World for
any need he had of it; Finite things were unable to make any accession to that
which is Infinite. Man indeed builds a House to be a shelter to him against
Wind and Weather, and makes Clothes to secure him from Cold, and Plants Gardens
for his Recreation and Health. God is above all those little helps: he did not
make the World for himself in such a kind, but for himself, i. e. the
manifestation of himself and the Riches of his Nature: Not to make himself
Blessed, but to discover his own Blessedness to his Creatures, and communicate
something of it to them. He did not garnish the World with so much Bounty, that
he might live more happily than he did before; but that his Rational Creatures
might have fit conveniences. As the end for which God demands the performance
of our Duty, is not for his own advantage, but for our good; Deuteronomy. 10.13.
so the end why he conferred upon us the excellency of such a Being, was for
our good, and the discovery of his Goodness to us: For had not God Created the
World, he had been wholly unknown to any but himself; He produced Creatures
that he might be known. As the Sun shines not only to discover other things,
but to be seen it self in its beauty and brightness. God would Create things,
because he would be known in his Glory and Liberality; Hence it that he Created
Intellectual Creatures, because without them, the rest of the Creation could
not be taken notice of: It had been in some sort in vain; for no Nature lower
than an Understanding Nature, was able to know the Marks of God in the
Creation, and acknowledge him as God. In this regard, God is good above all
Creatures, because he intends only to communicate his Goodness in Creation, not
to acquire any Goodness, or Excellency from them, as Men do in their framing of
things. God is all, and is destitute of nothing, and therefore nothing accrues
to him by the Creation, but the acknowledgment of his Goodness. This Goodness
therefore must be the Motive and End of all his Works.

The third thing, That God is good.

1. The more excellent any thing is in Nature, the more of goodness and
kindness it has. For we see more of love and kindness in Creatures that are
endued with Sense, to their Descendents, than in Plants, that have only a
Principle of Growth. Plants preserve their Seeds whole that are enclosed in
them; Animals look to their young only after they are dropped from them; yet
after some time take no more notice of them than of a Stranger that never had
any Birth from them. But Man, that has a higher Principle of Reason,
cherishes his Offspring, and gives them Marks of his goodness while he lives,
and leaves not the World at the time of his Death without some testimonies of
it; Much more must God, who is a higher Principle than Sense or Reason, be good
and bountiful to all his Offspring. The more perfect any thing is, the more it
does communicate it self. The Sun is more excellent than the Stars, and
therefore does more sensibly, more extensively disperse its liberal Beams than
the Stars do. And the better any Man is, the more charitable he is. God being
the most excellent Nature, having nothing more excellent than himself, because
nothing more ancient than himself, who is the ancient of days; There is nothing
therefore better and more bountiful than himself.

2. He is the cause of all Created Goodness, he must therefore himself be the
Supreme Good. What Good is in the Heavens, is the Product of some Being above
the Earth; and those varieties of Goodness in the Earth, and several Creatures,
are some where in their fullness and union: That therefore which possesses all
those scattered Goodnesses in their fullness, must be all Good, All that Good
which is displayed in Creatures; therefore Soveraignly best. Whatsoever Natural
or Moral Goodness there is in the World, in Angels, or Men, or Inferior
Creatures, is a line drawn from that Center, the bublings of that Fountain. God
cannot but be better then all, since the Goodness that is in Creatures is the
fruit of his own. If he were not good, he could produce no good: he could not
bestow what he had not. If the Creature be good, as the Apostle says, every
Creature is 1 Timothy 4.4.
, he must needs be better than all, because they have nothing but what is
derived to them from him; And much more goodness then all, because Finite Being
are not capable of receiving into them, and containing in themselves all that
goodness which is in an Infinite Being; When we search for good in Creatures,
they come short of that satisfaction which is in God. Psalm. 4.6.
As the certainty of a first Principle of all things, is necessarily concluded
from the being of Creatures, and the upholding and sustaining Power and Virtue
of God is concluded from the mutability of those things in the World; whence we
infer, that there must be some Stable Foundation of those tottering things,
some firm Hinge upon which those changeable things do move, without which there
would be no Stability in the Kinds of things, no order, no agreement, or union
among them: So from the goodness of every thing, and their usefulness to us, we
must conclude him Good, who made all those things. And since we find distinct
Goodnesses in the Creature, we must conclude that one Principle whence they did
slow, excels in the Glory of Goodness: All those little glimmerings of Goodness
which are scattered in the Creatures, as the Image in the Glass, Represent the
Face, Posture, Motion of him whose Image it is, but not in the fullness of Life
and Spirit, as in the Original; It Is but a Shadow at the best, and speaks
something more excellent in the Copy. As God has an Infiniteness of Being
above them, so he has a Supremacy of Goodness beyond them: What they have, is
but a Participation from him; what he has, must be infinitely super-eminent
above them. If any thing be good by it self, it must be Infinitely Good, it
would set it self no bounds; we must make as many Gods, as particulars of
Goodness in the World: But being Good by the bounty of another, that from
whence they flow must be the chief Goodness. Fi^inus in Con. Amor. Orat 2. cap.
p. 1326.
It Is Gods Excellency and Goodness, which like a Beam pierces all things: He
decks Spirits with Reason, endues Matter with Form, furnishes every thing with
useful Qualities.

As one Beam of the Sun illustrates Fire, Water, Earth; so one Beam of God
enlightens and endows Minds, Souls, and Universal Nature: Nothing in the World
had its goodness from it self, any more than it had its being from it self. The
Cause must be riches than the Effect.

But that which I intend is the Defense of this Goodness.

1. The goodness of God is not impaired by suffering Sin to enter into the
World, and Man to fall thereby. It Is rather a Testimony of Gods Goodness, that
he gave Man an ability to be Happy, than any Charge against his Goodness, that
he settled Man in a capacity to be Evil. God was first a Benefactor to Man,
before Man could be a Rebel against God. May it not be enquired, whether it had
not been against the Wisdom of God, to have made a Rational Creature with
Liberty, and not suffer him to act according to the Nature he was endowed with,
and to follow his own choice for some time? Had it been Wisdom to frame a Free
Creature, and totally to restrain that Creature from following its Liberty? Had
it been Goodness, as it were, to force the Creature to be happy against its
will? Gods Goodness furnished Adam with a power to stand; was it contrary to his
Goodness, to leave Adam to a free use of that Power? To make a Creature, and
not let that Creature act according to the freedom of his Nature, might have
been thought to have been a blot upon his Wisdom, and a constraint upon the
Creature, not to make use of that freedom of his Nature, which the Divine
Goodness had bestowed upon him. To what purpose did God make a Law, to govern
his Rational Creature, and yet resolve that Creature should not have his
choice, whether he would obey it or no? Had he been really constrained to
observe it, his Observation of it could no more have been called Obedience,
than the acts of Bruits that have a kind of Natural constraint upon them by the
instinct of their Nature, can be called Obedience: In vain had God endowed a
Creature with so great and noble a Principle as Liberty. Had it been Goodness
in God after he had made a Reasonable Creature, to govern him in the same
manner as he did Bruits by a necessary Instinct? It was the Goodness of God to
the Nature of Men and Angels, to leave them in such a condition, to be able to
give him a voluntary Obedience, a nobler Offering than the whole Creation could
present him with; And shall this Goodness be undervalued, and accounted mean,
because Man made an ill use of it, and turned it into wantonness? As the
unbelief of Man does not diminish the Redeeming Grace of God, Romans 3.3.
so neither does the fall of Man lessen the Creating Goodness of God. Besides,
why should the permission of Sin be thought more a blemish to his Goodness,
than the providing a way of Redemption for the destroying the works of Sin, and
the Devil be judged the Glory of it, whereby he discovered a goodness of Grace
that surpast the bounds of Nature? If this were a thing that might seem to
obscure, or deface the Goodness of God, in the permission of the fall of Angels
and Adam, it was in order to bring forth a greater Goodness in a more
illustrious pomp to the view of the World: Romans 11.32.
God has concluded them all in Unbelief, that he might have Mercy upon all.
But if nothing could be alleged for the defense of his Goodness in this, it
were most comely for an ignorant Creature, not to Impeach his Goodness, but
adore him in his proceedings, in the same language the Apostle does, verse. 33.
Oh the depth of the Riches both of the Wisdom and Knowledge of God! How
unsearchable are his Judgments, and his ways past finding out?

2. Nor is his Goodness prejudiced, by not making all things the equal Subjects
of it.

1. It Is true all things are not Subjects of an equal Goodness. The Goodness of
God is not so illustriously manifested in one thing as another. In the Crea^^on
he has dropped Goodness upon some, in giving them Beings and Sense; and powered
it upon others, in endowing them with Understanding and Reason. The Sun is full
of Light, but it has a want of Sense; Brutes excel in in the vigor of Sense,
but they are destitute of the Light of Reason; Man has a Mind and Reason
conferred on him, but he has neither the acuteness of Mind, nor the quickness
of Motion equal with an Angel. In Providence also he does give abundance: and
opens his hand to some, to others he is more sparing; He gives greater gifts of
knowledge to some, while he lets others remain in ignorance; He strikes down
some, and raises others; He afflicts some with a continual Pain, while he
blesses others with an uninterrupted Health; He has chosen one Nation wherein
to set up his Gospel Sun, and leaves another benighted in their own Ignorance.
Known was God in Judaea; they were a peculiar People alone of all the Nations
of the Earth Deuteronomy. 14.2.
. He was not equally good to the Angels: He held forth his hand, to support
some in their happy Habitation, while he suffered others to sink in irreparable
Ruin; and he is not so diffusive here of his Goodness to his own, as he will
be in Heaven. Here their Sun is sometimes Clouded, but there all Clouds and
Shades will be blown away, and melted into nothing: Instead of Drops here,
there will be above Rivers of Life. Is any Creature destitute of the open Marks
of his Goodness, though all are not enricht with those signal Characters, which
he vouchsafes to others? He that is unerring pronounced every thing good
distinctly in its Production, and the whole good in its Universal Perfection.
Genesis 1.4, 10, 12, 18, 21, 25, 31.
Though he made not all things equally good, yet he made nothing evil; And
though one Creature in regard of its Nature, may be better than another, yet an
Inferior Creature in regard of its usefulness in the order of the Creation, may
be better than a Superior. The Earth has a goodness in bringing forth Fruits,
and the Waters in the Sea a goodness in multiplying Food. That any of us have a
Being, is goodness; that we have not so healthful a Being as others, is
unequal, but not unjust goodness. He is good to all, though not in the same
degree. The whole Earth is full of his Mercy Psalm. 119.64.
. A good Man is good to his Cattle, to his Servants; he makes a Provision for
all, but he bestows not those Floods of Bounty upon them, that he does upon his
Children. As there are various Gifts, but one Spirit 1 Cor. 12.4.
; so there are various Distributions, but from one Goodness; The Drops as well
as the fuller Streams, are of the same Fountain, and relish of the Nature of
it; And though he do not make all Men partake of the riches of his Grace after
the corruption of their Nature, Is his Goodness disgraced hereby? Or does he
merit the Title of Cruelty? Will any diminish the goodness of a Father, for his
not setting up his Son after he has foolishly and wilfully proved Bankrupt; or
not rather admire his liberality in giving him so large a Stock to Trade with,
when he first set him up in the World?

2. The goodness of God to Creatures, is to be measured by their distinct
Usefulness to the Common End. It were better for a Toad or Serpent to be a Man,
i. e. better for the Creature it self, if it were advanced to a higher degree
of Being, but not better for the Universe: He could have made every Pebble a
living Creature, and every living Creature a Rational one: But that he made
every thing as we see, it was a goodness to the Creature it self; But that he
did not make it of a higher Elevation in Nature, was a part of his goodness to
the Rational Creature. If all were Rational Creatures, there would have been
wanting Creatures of an Inferior Nature for their convenience; There would have
wanted the manifestation of the variety and fullness of his goodness. Had all
things in the World been Rational Creatures, much of that goodness which he
has communicated to Rational Creatures, would not have appeared: How could Man
have showed his skill in Taming and Managing Creatures more mighty than
himself? What Materials would there have been to manifest the goodness of God,
bestowed upon the Reasonable Creatures for framing Excellent Works, and
Inventions? Much of the Goodness of God had lain wrapped up from Sense and
Understanding. All other things partake not of so great a goodness as Man; yet
they are so subservient to that goodness poured forth on Man, that little of it
could have been seen without them. Consider Man, every Member in his Body has
a goodness in it self; but a greater goodness as referred to the whole, without
which the goodness of the more noble part would not be manifested. The Head is
the most excellent Member, and has greater Impressions of Divine Goodness upon
it, in regard that it is the Organ of Understanding: Were every Member of the
Body a Head, what a deformed Monster would Man be? If he were all Head, where
would be feet for Motion? And Arms, for Action? Man would be fit only for
Thought, and not for Exercise. The goodness of God in giving Man so noble a
part as the Head, could not be known without a Tongue, whereby to Express the
Conception of his Mind; and without Feet and Hands whereby to act, much of what
he conceives, and determines, and execute the resolves of his Will: All those
have a goodness in themselves, an honor, a comeliness from the goodness of
God, 1 Cor. 12.22, 23.
but not so great a goodness as the nobler part: Yet if you consider them in
their Functions, and refer them to that excellent Member which they serve,
their Inferior goodness is absolutely necessary to the goodness of the other;
without which the goodness of the Head and Understanding would lie in
obscurity, be insignificant to the whole World, and in a great measure to the
Person himself that wants such Members.

3. The goodness of God is more seen in this inequality. If God were equally
good to all, it would destroy Commerce, Unity, the Links of Humane Society;
damp Charity, and render that useless which is one of the noblest and
delightfullest Duties to be exercised here; It would cool Prayer, which is
excited by wants, and is a necessary demonstration of the Creatures dependence
on God. But in this inequality, every Man has enough in his Enjoyments for
Praise, and in his Wants matter for his Prayer. Besides the inequality of the
Creature is the Ornament of the World: What pleasure could a Garden afford, if
there were but one sort of Flowers, or one sort of Plants? Far less than when
there is variety to please the Sight, and every other Sense.

Again, the freedom of Divine Goodness, which is the glory of it, is evident
hereby; Had he been alike good to all, it would have looked like a necessary,
not a free act: But by the inequality, it is manifest that he does not do it by
a Natural necessity as the Sun shines, but by a voluntary Liberty, as being the
entire Lord, and free Disposer of his own Goods: And that it is the gift of the
pleasure of his Will, as well as the Efflux of his Nature; That he has not a
Goodness without Wisdom, but a Wisdom as rich as his Bounty.

4. The goodness of God could not be equally communicated to all, after their
settlement in their several Beings. Because they have not a capacity in their
Natures for it: He does bestow the Marks of his Goodness according to that
natural capacity of fitness, he perceives in his Creatures: As the Water of
the Sea fills every Creek and Gulf with different measures, according to the
compass each have to contain it; And as the Sun does disperse Light to the
Stars above, and the places below, to some more, to some less, according to the
measures of their Reception. God does not do good to all Creatures according to
the greatness of his own Power, and the extent of his own Wealth, but
according to the capacity of the Subject; Not so much good as he can do, but so
much good as the Creature can receive. The Creature would sink, if God would
pour out all his Goodness upon it: As Moses would have perished, if God should
have shown him all his Glory Exodus 33.18, 20.
. He does manifest more Goodness to his Reasonable Creatures, because they are
more capable of acknowledging, and setting forth his Goodness.

5. God ought to be allowed the free disposal of his own Goodness. Is not God
the Lord of his own Gifts; and will you not allow him the privilege of having
some more peculiar Objects of his love and pleasure, which you allow without
blame to Man, and use your self without any sense of a Crime? Is a Prince
esteemed good, though he be not equally bountiful to all his Servants, nor
equally gracious in pardoning all his Rebels; And shall the goodness of the
great Sovereign of the World be impeacht, notwithstanding those mighty
distributions of it; because he will act according to his own Wisdom and
Pleasure, and not according to Men's fancies and humors? Must Purblind Reason be
the Judge and Director, how God shall dispose of his own, rather than his own
Infinite Wisdom and Sovereign Will? Is God less good, because there are
number less nothings, which he is able to bring into being? He could Create a
World of more Creatures than he has done: does he therefore wish evil to them
by letting them remain in that nothing from whence he could draw them? No, but
he denies that good to them, which he is able, if he pleased, to confer upon
them.

If God does not give that good to a Creature which it wants by its own
demerit, can he be said to wish evil to it; or only to deny that goodness which
the Creature has forfeited, Camere p. 30.
and which is at Gods liberty to retain or disperse? Though God cannot but love
his own Image where he finds it, yet when this Image is lost, and the Devils
Image voluntarily received, he may choose whether he will manifest his goodness
to such a one or no. Will you not account that Man liberal, that distributes
his Alms to a great company, though he rejects some? Much more will you account
him good, if he rejects none that implore him, but dispenses his doles to
every one upon their Petition: And is he not good, because he will not bestow a
Farthing upon those that Address not themselves to him? God is so good, that he
denies not the best good to those that seek him: He has promised Life and
Happiness to them that do so. Is he less good, because he will not distribute
his goodness to those that despise him? Though he be Good, yet his Wisdom is
the Rule of dispensing his Goodness.

6. The severe Punishment of Offenders, and the Afflictions he inflicts upon
his Servants, are no violations of his Goodness. The Notion of Gods Vindictive
Justice is as naturally inbred, and implanted in the mind of Man, as that of
his Goodness, and those two Sentiments never shockt one another. The Heathen
never thought him bad because he was just, nor unrighteous because he was good.
God being Infinitely good, cannot possibly intend or act any thing but what is
good: Thou art good, and thou do good, i. e. whatsoever thou do is good,
whatsoever it be, pleasant or painful to the Creature: Ps. 119.68.
Punishments themselves are not a Moral Evil in the Person that inflicts,
though they are a Natural Evil in the Person that suffers them. Boethius.
In ordering Punishment to the Wicked, Good is added to Evil; In ordering
Impunity to the Wicked, Evil is added to Evil. To punish Wickedness is Right,
therefore Good: To leave men uncontrolled in their Wickedness, is Unrighteous,
and therefore Bad. But again, Shall his Justice in some few Judgments in the
World, impeach his Goodness, more than his wonderful Patience to Sinners is
able to silence the Calumnies against him? Is not his hand fuller of gracious
Doles, than of dreadful Thunderbolts? Does he not oftener seem forgetful of his
Justice, when he pours out upon the guilty the Streams of his Mercy, than to be
forgetful of his Goodness, when he sprinkles in the World some drops of his
Wrath?

First, Gods Judgments in the World, do not infringe his Goodness; For

1. The justice of God is a part of the goodness of his Nature. God himself
thought so, when he told Moses, he would make all his Goodness pass before him
Exodus 33.19.
: He leaves not out in that enumeration of the parts of it, his resolution, by
no means to clear the Guilty, but to visit the Iniquity of the Fathers upon the
Children Exodus 34.7.
. It Is a property of goodness to hate evil, and therefore a property of
goodness to punish it: It Is no less Righteousness to give according to the
deserts of a Person in a way of Punishment, than to reward a Person that obeys
his Precepts in a way of Recompense. Whatsoever is Righteous is Good; Sin is
evil, and therefore whatsoever does witness against it, is good; His Goodness
therefore shines in his Justice, for without being just he could not be good.
Sin is a Moral Disorder in the World: Every Sin is Injustice: Injustice breaks
Gods Order in the World; there is a necessity therefore of Justice to put the
World in order. Punishment orders the Person committing the Injury, who when
he will not be in the order of Obedience, must be in the order of suffering for
Gods Honor. The goodness of all things which God pronounced so, consisted in
their order and beneficial helpfulness to one another: When this order is
inverted, the goodness of the Creature cease: If it be a bad thing to spoil
this order, Is it not a part of Divine Goodness to reduce them into order, that
they may be reduced in some measure to their goodness? Do we ever account a
Governor less in goodness, because he is exact in Justice, and punishes that
which makes a disorder in his Government? And is it a diminution of the Divine
Goodness, to punish that which makes a Disorder in the World? As Wisdom
without Goodness would be a Serpentine Craft, and issue in destruction; so
Goodness without Justice would be impotent Indulgence, and cast things into
confusion. When Abels Blood cried out for Vengeance against Cain, it spoke a
good thing; Christ's Blood speaking better things than the Blood of Abel,
implies that Abels Blood spoke a good thing; the comparative implies a positive
Heb. 12.24.
. If it were the goodness of that Innocent Blood to demand Justice, it could
not be a badness in the Sovereign of the World to execute it. How can God
sustain the part of a Good and Righteous Judge, if he did not preserve Humane
Society? And how would it be preserved, without manifesting himself by public
Judgments against public Wrongs? Is there not as great a necessity that
Goodness should have Instruments of Judgment, as that there should be Prisons,
Bridewels, and Gibbets in a good Commonwealth? Did not the Thunderbolts of God
sometimes roar in the Ears of Men, they would sin with a higher hand than they
do, fly more in the face of God, make the World as much a Moral, as it was at
first a Natural Chaos: The ingenuity of Men would be dampt, if there were not
something to work upon their fears, to keep them in their due order. Impunity
of the Innocent Person is worse than any Punishment. It Is a Misery to want
Medicines for the Cure of a sharp Disease; and a Mark of goodness in a Prince
to consult for the security of the Political Body, by cutting off a Gangrened
and corrupting Member: And what Prince would deserve the noble Title of Good,
if he did not restrain by punishment those Evils, which impair the Public
Welfare? Is it not necessary that the examples of Sin, whereby others have been
encouraged to Wickedness, should be made examples of Justice, whereby the same
Persons and others may be discouraged from what before they were greedily
inclined unto? Is not a hatred of what is bad and unworthy, as much a part of
Divine Goodness, as a love to what is Excellent, and bears a Resemblance to
himself? Could he possibly be accounted Good, that should bear the same degree
of Affection to a prodigious Vice, as to a sublime Virtue? And should behave
himself in the same manner of carriage to the Innocent and Culpable? Could you
account him Good, if he did always with pleasure behold Evil, and perpetually
suffer the Oppressions of the Innocent under unpunisht Wickedness? How should
we know the Goodness of the Divine Nature, and his Affection to the goodness of
his Creature, if he did not by some acts of severity witness his implacable
aversion against Sin, and his care to preserve the good Government of the
World? If corrupted Creatures should always be exempt from the effects of his
Indignation, he would declare himself not to be Infinitely Good, because he
would not be really Righteous. No Man thinks it a Natural Vice in the Sun by
the power of its scorching heat, to dry up and consume the unwholsom Vapors of
the Air; nor are the demonstrations of Divine Justice any blots upon his
Goodness, since they are both for the defense and glory of his Holiness, and
for the preservation of the beauty and order of the World.

2. Is it not part of the Goodness of God to make Laws, and annex Threatn ngs;
And shall it be an impeachment of his Goodness to support them? The more severe
Laws are made for deterring Evil, the better is that Prince accounted, in
making such provision for the welfare of the Community. The design of Laws, and
the design of upholding the honor of those Laws by the punishment of
Offenders, is to promote Goodness and restrain Evil; The Execution of those
Laws must be therefore pursuant to the same design of Goodness, which first
settled them. Would it not be contrary to Goodness, to suffer that which was
designed for the support of Goodness, to be scorned and slighted? It would
neither be prudence nor goodness, but folly and vice, to let Laws, which were
made to promote Virtue, be broken with impunity. Would not this be to weaken
Virtue, and give a new life and vigor to Vice? Not only the Righteousness of
the Law it self, but the Wisdom of the Lawgiver would be exposed to contempt,
if the Violations of it remained uncontrolled, and the Violence offered by Men
passed unpunished. None but will acknowledge the Divine Precepts to be the
Image of the Righteousness of God, and beneficial for the common good of the
World; Romans 7.12.
The Law is holy, just and good, and so is every Precept of it: The Law was for
no other end, but to keep the Creature in subjection to, and dependence on God;
This dependence could not be preserved without a Law, nor that Law be kept in
Reputation without a Penalty; nor would that Penalty be significant without an
Execution. Every Law loses the nature of a Law, without a Penalty; and the
Penalty loses its vigor, without the infliction of it: How can those Laws
attain their end, if the Transgressions of them be not punished? Would not the
wickedness of Men's hearts be encouraged by such a kind of uncomely Goodness?
And all the threatenings be to no other end, than to engender vain and fruitless
fears in the minds of Men? Is it good for the Majesty of God to suffer it self
to be trampled on by his Vassals? To suffer Men by their Rebellion to level his
Law with the wickedness of their own hearts; and by impunity slight his own
Glory, and encourage their Disobedience? Who would give any Man, any Prince,
any Father that should do so, the name of a good Governor? If it were a fruit
of Divine Goodness to make Laws, is it contrary to Goodness to support the
honor of them? It Is every whit as rational, and as good to vindicate the
honor of his Laws by Justice, as at first to settle them by Authority; As much
goodness to vindicate it from Contempt, as at first to Enact it; As it is as
much Wisdom to preserve a Law, as at first to frame it: Shall his Precepts be
thought by him unworthy of a support, that were not thought by him unworthy to
be made? The same reason of Goodness that led him to enjoin them, will lead him
to revenge them. Did Evil appear odious to him, while he Enacted his Law; and
would not his own Goodness, as well as his Wisdom appear odious to him, if he
did never Execute it? Would it not be a denial of his own Goodness, to be led
by the foolish and corrupt Judgment of his Creatures, and slight his own Law,
because his Rebels spurn at it? Since he valued it before they could actually
contemn it, would he not misjudge his own Law and his own Wisdom, discount from
the true value of them, condemn his own Acts, censure his Precepts as
Unrighteous, and therefore Evil and Injurious? Remove the differences between
Good and Evil, look upon Vice and Virtue and Wickedness as Righteousness, if he
thought his Commands unworthy of a Vindication? How can there be any support to
the honor of his Precepts without sometimes Executing the severity of his
Threatenings?

And as to his Threatenings of Punishment for the breach of his Laws, are they
not designed to discourage Wickedness, as the Promises of Reward were designed
to encourage Goodness? Has he not multiplied the one to scare Men from Sin, as
well as the other to allure Men to Obedience? Is not the same Truth engaged to
support the one as well as the other? And how could he be abundant in Goodness,
if he were not abundant in Truth? Both are linkt together; Exodus 34.6.
If he neglected his Truth, he would be out of love with his own Goodness;
since it cannot be manifested in performing the Promises to the Obedient, if it
be not also manifested in executing his Threatenings upon the Rebellious. Had
not God annexed Threatenings to his Laws, he would have had no care of his own
Goodness. The Order between God and the Creature wherein the declaration of his
Goodness consisted, might have been easily broken by his Creature: Man would
have freed himself from subjection to God, been unaccountable to him. Had this
consisted with that infinite Goodness whereby he loves himself, and loves his
Creatures? As therefore the annexing Threatenings to his Law, was a part of his
Goodness; the Execution of them is so far from being a blemish, that it is the
honor of his Goodness. The Rewards of Obedience, and the Punishment of
Disobedience refer to the same end, viz. the due manifestation of the valuation
of his own Law, the glorifying his own Goodness, which enjoined so beneficial a
Law for Man, and the support of that goodness in the Creatures which by that
Law he demands righteously and kindly of them.

3. Hence it follows, That not to punish Evil would be a want of Goodness to
himself. The Goodness of God is an indulgent Goodness in a way of Wisdom and
Reason; not a fond Goodness in a way of weakness and folly: Would it not be a
weakness, always to bear with the Impenitent? A want of expressing a goodness
to Goodness it self? Would not Goodness have more reason to complain for a want
of Justice to rescue it, than Men have reason to complain for the exercise of
Justice in the vindication of it? If God established all things in Order with
Infinite Wisdom and Goodness, and God silently behold for ever this Order
broken; would he not either charge himself with a want of Power, or a want of
Will to preserve the Marks of his own Goodness? Would it be a kindness to
himself to be careless of the breaches of his own Orders? His Throne would
shake, yea, sink from under him, if Justice, whereby he Sentenceth, and
Judgment, whereby he Executes his Sentence, were not the supports of it. Ps.
89.14.
Justice and Judgment are the habitation of thy Throne, (...), the Stability or
Foundation of thy Throne; So Psalm. 92.2. Man would forget his Relation to God,
God would be unknown to be Sovereign of the World, were he careless of the
breaches of his own Order. Psalm. 9.16.
The Lord is known by the Judgments which he Executes; Is it not a part of his
Goodness to preserve the indispensible Order between himself and his Creatures?
His own Sovereignty which is good, and the subjection of the Creature to him as
Sovereign, which is also good; The one would not be maintained in its due
place, nor the other restrained in due limits without Punishment. Would it be a
goodness in him to see Goodness it self trampled upon constantly, without some
time or other appearing for the relief of it? Is it not a Goodness to secure
his own Honor, to prevent further Evil? Is it not a Goodness to discourage Men
by Judgments, sometimes from a contempt and ill use of his Bounty; as well as
sometimes patiently to bear with them, and wait upon them for a Reformation?
Must God be bad to himself, to be kind to his Enemies? And shall it be
accounted an unkindness and a Mark of Evil in him not to suffer himself to be
always outrag'd and defied? The World is wronged by Sin, as well as God is
injured by it. How could God be good to himself, if he righted not his own
Honor? Or be a good Governor of the World, if he did not sometimes witness
against the Injuries it receives sometimes from the works of his hands? Would
he be good to himself as a God, to be careless of his own Honor? Or good as
the Rector of the World, and be regardless of the Worlds Confusion?

That God should give an Eternal good to that Creature that declines its Duty,
and despises his Sovereignty, is not agreeable to the goodness of his Wisdom,
or that of his Righteousness; It Is a part of Gods Goodness to love himself:
Would he love his Sovereignty, if he saw it daily slighted, without sometimes
discovering how much he values the Honor of it? Would he have any esteem for
his own Goodness, if he beheld it trampled upon, without any will to vindicate
it? Does Mercy deserve the name of Cruelty, because it pleads against a
Creature that has so often abused it; and has refused to have any pity
exercised toward it in a Righteous and Regular way? Is Sovereignty destitute
of Goodness, because it preserves its Honor against one that would not have it
Reign over him? Would he not seem by such a regardlesness to renounce his own
Essence, undervalue and undermine his own Goodness, if he had not an implacable
aversion to whatsoever is contrary to it? If Men turn Grace into Wantonness, is
it not more reasonable he should turn his Grace into Justice?

All his Attributes, which are parts of his Goodness, engage him to punish Sin;
without it his Authority would be vilified, his Purity stained, his Power
derided, his Truth disgraced, his Justice scorned, his Wisdom slighted: He
would be thought to have dissembled in his Laws, and be judged, according to
the Rules of Reason, to be void of true Goodness.

4. Punishment is not the primary Intention of God. It Is his Goodness that he
has no mind to Punish; and therefore he has put a bar to Evil by his
Prohibitions and Threatenings, that he might prevent Sin, and consequently any
occasions of severity against his Creature Zarnovecius, de satisfact. Part. 1.
cap. 1. p. 3, 4.
: The principal Intention of God in his Law, was to encourage Goodness, that he
might reward it; And when by the commission of Evil God is provoked to Punish,
and takes the Sword into his hand, he does not act against the Nature of his
Goodness, but against the first intention of his Goodness in his Precepts,
which was to Reward: As a good Judge principally intendeds in the Exercise of
his Office, to protect good Men from Violence, and maintain the honor of the
Laws; yet consequently to punish bad men, without which the Protection of the
good would not be secured, nor the Honor of the Law be supported: And a good
Judge in the Exercise of his Office, does principally intend the encouragement
of the good, and wishes there were no wickedness, that might occasion
Punishment; and when he does Sentence a Malefactor in order to the Execution of
him, he does not act against the goodness of his Nature, but pursuant to the
Duty of his Place; but wishes he had no occasion for such severity. Thus God
seems to speak of himself; Isaiah 28.21.
He calls the act of his Wrath, his Strange Work, his Strange Act; A work not
against his Nature, as the Governor of the World; but against his first
Intention as Creator, which was to manifest his Goodness: Therefore he moves
with a slow pace in those Acts, brings out his Judgments with relentings of
heart, and seems to cast out his Thunderbolts with a trembling hand: He does
not afflict willingly, nor grieve the Children of Men Lam. 3.33.
: And therefore he delights not in the death of a Sinner Ezekiel. 33.11.
: Not in Death as Death, in Punishment as Punishment, but as it reduces the
suffering Creature to the Order of his Precept, or reduces him into order
under his Power, or reforms others who are Spectators of the Punishment upon a
Criminal of their own Nature: God only hates the Sin, not the Sinner: He
desires only the destruction of the one, Suarez, Vol. 1. de Deo lib. 3. cap. 7.
p. 146.
not the misery of the other; The Nature of a Man does not displease him,
because it is a work of his own Goodness; but the Nature of the Sinner
displeases him, because it is a work of the Sinners own extravagance. Divine
Goodness pitcheth not its hatred primarily upon the Sinner, but upon the Sin:
But since he cannot punish the Sin, without punishing the Subject, to which it
cleaves, the Sinner falls under his lash. Who ever regards a good Judge as an
Enemy to the Malefactor, but as an Enemy to his Crime, when he does Sentence
and Execute him?

5. Judgments in the World have a goodness in them, therefore they are no
Impeachments of the Goodness of God.

1. A Goodness in their preparations. He sends not Judgments without giving
warnings: His Justice is so far from extinguishing his Goodness, that his
Goodness rather shines out in the preparations of his Justice: He gives Men
time, and sends them Messengers to persuade them to another temper of mind,
that he may change his Hand, and exercise his Liberality, where he threatened
his Severity. When the Heathen had Presages of some Evil upon their Persons or
Countries, they took them for invitations to Repentance, excited themselves to
many acts of Devotion, implored his Favor, and often Experimented it. The
Ninivites upon the Proclamation of the destruction of their City by Jonah, fell
to Petitioning him; whereby they signified, That they thought him good, though
he were just, and more prone to Pity than Severity; and their humble Carriage
caused the Arrows he had ready against them, to drop out of his hands Jonah
3.9, 10.
. When he brandisheth his Sword, he wishes for some to stand in that Gap to
mollify his anger, that he might not strike the fatal blow; Ezekiel 22.30.
I sought for a Man among them that should make up the Hedge, and stand in the
Gap before me in the Land, that I should not destroy it. He was desirous that
his Creatures might be in a capacity to receive the Marks of his Bounty Cressel
Antholog. Decad. 2. p. 162.
: This he signified not obscurely to Moses, Exodus 32.10. when he spoke to him
to let him alone, that his anger might wax hot against the People, after they
had made a Golden Calf and Worshipped it. Let me alone, said God: Not that
Moses restrained him, says Chrysostom, who spoke nothing to him, but stood
silent before him, and knew nothing of the Peoples Idolatry; But God would give
him an occasion of praying for them, that he might exercise his Mercy toward
them; yet in such a manner, that the People being struck with a sense of their
Crime, and the horror of Divine Justice, they might be amended for the future;
when they should understand that their Death was not averted by their own Merit
or Intercession, but by Moses his Patronage of them, and pleading for them. As
we see sometimes Masters and Fathers angry with their Servants and Children,
and preparing themselves to punish them, but secretly wish some Friend to
intercede for them, and take them out of their hands: There is a Goodness
shining in the preparations of his Judgments.

2. A Goodness in the Execution of them. They are good, as they show God
disaffected to Evil, and conduce to the glory of his Holiness, and deter others
from presumptuous Sins: Deuteronomy. 10.3.
I will be glorified in all that draw near unto me; in his Judgment upon Nadab
and Abihu, the Sons of Aaron, for Offering strange Fire.

By them God preserves the excellent Footsteps of his own Goodness in his
Creation and his Law; and curbs the Licentiousness of Men, and contains them
within the bounds of their Duty. The Judgments are good, says the Psalmist
Psalm. 119. Psalm. 39.
, i. e. Thy Judicial proceedings upon the Wicked: For he desires God there, to
turn away by some signal act, the reproach the Wicked cast upon him. Can there
be any thing more Miserable than to live in a World full of Wickedness, and
void of the Marks of Divine Goodness and Justice to repress it? Were there not
Judgments in the World, Men would forget God, be insensible of his Government
of the World, neglect the Exercises of Natural and Christian Duties; Religion
would be at its last gasp, and expire among them, and Men would pretend to
break Gods Precepts by Gods Authority. Are they not good then, as they restrain
the Creature from further Evils? Affright others from the same Crimes, which
they were inclinable to commit? He strikes some, to reform others that are
Spectators; As Apollonius tamed Pigeons, by beating Dogs before them.
Punishments are Gods gracious warnings to others, not to venture upon those
Crimes which they see attended with such Judgments. The Censers of Corah,
Dathan, and Abiram were to be wrought into Plates for a covering of the Altar,
to abide there as a Memento to others, not to approach to the Exercise of the
Priestly Office without an authoritative call from God Number. 16.38, 40.
; And those Judgments exercised in the former Ages of the World, were intended
by Divine Goodness for warnings, even in Evangelical times. Lots Wife was
turned into a Pillar of Salt, to prevent Men from Apostasy: That use Christ
himself makes of it, in the exhortation against turning back Luke 17.32, 33.
. And, Psalm. 58.10.
The Righteous shall wash his Feet in the Blood of the Wicked. When God shall
drench his Sword in the Blood of the Wicked, the Righteous shall take occasion
from thence to purify themselves, and reform their Ways, and look to the Paths
of their Feet. Would not Impunity be hurtful to the World, and Men receive
encouragement to Sin, if severities sometimes did not bridle them from the
practice of their Inclinations? Sometimes the Sinner himself is reformed, and
sometimes removed from being an example to others. Though Thunder be an
affrightning noise, and Lightning a scaring flash, yet they have a liberal
goodness in them, in shattering and consuming those contagious Vapors which
burden and infect the Air, and thereby render it more clear and healthful.

Again, There are few acts of Divine Justice upon a People, but are in the very
Execution of them attended with demonstrations of his Goodness to others: He is
a Protector of his own, while he is a Revenger on his Enemies; When he rides
upon his Horses in anger against some, his Chariots are Chariots of Salvation
to others Hab. 3.8.
. Terror makes way for Salvation: The overthrow of Pharaoh and the strength of
his Nation completed the deliverance of the Israelites. Had not the Egyptians
met with their Destruction, the Israelites had unavoidably met with their
Ruin, against all the Promises God had made to them, and to the defamation of
his former Justice in the former Plagues upon their Oppressors. The death of
Herod was the security of Peter, and the rest of the Malic'd Christians. The
gracious deliverance of good Men is often occasioned by some severe stroke upon
some eminent Persecutor: The destruction of the Oppressor is the rescue of the
Innocent.

Again, Where is there a Judgment but leaves more Criminals behind than it
sweeps away, that deserved to be involved in the same fate with the rest? More
Egyptians were left behind to possess and enjoy the goodness of their fruitful
Land, than they were that were hurried into another World by the overflowing
Waves; Is not this a Mark of goodness as well as severity?

Again, Is it not a goodness in him not to pour out Judgments according to the
greatness of his Power? To go gradually to work with those, whom he might in a
moment blow to destruction with one breath of his Mouth?

Again, He sometimes exercises Judgments upon some, to form a new Generation
for himself; He destroyed an old World, to raise a new one more Righteous; As a
Man pulls down his old Buildings to erect a sounder and more stately Fabric.
To sum up what has been said in this particular; How could God be a Friend to
Goodness, if he were not an Enemy to Evil? How could he show his enmity to
Evil, without revenging the abuse and contempt of his Goodness? God would
rather have the Repentance of a Sinner than his Punishment; but the Sinner
would rather expose himself to the severest frowns of God, than pursue those
Methods wherein he has settled the conveyances of his kindness; You will not
come to me that you might have Life, says Christ. How is Eternity of
Punishment inconsistent with the Goodness of God? Nay, how can God be good
without it? If Wickedness always remain in the Nature of Man, Is it not fit the
Rod should always remain on the Back of Man? Is it a want of goodness that
keeps an incorrigible Offender in Chains, in a Bridewell? While Sin remains,
it is fit it should be Punished: Would not God else be an Enemy to his own
Goodness; and show favor to that which does abuse it, and is contrary to it?
He has threatened Eternal Flames to Sinners, that he might the more strongly
excite them to a Reformation of their Ways, and a Practice of his Precepts.

In those Threatenings he has manifested his Goodness; And can it be bad in him
to defend what his Goodness has Commanded, and Execute what his Goodness has
Threatened? His Truth is also a part of his Goodness; for it is nothing but his
Goodness performing that which it obliged him to do. That is the first thing,
Severe Judgments in the World are no Impeachments of his Goodness.

2. The Afflictions God inflicts upon his Servants, are no violations of his
Goodness. Sometimes God aflicts Men for their Temporal and Eternal good; for
the good of their Grace in order to the good of their Glory; which is a more
excellent Good than Afflictions can be an Evil. The Heathens reflected upon
Ulysses his hardship as a Mark of Jupiters goodness and love to him, that his
Virtue might be more conspicuous. By strong Persecutions brought upon the
Church, her Lethargy is Cured, her Chaff Purged, the glorious Fruit of the
Gospel brought forth in the lives of her Children; The number of her Proselytes
multiply, and the strength of her weak ones is increased, by the Testimonies of
Courage and Constancy which the stronger present to them in their Sufferings.
Do those good Effects speak a want of goodness in God, who brings them into
this condition? By those he cures his People of their Corruptions, and promotes
their Glory by giving them the honor of suffering for the Truth, and raises
their Spirits to a Divine pitch. The Epistles of Paul to the Ephesians. Philip. and
Colos. wrote by him while he was in Nero's Chains, seem to have a higher strain
than some of those he wrote when was at liberty.

As for Afflictions, they are Marks of a greater measure of Fatherly Goodness
than he discovers to those that live in an uninterrupted Prosperity, who are
not dignified with that glorious Title of Sons, as those are that he chasteneth
Heb. 12.6, 7.
. Can any question the goodness of the Father that Corrects his Child to
prevent his Vice and Ruin, and breed him up to Virtue and Honor? It would be
a Cruelty in a Father leaving his Child without Chastisement, to leave him to
that Misery an ill Education would reduce him to. God judges us that we might
not be condemned with the World 1 Cor. 11.32.
. Is it not a greater Goodness to separate us from the World to Happiness by
his Scourge, than to leave us to the condemnation of the World for our Sins? Is
it not a greater Goodness to make us smart here, than to see us scorcht
hereafter? As he is our Shepherd, it is no part of his Enmity or ill will to
us, to make us feel sometimes the weight of his Shepherds Crook, to reduce us
from our Straggling. The visiting our Transgressions with Rods, and our
Iniquities with Stripes, is one of the Articles of the Covenant of Grace,
wherein the greatest luster of his Goodness appears Psalm. 89.33.
. The advantage and gain of our Afflictions is a greater Testimony of his
Goodness to us, than the pain can be of his Unkindness: The Smart is well
recompensed by the accession of clearer Graces.

It is rather a high Mark of his Goodness, than an Argument for the want of it,
that he treats us as his Children, and will not suffer us to run into that
Destruction we are more ambitious of, than the Happiness he has prepared for
us, and by Afflictons he fits us for the partaking of, by imparting his
Holiness together with the inflicting his Rod Heb. 12.10.
. That is the third thing, God is Good.

The Fourth thing is, The manifestation of this Goodness in Creation,
Redemption, and Providence.

1. In Creation. This is apparent from what has been said before, That no
other Attribute could be the Motive of his Creating, but his Goodness; His
Goodness was the Cause that he made any thing, and his Wisdom was the Cause
that he made every thing in Order and Harmony: He pronounced every thing good,
i. e. such as became his Goodness to bring forth into Being, and rested in them
more, as they were Stamps of his Goodness, than as they were Marks of his
Power, or Beams of his Wisdom: And if all Creatures were able to answer to this
Question, What that was which Created them? The Answer would be, Almighty
Power, but employed by the Motion of Infinite Goodness Cusan. p. 228.
. All the varieties of Creatures are so many Apparitions of this Goodness.
Though God be one, yet he cannot appear as a God but in variety. As the
greatness of Power is not manifest but in variety of Works, and an Acute
Understanding not discovered, but in variety of Reasonings; so an Infinite
Goodness is not so apparent, as in variety of Communications.

1. The Creation proceeds from Goodness. It Is the Goodness of God to extract
such multitude of things from the depths of nothing. Because God is Good,
things have a Being; If he had not been Good, nothing could have been Good;
Nothing could have imparted that which it possessed not: Nothing but Goodness
could have communicated to things an Excellency, which before they wanted.
Being is much more Excellent than nothing. By this Goodness therefore the whole
Creation was brought out of the dark Womb of Nothing: This formed their
Natures, this beautified them with their several Ornaments and Perfections,
whereby every thing was enabled to act for the good of the Common World. God
did not Create things because he was a Living Being; but because he was a Good
Being: No Creature brought forth any thing in the World merely because it is;
but because it is good, and by a Communicated Goodness fitted for such a
Production. If God had been the Creating Principle of things, only as he was a
Living Being, or as he was an Understanding Being; then all things should have
partaken of Life and Understanding; because all things were to bear some
Characters of the Deity upon them. If by Understanding solely God were the
Creator of all things, all things should have born the Mark of the Deity upon
them, and should have been more or less Understanding; but he Created things as
he was Good, and by Goodness he renders all things more or less like himself:
Hence every thing is accounted more noble, not in regard of its Being, but in
regard of the beneficialness of its Nature. The Being of things was not the End
of God in Creating, but the Goodness of their Being: God did not rest from his
Works, because they were his Works, i. e. because they had a Being, but because
they had a Good Being; Genesis 1.
because they were naturally useful to the Universe: Nothing was more pleasing
to him, than to behold those Shadows and Copies of his own Goodness in his
Works.

2. Creation was the first act of Goodness without himself. Petav. Theclog.
Dogmat. Tom. 1. p. 401.
When he was alone from Eternity, he contented himself with himself, abounding
in his own Blessedness, delighting in that abundance: He was incomprehensively
rich in the possession of an unstained Felicity. Lessius de Perfect. div. p.
100.
This Creation was the first Efflux of his Goodness without himself: For the
work of Creation cannot be called a work of Mercy: Mercy supposes a Creature
miserable; but that which has no Being, is subject to no Misery: For to be
Miserable, supposes a Nature in Being, and deprived of that Good which belongs
to the pleasure and felicity of Nature; but since there was no Being, there
could be no Misery: The Creation therefore was not an act of Mercy, but an act
of sole Goodness: And therefore it was the Speech of an Heathen, That when God
first set upon the Creation of the World, he transformed himself into Love and
Goodness, (...). Pherecy^es.
This led forth and animated his Power, the first moment it drew the Universe
out of the Womb of Nothing; And

3. There is not one Creature but has a Character of his Goodness. The whole
World is a Map to Represent, and a Herald to proclaim this Perfection: It Is as
difficult not to see something of it in every Creature with the Eye of our
Minds, as it is not to see the Beams of the Shining Sun with those of our
Bodies. Psalm. 145.9.
He is good to all: He is therefore good in all; Not a drop of the Creation,
but is a drop of his Goodness.

These are the Colors worn upon the Heads of every Creature. As in every Spark
the light of the Fire is manifested, so does every grain of the Creation wear
the visible Badges of this Perfection. In all the Lights, the Father of Lights
has made the riches of Goodness apparent; No Creature is silent in it, it is
legible to all Nations in every work of his hands. That as it is said of
Christ, Psalm. 40.7.
In the Volume of thy Book it is written of me: In the Volume of the Book of
the Scripture it is written of me, and my Goodness in Redemption; So it may be
said of God, In the Volume of the Book of the Creature it is written of me, and
my Goodness in Creation. Every Creature is a Page in this Book, whose Line is
gone through all the Earth, and their Words to the end of the World Psalm. 19.4.
. Though indeed the less Goodness in some is obscured by the more resplendent
Goodness he has imparted unto others: What an admirable piece of Goodness is
it to communicate Life to a Fly? How should we stand gazing upon it, till we
turn our Eye inwards, and view our own Frame, which is much more ravishing?

But let us see the Goodness of God in the Creation of Man.

1. In the Being and Nature of Man. God has with a liberal hand conferred upon
every Creature the best Being it was capable of in that Station and Order, and
conducing to that end and use in the World he intended it for: But when you
have run over all the measures of Goodness God has poured forth upon other
Creatures, you will find a greater fullness of it in the Nature of Man, whom he
has placed in a more Sublime Condition, and endued with choicer Prerogatives
than other Creatures: He was made but little lower than the Angels, and much
more loftily crowned with glory and honor than other Creatures Psalm. 8 5.
. Had it not been for Divine Goodness, this Excellent Creature had lain wrapped
up in the Abyss of nothing: Or if he had called it out of nothing, there might
have been less of Skill, and less of Goodness displayed in the forming of it,
and a lesser kind of Being imparted to it, than what he has conferred.

1. How much of Goodness is visible in his Body? God drew out some part of the
Dust of the Ground, and Copied out this Perfection, as well as that of his
Power, on that mean Matter, by erecting it into the form of Man, quickening that
Earth by the Inspiration of a living Soul Genesis 2.7.
: Of this Matter he composed an Excellent Body in regard of the Majesty of the
Face, Erectness of its Stature, and Grace of every Part: How neatly has he
wrought this Tabernacle of Clay, this Earthly House, as the Apostle calls it 2
Cor. 5.1.
? A curious wrought piece of Needle Work, a Comely Artifice; Ps. 139.15.
an Embroidered Case for an Harmonious Lute: What variety of Members, with a
due proportion, without confusion, beautiful to sight, excellent for use,
powerful for strength? It has Eyes to conduct its Motion, to serve in Matter
for the Food and and delight of the Understanding: Ears to let in the pleasure
of Sounds, to convey Intelligence of the Affairs of the World, and the Counsels
of Heaven to a more noble Mind: It has a Tongue to Express, and sound forth
what the learned Inhabitant in it thinks; and Hands to act what the inward
Counselor directs; and Feet to support the Fabric: It Is tempered with a
kindly Heat, and an Oily Moisture for Motion, and endued with conveyances for
Air to qualify the fury of the Heat, and Nourishment to supply the decays of
Moisture: It Is a Cabinet fitted by Divine Goodness for the enclosing a rich
Jewel; a Palace made of Dust, to lodge in it the Viceroy of the World: An
Instrument disposed for the operations of the Nobler Soul, which he intended to
unite to that Refined Matter: What is there in the situation of every part, in
the proportion of every Member, in the usefulness of every Limb and String to
the Offices of the Body, and Service of the Soul? What is there in the whole
Structure that does not inform us of the Goodness of God?

2. But what is this to that goodness which shines in the Nature of the Soul?
Who can express the wonders of that Comeliness that is wrapped up in this Mask of
Clay? A Soul endued with a clearness of Understanding and freedom of Will:
Faculties no sooner framed, but they were able to produce the Operations they
were intended for; A Soul that excelled the whole World, that comprehended the
whole Creation; A Soul that evidenced the extent of its Skill, in giving names
to all that variety of Creatures, which had issued out of the hand of Divine
Power Genesis 2.19.
; A Soul able to discover the Nature of other Creatures, and manage and conduct
their Motions. In the Ruins of a Palace we may see the Curiosity displayed,
and the Cost expended in the building of it; In the Ruins of this fallen
Structure, we still find it capable of a mighty Knowledge; a Reason able to
regulate Affairs, govern States, order more Mighty and Massy Creatures, find
out witty Inventions; There is still an Understanding to irradiate the other
Faculties, a Mind to contemplate its own Creator, a Judgment to discern the
differences between Good and Evil, Vice and Virtue, which the Goodness of God
has not granted to any lower Creature. These Excellent Faculties, together
with the Power of Self-reflection, and the swiftness of the Mind in running
over the things of the Creation, are astonishing Gleams of the vast Goodness of
that Divine Hand which ennobled this Frame. To the other Creatures of this
World, God had given out some small Mites from his Treasury; but in the
Perfections of Man, he has opened the more secret parts of his Exchequer, and
liberally bestowed those Doles, which he has not expended upon the other
Creatures on Earth.

3. Besides this, He did not only make Man so noble a Creature in his Frame,
but he made him after his own Image in Holiness. He imparted to him a Spark of
his own Comeliness, in order to a communion with himself in Happiness, had Man
stood his ground in his trial, and used those Faculties well, which had been
the gift of his Bountiful Creator: He made Man after his Image, after his own
Image; Genesis 1.26, 27.
That as a Coin bears the Image of the Prince, so did the Soul of Man the Image
of God: Not the Image of Angels, though the speech be in the Plural Number,
[Let us make Man.] It Is not to a Creature, but to a Creator; Let us, that are
his Makers, make him in the Image of his Makers. God Created Man, Angels did
not Create him; God Created Man in his own Image, not therefore in the Image of
Angels: The Nature of God, and the Nature of Angels are not the same. Where in
the whole Scripture is Man said to be made after the Image of Angels? God made
Man not in the Image of Angels, to be conformed to them as his Prototype; but
in the Image of the Blessed God, to be conformed to the Divine Nature: That as
he was conformed to the Image of his Holiness, he might also partake of the
Image of his Blessedness, which without it could not be attained: For as the
felicity of God could not be clear without an unspotted Holiness, so neither
can there be a glorious Happiness without Purity in the Creature; This God
provided for in his Creation of Man, giving him such accomplishments in those
two Excellent Pieces of Soul and Body, that nothing was wanting to him but his
own will, to instate him in an invariable Felicity. He was possessed with such
a Nature by the hand of Divine Goodness, such a loftiness of Understanding, and
purity of Faculties, that he might have been for ever Happy as well as the
standing Angels: And he was placed in such a Condition, that moved the envy of
fallen Spirits; He had as much Grace bestowed upon him, as was proportionable
to that Covenant God then made with him: The Tenor of which was, That his Life
should continue so long as his Obedience, and his Happiness endure so long as
his Integrity: And as God by Creation had given him an Integrity of Nature, so
he had given him a power to persist in it, if he would. Herein is the Goodness
of God displayed, that he made Man after his own Image.

4. As to the Life of Man in this World, God by an immense Goodness Copied out
in him the whole Creation, and made him an Abridgment of the higher and lower
World; a little World in a greater one. The Link of the two Worlds, of Heaven
and Earth, as the Spiritual and Corporeal Natures are united in him, the Earth
in the Dust of his Body, and the Heavens in the Crystal of his Soul: He has
the upper Springs of the Life of Angels in his Reason, and the nether Springs
of the Life of Animals in his Sense. God displayed those Virtues in Man, which
he had discovered in the rest of the lower Creation; but besides the
communication which he had with Earth in his Nature, God gave him a
participation with Heaven in his Spirit. A mere Bodily Being he has given to
the Heavens, Earth, Elements; a Vegetative Life, or a Life of Growth he has
vouchsafed to the Plants of the Ground: He has stretched out his Liberality
more to Animals and Beasts by giving them Sense. All these has his Goodness
linkt in Man, Being, Life, Sense, with a richer Dole than any of those
Creatures have received in a Rational, Intellectual Life, whereby he
approaches to the Nature of Angels. This some of the Jews understood. Genesis 2.7.
God breathed into his Nostrils the Breath of Life, and Man became a living
Soul, (...) Breath of Lives, in the Hebrew; not one sort of Life, but that
variety of Lives which he had imparted to other Creatures: All the Perfections
scattered in other Creatures, do unitedly meet in Man: So that Philo might well
call him every Creature, the Model of the whole Creation: His Soul is Heaven,
and his Body is Earth Eugubin, lib. 5. cap. 9.
. So that the Immensity of his Goodness to Man, is as great as all that
Goodness you behold in Sensitive and Intelligible things.

5. All this was free Goodness. God Eternally possessed his own Felicity in
himself, and had no need of the Existence of any thing without himself for his
satisfaction. Man before his Being could have no good qualities to invite God
to make him so Excellent a Fabric: For being nothing, he was as unable to
allure and merit, as to bring himself into Being; Nay, he Created a Multitude
of Men, who he foresaw, would behave themselves in as ungrateful a manner; as
if they had not been his Creatures, but had bestowed that rich variety upon
themselves without the hand of a Superior Benefactor.

How great is this Goodness, that has made us Models of the whole Creation,
tied together Heaven and Earth in our Nature, when he might have rankt us among
the lower Creatures of the Earth, made us mere Bodies as the Stones, or mere
Animals as the Brutes, and denied us those Capacious Souls, whereby we might
both know him and enjoy him? What could Man have been more, unless he had been
the Original, which was impossible? He could not be greater than to be an Image
of the Deity, an Epitome of the whole Creation. Well may we cry out with the
Psalmist, Psalm. 8.1, 4.
O Lord, our Lord, How Excellent is thy Name, the Name of thy Goodness in all
the Earth? How more particularly in Man: What is Man that thou art mindful of
him? What is a little Clod of Earth and Dust, that thou should ennoble him
with so rich a Nature, and Engrave upon him such Characters of thy Immense
Being?

6. The Goodness of God appears in the Conveniences he provided for, and gave
to Man. As God gave him a Being Morally perfect in regard of Righteousness, so
he gave him a Being Naturally perfect in regard of delightful Conveniences,
which was the fruit of Excellent Goodness; Since there was no quality in Man,
to invite God to provide him so Rich a World, nor to bestow upon him so Comely
a Being.

1. The World was made for Man. Since Angels have not need of any thing in this
World, and are above the Conveniences of Earth and Air, it will follow, that
Man being the noblest Creature on the Earth, was the more immediate End of the
visible Creation. All Inferior things are made to be subservient to those that
have a more excellent Prerogative of Nature; and therefore all things for Man,
who exceeds all the rest in Dignity: As Man was made for the honor of God, so
the World was made for the support and delight of Man, in order to his
performing the Service due from him to God. The Empire God settled Man in as
his Lieutenant over the Works of his Hands, when he gave him possession of
Paradise, is a clear manifestation of it: God put all things under his Feet,
and gave him a deputed Dominion over the rest of the Creatures under himself,
as the absolute Sovereign; Psalm. 8.6, 7, 8.
Thou made him to have Dominion over the Works of thy Hands, thou have put
all things under his Feet, all Sheep and Oxen, yea, and the Beasts of the
Field, the Foul of the Air, and the Fish of the Sea, yea, and whatsoever
passes through the Paths of the Sea. What less is witnest to by the Calamity,
all Creatures were subjected to by the Corruption of Man's Nature? Then was the
Earth Cursed, and a black Cloud flung upon the Beauty of the Creation, and the
strength and vigor of it languisheth to this day under the Curse of God Genesis
2.17, 18.
, and groans under that vanity the Sin of Man subjected it to Romans 8.20, 22.
. The Treasons of Man against God, brought Misery upon that which was framed
for the use of Man: As when the Majesty of a Prince is violated by the Treason
and Rebellion of his Subjects, all that which belongs to them, and was before
the free Gift of the Prince to them is forfeit, their Habitations, Palaces,
Cattle, all that belongs to them bear the Marks of his Sovereign fury: Had not
the Delicacies of the Earth been made for the use of Man, they had not fallen
under the Indignation of God upon the Sin of Man.

God Crowned the Earth with his Goodness to gratify Man; gave Man a right to
serve himself of the delightful Creatures he had provided; Genesis 1.28, 29, 30.
yea, and after Man had forfeited all by Sin, and God had washed again the
Creature in a Deluge, he renews the Creation, and delivers it again into the
hand of Man, binding all Creatures to pay a Respect to him, and Recognize him
as their Lord, either spontaneously or by force; Genesis 9.2, 3.
and commissions them all to fill the heart of Man with food and gladness: And
he loves all Creatures as they conduce to the good of, and are serviceable to
his prime Creature which he set up for his own glory: And therefore when he
loves a Person, he loves what belongs to him: He takes care of Jacob and his
Cattle: Of Penitent Nineveh and their Cattle: Jonah 4.11.
As when he sends Judgments upon Men, he destroys their Goods.

2. God richly furnished the World for Man. He did not only Erect a stately
Palace for his Habitation, but provided all kind of Furniture as a Mark of his
Goodness for the Entertainment of his Creature Man: He Archt over his
Habitation with a bespangled Heaven, and Floor'd it with a solid Earth, and
spread a curious wrought Tapestry upon the Ground where he was to tread, and
seemed to sweep all the Rubbish of the Chaos to the two uninhabitable Poles.
When at the first Creation of the Matter the Waters covered the Earth, and
rendered it uninhabitable for Man, God Drained them into the proper Channels he
had founded for them, and set a bound that they might not pass over, that they
turn not again to cover the Earth Genesis 1.9.
. They fled and hasted away to their proper Stations, Psalm. 104.7, 8, 9.
as if they were ambitious to deny their own Nature, and content themselves
with an Imprisonment for the convenient Habitation of him, who was to be
appointed Lord of the World. He has set up standing Lights in the Heaven, to
direct our Motion and to regulate the Seasons: The Sun was Created, that Man
might see to go forth to his Labor Psalm. 104.22, 23.
: Both Sun and Moon though set in the Heaven, were formed to give light on the
Earth Genesis 1.15, 17.
. The Air is his Aviary, the Sea and Rivers his Fish Ponds, the Valleys his
Granary, the Mountains his Magazine; The first afford Man Creatures for
Nourishment, the other Metals for Perfection: The Animals were Created for the
support of the life of Man, the Herbs of the Ground were provided for the
maintenance of their Lives, and gentle Dews, and moistening Showers, and in
some places slimy Floods appointed to render the Earth fruitful, and capable to
offer to Man and Beast what was fit for their Nourishment. He has peopled
every Element with a variety of Creatures both for necessity and delight; all
furnished with useful qualities for the Service of Man. There is not the most
despicable thing in the whole Creation, but it is endued with a Nature to
contribute something for our Welfare; either as Food to Nourish us when we are
Healthful, or as Medicine to Cure us when we are Distempered, or as a Garment
to Cloth us when we are Naked, and Arm us against the Cold of the Season, or
as a refreshment when we are weary, or as a delight when we are sad; All serve
for Necessity or Ornament, either to spread our Table, beautify our Dwellings,
furnish our Closets, or store our VVardrobes: Psalm. 104.24.
The whole Earth is full of his Riches. Nothing but by the rich Goodness of God
is exquisitely accomodated in the numerous brood of things, immediately or
mediately for the use of Man; All in the issue conspire together to render the
World a delightful Residence for Man. And therefore all the living Creatures
were brought by God to attend upon Man after his Creation, to receive a Mark of
his Dominion over them by the imposition of their Names Genesis 2.19, 20.
. He did not only give variety of Senses to Man, but provided variety of
delightful Objects in the World for every Sense; The Beauties of Light and
Colors for our Eye, the Harmony of Sounds for our Ear, the Fragrancy of Odours
for our Nostrils, and a Delicious Sweetness for our Palates: Some have
qualities to pleasure all, every thing a quality to pleasure one or other: He
does not only present those things to our view, as Rich Men do in Ostentation
their Goods: He makes us the Enjoyers as well as the Spectators, and gives us
the Use as well as the Sight: And therefore he has not only given us the
Sight, but the Knowledge of them. He has set up a Sun in the Heavens, to
expose their outward Beauty and Conveniences to our Sight; and the Candle of
the Lord is in us, to expose their inward Qualities and Conveniences to our
Knowledge, that we might serve our selves of, and rejoice in all this Furniture
wherewith he has garnisht the World; and have wherewithal to employ the
inquisitiveness of our Reason, as well as gratify the pleasure of our Sense:
And particularly, God provided for Innocent Man a delightful Mansion House, a
place of more special Beauty and Curiosity, the Garden of Eden, a delightful
Paradise, a Model of the Beauties and Pleasures of another World, wherein he
had placed whatsoever might contribute to the felicity of a Rational, and
Animal Life, the Life of a Creature composed of Mire and Dust, of Sense and
Reason Genesis 2.9.
: Besides the other Delicacies consigned in that place to the use of Man, there
was a Tree of Life provided to maintain his Being, and nothing denied in the
whole compass of that Territory but one Tree, that of the knowledge of Good and
Evil, which was no Mark of an ill will in his Creator to him, but a Reserve of
Gods absolute Sovereignty, and a Trial of Man's voluntary Obedience. What blur
was it to the Goodness of God, to reserve one Tree for his own propriety, when
he had given to Man in all the rest such numerous Marks of his Rich Bounty and
Goodness? What Israel after Man's Fall enjoyed sensibly, Nehemiah calls great
Goodness Neh. 9.25.
. How inexpressible then was that Goodness manifested to Innocent Man, when so
small a part of it indulged to the Israelites after the Curse upon the Ground,
is called, as truly it Merits, such great Goodness? How can we pass through any
part of this great City, and cast our Eyes upon the well Furnished Shops, stored
with all kinds of Commodities, without reflections upon this Goodness of God,
starting up before our Eyes in such varieties, and plainly telling us, that he
has accommodated all things for our use, suited things both to supply our
need, content a reasonable Curiosity, and delight us in our aims at, and
passage to our Supreme End?

3. The Goodness of God appears in the Laws he has given to Man, the Covenant
he made with him. It had not been agreeable to the Goodness of God, to let a
Creature governable by a Law, be without a Law to regulate him, his Goodness
then which had broke forth in the Creation, had suffered an Eclipse and
obscurity in his Government. As Infinite Goodness was the Motive to Create, so
Infinite Goodness was the Motive of his Government. And this appears;

1. In the fitting the Law to the Nature of Man. It was rather below than above
his strength; he had an integrity in his Nature to answer the Righteousness of
the Precept. Eccles. 7.29.
God Created Man upright; his Nature was suited to the Law, and the Law to his
Nature; it was not above his understanding to know it, nor his will to embrace
it, nor his passions to be regulated by it: The Law and his Nature were like
two exact straight Lines, touching one another in every part when joined
together: God exacted no more by his Law, than what was written by Nature in
his Heart: He had a knowledge by Creation to observe the Law of his Creation,
and he fell not for want of a Righteousness in his Nature: He was enabled for
more than was commanded him, but wilfully indisposed to less than he was able
to perform. The Precepts were easy, not only becoming the Authority of a
Sovereign to exact, but the Goodness of a Father to demand, and the Ingenuity
of a Creature and a Son to pay. 1 John 5.3.
His Commands are not grievous; the observance of them had filled the Spirit of
Man with an extraordinary Contentment. It had been no less a pleasure and a
delightful satisfaction to have kept the Law in a Created State, than it is to
keep it in some measure in a Renewed State: The Renewed Nature finds a
suitableness in the Law to kindle a delight Psalm. 1.2.
: It could not then have anywise shook the Nature of an upright Creature, nor
have been a burden too heavy for his Shoulders to bear. Though he had not a
Grace given him above Nature, yet he had not a Law given him that surmounted
his Nature: It did not exceed his Created strength, and was suited to the
Dignity and Nobility of a Rational Nature: It was a just Law, Romans 7.12
and therefore not above the Nature of the Subject that was bound to obey it.
And had it been impossible to be observed, it had been unrighteous to be
Enacted: It had not been a matter of Divine Praise, and that seven times a day;
as it is, Psalm. 119.164.
Seven times a day do I praise thee, because of thy Righteous Judgments. The
Law was so Righteous, that Adam had every whit as much reason to bless God in
his Innocence for the Righteousness of it, as David had with the Relics of
Enmity against it: His Goodness shines so much in his Law, as merits our Praise
of him, as he is a Sovereign Lawgiver, as well as a Gracious Benefactor in the
imparting to us a Being.

2. In fitting it for the Happiness of Man. For the satisfaction of his Soul,
which finds a Reward in the very act of keeping it, Psalm. 119.165.
Great peace in the loving it; for the preservation of Human Society, wherein
consists the External felicity of Man. It had been inconsistent with Divine
Goodness, to enjoin Man any thing that should be oppressive and uncomfortable.
Bitterness cannot come from that which is altogether Sweet: Goodness would not
have obliged the Creature to any thing, but what is not only free from damaging
him, but wholly conducing to his VVelfare, and Perfective of his Nature.
Infinite Wisdom could not order any thing, but what was agreeable to Infinite
Goodness. As his Laws are the most Rational, as being the contrivance of
Infinite Wisdom: so they are the best, as being the Fruit of Infinite Goodness.
His Laws are not only the acts of his Sovereign Authority, but the Effluxes of
his Loving Kindness, and the Conductors of Man to an enjoyment of a greater
Bounty: He minds as well the promotion of his Creatures Felicity, as the
asserting his own Authority: As good Princes make Laws for their Subjects
benefit, as well as their own honor. What was said of a more difficult and
burdensome Law long after Man's fall, may much more be said of the easy Law of
Nature in the state of Man's Innocence, that it was for our good Deuteronomy. 10.12, 13.
. He never pleaded with the Israelites for the observation of his Commands upon
the account of his Authority, so much as upon the score of their benefit by
them. Deuteronomy. 4.40.
Deuteronomy. 12.28.


And when his Precepts were broken, he seems sometimes to be more grieved for
Men's impairing their own felicity by it, than for their violating his
Authority; Esaiah 48.18.
Oh that thou had hearkened to my Commandments, then had thy Peace been as a
River! Goodness cannot prescribe a thing prejudicial: whatsoever it enjoins, is
beneficial to the Spiritual and Eternal Happiness of the Rational Creature:
This was both the design of the Law given, and the end of the Law. Christ in
his Answer to the Young man's Question, refers him to the Moral Law, (which was
the Law of Nature in Adam) as that whereby Eternal Life was to be gained: Which
evidenceth, that when the Law was first given as the Covenant of Works, it was
for the happiness of Man; and the end of giving it was, that Man might have
Eternal Life by it: There would else be no strength or truth in that Answer of
Christ to that Ruler. And therefore Stephen calls the Law given by Moses, which
was the same with the Law of Nature in Adam, Acts 7.38.
The living Oracles: He enjoined Men's Services to them not simply for his own
Glory, but his Glory in Men's VVelfare: As if there were any Being better than
himself, his Goodness and Righteousness would guide him to love that better
than himself; because it is Good and Righteous to love that best which is most
amiable: So if there were any that could do us more good, and shour down more
happiness upon us than himself, 1 Kings 18.21.
he would be content we should obey that as Sovereign, and Steer our Course
according to his Laws: If God be God, follow him, but if Baal, then follow him:
If the observance of the Precepts of Baal be more beneficial to you; If you can
advance your Nature by his Service, and gain a more mighty Crown of Happiness
than by mine, follow him with all my heart: I never intended to enjoin you any
thing to impair, but increase your Happiness. The chief design of God in his
Law, is the Happiness of the Subject; and Obedience is intended by him, as a
means for the attaining of Happiness, as well as preserving his own
Sovereignty: This is the reason why he wished that Israel had walked in his
ways, that their time might have endured for ever, Psalm. 81.13, 15, 16. And by
the same reason, this was his intendment in his Law given to Man, and his
Covenant made with Man at the Creation, that he might be fed with the finest
part of his Bounty, and be satisfied with Honey out of the Eternal Rock of
Ages. To Paraphrase his Expression there. The Goodness of God appears further;

3. In engaging Man to Obedience by Promises and Threatenings. A Threatening is
only mentioned, Genesis 2.17. but a Promise is implied: If Eternal Death were
fixed for Transgression, Eternal Life was thereby designed for Obedience: And
that it was so, the Answer of Christ to the Ruler evidenceth, that the first
intendment of the Precept was the Eternal Life of the Subject, ordered to obey
it.

1. God might have acted, in settling his Law only as a Sovereign. Though he
might have dealt with Man upon the score of his absolute Dominion over him as
his Creature, and signified his pleasure upon the right of his Sovereignty,
threatening only a Penalty if Man transgressed, without the promising a
bountiful acknowledgment of his Obedience by a Reward as a Benefactor: yet he
would treat with Man in gentle Methods, and Rule him in a tract of Sweetness as
well as Sovereignty; He would preserve the rights of his Dominion in the
Authority of his Commands, and honor the condescensions of his Goodness in the
allurements of a Promise. He that might have solely demanded a compliance with
his Will, would kindly Article with him, to oblige him to observe him out of
love to himself as well as Duty to his Creator; that he might have both the
interest of avoiding the Threatened Evil to affright him, and the interest of
attaining the promised Good to allure him to Obedience. How does he value the
Title of Benefactor above that of a Lord! when he so kindly Sollicites, as well
as Commands, and engages to Reward that Obedience which he might have
absolutely claimed as his due, by enforcing fears of the severest Penalty. His
Sovereignty seems to stoop below it self for the elevation of his Goodness; and
he is pleased to have his Kindness more taken notice of than his Authority.
Nothing imported more condescension than his bringing forth his Law in the
Nature of a Covenant, whereby he seems to humble himself, and vail his
Superiority to treat with Man as his equal, that the very manner of his
Treatment might oblige him in the richest Promises he made to draw him, and the
startling Threatenings he pronounced to link him to his Obedience: And therefore
is it observable, that when after the Transgression of Adam God comes to deal
with him, he does not do it in that thundering Rigor, which might have been
expected from an enraged Sovereign, but in a gentle Examination, Genesis 3.11, 13.
Have thou eaten of the Tree whereof I commanded thee, that thou should not
eat? To the Woman, he said no more than, What is this that thou have done? And
in the Scripture we find, when he cites the Israelites before him for their
Sin, he Expostulates with them not so much upon the absolute right he had to
challenge their Obedience, as upon the equity and reasonableness of his Law,
which they had transgrest: That by the same Argument of sweetness wherewith he
would attract them to their Duty, he might shame them after their Offense
Isaiah 1.2.
. Ezekiel. 18.25.


2. By the Threatenings he manifests his Goodness as well as by his Promises. He
Promises that he might be a Rewarder, and Threatens that he might not be a
Punisher; the one is to elevate our hope, and the other to excite our fear, the
two Passions whereby the Nature of Man is managed in the World. He imprints
upon Man Sentiments of a Misery by Sin in his thundering Commination, that he
might engage him the more to embrace and be guided by the Motives of Sweetness
in his gracious Promises. The design of them was to preserve Man in his due
bounds, that God might not have occasion to blow upon him the Flames of his
Justice; to suppress those irregular Passions, which the Nature of Man (though
Created without any disorder) was capable of entertaining upon the appearance
of suitable Objects; and to keep the Waves from swelling upon any turning Wind,
that so Man being modest in the use of the Goodness God had allowed him, might
still be capable of fresh streams of Divine Bounty, without ever falling under
his Righteous Wrath for any Transgression. What a prospect of Goodness is in
this proceeding, to disclose Man's Happiness to be as durable as his Innocence;
and set before a Rational Creature the extremest Misery due to his Crime, to
affright him from neglecting his Creator, and making unworthy Returns to his
Goodness? What could be done more by Goodness to suit that passion of fear
which was implanted in the Nature of Man, than to assure him he should not
degenerate from the Righteousness of his Nature, and violate the Authority of
his Creator, without falling from his own Happiness, and sinking into the most
deplorable Calamity?

3. The Reward he promised, manifests yet further his Goodness to Man. It was
his Goodness to intend a Reward to Man: No necessity could oblige God to Reward
Man, had he continued obedient in his Created State: For in all Rewards which
are truly Merited, besides some kind of equality to be considered between the
Person doing Service, and the Person Rewarding, and also between the Act
performed, and the Reward bestowed, there must also be considered the condition
of the Person doing the Service, that he is not obliged to do it as a Duty, but
is at his own choice whether to offer it or no: But Man being wholly dependent
on God in his Being and Preservation, having nothing of his own, but what he
had received from the hands of Divine Bounty, 1 Cor. 4.7.
his Service was due by the strongest Obligation to God: But there was no
natural Engagement on God to return a Reward to him; for Man could return
nothing of his own, but that only which he had received from his Creator: It
must be pure Goodness that gives a gracious Reward for a due Debt, to receive
his own from Man, and return more than he had received. A Divine Reward does
far surmount the value of a Rational Service.

It was therefore a mighty Goodness to stipulate with Man, that upon his
Obedience he should enjoy an Immortality in that Nature. Amyral. Dissertat. p.
637, 638.
The Article on Man's part was Obedience, which was necessarily just, and
founded in the Nature of Man: He had been unjust, ungrateful, and violated all
Laws of Righteousness, had he committed any act unworthy of one that had been
so great a Subject of Divine Liberality: But the Article on Gods part of giving
a perpetual Blessedness to Innocent Man, was not founded upon Rules of strict
Justice and Righteousness, for that would have argued God to be a Debtor to
Man; but that God cannot be to the Work of his hands, that had received the
Materials of his Being and Acting from him, as the Vessel does from the Potter.
But this was founded only on the Goodness of the Divine Nature, whereby he
cannot but be kind to an innocent and holy Creature. The Nature of God inclined
him to it by the Rules of Goodness, but the Service of Man could not claim it
by the Rules of Justice without a Stipulation: So that the Covenant whereby God
obliged himself to continue the Happiness of Man upon the continuance of his
Obedience, in the Original of it, springs from pure Goodness, though the
performance of it upon the fulfilling Condition required in the Creature, was
founded upon the Rules of Righteousness and Truth, after Divine Goodness had
brought it forth.

God did Create Man for a Reward and Happiness: Now Gods implanting in the
Nature of Man a desire after Happiness, and some higher Happiness than he had
in Creation invested him in, does evidence that God did not Create Man only for
his own Service, but for his attaining a greater Happiness. All Rational
Creatures are possessed with a Principle of seeking after Good, the highest
Good, and God did not plant in Man this Principle in vain: It had not been
Goodness to put this Principle in Man, if he had designed never to bestow a
Happiness on Man for his Obedience; This had been Repugnant to the Goodness and
Wisdom of God; And the Scripture does very Emphatically express, the Felicity
of Man to be the design of God in the first forming him and moulding him a
Creature, as well as working him a new Creature, 2 Cor. 5.1, 2.
He that has wrought us for the self same thing is God: He framed this Earthly
Tabernacle for a Residence in an Eternal Habitation, and a better Habitation
than an Earthly Paradise. What we expect in the Resurrection, that very same
thing God did in Creation intend us for; but since the Corruption of our
Natures, we must undergo a dissolution of our Bodies, and may have just reason
of a despondency, since Sin has seemed to change the course of Gods Bounty,
and brought us under a Curse. He has given us the Earnest of his Spirit, as an
assurance that he will perform that very self same thing, the conferring that
Happiness upon renewed Creatures for which he first formed Man in Creation,
when he compacted his Earthly Tabernacle of the dust of the Ground, and reared
it up before him.

4. It was a mighty Goodness that God should give Man an Eternal Reward. That
an Eternity of Reward was promised, is implied in the Death that was threatened
upon Transgression: Whatsoever you conceive the threatened Death to be, either
for Nature, or duration upon Transgression; of the same Nature and duration you
must suppose the life to be, which is implied upon his constancy in his
Integrity. As Sin would render him an Eternal Object of Gods hatred, so his
Obedience would render him an Eternally amiable Object to his Creator, as the
standing Angels are preserved and confirmed in an entire Felicity and Glory.
Though the threatening be only expressed by God, Genesis 2.17.
yet the other is implied, and might easily be concluded from it by Adam. And
one reason why God only expressed the Threatening, and not the Promise, was,
because man might collect some hopes and expectations of a perpetual Happiness
from that Image of God which he beheld in himself, and from the large Provision
he had made for him in the World, and the Commission given him to Increase and
Multiply, and to Rule as a Lord over his other Works; whereas he could not so
easily have imagined himself capable of being exposed to such an extraordinary
Calamity as an Eternal Death, without some signification of it from God. It Is
easily concludable, that Eternal Life was supposed to be promised, to be
conferred upon him if he stood, as well as Eternal Death to be inflicted on him
if he Rebelled Suarez. de Gratia Vol 1. p. 126, 127.
. Now this Eternal Life was not due to his Nature, but it was a pure Beam, and
Gift of Divine Goodness: For there was no proportion between Man's Service in
his Innocent Estate, and a Reward so great both for Nature and duration: It was
a higher Reward than can be imagined either due to the Nature of Man, or upon
any Natural Right claimable by his Obedience. All that could be expected by
him, was but a Natural Happiness, not a Supernatural: As there was no necessity
upon the account of Natural Righteousness, so there was no necessity upon the
account of the Goodness of God to elevate the Nature of Man to a Supernatural
Happiness, merely because he Created him: For though it be necessary for God,
when he would Create, in regard of his Wisdom, to Create for some End, yet it
was not necessary that End should be a Supernatural End and Happiness, since a
Natural Blessedness had been sufficient for Man. And though God in Creating
Angels and Men intellectual and Rational Creatures, did make them necessary for
himself and his own Glory, yet it was not necessarily for him to order either
Angels or Men to such a Felicity as consists in a clear Vision, and so high a
Fruition of himself: for all other things are made by him for himself, and yet
not for the Vision of himself. God might have Created Man only for a Natural
Happiness, according to the Perfection of his Natural Faculties, and had dealt
Bountifully with him, if he had never intended him a Supernatural Blessedness,
and an Eternal Recompense: But what a largeness of Goodness is here, to design
Man in his Creation for so rich a Blessedness as an Eternal Life, with the
Fruition of himself? He has not only given to Man all things which are
necessary, but designed for Man that which the poor Creature could not imagine:
He garnisht the Earth for him, and garnisht him for an Eternal Felicity, had he
not by slighting the Goodness of God stripped himself of the present, and
forfeited his future Blessedness.

2. The second thing is the manifestation of this Goodness in Redemption. The
whole Gospel is nothing but one entire Mirror of Divine Goodness: The whole of
Redemption is wrapped up in that one Expression of the Angels Song, Luke 2.14.
Good will toward Man. The Angels Sang but one Song before, which is upon
Record, but the Matter of it seems to be the Wisdom of God chiefly in Creation.
Job 38.7. compar. 9. v. 5, 6, 8, 9. The Angels are there meant by the Morning
Stars; The visible Stars of Heaven were not distinctly formed, when the
Foundations of the Earth were laid: And the Title of the Sons of God verifies
it, since none but Creatures of understanding are dignified in Scripture with
that Title. There they Celebrate his Wisdom in Creation; here his Goodness in
Redemption, which is the entire Matter of the Song.

1. Goodness was the Spring of Redemption. All and every part of it owes only
to this Perfection the appearance of it in the World. This only excited Wisdom
to bring forth from so great an Evil as the Apostasy of Man, so great a Good as
the Recovery of him. When Man fell from his Created Goodness, God would
evidence that he could not fall from his Infinite Goodness: That the greatest
Evil could not surmount the ability of his Wisdom to contrive, nor the Riches
of his Bounty to present us a Remedy for it. Divine Goodness would not stand by
a Spectator, without being Reliever of that Misery Man had plunged himself
into; but by astonishing Methods it would recover him to Happiness, who had
wrested himself out of his hands, to fling himself into the most deplorable
Calamity: And it was the greater, since it surmounted those Natural
Inclinations, and those strong Provocations, which he had to shower down the
Power of his Wrath. What could be the Source of such a Procedure, but this
Excellency of the Divine Nature; Since no Violence could force him, nor was
there any Merit to persuade to such a Restoration? This under the name of his
Love, is rendered the sole cause of the Redeeming Death of the Son: It was to
commend his Love with the highest Gloss, and in so singular a manner that had
not its parallel in Nature, nor in all his other Works, and reaches in the
brightness of it beyond the manifested extent of any other Attribute Romans 5.8.
. It must be only a miraculous Goodness that induced him to expose the Life of
his Son to those difficulties in the World, and Death upon the Cross for the
freedom of sordid Rebels: His great End was to give such a demonstration of the
liberality of his Nature, as might be attractive to his Creature, remove its
shakings and tremblings, and encourage its approaches to him. It Is in this he
would not only manifest his Love, but assume the name of Love. By this Name the
Holy Ghost calls him in relation to this good will manifested in his Son, 1
John 4.8, 9.
God is love. In this is manifested the love of God toward us, because that
God sent his only begotten Son into the World, that we might live through him.
He would take the Name he never expressed himself in before. He was Jehovah in
regard of the truth of his Promise; so he would be known of old: He is Goodness
in regard of the grandeur of his Affection in the Mission of his Son: And
therefore he would be known by the Name of Love now in the days of the Gospel.

2. It was a Pure Goodness. He was under no obligation to pity our Misery, and
repair our Ruins: He might have stood to the terms of the first Covenant, and
exacted our Eternal Death, since we had committed an infinite Transgression: He
was under no tie to put off the Robes of a Judge for the Bowels of a Father,
and erect a Mercy-seat above his Tribunal of Justice Rada Controvers. Part. 3.
p. 363.
. The reparation of Man had no necessary connection with his Creation; It
follows not, that because Goodness had extracted us from nothing by a mighty
Power, that it must lift us out of wilful Misery by a mighty Grace. Certainly
that God who had no need of Creating us, had far less need of Redeeming us: For
since he Created one World, he could have as easily destroyed it and reared
another. It had not been unbecoming the Divine Goodness or Wisdom, to have let
Man perpetually wallow in that Sink wherein he had plunged himself, since he
was Criminal by his own will, and therefore Miserable by his own fault: Nothing
could necessitate this Reparation. If Divine Goodness could not be obliged by
the Angelical Dignity to repair that Nature, he is further from any Obligation
by the meaness of Man to repair Humane Nature. There was less necessity to
restore Man, than to restore the fallen Angels: What could Man do to oblige God
to a Reparation of him, since he could not render him a Recompense for his
Goodness manifested in his Creation? He must be much more impotent to render
him a Debtor for the Redemption of him from Misery. Could it be a salary for
any thing we had done: Alas! we are so far from Meriting it, that by our daily
Demerits, we seem ambitious to put a stop to any further Effusions of it: We
could not have complained of him, if he had left us in the Misery we had
courted, since he was bound by no Law to bestow upon us the Recovery we wanted.
When the Apostle speaks of the Gospel of Redemption, he gives it the Title of
the Gospel of the Blessed God 2 Timothy 1.11.
. It was the Gospel of a God abounding in his own Blessedness, which received
no addition by Man's Redemption; If he had been blessed by it, it had been a
goodness to himself, as well as to the Creature: It was not an Indigent
Goodness needing the receiving any thing from us; but it was a pure Goodness,
streaming out of it self, without bringing any thing into it self for the
Perfection of it: There was no Goodness in us to be the Motive of his Love, but
his Goodness was the Fountain of our Benefit.

3. It was a distinct Goodness of the whole Trinity. In the Creation of Man we
find a general Consultation, Genesis 1.26.
without those distinct Labors and Offices of each Person; and without those
raised Expressions and Marks of Joy and Triumph as at Man's Restoration. In this
there are distinct Functions: The Grace of the Father, the Merit of the Son,
and the Efficacy of the Spirit; The Father makes the Promise of Redemption, the
Son Seals it with his Blood, and the Spirit applies it; The Father Adopts us to
be his Children, the Son Redeems us to be his Members, and the Spirit Renews us
to be his Temples. In this the Father testifies himself well pleased in a
Voice; The Son proclaims his own delight to do the will of God; and the Spirit
hastens with the Wing of a Dove, to fit him for his work; And afterward in his
apparition in the likeness of Fiery Tongues, manifests his zeal for the
propagation of the Redeeming Gospel.

4. The Effects of it proclaim his great Goodness. It Is by this we are
delivered from the Corruption of our Nature, the Ruin of our Happiness, the
deformity of our Sins, and the punishment of our Transgressions: He frees us
from the Ignorance wherewith we were darkened, and from the Slavery wherein we
were fettered. When he came to make Adams Process after his Crime, instead of
pronouncing the Sentence of Death he had merited, he utters a Promise that Man
could not have expected: His Kindness swells above his provoked Justice, and
while he chaseth him out of Paradise, he gives him hopes of regaining the same
or a better Habitation; and is in the whole, more ready to prevent him with the
Blessings of his Goodness, than charge him with the horror of his Crimes Genesis
3.17.
: It Is a Goodness that pardons us more Transgressions than there are Moments in
our Lives; and overlooks as many Follies as there are Thoughts in our Heart: He
does not only relieve our wants, but restores us to our Dignity. It Is a greater
Testimony of Goodness to instate a Person in the highest Honor, than barely to
supply his present Necessity; It Is an admirable Pity, whereby he was inclined
to Redeem us, and an incomparable Affection whereby he was resolved to exalt
us. What can be desired more of him than his Goodness has granted? He has
sought us out when we were lost, and Ransomed us when we were Captives: He has
Pardoned us when we were Condemned, and raised us when we were Dead. In
Creation he reared us from nothing, in Redemption he delivers our Understanding
from ignorance and vanity, and our Wills from impotence and obstinacy, and our
whole Man from a Death worse than that nothing he drew us from by Creation.

5. Hence we may consider the height of this Goodness in Redemption to exceed
that in Creation. He gave Man a Being in Creation, but did not draw him from
unexpressible Misery by that act. His Liberality in the Gospel does infinitely
surpass what we admire in the Works of Nature: His Goodness in the latter is
more astonishing to our belief, than his Goodness in Creation is visible to our
Eye. There is more of his Bounty expressed in that one Verse, ( Joh. 3.16.
So God loved the World, that he gave his only begotten Son.) than there is in
the whole Volume of the World: It Is an incomprehensible so; a so, that all the
Angels in Heaven cannot Analyze, and few Comment upon, or understand the
dimensions of this so. In Creation he formed an Innocent Creature of the Dust
of the Ground; in Redemption he restores a Rebellious Creature by the Blood of
his Son: It is greater than that Goodness manifested in Creation.

1. In regard of the difficulty of effecting it. In Creation mere nothing was
vanquished, to bring us into Being; In Redemption sullen Enmity was conquered
for the enjoyment of our Restoration; In Creation he subdued a Nullity to make
us Creatures; In Redemption his Goodness overcomes his Omnipotent Justice to
restore us to Felicity; A word from the Mouth of Goodness inspired the Dust of
Men's Bodies with a living Soul; but the Blood of his Son must be shed, and the
Laws of Natural Affection seem to be overturned, to lay the Foundation of our
renewed Happiness. In the first, Heaven did but speak, and the Earth was
formed; In the second, Heaven it self must sink to Earth, and be clothed with
dusty Earth to reduce Man's Dust to its Original State.

2. This Goodness is greater than that manifested in Creation, in regard of its
Cost. This was a more expensive Goodness than what was laid out in Creation;
The redemption of one Soul is precious Psalm. 49.8.
, much more costly than the whole Fabric of the World, or as many Worlds as
the understandings of Angels in their utmost extent can conceive to be Created:
For the effecting of this God parts with his dearest Treasure, and his Son
Eclipses his choicest Glory; For this God must be made Man, Eternity must
suffer Death, the Lord of Angels must weep in a Cradle, and the Creator of the
World must hang like a Slave; he must be in a Manger in Bethlehem, and die upon
a Cross on Calvary: Unspotted Righteousness must be made Sin, and unblemisht
Blessedness be made a Curse. He was at no other Expense than the Breath of his
Mouth to form Man; the Fruits of the Earth could have maintained Innocent Man
without any other Cost; but his broken Nature cannot be healed without the
invaluable Medicine of the Blood of God. View Christ in the Womb and in the
Manger, in his weary Steps and hungry Bowels, in his Prostrations in the
Garden, and in his clodded drops of Bloody Sweat; View his Head pierced with a
Crown of Thorns, and his Face besmeared with the Soldiers Slabber; View him in
his march to Calvary, and his Elevation on the painful Cross with his Head
hanged down, and his Side streaming Blood; View him pelted with the Scoffs of
the Governors, and the Derisions of the Rabble; And see in all this, what Cost
Goodness was at for Man's Redemption. In Creation his Power made the Sun to
shine upon us, and in Redemption his Bowels sent a Son to die for us.

3. This Goodness of God in Redemption is greater than that manifested in
Creation, in regard of Man's desert of the contrary. In the Creation, as three
was nothing without him to allure him to the Expressions of his Bounty; so
there was nothing that did damp the Inclinations of his Goodness: The nothing
from whence the World was drawn, could never merit, nor demerit a Being,
because it was nothing: As there was nothing to engage him, so there was
nothing to disoblige him: As his Favor could not be merited, so neither could
his Anger be deserved: But in this he finds ingratitude against the former
Marks of his Goodness, and Rebellion against the sweetness of his Sovereignty:
Crimes unworthy of the dews of Goodness, and worthy of the sharpest strokes of
Vengeance: And therefore the Scripture advances the honor of it above the
Title of mere Goodness, to that of Grace Romans 5.2. Tit. 2.11.
; because Men were not only unworthy of a Blessing, but worthy of a Curse. An
Innocent Nothing more deserves Creation, than a Culpable Creature deserves an
exemption from Destruction. When Man fell, and gave occasion to God to repent
of his Created Work, his ravishing Goodness surmounted the occasions he had of
repenting, and the provocations he had to the destruction of his Frame.

4. It was a greater Goodness than was expressed toward the Angels.

1. A greater Goodness than was expressed toward the standing Angels. The Son of
God did no more expose his Life for the confirmation of those that stood, than
for the restoration of those that fell: The Death of Christ was not for the
holy Angels, but for sinful Man; They needed the Grace of God to confirm them,
but not the Death of Christ to restore or preserve them; They had a beloved
Holiness to be established by the powerful Grace of God, but not any abominable
Sin to be expiated and blotted out by the Blood of God; They had no Debt to pay
but that of Obedience; but we had both a Debt of Obedience to the Precepts, and
a Debt of Suffering to the Penalty after the Fall. Whether the holy Angels were
confirmed by Christ, or no, is a question: some think they were, from Colos.
1.20. where things in Heaven are said to be reconciled; but some think that
place signifies no more than the Reconciliation of things in Heaven, if meant
of the Angels, to things on Earth, with whom they were at enmity in the Cause
of their Sovereign; or the Reconciliation of things in Heaven to God, is meant
the glorified Saints who were once in a State of Sin, and whom the Death of
Christ upon the Cross reached, though dead long before. But if Angels were
confirmed by Christ, it was by him not as a slain Sacrifice, but as the
Sovereign head of the whole Creation, appointed by God to gather all things
into one, which some think to be the intendment of, Ephesians. 1.10. where all
things, as well those in Heaven, as those in Earth are said to be gathered
together in one in Christ. Where is a syllable in Scripture of his being
Crucified for Angels, but only for Sinners? Not for the Confirmation of the
one, but the Reconciliation of the other; So that the Goodness whereby God
continued those Blessed Spirits in Heaven through the effusions of his Grace,
is a small thing to the restoring us to our forfeited Happiness through the
Streams of Divine Blood. The preserving a Man in life, is a little thing and a
smaller benefit than the raising a Man from Death. The rescuing a Man from an
ignominious Punishment lays a greater obligation, than barely to prevent him
from committing a capital Crime. The preserving a Man standing upon the top of
a steep Hill is more easy, than to bring a Crippled and Tissical Man from the
bottom to the top. The continuance God gave to the Angels, is not so signal a
Mark of Goodness, as the deliverance he gave to us, since they were not sunk
into Sin, nor by any Crime fallen into Misery.

2. His Goodness in Redemption is greater than any Goodness expressed to the
Fallen Angels. It Is the wonder of his Goodness to us, that he was mindful of
Fallen Man, and careless of Fallen Angels; That he should visit Man, wallowing
in Death and Blood with the Dayspring from on high, and never turn the
Egyptian darkness of Devils into a cheerful day; When they Sinned Divine
Thunder dashed them into Hell; When Man Sinned Divine Blood wafts the Fallen
Creature from his Misery: The Angels wallow in their own Blood for ever, while
Christ is made partaker of our Blood, and wallows in his Blood, that we might
not for ever corrupt in ours; They tumbled down from Heaven, and Divine
Goodness would not vouchsafe to catch them: Man tumbles down, and Divine
Goodness holds out a hand drencht in the Blood of him, that was from the
Foundations of the World, to lift us up, Heb. 2.16. He spared not those
dignified Spirits, when they Revolted; and spared not punishing his Son for
dusty Man, when he offended; when he might as well for ever have let Man lie in
the Chains wherein he had entangled himself, as them. We were as fit Objects of
Justice as they, and they as fit Objects of Goodness as we: they were not more
wretched by their Fall than we, and the poverty of our Nature rendered us more
unable to recover our selves, than the dignity of theirs did them; They were
his Reuben his first born, they were his Might and the beginning of his
Strength, yet those Elder Sons he neglected to prefer the Younger; They were
the Prime and Golden Pieces of Creation, not laden with gross Matter, yet they
lie under the Ruins of their Fall, while Man, Lead in comparison of them, is
refined for another World.

They seemed to be fitter Objects of Divine Goodness in regard of the eminency
of their Nature above the Humane: One Angel excelled in Endowments of Mind and
Spirit, vastness of Understanding, greatness of Power, all the Sons of Men;
they were more capable to praise him, more capable to serve him, and because of
the Acuteness of their Comprehension more able to have a due Estimate of such a
Redemption, had it been afforded them; yet that Goodness which had Created them
so Comely, would not lay it self out in restoring the Beauty they had defaced.
The Promise was of bruising the Serpents head for us, not of listing up the
Serpents head with us; Their Nature was not assumed, nor any command given them
to believe or repent: Not one Devil spared, not one Apostate Spirit recovered,
not one of those eminent Creatures restored; Every one of them has only a
prospect of Misery without any glimps of Recovery: They were ruined under one
Sin, and we repaired under many. All his Redeeming Goodness was laid out upon
Man, Psalm. 144.3. What is Man that thou take knowledge of him, and the Son of
Man that thou make account of him? Making account of him above Angels; As
they fell without any tempting them, so God would leave them to rise without
any assisting them. I know the Schools trouble themselves to find out the
reasons of this peculiarity of Grace to Man, and not to them; because the whole
Humane Nature fell, but only a part of the Angelical; The one Sinned by a
Seduction, and the other by a sullenness without any Tempter: Every Angel
Sinned by his own proper will, whereas Adams Posterity Sinned by the will of
the first Man, the common Root of all. God would deprive the Devil of any glory
in the satisfaction of his envious desire to hinder Man from attainment and
possession of that Happiness which himself had lost. The weakness of Man below
the Angelical Nature might excite the Divine Mercy: And since all the things of
the lower World were Created for Man, God would not lose the honor of his
Works, by losing the immediate End for which he framed them. And finally
because in the Restoration of Angels, there would have been only a Restoration
of one Nature that was not comprehensive of the Nature of Inferior things: But
after all such Conjectures Man must sit down, and acknowledge Divine Goodness
to be the only Spring without any other Motive. Since Infinite Wisdom could
have contrived a way for Redemption for Fallen Angels, as well as for Fallen
Man, and restored both the one and the other; Why might not Christ have assumed
their Nature as well as ours into the unity of the Divine Person, and suffered
the Wrath of God in their Nature for them, as well as in his Humane Soul for
us? It Is as conceivable that two Natures might have been assumed by the Son of
God, as well as three Souls be in Man distinct, as some think there are.

3. To Enhance this Goodness yet higher; It was a greater Goodness to us, than
was for a time manifested to Christ himself. To demonstrate his Goodness to Man
in preventing his Eternal Ruin, he would for a while withold his Goodness
from his Son, by exposing his Life as the price of our Ransom; not only
subjecting him to the Derisions of Enemies, Desertions of Friends, and Malice
of Devils, but to the unexpressible bitterness of his own Wrath in his Soul, as
made an offering for Sin.

The Particle so, John 3.16. seems to intimate this Supremacy of Goodness: He
so loved the World that he gave his only begotten Son. He so loved the World,
that he seemed for a time not to love his Son in comparison of it, or equal
with it. The Person to whom a Gift is given, is in that regard accounted more
valuable than the Gift or Present made to him: Thus God valued our Redemption
above the worldly Happiness of the Redeemer, and sentenceth him to an
Humiliation on Earth, in order to our Exaltation in Heaven: He was desirous to
hear him groaning, and see him bleeding, that we might not groan under his
Frowns, and bleed under his Wrath: He spared not him, that he might spare us;
refused not to strike him, that he might be well pleased with us; drencht his
Sword in the Blood of his Son, that it might not for ever be wet with ours; but
that his Goodness might for ever triumph in our Salvation: He was willing to
have his Son made Man, and die, rather than Man should perish, who had
delighted to ruin himself; He seemed to degrade him for a time from what he
was Lingend de Eucharist, p. 84, 85.
. But since he could not be united to any but to an intellectual Creature, he
could not be united to any viler and more sordid Creature than the Earthly
Nature of Man. And when this Son in our Nature prayed, that the Cup might pass
from him, Goodness would not suffer it, to show how it valued the manifestation
of it self in the Salvation of Man above the preservation of the Life of so
dear a Person.

In particular wherein this Goodness appears;

1. The first Resolution to Redeem, and the means appointed for Redemption,
could have no other inducement but Divine Goodness. We cannot too highly value
the Merit of Christ; but we must not so much extend the Merit of Christ, as to
draw a value to Eclipse the Goodness of God: Though we owe our Redemption and
the Fruits of it to the Death of Christ, yet we owe not the first Resolutions
of Redemption, and assumption of our Nature, the means of Redemption, to the
Merit of Christ. Divine Goodness only, without the association of any Merit,
not only of Man but of the Redeemer himself, begat the first purpose of our
Recovery: He was singled out, and predestined to be our Redeemer, before he
took our Nature to Merit our Redemption. God sent his Son, is a frequent
Expression in the Gospel of St. John John 3.34. Joh. 9.24. Joh. 17.3.
. To what end did God send Christ, but to Redeem? Lessius.
The purpose of Redemption therefore preceded the pitching upon Christ as the
means and procuring Cause of it, i. e. of our actual Redemption, but not of the
Redeeming purpose; the end is always in intention before the means. God so
loved the World, that he gave his only begotten Son; The love of God to the
World was first in Intention and the Order of Nature, before the will of giving
his Son to the World. His Intention of saving was before the Mission of a
Savior: So that this Affection rose not from the Merit of Christ, but the
Merit of Christ was directed by this Affection. It was the Effect of it, not
the Cause. Nor was the union of our Nature with his Merited by him; All his
Meritorious acts were performed in our Nature: The Nature therefore wherein he
performed it, was not Merited; that Grace which was not, could not Merit what
it was: He could not Merit that Humanity, which must be assumed before he could
Merit any thing for us, because all Merit for us must be offered in the Nature
which had offended. It Is true Christ gave himself, but by the order of Divine
Goodness; he that begat him pitched upon him, and called him to this great work:
Heb. 5.5.
He is therefore called the Lamb of God, as being set apart by God to be a
propitiating and appeasing Sacrifice. He is the Wisdom of God, since from the
Father he reveals the Council and Order of Redemption. In this regard he calls
God his God in the Prophet, Isaiah 49.4.
and in the Evangelist; Joh. 20.17.
though he was big with affection for the accomplishment, yet he came not to do
his own will, but the will of Divine Goodness: His own will it was too, but not
principally as being the first Wheel in Motion, but subordinate to the eternal
will of Divine Bounty. It was by the will of God that he came, and by his will
he drank the dreggy Cup of Bitterness. Divine Justice laid upon him the
iniquity of us all, but Divine Goodness intended it for our Rescue: Divine
Goodness singled him out, and set him apart: Divine Goodness invited him to it:
Divine Goodness commanded him to effect it, and put a Law into his heart, to
biass him in the performing of it: Divine Goodness sent him, and Divine
Goodness moved Justice to bruise him; and after his Sacrifice, Divine Goodness
accepted him, and caressed him for it. So earnest was it for our Redemption, as
to give out special and irreversible Orders: Death was commanded to be endured
by him for us, and Life commanded to be imparted by him to us John 10.10, 18.
. If God had not been the Mover, but had received the proposal from another, he
might have heard it, but was not bound to grant it: His Sovereign Authority was
not under any obligation to receive another Sponsion for the miserable
Criminal. As Christ is the head of Man, so God is the head of Christ 1 Cor.
11.3.
; He did nothing but by his directions, as he was not a Mediator but by the
Constitution of Divine Goodness. As a liberal Man devises liberal things
Isaiah 2.8.
, so did a bountiful God devise a bountiful act, wherein his kindness and love
as a Savior appeared: He was possessed with the resolutions to manifest his
Goodness in Christ in the beginning of his way Prove. 8.22, 23.
, before he descended to the act of Creation. This intention of Goodness
preceded his making that Creature Man, who he foresaw would fall, and by his
fall disjoynt, and entangle the whole Frame of the World without such a
provision.

2. In Gods giving Christ to be our Redeemer, he gave the highest gift that it
was possible for Divine Goodness to bestow. As there is not a greater God than
himself to be conceived, so there is not a greater Gift for this great God to
present to his Creatures: Never did God go farther in any of his excellent
Perfections than this. It Is such a Dole that cannot be transcended with a
choicer: He is as it were come to the last Mite of his Treasure. And though he
could Create Millions of Worlds for us, he cannot give a greater Son to us. He
could abound in the expressions of his Power in new Creations of Worlds, which
have not yet been seen, and in the luster of his Wisdom in more stately
Structures; but if he should frame as many Worlds, as there are Mites of Dust
and Matter in this, and make every one of them as bright and glorious as the
Sun; Though his Power and Wisdom would be more signalized, yet his Goodness
could not, since he has not a choicer Gift to bless those brighter Worlds
withal, than he has conferred upon this. Nor can Immense Goodness contrive a
richer means to conduct those Worlds to Happiness, than he has both invented
for this World, and presented it with. It cannot be imagined, that it can
extend it self farther, than to give a Gift equal with himself; a Gift as dear
to him as himself. His Wisdom, had it studied millions of Eternities, (excuse
the Expression, since Eternity admits of no Millions, it being an interminable
duration) it could have found out no more to give, this Goodness could have
bestowed no more, and our necessity could not have required a greater offering
for our relief. When God intended in Redemption the manifestation of his
highest Goodness, it could not be without the Donation of the choicest Gift. As
when he would ensure our Comfort, he swears by himself, because he cannot swear
by a greater Heb. 6.13.
: So when he would ensure our Happiness, he gives us his Son, because he cannot
give a greater, being equal with himself. Had the Father given himself in
Person, he had given one first in order, but not greater in Essence and
glorious Perfections: It could have been no more than the life of God, that
should then have been laid down for us; and so it was now, since the Humane
Nature did not subsist but in his Divine Person.

1. It Is a greater Gift than Worlds, or all things purchased by him. What was
this Gift but the Image of his Person, and the brightness of his Glory Heb. 1.3.
? What was this Gift, but one as rich as Eternal Blessedness could make him?
What was this Gift, but one that possessed the fullness of Earth, and the more
Immense Riches of Heaven? It Is a more valuable Present, than if he presented us
with thousands of Worlds of Angels and inferior Creatures, because his Person
is incomparably greater, not only than all conceivable, but inconceivable
Creations: We are more obliged to him for it, than if he had made us Angels of
the highest Rank in Heaven, because it is a Gift of more value than the whole
Angelical Nature, because he is an infinite Person; and therefore infinitely
transcends whatsoever is finite, though of the highest Dignity. The Wounds of
an Almighty God for us are a greater Testimony of Goodness, than if we had all
the other Riches of Heaven and Earth. This Perfection had not appeared in such
an astonishing grandeur, had it pardoned us without so rich a satisfaction;
that had been pardon to our Sin, not a God of our Nature. God so loved the
World that he pardoned it, had not sounded so great and so good, as God so
loved the World that he gave his only begotten Son. Est aliquid in Christo
formosius Servatore. There is something in Christ more Excellent and Comely
than the Office of a Savior; the greatness of his Person is more Excellent,
than the Salvation procured by his Death: It was a greater Gift than was
bestowed upon innocent Adam, or the holy Angels. In the Creation, his Goodness
gave us Creatures for our use: In our Redemption, his Goodness gives us what
was dearest to him for our Service; our Sovereign in Office to benefit us, as
well as in a Royalty to govern us.

2. It was a greater Gift, because it was his own Son. Not an Angel. It had
been a mighty Goodness to have given one of the lofty Seraphims; A greater
Goodness to have given the whole Corporation of those glorious Spirits for us;
those Children of the most high: But he gave that Son, whom he commands all the
Angels to Worship Heb. 1.6.
, and all Men to adore, and pay the lowest Homage to Psalm. 2.12.
; that Son that is to be honored by us, as we honor the Father Joh. 5.23.
; that Son which was his delight; his delights in the Hebrew, Prove. 8.30.
wherein all the delights of the Father were gathered in one, as well as of the
whole Creation; and not simply a Son, but an only begotten Son, upon which
Christ lays the stress with an Emphasis Joh. 3.16.
. He had but one Son in Heaven or Earth, one Son from an unviewable Eternity,
and that one Son he gave for a degenerate World; this Son he Consecrated for
evermore a Priest Heb. 7 28.
. The word of the Oath makes the Son; The peculiarity of his Sonship heightens
the Goodness of the Donor. It was no meaner a Person that he gave to empty
himself of his glory, to fulfill an obedience for us, that we might be rendered
happy partakers of the Divine Nature. Those that know the natural affection of
a Father to a Son, must judge the affection of God the Father to the Son
infinitely greater, than the affection of an Earthly Father to the Son of his
Bowels. It must be an unparalleled Goodness, to give up a Son that he loved
with so ardent an Affection for the Redemption of Rebels: Abandon a glorious
Son to a dishonorable Death for the security of those that had violated the
Laws of Righteousness, and endeavored to pull the Sovereign Crown from his
head. Besides, being an only Son, all those Affections centered in him, which
in Parents would have been divided among a multitude of Children: So then, as
it was a Testimony of the highest Faith and Obedience in Abraham to offer up
his only begotten Son to God Heb. 11.17.
; So it was the Triumph of Divine Goodness, to give so great, so dear a Person
for so little a thing as Man; and for such a piece of nothing and vanity, as a
Sinful World.

3. And this Son given to Rescue us by his Death. It was a gift to us; For our
sakes he descended from his Throne, and dwelt on Earth; For our sakes he was
made Flesh, and infirm Flesh; For our sakes he was made a Curse, and scorcht in
the Furnace of his Fathers Wrath; For our sakes he went naked, armed only with
his own Strength into the Lists of that Combat with the Devils, that led us
Captive. Had he given him to be a Leader for the conquest of some Earthly
Enemies, it had been a great Goodness to display his Banners, and bring us
under his Conduct; but he sent him to lay down his Life in the bitterest and
most inglorious manner, and exposed him to a cursed Death for our Redemption
from that dreadful Curse which would have broken us to pieces, and irreparably
have crushed us. He gave him to us, to suffer for us as a Man, and Redeem us as
a God; to be a Sacrifice to expiate our Sin, by translating the Punishment upon
himself, which was merited by us. Thus was he made low to exalt us, and debased
to advance us, made poor to enrich us ^. Co^. 8.9.
; and Eclipsed to brighten our sullied Natures, and Wounded that he might be a
Physician for our languishments: He was ordered to taste the bitter Cup of
Death, that we might drink of the Rivers of Immortal Life, and pleasures: To
submit to the frailties of the Humane Nature, that we might possess the Glories
of the Divine: He was ordered to be a Sufferer, that we might be no longer
Captives; and to pass through the Fire of Divine Wrath, that he might purge our
Nature from the dross it had contracted. Thus was the Righteous given for Sin,
the Innocent for Criminals, the Glory of Heaven for the Dregs of Earth, and the
Immense Riches of a Deity expended to re-stock Man.

4. And a Son that was exalted for what he had done for us by the order of
Divine Goodness. The Exaltation of Christ was no less a signal Mark of his
miraculous Goodness to us, than of his Affection to him; since he was obedient
by Divine Goodness to die for us, his advancement was for his obedience to
those Orders. 2 Phil. 8 9.
The Name given to him above every Name, was a repeated Triumph of this
Perfection; Since his Passion was not for himself, he was wholly Innocent, but
for us who were Criminal. His advancement was not only for himself as Redeemer,
but for us as Redeemed: Divine Goodness centered in him, both in his Cross and
in his Crown; for it was for the purging our Sins he sat down on the Right hand
of the Majesty on high Heb. 1.3.
: And the whole blessed Society of Principalities and Powers in Heaven admire
this Goodness of God, and ascribe to him Honor, Glory, and Power for advancing
the Lamb slain Revel. 5.11, 12, 13.
. Divine Goodness did not only give him to us, but gave him Power, Riches,
Strength, and Honor, for manifesting this Goodness to us, and opening the
passages for its fuller conveyances to the Sons of Men. Had not God had
thoughts of a perpetual Goodness, he would not have settled him so near him, to
manage our Cause, and testified so much Affection to him on our behalf. This
Goodness gave him to be debased for us, and ordered him to be Enthroned for us:
As it gave him to us Bleeding, so it would give him to us Triumphing; that as
we have a share by Grace in the Merits of his Humiliation, we might partake
also of the glories of his Coronation; that from first to last, we may behold
nothing but the Triumphs of Divine Goodness to fallen Man.

5. In bestowing this Gift on us, Divine Goodness gives whole God to us.
Whatsoever is great and excellent in the Godhead, the Father gives us, by
giving us his Son: The Creator gives himself to us in his Son Christ. In giving
Creatures to us, he gives the Riches of Earth; In giving himself to us, he
gives the Riches of Heaven, which surmount all understanding: It Is in this Gift
he becomes our God, and passes over the Title of all that he is for our use
and benefit, that every Attribute in the Divine Nature may be claimed by us;
not to be imparted to us whereby we may be deified; but employed for our
welfare, whereby we may be blessed. He gave himself in Creation to us in the
Image of his Holiness; but in Redemption he gave himself in the Image of his
Person: He would not only communicate the Goodness without him, but bestow upon
us the infinite Goodness of his own Nature; That that which was his own End and
Happiness, might be our End and Happiness, viz. Himself.

By giving his Son, he has given himself; and in both Gifts he has given all
things to us: The Creator of all things is eminently all things: He has given
all things into the hands of his Son, Joh. 3.35.
and by consequence given all things into the hands of his Redeemed Creatures,
by giving them him to whom he gave all things; Whatsoever we were invested in
by Creation, whatsoever we were deprived of by Corruption, and more, he has
deposited in safe hands for our enjoyment: And what can Divine Goodness do more
for us? What further can it give unto us, than what it has given, and in that
Gift designed for us?

3. This Goodness is enhanc'd by considering the State of Man in the first
Transgression, and since.

1. Man's first Transgression. If we should rip up every Vein of that first Sin,
should we find any want of Wickedness to excite a just Indignation? What was
there but ingratitude to Divine Bounty, and Rebellion against Divine
Sovereignty? The Royalty of God was attempted, the Supremacy of Divine
knowledge above Man's own knowledge envied; the Riches of Goodness whereby he
lived and breathed, slighted: There is a discontent with God upon an
unreasonable Sentiment, that God had denied a knowledge to him, which was his
right and due; when there should have been an humble acknowledgment of that
unmerited Goodness, which had not only given him a Being above other Creatures,
but placed him the Governor and Lord of those that were inferior to him: What
alienation of his understanding was there from knowing God, and of his will
from loving him? A Debauch of all his Faculties: A Spiritual Adultery, in
preferring not only one of Gods Creatures, but one of his desperate Enemies
before him; thinking him a wiser Counselor than Infinite Wisdom, and imagining
him possessed with kinder affections to him, than that God who had newly
Created him. Thus he joins in League with Hell against Heaven, with a Fallen
Spirit against his Bountiful Benefactor, and enters into Society with Rebels,
that just before commenced a War against his and their common Sovereign: He did
not only falter in, but cast off the Obedience due to his Creator; endeavored
to purloin his Glory, and actually murdered all those that were vertually in
his Loins. Romans 5.12.
Sin entered into the World by him, and Death by Sin, and passed upon all Men,
taking them off from their Subjection to God, to be Slaves to the damned
Spirits, and Heirs of their Misery: And after all this he adds a foul
imputation on God, taxing him as the Author of his Sin, and thereby stains the
Beauty of his Holiness. But notwithstanding all this, God stops not up the
Floodgates of his Goodness, nor does he entertain Fiery Resolutions against
Man, but brings forth a healing Promise; and sends not an Angel upon
Commission, to Reveal it to him, but Preaches it himself to this Forlorn and
Rebellious Creature. Genesis 3.15.


2. Could there be any thing in this Fallen Creature, to allure God to the
Expression of his Goodness? Was there any good action in all his Carriage, that
could plead for a readmission of him to his former State? Was there one good
quality left, that could be an Orator to persuade Divine Goodness to such a
gracious Procedure? Was there any Moral Goodness in Man after this Debauch,
that might be an Object of Divine Love? What was there in him, that was not
rather a provocation, than an allurement? Could you expect that any Perfection
in God, should find a Motive in this ungrateful Apostate, to open a Mouth for
him, and be an Advocate to support him, and bring him off from a just Tribunal?
Or after Divine Goodness had begun to pity and plead for Man, is it not
wonderful that it should not discontinue the Plea, after it found Man's Excuse
to be as black as his Crime Genesis 3.12.
; and his Carriage upon his Examination, to be as disobliging as his first
Revolt? It might well be expected, that all the Perfections in the Divine
Nature, would have entered into an association eternally to treat this Rebel
according to his deserts. What attractives were there in a silly Worm, much
less in such complete Wickedness, inexcusable Enmity, infamous Rebellion, to
design a Redeemer for him, and such a Person as the Son of God to a Fleshy
Body, an Eclipse of Glory, and an ignominious Cross? The meaness of Man was
further from alluring God to it, than the dignity of Angels.

3. Was there not a World of demerit in Man, to animate Grace as well as Wrath
against him. We were so far from deserving the opening any Streams of Goodness,
that we had merited Floods of devouring Wrath. What were all Men, but Enemies
to God in a high manner? Every offense was infinite, as being committed against
a Being of Infinite Dignity; it was a stroke at the very Being of God; A
resistance of all his Attributes; it would degrade him from the height and
Perfection of his Nature; it would not by its good will suffer God to be God.
If he that hates his Brother, is a Murderer of his Brother, he that hates his
Creator, is a Murderer of the Deity; Joh. 1.3.15.
and every Carnal mind is Enmity to God Romans 8.7.
: Every Sin envies him his Authority by breaking his Precept; and envies him
his Goodness by defacing the Marks of it: Every Sin comprehends in it more than
Men or Angels can conceive: That God who only has the clear apprehensions of
his own Dignity, has the sole clear apprehensions of Sins Malignity. All Men
were thus by Nature; those that Sinned before the coming of the Redeemer, had
been in a State of Sin; those that were to come after him would be in a State
of Sin by their Birth, and be Criminals as soon as ever they were Creatures.
All Men, as well the Glorified as those in the Flesh at the coming of the
Redeemer, and those that were to be born after, were considered in a State of
Sin by God, when he bruised the Redeemer for them: All were filthy and unworthy
of the Eye of God: All had employed the Faculties of their Souls, and the
Members of their Bodies, which they enjoyed by his Goodness, against the
interest of his Glory. Every Rational Creature had made himself a Slave to
those Creatures over whom he had been appointed a Lord; subjected himself as a
Servant to his Inferior, and strutted as a Superior against his Liberal
Sovereign, and by every Sin rendered himself more a Child of Satan, and Enemy of
God, and more worthy of the Curses of the Law, and the Torments of Hell: Was it
not now a mighty Goodness that would surmount those high Mountains of Demerit,
and elevate such Creatures by the Depression of his Son? Had we been possessed
of the highest Holiness, a Reward had been the natural effect of Goodness: It
was not possible that God should be unkind to a Righteous and Innocent
Creature: His Grace would have Crowned that, which had been so agreeable to
him: He had been a denier of himself, had he numbered Innocent Creatures in the
Rank of the Miserable. But to be kind to an Enemy: To run Counter to the
vastness of Demerit in Man, was a Superlative Goodness; a Goodness triumphing
above all the provocations of Men, and Pleas of Justice. It was an abounding
Goodness of Grace: Romans 5.20.
Where Sin abounded, Grace did much more abound, (...). It swelled above the
heights of Sin, and triumphed more than all his other Attributes.

4. Man was reduced to the lowest Condition. Our Crimes had brought us to the
lowest Calamity; we were brought to the dust, and prepared for Hell. Adam had
not the boldness to Request, and therefore we may Judge he had not the least
hopes of Pardon; he was sunk under Wrath, and could have expected no better an
Entertainment, than the Tempter, whose solicitations he submitted to: We had
cast the Diadem from our heads, and lost all our Original Excellency: We were
lost to our own Happiness, and lost to our Creators Service, when he was so
kind as to send his Son to seek us, Matthew. 18.11. and so liberal as to expend
his Blood for our cure and preservation. How great was that Goodness that would
not abandon us in our Misery, but remit our Crimes, and rescue our Persons, and
ransom our Souls by so great a Price from the Rights of Justice, and horrors of
Hell, we were so fitted for?

5. Every Age multiplied Provocations. Every Age of the World proved more
degenerate; The Traditions which were purer and more lively among Adams
immediate Posterity, were more dark among his further Descendants. Idolatry,
whereof we have no Marks in the old World before the Deluge, was frequent
afterward in every Nation: Not only the knowledge of the true God was lost,
but the Natural Reverential thoughts of a Deity were expelled. Hence Gods were
dubbed according to Men's humors; and not only Human Passions, but Brutish Vices
ascribed to them: As by the Fall we were become less than Men, so we would
fancy God no better than a Beast, since Beasts were Worshipped as Gods Romans
1.21.
; yea, fancied God no better than a Devil; since that Destroyer was Worshipped
instead of the Creator; and a Homage paid to the Powers of Hell that had ruined
them, which was due to the Goodness of that Benefactor, who had made them and
preserved them in the World. The vilest Creatures were Deifi'd; Reason was
debased below Common Sense: And Men adored one end of a Log, while they warmed
themselves with the other Isai. 44.14.16, 17.
; as if that which was Ordained for the Kitchen, were a fit Representation for
God in the Temple. Thus were the Natural Notions of a Deity depraved; the whole
World drencht in Idolatry; And though the Jews were free from that gross abuse
of God, yet they were sunk also into loathsome Superstitions, when the Goodness
of God brought in his designed Redeemer and Redemption into the World.

6. The impotence of Man enhanceth this Goodness. Our own Eye did scarce pity
us, and it was impossible for our own hands to relieve us; we were insensible
of our Misery, in love with our Death; we courted our Chains, and the noise of
our fettering Lusts were our Music, Tit. 3.3.
serving diverse Lusts and Pleasures. Our Lusts were our Pleasures; Satan's Yoke
was as del ghtful to us to bear, as to him to impose: Instead of being his
Opposers in his attempts against us, we were his voluntary Seconds, and every
whit as willing to embrace, as he was to propose his Ruining Temptations. As no
Man can recover himself from Death, so no Man can recover himself from Wrath;
he is as unable to Redeem, as to Create himself; he might as soon have stripped
himself of his being, as put an end to his Misery; his Captivity would have
been endless, and his Chains remediless, for any thing he could do to knock
them off, and deliver himself; he was too much in love with the Sink of Sin, to
leave wallowing in it, and under too powerful a hand, to cease frying in the
Flames of Wrath. As the Law could not be obeyed by Man, after a corrupt
Principle had entered into him, so neither could Justice be satisfied by him
after his Transgression. The Sinner was indebted, but Bankrupt; As he was
unable to pay a Mite of that Obedience he owed to the Precept, because of his
enmity; so he was unable to satisfy what he owed to the Penalty, because of
his Feebleness: He was as much without love to observe the one, as without
strength to bear the other: Romans 8.7.
He could not because of his Enmity be subject to the Law, or compensate for
his Sin, because he was Romans 5.6.
without strength. His strength to offend was great; but to deliver himself a
mere nothing. Repentance was not a thing known by Man after the fall, till he
had hopes of Redemption; and if he had known and exercised it, what
compensation are the Tears of a Malefactor for an injury done to the Crown, and
attempting the life of his Prince? How great was Divine Goodness; not only to
pity Men in this State, but to provide a strong Redeemer for them? Oh Lord my
Strength, and my Redeemer, said the Psalmist Psalm. 19.1^.
: When he found out a Redeemer for our Misery, he found out a Strength for our
Impotency.

To conclude this: Behold the Goodness of God, when we had thus unhandsomely
dealt with him; had nothing to allure his Goodness, Multitudes of Provocations
to incense him, were reduced to a conditon as low as could be, fit to be the
Matter of his Scoffs, and the Sport of Divine Justice, and so weak that we
could not repair our own Ruins; then did he open a Fountain of fresh Goodness
in the Death of his Son, and sent forth such delightful Streams, as in our
Original Creation, we could never have tasted; Not only overcame the
Resentments of a Provoked Justice, but magnified it self by our lowness, and
strengthened it self by our weakness: His Goodness had before Created an
Innocent, but here it saves a Malefactor; and sends his Son to die for us, as
if the Holy of Holies were the Criminal, and the Rebel the Innocent. It had
been a pompous Goodness, to have given him as a King; but a Goodness of greater
grandeur, to expose him as a Sacrifice for Slaves and Enemies: Had Adam
remained Innocent, and proved thankful for what he had received, it had been
great Goodness to have brought him to glory; But to bring filthy and rebellious
Adam to it, surmounts by unexpressible degrees, that sort of Goodness he had
experimented before; Since it was not from a light Evil, a tolerable Curse
unawares brought upon us, but from the Yoke we had willingly submitted to, from
the power of darkness we had courted, and the furnace of wrath we had kindled
for our selves. What are we dead Dogs, that he should behold us with so
gracious an Eye? This Goodness is thus inhanced, if you consider the State of
Man in his first Transgression and after.

4. This Goodness further appears in the high advancement of our Nature, after
it had so highly offended. By Creation, we had an affinity with Animals in our
Bodies, with Angels in our Spirits, with God in his Image; but not with God in
our Nature till the Incarnation of the Redeemer. Adam by Creation was the Son
of God, Luke 3.38.
but his Nature was not one with the Person of God: He was his Son as Created
by him, but had no affinity to him by virtue of union with him: But now Man
does not only see his Nature in multitudes of Men on Earth, but by an
astonishing Goodness, beholds his Nature united to the Deity in Heaven: That as
he was the Son of God by Creation, he is now the Brother of God by Redemption;
for with such a Title does that Person, who was the Son of God as well as the
Son of Man, honor his Disciples Joh. 20.17.
: And because he is of the same Nature with them, he is not ashamed to call
them Brethren, Heb. 2.11.

Our Nature which was infinitely distant from, and below the Deity, now makes
one Person with the Son of God. What Man sinfully aspired to, God has
graciously granted, and more: Man aspired to a likeness in knowledge, and God
has granted him an affinity in union. It had been astonishing Goodness to
Angelize our Natures, but in Redemption Divine Goodness has acted higher, in a
sort to Deifie our Natures. In Creation our Nature was exalted above other
Creatures on Earth; in our Redemption our Nature is exalted above all the Host
of Heaven: We were higher than the Beasts as Creatures, but lower than the
Angels; Psalm. 8.5.
But by the Incarnation of the Son of God, our Nature is elevated many steps
above them. After it had sunk it self by Corruption below the Bestial Nature,
and as low as the Diabolical, the fullness of the Godhead dwells in our Nature
Bodily, Colos. 2.9.
but never in the Angels, Angelically. The Son of God descended to dignifie our
Nature, by assuming it, and ascended with our Nature to have it crowned above
those standing Monuments of Divine Power, and Goodness. 1 Ephesians 20.21.
That Person that descended in our Nature into the Grave, and in the same
Nature was raised up again, is in that same Nature set at the right hand of God
in Heaven, far above all Principality and Power, and Might, and Dominion, and
every Name that is named. Our Refined Clay by an indissoluble union with this
Divine Person, is honored to sit for ever upon a Throne above all the Tribes
of Seraphims and Cherubins; and the Person that wears it, is the head of the
good Angels, and the conqueror of the bad; The one are put under his Feet, and
the other commanded to adore him, that purged our Sins in our Nature Heb. 1.3,
6.
: That Divine Person in our Nature receives Adoration from the Angels; but the
Nature of Man is not ordered to pay any Homage and Adorations to the Angels.
How could Divine Goodness to Man more magnify it self? As we could not have a
lower descent than we had by Sin, How could we have a higher ascent, than by a
substantial participation of a Divine Life in our Nature in the unity of a
Divine Person? Our Earthly Nature is joined to a Heavenly Person; our undone
Nature united to one equal with God Phil. 2.6.
. It may truly be said, that Man is God, which is infinitely more glorious for
us, than if it could be said, Man is an Angel. If it were Goodness to advance
our Innocent Nature above other Creatures, the advancement of our degenerate
Nature above Angels deserves a higher Title than mere Goodness. It Is a more
gracious act, than if all Men had been transformed into the pure Spiritual
Nature of the loftiest Cherubins.

5. This Goodness is manifest in the Covenant of Grace made with us, whereby we
are fre^d from the rigor of that of Works. God might have insisted upon the
terms of the old Covenant, and required of Man the improvement of his Original
Stock; but God has condescended to lower terms, and offered Man more gracious
Methods, and mitigated the rigor of the first, by the sweetness of the second.

1. It Is Goodness, that he should condescend to make another Covenant with Man.
To Stipulate with Innocent and Righteous Adam for his Obedience, was a stoop of
his Sovereignty: Though he gave the Precept as a Sovereign Lord, yet in his
Covenanting he seems to descend to some kind of equality with that Dust and
Ashes with whom he treated. Absolute Sovereigns do not usually Covenant with
their People, but exact Obedience and Duty, without binding themselves to
bestow a Reward; and if they intend any, they reserve the purpose in their own
breasts, without treating their Subjects with a solemn declaration of it. There
was no obligation on God to enter into the first Covenant, much less after the
violation of the first, to the settlement of a new. If God seemed in some sort
to equal himself to Man in the first, he seemed to descend below himself in
treating with a Rebel upon more condescending terms in the second. If his
Covenant with Innocent Adam was a stoop of his Sovereignty, this with
Rebellious Adam seems to be a stripping himself of his Majesty in favor of his
Goodness; As if his happiness depended upon us, and not ours upon him. It Is a
Humiliation of himself to behold the things in Heaven, the glorious Angels, as
well as things on Earth, mortal Men; Psalm. 113.6.
much more to bind himself in gracious bonds to the glorious Angels, and much
more if to Rebel Man. In the first Covenant there was much of Sovereignty as
well as Goodness; In the second there is less of Sovereignty, and more of
Grace: In the first there was a Righteous Man for a Holy God; In the second a
polluted Creature for a pure and provoked God: In the first he holds his
Scepter in his hand, to Rule his Subjects; In the second he seems to lay by his
Scepter, to Court and Espouse a Beggar: Hosea 2.18, 19, 20.
In the first he is a Lord; in the second a Husband, and binds himself upon
Gracious Conditions to become a Debtor. How should this Goodness fill us with
an humble astonishment, as it did Abraham, when he fell on his face, when he
heard God speaking of making a Covenant with him! Genesis 17.2.3.
And if God speaking to Israel out of the Fire, and making them to hear his
voice out of Heaven, that he might instruct them, was a Consideration whereby
Moses would heighten their admiration of Divine Goodness, and engage their
affectionate Obedience to him Deuteronomy. 4.32, 36, 40.
; How much more admirable is it for God to speak so kindly to us through the
pacifying Blood of the Covenant, that silenced the terrors of the old, and
settled the tenderness of the new?

2. His Goodness is seen in the Nature and Tenor of the new Covenant. There are
in this richer Streams of Love and Pity. The language of one was, die if thou
Sin; that of the other, live if thou believe Turreti, ser. p. 33.
: The old Covenant was founded upon the obedience of Man; the new is not
founded upon the inconstancy of Man's Will, but the firmness of Divine Love, and
the valuable Merit of Christ. The head of the first Covenant was Humane and
mutable; the head of the second is Divine and immutable. The Curse due to us by
the breach of the first, is taken off by the indulgence of the second: Rom 8.1.
We are by it snatched from the Jaws of the Law, to be wrapped up in the bosom of
Grace: Romans 6.14.
For you are not under the Law, but under Grace; from the Curse and
condemnation of the Law, to the sweetness and forgiveness of Grace. Christ bore
the one, being made a Curse for us, Gal. 3.13.
that we might enjoy the sweetness of the other; By this we are brought from
Mount Sinai, the Mount of Terror, to Mount Sion, the Mount of Sacrificing, the
Type of the great Sacrifice Heb. 12.18, 22.
: That Covenant brought in Death upon one offense, this Covenant offers Life
after many offenses Romans 5.16, ^7.
: That involved us in a Curse, and this enricheth us with a Blessing: The
breaches of that expelled us out of Paradise, and the embracing of this admits
us into Heaven. This Covenant demands, and admits of that Repentance, whereof
there was no mention in the first: That demanded Obedience, not Repentance upon
a failure; and though the exercises of it had been never so deep in the fallen
Creature, nothing of the Laws severity had been remitted by any virtue of it.
Again, the first Covenant demanded exact Righteousness, but conveyed no
cleansing virtue upon the contracting any filth. The first demands a
continuance in the Righteousness conferred in Creation; the second imprints a
gracious heart in Regeneration. I will pour clean Water upon you; I will put a
new Spirit within you, was the voice of the second Covenant, not of the first.
Again, as to Pardon: Adams Covenant was to punish him, not to pardon him if he
fell; That threatened Death upon Transgression, this remits it; That was an Act
of Divine Sovereignty declaring the will of God, this is an Act of Divine
Grace, passing an Act of Oblivion on the Crimes of the Creature: That, as it
demanded no Repentance upon a failure, so it promised no Mercy upon guilt: That
convened our Sin, and condemned us for it; this clears our guilt, and comforts
us under it. The first Covenant related us to God as a Judge; every
transgression against it forfeited his indulgence as a Father: The second
delivers us from God as a condemning Judge, to bring us under his Wing as an
affectionate Father: In the one there was a dreadful frown to scare us, in the
other a healing Wing to cover and relieve us. Again, in regard of
Righteousness: That demanded our performance of a Righteousness in and by our
selves, and our own strength; This demands our acceptance of a Righteousness
higher than ever the standing Angels had: The Righteousness of the first
Covenant was the Righteousness of a Man; the Righteousness of the second, is
the Righteousness of a God 2 Cor. 5.21.
. Again in regard of that Obedience it demands, it exacts not of us as a
necessary condition the Perfection of Obedience, but the sincerity of
Obedience; an uprightness in our intention, not an unspottedness in our action;
an integrity in our aims, and an industry in our compliance with Divine
Precepts, Genesis 17.1.
Walk before me, and be thou perfect, i. e. sincere. What is hearty in our
actions is accepted, and what is defective is over-looked, and not charged upon
us, because of the Obedience and Righteousness of our surety. The first
Covenant rejected all our services after Sin; the services of a Person under
the sentence of Death are but dead services; This accepts our imperfect
services after Faith in it; That administered no strength to obey, but supposed
it; This supposes our inability to obey, and confers some strength for it,
Ezekiel. 36.27.
I will put my Spirit within you, and cause you to walk in my Statutes. Again,
in regard of the Promises; Heb. 8.6.
The old Covenant had good, but the new has better Promises, of justification
after guilt, and sanctification after filth, and glorification at last of the
whole Man. In the first there was provision against guilt, but none for the
removal of it: Provision against filth, but none for the cleansing of it:
Promise of happiness implied, but not so great a one as that Life and
Immortality in Heaven, brought to light by the Gospel. 2 Timothy 1.10.
Why said to be brought to light by the Gospel? because it was not only buried
upon the fall of Man under the Curses of the Law, but it was not so obvious to
the conceptions of Man in his Innocent State. Life indeed was implied to be
promised upon his standing, but not so glorious an immortality disclosed, to be
reserved for him, if he stood. As it is a Covenant of better Promises, so a
Covenant of sweeter Comforts; Comforts more choice, and Comforts more durable;
An everlasting Consolation, and a good h^pe are the fruits of Grace, i. e. the
Covenant of Grace 2 These. 2.16.
: In the whole there is such a love disclosed, as cannot be expressed; The
Apostle leaves it to every Man's mind to conceive it, if he could, what manner
of love the F^ther has b^stowed upon us, that we should be called the Sons of
God 1 John 3.1.
. It in^^ates us in such a manner of the love of God as he bears to his Son the
Image of his Person; John 17.2^.
That the World may know, that thou have loved them, as thou have loved me.

3. This Goodness appears in the choice gift of himself which he has made over
in this Covenant. You know how it runs in Scripture, I will be their God, and
they shall be my People Genesis 17.7.
: A propriety in the Deity is made over by it. As he gave the Blood of his Son
to Seal the Covenant, so he gave himself as the Blessing of the Covenant; He is
not ashamed to be called their God. Jer. 32.38.
Though he be environed with Millions of Angels, and presides over them in an
unexpressible glory, he is not ashamed of his condescensions to Man, and to
pass over himself as the propriety of his People, as well as to take them to be
his It Is a diminution of the sense of the place, to understand it of God as
Creator; what reason was there for God to be ashamed of the Expressions of his
Power, Wisdom, Goodness in the works of his hands? but we might have reason to
think, there might be some ground in God, to be ashamed of making himself over
in a Deed of Gift to a mean Worm, and a filthy Rebel; this might seem a
disparagement to his Majesty; but God is not ashamed of a Title so mean, as the
God of his despised People. A Title below those others, of the Lord of Hosts,
glorious in Holiness, fearful in Praises, doing Wonders, riding on the wings of
the Wind, walking in the Circuits of Heaven. He is no more ashamed of this
Title of being our God, than he is of those other that sound more glorious: He
would rather have his Greatness vail to his Goodness, than his Goodness be
confined by his Majesty. He is not only our God, but our God as he is the God
of Christ. He is not ashamed to be our Propriety, and Christ is not ashamed to
own his People in a Partnership with him in this Propriety; Heb. 11.16.
I ascend to my God, and your God. This of Gods being our God, John 20.17.
is the quintessence of the Covenant, the Soul of all the Promises: In this he
has promised whatsoever is Infinite in him, whatsoever is the Glory and
Ornament of his Nature for our use: Not a part of him, or one single
Perfection, but the whole vigor and strength of all. As he is not a God without
Infinite Wisdom, and Infinite Power, and Infinite Goodness, and Infinite
Blessedness, etc. so he passes over in this Covenant all that which presents
him as the most adorable Being to his Creatures: He will be to them as Great,
as Wise, as Powerful, as Good as he is in himself. And the assuring us in this
Covenant to be our God, imports also that he will do as much for us, as we
would do for our selves, were we furnished with the same Goodness, Power, and
Wisdom: In being our God, he testifies it is all one, as if we had the same
Perfections in our own power to employ for our use; For he being possessed with
them, it is as much, as if we our selves were possessed with them for our own
advantage, according to the Rules of Wisdom, and the several Conditions we pass
through for his Glory; but this must be taken with a relation to that Wisdom,
which he observes in his proceedings with us as Creatures, and according to the
several Conditions we pass through for his Glory. Thus Gods being ours is more
than if all Heaven and Earth were ours besides: It Is more than if we were fully
our own and at our own dispose; it makes all things that God has ours*. And
therefore not only all things he has Created, ^ Cor. 3.^2.
but all things that he can Create: Not only all things that he has contrived,
but all things that he can contrive: For in being ours, his Power is ours, his
possible Power as well as his active Power; his Power whereby he can effect
more than he has done; and his Wisdom whereby he can contrive more than he
has done; so that if there were need of employing his Power to Create many
Worlds for our good, he would not stick at it; for if he did, he would not be
our God in the extent of his Nature, as the Promise intimates. What a rich
Goodness, and a fullness of Bounty is there in this short Expression, as full as
the expression of a God can make it to be intelligible, to such Creatures as we
are?

4. This Goodness is further manifest in the Confirmation of the Covenant. His
Goodness did not only condescend to make it for our happiness, after we had
made our selves miserable, but further condescended to ratify it in the
solemnest manner for our assurance, to overruled all the Despondencies unbelief
could raise up in our Souls. The reason why he confirmed it by an Oath, was to
show the immutability of his glorious Counsel; not to tie himself to keep it:
For his Word and Promise is in it self as immutable as his Oath; They were two
immutable things, his Word, and his Oath, one as unchangable as the other; but
for the strength of our Consolation, that it might have no reason to shake and
totter Heb. 6.17, 18.
: He would condescend as low as was possible for a God to do for the
satisfaction of the dejected Creature. When the first Covenant was broken, and
it was impossible for Man to fulfill the terms of it, and mount to Happiness
thereby, he makes another: And as if we had reason to distrust him in the
first, he solemnly Ratifies it in a higher manner than he had done the other,
and swears by himself, that he will be true to it, not so much out of an
Election of himself, as the Object of the Oath. Heb. 6.13.
Because he could not swear by a greater, he swears by himself; whereby the
Apostle clearly intimates, that Divine Goodness was raised to such a height for
us, that if there had been any thing else more sacred than himself, or that
could have punished him, if he had broken it, that he would have sworn by, to
silence any diffidence in us, and confirm us in the reality of his intentions.
Now if it were a mighty Mark of Goodness, for God to stoop to a Covenanting
with us; it was more for a Sovereign to bind himself so solemnly, to be our
Debtor in a Promise, as well as he was our Sovereign in the Precept, and stoop
so low in it to satisfy the distrusts of that Creature, that deserved for ever
to lie soaking in his own ruins, for not believing his bare word. What
absolute Prince would ever stoop so low, as to Article with Rebellious
Subjects, whom he could in a moment set his Foot upon and crush; much less
countenance a causeless distrust of his Goodness by the addition of his Oath,
and thereby bind his own hands, which were unconfined before, and free to do
what he pleased with them?

5. This Goodness of God is remarkable also in the Condition of this Covenant,
which is Faith. This was the easiest Condition in its own Nature, that could be
imagined: No difficulty in it but what proceeds from the pride of Man's Nature,
and the obstinacy of his Will: It was not impossible in it self; it was not the
old Condition of perfect Obedience: It had been mighty Goodness to set us up
again upon our old Stock, and restore us to the Tenor and Condition of the
Covenant of Works, or to have required the burdensome Ceremonies of the Law. Nor
is it an exact knowledge he requires of us; all Men's understandings being of a
different size, they had not been capable of this. It was the most reasonable
Condition, in regard of the excellency of the things proposed, and the effects
following upon it; Nay, it was necessary. It had been a want of Goodness to
himself and his own Honor; he had cast that off, had he not insisted on this
Condition of Faith; it being the lowest he could condescend to with a salvo for
his Glory. And it was a Goodness to us; it is nothing else he requires, but a
willingness to accept what he has contrived, and acted for us: And no Man can
be happy against his will; without this belief at least, Man could never
voluntarily have arrived to his Happiness. The Goodness of God is evidenced in
that,

First, It Is an easy Condition, not impossible.

1. It was not the Condition of the old Covenant. The Condition of that was an
entire Obedience to every Precept with a Man's whole strength, and without any
flaw or crack. But the Condition of the Evangelical Covenant is a sincere
though weak Faith; He has suited this Covenant to the Misery of Man's fallen
Condition: He considers our weakness, and that we are but Dust, and therefore
exacts not of us an entire, but a sincere Obedience. Had God sent Christ to
expiate the Crime of Adam, restore him to his Paradise Estate, and repair in
Man the ruined Image of Holiness, and after this to have renewed the Covenant
of Works for the future, and settled the same Condition in exacting a complete
Obedience for the time to come; Divine Goodness had been above any accusation,
and had deserved our highest admiration in the pardon of former Transgressions,
and giving out to us our first Stock. But Divine Goodness took larger strides:
He had tried our first Condition, and found his mutable Creature quickly to
violate it: Had he demanded the same now, it is likely it had met with the same
issue as before in Man's disobedience and fall; we should have been as Men, as
Adam, Hos. 6.7.
transgr^ssing the Covenant, and then we must have lain groaning under our
Disease, and wallowing in our Blood, unless Christ had come to die for the
Expiation of our new Crimes; for every Transgression had been a violation of
that Covenant, and a forfeiture of our Right to the benefits of it. If we had
broke it but in one tittle, we had rendered our selves incapable to fulfill it
for the future; that one Transgression had stood as a bar against the pleas of
after Obedience. But God has wholly laid that Condition aside as to us, and
settled that of Faith, more easy to be performed, and to be renewed by us. It Is
infinite Grace in him, that he will accept of Faith in us, instead of that
perfect Obedience, he required of us in the Covenant of Works.

2. It is easy, not like the burdensome Ceremonies appointed under the Law. He
exacts not now the legal Obedience, expensive Sacrifices, troublesome
Purifications and Abstinencies, that Yoke of Bondage, Gal. 5.1.
which they were not able to bear. Acts 15.10,
He treats us not as Servants, or Children in their Nonage under the Elements
of the World, nor requires those innumerable bodily Exercises, that he exacted
of them: He demands not 1000 of Lambs, and Rivers of Oil; but he requires a
sincere Confession and Repentance in order to our absolution; an unfain'd Faith
in order to our Blessedness, and elevation to a Glorious Life. He requires only
that we should believe what he says, and have so good an opinion of his
Goodness and Veracity, as to persuade our selves of the reality of his
Intentions, confide in his Word, and rely upon his Promise, cordially embrace
his Crucified Son, whom he has set forth as the means of our Happiness, and
have a sincere Respect to all the discoveries of his Will. What can be more
easy than this? Though some in the days of the Apostles, and others since have
endeavored to introduce a multitude of legal Burdens, as if they envied God
the Expressions of his Goodness, or thought him guilty of too much Remissness,
in taking off the Yoke, and treating Man too favorably.

3. Nor is it a clear knowledge of every Revelation, that is the Condition of
this Covenant. God in his kindness to Man has made Revelations of himself, but
his Goodness is manifested in obliging us to believe him, not fully to
understand him. He has made them by sufficient Testimonies as clear to our
Faith, as they are incomprehensible to our Reason: He has revealed a Trinity
of Persons in their distinct Offices in the business of Redemption, without
which Revelation of a Trinity, we could not have a right Notion and Scheme of
Redeeming Grace. But since the clearness of Men's understanding is sullied by
the fall, and has lost its Wings to fly up to a knowledge of such sublime
things as that of the Trinity, and other Mysteries of the Christian Religion:
God has manifested his Goodness in not obliging us to understand them, but to
believe them, and has given us reason enough to believe it to be his
Revelation, (both from the Nature of the Revelation it self, and the way and
manner of propagating it; which is wholly Divine, exceeding all the Methods of
Humane Art) though he has not extended our understandings to a capacity to
know them, and render a reason of every Mystery. He did not require of every
Israelite, or of any of them that were stung by the fiery Serpents, that they
should understand, or be able to discourse of the Nature and Qualities of that
Brass of which the Serpent upon the Pole was made, or by what Art that Serpent
was formed, or in what manner the sight of it did operate in them for their
Cure; it was enough that they did believe the Institution, and Precept of God,
and that their own Cure was assured by it: It was enough if they cast their
Eyes upon it according to the direction. The understandings of Men are of
several sizes and elevations, one higher than another: If the Condition of this
Covenant had been a greatness of knowledge, the most acute Men had only enjoyed
the benefits of it. But it is Faith, which is as easy to be performed by the
ignorant and simple, as by the strongest and most towering Mind: It Is that which
is within the compass of every Man's understanding. God did not require that
every one within the Verge of the Covenant, should be able to discourse of it
to the reasons of Men: He required not that every Man should be a Philosopher,
or an Orator, but a Believer. What could be more easy than to lift up the Eye
to the Brazen Serpent, to be Cured of a fiery Sting? What could be more facile
than a glance, which is done without any pain, and in a moment? It Is a
Condition may be performed by the weakest as well as the strongest: Could those
that were bitten in the most Vital part, cast up their Eyes, though at the last
gasp, they would arise to health by the expulsion of the Venom.

2. As it is Easy, so it is Reasonable. Repent and Believe is that which is
required by Christ and the Apostles for the enjoyment of the Kingdom of Heaven:
It Is very reasonable that things so great and glorious, so beneficial to Men,
and revealed to them by so sound an Authority, and an unerring truth, should be
believed. The Excellency of the thing disclosed could admit of no lower a
Condition than to be believed and embraced. There is a sort of Faith, that is a
Natural Condition in every thing: All Religion in the World, though never so
false, depends upon a sort of it; for unless there be a belief of future
things, there would never be a hope of Good, or a fear of Evil, the two great
Hinges upon which Religion moves. In all kinds of Learning, many things must be
believed, before a progress can be made. Belief of one another is necessary in
all acts of Humane Life; without which Humane Society would be unlinkt and
dissolved. What is that Faith that God requires of us in this Covenant, but a
willingness of Soul to take God for our God, Christ for our Mediator, and the
Procurer of our Happiness Rev. 22.17.
? What Prince could require less upon any Promise he makes his Subjects, than
to be believed as true, and depended on as good? That they should accept his
Pardon, and other gracious offers, and be sincere in their Allegiance to him,
avoiding all things that may offend him, and pursuing all things that may
please him: Thus God by so small and reasonable a Condition as Faith, lets in
the Fruits of Christ's Death into our Soul, and wraps us up in the fruition of
all the Privileges purchased by it. So much he has condescended in his
Goodness, that upon so slight a Condition we may plead his Promise, and humbly
challenge by virtue of the Covenant those good things he has promised in his
Word: It Is so reasonable a Condition, that if God did not require it in the
Covenant of Grace, the Creature were obliged to perform it: For the publishing
any Truth from God, naturally calls for Credit to be given it by the Creature,
and an entertainment of it in Practice. Could you offer a more reasonable
Condition your selves, had it been left to your choice? Should a Prince
proclaim a Pardon to a profligate Wretch, would not all the World cry shame of
him, if he did not believe it upon the highest assurances? and if Ingenuity did
not make him sorry for his Crimes, and careful in the Duty of a Subject, surely
the World would cry shame of such a Person.

5. It Is a necessary Condition.

1. Necessary for the honor of God. A Prince is disparaged if his Authority in
his Law, and if his Graciousness in his Promises be not accepted and believed.
What Physician would undertake a Cure, if his Precepts may not be Credited?
It Is the first thing in the order of Nature, that the Revelation of God should
be believed, that the reality of his Intentions in inviting Man to the
acceptance of those Methods, he has prescribed for their attaining their chief
Happiness, should be acknowledged. It Is a debasing Notion of God, that he
should give a Happiness, purchased by Divine Blood, to a Person that has no
value for it, nor any abhorrency of those Sins that occasioned so great a
Suffering, nor any will to avoid them: Should he not vilify himself, to bestow
a Heaven upon that Man, that will not believe the offers of it, nor walk in
those ways that leads to it? That walks so, as if he would declare, there was
no truth in his Word, nor Holiness in his Nature? Would not God by such an act
verify a truth in the language of their practice, viz. that he were both false
and impure, careless of his Word, and negligent of his Holiness? As God was so
desirous to ensure the Consolation of Believers, that if there had been a
greater Being than himself to attest, and for him to be Responsible to, for the
confirmation of his Promise, he would willingly have submitted to him, and have
made him the Umpire; Heb. 6.19.
He swore by himself, because he could not swear by a greater. By the same
reason; Had it stood with the Majesty and Wisdom of God to stoop to lower
Conditions in this Covenant, for the reducing of Man to his Duty and Happiness,
he would have done it; but his Goodness could not take lower steps with the
preservation of the Rights of his Majesty, and the Honor of his Wisdom. Would
you have had him wholly submitted to the obstinate will of a Rebellious
Creature, and be ruled only by his terms? Would you have had him received Men
to Happiness, after they had heightened their Crimes by a contempt of his Grace
as well as of his Creating Goodness, and have made them blessed under the guilt
of their Crimes without an acknowledgment? Should he glorify one that will not
believe what he has revealed, nor repent of what himself has committed; and
so save a Man after a repeated unthankfulness to the most immense Grace that
ever was, or can be discovered, and offered, without a detestation of his
ingratitude, and a voluntary acceptance of his offers? It Is necessary for the
honor of God, that Man should accept of his terms, and not give Laws to him,
to whom he is obnoxious as a guilty Person, as well as Subject as a Creature.

Again, it was very equitable and necessary for the honor of God, that since
Man fell by an unbelief of his Precept and Threatening, he should not rise again
without a belief of his Promise, and calling himself upon his Truth in that:
Since he had vilified the honor of his Truth in the Threatening: Since Man in
his fall would lean to his own understanding against God, it is fit that in his
Recovery, the highest powers of his Soul, his Understanding and Will should be
subjected to him in an entire Resignation. Now, whereas Knowledge seems to have
a power over its Object, Faith is a full submission to that which is the Object
of it. Since Man intended a glorying in himself; the Evangelical Covenant
directs its whole battery against it, that Men may glory in nothing but Divine
Goodness 1 Cor. 1.29 30, 31.
. Had Man performed exact Obedience by his own Strength, he had had something
in himself as the Matter of his Glory. And though after the fall Grace had made
it self illustrious, in setting him up upon a new Stock, yet had the same
Condition of exact Obedience been settled in the same manner, Man would have had
something to glory in, which is struck off wholly by Faith; whereby Man in
every act must go out of himself for a supply, to that Mediator which Divine
Goodness and Grace has appointed.

2. It Is necessary for the happiness of Man. That can be no contenting
Condition wherein the will of Man does not concur. He that is forced to the
most delicious Diet, or to wear the bravest Apparel, or to be stored with
abundance of Treasure, cannot be happy in those things without an esteem of
them, and delight in them: If they be nauseous to him, the indisposition of his
mind is a dead Fly in those Boxes of precious Ointment. Now Faith being a
sincere willingness to accept of Christ, and to come to God by him; and
Repentance being a detestation of that, which made Man's separation from God,
it is impossible he could be yoluntarily happy without it: Man cannot attain and
enjoy a true happiness without an operation of his understanding about the
Object proposed, and the means appointed to enjoy it: There must be a knowledge
of what is offered, and of the way of it, and such a knowledge as may determine
the will, to affect that end, and embrace those means; which the will can never
do, till the understanding be fully persuaded of the truth of the Offerer, and
the goodness of the Proposal it self, and the convenience of the means for the
attaining of it. It Is necessary in the nature of the thing, that what is
revealed, should be believed to be a Divine Revelation. God must be judged true
in the Promising Justification, and Sanctification, the means of happiness; and
if any Man desires to be Partaker of those Promises, he must desire to be
Sanctified; and how can he desire that which is the Matter of those Promises,
if he wallow in his own lusts, and desire to do so, a thing repugnant to the
Promise it self? Would you have God force Man to be happy against his will? Is
it not very reasonable, he should demand the consent of his reasonable
Creature, to that Blessedness he offers him? The new Covenant is a Marriage
Covenant Hos. 2.16, 19, 20.
, which implies a consent on our parts, as well as a consent on Gods part; That
is no Marriage, that has not the consent of both Parties. Now Faith is our
actual Consent, and Repentance and sincere Obedience are the Testimonies of the
truth and reality of this Consent.

6. Divine Goodness is eminent in his Methods of treating with Men to embrace
this Covenant. They are Methods of gentleness and sweetness: It Is a wooing Go
dness, and a bewailing Goodness; His Expressions are with strong motions of
affection: He carries not on the Gospel by force of Arms: He does not solely
menace Men into it, as Worldly Conquerors have done: He does not as Mahomet,
plunder Men's Estates, and wound their Bodies, to imprint a Religion on their
Souls: He does not erect Gibbets, and kindle Faggots, to scare Men to an
entering into Covenant with him. What Multitudes might he have raised by his
power, as well as others? What Legions of Angels might he have Rendezvouz'd
from Heaven, to have beaten Men into a profession of the Gospel? Nor does he
only interpose his Sovereign Authority in the Precept of Faith, but uses
Rational Expostulations, to move Men voluntarily to comply with his Proposals;
Isaiah 1.18.
Come now says the Lord, let us reason together. He seems to call Heaven and
Earth to be judge, whether he had been wanting in any reasonable ways of
Goodness, to overcome the perversity of the Creature; Isaiah 1.2.
Hear O Heavens, and give ear O Earth, I have nourished and brought up
Children. What various encouragements does he use agreeable to the Nature of
Men, endeavoring to persuade them with all tenderness, not to despise their
own Mercies, and be Enemies to their own Happiness? He would allure us by his
Beauty, and win us by his Mercy. He uses the Arms of his own Excellency, and
our necessity to prevail upon us; and this after the highest provocations. When
Adam had trampled upon his Creating Goodness, it was not crushed; and when Man
had cast it from him, it took the higher rebound: When the Rebels provocation
was fresh in his mind, he sought him out with a promise in his hand, though
Adam fled from him out of enmity, as well as fear Genesis 3.
. And when the Jews had outrag'd his Son, whom he loved from Eternity, and made
the Lord of Heaven and Earth bow down his head like a Slave on the Cross, yet
in that place where the most horrible wickedness had been committed, must the
Gospel be preached: The Law must go forth out of that Sion, and the Apostles
must not stir from thence, till they had received the promise of the Spirit,
and published the Word of Grace in that ungrateful City, whose Inhabitants yet
swelled with indignation against the Lord of Life, and the Doctrine he had
preached among them: Luke 24.47,
He would overlook their indignities out of tenderness to their Souls; and
expose the Apostles to the peril of their Lives, rather than expose his Enemies
to the fury of the Devil.

1. How affectionately does he invite Men? What multitudes of alluring
Promises, and pressing Exhortations are there every where sprinkled in the
Scripture, and in such a passionate manner, as if God were solely concerned in
our good, without a glance on his own glory? How tenderly does he woe flinty
hearts, and express more pity to them, than they do to themselves? With what
affection do his Bowels rise up to his Lips in his Speech in the Prophet, Acts
1.4.5.
Hearken to me, O my People, and give ear unto me, O my Nation, my People, my
Nation? Melting Expressions of a tender God soliciting a rebellious People, to
make their retreat to him: He never emptied his hand of his Bounty, nor
divested his Lips of those charitable Expressions. He sent Noah to move the
Wicked of the old World to an embracing of his Goodness, and frequent Prophets
to the provoking Jews; and as the World continued, and grew up to a taller
stature in Sin, he stoops more in the manner of his Expressions. Never was the
World at a higher pitch of Idolatry, than at the first publishing the Gospel;
yet when we should have expected him to be a punishing, he is a beseeching God.
The Apostle fears not to use the Expression for the glory of Divine Goodness,
Isaiah 51.4.
We are Ambassadors for Christ, as though God did beseech you by us. 2 Cor.
5.20.
The beseeching voice of God is in the voice of the Ministry, as the voice of
the Prince is in that of the Herald: It Is as if Divine Goodness did kneel down
to a Sinner with wringed Hands and blubbered Cheeks, entreating him not to
force him to reassume a Tribunal of Justice in the nature of a Judge, since he
would treat with Man upon a Throne of Grace in the nature of a Father; yea, he
seems to put himself into the posture of the Criminal, that the offending
Creature might not feel the punishment due to a Rebel. It Is not the
condescension, but the interest of a Traitor to creep upon his knees in
Sackcloth to his Sovereign, to beg his life: But it is a Miraculous Goodness in
the Sovereign to creep in the lowest posture to the Rebel, to importune him not
only for an amity to him, but a love to his own life and happiness; This he
does, not only in his general proclamations, but in his particular wooings,
those inward courtings of his Spirit, soliciting them with more diligence (if
they would observe it) to their happiness, than the Devil tempts them to the
ways of their Misery. As he was first in Christ, reconciling the World, when
the World looked not after him; so he is first in his Spirit, wooing the World
to accept of that Reconciliation, when the World will not listen to him. How
often does he flash up the Light of Nature, and the Light of the Word in Men's
hearts, to move them not to lie down in sparks of their own kindling, but to
aspire to a better happiness, and prepare them to be subject to a higher Mercy;
If they would improve his present entreaties to such an end? And what are his
Threatenings designed for, but to move the Wheel of our Fears, that the Wheel of
our Desire and Love might be set on Motion for the embracing his Promise? They
are not so much the Thunders of his Justice, as the loud Rhetoric of his good
Will, to prevent Men's Misery under the Vials of Wrath. It Is his kindness to
fear Men by threatenings, that Justice might not strike them with the Sword:
It Is not the destruction, but the preserving Reformation that he aims at: He
has no pleasure in the death of the Wicked; This he confirms by his Oath.
Ezekiel. 33.11.
His threatenings are gracious Expostulations with them, Why will ye die O house
of Israel? They are like the noise a favorable Officer makes in the Street, to
warn the Criminal he comes to seize upon, to make his escape: He never used his
Justice to crush Men, till he had used his Kindness to allure them. All the
dreadful descriptions of a future Wrath, as well as the lively descriptions of
the happiness of another World, are designed to persuade Men: The Honey of his
Goodness is in the Bowels of those roaring Lions; such pains does Goodness take
with Men, to make them Candidates for Heaven.

2. How readily does he receive Men, when they do return? We have David's
Experience for it; Psalm. 32.5.
I said, I will confess my Transgressions unto the Lord, and thou forgavest the
iniquity of my Sin, Selah. A sincere look from the Creature draws out his Arms,
and opens his Bosom; he is ready with his Physic to heal us, upon a resolution
to acquaint him with our Disease, and by his Medicines prevents the putting our
Resolution into a Petition. The Psalmist adds a Selah to it, as a special Note
of Thankfulness for Divine Goodness. He does not only stand ready to receive
our Petitions, while we are speaking, but answers us before we call; Isai.
65.24.
listening to the Motions of our Hearts, as well as to the supplications of our
Lips: He is the true Father, that has a quicker pace in meeting, than the
Prodigal has in returning; Who would not have his Embraces and Caresses
interrupted by his Confession; Luke 15.20, 21, 22.
The Confession follows, does not precede the Fathers Compassion. How does he
rejoice in having an opportunity to express his Grace, when he has prevailed
with a Rebel to throw down his Arms and lie at his Feet; and this because he
delights in Mercy? Mic. 7.18.
He delights in the Expressions of it from himself, and the acceptance of it by
his Creature.

3. How meltingly does he bewail Man's wilful refusal of his Goodness? It Is a
mighty Goddness to offer Grace to a Rebel, a mighty Goodness to give it him
after he has a while stood off from the terms: An astonishing Goodness to
regret and lament his wilful perdition. He seems to utter those words in a
sigh, Psalm. 81.13.
Oh that my People had hearkened unto me, and Israel had walked in my way! It Is
true, God has not Humane Passions, but his Affections can not be expressed
otherwise in a way intelligible to us: The Excellency of his Nature is above
the Passions of Men, but such Expressions of himself manifest to us the
sincerity of his Goodness; and that were he capable of our Passions, he would
express himself in such a manner as we do. And we find incarnate Goodness
bewailing with tears and sighs the ruin of Jerusalem: Luke 19.42.
By the same reason that when a Sinner returns, there is joy in Heaven, upon
his obstinacy there is sorrow in Earth. The one is as if a Prince should Cloth
all his Court in Triumphant Scarlet upon a Rebels Repentance: And the other, as
if a Prince should put himself, and his Court in Mourning for a Rebels
obstinate refusal of a Pardon, when he lies at his Mercy. Are not now these
affectionate invitations, and deep bewailings of their perversity high
Testimonies of Divine Goodness? Do not the unwearied repetitions of Gracious
Encouragements deserve a higher name than that of mere Goodness? What can be a
stronger Evidence of the sincerity of it, than the sound of his saving voice in
our enjoyments, the motion of his Spirit in our hearts, and his grief for the
neglect of all? These are not Testimonies of any want of Goodness in his Nature
to answer us, or willingness to express it to his Creature. Has he any mind to
deceive us, that thus entreats us? The Majesty of his Nature is too great for
such shifts; or if it were not, the despicableness of our condition would
render him above the using any. Who would charge that Physician with want of
kindness, that freely offers his Sovereign Medicine, importunes Men by the love
they have to their health to take it, and is dissolved into tears and sorrow,
when he finds it rejected by their peevish and conceited humor?

7. Divine Goodness is eminent in the Sacraments he has affixt to this
Covenant, especially in the Lords Supper. As he gave himself in his Son, so he
gives his Son in the Sacrament; He does not only give him as a Sacrifice upon
the Cross for the Expiation of our Crimes, but as a Feast upon the Table for
the no^^ishment of our Souls: In the one he was given to be offered; in this he
gives him to be partaked of, with all the Fruits of his Death: Under the Image
of the Sacramental Signs, every Believer does eat the Flesh, and drink the
Blood of the great Mediator of the Covenant. The words of Christ, This is my
Body, and this is my Blood, are true to the end of the World Matthew. 26.26, 28.
. This is the most delicious Viand of Heaven, the most exquisite Dainty Food,
God can feed us with; the delight of the Deity, the admiration of Angels: A
Feast with God is great, but a Feast on God is greater. Under those Signs that
Body is presented; that which was conceived by the Spirit, inhabited by the
Godhead, bruised by the Father to be our Food, as well as our Propitiation, is
presented to us on the Table: That Blood which satisfied Justice, washed away
our guilt on the Cross, and pleads for our Persons at the Throne of Grace: That
Blood which silenced the Curse, pacified Heaven, and purged Earth, is given to
us for our refreshment. This is the Bread sent from Heaven, the true Manna; The
Cup is the Cup of Blessing, and therefore a Cup of Goodness 1 Cor. 10.15.
. It Is true, Bread does not cease to be Bread, nor the Wine cease to be Wine;
neither of them lose their Substance, but both acquire a Sanctification, by the
relation they have to that which they represent, and give a nourishment to that
Faith that receives them. In those God offers us a Remedy for the Sting of Sin,
and troubles of Conscience: He gives us not the Blood of a mere Man, or the
Blood of an incarnate Angel, but of God blessed for ever: A Blood that can
secure us against the wrath of Heaven, and the tumults of our Consciencies: A
Blood that can wash away our Sins, and beautify our Souls: A Blood that has
more strength than our Filth, and more prevalency than our Accuser: A Blood
that secures us against the terrors of Death, and purifies us for the
Blessedness of Heaven. The Goodness of God complies with our senses, and
condescends to our weakness: He instructs us by the Eye, as well as by the Ear:
He lets us see, and taste, and feel him, as well as hear him: He vails his
Glory under Earthly Elements, and informs our understanding in the Mysteries of
Salvation by signs familiar to our Senses; and because we cannot with our
Bodily Eyes behold him in his Glory, he presents him to the Eyes of our Minds
in Elements, to affect our understandings in the representations of his Death.
The Body of Christ Crucified is more visible to our Spiritual sense, than the
invisible Deity could be visible in his Flesh upon Earth: And the Power of his
Body and Blood is as well experimented in our Souls, as the power of his
Divinity was seen by the Jews in his miraculous actions in his Body in the
World. It Is the Goodness of God, to mind us frequently of the great things
Christ has purchased; That as himself would not let them be out of his mind,
to communicate them to us, so he would give us means to preserve them in our
minds, to adore him for them, and request them of him; whereby he does evidence
his own solicitousness, that we should not be deprived by our own forgetfulness
of that Grace, Christ has purchased for us: It was to remember the Redeemer,
and show his Death till he came 1 Cor. 1^^ 25, 26.
.

1. His Goodness is seen in the end of it, which is a sealing the Covenant of
Grace. Amyral. (...), p. 16, ^7.
The common Nature and End of Sacraments is to seal the Covenant they belong
to, and the truths of the Promises of it. The legal Sacraments of Circumcision
and the Passover sealed the legal Promises and the Covenant in the Judaical
Administration of it: And the Evangelical Sacraments seal the Evangelical
Promises, as a Ring confirms a contract of Marriage, and a Seal the Articles of
a Compact: By the same reason Circumcision is called a Seal of the
Righteousn^ss of Faith Romans 4.11.
, other Sacraments may have the same Title: God does attest, that he will
remain firm in his Promise, and the Receiver atte^ts he will remain firm in his
Faith. In all Reciprocal Covenants there are mutual Engagements, and that which
serves for a Seal on the part of the one, serves for a Seal also on the part of
the other: God obliges himself to the performance of the Promise, and Man
engages himself to the performance of his Duty. The thing confirmed by this
Sacrament is the perpetuity of this Covenant in the Blood of Christ, whence it
is called the New Testament, or Covenant in the Blood of Christ L^ke 22.20.
. In every repetition of it, God by presenting confirms his resolution to us,
of sticking to this Covenant for the Merit of Christ's Blood; and the Receiver
by eating the Body, and drinking the Blood, engages himself to keep close to
the Condition of Faith, expecting a full Salvation, and a blessed Immortality
upon the Merit of the same Blood alone. This Sacrament could not be called the
New Testament or Covenant, if it had not some relation to the Covenant; and
what it can be but this, I do not understand. The Covenant it self was
confirmed by the Death of Christ Heb. 9.15.
, and thereby made unchangeable both in the Benefits to us, and the Condition
required of us; but he seals it to our sense in a Sacrament to give us strong
consolation: Or rather the Articles of the Covenant of Redemption between the
Father and the Son, agreed on from Eternity, were accomplished on Christ's part
by his Death, on the Fathers part by his Resurrection; Christ performed what he
promsed in the one, and God acknowledges the validity of it, and performs what
he had promised in the other. The Covenant of Grace founded upon this Covenant
of Redemption is sealed in the Sacrament; God owns his standing to the terms of
it, as sealed by the Blood of the Mediator, by presenting him to us under those
Signs, and gives us a right upon Faith to the enjoyment of the Fruits of it: As
the right of a House is made over by the delivery of the Key, and the right of
Land translated by the delivery of a Turf; whereby he gives us assurance of his
reality, and a strong support to our confidence in him; Not that there is any
virtue and power of sealing in the Elements themselves, no more than there is
in a Turf, to give an Infeoffment in a parcel of Land; but as the power of the
one is derived from the Order of the Law, so the confirming power of the
Sacrament is derived from the Institution of God. As the Oil wherewith Kings
were anointed, did not of it self confer upon them that Royal Dignity, but it
was a sign of their investiture into Office, ordered by Divine Institution. We
can with no reason imagine, that God intended them as naked Signs or Pictures,
to please our Eyes with the Image of them, to represent their own Figures to
our Eyes, but to confirm something to our understanding by the Efficacy of the
Spirit accompanying them Daille. Mel^^g. part. 1. p. 153.
: They convey to the Believing Receiver, what they represent, as the great Seal
of a Prince fixed to the Parchment, does the Pardon of the Rebel as well as its
own Figure. Christ's Death, and the Grace of the Covenant is not only signified,
but the Fruits and Merit of that Death communicated also. Thus does Divine
Goodness evidence it self, not only in making a Gracious Covenant with us, but
fixing Seals to it; not to strengthen his own Obligation, which stood stronger
than the Foundations of Heaven and Earth, upon the Credit of his Word, but to
strengthen our weakness, and support our security, by something which might
appear more formal and solemn than a bare word. By this, the Divine Goodness
provides against our Spiritual faintings, and shows us by real Signs as well as
Verbal Declarations, that the Covenant sealed by the Blood of Christ, is
unalterable; and thereby would fortify and mount our hopes to degrees in some
measure suitable to the kindness of the Covenant, and the dignity of the
Redeemer's Blood. And it is yet a further degree of his Goodness, that he has
appointed us so often to Celebrate it, whereby he shows, how careful he is to
keep up our tottering Faith, and preserve us constant in our obedience;
obliging himself to the performance of his Promise, and obliging u^ to the
payment of our Duty.

2. His Goodness is seen in the Sacrament in giving us in it an union and
communion with Christ. There is not only a Commemoration of Christ dying, but a
Communication of Christ living. The Apostle strongly asserts it by way of
Interrogation, 1 Cor 1^.
The Cup of Blessing which we bless, is it not the Communion of the Blood of
Christ? The Bread which we break, is it not the Communion of the Body of
Christ? In the Cup there is a communication of the Blood of Christ, a
conveyance of a Right to the Merits of his Death, and the Blessedness of his
Life: We are not less by this made one Body with Christ, than we are by
Baptism: 1 Cor. 12.13.
And put on Christ living in this, as well as in Baptism; Gal. 3.27.
That as his taking our infirm Flesh, was a real Incarnation, so the giving us
his Flesh to eat, is a Mystical Incarnation in Believers, whereby they become
one Body with him as Crucified, and one Body with him as Risen; For if Christ
himself be received by Faith in the Word, Colos. 2.6.
He is no less received by Faith in the Sacrament. When the Holy Ghost is said
to be received, the Graces or Gifts of the Holy Ghost are received; So when
Christ is received, the Fruits of his Death are really partaked of. The
Israelites that eat of the Sacrifices, did partake of the Altar 1 Cor. 10.18.
, i. e. had a communion with the God of Israel, to whom they had been
Sacrificed; and those that eat of the Sacrifices offered to Idols, had a
fellowship with Devils, to whom those Sacrifices were offered, Verse 20. Those
that partake of the Sacraments in a due manner, have a communion with that God
to whom it was Sacrificed, and a communion with that Body which was Sacrificed
to God; Not that the Substance of that Body and Blood is wrapped up in the
Elements, or that the Bread and Wine are transformed into the Body and Blood of
Christ, but as they represent him, and by virtue of the Institution are in
Estimation himself, his own Body and Blood; by the same reason as he is called
Christ our Passover, he may be called Christ our Supper 1 Cor. 5.7.
: For as they are so reckoned to an unworthy Receiver, as if they were the real
Body and Blood of Christ, because by his not discerning the Lords Body in it,
or making light of it as common Bread, he is judged guilty of the Body and
Blood of Christ, guilty of treating him in as base a manner as the Jews did
when they Crowned him with Thorns: 1 Cor. 11.27.29.
By the same reason they must be reckoned to a worthy Receiver, as the very
Body and Blood of Christ: So that as the unworthy Receiver eats and drinks
Damnation; the worthy Receiver eats and drinks Salvation. It would be an empty
Mystery, and unworthy of an Institution by Divine Goodness, if there were not
some communion with Christ in it: There would be some kind of deceit in the
Precept, Take, Eat, and Drink, this is my Body and Blood, a conveyance of
Spiritual vital influences to our Souls: For the natural End of eating and
drinking is the nourishment and increase of the Body, and preservation of Life,
by that which we eat and drink. The infinite Wise, gracious and true God, would
never give us empty Figures without accomplishing that which is signified by
them, and suitable to them. How great is this Goodness of God? he would have
his Son in us, one with us, straightly joined to us, as if we were his proper
Flesh and Blood: In the Incarnation Divine Goodness united him to our Nature;
in the Sacrament, it does in a sort unite him with his purchased Privileges to
our Persons; we have not a communion with a part or a Member of his Body, or a
drop of his Blood, but with his whole Body and Blood, represented in every part
of the Elements. The Angels in the Heaven enjoy not so great a privilege; They
have the honor to be under him as their Head, but not that of having him for
their Food; they behold him, but they do not taste him. And certainly that
Goodness that has condescended so much to our weakness, would impart it to us
in a very glorious manner, were we capable of it. But because a Man cannot
behold the Light of the Sun in its full splendour by reason of the infirmities
of his Eyes, he must behold it by the help of a Glass, and such a communication
through a colored and Opake-glass, is as real from the Sun it self, though not
so glorious, but more shrouded and obscure; It Is the same light that shines
through that Medium, as spreads it self gloriously in the open Air, though the
one be maskt, and the other open-fac'd.

To conclude this, by the way we may take notice of the neglect of this
Ordina^^^: If it be a token of Divine Goodness to appoint it, it is no sign of
our estimation of Divine Goodness to neglect it. He that values the kindness of
his friend, will accept of his invitation, if there be not some strong
impediments in the way, or so much familiarity with him that his refusal upon a
light occasion would not be unkindly taken. But though God put on the
disposition of a Friend to us, yet he loses not the authority of a Sovereign;
and the humble familiarity he invites us to, does not diminish the conditi^n
and duty of a Subject. A Sovereign Prince would not take it well, if a
Favorite should refuse the offered honor of his Table. The Viands of Godare
not to be slighted. Can we live better upon our poor pittance, than upon his
Dainties? Did not Divine Goodness condescend in it to the weakness of our
Faith, and shall we conceit our Faith stronger than God thinks it? If he
thought fit by those Seals to make a Deed of Gift to us, shall we be so
unmannerly to him, and such enemies to the security he offers us over and above
his word, as not to accept it? Are we unwilling to have our Souls enflamed with
love, our Hearts filled with comfort, and armed against the attempts of our
Enemies? It Is true, there is a guilt of the Body and Blood of Christ contracted
by a slightness in the manner of attending; Is it not also contracted by a
refusal and neglect? What is the language of it? If it speaks not the death of
Christ in vain, it speaks the institution of this Ordinance as a remembrance of
his death to be a vanity, and no mark of Divine Goodness. Let us therefore put
such a value upon Divine Goodness in this affair, as to be willing to receive
the conveyances of his love, and fresh engagements of our duty; the one is due
from us to the kindness of our Friend, and the other belongs to our duty as his
Subjects.

6. By this Redemption God restores us to a more excellent condition than Adam
had in Innocence. Christ was sent by Divine Goodness, not only to restore the
Life Adam's sin had stripped us of, but to give it more abundantly than Adam,
standing could have conveyed it to us, Joh. 10.10.
I am come that they might have life, and that they might have it more
abundantly. More abundantly for strength, more abundantly for duration, a life
abounding with greater felicity, and glory: The substance of those better
Promises of the New Covenant, than what attended the old. There are fuller
Streams of Grace by Christ, than flowed to Adam, or could flow from Adam. As
Christ never restored any to health and strength, while he was in the World,
but he gave them a greater measure of both than they had before; so there is
the same kindness no question manifested in our Spiritual condition. Adam's
life might have preserved us, but Adam's death could not have rescued either
Himself or his Posterity; but in our Redemption, we have a Redeemer, who has
died to expiate our sins, and so Crowned with life to save, and for ever
preserve our persons Romans 5.10.
Because I live, ye shall live also: So that by Redeeming Goodness the life of
a Believer is as perpetual as the life of the Redeemer Christ. Joh. 14.19.
Adam though Innocent was under the danger of perishing; a Believer though
culpable, is above the fears of Mutability. Adam had a holiness in his Nature,
but capable of being lost; by Christ Believers have a holiness bestowed, not
capable of being rifled, but which will remain, till it be at last fully
perfected: Though they have a power to change in their Nature; yet they are
above an actual final change by the indulgence of Divine Grace. Adam stood by
himself, Believers stand in a Root impossible to be shaken, or corrupted: By
this means the promise is sure to all the S^ed. Romans 4.16.
Christ is a stronger person than Adam, who can never break Covenant with God,
and the truth of God will never break Covenant with him. We are united to a
more excellent head than Adam. Instead of a Root merely Humane, we have a Root
Divine, as well as Humane. In him we had the Righteousness of a Creature merely
Humane; In this we have a Righteousness Divine, the Righteousness of God-man;
the stock is no longer in our own hands, but in the hands of one that cannot
imbezzle it, or forfeit it. Divine Goodness has deposited it strongly for our
security. The stamp we receive by the Divine Goodness from the second Adam, is
more noble, than that we should have received from the first, had he remained
in his created State: Adam was formed of the Dust of the Earth, and the New Man
is formed by the incorruptible Seed of the word. And at the Resurrection the
Body of Man shall be endued with better qualities than Adam had at Creation.
They shall be like that glorious Body, which is in Heaven in union with the
person of the Son of God. Phil. 3.21.
Adam at the best had but an Earthly Body, but the Lord from Heaven has a
Heavenly Body, the Image of which shall be born by the Redeemed Ones, as they
have born the Image of the Earthly Cor. 1.15.47, 48, 49.
. Adam had the Society of Beasts, Redeemed ones expect by Divine Goodness in
Redemption a commerce with Angels; as they are reconciled to them by his death,
they shall certainly come to converse with them at the consummation of their
happiness. As they are made of one Family, so they will have a peculiar
intimacy. Adam had a Paradise, and Redeemed Ones a Heaven provided for them, a
happier place with a richer furniture. It Is much to give so complete a Paradise
to innocent Adam; but more to give Heaven to an ungrateful Adam, and his
Rebellious Posterity. It had been abundant Goodness, to have restored us to the
same condition in that Paradise, from whence we were ejected; but a
super-abundant Goodness, to bestow upon us a better habitation in Heaven, which
we could never have expected. How great is that Goodness, when by sin we were
fallen to be worse than nothing, that he should raise us to be more than what
we were! That restored us, not to the first step of our Creation, but to many
degrees of elevation beyond it. Not only restores us, but prefers us, not only
striking off our Chains, to set us free, but clothing us with a Robe of
Righteousness, to render us honorable. Not only quenching our Hell, but
preparing a Heaven; not regarnishing an earthly, but providing a richer Palace:
His Goodness was so great, that after it had rescued us, it would not content
it self with the old furniture, but makes all new for us in another World: A
new Wine to drink; a new Heaven to dwell in; a more magnificent Structure for
our Habitation; Thus has Goodness prepared for us a straiter Union, a stronger
Life, a purer Righteousness, an unshaken Standing, and a fuller Glory. All more
excellent then was within the compass of innocent Adam's Possession.

7. This Goodness in Redemption extends it self to the lower Creation. It takes
in not only Man, but the whole Creation, except the Fallen Angels, and gives a
participation of it to insensible Creatures; upon the account of this
Redemption the Sun and all kind of Creatures were preserved, which otherwise
had sunk into destruction upon the sin of Man, and ceased from their Being, as
Man had utterly ceased from his Happiness. Colos. 1.17.
By him all things consist. The Fall of Man brought not only a misery upon
himself, but a Vanity upon the Creature: The Earth groaned under a Curse for
his sake. They were all created for the Glory of God, and the support of Man in
the performance of his duty, who was obliged to use them for the honor of him
that created them both. Had Man been true to his obligations, and used the
Creatures for that end, to which they were dedicated by the Creator; As God
would have then rejoiced in his Works, so his Works would have rejoiced in the
honor of answering so excellent an end. But when Man lost his integrity, the
Creatures lost their Perfection; the honor of them was stained when they were
debased to serve the Lusts of a Traitor, instead of supporting the Duty of a
Subject, and employed in the defense of the Vices of Men against the Precepts
and Authority of their common Sovereign. This was a vilifying the Creature, as
it would be a vilifying the Sword of a Prince, which is for the maintenance of
Justice, to be used for the Murder of an Innocent; and a dishonouring a Royal
Mansion, to make it a Storehouse for a Dunghill. Had those things the benefit of
sense, they would groan under this disgrace, and rise up in indignation against
them, that offered them this affront; and turned them from their proper end.
When sin entered, the Heavens that were made to shine upon Man, and the Earth
that was made to bear and nourish an innocent Creature, were now subjected to
serve a rebellious Creature. And as Man turned against God, so he made those
instruments against God, to serve his Enmity, Luxury, Sensuality. Hence the
Creatures are said to groan, Romans 8.21.
The whole Creation groans and travels in pain together until now. They would
really groan, had they understanding to be sensible of the Outrage done them.

The whole Creation, It Is the pang of universal Nature, the agony of the whole
Creation, to be alienated from the original use for which they were intended,
and be disjointed from their end, to serve the disloyalty of a Rebel. The
Drunkards Cup, and the Gluttons Table, the Adulterers Bed, and the proud Man's
Purple would groan against the abuser of them. But when all the fruits of
Redemption shall be completed, the Goodness of God shall pour it self upon the
Creatures, deliver them from the Bondage of Corruption into the glorious
liberty of the Children of God Romans 8.21.
, they shall be reduced to their true end, and retun'd in their original
harmony. As the Creation does passionately groan under its vanity, so it does
earnestly expect and wait for its deliverance at the time of the manifestation
of the Sons of God. V. 19.
The manifestation of the Sons of God is the attainment of the liberty of the
Creature. They shall be freed from the vanity under which they are enslaved. As
it entered by sin, it shall vanish upon the total removal of sin. What use they
were designed for in Paradise, they will have afterward, except that of the
nourishment of Men, who shall be as Angels, neither eating nor drinking. The
Glory of God shall be seen and contemplated in them. It can hardly be thought
that God made the World to be little a moment after he had reard it, sullied by
the Sin of Man, and turned from its original end, without thoughts of a
restoration of it to its true end, as well as Man to his lost happiness. The
World was made for Man: Man has not yet enjoyed the Creature in the first
intention of them; Sin made an interruption in that Fruition. As Redemption
restores Man to his true end, so it restores the Creatures to their true use.
The restoration of the World to its beauty and order, was the design of the
Divine Goodness in the coming of Christ, as it is intimated in Isaiah 11.6, 7,
8, 9. As he came not to destroy the Law, but to fulfill it, so he came not to
destroy the Creatures, but to repair them. To restore to God the honor and
pleasure of the Creation, and restore to the Creatures their felicity in
restoring their Order. The Fall corrupted it, and the full Redemption of Men
restores it. The last time is called not a time of destruction, but a time of
restitution, and that of all things Acts 3.21.
of universal nature, the main part of the Creation at least. All those things
which were the effects of sin, will be abolisht; the removal of the Cause beats
down the effect. The disorder and unruliness of the Creature arising from the
venom of Man's transgression, all the fierceness of one Creature against another
shall vanish. The World shall be nothing but an universal smile; Nature shall
put on triumphant Vestments: There shall be no affrighting Thunders, choking
Mists, venomous Vapors, or poisonous Plants. It would not else be a
restitution of all things. They are now subject to be wasted by Judgments for
the sin of their Possessor, but the perfection of Man's Redemptions shall free
them from every misery. They have an advancement at the present; for they are
under a more glorious head, as being the possession of Christ the heavenly Adam
much superior to the first: As it is the glory of a person to be a Servant to a
Prince, rather than a Peasant. And afterward they shall be elevated to a
better state, sharing in Man's happiness, as well as they did in his misery; As
Servants are interested in the good Fortune of their Master, and bettered by
his advance in his Princes favor. As Man in his first Creation was mutable and
liable to sin, so the Creatures were liable to vanity; But as Man by Grace
shall be freed from the Mutability, so shall the Creatures be freed from the
fears of an Invasion, by the vanity that sullied them before. The condition of
the Servants shall be suited to that of their Lord, for whom they were
designed: Hence all Creatures are called upon to rejoice upon the Perfection of
Salvation, and the appearance of Christ's Royal Authority in the World. Psalm.
96.11.12. Psalm. 98.7, 8.
If they were to be destroyed, there would be no ground to invite them to
triumph. Thus does Divine Goodness spread its kind Arms over the whole Creation.

3. The third thing is the Goodness of God in his Government. That Goodness
that despised not their Creation, does not despise their conduct. The same
Goodness that was the head that framed them, is the helm that guides them; his
Goodness hovers over the whole frame, either to prevent any wild disorders
unsuitable to his Creating end, or to conduct them to those ends which might
illustrate his Wisdom and Goodness to his Creatures. His Goodness does no less
incline him to provide for them, than to frame them. It Is the natural
inclination of man to love what is purely the birth of his own strength or
skill. He is fond of preserving his own Inventions, as well as laborious in
inventing them. It Is the glory of a Man to preserve them, as well as to produce
them. God loves every thing which he has made, which love could not be without
a continued diffusiveness to them, suitable to the end for which he made them.
It would be a vain Goodness, if it did not interest it self in managing the
World, as well as erecting it: Without his Government every thing in the World
would justle against one another: The beauty of it would be more defaced, it
would be an unruly Mass, a confused Chaos rather then a (...), a comely World.
If Divine Goodness respected it when it was nothing, it would much more respect
it when it was something by the sole virtue of his Power and good Will to it,
without any motive from any thing else than Himself, because there was nothing
else but Himself. But since he sees his own stamp in things without Himself in
the Creature, which is a kind of motive or moving Object to Divine Goodness to
preserve it, when there was nothing without Himself, that could be any motive
to Him, to Create it: As when God has created a Creature, and it falls into
misery, that misery of the Creature, though it does not necessitate his mercy,
yet meeting with such an affection as mercy in his Nature, is a moving Object
to excite it: As the repentance of Nineveh drew forth the exercise of his pity
and preserving goodness. Certainly since God is Good, he is Bountiful, and if
Bountiful, he is Provident. He would seem to envy and malign his Creatures, if
he did not provide for them, while he intends to use them: But infinite
Goodness cannot be affected with envy: For all envy implies a want of that good
in our selves, which we regard with so evil an eye in another. But God being
infinitely blessed, has not the want of any good, that can be a rise to such
an uncomely disposition. The Jews thought that Divine Goodness extended only to
them in an immediate and particular Care, and left all other Nations and things
to the guidance of Angels. But the Psalmist, Psalm. 107. a Psalm calculated for
the celebration of this Perfection, in the continued course of his Providence
throughout all Ages of the World, ascribes to Divine Goodness immediately all
the advantages men meet with. He helps them in their actions, presides over
their motions, inspects their several conditi^ns, labors day and night in a
perpetual care of them. The whole life of the World is linkt together by Divine
Goodness. Every thing is ordered by him in the place where he has set it,
without which the World would be stripped of that Excellency it has by Creation.

1. First, This Goodness is evident in the Care he has of all Creatures. There
is a peculiar goodness to his People; but this takes not away his general
goodness to the World: Though a Master of a Family has a choicer affection to
those that have an Affinity to him in Nature, and stand in a nearer Relation,
as his Wife, Children, Servants; yet he has a regard to his Cattle, and other
Creatures he nourishes in his House. All things are not only before his eyes,
but in his Bosom; He is the Nurse of all Creatures, supplying their wants, and
sustaining them from that nothing they tend to. Psalm 104.24.
The Earth is full of his Riches, not a creek or cranny but partakes of it.
Abundant Goodness daily hovers over it, as well as hatched it. Gulielmus
Parasien. p. 184.
The whole World swims in the rich Bounty of the Creator, as the Fish do in the
largeness of the Sea, and Birds in the spatiousness of the Air. The Goodness of
God is the River, that Waters the whole Earth. As a lifeless Picture casts its
eye upon every one in the Room, so does a living God upon every thing in the
World. And as the Sun illuminates all things which are capable of partaking of
its light, and diffuseth its Beams to all things which are capable of receiving
them; So does God spread his Wings over the whole Creation, and neglects
nothing, wherein he sees a mark of his first creating Goodness.

His Godness is seen, 1. In preserving all things. Psalm. 36.6.
Oh Lord thou preservest Man and Beast. Not only Man, but Beasts, and Beasts as
well as Men. Man, as the most excellent Creature, and Beasts as being
serviceable to Man, and Instruments of his Worldly Happiness. He continues the
Species of all things, concurs with them in their distinct Offices, and
quickens the Womb of Nature. He visits Man every day, and makes him feel the
effects of his Providence, in giving him fruitful seasons, and filling his
heart with food and gladness Acts 14.17.
, as witnesses of his Liberality and Kindness to Man. The Earth is visited and
watered by the River of God. He settles the furrows of the Earth, and makes it
soft with showers, that the Corn may be nourished in its Womb, and spring up to
Maturity. He crowns the year with his Goodness, and his paths drop fatness. The
little Hills rejoice on every side; The Pastures are clothed with Flocks, and
the Valleys are covered over with Corn, as the Psalmist elegantly Psalm. 65.9,
10. and Psalm. 107.35.36.
. He waters the ground by his Showers, and preserves the little Seed from the
Rapine of Animals. He draws not out the evil Arrows of Famine, as the
expression is Ezekiel. 5.16.
. Every day shines with new Beams of his Divine Goodness. The vastness of this
City, and the multitudes of living Souls in it, is an astonishing Argument.
What streams of nourishing necessaries are daily conveyed to it? Every Mouth
has Bread to sustain it, and among all the number of Poor in the Bowels and
Skirts of it, how rare is it to hear of any starved to death for want of it?
Every day he spreads a Table for us, and that with varieties; and fills our
Cups Psalm. 23.5.
. He shortens not his hand, nor withdraws his Bounty: The Increase of one year
by his Blessing, restores what was spent by the former. He is the strength of
our life Psalm. 27.1.
, continuing the vigor of our Limbs, and the health of our Bodies; secures us
from terrors by night, and the Arrows of Diseases that fly by day Psalm. 91.5.
. Sets a hedge about our Estates Job 1.10.
, and defends them against the attempts of violence. Preserves our Houses from
flames that might consume them, and our persons from the dangers that lie in
wait for them. Watches over us in our goings out, and our comings in Psalm.
221.8.
; and way-lays a Thousand dangers we know not of. And employs the most glorious
Creatures in Heaven, in the service of mean Men upon Earth Psalm. 91.1^
: Not by a faint Order, but a pressing Charge over them, to keep them in all
his ways. Those that are his immediate Servants before his Throne, he sends to
Minister to them, that were once his Rebels. By an Angel he conducted the
affairs of Abraham Genesis 24.7.
: And by an Angel secured the life of Ishmael Genesis 21.17.
: Glorious Angels for mean Man, Holy Angels for impure Man, Powerful Angels for
weak Man. How in the midst of great dangers, does his sudden light dissipate
our great darkness, and create a deliverance out of nothing? How often is he
found a present help in time of trouble? When all other assistance seems to
stand at a distance, He flies to us beyond our expectations, and raises us upon
the sudden from the pit of our dejectedness, as well as that of our danger,
exceeding our wishes, and shooting beyond our desires as well as our deserts.
How often in a time of confusion, does he preserve an indefensible place from
the attacks of Enemies, like a spark in the midst of a tempestuous Sea? the
rage falls upon other places round about them, and by a secret Efficacy of
Divine Goodness is not able to touch them. He has peculiar preservations for
his Israel in Egypt, and his Lots in Sodom, his Daniels in the Lions Dens, and
his Children in a fiery Furnace. He has a tenderness for all, but a peculiar
affection to those that are in Covenant with him.

2. The Goodness of God is seen in taking care of the Animals and inanimate
things. Divine Goodness embraces in its arms the lowest Worm as well as the
loftiest Cherubin: He provides Food for the Crying Ravens, Psalm. 147.9.
and a Prey for the Appetite of the hungry Lion Ps. 104.21.
: He opens his hand, and fills with good those innumerable Creeping things,
both small and great Beasts, they are all wa^ters upon him, and all are
satisfied by their bountiful Master Psalm. 104.25, 26, 27, 28.
. They are better provided for by the Hand of Heaven, than the best favorite
is by an Earthly Prince: For they are filled with good. He has made Channels
in the wildest Deserts for the watering of Beasts, and Trees for the Nests and
Habitation of Birds Psalm. 104.10, 12, 17.
. As a Lawgiver to the Jews, he took care, that the poor Beast should not be
abused by the cruelty of Man: He provided for the ease of the laboring Beast
in that Command of the Sabbath, wherein he provided for his own service: The
Cattle was to do no work on it Ex. 20.10.
. He ordered that the mouth of the Ox should not be Muzled, while it trod out
the Corn, Deuteronomy, 25.4.
(it being the manner of those Countries to separate the Corn from the Stalk by
that means, as we do in this by Thrashing) regarding it as a part of Cruelty to
deprive the poor Beast of tasting, and satisfying it self with that, which he
was so officious by his labor to prepare for the use of Man. And when any met
with a Nest of young Birds, though they might take the young to their use, they
were forbiden to seize upon upon the Dam, that she might not lose the Objects
of her Affection and her own liberty in one day Deuteronomy. 22.6.
.

And see how God enforces this Precept with a threatening of a shortness of
life, if they transgrest it? Deuteronomy. 22.7.
Thou shall let the Dam go, that it may be well with thee, and that thou may
prolong thy days. He would revenge the Cruelty to Dumb Creatures with the
shortness of the Oppressors life: Nor would he have Cruelty used to Creatures
that were separated for his Worship: He therefore provides, that a Cow, or an
Ew, and their young ones should not be killed for Sacrifice in one day Lev.
22.28.
. All which Precepts, say the Jews, are to teach Men Mercifulness to their
Beasts; so much does Divine Goodness bow down it self, to take notice of those
mean Creatures, which Men have so little regard to, but for their own
advantage: Yea, he is so good, that he would have Worship declined for a time
in favor of a distressed Beast; the helping a Sheep, or an Ox, or an Ass out
of a Pit, was indulged them even on the Sabbath Day, a day God had peculiarly
Sanctified and ordered for his Service: Matthew. 12.1^. Luke 14.5.
In this case he seems to remit for a time the Rights of the Deity for the
rescue of a mere Animal. His Goodness extends not only to those kind of
Creatures that have life, but to the insensible ones; He clothes the Grass, and
arrays the Lillies of the Field with a greater glory, than Solomon had upon his
Throne Matthew. 6.28, 29.
; And such care he had of those Trees which bor^ Fruit for the maintenance of
Man or Beast, that he forbids any injury to be offered to them, and bars the
Rapine and Violence, which by Soldiers uses to be practiced, Deuteronomy 20.19.
though it were to promote the conquest of their Enemy. How much Goodness is it,
that he should think of so small a thing as Man! How much more that he should
concern himself in things, that seem so petty as Beasts and Trees! Persons
seated in a Sovereign Throne, think it a debasing of their Dignity to regard
little things: But God, who is infinitely greater in Majesty above the
mightiest Potentate, and the highest Angel, yet is so infinitely good, as to
employ his Divine thoughts about the meanest things. He who possesses the
praises of Angels, leaves not off the care of the meanest Creatures: And that
Majesty that dwells in a pure Heaven, and an unconceivable Light, stoops to
provide for the ease of those Creatures, that lie and lodge in the Dirt and
Dung of the Earth. How should we be careful not to use those unmercifully,
which God takes such care of in his Law, and not to distrust that Goodness,
that opens his hand so liberally to Creatures of another Rank?

3. The Goodness of God is seen in taking care of the meanest Rational
Creatures: As Servants and Criminals. He provided for the liberty of Slaves,
and would not have their Chains continue longer than the seventh year, unless
they would voluntarily continue under the power of their Masters; and that upon
pain of his displeasure, and the withdrawing his Blessing Deuteronomy. 15.18.
. And though by the Laws of many Nations, Masters had an absolute power of Life
and Death over their Servants, yet God provided that no Member should be lamed,
not an Eye, no nor a Tooth struck out, but the Master was to pay for his folly
and fury the price of the liberty of his Servant Exodus 21.26, 27.
: He would not suffer the abused Servant to be any longer under the power of
that Man, that had not Humanity to use him as one of the same Kindred and Blood
with himself. And though those Servants might be never so wicked, yet when
unjustly afflicted, God would interest himself as their Guardian in their
protection and delivery. And when a poor Slave had been provoked by the
severity of his Masters fury, to turn fugitive from him, he was by Divine order
not to be delivered up again to his Masters fury, but dwell in that City and
with that Person, to whom he had fled for refuge Deuteronomy. 23.15, 16.
. And when Public Justice was to be administered upon the lesser sort of
Criminals, the Goodness of God ordered the number of blows, not to exceed
forty, and left not the fury of Man to measure out the Punishment to excess
Deuteronomy. 25.3.
. And in any just quarrel against a provoking and injuring Enemy, he ordered
them not to ravage with the Sword, till they had summoned a Rendition of the
place Deuteronomy. 20.10.
. And as great a care he took of the Poor, that they should have the gleanings
both of the Vineyard and Field, Lev. 19.10. Lev. 23.22.
and not be forced to pay Usury for the Money lent them Ex. 22.25.
.

4. His Goodness is seen in taking care of the wickedest Persons. The Earth is
full of his Goodness Psalm. 37.5.
. The wicked as well as the good enjoy it; they that dare lift up their hands
against Heaven in the posture of Rebels, as well as those that lift up their
Eyes in the condition of suppliants. To do good to a Criminal, far surmounts
that goodness that flows down upon an Innocent Object: Now God is not only good
to those that have some degrees of goodness, but to those that have the
greatest degrees of wickedness, to Men that turn his liberality into affronts
of him, and have scarce an appetite to any thing but the violation of his
Authority and Goodness. Though upon the fall of Adam we have lost the pleasant
habitation of Paradise, and the Creatures made for our use are fallen from
their Original Excellency and Sweetness; yet he has not left the World utterly
incommodious for us, but yet stores it with things not only for the
preservation, but delight of those that make their whole lives invectives
against this good God. Manna fell from Heaven for the Rebellious as well as for
the Obedient Israelites. Cain as well as A^^l, and Esau as well as Jacob had
the influences of his Sun, and the benefits of his Showers. The World is yet a
kind of Paradise to the veriest Beasts among Mankind: The Earth affords its
Riches, the Heavens its Showers, and the Sun its light to those that injure and
Blaspheme him: Mat. 5.45.
He makes his S^n to rise on the evil and on the good, and sends rain on the
just and on the unjust. The wickedest breath in his Air, walk upon his Earth,
and drink of his Water as well as the best. The Sun looks with as pleasant and
bright an Eye upon a rebellious Absalom, as a righteous David: The Earth yields
its Plants and Medicines to one as well as to the other: It Is seldom that he
deprives any of the faculties of their Souls, or any Members of their Bodies.
God distributes his Blessings, where he might shoot his Thunders, and darts his
Light on those who deserve an Eternal Darkness, and presents the good things of
the Earth, to those that Merit the Miseries of Hell; for the Earth and the
fuln^ss thereof is the Lords; Psalm. 24.1.
Every thing in it is his in Propriety, ours in Trust: It Is his Corn, his Wine;
Hos. 2.8.
He never divested himself of the Propriety, though he grants us the Use; And
by those good things he supports multitudes of wicked Men, not one or two, but
the whole Shoal of them in the World: For he is the Savior of all Men, i. e.
is the Preserver of all Men 1 Timothy 4.10.
. And as he Created them, when he foresaw they would be wicked, so he provides
for them, when he beholds them in their ungodliness. The ingratitude of Men
stops not the Current of his Bounty, nor tires his liberal hand; Howsoever
unprofitable and injurious Men are to him, he is liberal to them; and his
Goodness is the more admirable, by how much the more the unthankfulness of Men
is provoking: He sometimes affords to the worst a greater portion of these
Earthly Goods; they often swim in Wealth, when others pine away their lives in
Poverty. And the Silkworm yields its bowels to make Purple for Tyrants, while
the Oppressed scarce have from the Sheep Wool enough to cover their nakedness;
and though he furnish Men with those good things, upon no other account than
what Princes do, when they nourish Criminals in a Prison till the time of their
Execution, it is a Mark of his Goodness. Is it not the kindness of a Prince to
treat his Rebels deliciously? To give them the liberty of the Prison, and the
enjoyment of the delights of the place, rather than to load their Legs with
Fetters, and lodge them in a dark and loathsome Dungeon, till he orders them for
their Crime to be conducted to the Scaffold or Gibbet? Since God is thus kind
to the vilest Men, whose meaness by reason of Sin is beyond that of any other
Creature, as to shoot such rays of Goodness upon them; How unexpressible would
be the Expressions of his Goodness, if the Divine Image were as pure and bright
upon them, as it was upon Innocent Adam?

2. His Goodness is evident in the preservation of Humane Society. It belongs
to his Power that he is able to do it, but to his Goodness that he is willing
to do it.

1. This Goodness appears, in prescribing Rules for it. The Moral Law consists
but of Ten Precepts, and there are more of them ordered for the support of
Humane Society, than for the adoration and honor of himself; Exodus 20.1, 2.
Four for the Rights of God, and Six for the Rights of Man, and his security in
his Authority, Relations, Life, Goods, and Reputation; Superiors not to be
dishonored, Life not to be invaded, Chastity not to be stained, Goods not to
be filcht, Good Name not to be cracked by False-witness, nor any thing belonging
to our Neighbor to be coveted: And in the whole Scripture, not only that which
was Calculated for the Jews, but compiled for the whole World, he has fixed
Rules for the ordering all Relations; Magistrates, and Subjects, Parents and
Children, Husbands and Wives, Masters and Servants, Rich and Poor find their
distinct Qualifications and Duties. There would be a Paradisical State, if Men
had a goodness to observe, what God has had a goodness to order, for the
strengthening the Sinews of Humane Society: The World would not groan under
oppressing Tyrants, nor Princes tremble under discontented Subjects, or mighty
Rebels: Children would not be provoked to anger by the unreasonableness of
their Parents, nor Parents sink under grief by the Rebellion of their Children:
Masters would not tyrannize over the meanest of their Servants, nor Servants
invade the authority of their Masters.

2. The Goodness of God in the preserving Humane Society, is seen in setting a
Magistracy to preserve it. Magistracy is from God in its Original, the Charter
was drawn up in Paradise; Civil subordination must have been, had Man remained
in innocence; But the Charter was more explicitly renewed and enlarged at the
restoration of the World after the Deluge, and given out to Man under the Broad
Seal of Heaven, Genesis 9.6.
Whosoever sheds Man's Blood, by Man shall his Blood be shed. The Command of
shedding the Blood of a Murderer, was a part of his Goodness, to secure the
lives of those that bore his Image. Magistrates are the Shields of the Earth,
but they belong to God Psalm. 47.9.
. They are Fruits of his Goodness in their Original and Authority; Were there
no Magistracy, there would be no Government, no security to any Man under his
own Vine and Fig Tree; The World would be a Den of wild Beasts preying upon one
another, every one would do what seems good in his Eyes; The loss of Government
is a Judgment God brings upon a Nation, Hab. 1.14.
when Men become as the Fishes of the Sea, to devour one another, because they
have no Ruler over them. Private Dissensions will break out into Public
Disorders and Combustions.

3. The Goodness of God in the preservation of Humane Society, is seen in the
restraints of the Passions of Men. He sets bounds to the Passions of Men, as
well as to the Roulings of the Sea, Psalm. 65.7.
He stilleth the noise of the Waves, and the tumults of the People. Though God
has erected a Magistracy to stop the breaking out of those Floods of
Licentiousness, which swell in the hearts of Men, yet if God should not hold
stiff Reins on the necks of those tumultuous and foaming Passions, the World
would be a place of unruly confusion, and Hell Triumph upon Earth: A Crazy
State would be quickly broke in pieces by boisterous Nature. The tumults of a
People could no more be quelled by the force of Man, than the rage of the Sea
by a puff of breath; Without Divine Goodness, neither the Wisdom nor
watchfulness of the Magistrates, nor the industry of Officers could preserve a
State. The Laws of Men would be too slight to curb the Lusts of Men, if the
Goodness of God did not restrain them by a secret hand, and interweave their
Temporal security with observance of those Laws. The Sons of Belial did murmur
when Saul was chosen King; and that they did no more was the Goodness of God,
for the preservation of Humane Society. If God did not restrain the
impetuousness of Men's Lusts, they would be the entire ruin of Humane Society;
their Lusts would render them as bad as Beasts, and change the World into a
Savage Wilderness.

4. The Goodness of God is seen in the preservation of Humane Society, in
giving various inclinations to Men for public advantage. If all Men had an
inclination to one Science or Art, they would all stand idle Spectators of one
another; but God has bestowed various dispositions and gifts upon Men, for the
promoting the common good, that they may not only be useful to themselves, but
to Society. He will have none idle, none unuseful, but every one acting in a
due place according to their measures for the good of others.

5. The Goodness of God is seen in the witness he bears against those Sins,
that d^sturb Humane Soci^ty. In those cases he is pleased to interest himself
in a more signal manner, to cool those that make it their business to overturn
the order he has established for the good of the Earth. He does not so often
in this World punish those faults committed immediately against his own Honor,
as those that put the World into a hurry and confusion: As a good Governor is
more Merciful to Crimes against himself, than those against his Community. It Is
observed that the most turbulent seditious Persons in a State, come to most
violent ends; As Corah, Adonijah, Zimri; Achitophel draws Absalom's Sword
against David and Israel, and the next is, he twists a Halter for himself.
Absalom heads a Party against his Father, and God by a goodness to Israel hangs
him up, and prevents not its safety by David's indulgence, and a future
Rebellion, had life been spared by the fondness of his Father. His Providence
is more evident in discovering Disturbers, and the Causes that move them, in
defeating their Enterprises, and digging the Contrivers out of their Caverns
and lurking holes. In such cases, God does so act, and use such Methods, that
he silenceth any Creature from challenging any partnership with him in the
discovery. He does more severely in this World correct those actions, that
unlink the mutual assistance between Man and Man, and the charitable and kind
Correspondence, he would have kept up. The Sins for which the Wrath of God
comes upon the Children of d sobedience in this World, are of this sort: Col.
3.5, 6.
And when Princes will be oppressing the People, God will be pouring contempt
on the Princes, and set the p^or on high from affliction. Psalm. 107.40, 41.
An evidence of Gods care and kindness in the preserving Humane Society, is
those strange discoveries of Murders, though never so clandestine and subtly
committed, more than of any other Crime among Men. Divine Care never appears
more, than in bringing those hidden and injurious works of darkness to light,
and a due Punishment.

6. His Goodness is seen in ordering mutual Offices to one another against the
Current of Men's Passions. Upon this account he ordered in his Laws for the
government of the Israelites, that a Man should reduce the wandering Beast of
his Enemy, to the hand of his rightful Proprietor, though he were a provoking
Enemy; and also help the poor Beast, that belonged to one that hated him, when
he saw him sink under his burden Exodus 23.4, 5.
. When mutual assistance was necessary, he would not have Men considered as
Enemies, or considered as Wicked, but as of the same Blood with our selves,
that we might be serviceable to one another for the preservation of Life and
Goods.

7. His Goodness is seen in remitting something of his own Right, for the
pr^serving a due dependence and subjection. He declines the Right he had to the
Vows of a Minor or one under the power of another, waving what he might
challenge by the voluntary obligation of his Creature, to keep up the due order
between Parents and Children, Husbands and Wives, Superiors and Inferiors;
those that were under the power of another, as a Child under his Parents, or a
Wife under her Husband, if they had vowed a Vow unto the Lord, which concerned
his Honor and Worship, it was void without the approbation of that person
under whose charge they were Numb. 30.3, 4, etc.
. Though God was the Lord of every Man's Goods, and Men but his Stewards; and
though he might have taken to himself, what another had offered by a Vow, since
whatsoever could be offered, was Gods own, though it was not the Parties own,
who offered it; yet God would not have himself adored by his Creature, to the
prejudice of the necessary ties of Humane Society: He lays aside what he might
challenge by his Sovereign Dominion, that there might not be any breach of that
Regular Order, which was necessary for the preservation of the World. If Divine
Goodness did not thus order things, he would not do the part of a Rector of the
World: The beauty of the World would be much defaced, it would be a confused
Mass of Men and Women, or rather Beasts and Bedlams. Order renders every City,
every Nation, yea, the whole Earth beautiful: This is an effect of Divine
Goodness.

3. His Goodness is evident in encouraging any thing of Moral Goodness in the
World. Though Moral Goodness cannot claim an Eternal Reward, yet it has been
many times rewarded with a Temporal Happiness; He has often signally rewarded
acts of honesty, justice, and fidelity, and punished the contrary by his
Judgments, to deter Man from such an unworthy practice, and encourage others to
what was Comely, and of a general good report in the World. Ahab's humiliation
put a demurrer to Gods Judgments intended against him; and some ascribe the
great Victories and success of the Romans, to that justice which was observed
among themselves. Baruch was but an Amanuensis to the Prophet Jeremy, to write
his Prophesy, and very despondent of his own welfare; Jer. 45.13.
God upon that account provides for his safety, and rewards the industry of his
service with the security of his Person; He was not a Statesman, to declare
against the corrupt Counsels of them that sat at the Helm; nor a Prophet to
declare against their profane practices; but the Prophets Scribe; and as he
writes in Gods service the Prophesies revealed to the Prophet, God writes his
name in the Roll of those that were designed for preservation in that deluge of
Judgments, which were to come upon that Nation. Epicurus complained of the
administration of God, that the Virtuous Moralist had not sufficient smiles of
Divine Favor, nor the Swinish Sensualist frowns of Divine Indignation. But
what if they have not always that confluence of outward Wealth and Pleasures,
but remain in the common level? Yet they have the happiness and satisfaction of
a clear Reputation, the esteem of Men, and the secret applauses of their very
Enemies; besides the inward ravishments upon an exercise of Virtue, and the
commendatory subscription of their own hearts, a dainty the Vicious Man knows
not of; They have an inward applause from God as a Reward of Divine Goodness,
instead of those Racks of Conscience upon which the Profane are sometimes
stretched. He will not let the worst Men do him any service, (though they never
intended in the act of service, him, but themselves) without giving them their
Wages: He will not let them hit him in the teeth, as if he were beholding to
them. If Nebuchadnezzar be the instrument of Gods Judgments against Tyrus and
Israel, he will not only give him that rich City, but a richer Country, Egypt,
the granary for her Neighbors, a wages above his work. In this is Divine
Goodness eminent, since in the most Moral actions, as there is something
beautiful, so there is something mixed, hateful to the infinitely exact Holiness
of the Divine Nature; yet he will not let that which is pleasing to him, go
unrewarded, and defeat the expectations of Men, as Men do with those they
employ, when for one flaw in an action, they deny them the reward due for the
other part. God encouraged and kept up Morality in the Cities of the Gentiles,
for the entertainment of a further goodness in the Doctrine of the Gospel, when
it should be published among them.

4. Divine Goodness is eminent in providing a Scripture as a Rule to guide us,
and continuing it in the World. If Man be a Rational Creature governable by a
Law, can it be imagined there should be no revelation of that Law to him? Man
by the light of Reason must needs confess himself to be in another condition
than he was by Creation, when he came first out of the hands of God; and can it
be thought, that God should keep up the World under so many Sins against the
light of Nature, and bestow so many providential influences, to invite Men to
return to him, and acquaint no Men in the World with the means of that return?
Would he exact an Obedience of Men, as their Consciencies witness he does, and
furnish them with no Rules to guide them in the darkness, they cannot but
acknowledge, that they have contracted? No, Divine Goodness has otherwise
provided; This Bible we have, is his Word and Rule. Had it been a falsity and
imposture, would that Goodness that watches over the World, have continued it
so long? That Goodness that overthrew the burdensome Rites of Moses, and
expelled the foolish Idolatry of the Pagans, would have discovered the
imposture of this, had it not been a transcript of his own Will. Whatever
mistakes he suffers to remain in the World, what goodness had there been, to
suffer this anciently amongst the Jews, and afterward to open it to the whole
World, to abuse Men in Religion and Worship, which so nearly concerned himself
and his own Honor, that the World should be deceived by the Devil without a
remedy in the morning of its appearance? It has been honored and admired by
some Heathens, when they have cast their Eyes upon it, and their natural Light
made them behold some footsteps of a Divinity in it. If this therefore be not a
Divine Praescript, let any that deny it, bring as good Arguments for any Book
else, as can be brought for this. Now the publishing this is an argument of
Divine Goodness: It Is designed to win the affections of beggarly Man, to be
espoused to a God of Eternal Blessedness, and immense Riches. It speaks words
in season; No doubts but it resolves; No Spiritual Distemper but it Cures; No
Condition but it has a Comfort to suit it. It Is a Garden which the hand of
Divine Bounty has planted for us; In it he condescends to shadow himself in
those Expressions that render him in some manner intelligible to us. Had God
wrote in a loftiness of Style suitable to the greatness of his Majesty, his
Writing had been as little understood by us, as the brightness of his Glory can
be beheld by us. But he draws Phrases from our affairs, to express his mind to
us; He incarnates himself in his Word to our Minds, before his Son was
incarnate in the Flesh to the Eyes of Men: He ascribes to himself Eyes, Ears,
Hands, that we might have from the consideration of our selves, and the whole
Humane Nature, a conception of his Perfections: He assumes to himself the
Members of our Bodies, to direct our Understandings in the knowledge of his
Deity: This is his Goodness.

Again, Though the Scripture was written upon several occasions, yet in the
dictating of it, the Goodness of God cast his Eye upon the last Ages of the
World, 1 Cor. 10, 11.
They are written for our admonition, upon whom the end^ of the World are come.
It was given to the Israelites, but Divine Goodness intended it for the future
Gentiles. The old Writings of the Prophets were thus designed, much more the
later Writings of the Apostles. Thus did Divine Goodness think of us, and
prepare his Records for us, before we were in the World: These he has written
plain for our instruction, and wrapped up in them, what is necessary for our
Salvation: It Is clear to inform our Understanding, and rich to comfort us in
our Misery: It Is a Light to guide us, and a Cordial to refresh us; It Is a Lamp
to our Feet, and a Medicine for our Diseases; a Purifier of our Filth, and a
Restorer of us in our faintings. He has by his Goodness sealed the truth of
it, by his efficacy on multitudes of Men: He has made it the Word of
Regeneration Jam. 1.18.
. Men wilder, and more monstrous than Beasts, have been tamed and changed by
the power of it: It has raised multitudes of dead Men from a Grave fuller of
horror than any Earthly one. Again, Goodness was in all ages sending his
Letters of Advice and Counsel from Heaven, till the Canon of the Scripture was
closed; Sometimes he wrote to chide a froward People, sometimes to cheer up an
oppressed and disconsolate People, according to the State wherein they were; as
we may observe by the several Seasons wherein parts of Scripture were written.
It was his Goodness that he first revealed any thing of his Will after the
Fall; it was a further degree of Goodness, that he would add more Cubits to its
Stature; before he would lay aside his Pensil it grew up to that bulk, wherein
we have it. And his Goodness is further seen in the preserving it; He has
triumphed over the powers that opposed it, and showed himself good in the
Instruments that propagated it: He has maintained it against the blasts of
Hell, and spread it in all Languages against the obstructions of Men and
Devils. The Sun of his Word is by his kindness preserved in our Horizon, as
well as the Sun in the Heavens. How admirable is Divine Goodness! He has sent
his Son to die for us, and his written Word to instruct us, and his Spirit to
edge it for an entrance into our Souls: He has opened the Womb of the Earth to
nourish us; and sent down the Records of Heaven, to direct us in our
Pilgrimage: He has provided the Earth for our habitation, while we are
Travelers; and sent his Word to acquaint us with a felicity at the end of our
Journey, and the way to attain in another World, what we want in this, viz. a
happy Immortality.

5. His Goodness in his Government is evident. In Conversions of Men. Though
this Work be wrought by his Power, yet his Power was first solicited by his
Goodness. It was his rich Goodness, that he would employ his power to pierce
the scales of a heart as hard as those of the Leviathan. It was this that
opened the Ears of Men to hear him, and draws them from the hurry of Worldly
cares, and the Charms of Sensual Pleasures, and, which is the top of all, the
impostures and Cheats of their own hearts. It is this that sends a spark of his
wrath into Men's consciencies, to put them to a stand in sin, that he might not
send down a shower of Brimstone eternally to consume their persons. This it was
that first showed you the Excellency of the Redeemer, and brought you to taste
the sweetness of his Blood, and find your security in the Agonies of his Death.
It Is his Goodness to call one man and not another, to turn Paul in his course,
and lay hold of no other of his companions. It Is his Goodness to call any, when
he is not bound to call one.

1. It Is his Goodness, To pitch upon mean and despicable Men in the eye of the
World. To call this poor Publican, and overlook that proud Pharisee, this Man
that sits upon a Dunghill, and neglect him that glisters in his Purple. His
Majesty is not enticed by the lofty Titles of Men, nor, which is more worth, by
the Learning and Knowledge of Men. Not many Wise; not many Mighty; Cor. 1.26,
27, 28.
not many Doct^rs, not many Lords, though some of them; but his Goodness
condescends to the base things of the World, and things which are despised. The
Poor receive the Gospel Mat. 11.5.
; when those that are more acute, and furnished with a more apprehensive Reason,
are not touched by it.

2. The worst Men. He seizes sometimes upon Men most soyl'd, and neglects
others that seem more clean and less polluted. He turns Men in their course in
sin, that by their infernal practices have seemed to have gone to School to
Hell, and to have sucked in the sole instructions of the Devil. He lays hold
upon some when they are most under actual demerit, and snatcheth them as
Firebrarnds out of the Fire; as upon Paul when fullest of rage against him; And
shoots a Beam of Grace, where nothing could be justly expected but a
Thunderbolt of Wrath. It Is his Goodness to visit any, when they lie putrefying
in their loathsome Lusts; To draw near to them who have been guilty of the
greatest contempt of God, and the light of Nature; The murdering Manassehs,
persecuting Saul's, Christ-crucifying Jews, Persons in whom Lusts had had a
peaceable possession and Empire for many years.

3. His Goodness appears, In converting Men possessed with the greatest enmity
against him, while he was dealing with them. All were in such a state, and
framing contrivances against him, when Divine Goodness knocked at the door Col.
1.21.
. He looked after us, when our backs were turned upon him, and sought us, when
we slighted him, and were a gainsaying People Romans 10.21.
; when we had shaken off his convictions, and contended with our Maker, and
mustered up the Powers of Nature against the Alarms of Conscience; strugled
like wild Bulls in a Net, and blunted those Darts which stuck in our Souls. Not
a Man that is turned to him, but had lifted up the heel against his
Gospel Grace, as well as made light of his Creating Goodness. Yet it has
employed it self about such ungrateful Wretches, to polish those knotty and
rugged pieces for Heaven; And so invincibly, that he would not have his
Goodness defeated by the fierceness and rebellion of the Flesh. Though the
thing was more difficult in it self (if any thing may be said to have a
difficulty to Omnipotency) than to make a Stone live, or to turn a Straw into a
Marble-Pillar. The Malice of the Flesh makes a Man more unfit for the one, than
the nature of the straw unfits it for the other.

4. His Goodness appears in turning Men, When they were pleased with their own
misery, and unable to deliver themselves. When they preferred a Hell before
him, and were in love with their own Vileness; when his Call was our torment,
and his neglect of us had been accounted our felicity. Was it not a mighty
Goodness to keep the Light close to our Eyes, when we endeavored to blow it
out, and the corrosive near to our hearts when we endeavored to tear it off,
being more fond of our Disease, than the Remedy? We should have been scalded to
death with the Sodomites, had not God laid his good hand upon us, and drawn us
from the approaching ruin we affected, and were loath to be freed from. And
had we been displeased with our state, yet we had been as unable Spiritually to
raise our selves from Sin to Grace, as to raise our selves naturally from
Nothing to Being: In this state we were when his Goodness triumphed over us;
when he put a hook into our nostrils, to turn us in order to our Salvation; and
drew us out of the Pit, which we had dug, when he might left us to sink
under the rigors of his Justice, we had merited. Now this Goodness in
Conversion is greater than that in Creation; as in Creation there was nothing
to oppose him, so there was nothing to disoblige him: Creation was terminated
to the good of a mutable Nature, and Conversion tends to a supernatural Good.
God pronounced all Creatures good at first, and Man among the rest, but did not
pronounce any of them, or Man himself, his Portion, his Inheritance, his
Segullah, his House, his Diadem. He speaks slightly of all those things which
he made, the noblest Heavens, as well as the lowest Earth in comparison of a
true Convert. Isa. 66.1, 2.
All those things has mine hand made, and all those things have been, but to
this Man will I look, to him that is of a contrite Spirit. It Is more goodness
to give the espousing Grace of the Covenant, than the completing Glory of
Heaven. As it is more for a Prince to marry a Beggar, than only to bring her to
live deliciously in his Courts; all other benefits are of a meaner strain, if
compared with this; there is little less of Goodness in imparting the Holiness
of his Nature, than imputing the Righteousness of his Son.

6. The Divine Goodness does appear in answering Prayers. He delights to be
familiarly acquainted with his People, and to hear them call upon him. He
indulgeth them a free access to him, and delights in every address of an
upright Man Prove. 15.8.
. The wonderful efficacy of Prayet depends not upon the nature of our
Petitions, or the temper of our Soul, but the Goodness of God to whom we
address. Christ establishes it upon this bottom; when he exhorts to ask in his
name, he tells them the Spring of all their Grants, is the Fathers love. Joh.
16.26, 27.
I say not I will pray the Father for you, for the Father himself loves you.
And since it is of it self incredible, that a Majesty exalted above the
Cherubims, should stoop so low, as to give a miserable and rebellious Creature
admittance to him, and afford him a gracious hearing, and a quick supply,
Christ ushers in the Promise of answering Prayer, with a Note of great
Assurance. Luke 11.9, 10.
I say unto you, ask and it shall be given you. I that know the Mind of my
Father, and his good disposition, assure you, your Prayer shall not be in vain.
Perhaps you will not be so ready of your selves, to imagine so great a
Liberality; but take it upon my word, it is true, and so you will find it. And
his Bounty travels as it were in Birth, to give the greatest Blessings, upon
our asking, rather than the smallest. Verse 13.
Your Heavenly Father shall give his Holy Spirit to them that ask him: Which in
Mat. 7.11. is called good things. Of all the good and rich things Divine
Goodness has in its Treasury, he delights to give the best upon asking,
because God does act so, as to manifest the greatness of his Bounty and
Magnificence to Men; and therefore is delighted, when Men by their Petitioning
him, own such a liberal disposition in him, and put him upon the manifesting
it. He would rather you should ask the greatest things Heaven can afford, than
the trifles of this World* Because his Bounty is not discovered in meaner
Gifts, he loves to have an opportunity to manifest his affection above the
liberality and tenderness of Worldly Fathers. He does more wait to give in a
way of Grace, than we to beg. Isai. 30.18.
And therefore will the Lord wait, that he may be gracious unto you. He stands
expecting your Suits, and employs his Wisdom in pitching upon the fittest
seasons, when the manifestation of his Goodness may be most gracious in it
self, and the Mercy you want most welcome to you; as it follows; for the Lord
is a God of Judgment. He chooses the time, wherein his doles may be most
acceptable to his Suppliants; Isai. 49.8.
In an acceptable time have I heard thee. He often opens his hand, while we are
opening our Lips, and his Blessings meet our Petitions, at the first setting
out upon their Journey to Heaven. Isai. 65.24.
While they are yet speaking, I will hear. How often do we hear a secret Voice
within us, while we are Praying, saying, Your Prayer is granted: As well as
hear a Voice behind us, while we are Erring, saying, This is the way, walk in
it? And his liberality exceeds often our desires, as well as our deserts; and
gives out more than we had the wisdom or confidence to ask. The Apostle
intimates it in that Doxology, Ephesians 3.20.
Unto him who is able to do abundantly above all that we ask or think. This
Power would not have been so strong an Argument of comfort, if it were never
put in practice, He is more liberal than his Creatures are craving. Abraham
petitioned for the life of Ishmael, and God promises him the birth of Isaac
Genesis 17.18, 19.
. Isaac asks for a Child, and God gives him two, Genesis 25.21, 22. Jacob desires
Food to eat, and Raiment to put on; God confines not his Bounty within the
narrow limits of his Petition, but instead of a Staff wherewith he passed
Jordan, makes him repass it with two Bands Genesis 28.20.
. David asked life of God, and he gave him Life and a Crown to boot Psalm. 21.2,
3, 4, 5.
. The Israelites would have been contented with a free life in Egypt, they only
cried to have their Chains struck off; God gave them that, and adopts them to
be his peculiar People, and raises them into a famous State. It Is a wonder that
God should condescend so much, that he should hear Prayers so weak, so cold, so
wandering, and gather up our sincere Petitions from the dung of our distractions
and diffidence. David vents his astonishment at it; Psalm. 31.21, 22.
Blessed be God, for he has showed me mavelous kindness. I said in my haste,
I am cut off from before thy Eyes, nevertheless thou heardest the voice of my
supplication. How do we wonder at the goodness of a petty Man in granting our
desires; how much more should we at the Humility and Goodness of the most
Sovereign Majesty of Heaven and Earth?

6. The Goodness of God is seen in bearing with the infirmities of his People,
and accepting imperfect Obedience. Though Asa had many blots in his Scutcheon,
yet they are over-lookt, and this Note set upon Record by Divine Goodness, That
his heart was perfect toward the Lord all his days; 1 Kings 15.14.
But the high places were not removed, nevertheless Asa 's heart was perfect
with the Lord all his days. He takes notice of a sincere, though checkered
Obedience, to reward it, which could claim nothing but a slight from him, if he
were extreme to mark what is done amiss. When there is not an opportunity to
work, but only to will, he accepts the will, as if it had past into work and
act. He sees no iniquity in Jacob, Numb. 23.21.
i. e. He sees it not so as to cast off a respect to their Persons, and the
acceptance of their Services: His Omniscience knows their Sins, but his
Goodness does not reject their Persons. He is of so good a disposition, that he
delights in a weak Obedience of his Servants, not in the Imperfection but in
the Obedience; Psalm. 37.23.
He delights in the way of a good Man, though he sometimes slips in it: He
accepts a poor Man's Pigeon, as well as a rich Man's Ox; He has a Bottle for the
Tears, and a Book for the services of the Upright, as well as for the most
perfect Obedience of Angels: Psalm. 56.8.
He preserves their Tears, as if they were a rich and generous Wine, as the
Vine-dresser does the Expressions of the Grape.

8. The Goodness of God is seen in Afflictions and Persecutions. If it be good
for us to be afflicted, for which we have the Psalmist's Vote, Psalm. 119.71.
then Goodness in God is the principal cause and orderer of the Afflictions.
It Is his Goodness to snatch away that, whence we fetch supports for our
security, and encouragements for our insolence against him: He takes away the
thing which we have some value for, but such as his Infinite Wisdom sees
inconsistent with our true happiness. It Is no ill will in the Physician to take
away the hurtful Matter the Patient loves, and prescribe bitter Potions, to
advance that health which the other impaired. Nor any mark of unkindness in a
Friend, to wrest a Sword out of a mad Man's hand, wherewith he was about to stab
himself, though it were beset with the most Orient Pearls. To prevent what is
evil, is to do us the greatest good. It Is a kindness to prevent a Man from
falling down a Precipice, though it be with a violent blow, that lays him flat
upon the ground at some distance from the edge of it. By Afflictions he often
snaps asunder those Chains which fettered us, and quells those Passions which
ravaged us: He sharpens our Faith, and quickens our Prayers, he brings us into
the secret Chamber of our own heart, which we had little mind before to visit
by a self-examination. It Is such a Goodness that he will vouchsafe to correct
Man in order to his Eternal Happiness, that Job makes it one part of his
astonishment; Job 7.17.
What is Man, that thou should magnify him? That thou should set thy
heart upon him? And that thou should visit him every morning? And try him
every moment? His strokes are often the magnifyings and exaltings of Man. He
sets his heart upon Man, while he inflicts the smart of his Rod: He shows
thereby, what a high account he makes of him, and what a special affection he
bears to him. When he might treat us with more severity after the breach of his
Covenant, and make his jealousy flame out against us in furious Methods; he
will not destroy his Relation to us, and leave us to our own inclinations, but
deal with us as a Father with his Children; and when he takes this course with
us, it is when it cannot be avoided without our ruin: His Goodness would not
suffer him to do it, if our badness did not force him to it, Jerem. 9.7.
I will melt them and try them, for how shall I do for the daughter of my
People? What other Course can I take but this, according to the nature of Man?
The Goldsmith has no other way to separate the Dross from the Metal, but by
melting it down. And when the impurities of his People necessitate him to this
proceeding, he sits as a Refiner Mal. 3.3.
: He watches for the purifying the Silver, not for his own profit as the
Goldsmith, but out of a Care of them, and good will to them; As himself speaks,
Isai. 48.10.
I have Refined thee but not with Silver; Or as some read it, not for Silver.
As when he scatters his People abroad for their Sin, he will not leave them
without his Presence for their Sanctuary Ezekiel. 11.16.
: He would by his Presence with them supply the place of Ordinances, or be an
Ark to them in the midst of the Deluge: His hand that struck them, is never
without a Goodness to comfort them, and pity them. When Jacob was to go into
Egypt, which was to prove a furnace of Affliction to his Offspring, God
promises to go down with him, and to bring him up again Genesis 46.4.
. A Promise not only made to Jacob in his Person, but to Jacob in his
Posterity. He returned not out of Egypt in his Person, but as the Father of a
numerous Posterity. He that would go down with their Root, and afterward bring
up the Branches, was certainly with them in all their Oppressions; I will go
down with thee. Down, says one, Ha^wood's Sermon at Oxford, p. 5.
What a word is that for a Deity? into Egypt, Idolatrous Egypt, What a place is
that for his Holiness? Yet, Oh the Goodness of God! He never thinks himself low
enough to do his People good, nor any place too bad for his Society with them.
So when he had sent away into Captivity the People of Israel by the hand of the
Assyrian, his bowels yearn after them in their affliction; Isai. 52.4, 5.
The Assyrian Oppressed them without Cause, i. e. without a just Cause in the
Conqueror to inflict so great an evil upon them, but not without Cause from
God, whom they had provoked. Now therefore what have I here, says the Lord?
What do I here? I will not stay behind them. What do I longer here? For I will
redeem again those Jewels the Enemy has carried away. That Chapter is a
Prophecy of Redemption: God shows himself so good to his People in their
Persecutions, that he gives them occasion to glorify him in the very Fires, as
the Divine Order is, Isai. 24.15.
Wherefore glorify the Lord in the Fires.

9. The Goodness of God is seen in Temptations. In those he takes occasion to
show his care and watchfulness, as a Father uses the distress of a Child as an
opportunity for manifesting the tenderness of his affection. God is at the
beginning and end of every Temptation; He measures out both the quality and
quantity: He exposes them not to Temptation beyond the ability he has already
granted them, or will at the time, or afterward multiply in them. 1 Cor. 10.13.
He has promised his People, that the gates of Hell shall not prevail against
them: That in all things they shall be more than Conquerors through him that
loved them: That the most raging Malice of Hell, shall not wrest them out of
his hands. His Goodness is not less in performing, than it was in promising:
And as the care of his Providence extends to the least as well as the greatest;
so the watchfulness of his Goodness extends to us in the least as well as in
the greatest Temptation.

1. The Goodness of God appears in shortening Temptations. None of them can go
beyond their appointed times: Dan. 11.35.
The strong blast Satan breaths, cannot blow, nor the Waves he raises, rage one
minute beyond the time God allows them; when they have done their work, and
come to the period of their time, God speaks the word, and the Wind and Sea of
Hell must obey him, and retire into their Dens. The more violent Temptations
are, the shorter time does God allot them. The assaults Christ had at the time
of his Death, were of the most pressing and urging nature: The Powers of
Darkness were all in Arms against him; the Reproaches and scorns put upon him,
questioning his Sonship, were very sharp; yet a little before his Suffering he
calls it but an hour, Luke 22.53.
This is your hour and the Power of Darkness. A short time that Men and Devils
were combined against him; and the time of Temptation that is to come upon all
the World for their trial, is called but an hour Rev. 3.10.
. In all such attempts, the greatness of the rage is a certain Prognostic of
the shortness of the Season, Revel. 12.12.

2. The Goodness of God appears in strengthening his People under Temptations.
If he does not restrain the Arm of Satan from striking, he gives us a Sword to
manage the Combat, and a Shield to bear off the blow. Ephesians. 6.16, 17.
If he obscures his Goodness in one part, he clears and brightens it in
another: He either binds the strong Man that he shall not stir, or gives us
Armor to render us victorious. If we fall, it is not for want of provision
from him, but for want of our putting on the Armor of God Ephesians. 6.11, ^3.
. When we have not a strength by Nature, he gives it us by Grace: He often
quells those Passions within, which would join hands with, and second the
Temptation without. He either qualifies the Temptation, sutably to the force we
have, or else supplies us with a new strength to mate the Temptation, he
intends to let loose against us: He knows we are but Dust, and his Goodness
will not have us unequally matched. The Jews that in Antiochus his time were
under great Temptation to Apostasy, by reason of the violence of their
Persecutions, were out of weakness made strong for the Combat Heb. 11.34
. The Spirit came more strongly upon Sampson, when the Philistines most
furiously and confidently assaulted him. His Spirit is sent to strengthen his
People, before the Devil is permitted to tempt them; Matthew. 4.2.
Then was Jesus led up of the Spirit. Then: When? When the Spirit had in an
extraordinary manner descended upon him, Matthew. 3.16. Then, and not before. As
the Angels appeared to Christ after his Temptation, to Minister to him, so they
appeared to him before his Passion, the time of the strongest Powers of
Darkness, to strengthen him for it: He is so Good, that when he knows our
Pot-sheard strength too weak, he furnishes our Recruits from his own
Omnipotence; Ephesians. 6.1^.
Be strong in the Lord, and in the Power of his Might. He does as it were
breath in something of his own Almightiness, to assist us in our wrestling
against Principalities and Powers, and make us capable to sustain the violent
Storms of the Enemies.

3. The Goodness of God is seen in Temptations, in giving great Comforts in on
after them. The Israelites had a more immediate provision of Manna from Heaven,
when they were in the Wilderness. We read not that the Father spoke audibly to
the Son, and gave him so loud a Testimony, that he was his beloved Son, in whom
he was well pleased, till he was upon the brink of strong Temptations Mat. 3.17.
: Nor sent Angels to Minister immediately to his Person, till after his success
Mat. 4.11.
. Job never had such evidences of Divine Love, till after he had felt the sharp
strokes of Satan's Malice; he had heard of God before by the hearing of the Ear,
but afterward is admitted into greater familiarity Job 42.5.
: He had more choice appearances, clearer illuminations, and more lively
instructions. And though his People fall into Temptation, yet after their
rising, they have more signal Marks of his favor, than others have, or
themselves, before they fell. Peter had been the Butt of Satan's rage, in
tempting him to deny Christ, and he had shamefully complied with the
Temptation; yet to him particularly must the first news of the Redeemers
Resurrection be carried by Gods order in the mouth of an Angel; Mar. 16.7.
Go your ways, tell his Disciples and Peter. We have the greatest Communion
with God after a Victory: The most refreshing truths after the Devil has done
his worst. God is ready to furnish us with strength in a Combat, and Cordials
after it.

4. The Goodness of God is seen in Temptations, in discovering and advancing
inward Grace by this means. The issue of a Temptation of a Christian is often
like that of Christ's, the manifesting a greater vigor of the Divine Nature in
affections to God, and enmity to Sin. Spices perfume not the Air with their
scent, till they are invaded by the Fire; the truth of Grace is evidenced by
them. The assault of an Enemy revives, and actuates that Strength and Courage,
which is in a Man perhaps unknown to himself as well as others, till he meets
with an Adversary. Many seem good, not that they are so in themselves, but for
want of a Temptation. This many times verifies a Virtue, which was owned upon
trust before, and discovers that we had more Grace than we thought we had. The
solicitations of Joseph's Mistress cleared up his Chastity. We are many times
under Temptation, as a Candle under the Snuffer, it seems to be out, but
presently burns the clearer. Afflictions are like those Clouds, which look
black, and Eclips the Sun from the Earth, but yet when they drop, refresh that
Ground they seem to threaten, and multiply the Grain on the Earth, to serve for
our Food; and so our troubles while they wet us to the Skin, wash much of that
dust from our Graces, which in a clearer day had been blown upon us. Too much
rest Corrupts; Exercise teaches us to manage our Weapons: The Spiritual Armor
would grow rusty, without opportunity to furbish it up. Faith receives a new
heart by every Combat, and by every Victory; like a Fire it spreads it self
further, and gathers strength by the blowing of the Wind. While the Gardener
commands his Servant to shake the Tree, he intends to fasten its Roots, and
settle it firmer in its place; And is this an ill will to the Plant?

5. His Goodness is seen in Temptations, in preventing Sin which we were likely
to fall into. Paul's Thorn in the Flesh was to prevent the pride of his Spirit,
and let out the windiness of his heart, 2 Cor. 12.7.
lest it should be exalted above measure. The Goodness of God makes the Devil a
Polisher, while he intends to be a Destroyer. The Devil never works, but
sutably to some Corruption lurking in us: Divine Goodness makes his fiery Darts
a means to discover, and so to prevent the treachery of that perfidious inmate
in our own hearts. Humility is a greater benefit than a putrefying pride; If
God brings us into a Wilderness to be tempted of the Devil, it is to bring down
our loftiness, to starve our Carnal Confidence, and expel our rusting security
Deuteronomy. 8.2.
; We many times fly under a Temptation to God, from whom we sat too loose
before. Is it not Goodness to use those means that may drive us into his own
Arms? It Is not a want of goodness to Soap the Garment, in order to take away
the Spots: We have reason to bless God for the Assaults from Hell, as well as
pure Mercies from Heaven; and it is a Sin to overlook the one, as well as the
other, since Divine Goodness shines in both.

6. The Goodness of God is seen in Temptations, in fitting us more for his
Service. Those whom God intends to make choice Instruments in his Service, are
first seasoned with strong Temptations, as Timber reserved for the strong Beams
of a Building, is first exposed to Sun and Wind, to make it more compact for
its proper use. By this Men are brought to answer the end of their Creation,
the Service of God, which is their proper Goodness. Peter was after his foil by
a Temptation more Courageous in his Masters Cause than before, and the more
fitted to strengthen his Brethren. Thus the Goodness of God appears in all
parts of his Government.

I shall now come to the USE.

First, Of Instruction.

1. If God be so Good, how unworthy is the contempt or abuse of his Goodness?

1. The contempt and abuse of Divine Goodness is frequent and common; it began
in the first Ages of the World, and commenced a few moments after the Creation;
it has not to this day diminisht its affronts; Adam began the Dance, and his
Posterity have followed him; The injury was directed against this, when he
entertained the Seducers Notion of Gods being an envious Deity, in not
indulging such a Knowledge, as he might have afforded him: Genesis 3.5.
God does know, that you shall be as Gods, knowing Good and Evil. The charge of
Envy is utterly inconsistent with pure Goodness. What was the language of this
Notion so easily entertained by Adam, but that the Tempter was better than God,
and the Nature of God as base and sordid as the Nature of a Devil? Satan Paints
God with his own Colors, Represents him as Envious and Malicious as himself:
Adam admires, and believes the Picture to be true, and hangs it up as a beloved
one in the Closet of his heart. The Devil still drives on the same Game, fills
Men's hearts with the same Sentiments, and by the same means he Murdered our
first Parents, he redoubles the Stabs to his Posterity. Every violation of the
Divine Law is a contempt of Gods Goodness, as well as his Sovereignty, because
his Laws are the Products both of the one and the other. Goodness animates them
while Sovereignty enjoys them: God has Commanded nothing but what does conduce
to our happiness. All disobedience implies, that his Law is a snare to entrap
us, and make us miserable, and not an act of Kindness, to render us happy,
which is a disparagement to this Perfection, as if he had Commanded what would
promote our Misery, and prohibited what would conduce to our Blessedness: To go
far from him, and walk after vanity, is to charge him with our Iniquity, and
Unrighteousness, Baseness, and Cruelty in his Commands; God implies it by his
Speech, Jer. 2.5.
What iniquity have your Fathers found in me, that they are gone far from me,
and walked after vanity? As if like a Tyrant he had consulted Cruelty in the
composure of them, and designed to Feast himself with the Blood and Misery of
his Creatures. Every Sin is in its own Nature a denial of God to be the
chiefest Good and Happiness, and implies that it is no great matter to lose
him; it is a forsaking him as the Fountain of Life, and a preferring a cracked
and empty Cistern as the chief Happiness before him Jer. 2.13.
. Though Sin is not so Evil as God is Good, yet it is the greatest Evil, and
stands in opposition to God as the greatest Good. Sin disorders the Frame of
the World, it endeavored to frustrate all the Communications of Divine
Goodness in Creation, and to stop up the way of any further Streams of it to
his Creatures.

2. The abuse and contempt of the Divine Goodness is base and disingenuous.
It Is the highest Wickedness, because God is the highest Goodness, pure Goodness
that cannot have any thing in him worthy of our contempt. Let Men injure God
under what Notion they will, they injure his Goodness; because all his
Attributes are summed up in this one, and all as it were Deified by it. For
whatsoever Power or Wisdom he might have, if he were destitute of this, he were
not God: The contempt of his Goodness implies him to be the greatest Evil, and
worst of Beings. Badness, not Goodness is the proper Object of Contempt: As
Respect is a propension of Mind to something that is Good, so Contempt is an
alienation of the Mind from something as Evil, either simply or supposedly Evil
in its Nature, or base or unworthy in its action toward that Person that
contemns it. As Men desire nothing but what they apprehend to be Good, so they
slight nothing but what they apprehend to be Evil: Since nothing therefore is
more Contemned by us than God, nothing more spurned at by us than God, it will
follow that we regard him as the most loathsome and despicable Being, which is
the greatest Baseness. And our Contempt of him is worse than that of the
Devils; they injure him under the inevitable strokes of his Justice, and we
slight him when we are surrounded with the Expressions of his Bounty; They
abuse him under Vials of Wrath, and we under a plenteous Liberality; They
malice him, because he inflicts on them what is hurtful, and we despise him,
because he Commands what is profitable, holy, and honorable in its own Nature,
though not in our Esteem. They are not under those high Obligations as we, they
abuse his Creating, and we his Redeeming Goodness: He never sent his Son to
shed a drop of Blood for their Recovery, they can expect nothing but the
torment of their Persons, and the destruction of their Works: But we abuse that
Goodness, that would Rescue us since we are Miserable, as well as that
Righteousness which Created us Innocent. How base is it to use him so ill, that
is not once or twice, but a daily, hourly Benefactor to us; whose Rain drops
upon the Earth for our Food, and whose Sun shines upon the Earth for our
pleasure as well as profit; such a Benefactor as is the true Proprietor of what
we have, and thinks nothing too good for them, that think every thing too much
for his Service? How unworthy is it to be guilty of such base Carriage toward
him, whose benefits we cannot want, nor live without? How disingenuous both to
God and our selves, to despise the riches of his Goodness, that are designed to
lead us to Repentance, Romans 2.4.
and by that to Happiness? And more heinous are the Sins of Renewed Men upon
this account, because they are against his Goodness, not only offered to them,
but tasted by them; not only against the Notion of Goodness, but the Experience
of Goodness, and the relisht sweetness of choicest Bounty.

3. God takes this Contempt of his Goodness hainously. He never upbraids Men
with any thing in the Scripture, but with the abuse of the good things he has
vouchsaft them, and the unmindfulness of the Obligations arising from them.
This he bears with the greatest regret and indignation. Thus he upbraids Eli
with the preference of him to the Priesthood, above other Families 1 Samuel 2.28.
: And David with his Exaltation to the Crown of Israel, 2 Samuel 12.7, 8, 9.
when they abused those Honors to carelessness and licentiousness. All Sins
offend God, but Sins against his Goodness do more disparage him; and therefore
his fury is the greater, by how much the more liberally his benefits have been
dispensed. It was for abuse of Divine Goodness, as soon as it was tasted, that
some Angels were hurled from their Blessed Habitation and more happy Nature: It
was for this Adam lost his present Enjoyments, and future Happiness; for the
abuse of Gods Goodness in Creation. For the abuse of Gods Goodness the old
World fell under the fury of the Flood; and for the Contempt of the Divine
Goodness in Redemption, Jerusalem once the darling City of the infinite Monarch
of the World, was made an Aceldema, a Field of Blood. For this Cause it is,
that Candlesticks have been removed, great Lights put out, Nations overturned,
and Ignorance has triumphed in places bright before with the Beams of Heaven.
God would have little care of his own Goodness, if he always prostituted the
Fruits of it to our Contempt: Why should we expect, he should always continue
that to us, which he sees, we will never use to his Service? When the
Israelites would Dedicate the Gifts of God to the service of Baal, then he
would return, and take away his Corn, and his Wine, and make them know by the
less, that those things were his in Dominion, which they abused, as if they had
been Sovereign Lords of them Hos. 2.8, 9.
. Benefits are Entailed up us no longer than we obey; Josh. 24.20.
If you forsake the Lord, he will do you hurt, after he has done you good.
While we obey, his Bounty shall shower upon us, and when we revolt, his Justice
shall consume us. Present Mercies abused, are no Bulwarks against impendent
Judgments. God has Curses as well as Blessings, and they shall light more
heavy, when his Blessings have been more weighty: Justice is never so severe,
as when it comes to right Goodness, and revenge its quarrel for the injuries
received.

A convenient Enquiry may be here, How Gods Goodness is contemned or abused?

1. By a forgetfulness of his Benefits. We enjoy the Mercies, and forget the
Donor; we take what he gives, and pay not the Tribute he deserves; The
Israelites forgot God their Savior, which had done great things in Egypt Psalm.
100.2^.
. We send Gods Mercies, where we would have God send our Sins, into the Land of
forgetfulness, and write his Benefits, where himself will write the Names of
the Wicked, in the Dust, which every Wind defaceth: The remembrance soon wears
out of our Minds, and we are so far from remembering what we had before, that we
scarce think of that Hand that gives, the very instant wherein his Benefits
drop upon us. Adam basely forgot his Benefactor, presently after he had been
made capable to remember him, and reflect upon him; the first remark we hear of
him, is of his forgetfulness, not a syllable of his thankfulness. We f^rget
those Souls he has lodged in us, to acknowledge his favors to our Bodies; we
forget that Image wherewith he beautified us; and that Christ he exposed as a
Criminal to Death for our Rescue, which is such an act of Goodness as cannot be
expressed by the Eloquence of the Tongue, or conceived by the acuteness of the
Mind. Those things which are so common, that they cannot be invisible to our
Eyes, are unregarded by our Minds; our Sense prompts our Understanding, and our
Understanding is deaf to the plain dictates of our Sense. We forget his
Goodness in the Sun, while it warms us, and his Showers while they enrich us;
in the Corn while it nourishes us, and the Wine while it refreshes us; Hos.
2.8.
She did not know that I gave her Corn, and Wine, and Oil: She that might have
read my Hand in every bit of Bread, and every drop of Drink, did not consider
this. It Is an injustice to forget the benefits we receive from Man; it is a
Crime of a higher Nature to forget those dispensed to us by the hand of God,
who gives us those things that all the World cannot furnish us with, without
him. The Inhabitants of Troas will condemn us, who worshipped Mice, in a
grateful remembrace of the Victory they had made easy for them, by gnawing
their Enemies Bow-strings. They were mindful of the Courtesy of Animals,
though unintended by those Creatures; and we are regardless of the
fore-meditated Bounty of God. It Is in Gods Judgment a brutishness beyond that
of a stupid Ox, or a duller Ass; Isai. 1.3.
The Ox knows his Owner, and the Ass his Masters Crib, but Israel does not
know, my People do not consider. The Ox knows his Owner that Pastures him, and
the Ass his Master that feeds him; but Man is not so good as to be like to
them, but so bad as to be inferior to them: He forgets him that sustains him,
and spurns at him, instead of valuing him for the benefits conferred by him.
How horrible is it, that God should loose more by his Bounty, than he would do
by his Patrimony? If we had Blessings more sparingly, we should remember him
more gratefully. If he had sent us a bit of Bread in a distress by a Miracle,
as he did to Elijah by the Ravens, it would have stuck longer in our memories,
but the sense of daily favors soonest wears out of our minds, which are as
great Miracles as any in their own Nature, and the products of the same Power;
But the wonder they should beget in us, is obscured by their frequency.

2. The Goodness of God is contemned by an impatient murmuring. Our repinings
proceed from an inconsideration of Gods free liberality, and an ungrateful
temper of Spirit. Most Men are guilty of this. It Is implied in the commendation
of Job under his Pressures; Job 1.22.
In all this Job sinned not, nor charged God foolishly, as if it were a
Character peculiar to him, whereby he verified the Elogy, God had given of him
before, v: 8. That there was none like him in the Earth, a perfect and an
upright Man. What is implied by the Expression? but that scarce a Man is to be
found without unjust complaints of God, and charging him under their Crosses
with Cruelty; when in the greatest, they have much more reason to bless him for
his Bounty in the remainder. Good Men have not been innocent. Baruch complains
of God, for adding grief to his sorrow, not furnishing him with those great
things he expected, whereas he had matter of thankfulness in Gods gift of his
life as a prey. Jer. 45.3, 4.
But his Master charge God in a higher strain, Jer. 20.7.
Oh Lord thou have deceived me, and I was deceived, I am in derision daily.
When he met with reproach instead of success in the execution of his Function,
he quarrels with God, as if he had a mind to cheat him into a mischief, when he
had more reason to bless him for the honor of being employed in his Service.
Because we have not what we expect, we slight his Goodness in what we enjoy. If
he Cross us in one thing, he might have made us successless in more: If he take
away some things, he might as well have taken away all. The unmerited
remainder, though never so little, deserves our acknowledgments more than the
deserved loss, can justify our repining. And for that which is snatched from
us, there is more cause to be thankful, that we have enjoyed it so long, than
to murmur that we possess it no longer. Adams Sin implies a repining: He
imagined God had been short in his Goodness, in not giving him a knowledge he
foolishly conceived himself capable of, and would venture a forfeiture of what
already had been bountifully bestowed upon him. Man thought God had envied him,
and ever since, Man studies to be even with God, and envies him the free
disposal of his own Doles: All murmuring either in our own Cause or others,
charges God with a want of Goodness, because there is a want of that, which he
foolishly thinks would make himself or others happy. The language of this Sin
is, that Man thinks himself better than God, and if it were in his Power, would
express a more plentiful Goodness than his Maker. As Man is apt to think
himself more pure than God, Job 4.17.
so of a kinder Nature also than an Infinite Goodness. The Israelites are a
wonderful Example of this contempt of Divine Goodness; They had been Spectators
of the greatest Miracles, and partakers of the choicest deliverance: He had
solicited their Redemption from Captivity, and when words would not do, he
came to blows for them; Musters up his Judgments against their Enemies, and at
last, as the Lord of Hosts, and God of Battles, totally defeats their Pursuers,
and drowns them and their proud hopes of Victory in the Red Sea. Little account
was made of all this by the Redeemed ones, They lightly esteemed the Rock of
their Salvation, and lanch into greater unworthiness instead of being thankful
for the breaking their Yoke: They are angry with him, that he had done so much
for them: They repented that ever they had complied with him, for their own
deliverance, and had a regret, that they had been brought out of Egypt: They
were angry that they were Freemen, and that their Chains had been knocked off:
They were more desirous to return to the Oppression of their Egyptian Tyrants,
than have God for their Governor, and Caterer, and be fed with his Manna. It
was well with us in Egypt, Why came we forth out of Egypt? which is called a
despising the Lord: Numb. 11.18, 20.
They were so far from rejoicing in the expectation of the future benefits
promised them, that they murmured, that they had not enjoyed less; They were so
sottish, as to be desirous to put themselves into the Irons whence God had
delivered them; They would seek a Remedy in that Egypt, which had been the
Prison of their Nation, and under the Successors of that Pharaoh, who had been
the Invader of their Liberties; They would snatch Moses from the place, where
the Lord by an extraordinary Providence has established him; Numb. 16.3, 9, 10,
11.
They would stone those that minded them of the Goodness of God to them, and
thereupon of their Crime and their Duty; They rose against their Benefactors,
and murmured against God, that had strengthened the hands of their Deliverers;
they despised the Manna he had sent them, and despised the pleasant Land he
intended them: Psalm. 106.24.
All which was a high contempt of God and his unparalleled Goodness and Care
of them. All murmuring is an accusation of Divine Goodness.

3. By unbelief and impenitency. What is the reason we come not to him, when he
calls us, but some secret imagination that he is of an ill Nature, means not as
he speaks, but intends to mock us, instead of welcoming us? When we neglect his
Call, spurn at his bowels, slight the riches of his Grace; As it is a
disparagement to his Wisdom, to despise his Counsel, so it is to his Goodness,
to slight his Offers, as though you could make better provision for your
selves, than he is able or willing to do. It disgraceth that which is designed
to the praise of the glory of his Grace: And renders God Cruel to his own Son,
as being an unnecessary shedder of his Blood. As the Devil by his Temptation of
Adam, envied God the glory of his Creating Goodness; so unbelief envies God the
glory of his Redeeming Grace: It Is a bidding defiance to him, and challenging
him to Muster up the Legions of his Judgments, rather than have sent his Son to
suffer for us, or his Spirit to solicit us. Since the sending his Son was the
greatest act of Goodness, that God could express, the refusal of him must be
the highest Reproach of that Liberality, God designed to commend to the World
in so rare a Gift: The ingratitude in this refusal must be as high in the Rank
of Sins, as the Person slighted is in the Rank of Beings, or Rank of Gifts.
Christ is a Gift, Romans 5.16.
the Royallest Gift, an unparalleled Gift, springing from unconceivable
Treasures of Goodness: John 3.16.
What is our turning our backs upon this Gift but a low opinion of it? As
though the richest Jewel of Heaven were not so valuable as a Swinish pleasure
on Earth; and deserved to be treated at no other rate, than if mere Offals had
been presented to us. The plain language of it is, that there were no gracious
intentions for our welfare in this present; and that he is not as good in the
Mission of his Son, as he would induce us to imagine. Impenitence is also an
abuse of this Goodness, either by presumption as if God would entertain Rebels,
that bid defiance against him, with the same respect that he does his prostrate
and weeping Suppliants; That he will have the same regard to the Swine as to
the Children, and lodge them in the same Habitation: Or it speaks a suspicion
of God, as a deceitful Master, one of a pretended, not a real Goodness; That
makes promises to mock Men, and invitations to delude them; That he is an
implacable Tyrant, rather than a good Father; A rigid, not a kind Being,
delightful only to mark our Faults, and overlook our Services.

4. The Goodness of God is contemned by a distrust of his Providence. As all
trust in him supposes him Good, so all distrust of him supposes him Evil,
either without Goodness to exert his Power, or without Power to display his
Goodness. Job seems to have a Spice of this in his complaint, Job 30.20.
I cry unto thee, and thou do not hear me, I stand up, and thou regardest me
not. It Is a fume of the Serpents Venom, first breathed into Man, to suspect him
of Cruelty, Severity, Regardlesness, even under the daily Evidences of his good
Disposition: And it is ordinary not to believe him when he speaks, nor Credit
him when he acts: To question the goodness of his Precepts, and misinterpret
the kindness of his Providence; As if they were designed for the supports of a
Tyranny, and the deceit of the Miserable. Thus the Israelites thought their
miraculous deliverance from Egypt, and the placing them in security in the
Wilderness, was intended only to pound them up for a slaughter Numb. 14.3.
. Thus they defiled the luster of Divine Goodness, which they had so highly
Experimented, and placed not that confidence in him, which was due to so
frequent a Benefactor; and thereby Crucified the rich Kindness of God, as
Genebrard translates the word, limited Psalm. 78.41.
. It Is also a jealousy of Divine Goodness, when we seek to deliver our selves
from our straights by unlawful ways; as though God had not kindness enough to
deliver us without committing Evil. What did God make a World and all Creatures
in it, to think of them no more, not to concern himself in their Affairs? If he
be Good, he is diffusive, and delights to Communicate himself, and what
Subjects should there be for it, but those that seek him and implore his
assistance? It Is an indignity to Divine Bounty, to have such mean thoughts of
it, that it should be of a Nature contrary to that of his Works, which the
better they are, the more diffusive they are. Does a Man distrust that the Sun
will not shine any more, or the Earth not bring forth its Fruit? Does he
distrust the goodness of an approved Medicine, for the expelling his Distemper?
If we distrust those things, should we not render our selves ridiculous, and
sottish? And if we distrust the Creator of those things, do we not make our
selves contemners of his Goodness? If his Careing for us be a principal
Argument, to move us to cast our Care upon him, as it is, 1 Pet. 5.7. Casting
your Care upon him; for he Cares for you; then if we cast not our Care upon
him, it is a denial of his Gracious Care of us; as if he regarded not what
becomes of us.

5. We do contemn or abuse his Goodness by omissions of Duty. These sometimes
spring from injurious conceits of God, which end in desperate Resolutions. It
was the Crime of a good Prophet in his passion, 2 Kings 6.33.
This Evil is of the Lord, Why should I wait on the Lord any longer? God
designs nothing but mischief to us, and we will seek him no longer. And the
complaint of those in Malachy, Mal. 3.14. is of the same nature: Ye have said,
it is vain to serve God, and what profit is it, that we have kept his
Ordinances? We have all this while served a hard Master, not a Benefactor, and
have not been answered with advantages proportionable to our services: We have
met with a hand too niggardly, to dispense that Reward, which is due to the
largeness of our Offerings. When Men will not lift up their Eyes to Heaven, and
solicit nothing but the contrivance of their own brain, and the industry of
their own heads, they disown Divine Goodness, and approve themselves as their
own Gods, and the Spring of their own Prosperity. Those that run not to God in
their necessity, to crave his support, deny either the Arm of his Power, or the
disposition of his Will, to sustain and deliver them: They must have very mean
sentiments, or none at all of this Perfection, or think him either too empty to
fill them, or too churlish to relieve them: That he is of a narrow and
contracted Temper, and that they may sooner expect to be made better and
happier by any thing else than by him. And as we contemn his Goodness by a
total omission of those Duties which respect our own advantage and supply, as
Prayer; so we contemn him as the chiefest Good, by an omission of the due
manner of any act of Worship, which is designed purely for the acknowledgment
of him. As every omission of the material part of a Duty is a denial of his
Sovereignty as Commanding it; So every omission of the manner of it, not
performing it with a due esteem and valuation of him, a surrender of all the
Powers of our Souls to him, is a denial of him, as the most amiable Object. But
certainly to omit those Addresses to God, which his Precept enjoins, and his
Excellency deserves, speaks this language, that they can be well enough, and do
well enough without God, and stand in no need of his Goodness to maintain them.
The neglect or refusal in a Malefactor to supplicate for his Pardon, is a wrong
to, and contempt of the Princes goodness: Either implying, that he has not a
goodness in his Nature worthy of an Address, or that he scorns to be obliged to
him for any Exercise of it.

6. The Goodness of God is contemned or abused, in relying upon our Services,
to procure Gods good Will to us. Amyral, Moral. Tom. 4. p. 291.
As when we stand in need either of some particular Mercy, or special
Assistance: When Pressures are heavy, and we have little hopes of ease in an
ordinary way: When the Devotions in course have not prevailed for what we want:
We engage our selves by extraordinary Vows and Promises to God, hereby to open
that Goodness, which seems to be locked up from us. Sometimes indeed Vows may
proceed from a sole desire, to engage our selves to God, from a sense of the
levity and inconstancy of our Spirits: Binding our selves to God by something
more sacred and inviolable than a common Resolution. But many times the Vowing
the building of a Temple, Endowing an Hospital, giving so much in Alms, if God
will free them from a Fit of Sickness, and spin out the thread of their Lives a
little longer, (as has been frequent among the Romanists) arises from an
opinion of Laziness, and a Selfishness in the Divine Goodness; that it must be
squeezed out by some solemn Promises of Returns to him, before it will exercise
it self to take their parts. Popular Vows are often the effects of an ignorance
of the free and bubbling Nature of this Perfection of the Generousness and
Royalty of Divine Goodness: As if God were of a mean and Mechanic Temper, not
to part with any thing, unless he were in some measure paid for it: And of so
bad a Nature, as not to give passage to any kindness to his Creature without a
Bribe. It implies also, that he is of an ignorant, as well as contracted
Goodness; that he has so little understanding, and so much weakness of
Judgment, as to be taken with such trifles and Ceremonial Courtships and little
Promises; And meditated only low designs, in imparting his Bounty: It Is just as
if a Malefactor should speak to a Prince, Sir, If you will but bestow a Pardon
upon me, and prevent the Death I have merited for this Crime, I will give you
this Rattle. All Vows made with such a temper of Spirit to God, are as
injurious and abusive to his Goodness, as any Man will judge such an offer to
be to a Majestic and Gracious Prince; as if it were a Trading, not a free and
Royal Goodness.

7. The Goodness of God is abused, when we give up our Souls and Affections to
those Benefits we have from God. When we make those things Gods Rivals, which
were sent to Woe us for him, and offer those Affections to the Presents
themselves, which they were sent to solicit for the Master. This is done,
when either we place our trust in them, or glue our choicest Affections to
them. This Charge God brings against Jerusalem, the trusting in her own Beauty,
Glory, and Strength, though it was a Comeliness put upon her by God Ezekiel.
16.14, 15.
. When a little Sunshine of Prosperity breaks out upon us, we are apt to grasp
it with so much eagerness and closeness, as if we had no other Foundation to
settle our selves upon, no other Being that might challenge from us our sole
dependence. And the love of our selves, and of Creatures above God, is very
natural to us: 2 Timothy 3.2, 4.
Lovers of themselves and lovers of Pleasure more than of God. Self-love is the
Root, and the love of Pleasures the top Branch, that mounts its head highest
against Heaven. Cressol. Antholog. Part 2. p. 29.
It Is for the love of the World that the dangers of the Sea are past over, that
Men descend into the Bowels of the Earth, pass Nights without sleep, undertake
Suits without intermission, wade through many inconveniences, venture their
Souls, and contemn God; In those things Men glory, and foolishly grow proud by
them, and think themselves safe and happy in them. Now to love our selves above
God, is to own our selves better than God, and that we transcend him in an
amiable Goodness; Or if we love our selves equal with God, it at least
manifests, that we think God no better than our selves, and think our selves
our own chief good, and deny any thing above us, to outstrip us in goodness,
whereby to deserve to be the Center of our Affections and Actions: And to love
any other Creature above him, is to conclude some defect in God, that he has
not so much goodness in his own Nature, as that Creature has, to complete our
felicity; that God is a slighter thing than that Creature. It Is to account God,
what all the things in the World are, an imaginary happiness, a goodness of
Clay, and them what God is, a Supreme Goodness. It Is to value the goodness of a
Drop above that of the Spring, and the goodness of the Spark above that of the
Sun. As if the Bounty of God were of a less alloy, than the advantages we
immediately receive from the hands of a silly Worm. By how much the better we
think a Creature to be, and place our Affections chiefly upon it; by so much
the more deficient and indigent we conclude God: For God wants so much in our
conception, as the other thing has goodness above him in our thoughts. Thus is
God lessened below the Creature, as if he had a mixture of evil in him, and
were capable of an imperfect goodness. He that esteems the Sun that shines upon
him, the Clothes that warm him, the Food that nourishes him, or any other
Benefit above the Donor, regards them as more Comely and useful than God
himself; and behaves himself, as if he were more obliged to them, than to God,
who bestowed those advantageous qualities upon them.

8. The Divine Goodness is contemned, in sinning more freely upon the account
of that Goodness, and employing Gods Benefits in a drudgery for our Lusts. This
is a treachery to his Goodness, to make his Benefits serve for an end quite
contrary to that for which he sent them. As if God had been plentiful in his
Blessings, to hire them to be more fierce in their Rebellions, and fed them to
no other purpose, but that they might more strongly kick against him: This is
the Fruit which Corrupt Nature produces. Thus the Egyptians who had so fertile
a Country, prove unthankful to the Creator, by adoring the meanest Creatures,
and putting the Scepter of the Monarch of the World, into the hands of the
Sottishest and Cruellest Beasts. And the Romans multiply their Idols, as God
multiplied their Victories. This is also the complaint of God concerning
Israel, Hos. 2.8.
She did not know, that I gave her Corn, and Wine, and Oil, and multiplied her
Silver and Gold, which they prepared for Baal. They ungratefully employed the
Blessings of God in the Worship of an Idol against the will of the Donor. So in
Hos. 10.1. According to the multitude of his Fruit, he has increased the
Altars, according to the goodness of his Land they have made goodly Images.
They followed their own inventions with the strength of my outward Blessings.
As their Wealth increased, they increased the Ornaments of their Images; so
that what were before of Wood and Stone, they advanced to Gold and Silver. And
the like complaint you may see, Ezekiel. 16.17. Thus,

1. The Benefits of God are abused to Pride; when Men standing upon a higher
ground of outward Prosperity, vaunt it loftily above their Neighbors; the
common fault of those that enjoy a Worldly Sunshine, which the Apostle
observes in his Direction to Timothy; 1 Timothy 6.17.
Charge them that are rich in this World, that they be not high-m^nded. It Is an
ill use of Divine Blessings, to be filled by them with Pride and Wind. Also,

2. When Men abuse Plenty to Ease; because they have abundance, spend their
time in idleness, and make no other use of Divine Benefits, than to trifle away
their time, and be utterly useless to the World.

3. When they also abuse Peace and other Blessings to security. As they which
would not believe the threatenings of Judgment and the Storm coming from a far
Country, because the Lord was in Sion, and her King in her; Jer. 8.19.
Is not the Lord in Sion, is not her King in her? thinking they might continue
their progress in their Sin, because they had the Temple, the Seat of the
Divine Glory, Sion, and the promise of an everlasting Kingdom to David; abusing
the Promise of God to presumption and security, and turning the Grace of God
into wantonness.

4. Again, When they abuse the Bounty of God to sensuality and luxury,
misemploying the Provisions God gives them, in resolving to live like Beasts,
when by a good improvement of them, they might attain the Life of Angels. Thus
is the light of the Sun abused to conduct them, and the Fruits of the Earth
abused to enable them to their prodigious Debauchery: As we do, says one,
Young, of Affliction, p. 34.
with the Thames, which brings us in Provision, and we soil it with our
Rubbish. The more God sowes his Gifts, the more we sow our Cockle and Darnel.
Thus we make our outward Happiness the most unhappy part of of our lives, and
by the strength of Divine Blessings exceed all Laws of Reason and Religion too.

How unworthy a Carriage is this, to use the Expressions of Divine Goodness as
occasions of a greater outrage and affront of him? When we stab his Honor by
those Instruments he puts into our hands to glorify him; as if a favorite
should turn that Sword into the Bowels of his Prince, wherewith he Knighted
him. And a Servant enricht by a Lord, should hire by that Wealth Murderers to
take away his life. How brutish is it, the more God Courts us with his
Blessings, the more to spurn at him with our Feet? Like the Mule that lifts up
its Heel against the Dam, as soon as ever it has sucked her. We never beat God
out of our hearts, but by his own Gifts: He receives no blows from Men, but by
those Instruments he gave them to promote their Happiness. While Man is an
Enjoyer, he makes God a Looser by his own Blessings; inflames his Rebellion by
those Benefits, which should kindle his love; and runs from him by the strength
of those favors, which should endear the Donor to him. Do you thus requite the
Lord, Oh foolish People and unwise? is the Expostulati n, Deuteronomy. 32.6. Divine
Goodness appears in the complaint of the abuse of it, in giving them Titles
below their Crime, and complaining more of their being unfaithful to their own
Interest, than Enemies to his Glory. Foolish and unwise in neglecting their own
Happiness, a Charge below the Crime, which deserved to be abominable,
ungrateful People to a Prodigy. All this Carriage toward God, is as if a Man
should knock the Surgeon on the Head, as soon as he has set and bound up
his Dislocated Members. So God compares the ungrateful behavior of the
Israelites against him, Hos. 7.1^.
Though I have bound, and strengthn'd their Arms, yet do they imagine mischief
against me. A Metaphor taken from a Surgeon that applies Corroborating
Playsters to a broken Limb.

9. We contemn the Goodness of God, in ascribing our Benefits to other Causes
than Divine Goodness. Thus Israel ascribed her Felicity, Plenty, and Success to
her Idols, as Rewards which her lovers had given her Hos. 2.5.12.
. And this Charge Daniel brought home upon Belshazz^r; Dan. 5.23.
Thou have praised the Gods of Silver, and Gold, and Brass, and Iron, and the
God in whose hand is thy breath, and whose are all thy ways, have thou not
glorified. The God who has given success to the Arms of thy Ancestors, and
conveyed by their hands so large a Dominion to thee, thou have not honored in
the same Rank with the sordidest of thy Idols. It Is the same case, when we own
him not as the Author of any success in our Affairs, but by an overweening
conceit of our own Sagacity, applaud and admire our selves, and overlook the
Hand, that conducted us, and brought our endeavors to a good issue. We Eclipse
the Glory of Divine Goodness, by setting the Crown that is due to it upon the
head of our own Industry. A Sacrilege worse than Belshazzar's drinking of Wine
with his Lords and Concubines in the Sacred Vessels pilfer'd from the Temple;
as in that place of Daniel. This was the proud vaunt of the Assyrian Conqueror,
for which God threatens to punish the fruit of his stout heart; Isai. 10.12.13,
14.
By the strength of my hand, I have done it, and by my Wisdom: for I am
prudent, and I have removed the bounds of the People, and have robbed their
Treasures, and I have put down the Inhabitants like a valiant Man. Not a word
of Divine Goodness and Assistance in all this, but applauding his own Courage
and Conduct. This is a robbing of God, to set up our selves, and making Divine
Goodness a Footstool, to ascend into his Throne. And as it is unjust, so it is
ridiculous, to ascribe to our selves or Instruments, the chief honor of any
work: As ridiculous as if a Soldier after a Victory should Erect an Altar to
the honor of his Sword, or an Artificer offer Sacrifices to the Tools, whereby
he completed some excellent and useful Invention. A practice that every
Rational Man would disdain, where he should see it. It Is a discarding any
thoughts of the Goodness of God, when we imagine, that we chiefly owe any thing
in this World to our own Industry or Wit, to Friends or Means, as though Divine
Goodness did not open its hand, to interest it self in our Affairs, support our
Ability, direct our Counsels, and mingle it self with any thing we do. God is
the principal Author of any advantage that accrues to us, of any wise
Resolution we fix upon, or any proper way we take to compass it; No Man can be
wise in opposition to God, act wisely or well without him; His Goodness
inspires Men with generous and magnificent Counsels, and furnishes them with
fit and proportionable Means; When he withdraws his hand, Men's heads grow
foolish, and their hands feeble; folly and weakness drops upon them as darkness
upon the World upon the removal of the Sun. It Is an abuse of Divine Goodness,
not to own it, but erect an Idol in its place. Ezra was of another mind, when
he ascribed to the good hand of God, the providing Ministers for the Temple,
and not to his own care and diligence Ezra 8.18.
: And Nehemiah the success he had with the King in the behalf of his Nation,
and not solely to his favor with the Prince, Neh. 2.8.
or the arts he used to please him.

2. The second Information is this, If God be so good, it is a certain Argument
that Man is fallen from his Original State. It Is the complaint of Man
sometimes, that other Creatures have more of Earthly Happiness than Men have,
live freer from cares and trouble, and are not rackt with that sollicitousness
and anxiety as Man is: Have not such distempers to embitter their lives. It Is a
good ground for Man to look into himself, and consider whether he has not some
ways or other, disobliged God more than other Creatures can possibly do. We
often find that the Creatures Men have need of in this State, do not answer the
expectation of Man. Cursed be the ground for thy sake Genesis 3.17.
. A fruitful Land is made barren, Thorns and Thistles triumph upon the face of
the Earth instead of good Fruit. Is it like that that Goodness which is as
infinite as his Power, and knows no more limits than his Almightiness, should
imprint so many scars upon the World, if he had not been hainously provoked by
some miscarriage of his Creature? Infinite Goodness could never move Infinite
Justice to inflict Punishment upon Creatures, if they had not highly Merited
it: We cannot think, that any Creature was blemished with a Principle of
Disturbance, as it came first out of the hand of God. All things were certainly
settled in a due order and dependence upon one another: Nothing could be
ungrateful, and unuseful to Man by the Original Law of their Creation: If there
had, it had not been Goodness, but Evil and Baseness, that had Created the
World. When we see therefore the Course of Nature overturned, the Order Divine
Goodness had placed, disturbed; and the Creatures pronounced good and useful to
Man, employed as Instruments of Vengeance against him; We must conclude some
horrible blot upon Humane Nature, and very odious to a God of Infinite
Goodness; And that this blot was dashed upon Man by himself, and his own fault;
for it is repugnant to the Infinite Goodness of God, to put into the Creature,
a Sinning Nature, to hurry him into Sin, and then punish him for that, which he
had impressed upon him. The Goodness of God inclines him to love goodness,
wherever he finds it, and not to punish any, that have not deserved it by their
own Crimes. The Curse we therefore see the Creatures groan under, the disorders
in Nature, the frustrating the expectations of Man in the Fruits of the Earth
and plentiful Harvests, the trouble he is continually exposed to in the World,
which tedders down his Spirit from more generous Employments, shows, that Man
is not what he was, when Divine Goodness first Erected him; but has admitted
into his Nature something more uncomely in the Eye of God; and so heinous that
it puts his Goodness sometimes to a stand, and makes him lay aside the
Blessings, his hand was filled with, to take up the Arms of Vengeance,
wherewith to fight against the World. Divine Goodness would have secured his
Creatures from any such invasions, and never used those things against Man,
which he designed in the first frame for Man's service, were there not some
detestable disorder risen in the Nature of Man, which makes God withold his
Liberality, and change the dispensation of his numerous Benefits into Legions
of Judgments. The Consideration of the Divine Goodness, which is a Notion that
Man naturally concludes to be inseparable from the Deity, would to an unbyast
Reason, verify the History of those Punishments, settled upon Man in the third
Chapter of Genesis, and make the whole seem more probable to Reason at the
first Relation. This instruction naturally flows from the Doctrine of Divine
Goodness. If God be so good, it is a certain Argument, that Man is fallen from
his Original State.

3. The third Information is this, If God be infinitely good, there can be no
just complaint against God, if Men be punished for abusing his Goodness. Man had
nothing, nay, it was impossible he could have any thing from infinite Goodness
to disoblige him, but to engage him. God never did, nay, never could draw his
Sword against Man, till Man had had slighted him, and affronted him by the
strength of his own Bounty. It Is by this, God does justify his severest
proceedings against Men, and very seldom charges them with any else as the
matter of their provocations; Hosea 2.9.
Therefore will I return, and take away my Corn in the time thereof, and my
Wine in the season thereof, and will recover my Wool and my Flax. And in Ezekiel.
16. after he had drawn out a Bill of Complaint against them, and inserted on^y
the abuse of his Benefits, as a justification of what he intended to do; He
concludes Verse 27. Behold therefore, I have stretched out my hand over thee,
and dim^nisht thy ordinary food, and delivered thee unto the will of them that
hate thee. When Men suffer, they suffer justly; they were not constrained by
any Violence, or forced by any necessity, nor provoked by any ill usage, to
turn head against God, but broke the bands of the strongest Obligations, and
most tender Allurements. What Man, what Devil can justly blame God for
punishing them, after they had been so intolerably bold, as to fly in the face
of that Goodness that had obliged them, by giving them beings of a higher
elevation than to inferior Creatures, and furnishing them with sufficient
strength to continue in their first Habitation? Man seems to have less reason
to accuse God of rigor than Devils, since after his unreasonable Revolt, a more
express Goodness than that which Created him, has solicited him to
Repentance, Courted him by melting Promises and Expostulations, added
undeniable Arguments of Bounty, and drawn out the choicest Treasures of Heaven
in the gift of his Son, to prevail over Men's perversity. And yet Man after he
might arrive to the height and happiness of an Angel, will be fond of
continuing in the meanness and misery of a Devil; and more strongly link
himself to the Society of the damned Spirits, wherein by his first Rebellion he
had incorporated himself. Who can blame God for vindicating his own Goodness
from such desperate contempts, and the extreme ingratitude of Man? Petav.
Theolog. Dogmat. Vol. 1. p. 407.
If God be good, it is our happiness to adhere to him: If we depart from him, we
depart from Goodness, and if Evil happen to us, we cannot blame God but our
selves, for our departure. Why are Men happy? Because they cleave to God; Why
are Men miserable? Because they recede from God; It Is then our own fault that
we are miserable; God cannot be charged with any injustice, if we be miserable,
since his Goodness gave means to prevent it, and afterward added means to
recover us from it, but all despised by us. The Doctrine of Divine Goodness
justifies every Stone laid in the Foundation of Hell, and every Spark in that
burning Furnace, since it is for the abuse of Infinite Goodness, that it was
kindled.

4. The fourth Information, Here is a certain Argument, both for Gods fitness
to govern the World, and his actual Government of it.

1. This renders him fit for the Government of the World, and gives him a full
Title to it. This Perfection does the Psalmist Celebrate throughout the 107
Psalm, where he declares Gods Works of Providence, verse. 8, 15, 21, 32. Power
without goodness would deface, instead of preserving; Ruin is the fruit of
rigor without kindness; But God because of his infinite and immutable goodness
cannot do any thing unworthy of himself, and uncomely in it self, or
destructive to any Moral goodness in the Creature. It Is impossible he should do
any thing that is base, or act any thing but for the best, because he is
essentially and naturally, and therefore necessarily good. As a good Tree
cannot bring forth bad Fruit, so a good God cannot produce evil acts; no more
than a pure Beam of the Sun can engender so much as a mite of darkness; or
infinite Heat produce any particle of Cold. As God is so much Light, that he
can be no Darkness, so he is so much G^od, that he can have no Evil; and
because there is no Evil in him, nothing simply Evil can be produced by him.
Since he is good by Nature, all evil is against his Nature, and God can do
nothing against his Nature: It would be a part of impotence in him, to Will
that which is Evil; and therefore the Misery Man feels, as well as the Sin
whereby he deserves that Misery, are said to be from himself; Hos. 13.9.
Oh Israel thou have destroyed thy self. And though God sends Judgments upon
the World, we have shown these to be intended for the support and vindication
of his Goodness. And Hezekiah judged no otherewise, when after the threatening
of the Devastation of his House, the Plundering his Treasures, and Captivity of
his Posterity, He replies, Good is the Word of the Lord, which thou have spoken
Isai. 39.8.
. God cannot act any thing that is base and Cruel, because his Goodness is as
infinite as his Power, and his Power acts nothing, but what his Wisdom directs,
and his Goodness moves him to. Wisdom is the Head in Government, Omniscience
the Eye, Power the Arm, and Goodness the Heart and Spirit in them, that
animates all.

2. As Goodness renders him fit to govern the World, so God does actually
govern the World. Can we understand this Perfection aright, and yet imagine,
that he is of so Morose a Disposition, as to neglect the care of his Creatures?
That his Excellency which was displayed in framing the World, should withdraw
and wrap up it self in his own Bosom, without looking out, and darting it self
out in the disposal of them? Can that which moved him first to Erect a World,
suffer him to be unmindful of his own Work? Would he design first to display it
in Creation, and afterward obscure the Honor of it? That cannot be Entitled
an Infinite permanent Goodness, which should be so indifferent, as to let the
Creatures tumble together, as they please, without any order, after he had
Molded them in his hand. If Goodness be diffusive and communicative of it
self, can it consist with the Nature of it, to extend it self to the giving the
Creatures Being, and then withdraw and contract it self, not caring what
becomes of them? It Is the Nature of Goodness after it has communicated it
self, to enlarge its Channels; That Fountain that springs up in a little hollow
part of the Earth, does in a short progress increase its Streams, and widen the
Passages through which it runs: It would be a blemish to Divine Goodness, if it
did desert what it made, and leave things to wild Confusions, which would be,
if a good hand did not manage them, and a good Mind preside over them. This is
the Lesson intended to us by all his Judgments, Dan. 4.17.
That the living may know, that the Most High Rules in the Kingdoms of Men. If
he does not actually govern the World, he must have devolved it somewhere,
either to Men or Angels; Not to Men, who naturally want a goodness and Wisdom
to govern themselves, much more to govern others exactly. And besides the
misinterpretations of actions, they are liable to the want of Patience, to bear
with the provocations of the World. Since some of the best at one time in the
World, and in the greatest example of meekness and sweetness, would have
kindled a Fire in Heaven to have consumed the Samaritans, for no other affront
than a non Entertainment of their Master, and themselves Luke 9.54.
. Nor has he committed the disposal of things to Angels, either good or bad;
though he uses them as Instruments in his Government, yet they are not the
principal Pilots to Steer the World. Bad Angels certainly are not; they would
make continual Ravages, meditate Ruin, never defeat their own Counsels, which
they manage by the Wicked as their Instruments in the World, nor fill their
Spirits with disquiet and restlesness when they are engaged in some Ruinous
Design, as often is experienced: Nor has he committed it to the good Angels,
who for ought we know, are not more numerous than the evil ones are: But
besides, we can scarcely think their Finite Nature capable of so much goodness,
as to bear the innumerable Debaucheries, Villainies, Blasphemies vented in one
year, one week, one day, one hour throughout the World; Their Zeal for their
Creator might well be supposed to move them to testify their affection to him
in a constant and speedy Righting of his injured Honor upon the heads of the
Offenders. The evil Angels have too much Cruelty, and would have no care of
Justice, but take pleasure in the Blood of the most Innocent, as well as the
most Criminal. And the good Angels have too little tenderness, to suffer so
many Crimes; Since the World therefore continues without those floods of
Judgments, which it daily merits, since notwithstanding all the provocations,
the order of it is preserved; It Is a testimony, that an Infinite Goodness holds
the Helm in his hands, and spreads its warm Wings over it.

5. The fifth Information is this; Hence we may infer the ground of all
Religion, it is this Perfection of Goodness. As the Goodness of God is the
luster of all his Attributes, so it is the Foundation and Link of all true
Religious Worship: The natural Religion of the Heathens was introduced by the
consideration of Divine Goodness, in the Being he had bestowed upon them, and
the Provisions that were made for them. Divine Bounty was the Motive to Erect
Altars, and present Sacrifices; though they mistook the Object of their
Worship, and offered the dues of the Creator, to the Instruments whereby he
conveyed his Benefits to them. And you find, that the Religion instituted by
him among the Jews, was enforced upon them by the consideration of their
miraculous deliverance from Egypt, the preservation of them in the Wilderness,
and the infeoffing them in a Land flowing with Milk and Honey. Every act of
bounty and success the Heathens received, moved them to appoint new Feasts, and
repeat their adorations of those Deities, they thought the Authors and
Promoters of their Victories and Welfare. The Devil did not mistake the common
Sentiment of the World in Divine Service, when he alleged to God, that Job did
not fear him for naught, i. e. worship him for nothing Job 1.9.
. All acts of Devotion take their rise from Gods liberality, either from what
they have, or from what they hope: Praise speaks the Possession, and Prayer the
Expectation of some Benefit from his Hand. Though some of the Heathens made
fear, to be the prime Cause of the acknowledgment and worship of a Deity, yet
surely something else besides and beyond this Established so great a thing as
Religion in the World; an ingenuous Religion could never have been born into
the World, without a Notion of Goodness; and would have gaspt its last, as soon
as this Notion should have expired in the minds of Men. What encouragement can
fear of Power give, without sense of Goodness? just as much as Thunder has, to
invite a Man to the place where it is like to fall, and crush him. The nature
of fear is to drive from, and the nature of goodness to allure to the Object.
The Divine Thunders, Prodigies, and other Armies of his Justice in the World,
which are the Marks of his Power, could conclude in nothing but a slavish
Worship: Fear alone, would have made Men blaspheme the Deity; instead of
serving him, they would have fretted against him; they might have offered him a
trembling Worship, but they could never have in their minds, thought him worthy
of an Adoration; they would rather have secretly complained of him, and cursed
him in their heart, than inwardly have admired him: The issue would have been
the same, which Job's Wife advised him to, when God withdrew his Protection
from his Goods and Body, Curse God and die Job 2.9.
. It Is certainly the common sentiment of Men, that he that acts Cruelly and
Tyrannically, is not worthy of an integrity to be retained toward him in the
hearts of his Subjects: But Job fortifies himself against this Temptation from
his Bosom Friend, by the consideration of the good he had received from God,
which did more deserve a worship from him, than the present evil had reason to
discourage it. Alas! what is only feared, is hated, not adored: Would any seek
to an irreconcilable Enemy? Would any person affectionately list himself in the
service of a Man void of all good disposition? Would any distressed person put
up a Petition to that Prince, who never gave any experiment of the sweetness of
his Nature, but always satiated himself with the Blood of the meanest
Criminals? All affection to service is rooted up, when hopes of receiving good
are extinguished. There could not be a spark of that in the World, which is
properly called Religion without a Notion of Goodness: The Existence of God is
the first Pillar, and the Goodness of God in rewarding the next, upon which
coming to him (which includes all acts of Devotion) is established, Heb. 11.6.
He that comes unto God, must believe that he is, and that he is a Rewarder of
them that diligently seek him: If either of those Pillars be not thought to
stand firm, all Religion falls to the ground. It Is this as the most agreeable
Motive, that the Apostle James uses, to encourage Men's approach to God, because
he gives liberally, and upbraideth not James 1.5.
. A Man of a kind heart and bountiful hand, shall have his gate thronged with
suppliants, who sometimes would be willing to lay down their lives: For a good
Man one would even dare to die; when one of a niggardly or tyrannical temper,
shall be destitute of all free and affectionate applications. What Eyes would
be lifted up to Heaven? What hands stretched out, if there were not a knowledge
of goodness there to enliven their hopes of speeding in their Petitions?
Therefore Christ orders our Prayers to be directed to God as a Father, which is
a Title of tenderness, as well as a Father in Heaven, a Mark of his greatness;
The one to support our confidence, as well as the other to preserve our
distance. God could not be ingenuously adored and acknowledged, if he were not
liberal as well as powerful: The Goodness of God is the foundation of all
ingenuous Religion, Devotion, and Worship.

6. The sixth Instruction: The Goodness of God renders God amiable. His
Goodness renders him beautiful, and his Beauty renders him lovely, both are
linkt together: Zach. 9.17.
How great is his Goodness? And how great is his Beauty? This is the most
powerful Attractive, and masters the affections of the Soul: It Is goodness only
supposed, or real, that is thought worthy to demerit our affections to any
thing. If there be not a reality of this, or at least an opinion and estimation
of it in an Object, it would want a force and vigor to allure our Will. This
Perfection of God is the Loadstone to draw us, and the Center for our Spirits
to rest in.

1. This renders God amiable to himself. His Goodness is his Godhead, Romans 1.20.
By his Godhead is meant his Goodness: If he loves his Godhead for it self, he
loves his Goodness for it self: He would not be good, if he did not love
himself: And if there were any thing more Excellent, and had a greater goodness
than himself, he would not be good, if he did not love that greater Goodness
above himself: For not only a hatred of goodness is evil, but an indifferent or
cold affection to goodness, has a tincture of evil in it. If God were not
good, and yet should love himself in the highest manner, he would be the
greatest Evil, and do the greatest evil in that act; for he would set his love
upon that which is not the proper Object of such an affection, but the Object
of a version. His own Infinite Excellency and Goodness of his Nature, renders
him lovely and delightful to himself; without this he could not love himself in
a commendable and worthy way, and becoming the purity of a Deity; and he cannot
but love himself for this: For as Creatures by not loving him as the Supreme
Good, deny him to be the choicest good, so God would deny himself and his own
goodness, if he did not love himself, and that for his goodness. But the
Apostle tells us, That God cannot deny himself 2 Timothy 2.13.
: Self-love upon this account is the only Prerogative of God, because there is
not any thing better than himself, that can lay any just claim to his
affections: He only ought to love himself, and it would be an injustice in him
to himself, if he did not. He only can love himself, for this: An Infinite
Goodness ought to be infinitely loved, but he only being Infinite, can only
love himself according to the due Merit of his own Goodness. He cannot be so
amiable to any Man, to any Angel, to the highest Seraphim, as he is to himself;
because he is only capable in regard of his Infinite Wisdom, to know the
infiniteness of his own Goodness. And no Creature can love him, as he ought to
be loved, unless it had the same infinite capacity of Understanding to know
him, and of Affection to embrace him. This first renders God amiable to himself.

2. It ought therefore to render him amiable to us. What renders him lovely to
his own Eye, ought to render him so to ours; and since by the shortness of our
Understandings we cannot love him, as he Merits, yet we should be induced by
the measures of his Bounty, to love him, as we can. If this do not present him
lovely to us, we own him rather a Devil than a God: If his Goodness moved him
to frame Creatures, his Goodness moved him also to frame Creatures for himself,
and his own glory. It Is a mighty wrong to him, not to look with a delightful
Eye upon the Marks of it, and return an Affection to God in some measure
suitable to his liberality to us; We are descended as low as Brutes, if we
understand him not to be the Perfect Good; and we are descended as low as
Devils, if our Affections are not attracted by it.

1. If God were not Infinitely Good, he could not be the Object of Supreme
Love. If he were Finitely Good, there might be other things as good as God, and
then God in justice could not challenge our choicest Affections to him, above
any thing else: It would be a defect of goodness in him, to demand it, because
he would despoil that, which were equally good with him, of its due and right
to our affections, which it might claim from us upon the account of its
goodness: God would be unjust to challenge more than was due to him; for he
would claim that chiefly to himself, which another had a lawful share in.
Nothing can be supreamly loved, that has not a Triumphant Excellency above all
other things: Where there is an equality of goodness, neither can justly
challenge a Supremacy, but only an equality of Affection.

2. This Attribute of Goodness renders him more lovely than any other
Attribute. He never requires our Adoration of him so much, as the strongest or
wisest, but as the best of Beings: He uses this chiefly, to constrain and
allure us. Why would he be feared or worshipped, but because there is forgiveness
with him Psalm. 130.4.
? It Is for his goodness sake, that he is sued to by his People in distress,
Psalm. 25.7.
For thy goodness sake, O Lord. Men may be admired because of their knowledge,
but they are affected because of their goodness: The will in all the variety of
Objects it pursues, centers in this one thing of good as the term of its
appetite. All things are beloved by Men, because they have been bettered by
them, or because they expect to be the better for them. Severity can never
conquer enmity, and kindle love: Were there nothing but wrath in the Deity, it
would make him be feared, but render him odious, and that to an innocent
Nature. As the Spouse speaks of Christ, Cant 5.10, 11.
s^ we may of God: Though she commends him for his Head, the excellency of his
Wisdom, his Eyes, the extent of his Omniscence, his Hands, the greateness of
his Power, and his Legs, the swiftness of his Motions, and ways to and for his
People, yet the sweetness of his Mouth, in his gracious Words and Promises
closes all, and is followed with nothing but an Exclamation, that he is
altogether lovely, Verse 16. His Mouth in pronouncing Pardon of Sin, and
justification of the Person, presents him most lovely. His Power to do good is
admirable, but his Will to do good is amiable: This puts a gloss upon all his
other Attributes. Though he had knowledge to understand the depth of our
necessities, and power to prevent them, or rescue us from them, yet his
knowledge would be fruitless, and his power useless, if he were of a rigid
Nature, and not touched with any sentiments of kindness.

3. This Goodness therefore lays a strong Obligation upon us. It Is true he is
lovely in regard of his absolute goodness, or the goodness of his Nature, but
we should hardly be persuaded to return him an affection, without his Relative
goodness, his Benefits to his Creatures; We are obliged by both to love him.

1. By his Absolute Goodness, or the Goodness of his Nature. Suppose a Creature
had drawn its Original from something else, wherein God had no influx; and had
never received the least mite of a benefit from him, but from some other hand,
yet the infinite Excellency and goodness of his Nature, would merit the love of
that Creature, and it would act sordidly and disingenuously, if it did not
discover a mighty Respect for God: For what ingenuity could there be in a
Rational Creature, that were possessed with no esteem for any Nature filled
with unbounded goodness and Excellency, though he had never been obliged to him
for any favor? That Man is accounted odious, and justly despicable by Man,
that reproaches and disesteems, nay, that does not value a Person of a high
Virtue in himself, and an universal goodness and Charity to others, though
himself never stood in need of his Charity, and never had any benefit conveyed
from his hands, nor ever saw his face, or had any commerce with him: A value of
such a Person is but a just due to the natural claim of Virtue. And indeed, the
first Object of Love is God in the Excellency of his own Nature, as the first
Object of Love in Marriage, is the Person; the Portion is a thing consequent
upon it. To love God only for his Benefits, is to love our selves first, and
him secondarily: To love God for his own Goodness and Excellency, is a true
love of God; a love of him for himself. That flaming Fire in his own Breast,
though we have not a Spark of it, has a right to kindle one in ours to him.

2. By his Relative Goodness, or that of his Benefits. Though the Excellency of
his own Nature, wherein there is a combination of Goodness, must needs ravish
an apprehensive Mind; yet a reflection upon his imparted Kindness, both in the
Beings we have from him, and the support we have by him, must enhance this
Estimation. When the Excellency of his Nature, and the Expressions of his
Bounty are in conjunction, the Excellency of his own Nature, renders him
estimable in a way of Justice, and the greatness of his Benefits renders him
valuable in a way of Gratitude: The first ravisheth, and the other allures and
melts: He has enough in his Nature to attract, and sufficient in his Bounty to
engage our Affections. The Excellency of his Nature is strong enough of it
self, to blow up our Affections to him, were there not a Malignity in our
hearts, that represents him under the Notion of an Enemy; therefore in regard
of our Corrupt State, the consideration of Divine Largesses, comes in for a
share in the Elevation of our Affections. For indeed it is a very hard thing,
for a Man to love another, though never so well qualified, and of an eminent
Virtue, while he believes him to be his Enemy, and one that will severely
handle him; though he has before received many good turns from him: The
Virtue, Valor, and Courtesy of a Prince, will hardly make him affected by
those, against whom he is in Arms, and that are daily pilfer'd by his
Soldiers, unless they have hopes of a Reparation from him, and future security
from injuries. Christ in the Repetition of the Command to love God with all our
mind, with all our heart, and with all our Soul, i. e. with such an ardency,
above all things which glitter in our Eye, or can be Created by him, considers
him as our God Mat. 22.37.
. And the Psalmist considers him as one, that had kindly employed his power for
him, in the eruption of his love, Psalm. 18.1. I will love thee Oh Lord my
strength; And so in Psalm. 116.1. I love the Lord because he has heard the
voice of my supplications. An esteem of the Benefactor, is inseparable from
gratitude for the received Benefits: And should not then the unparalleled
kindness of God, advance him in our thoughts, much more than slighter
Courtesies do a Created Benefactor in ours? It Is an obligation on every Man's
Nature, to answer Bounty with gratitude, and Goodness with love. Hence you
never knew any Man, nor can the Records of Eternity produce any Man, or Devil,
that ever hated any Person, or any thing as good in it self: It Is a thing
absolutely repugnant to the Nature of any Rational Creature. The Devils hate
not God, because he is good; but because he is not so good to them, as they
would have him; because he will not unlock their Chains, turn them into
liberty, and restore them to Happiness, i. e. because he will not desert the
Rights of abused Goodness. But how should we send up flames of love to that
God, since we are under his direct Beams, and enjoy such plentiful influences!
If the Sun is comely in it self, yet it is more ami^ble to us, by the light we
see, and the warmth we feel.

1. The greatness of his Benefits have reason to affect us with a love to him.
The Impress he made upon our Souls, when he extracted us from the darkness of
nothing: The Comeliness he has put upon us, by his own Breath: The Care he
took of our Recovery, when we had lost our selves: The Expense he was at for
our Regaining our defaced Beauty: The gift he made of his Son: The Affectionate
Calls we have heard to over-master our Corrupt Appetites, move us to
Repentance, and make us disaffect our beloved Misery: The loud sound of his
Word in our Ears, and the more inward knockings of his Spirit in our Heart: The
offering us the Gift of himself, and the Everlasting Happiness he Courts us to;
besides those common favors we enjoy in the World, which are all the Streams
of his rich Bounty. The voice of all is loud enough to solicit our love, and
the Merit of all ought to be strong enough to engage our love: There is none
like the God of Jesurun, who rides upon the Heaven in thy help, and in his
Excellency on the Sky Deuteronomy. 33.26.
.

2. The unmeritedness of them does inhance this. It Is but reason to love him,
who has loved us first 1 John 4.19.
: Has he placed his delight upon were nothing, and after they were Sinful; and
shall he set his delight upon such vile Persons, and shall not we set our love
upon so Excellent an Object as himself? How base are we, if his goodness does
not constrain us to affect him, who has been so free in his favor to us, who
have merited the quite contrary at his hands? If his tender Mercies are over
all his Works Psalm. 145.9*
, He ought for it, to be esteemed by all his Works, that are capable of a
Rational Estimation.

3. Goodness in Creatures makes them estimable, much more should the Goodness
of God render him lovely to us. If we love a little spark of goodness in this
or that Creature, if a drop be so delicious to us, shall not the immense Sun of
Goodness, the ever-flowing Fountain of all, be much more delightful? The
Original Excellency always out-strips what is derived from it: If so mean and
contracted an Object as a little Creature deserves Estimation for a little Mite
communicated to it, so great and extended a goodness, as is in the Creator,
much more merits it at our hands: He is good after the infinite methods of a
Deity; A weak Resemblance is lovely, much more amiable then must be the
incomprehensible Original of that Beauty. We love Creatures for what we think
to be good in them, though it may be hurtful; And shall we not love God, who is
a real and unblemisht Goodness? And from whose hand are poured out, all those
Blessings, that are conveyed to us by second Causes. The Object that delights
us, the Capacity we have to delight in it, are both from him; Our love
therefore to him should transcend the Affection we bear to any Instruments he
moves for our welfare. Among the Gods, there is none like thee O Lord, neither
are there any Works like unto thy Works Psalm. 86.8.
. Among the pleasantest Creatures there is none like the Creator, nor any
Goodness like unto his Goodness. Shall we love the Food that Nourishes us, and
the Medicine that Cures us, and the Silver whereby we furnish our selves with
useful Commodities? Shall we love a Horse, or Dog, for the benefits we have by
them? And shall not the Spring of all those, draw our Souls after it, and make
us aspire to the honor of loving, and embracing him, who has stored every
Creature with that which may pleasure us? But instead of endeavoring to
parallel our Affection with his Kindness, we endeavor to make our Disingenuity
as extensive and towering as his Divine Goodness.

4. This is the true end of the manifestation of his Goodness, that he might
appear amiable, and have a Return of Affection. Did God display his Goodness
only to be thought of, or to be loved? It Is the want of such a return, that he
has usually aggravated, from the Benefits he has bestowed upon Men. Every
thought of him should be attended with a Motion suitable to the Excellency of
his Nature and Works. Can we think those nobler Spirits, the Angels, look upon
themselves, or those Frames of things in the Heavens and Earth without starting
some practical Affection to him for them? Their knowledge of his Excellency and
Works, cannot be a lazy Contemplation: It Is impossible their Wills and
Affections should be a thousand Miles distant from their Understandings in
their Operations. It Is not the least part of his condescending Goodness, to
Court in such Methods the Affections of us Worms, and manifest his desire to be
beloved by us. Let us give him then that Affection he deserves, as well as
demands, and which cannot be withheld from him without horrible Sacrilege.
There is nothing worthy of love besides him; Let no Fire be kindled in our
hearts, but what may ascend directly to him.

7. The seventh Instruction is this, This renders God a fit Object of trust and
confidence. Since none is good but God, none can be a full and satisfactory
Ground or Object of confidence but God; As all things derive their beings, so
they derive their helpfulness to us from God; they are not therefore the
principal Objects of trust, but that Goodness alone that renders them fit
Instruments of our support; They can no more challenge from us a stable
Confidence, than they can a Supreme Affection. It Is by this the Psalmist
allures Men to a trust in him; Psalm. 34.8.
Taste, and see, how good the Lord is, What is the consequence? Blessed is the
Man, that trusts in thee. The Voice of Divine Goodness sounds nothing more
intelligibly, and a taste of it produces nothing more effectually than this.
As the Vials of his Justice are to make us fear him, so the Streams of his
Goodness are to make us rely on him. As his Patience is designed to broach our
Repentance, so his Goodness is most proper to strengthen our assurance in him:
That Goodness which surmounted so many difficulties, and conquered so many
motions, that might be made against any repeated Exercise of it, after it had
been abused by the first Rebellion of Man: That Goodness that after so much
contempt of it, appeared in such a Majestic tenderness, and threw aside those
impediments, which Men had cast in the way of Divine Inclinations: This
Goodness is the foundation of all reliance upon God. Who is better than God?
And therefore, Who more to be trusted than God? As his Power cannot act any
thing weakly, so his Goodness cannot act any thing unbecomingly, and unworthy
of his Infinite Majesty. And here consider,

1. Goodness is the first motive of trust. Nothing but this could be the
encouragement to Man, had he stood in a State of Innocence, to present himself
before God; The Majesty of God would have constrained him to keep his due
distance, but the Goodness of God could only hearten his Confidence; It Is
nothing else now, that can preserve the same temper in us in our lapsed
Condition. To regard him only as the Judge of our Crimes, will drive us from
him; but only the regard of him as the Donor of our Blessings, will allure us
to him. The principal Foundation of Faith is not the Word of God, but God
himself, and God as considered in this Perfection. As the Goodness of God in
his Invitations, and Providential Blessings, leads us to Repentance Romans 2.4.
; so by the same reason the Goodness of God by his Promises, leads us to
Reliance. If God be not first believed to be good, he would not be believed at
all, in any thing that he speaks or swears: If you were not satisfied in the
goodness of a Man, though he should swear a thousand times, you would value
neither his Word nor Oath, as any security. Many times where we are certain of
the goodness of a Man, we are willing to trust him without his promise. This
Divine Perfection gives Credit to the Divine Promises; they of themselves would
not be a sufficient ground of trust, without an apprehension of his truth; nor
would his truth be very comfortable, without a belief of his good will, whereby
we are assured, that what he promises to give, he gives liberally, free, and
without regret. The truth of the Promiser, makes the Promise Credible, but the
goodness of the Promiser makes it cheerfully relied on. In Psalm. 73. Asaphs
Penitential Psalm for his distrust of God, he begins the first Verse with an
assertion of this Attribute, v. 1. Truly God is good to Israel, and ends with
this fruit of it, Verse 28. I will put my trust in the Lord God. It Is a mighty
ill Nature, that receives not with assurance the Dictates of Infinite Goodness,
(that cannot deceive or frustrate the hopes, we conceive of him) that is
unconceivably more abundant in the breast and inclinations of the Promiser,
than expressible in the words of his Promise: All true faith works by love Gal.
5.6.
, and therefore necessarily includes a particular eying of this Excellency in
the Divine Nature, which renders him amiable, and is the Motive and
Encouragement of a love to him. His Power indeed is a foundation of trust, but
his Goodness is the principal Motive of it. His Power without good Will would
be dangerous, and could not allure Affection; and his good Will without Power,
would be useless; and though it might merit a love, yet could not create a
Confidence; both in conjunction are strong grounds of hope; Especially since
his Goodness is of the same infinity with his Wisdom and Power; and that he can
be no more wanting in the effusions of this upon them that seek him, than in
his Wisdom to contrive, or his Power to effect his Designs and Works.

2. This goodness is more the foundation and motive of trust under the Gospel,
than under the Law. They under the Law had more evidences of Divine Power, and
their trust eyed that much; though there was an eminency of goodness in the
frequent deliverances they had, yet the Power of God had a more glorious dress,
than his Goodness, because of the extraordinary and miraculous ways whereby he
brought those deliverances about. Therefore in the Catalogue of Believers in
Heb. 11. you shall find the Power of God, to be the Center of their Rest and
Trust; and their Faith was built upon the extraordinary Marks of Divine Power,
which were frequently visible to them. But under the Gospel, goodness and love
was intended by God, to be the chief Object of trust; suitable to the
Excellency of that Dispensation, he would have an Exercise of more ingenuity in
the Creatures: Therefore it is said, Hosea 3.5. A promise of Gospel Times, They
shall fear God and his goodness in the later days, when they shall return to
seek the Lord, and David their King. It Is not said, they shall fear God, and
his Power, but the Lord and his goodness, or the Lord for his goodness: Fear is
often in the Old Testament taken for Faith, or Trust. This Divine Goodness, the
Object of Faith, is that goodness discovered in David their King; the Messiah,
our Jesus. God in this Dispensation recommends his goodness and love, and
reveals it more clearly than other Attributes, that the Soul might have more
prevailing and sweeter attractives, to confide in him.

3. A confidence in him gives him the glory of his goodness. Most Nations that
had nothing but the light of Nature, thought it a great part of the Honor that
was due to God, to implore his Goodness; and cast their Cares upon it. To do
good, is the most honorable thing in the World, and to acknowledge a goodness
in a way of confidence, is as high an honor as we can give to it, and a great
part of gratitude for what it has already expressed: Therefore we find often,
that an acknowledgment of one Benefit received, was attended with a trust in
him, for what they should in the future need; Psalm. 56.13.
Thou have delivered my Soul from Death, will thou not deliver my Feet from
falling? So 2 Cor. 1.10. And they who have been most eminent for their trust in
him, have had the greatest Elogies and Commendations from him. As a diffidence
does disparage this Perfection, thinking it meaner and shallower, than it is;
so Confidence highly honors it. We never please him more, than when we trust
in him, Psalm. 147.11.
The Lord takes pleasure in them that fear him, in them that hope in his Mercy.
He takes it for an Honor, to have this Attribute exalted by such a Carriage of
his Creature. He is no less offended, when we think his heart straightened, as if
he were a Parcimonious God, than when we think his Arm shortened, as if he were
an impotent and feeble God.

Let us therefore make this use of his Goodness, to hearten our Faith. When we
are scared by the terrors of his Justice, when we are dazzled by the arts of
his Wisdom, and confounded by the splendor of his Majesty, we may take refuge
in the Sanctuary of his Goodness; this will encourage us, as well as astonish
us; Whereas the consideration of his other Attributes would only amaze us, but
can never refresh us, but when they are considered, marching under the Conduct
and Banners of this. When all the other Perfections of the Divine Nature are
looked upon in conjunction with this Excellency, each of them send forth
ravishing and benign influences upon the applying Creature. It Is more
advantageous to depend upon Divine Bounty, than our own Cares; We may have
better assurance upon this account in his Cares for us, than in ours for our
selves. Our goodness for our selves is Finite, and besides we are too ignorant:
His goodness is Infinite, and attended with an infinite Wisdom; we have reason
to distrust our selves, not God. We have reason to be at rest, under that kind
influence we have so often experimented; He has so much goodness, that he can
have no deceit: His goodness in making the Promise, and his goodness in working
the heart to a Reliance on it, are grounds of trust in him; Psalm. 119.49.
Remember thy word to thy Servant, upon which thou have caused me to hope. If
his Promise did not please him, why did he make it? If Reliance on the Promise,
does not please him, why did his Goodness work it? It would be inconsistent
with his Goodness, to mock his Creature, and it would be the highest Mockery to
publish his Word, and Create a temper in the heart of his supplicant, suited to
his Promise, which he never intended to satisfy. He can as little wrong his
Creature, as wrong himself; and therefore can never disappoint that Faith,
which in his own methods casts it self into the arms of his Kindness, and is
his own Workmanship, and calls him Author. That Goodness that imparted it self
so freely in Creation, will not neglect those nobler Creatures that put their
trust in him. This renders God a fit Object for trust and confidence.

8. The eighth Instruction; This renders God worthy to be obeyed and honored.
There is an Excellency in God, to allure, as well as Sovereignty to enjoin
Obedience: The infinite Excellency of his Nature is so great, that if his
Goodness had promised us nothing to encourage our Obedience, we ought to prefer
him before our selves, devote our selves to serve him, and make his glory our
greatest content; but much more when he has given such admirable Expressions
of his Liberality, and stored us with hopes of richer and fuller Streams of it.
When David considered the Absolute Goodness of his Nature, and the Relative
Goodness of his Benefits, he presently expresses an ardent desire to be
acquainted with the Divine Statutes, that he might make ingenuous returns in a
dutiful observance; Psalm. 119.68.
Thou art good, and thou do good, teach me thy Statutes. As his Goodness is
the Original, so the acknowledgment of it is the end of all, which cannot be
without an observance of his Will. His Goodness requires of us an ingenuous,
not a servile Obedience.

And this is Established upon two Foundations.

1. Because the Bounty of God has laid upon us the strongest Obligations. The
strength of an Obligation depends upon the greatness and numerousness of the
Benefits received. The more Excellent the favors are, which are conferred upon
any Person, the more right has the Benefactor, to claim an observance from the
Person bettered by him. Much of the Rule and Empire, which has been in several
Ages conferred by Communities upon Princes, has had its first spring from a
sense of the advantages they have received by them, either in protecting them
from their Enemies, or rescuing them from an ignoble Captivity; in enlarging
their Territories, or increasing their Wealth. Conquest has been the Original
of a constrained, but Beneficence always the Original of a voluntary and free
Subjection Amyrald. Discert. p. 65.
. Obedience to Parents is founded upon their right, because they are
instrumental in bestowing upon us Being and Life; and because this of life is
so great a benefit, the Law of Nature never dissolves this Obligation of
Obeying, and Honoring Parents; It Is as long lived as the Law of Nature, and
has an universal practice, by the strength of that Law in all parts of the
World: And those rightful Chains are not unlockt, but by that which unties the
knot between Soul and Body. Much more has God a Right to be obeyed and
reverenced, who is the principal Benefactor, and moved all those second Causes,
to impart to us, what conduced to our advantage. The just Authority of God over
us, results from the superlativeness of his Blessings he has poured down upon
us, which cannot be equaled, much less exceeded by any other. As therefore
upon this account he has a claim to our choicest Affections, so he has also
to most exact Obedience; and neither one, nor other can be denied him, without
a sordid and disingenuous ingratitude; God therefore aggravates the Rebellion
of the Jews, from the cares he had in the bringing them up Isaiah 2.2.
, and the miraculous deliverance from Egypt Jer. 11.7, 8.
, implying that those Benefits were strong Obligations to an ingenuous
observance of him.

2. It is Established upon this, That God can enjoin the observance of nothing
but what is good. He may by the Right of his Sovereign Dominion, command that
which is indifferent in its own Nature; As in positive Laws, The not eating the
Fruit of the Tree of the knowledge of good and evil, which had not been evil in
it self, set aside the Command of God to the contrary; and likewise in those
Ceremonial Laws he gave the Jews: But in regard of the transcendent Goodness
and Righteousness of his Nature, he will not, he cannot Command any thing that
is evil in it self, or repugnant to the true interest of his Creature: And God
never obliged the Creature to any thing, but what was so free from damaging it,
that it highly conduced to its good and welfare; and therefore it is said, 1 John 5.3.
That his Commands are not grievous: Not grievous in their own Nature, nor
grievous to one possessed with a true Reason. The Command given to Adam in
Paradise was not grievous in it self, nor could he ever have thought it so, but
upon a false supposition instilled into him by the Tempter. There is a pleasure
results from the Law of God to a holy Rational Nature, a sweetness tasted both
by the Understanding and by the Will, for they both rejoice the heart, and
enlighten the Eyes of the Mind Psalm. 19.8.
. God being Essentially Wisdom and Goodness, cannot deviate from that Goodness
in any Orders he gives the Creature; whatsoever he Enacts, must be agreeable to
that Rule, and therefore he can Will nothing, but what is good and excellent,
and what is good for the Creature; As a Heathen Maximus Tyrius, Dissert. 22. p.
220. (...).
For since he has put Originally into Man a Natural Instinct, to desire that
which is good, He would never Enact any thing for the Creatures observance,
that might control that desire imprinted by himself, but what might
countenance that Impression of his own hand; for if God did otherwise, he would
contradict his own Natural Law, and be a Deluder of his Creatures, if he
impressed upon them desires one way, and ordered directions another. The truth
is, all his Moral Precepts are Comely in themselves, and they receive not their
goodness from Gods positive Command, but that Command supposes their goodness:
If every thing were good because God loves it, or because God wills it, i. e.
That Gods loving it, or willing it, made that good, which was not good before,
then as Camero well argues somewhere, Gods goodness would depend upon his
loving himself; He was good because he loved himself, and was not good, till he
loved himself; whereas indeed Gods loving himself, does not make him good, but
supposes him good: He was good in the Order of Nature, before he loved
himself, and his being good, was the ground of his loving himself, because as
was said before, if there were any thing better than God, God would love that:
For it is inconsistent with the Nature of God, and Infinite Goodness, not to
love that which is good, and not to love that supreamly, which is the Supreme
Good. Further to understand it, you may consider, If the Question be asked, Why
God loves himself? You would think it a reasonable Answer to say; Because he is
good. But if the Question be asked, Why God is good? You would think that
Answer, because he loves himself, would be destitute of Reason; but the true
Answer would be, Because his Nature is so, and he could not be God, if he were
not good: Therefore Gods goodness is in order of our conception before his
self-love, and not his self-love before his goodness: So the Moral things God
Commands, are good in themselves, before God Commands them; and such, that if
God should Command the contrary, it would openly speak him evil, and
unrighteous. Abstract from Scripture, and weigh things in your own Reason;
Could you conceive God good, if he should Command a Creature not to love him?
Could you preserve the Notion of a good Nature in him, if he did Command
Murder, Adultery, Tyranny, and Cutting of Throats? You would wonder, to what
purpose he made the World, and framed it for Society, if such things were
ordered, that should deface all Comeliness of Society: The Moral Commands given
in the Word, appeared of themselves very beautiful to mere Reason, that had no
knowledge of the Written Law; they are good, and because they are so, his
goodness had moved his Sovereign Authority strictly to enjoin them. Now this
goodness whereby he cannot oblige a Creature to any thing that is evil, speaks
him highly worthy of our Observance, and our Disobedience to his Law to be full
of unconceivable Malignity: That is the last thing.

2. Use is a Use of Comfort. He is a Good without mixture, Good without
weariness, none good but God, none good purely, none good inexhaustibly but
God; because he is good, we may upon our speaking expect his instruction; Psalm.
25.8.
Good is the Lord, therefore will he teach Sinners in his way. His goodness
makes him stoop to be the Tutor to those Worms that lie prostrate before him;
and though they are Sinners full of filth, he drives them not from his School,
nor denies them his Medicines, if they apply themselves to him as a Physician.
He is good in removing the Punishment due to our Crimes, and good in bestowing
Benefits, not due to our Merits; because he is good, Penitent Believers may
expect forgiveness, Psalm. 86.5.
Thou Lord art good, and ready to forgive. He acts not according to the rigor
of the Law, but willingly grants his Pardon to those that fly into the Arms of
the Mediator: His goodness makes him more ready to forgive, than our
necessities make us desirous to enjoy: He charged not upon Job his impatient
Expressions in Cursing the day of his Birth, his goodness passed that over in
silence, and extolls him, for speaking the thing that is right, right in the
main, ( Job 42.7.
when he charges his Friends, for not speaking of him, the thing that is right,
as his Servant Job had done.) He is so good, that if we offer the least thing
sincerely, he will graciously receive it; If we have not a Lamb to offer, a
Pigeon, or Turtle shall be accepted upon his Altar: He stands not upon Costly
presents, but sincerely tendered Services. All Conditions are sweetened by it;
whatsoever any in the World enjoy, is from a redundancy of this goodness; but
whatsoever a good Man enjoys, is from a propriety in this goodness.

1. Here is Comfort in our Addresses to him. If he be a Fountain and Sea of
Goodness, he cannot be weary of doing good, no more than a Fountain or Sea are
of flowing. All goodness delights to communicate it self: Infinite goodness
has then an infinite delight, in expressing it self; it is a part of his
goodness, not to be weary of showing it; He can never then be weary of being
solicited, for the effusions of it; If he rejoices over his People to do them
good, he will rejoice in any opportunities offered to him, to honor his
Goodness, and gladly meet with a fit Subject for it: He therefore delights in
Prayer; Never can we so delight in addressing, as he does in imparting: He
delights more in our Prayers, than we can our selves: Goodness is not pleased
with shyness. To what purpose did his immense Bounty bestow his Son upon us,
but that we should be accepted both in our Persons and Petitions? Ephesians. 1.6.
Psalm. 34.15.
His Eyes are upon the Righteous, and his Ears are open to their Cry; He fixes
the Eye of his Goodness upon them, and opens the Ears of his Goodness for them;
He is pleased to behold them, and pleased to listen to them, as if he had no
pleasure in any thing else: He loves to be sought to, to give a vent to his
Bounty; Job 22.21.
Acquaint thy self with God, and thereby good shall come unto thee. The word
signifies, to accustom our selves to God; The more we accustom our selves in
speaking, the more he will accustom himself in giving: He loves not to keep his
Goodness close under lock and key, as Men do their Treasures. Matthew. 7.7.
If we knock, he opens his Exchequer; His Goodness is as flexible to our
importunities, as his Power is invincible by the Arm of a silly Worm: He thinks
his Liberality Honored, by being applied to, and your Address to be a
Recompense for his Expense. There is no reason to fear, since he has so kindly
invited us, but he will as heartily welcome us: The Nature of Goodness is to
compassionate, and communicate, to pity and relieve, and that with a heartiness
and cheerfulness: Man is weary of being often solicited, because he has a
finite, not a bottomless goodness: He gives sometimes to be rid of his
Suppliant, not to encourage him to a second approach. But every Experience God
gives us of his Bounty, is a Motive to solicit him afresh, and a kind of
Obligation he has laid upon himself, to renew it 1 Samuel 17.37.
: It Is one part of his goodness, that it is boundless and bottomless; We need
not fear the wasting of it, nor any weariness in him to bestow it. The Stock
cannot be spent, and infinite Kindness can never become niggardly; When we have
enjoyed it, there is still an infinite Ocean in him to refresh us, and as full
Streams as ever to supply us. What an encouragement have we to draw near to
God? We run in our straights, to those that we think have most good will, as
well as power to relieve and protect us. The oftener we come to him, and the
nearer we approach to him, the more of his influences we shall feel: As the
nearer the Sun, the more of its heat insinuates it self into us. The greatness
of God joined with his goodness, has more reason to encourage our approach to
him, than our flight from him, because his greatness never goes unattended with
his goodness; and if he were not so good, he would not be so great in the
apprehensions of any Creature. How may his goodness, in the great gift of his
Son encourage us to apply to him; since he has set him as a days-Man between
himself and us; and appointed him an Advocate, to present our Requests for us,
and speed them at the Throne of Grace, and he never leaves, till Divine
Goodness subscribes a Fiat, to our believing and just Petitions?

2. Here is Comfort in Afflictions. What can we fear from the conduct of
infinite Goodness? Can his hand be heavy upon those that are humble before him?
They are the hands of infinite Power indeed, but there is not any motion of it
upon his People, but is ordered by a Goodness, as infinite as his Power; which
will not suffer any Affliction, to be too sharp or too long. By what ways
soever he conveys Grace to us here, and prepares us for glory hereafter, they
are good, and those are the good things, he has chiefly obliged himself to
give; Psalm. 84.11,
Grace and glory will he give, and no good thing will he withold from them,
that walk uprightly. This David comforted himself with, in that which his
devout Soul accounted the greatest Calamity, his absence from the Courts, and
House of God. Verse 2.
Not an ill will, but a good will directs his Scourges; He is not an idle
Spectator of our Combats; His thoughts are fuller of kindness, than ours in any
case can be of trouble: And because he is good, he wills the best good in every
thing he acts; in Exercising Virtue, or Correcting Vice: There is no Affliction
without some apparent mixtures of goodness; When he speaks, how he had smitten
Israel Jer. 2.30.
; He presently adds, Verse 31.
Have I been a Wilderness to Israel, a Land of darkness? Though he led them
through a Desert, yet he was not a desert to them; He was no Land of darkness
to them; While they marched through a Land of barrenness, he was a Caterer to
provide them Manna, and a place of broad Rivers, and Streams. How often has
Divine Goodness made our Afflictions our Consolations? Our Diseases our
Medicines, and his gentle Strokes reviving Cordials? How does he provide for us
above our deserts, even while he does punish us beneath our Merits? Divine
Goodness can no more mean ill, than Divine Wisdom can be mistaken in its End,
or Divine Power overruled in its Actions. Charity thinks no evil 1 Cor. 13.5.
, Charity in the Stream does not, much less does Charity in the Fountain. To be
afflicted by a hand of Goodness, has something comfortable in it, when to be
afflicted by an Evil hand, is very odious. Elijah who was loath to die by the
hand of a Whorish, Idolatrous Jezabel, was very desirous to die by the hand of
God 1 Kings 19.2, 3, 4.
. He accounted it a misery, to have died by her hand, who hated him, and had
nothing but Cruelty; and therefore fled from her, when he wished for death, as
a desirable thing by the hand of that God, who had been good to him, and could
not but be good in whatsoever he acted.

3. The third Comfort flowing from this Doctrine of the Goodness of God, is,
It Is a ground of assurance of Happiness. If God be so good, that nothing is
better, and loves himself, as he is good, he cannot be wanting in love to
those, that resemble his Nature, and imitate his Goodness: He cannot but love
his own Image of goodness; where ever he finds it, he cannot but be bountiful
to it; for it is impossible there can be any love to any Object, without
wishing well to it, and doing well for it. If the Soul loves God as its
chiefest good, God will love the Soul as his pious Servant: As he has offered
to them the highest allurements, so he will not withold the choicest
communications. Goodness cannot be a deluding thing; It cannot consist with the
nobleness and largeness of this Perfection, to invite the Creature to him, and
leave the Creature empty of him, when it comes. It Is inconsistent with this
Perfection, to give the Creature a knowledge of himself, and a desire of
enjoyment larger than that knowledge, a desire to know, and enjoy him
perpetually, yet never intend to bestow an Eternal Communication of himself
upon it. The Nature of Man was erected by the goodness of God, but with an
enlarged desire for the highest Good, and a Capacity of enjoying it. Can
Goodness be thought to be deceitful, to frustrate its own Work, be tired with
its own Effusions, to let a gracious Soul groan under its burden, and never
resolve to ease him of it? To see delightfully the aspirings of the Creature to
another State, and resolve, never to admit him to a happy issue of those
desires? It Is not agreeable to this unconceivable Perfection, to be unconcerned
in the longings of his Creature, since their first longings were placed in
them, by that Goodness which is so free from mocking the Creature, or falling
short of its well grounded Expectations or Desires, that it infinitely exceeds
them. If Man had continued in Innocence, the goodness of God without question
would have continued him in Happiness: And since he has had so much goodness,
to restore Man, would it not be dishonorable to that goodness, to break his
own Conditions, and defeat the believing Creature of Happiness, after it has
complied with his terms? He is a Believers God in Covenant, and is a God in the
utmost extent of this Attribute, as well as of any other; and therefore will
not communicate mean and shallow Benefits, but according to the grandeur of it,
Sovereign and Divine, such as the gift of a happy Immortality. Since he had no
obligation upon him, to make any promise, but the sweetness of his own Nature,
the same is as strong upon him, to make all the words of his Grace good; They
cannot be invalid in any one tittle of them, as long as his Nature remains the
same; And his goodness cannot be diminisht, without the impairing of his
Godhead, since it is inseparable from it. Divine Goodness will not let any Man
serve God for naught; He has promised our weak Obedience, more than any Man in
his right Wits can say it Merits: Matthew. 10.42.
A Cup of cold Water shall not lose its Reward. He will manifest our good
actions, as he gave so high a testimony to Job, in the face of the Devil his
Accuser: It will not only be the happiness of the Soul, but of the Body, the
whole Man, since Soul and Body were in conjunction in the acts of
Righteousness; it consists not with the goodness of God to reward the one, and
to let the other lie in the ruins of its first nothing: To bestow joy upon the
one, for its being principal, and leave the other without any Sentiments of
joy, that was instrumental in those good Works, both commanded, and approved by
God: He that had the goodness to pity our Original Dust, will not want a
goodness to advance it: And if we put off our Bodies, it is but afterward to
put them on repaired, and fresher. From this Goodness, the Upright may expect
all the Happiness their Nature is capable of.

4. It is a ground of Comfort in the midst of public dangers. This has more
sweetness in it to support us, than the malice of Enemies has to deject us;
because he is good, he is a strong hold in the day of trouble Nah. 1.7.
. If his goodness extends to all his Creatures, it will much more extend to
those that honor him: If the Earth be full of his goodness, that part of
Heaven which he has upon Earth, shall not be empty of it. He has a Goodness
often to deliver the Righteous, and a Justice to put the Wicked in his stead
Prove. 11.8.
. When his People have been under the power of their Enemies, he has changed
the Scene, and put the Enemies under the power of his People: He has clapped
upon them the same Bolts, which they did upon his Servants. How comfortable is
this Goodness, that has yet maintained us in the midst of dangers, preserved
us in the mouth of Lions, quenched kindled Fire; Hitherto rescued us from
designed ruin subtly hatched, and supported us in the midst of Men, very
passionate for our destruction? How has this watchful goodness been a
Sanctuary to us in the midst of an upper Hell?

3. The third Use is of Exhortation.

1. How should we endeavor after the enjoyment of God as good? How earnestly
should we desire him? As there is no other Goodness worthy of our supreme love,
so there is no other Goodness worthy our most ardent thirst. Nothing deserves
the name of a desirable good, but as it tends to the attainment of this: Here
we must pitch our desires, which otherwise will terminate in nullities; or
unconceivable disturbances.

1. Consider, nothing but good can be the Object of a Rational Appetite. The
Will cannot direct its motion to any thing under the notion of evil, evil in it
self, or evil to it; whatsoever Courts it, must present it self in the quality
of a good in its own nature, or in its present Circumstances to the present
state and condition of the desire; it will not else else touch or affect the
Will. This is the language of that faculty, Who will show me any good Psalm. 4.6.
? And good is as inseparably the Object of the wills motion, as truth is of the
understandings inquiry. Whatsoever a Man would allure another to comply with,
he must propose to the Person under the notion of some beneficialness to him in
point of honor, profit, or pleasure; To act after this manner, is the proper
Character of a Rational Creature. And though that which is evil, is often
embraced, instead of that which is good; and what we entertain as conducing to
our felicity, proves our misfortune, yet that is from our ignorance, and not
from a formal choice of it as evil; for what evil is chosen, it is not possible
to choose under the conception of evil, but under the appearance of a good,
though it be not so in reality. It Is inseparable from the Wills of all Men, to
propose to themselves that which in the opinion and judgment of their
understandings or imagination is good, though they often mistake and cheat
themselves.

2. Since that Good is the Object of a Rational Appetite, the purest, best, and
most universal good, such as God is, ought to be most sought after. Since good
only is the Object of a Rational Appetite, all the motions of our Souls should
be carried to the first and best Good: A real good is most desirable; The
greatest Excellency of the Creatures cannot speak them so, since by the
Corruption of Man they are subjected to vanity Romans 8.20.
. God is the most Excellent Good without any shadow: A real something without
that nothing, which every Creature has in its nature Isai. 40.17.
. A perfect good can only give us content; the best goodness in the Creature is
but slender and imperfect; had not the venom of Corruption infused a vanity
into it, the make of it speaks it finite, and the best qualities in it are
bounded, and cannot give satisfaction to a Rational Appetite, which bears in
its nature an imitation of Divine Infiniteness; and therefore can never find an
Eternal rest in mean trifles. God is above the imperfection of all Creatures;
Creatures are but drops of goodness, at best but shallow Streams; God is like a
teeming Ocean, that can fill the largest as well as the narrowest Creek. He
has an accumulative goodness; several Creatures answer several necessities,
but one God can answer all our wants: He has an universal fullness, to overtop
our universal emptiness: He contains in himself the sweetness of all other
goods, and holds in his Bosom plentifully, what Creatures have in their Natures
sparingly. Creatures are uncertain goods; As they begin to exist, so they may
cease to be; they may be gone with a breath, they will certainly languish, if
God blows upon them: Isai. 40.24.
The same Breath that raised them, can blast them; but who can rifle God of the
least part of his Excellency? Mutability is inherent in the Nature of every
Creature, as a Creature. All sublunary things are as gourds, that refresh us
one moment with their presence, and the next fret us with their absence; Like
fading Flowers strutting to day, and drooping to morrow Isai. 40.6.
; While we possess them, we cannot clip their Wings, that may carry them away
from us, and may make us vainly seek, what we thought we firmly held. But God
is as permanent a good, as he is a real one: He has Wings to fly to them that
seek him, but no Wings to fly from them for ever, and leave them. God is an
universal good; that which is good to one, may be evil to another, what is
desirable by one, may be refused as inconvenient for another: But God being an
universal, unstained good, is useful for all, convenient to the natures of all,
but such as will continue in enmity against him: There is nothing in God can
displease a Soul, that desires to please him; when we are darkness, he is a
light to scatter it, when we are in want, he has riches to relieve us, when we
are in a Spiritual death, he is a Prince of life to deliver us, when we are
defiled, he is Holiness to purify us: It Is in vain to fix our hearts any where
but on him, in the desire of whom there is a delight, and in the enjoyment of
whom there is an unconceivable pleasure.

3. He is to be most sought after, since all things else that are desirable,
had their goodness from him. If any thing be desirable because of its goodness,
God is much more desirable because of his, since all things are good by a
participation, and nothing good but by his print upon it: As what Being
Creatures have, was derived to them by God, so what goodness they are possessed
with, they were furnished with it by God: All goodness flowed from him, and all
Created goodness is summed up in him. The Streams should not terminate our
appetite, without aspiring to the Fountain. If the Waters in the Chanel which
receive mixture, communicate a pleasure, the taste of the Fountain must be much
more delicious: That Original Perfection of all things, has an unconceivable
beauty, above those things it has framed. Since those things live not by their
own strength, nor nourish us by their own liberality, but by the Word of God
Matthew. 4.4.
, that God that speaks them into life, and speaks them into usefulness, should
be most ardently desired as the best. If the sparkling glory of the visible
Heavens delight us, and the beauty, and bounty of the Earth please and refresh
us, what should be the language of our Souls upon those views and tastes, but
that of the Psalmist? Whom have I in Heaven but thee, and there is none upon
Earth, that I can desire beside thee Psalm. 73.25.
? No greater good can possibly be desired, and no less good should be ardently
desired: As he is the supreme Good, so we should bear that regard to him as
supreamly, and above all to thirst for him: As he is good, he is the Object of
desire; as the choicest and first goodness, he is desirable with the greatest
vehemence. Give me Children, or else I die, was an uncomely speech, Genesis 30.1.
the one was granted, and the other inflicted; she had Children, but the last
cost her her life: But give me God, or I will not be content, is a gracious
speech, wherein we cannot miscarry; All that God demands of us, is, that we
should long for him, and look for our happiness only in him. That is the first
thing, endeavor after the enjoyment of God as good.

2. Often meditate on the goodness of God. What was Man produced for, but to
settle his thoughts upon this? What should have been Adam's employment in
Innocence, but to read over all the lines of Nature, and fix his Contemplations
on that good hand, that drew them? What is Man endued with reason for, above
all other Animals, but to take notice of this goodness, spread over all the
Creatures, which they themselves though they felt it, could not have such a
sense of, as to make answerable returns to their Benefactor? Can we satisfy
our selves, in being Spectators of it, and Enjoyers of it, only in such a
manner as the Brutes are? The Beasts behold things, as well as we, they feel
the warm beams of this Goodness as well as we, but without any reflection upon
the Author of them. Shall Divine Blessings meet with no more from us, but a
brutish view, and beholding of them? What is more just, than to spend a thought
upon him, who has enlarged his hand in so many Benefits to us? Are we indebted
to any, more than we are to him? Why should we send our Souls to visit any
thing more than him in his Works? That we are able to meditate on him, is a
part of his goodness to us, who has bestowed that capacity upon us; and if we
will not, it is a great part of our ingratitude. Can any thing more delightful
enter into us, than that of the kind and gracious disposition of that God, who
first brought us out of the Abyss of an unhappy nothing, and has hitherto
spread his Wings over us? Where can we meet with a nobler Object than Divine
Goodness? And what nobler work can be practiced by us, than to consider it?
What is more sensible in all the Operations of his hands, than his skill as
they are considered in themselves, and his goodness as they are considered in
relation to us? It Is strange, that we should miss the thoughts of it; that we
should look upon this Earth, and every thing in it, and yet overlook that,
which it is most full of, viz. Divine Goodness; Psalm. 33.5^
It runs through the whole web of the World, all is framed, and diversifyed by
Goodness: It Is one entire single Goodness, which appears in various garbs and
dresses in every part of the Creation. Can we turn our Eyes inward, and send
our Eyes outward, and see nothing of a Divinity in both, worthy of our deepest
and seriousest thoughts? Is there any thing in the World we can behold, but we
see his Bounty, since nothing was made, but is one way or other beneficial to
us? Can we think of our daily food, but we must have some reflecting thoughts
on our great Caterer? Can the sweetness of the Creature to our Palate, obscure
the sweetness of the Provider to our Minds? It Is strange that we should be
regardless of that, wherein every Creature without us, and every sense within
us, and about us is a Tutor to instruct us! Is it not reason we should think of
the times, wherein we were nothing, and from thence run back, to a never begun
Eternity; and view our selves in the thoughts of that Goodness, to be in time
brought forth upon this stage, as we are at present? Can we consider but one
act of our understandings, but one thought, one blossom, one spark of our Souls
mounting upwards, and not reflect upon the goodness of God to us, who in that
faculty that sparkles out Rational thoughts, has advanced us to a nobler State,
and endued us with a nobler Principle, than all the Creatures we see on Earth,
except those of our own Rank and Kind? Can we consider but one foolish thought,
one sinful act, and reflect upon the guilt and filth of it, and not behold
Goodness in sparing us, and Miracles of Goodness in sending his Son to die for
us, for the Expiation of it? This Perfection cannot well be out of our
thoughts, or at least it is horrible it should, when it is writ in every line
of the Creation, and in a legible Rubric in Bloody Letters in the Cross of his
Son. Let us think with our selves, how often he has multiplied his Blessings,
when we did deserve his Wrath; how he has sent one unexpected Benefit upon the
heel of another, to bring us with a swift pace the tidings of good will to us?
How often has he delivered us from a Disease, that had the Arrows of Death in
its hand, ready to pierce us? How often has he turned our fears into joys, and
our distempers into promoters of our felicity? How often has he mated a
temptation, sent seasonable supplies, in the midst of a sore distress, and
prevented many dangers, which we could not be so sensible of, because we were
in a great measure ignorant of them? How should we meditate upon his goodness
to our Souls, in preventing some Sins, in pardoning others, in darting upon us
the knowledge of his Gospel, and of himself in the face of his Son Christ? This
seems to stick much upon the Spirit of Paul, since he does so often sprinkle
his Epistles with the Titles of the Grace of God, Riches of Grace, Unsearchable
Riches of God, Riches of Glory, and cannot satisfy himself with the Extolling
of it. Certainly we should bear upon our heart, a deep and quick sense of this
Perfection; as it was the design of God to manifest it, so it would be
acceptable to God, for us to have a sense of it: A dull receiver of his
Blessings, is no less nauseous to him, than a dull dispenser of his Alms: He
loves a cheerful giver 2 Cor. 9.7.
: He does himself, what he loves in others; He is cheerful in giving, and he
loves we should be serious in thinking of him, and have a right apprehension,
and sense of his Goodness.

1. A right sense of his Goodness would dispose us to an ingenuous Worship of
God. It would damp our aversness to any act of Religion; What made David so
resolute, and ready to Worship toward his holy Temple, but the sense of his
loving kindness Psalm. 138.2.
? This would render him always in our mind, a worthy Object of our Devotion, a
Stable Prop of our Confidence. We should then adore him, when we consider him
as our God, and our selves as the People of his Pasture, and the Sheep of his
hand Psalm. 95.7.
: We should send up Prayers with strong faith and feeling, and Praises with
great joy and pleasure. The sense of his Goodness would make us love him, and
our love to him would quicken our adoration of him; but if we regard not this,
we shall have no mind to think of him, no mind to act any thing toward him; We
may tremble at his Presence, but not heartily Worship him; We shall rather look
upon him as a Tyrant, and think no other affection due to him, than what we
reserve for an Oppressor, viz. hatred and ill will.

2. A sense of it will keep us humble. A sense of it would effect that, for
which it self was intended, viz. bring us to a Repentance for our Crimes, and
not suffer us to harden our selves against him. When we should deeply consider,
how he has made the Sun to shine upon us, and his Rain to fall upon the Earth
for our support; the one to supple the Earth, and the other to assist the Juice
of it to bring forth Fruits: How would it reflect upon us, our ill requitals,
and make us hang down our heads before him in a low posture, pleasing to him,
and advantageous to our selves? What would the first charge be upon our selves,
but what Moses brings in his Expostulation against the Israelites; Deuteronomy. 32.6.
Do I thus requite the Lord? What is this goodness for me, who am so much below
him; for me, who have so much incensed him; for me, who have so much abused,
what he has allowed? It would bring to remembrance the horror of our Crimes,
and set us a blushing before him, when we should consider the multitude of his
Benefits, and our unworthy behavior that has not constrained him, even
against the inclination of his Goodness, to punish us. How little should we
plead for a further liberty in Sin, or palliate our former faults? When we set
Divine Goodness in one Column, and our Transgressions in another, and compare
together their several Items; it would fill us with a deep consciousness of our
own guilt, and divest us of any worth of our own in our approaches to him: It
would humble us, that we cannot love so obliging a God, as much as he deserves
to be loved by us: It would make us humble before Men. Who would be proud of a
mere Gift, which he knows he has not Merited? How ridiculous would that
Servant be, that should be proud of a rich Livery, which is a Badge of his
Service, not a Token of his Merit, but of his Masters Magnificence and Bounty,
which though he wear this day, he may be stripped of to morrow, and be turned out
of his Masters Family?

3. A sense of the Divine Goodness would make us faithful to him. The Goodness
of God obliges us to serve him, not to offend him: The freeness of his
Goodness should make us more ready, to contribute to the advancement of his
Glory. When we consider the Benefits of a Friend proceed out of kindness to us,
and not out of self ends and vain applause, it works more upon us, and makes us
more careful of the honor of such a Person. It Is a pure Bounty God has
manifested in Creation, and Providence, which could not be for himself, who
being Blessed for ever, wanted nothing from us: It was not to draw a profit
from us, but to impart an advantage to us, Our goodness extends not to him
Psalm. 16.2.
. The service of the Benefactor is but a Rational return for Benefits, whence
Nehemiah aggravates the Sins of the Jews, Neh. 9.35.
They have not served thee in thy great goodness, that thou gave them, i. e.
which thou did freely bestow upon them. How should we dare to spend upon our
Lusts, that which we possess, if we considered by whose liberality we came by
it? How should we dare to be unfaithful in the Goods, he has made us Trustees
of? A deep sense of Divine Goodness will enoble the Creature, and make it act
for the most glorious, and noble end: It would strike Satan's Temptation dead,
at a blow: It would pull off the false Mask, and Vizor from what he presents to
us, to draw us from the service of our Benefactor. We could not with a sense of
this, think him kinder to us, than God has, and will be, which is the great
motive of Men, to join hands with him, and turn their backs upon God.

4. A sense of the Divine Goodness, would make us patient under our Miseries. A
deep sense of this, would make us give God the honor of his Goodness in
whatsoever he does, though the reason of his actions be not apparent to us, nor
the event and issue of his proceedings foreseen by us. It Is a stated case, that
goodness can never intend ill, but designs good in all its acts, to them that
love God Romans 8.28.
: Nay, he always designs the best; when he bestows any thins upon his People,
he sees it best, they should have it; and when he removes any thing from them,
he sees it best, they should lose it. When we have lost a thing, we loved, and
refuse to be comforted, a sense of this Perfection, which acts God in all,
would keep us from misjudging our sufferings, and measuring the intention of
the hand, that sent them, by the sharpness of what we feel. What Patient fully
persuaded of the affection of the Physician, would not value him, though that
which is given to purge out the Humors, racks his Bowels? When we lose, what
we love, perhaps it was some outward luster tickled our apprehensions, and we
did not see the Viper, we would have harmed our selves by; but God seeing it,
snatched it from us, and we mutter, as if he had been Cruel, and deprived us of
the good we imagined, when he was kind to us, and freed us from the hurt, we
should certainly have felt. We should regard that, which in goodness he takes
from us, at no other rate than some gilded Poison, and lurking Venom; The
sufferings of Men though upon high provocations, are often followed with rich
Mercies, and many times are intended as preparations for greater goodness. When
God utters that Rhetoric of his Bowels, Hos. 11.8.
How shall I give thee up Oh Ephraim, I will not execute the fierceness of my
anger! he intended them Mercy in their Captivity, and would prepare them by it,
to walk after the Lord. And it is likely, the Posterity of those Ten Tribes
were the first that ran to God, upon the publishing the Gospel, in the places
where they lived: He does not take away himself, when he takes away outward
Comforts: While he snatcheth away the Rattles we play with, he has a Breast in
himself, for us to suck. The consideration of his Goodness, would dispose us to
a composed frame of Spirit. If we are sick, it is Goodness it is a Disease, and
not a Hell. It Is Goodness, that it is a Cloud, and not a total Darkness. What
if he transfers from us, what we have? He takes no more, than what his Goodness
first imparted to us; And never takes so much from his People, as his Goodness
leaves them: If he strips them of their lives, he leaves them their Souls, with
those faculties he furnished them with at first, and removes them from those
Houses of Clay to a richer Mansion. The time of our Sufferings here, were it
the whole Course of our Life, bears not the proportion of a moment, to that
endless Eternity wherein he has designed to manifest his Goodness to us. The
Consideration of Divine Goodness would teach us to draw a Calm, even from
Storms, and distill Balsom from Rods; If the Reproofs of the Righteous be an
excellent Oil, Psalm. 145.5.
we should not think the Corrections of a good God, to have a less Virtue.

5. A sense of the Divine Goodness, would mount us above the World. It would
damp our appetites after meaner things, we should look upon the World not as a
God, but a Gift from God, and never think the Present better than the Donor. We
should never lie soaking in muddy Puddles, were we always filled with a sense
of the richness, and clearness of this Fountain, wherein we might bath our
selves: Little petty Particles of good would give us no content, when we were
sensible of such an unbounded Ocean. Infinite Goodness rightly apprehended,
would dull our desires after other things, and sharpen them with a keener edge,
after that which is best of all. How earnestly do we long for the presence of a
Friend, of whose good will toward us, we have full experience?

6. It would check any Motions of Envy. It would make us joy in the prosperity
of good Men, and hinder us from envying the outward felicity of the Wicked. We
should not dare with an evil Eye, to censure his good Hand Matthew. 20.15.
, but approve, of what he thinks fit to do both in the matter of his
Liberality, and the Subjects he chooses for it. Though if the disposal were in
our hands, we should not imitate him, as not thinking them Subjects fit for
Bounty; Yet since it is in his hands, we be to approve of his actions, and not
have an ill will toward him for his Goodness, or toward those he is pleased
to make the Subjects of it. Since all his Doles are given, to invite Man to
Repentance Romans 2.4.
, to envy them those Goods, God has bestowed upon them, is to envy God the
Glory of his own Goodness, and them the felicity those things might move them
to aspire to. It Is to wish God more contracted, and thy Neighbor more
miserable; But a deep sense of his Sovereign Goodness, would make us rejoice in
any marks of it upon others, and move us to bless him, instead of censuring him.

7. It would make us thankful. What can be the most proper, the most natural
Reflection, when we behold the most magnificent Characters, he has imprinted
upon our Souls; the convenience of the Members, he has compacted in our
Bodies, but a Praise of him? Such Motion had David upon the first
Consideration, Psalm. 139.14.
I will praise thee, for I am fearfully and wonderfully made. What could be the
most natural Reflection, when we behold the rich Prerogatives of our Natures
above other Creatures, the provision he has made for us, for our delight in
the beauties of Heaven, for our support in the Creatures on Earth? What can
reasonably be expected from uncorrupted Man, to be the first motion of his
Soul, but an extolling the bountiful hand of the invisible Donor, who ever he
be? This would make us venture at some endeavors of a grateful acknowledgment,
though we should despair of rendering any thing proportionable to the greatness
of the Benefit; and such an acknowledgment of our own weakness, would be an
acceptable part of our gratitude; Without a due and deep sense of Divine
Goodness, our praise of it, and thankfulness for it, will be but cold, formal,
and customary, our Tongues may bless him, and our Heart slight him. And this
will lead us to the third Exhortation.

3. Which is that of thankfulness for Divine Goodness. The absolute Goodness of
God, as it is the Excellency of his Nature, is the Object of Praise: The
Relative Goodness of God, as he is our Benefactor, is the Object Thankfulness;
This was always a Debt due from Man to God, he had Obligations in the time of
his Integrity, and was then to render it; he is not less, but more obliged to
it in the State of Corruption; The Benefits being the greater, by how much the
more unworthy he is of them by reason of his Revolt. The Bounty bestowed upon
an Enemy that merits the contrary, ought to be received with a greater
Resentment, than that bestowed on a Friend, who is not unworthy of Testimonies
of Respect. Gratitude to God is the Duty of every Creature, that has a sense
of it self. The more Excellent Being any enjoy, the more devout ought to be the
acknowledgment. How often does David stir up, not only himself, but summon all
Creatures, even the insensible ones to join in the Consort? Psalm. 148.
He calls to the Deeps, Fire, Hail, Snow, Mountains, and Hills, to bear a part
in this work of Praise; Not that they are able to do it actively, but to show
that Man is to call in the whole Creation to assist him passively, and should
have so much Charity to all Creatures, as to receive what they offer, and so
much affection to God as to present to him, what he receives from him. Snow and
Hail cannot bless and praise God, but Man ought to praise God for those things,
wherein there is a mixture of trouble and inconvenience, something to molest
our sense, as well as something that improves the Earth for Fruit. This God
requires of us, for this, he instituted several Offerings, and required a
little Portion of Fruits, to be presented to him, as an acknowledgment they
held the whole from his Bounty. And the end of the Festival Days among the
Jews, was to revive the memory of those signal acts, wherein his Power for
them, and his Goodness to them, had been extraordinarily evident. It Is no more
but our Mouths to Praise him, and our Hand to Obey him, that he exacts at our
hands. He commands us not to expend, what he allows us, in the Erecting stately
Temples to his Honor; all the Coin he requires to be paid with for his
Expense, is the offering of Thanksgiving Psalm. 50.14.
: And this we ought to do, as much as we can, since we cannot do it, as much as
he Merits, for who can show forth all his praise Psalm. 106.2.
? If we have the Fruit of his Goodness, it is fit he should have the Fruit of
our Lips Heb. 13.15.
. The least Kindness should inflame our Souls with a kindly Resentment: Though
some of his Benefits have a brighter, some a darker aspect toward us, yet they
all come from this common Spring; His Goodness shines in all; there are the
footsteps of Goodness in the least, as well as the smiles of Goodness in the
greatest; the meanest therefore is not to pass without a regard of the Author.
As the Glory of of God is more illustrious in some Creatures than in others,
yet it glitters in all, and the lowest as well as the highest administers
matter of Praise. But they are not only little things, but the choicer favors
he has bestowed upon us. How much does it deserve our acknowledgment, that he
should contrive our Recovery, when we had plotted our Ruin? That when he did
from Eternity behold the Crimes, wherewith we would incense him, he should not
according to the Rights of Justice, cast us into Hell, but prize us at the Rate
of the Blood and Life of his only Son, in value above the Blood of Men and
Lives of Angels. How should we bless that God, that we have yet a Gospel among
us, that we are not driven into the utmost Regions, that we can attend upon him
in the face of the Sun, and not forced to the secret obscurities of the Night?
Whatsoever we enjoy, whatsoever we receive, we must own him as the Donor, and
read his Hand in it. Rob him not of any Praise, to give to an Instrument. No
Man has wherewithal to do us good, nor a heart to do us good, nor
opportunities of benefiting us, without him. When the Cripple received the
soundness of his Limbs from Peter, he praised the Hand, that sent it, not the
Hand that brought it: Acts 3.6. Verse 8.
He praised God. When we want any thing that is good, let the goodness of
Divine Nature move us to David's practice, to thirst after God Psalm 42.1.
: And when we feel the motions of his Goodness to us, let us imitate the Temper
of the same Holy Man; Psalm. 103.2.
Bless the Lord O my Soul, and forget not all his benefits. It Is an unworthy
Carriage, to deal with him, as a Traveller does with a Fountain, kneel down to
drink of it, when he is thirsty, and turn his back upon it, and perhaps never
think of it more, after he is satisfied.

4. And Lastly, Imitate this Goodness of God. If his Goodness has such an
influence upon us, as to make us love him, it will also move us with an ardent
Zeal, to imitate him in it. Christ makes this use from the Doctrine of Divine
Goodness, Matthew. 5.44, 45.
Do good to them that hate you, that you may be the Children of your Father,
which is in Heaven, for he makes his Sun to rise on the evil and on the good.
As Holiness is a Resemblance of Gods Purity, so Charity is a Resemblance of
Gods Goodness: And this our Savior calls Perfection; Verse 48.
Be ye therefore perfect, even as your Father which is in Heaven, is perfect.
As God would not be a perfect God without Goodness, so neither can any be a
perfect Christian without Kindness; Charity and Love being the splendor and
loveliness of all Christian Graces, as Goodness is the splendor and loveliness
of all Divine Attributes. This, and Holiness are ordered in the Scripture to be
the grand Patterns of our imitation: Imitate the Goodness of God in two things.

1. In relieving, and assisting others in distress. Let our heart be as large
in the capacity of Creatures, as God's is in the capacity of a Creator. A large
heart from him to us, and a strait heart from us to others, will not suit: Let
us not think any so far below us, as to be unworthy of our Care, since God
thinks none, that are infinitely distant from him, too mean for his. His
infinite Glory mounts him above the Creature, but his infinite Goodness stoops
him to the meanest Works of his hands. As he lets not the Transgressions of
Prosperity, pass without punishment, so he lets not the distress of his
Afflicted People, pass him without support. Shall God provide for the ease of
Beasts, and shall not we have some tenderness toward those, that are of the
same Blood with our selves, and have as good Blood to boast of, as runs in the
Veins of the mightiest Monarch on Earth; and as mean, and as little as they
are, can lay claim to as ancient a Pedigree, as the stateliest Prince in the
World, who cannot ascend to Ancestors beyond Adam? Shall we glut our selves
with Divine Beneficence to us, and wear his Livery only on our own backs,
forgeting the Afflictions of some dear Joseph; when God who has an unblemisht
felicity in his own Nature, looks out of himself, to view, and relieve the
miseries of poor Creatures? Why has God increased the Doles of his Treasures
to some more than others? Was it merely for themselves, or rather that they
might have a bottom, to attain the honor of imitating him? Shall we embezzel
his Goods to our own use, as if we were absolute Proprietors, and not Stewards
entrusted for others? Shall we make a difficulty, to part with something to
others, out of that abundance he has bestowed upon any of us? Did not his
Goodness strip his Son of the Glory of Heaven for a time to enrich us? and
shall we shrug when we are to part with a little, to pleasure him? It Is not
very becoming for any to be backward, in supplying the necessities of others
with a few morsels, who have had the happiness, to have had their greatest
necessities supplied with his Sons Blood. He demands not, that we should strip
our selves of all for others, but of a pittance, something of superfluity,
which will turn more to our account, than what is vainly and unprofitably
consumed on our Backs and Bellies. If he has given much to any of us, it is
rather to lay aside part of the Income for his Service; Else we would
Monopolize Divine Goodness to our selves, and seem to distrust under our
present Experiments, his future Kindness, as though the last thing he gave us,
was attended with this language, Hoard up this, and expect no more from me; Use
it only to the glutting your Avarice, and feeding your Ambition; which would be
against the whose scope of Divine Goodness. If we do not endeavor, to write
after the Comely Copy, he has set us, we may provoke him, to harden himself
against us, and in wrath bestow that on the Fire, or on our Enemies, which his
Goodness has imparted to us for his Glory, and the supplying the necessities
of poor Creatures. And on the contrary he is so delighted with this kind of
imitation of him, that a Cup of cold Water, when there is no more to be done,
shall not be unrewarded.

2. Imitate God in his Goodness, in a kindness to our worst Enemies. The best
Man is more unworthy to receive any thing from God, than the worst can be to
receive from us. How kind is God, to those that blaspheme him, and gives them
the same Sun, and the same Showers, that he does to the best Men in the World!
Is it not more our glory to imitate God, in doing good to th^se that hate us,
than to imitate the Men of the World in requiting evil, by a return of a
sevenfold mischief? This would be a goodness which would vanquish the hearts of
Men, and render us greater than Alexanders, and Caesar's, who did only triumph
over miserable Carcases; Yea, it is to triumph over our selves, in being good
against the sentiments of Corrupt Nature. Revenge makes us Slaves to our
Passions, as much as the Offenders, and good Returns render us Victorious over
our Adversaries; Romans 12.21.
Be not overcome of evil, but overcome evil with good. When we took up our Arms
against God, his Goodness contrived not our Ruin, but our Recovery. This is
such a Goodness of God, as could not be discovered in an Innocent State; While
Man had continued in his Duty, he could not have been guilty of an Enmity; And
God could not but affect him, unless he had denied himself: So this of being
good to our Enemies, could never have been practiced in a State of Rectitude;
since where was a perfect Innocence, there could be no spark of Enmity to one
another. It can be no disparagement to any Man's Dignity, to cast his influences
on his greatest Opposers, since God who acts for his own Glory, thinks not
himself disparaged, by sending forth the Streams of his Bounty on the wickedest
Persons, who are far meaner to him than those of the same Blood can be to us.
Who has the worse thoughts of the Sun, for shining upon the Earth, that sends
up Vapors to Cloud it? It can be no disgrace to resemble God; if his Hand and
Bowels be open to us; let not ours be shut to any.

A DISCOURSE UPON GODS Dominion.
PSALM. CIII. Verse 19. The Lord has prepared his Throne in the Heavens: And
his Kingdom Rules over all.


THE Psalm begins with the praise of God, wherein the Penman excites his soul
to a right and elevated management of so great a duty. Ver. 1. Bless the Lord,
O my Soul, and all that is within me, bless his Holy Name: And because himself
and all men were insufficient, to offer up a praise to God, answerable to the
greatness of his benefits, he summons in the end of the Psalm the Angels, and
all Creatures, to join in consort with him.

Observe.

1. As man is too shallow a Creature to comprehend the excellency of God, so he
is too dull, and scanty a Creature to offer up a due praise to God, both in
regard of the excellency of his nature, and the multitude and greatness of his
benefits.

2. We are apt to forget divine benefits, our Souls must therefore be often
jogged, and roused up. All that is within me, every power of my Rational, and
every Affection of my Sensitive part. All his Faculties, all his Thoughts. Our
Souls will hang back from God in every duty, much more in this; if we lay not a
strict charge upon them. We are so void of a pure and entire love to God, that
we have no mind to those duties. Wants will spurr us on to Prayer, but a pure
love to God can only spirit us to Praise. We are more ready to reach out a
hand, to receive his Mercies, than to lift up our heart to recognize them after
the receipt.

After the Psalmist had summoned his own Soul to this task, he enumerates the
Divine blessings received by him, to awaken his soul by a sense of them to so
noble a work. He begins at the first and foundation Mercy to himself, the
pardon of his sin, and justification of his Person, the renewing of his sickly
and languishing nature. Verse 3. Who forgives all thy iniquities, and heals all
thy diseases. His Redemption from death or Eternal destruction; his expected
glorification thereupon, which he speaks of with that certainty as if it were
present. V.4. Who redeems thy life from destruction, who Crowns thee with
loving kindness and tender Mercies. He makes his progress to the mercy
manifested to the Church in the protection of it against, or delivery of it
from oppressions. Verse 6. The Lord executes Righteousness and Judgment, for
all that are oppressed. In the discovery of his Will and Law, and the glory of
his merciful Name to it. Verse 7, 8. He made known his ways unto Moses, and his
acts unto the Children of Israel. The Lord is Merciful and Gracious, slow to
Anger, and plenteous in Mercy. Which latter words may refer also to the free
and unmerited spring of the benefits he had reckoned up. Viz. The Mercy of God,
which he mentions also verse 10. He has not dealt with us after our sins, nor
rewarded us according to our iniquities; And then extols the perfection of
Divine mercy, in the pardoning of sin. Ver. 11, 12. The Paternal tenderness of
God. Verse 13. The eternity of his Mercy. Verse 17. But restrains it to the
proper object. Verse 11.17. To them that fear him i. e. To them that believe in
him: Fear being the word commonly used for Faith in the Old Testament under the
legal dispensation, wherein the spirit of bondage was more eminent than the
spirit of Adoption, and their fear more than their confidence.

Observe.

1. All true blessings grow up from the pardon of sin. ver. 3. Who forgives all
thine iniquities. That is the first blessing, the top and Crown of all other
favors, which draws all other blessings after it; and sweetens all other
blessings with it. The principal intent of Christ was Expiation of sin,
Redemption from iniquity; the purchase of other blessings was consequent upon
it. Pardon of sin is every blessing vertually, and in the root and spring, it
flows from the favor of God, and is such a gift as cannot be tainted with a
Curse, as outward things may.

2. Where sin is pardoned, the soul is renewed, verse 3. Who heals all thy
diseases. Where guilt is remitted, the deformity and sickness of the soul is
cured. Forgiveness is a teeming mercy, it never goes single; when we have an
interest in Christ, as bearing the chastisement of our peace, we receive also a
balsom from his blood, to heal the wounds we feel in our nature. Isaiah 53.5.
The chastisement of our Peace was upon him, and with his stripes we are healed.
As there is a guilt in sin, which binds us over to punishment, so there is a
contagion in sin, which fills us with pestilent diseases, when the one is
removed, the other is cured. We should not know how to love the one without the
other. The renewing the soul is necessary for a delightful relish of the other
blessings of God. A condemned Malefactor infected with a Leprosy, or any other
loathsome distemper, if pardoned, could take little comfort in his freedom from
the Gibbet without a Cure of his Plague.

3. God is the sole and sovereign author of all spiritual blessings. Who
forgives all thy iniquities, and heals all thy diseases. He refers all to God,
nothing to himself in his own merit and strength. All, not the pardon of one
sin merited by me, not the cure of one disease can I owe to my own power, and
the strength of my free will, and the operations of nature. He, and he alone is
the Prince of pardon, the Physician that restores me, the Redeemer that
delivers me; it is a Sacrilege, to divide the praise between God and our
selves. God only can knock off our fetters, expel our distempers, and restore
a deformed Soul to its decayed beauty.

4. Gracious Souls will bless God as much for Sanctification as for
Justification. The initials of Sanctification (and there are no more in this
Life) are worthy of solemn acknowledgement. It Is a sign of growth in Grace when
our Hymns are made up of acknowledgments of Gods sanctifying, as well as
pardoning Grace. In blessing God for the one, we rather show a love to our
selves, in blessing God for the other, we cast out a pure beam of love to God:
because by purifying Grace we are fitted to the service of our maker, prepared
to every good work which is delightful to him; by the other, we are eased in
our selves. Pardon fills us with inward peace, but Sanctification fills us with
an activity for God. Nothing is so capable of setting the soul in a heavenly
tune, as the consideration of God as a pardoner, and as a healer.

5. Where sin is pardoned, the punishment is remitted. Verse 3, 4. Who forgives
all thy iniquities, and Redeems thy Life from destruction. A Malefactors pardon
puts an end to his chains, frees him from the stench of the Dungeon, and fear
of the Gibbet. Pardon is nothing else but the remitting of guilt, and guilt is
nothing else but an obligation to punishment as a penal debt for sin. A
Creditors tearing a Bond frees the Debtor from payment, and rigor.

6. Growth in Grace is always annexed to true Sanctification. Verse 3. So that
thy youth is renewed like the Eagles. Interpreters trouble themselves much
about the manner of the Eagles renewing its youth, and regaining its vigor:
Amyrald. in loc.
He speaks best, that says, the Psalmist speaks only according to the opinion
of the vulgar, and his design was not to write a Natural History. Growth always
accompanies Grace, as well as it does Nature in the Body; not that it is
without its qualms, and languishing fits as Children are not, but still their
distempers make them grow; Grace is not an idle, but an active principle. It Is
not like, the Psalmist means it of the strength of the Body, or the prosperity
and stability of his Government, but the vigor of his Grace and Comfort, since
they are spiritual blessings here, that are the matter of his song. The healing
the Disease conduces to the sprouting up, and flourishing of the Body. It Is
the Nature of Grace to go from strength to strength.

7. When sin is pardoned, it is perfectly pardoned. Verse 11, 12. As far as the
East is from the West, so far has he removed our transgressions from us. The
East and West are the greatest distance in the World, the terms can never meet
together: When sin is pardoned, it is never charged again; the guilt of it can
no more return, than East can become West, or West become East.

8. Obedience is necessary to an interest in the mercy of God. Verse 17. The
mercy of the Lord is to them that fear him, to them that remember his
Commandments, to do them. Commands are to be remembered in order to practice, a
vain speculation is not the intent of the publication of them.

After the Psalmist had enumerated the benefits of God, he reflects upon the
greatness of God and considers him on his Throne, encompast with the Angels,
the Ministers of his Providence. Verse 19. The Lord has prepared his Throne in
the Heavens, and his Kingdom Rules over all. He brings in this of his Dominion,
just after he had largely treated of his mercy. Either,

1. To signify, That God is not only to be praised for his mercy, but for his
Majesty, both for the height and extent of his Authority.

2. To extol the greatness of his mercy and (...). What I have said now, Oh my
Soul, of the mercy of God, and his paternal pity, is commended by his Majesty;
his Grandeur hinders not his Clemency: Though his Throne be High, his Bowels
are Tender. He looks down upon his meanest Servants from the height of his
Glory. Since his Majesty is Infinite, his Mercy must be as great as his
Majesty. It must be a greater pity lodging in his Breast, than what is in any
Creature, since it is not dampt by the greatness of his Sovereignty.

3. To render his Mercy more Comfortable. The Mercy I have spoken of, Oh my
Soul, is not the Mercy of a Subject, but of a Sovereign. An Executioner may
torture a criminal, and strip him of his Life, and a vulgar pity cannot relieve
him, but the Clemency of the Prince can perfectly pardon him. It Is that God who
has none above him to control him, none below him to resist him, that has
performed all the acts of Grace to thee. If God by his supreme Authority
pardons us, who can reverse it? If all the Subjects of God in the World should
pardon us, and God withhold his grant, what will it profit us? Take comfort, Oh
my Soul, since God from his Throne in the highest, and that God, who rules over
every particular of the Creation, has granted and sealed thy pardon to thee.
What would his Grace signify, if he were not a Monarch, extending his Royal
Empire over every thing, and swaying all by his Scepter?

4ly. To render the Psalmists confidence more firm in any pressures. Verse 15,
16. He had considered the misery of man in the shortness of his Life; his place
should know him no more, he should never return to his Authority, Employments,
Opportunities, that death would take from him; but howsoever the Mercy and
Majesty of God were the ground of his confidence. He draws himself from poring
upon any Calamities, which may assault him, to heaven the place where God
orders all things, that are done on the Earth. He is able to protect us from
our dangers, and to deliver us from our distresses; whatsoever miseries thou
may lie under, Oh my Soul, cast thy Eye up to Heaven, and see a pitying God
in a Majestic Authority. A God who can perform what he has promised to them
that fear him; since he has a Throne above the Heavens, and bears sway over
all, that envy thy happiness, and would stain thy felicity. A God whose
Authority cannot be curtailed and dismembered by any. When the Prophet
sollicites the sounding of the Divine Bowels, he urges him by his dwelling in
Heaven, the habitation of his Holiness. Isaiah 63.15. His Kingdom rules over
all: There is none therefore has any Authority to make him break his Covenant
or violate his promise.

5. As an incentive to Obedience, The Lord is merciful, says he to them, that
Remember his Commandments to do them, verse 17, 18. And then brings in the Text
as an encouragement to observe his 'Precepts; he has a Majesty, that deserves
it from us, and an Authority to protect us in it; if a King in a small spot of
Earth is to be Obeyed by his Subjects, how much more is God, who is more
Majestic than all the Angels in Heaven, and Monarchs on Earth? who has a
majesty to exact our Obedience, and a Mercy to allure it! We should not set
upon the performance of any Duty, without an Eye lifted up to God as a great
King. It would make us willing to serve him; the more Noble the Person, the
more Honorable and Powerful the Prince, the more glorious is his Service. A
view of God upon his Throne, will makes us think his Service our Privilege,
his Precepts our Ornaments, and Obedience to him the greatest Honor and
Nobility. It will make us weighty, and serious in our performances. It would
stake us down to any duty. The reason we are so loose, and unmannerly in the
carriage of our Souls before God, is because we consider him not as a great
King. Malachy 1.14. Our Father which art in Heaven in regard of his Majesty, is
the Preface to Prayer.

Let us now consider the words in themselves. The Lord has prepared his Throne
in the Heavens, and his Kingdom rules over all.

The Lord has prepared] The word signifies Established, as well as prepared,
and might so be rendered. Due preparation is a natural way, to the
Establishment of a thing. Hasty resolve^ ^eak and moulder. This notes,

1. The infiniteness of his Authority. He prepares it, none else for him. It Is
a Dominion that originally resides in his Nature, not derived from any by
birth, or commission, he alone prepared it. He is the sole cause of his own
Kingdom; his Authority therefore is unbounded, as infinite as his Nature: None
can set Laws to him, because none but himself prepared his Throne for him. As
he will not impair his own Happiness, so he will not abridge himself of his own
Authority.

2. Readiness to exercise it upon due occasions. He has prepared his Throne,
he is not at a loss, he needs not stay for a Commission or Instructions from
any, how to act. He has all things ready for the assistance of his People, he
has Rewards, and Punishments; his Treasures, and Axes the great marks of
Authority lying by him, the one for the good, the other for the wicked. His
Mercy he keeps by him for Thousands, Exodus 34.7. His Arrows he has prepared by
him for Rebels. Psalm. 7.13.

3. Wise management of it; It Is prepared; preparations imply prudence; the
Government of God is not a rash and heady Authority. A Prince upon his Throne,
a Judge upon the Bench manages things with the greatest discretion, or should
be supposed so to do.

4. Successfulness and duration of it. He has prepared, or Established. It Is
fixed, not tottering, it is an immovable Dominion, all the strugglings of Men
and Devils cannot overturn it, nor so much as shake it. It Is Established above
the reach of obstinate Rebels; he cannot be deposed from it, he cannot be mated
in it. His Dominion, as himself, abides for ever. And as his Counsel so his
Authority shall stand, and he will do all his pleasure. Isaiah 46.10.

His Throne in the Heavens] This is an expression to signify the Authority of
God, for as God has no member properly, though he be so represented to us, so
he has properly no Throne. It signifies his power of Reigning, and Judging. A
Throne is proper to Royalty, the Seat of Majesty in its excellency, and the
place where the deepest respect and homage of Subjects is paid, and their
Petitions presented. That the Throne of God is in the Heavens, that there he
sits as a Sovereign, is the opinion of all that acknowledge a God; when they
stand in need of his Authority to assist them, their eyes are lifted up, and
their heads stretched out to Heaven; so his Son Christ prayed, he lifted up his
Eyes to Heaven, as the place where his Father sat in Majesty, as the most
adorable object. John 17.1. Heaven has the Title of his Throne, as the Earth
has that of his Footstool. Isaiah 66.1. And therefore Heaven is sometimes put
for the Authority of God. Dan. 4.26. After that thou shall have known, that the
Heavens do rule, i. e. That God who has his Throne in the Heavens, orders
earthly Princes and Scepters as he pleases, and rules over the Kingdoms of the
World.

His Throne in the Heavens, Notes,

1. The Glory of his Dominion, The Heavens are the most stately and comely
pieces of the Creation. His Majesty is there most visible, his glory most
splendid. Psalm. 19.1. The Heavens speak out with a full mouth his Glory. It Is
therefore called the Habitation of his Holiness and of his Glory, Isaiah 63.15.
There is the greater glister and brightness of his Glory. The whole Earth
indeed is full of his Glory, full of the beams of it, the Heaven is full of the
body of it; as the rays of the Sun reach the Earth, but the full Glory of it
is in the Firmament. In Heaven his Dominion is more acknowledged by the Angels,
standing at his beck, and by their readiness, and swiftness obeying his
Commands, going and returning as a flash of lightning. Ezekiel. 1.14. His Throne
may well be said to be in the Heavens, since his Dominion is not disputed there
by the Angels that attend him, as it is on Earth by the Rebels that arm
themselves against him.

2. The Supremacy of his Empire, The Heavens are the loftiest part of the
Creation and the only fit Palace for him; it is in the Heavens his Majesty and
Dignity are so sublime, that they are elevated above all Earthly Empires.

3. Peculiarly of this Dominion. He rules in the Heavens alone. There is some
shadow of Empire in the World. Royalty is communicated to men as his
Substitutes. He has disposed a vicarious Dominion to men in his footstool the
Earth, he gives them some share in his Authority; and therefore the Title of
his Name. Psalm. 82.6. I have said ye are Gods; but in Heaven he reigns alone
without any Substitutes; his Throne is there: He gives out his orders to the
Angels himself, the marks of his Immediate sovereignty are there most visible.
He has no Vicars General of that Empire. His Authority is not delegated to any
Creature, he rules the blessed Spirits by himself; but he rules Men that are on
his Footstool by others of the same kind, men of their own nature.

4. The vastness of his Empire. The Earth is but a spot to the Heavens; What is
England in a Mapp to the whole Earth, but a spot, you may cover with your
Finger? Much less must the whole Earth be to the extended Heavens; It Is but a
little point or Atome to what is visible; the Sun is vastly bigger than it, and
several Stars are supposed to be of a greater bulk than the Earth; and how many
and what Heavens are beyond, the ignorance of man cannot understand. If the
Throne of God be there it is a larger Circuit he rules in, than can well be
conceived. You cannot conceive the many millions of little particles there are
in the Earth, and if all put together be but as one point to that place where
the Throne of God is seated, how vast must his Empire be? He rules there over
the Angels, which excel in strength, those Hosts of his which do his pleasure,
in comparison of whom all the Men in the World, and the power of the greatest
Potentates is no more than the strength of an Ant or Fly; multitudes of them
encircle his Throne, and listen to his orders without roving, and execute them
without disputing. And since his Throne is in the Heavens, it will follow, that
all things under the Heaven are parts of his Dominion; his Throne being in the
highest place, the inferior things of Earth cannot but be subject to him; and
it necessarily includes his influence on all things below: because the Heavens
are the cause of all the motion in the World, the immediate thing the Earth
does naturally address to for Corn, Wine, and Oil, above which there is no
superior but the Lord. Hosea 2.21, 22. The Earth hears the Corn, Wine, and Oil;
the Heavens hear the Earth, and the Lord hears the Heavens.

5. The easiness of managing this Government. His Throne being placed on high
he cannot but behold all things, that are done below; the height of a place,
gives advantage to a pure and clear Eye to behold things below it. Had the Sun
an Eye, nothing could be done in the open Air out of its ken. The Throne of God
being in Heaven, he easily looks from thence upon all the Children of Men.
Psalm. 14.2. The Lord looked down from Heaven upon the Children of Men, to see
if there were any, that did understand. He looks not down from Heaven, as if he
were in regard of his presence confined there, but he looks down majestically
and by way of Authority, not as the look of a bare Spectator, but the look of a
Governor, to pass a sentence upon them as a Judge. His being in the Heavens
renders him capable of doing whatsoever he pleases. Psalm. 115.3. His Throne
being there, he can by a word in stopping the Motions of the Heavens turn the
whole Earth into confusion. In this respect it is said, he rides upon the
Heaven in thy help, Deuteronomy. 33.26. Discharges his Thunders upon men, and makes
the influences of it, serve his peoples interest. By one turn of a cock, as you
see in Grottos, he can cause streams from several parts of the Heavens to
refresh, or ruin the World.

6. Duration of it. The Heavens are incorruptible, his Throne is placed there
in an incorruptible state. Earthly Empires have their decays and dissolutions.
The Throne of God outlives the dissolution of the World.

His Kingdom rules over all.] He has an absolute right over all things within
the Circuit of Heaven and Earth; though his Throne be in Heaven, as the place
where his Glory is most eminent and visible, his Authority most exactly obeyed,
yet his Kingdom extends its self to the lower parts of the Earth. He does not
mufle, and cloud up himself in Heaven, or confine his Sovereignty to that
place, his Royal power extends to all visible, as well as invisible things: He
is proprietor and possessor of all. Deuteronomy. 10.14. The Heaven, and the Heaven of
Heavens is the Lords thy God, the Earth also with all that is there. He has
right to dispose of all as he pleases. He does not say his Kingdom Rules all
that fear him, but over all, so that it is not the Kingdom of Grace he here
speaks of, but his natural and universal Kingdom. Over Angels, and Men; Jews,
and Gentiles; Animate, and Inanimate things.

The Psalmist considers God here as a great Monarch and General, and all
Creatures as his Hosts, and Regiments under him, and takes notice principally
of two things.

1. The Establishment of his Throne together with the Seat of it. [He has
prepared his Throne in the Heavens.]

2. The extent of his Empire. [His Kingdom rules over all.]

This Text in all the parts of it is a fit basis for a discourse upon the
Dominion of God, and the observation will be this.

Doctrine. God is Sovereign Lord and King, and exercises a Dominion over the
whole World both Heaven and Earth. This is so clear, that nothing is more
spoken of in Scripture. The very name Lord imports it, a name originally
belonging to Gods, and from them translated to others. And he is frequently
called the Lord of Hosts, because all the Troops and Armies of Spiritual and
Corporeal Creatures are in his hands, and at his service. This is one of his
principal Titles. And the Angels are called his Hosts, 21. ver. following the
Text; his Camp and Militia. But more plainly, 1 Kings 22.19. God is presented
upon his Throne, encompast with all the Host of Heaven standing on his Right
hand, and on his Left, which can be understood of no other than of the Angels,
that wait for the Commands of their Sovereign, and stand about, not to Counsel
him, but to receive his Orders. The Sun, Moon, and Stars are called his Hosts,
Deuteronomy. 4.19. Appointed by him for the Government of inferior things. He has an
absolute Authority over the greatest, and the least Creatures; over those that
are most dreadful, and those that are most beneficial; over the good Angels
that willingly obey him, over the Evil Angels that seem most incapable of
Government. And as he is thus Lord of Hosts, he is the King of Glory, or a
glorious King. Psalm. 24.10. You find him called a great King; the most High.
Psalm. 92.1. The supreme Monarch, there being no dignity in Heaven or Earth, but
what is dimm before him, and infinitely inferior to him; yea he has the Title
of Only King. 1 Timothy 6.15. The Title of Royalty truly and properly only belongs
to him. You may see it described very magnificently by David, at the freewill
offering for the Building of the Temple. 1 Chronicles. 29.11, 12. Thine, O Lord, is
the greatness, and the Power, and the Glory, and the Victory, and the Majesty,
thine is the Kingdom, O God, and thou art exalted as Head above all. Both
Riches and Honor come of thee, and thou Reignest over all, and in thy hand is
Power and Might, and in thy hand it is to make Great, and to give strength to
all. He has an eminency of Power or Authority above all. All Earthly Princes
received their Diadems from him, yea even those that will not acknowledge him,
and he has a more absolute power over them, than they can challenge over their
meanest Vassals. As God has a knowledge infinitely above our knowledge; so he
has a Dominion incomprehensibly above any Dominion of Man, and by all the
shadows drawn from the Authority of one man over another; we can have but weak
glimmerings of the Authority and Dominion of God.

There is a threefold Dominion of God.

1. Natural, which is absolute over all Creatures, and is founded in the Nature
of God as Creator.

2. Spiritual or Gracious, which is a Dominion over his Church as Redeemed, and
founded in the Covenant of Grace.

3. A Glorious Kingdom at the winding up of all, wherein he shall Reign over
all, either in the Glory of his Mercy, as over the glorified Saints; or in the
Glory of his Justice in the condemned Devils, and Men. The first Dominion is
founded in Nature. The second in Grace. The third in regard of the blessed, in
Grace; in regard of the damned, in demerit in them, and Justice in him.

He is Lord of all things, and always in regard of propriety Psalm. 24.1. The
Earth is the Lords and the fullness thereof, the World and all that dwell
therein. The Earth with the Riches and Treasures in the Bowels of it; the
habitable World with every thing that moves upon it, are his; he has the sole
right, and what right soever any others have, is derived from him. In regard
also of possession, Genesis 14.22. The most high God, possessor of Heaven and
Earth. In respect of whom, Man is not the proprietary nor possessor, but
usufructuary at the Will of this Grand Lord.

In the prosecution of this, I. I shall lay down Some general propositions for
the clearing and confirming it. II. I shall show Wherein this right of Dominion
is founded. III. What the nature of it is. IV. Wherein it consists; and how
it is manifested.


I. Some general Propositions for the clearing and confirming of it.

1. We must know the difference between the Might or Power of God, and his
Authority. We commonly mean by the Power of God the strength of God, whereby he
is able to effect all his purposes. By the Authority of God, we mean the right
he has to act what he pleases. Omnipotence is his Physical power, whereby he
is able to do what he will. Dominion is his moral Power, whereby it is lawful
for him to do what he will. Among men, Strength and Authority are two distinct
things. A Subject may be a Giant, and be stronger than his Prince, but he has
not the same Authority as his Prince. Worldly Dominion may be seated not in a
brawny Arm, but a sickly and infirm Body. As knowledge and wisdom are
distinguished; knowledge respects the matter, being, and nature of a thing.
Wisdom respects the harmony, order, and actual usefulness of a thing. Knowledge
searches the nature of a thing, and Wisdom employs that thing to its proper
use. A man may have much Knowledge, and little Wisdom, so a man may have much
Strength, and little or no Authority. A greater strength may be settled in the
Servant, but a greater Authority resides in the Master; strength is the natural
vigor of a Man. God has an infinite strength, he has a strength to bring to
pass whatsoever he decrees; he acts without fainting and weakness, Isaiah
40.28. and impairs not his strength by the exercise of it. As God is Lord he
has a right to Enact; as he is Almighty, he has a power to Execute. His
strength is the executive power belonging to his Dominion: In regard of his
Sovereignty he has a right to Command all Creatures. In regard of his
Almightiness he has power to make his Commands be obeyed; or to punish men for
the violation of them. His power is that whereby he subdues all Creatures under
him, his Dominion is that, whereby he has a right to subdue all Creatures
under him.

This Dominion is a right of making what he pleases, of possessing what he
made, of disposing of what he does possess; whereas his power is an ability, to
make, what he has a right to Create, to hold what he does possess, and to
execute the manner, wherein he resolves to dispose of his Creatures.

2. All the other Attributes of God refer to this perfection of Dominion.
They all bespeak him fit for it, and are discovered in the exercise of it,
(which has been manifested in the discourses of those Attributes, we have
passed through hitherto.) His Goodness fits him for it, because he can never
use his Authority but for the good of the Creatures, and conducting them to
their true end. His Wisdom can never be mistaken in the exercise of it; his
power can accomplish the Decrees, that flow from his absolute Authority. What
can be more rightful, than the placing Authority in such an infinite Goodness,
that has Bowels to pity, as well as a Scepter to sway his Subjects? That has
a mind to contrive, and a will to regulate his contrivances for his own Glory,
and his Creatures good; and an arm of power to bring to pass, what he Orders.
Without this Dominion some perfections, as Justice, and Mercy, would lie in
obscurity, and much of his Wisdom would be shrouded from our sight and
knowledge.

3. This of Dominion, as well as that of Power, has been acknowledged by all.
The High Priest was to wave the Offering, or shake it to and fro. Exodus 29.24.
which the Jews say, was customarily from East to West, and from North to South,
the four quarters of the World, to signify Gods Sovereignty over all the parts
of the World. And some of the Heathens in their Adorations turned their Bodies
to all quarters, to signify the extensive Dominion of God throughout the whole
Earth. That Dominion did of right pertain to the Deity, was confessed by the
Heathen in the name Baal, given to their Idols, which signifies Lord; and was
not a name of one Idol, adored for a God, but common to all the Eastern Idols.
God has interwoven the notion of his Sovereignty in the Nature and
Constitution of Man, in the noblest and most inward acts of his Soul, in that
faculty or act which is most necessary for him, in his converse in this World
either with God or Man. It Is stamped upon the Conscience of Man, and flashes in
his face in every act of self Judgment Conscience passes upon a Man. Every
reflection of Conscience implies an obligation of man to some Law written in
his Heart. Romans 2.15. This Law cannot be without a Legislator, nor this
Legislator without a Sovereign Dominion; these are but natural, and easy
consequences in the mind of Man from every act of Conscience. The indelible
Authority of Conscience in Man, in the whole exercise of it, bears a respect to
the Sovereignty of God, clearly proclaims not only a supreme being, but a
supreme Governor, and points man directly to it, that a man may as soon deny
his having such a reflecting principle within him, as deny Gods Dominion over
him, and consequently over the whole World of rational Creatures.

4. This notion of Soveraingty is inseparable from the notion of a God. To
acknowledge the Existence of a God, and to acknowledge him a Rewarder are linkt
together. Heb. 11.6. To acknowledge him a Rewarder, is to acknowledge him a
Governor: Rewards being the marks of Dominion. The very name of a God includes
in it a supremacy, and an actual rule. He cannot be conceived as God, but he
must be conceived as the highest Authority in the World. It Is as possible for
him not to be God, as not to be supreme. Wherein can the exercise of his
excellencies be apparent, but in his Sovereign rule? To fancy an infinite power
without a supreme Dominion, is to fancy a mighty senseless Statue fit to be
beheld, but not fit to be obeyed; as not being able or having no right to give
out Orders, or not caring for the exercise of it. God cannot be supposed to be
the chief being, but he must be supposed to give Laws to all, and receive Laws
from none. And if we suppose him with a perfection of Justice and Righteousness
(which we must do, unless we would make a lame and imperfect God) we must
suppose him to have an entire Dominion, without which he could never be able to
manifest his Justice. And without a supreme Dominion, he could not manifest the
supremacy, and infiniteness of his Righteousness.

1. We cannot suppose God a Creator, without supposing a Sovereign Dominion in
him. No Creature can be made without some Law in its Nature; if it had not Law,
it would be Created to no purpose, to no regular end; it would be utterly
unbecoming an infinite Wisdom, to create a lawless Creature, a Creature wholly
vain; much less can a rational Creature be made without a Law; if it had no
Law, it were not rational: For the very notion of a rational Creature implies
reason to be a Law to it, and implies an acting by rule. Maccov. Colleg.
Theolog. 10. Disput. 18. p. 6, 7. or thereabout.
If you could suppose rational Creatures without a Law, you might suppose, that
they might blaspheme their Creator, and Murder their fellow Creatures, and
commit the most abominable villainies destructive to humane Society without sin;
for where there is no Law, there is no transgression,. But those things are
accounted sins by all mankind, and sins against the supreme being: So that a
Dominion and the exercise of it is so fast linkt to God, so entirely in him, so
intrinsic in his Nature, that it cannot be imagined that a rational Creature,
can be made by him without a stamp and mark of that Dominion in his very
nature, and frame; it is so inseparable from God in his very act of Creation.

2. It Is such a Dominion as cannot be renounced by God himself. It Is so
intrinsic and connatural to him, so inlaid in the nature of God, that he
cannot strip himself of it, nor of the exercise of it, while any Creature
remains. 'T^^ preserved by him; for it could not subsist of its self; it is
governed by him, it could not else answer its end. It Is impossible there can be
a Creature, which has not God for its Lord. Christ himself though in regard of
his Deity equal with God, yet in regard of his created state, and assuming our
nature, was God's servant, was governed by him in the whole of his office,
acted according to his command and directions; God calls him his servant.
Isaiah 42.1. And Christ in that Prophetic Psalm of him, calls God his Lord.
Psalm. 16.2. Oh my Soul, Thou have said unto the Lord, thou art my Lord. It was
impossible it should be otherwise; Justice had been so far from being
satisfied, that it had been highly incensed, if the order of things in the due
subjection to God had been broke, and his terms had not been complied with. It
would be a Judgment upon the World, if God should give up the Government to any
else, as it is when he gives Children to be Princes. Isaiah 3.4. i. e. Children
in understanding.

3. It Is so inseparable, that it cannot be communicated to any Creature. No
Creature is able to exercise it, every Creature is unable to perform all the
offices that belong to this Dominion. No Creature can impose Laws upon the
Consciences of men: Man knows not the inlets into the Soul, his pen cannot
reach the inwards of man. What Laws he has power to propose to Conscience, he
cannot see executed: because every Creature wants omniscience, he is not able
to perceive all those breaches of the Law, which may be committed at the same
time in so many Cities, so many Chambers. Or suppose an Angel, in regard of the
height of his standing, and the insufficiency of Walls, and darkness, and
distance to obstruct his view, can behold men's actions, yet he cannot know the
internal acts of men's minds, and Wills without some outward eruption and
appearance of them. And if he be ignorant of them, how can he execute his Laws?
If he only understand the outward fact without the inward thought, how can he
dispense a Justice proportionable to the crime? He must needs be ignorant of
that, which adds the greatest aggravation sometimes to a sin, and inflict a
lighter punishment upon that which receives a deeper tincture from the inward
posture of the mind, than another fact may do, which in the outward act may
appear more base and unjust; and so while he intends Righteousness, may act a
degree of injustice. M^^^ii Colleg. Theolo^. Disp. 18. p. 12, 13.
Besides, no Creature can inflict a due punishment for sin; that which is due
to sin, is a loss of the Vision, and sight of God; but none can deprive any of
that but God himself; nor can a Creature reward another with Eternal Life,
which consists in Communion with God, which none but God can bestow.

II. Thing, Wherein the Dominion of God is founded.

1. On the Excellency of his Nature. Indeed a bare excellency of Nature
bespeaks a fitness for Government, but does not properly convey a right of
Government. Excellency speaks aptitude, not Title: A Subject may have more
Wisdom than the Prince, and be fitter to hold the Reins of Government, but he
has not a Title to Royalty. A man of large capacity, and strong virtue, is fit
to serve his Country in Parliament, but the Election of the People conveys a
Title to him. Yet a strain of Intellectual and Moral abilities beyond others,
is a foundation for Dominion. And it is commonly seen that such eminences in
men, though they do not invest them with a Civil Authority, or an Authority of
Jurisdiction, yet they create a veneration in the minds of men; their virtue
attracts reverence, and their advice is regarded as an Oracle. Old men by their
age, when stored with more Wisdom and Knowledge by reason of their long
experience, acquire a kind of power over the younger in their Dictates and
Counsels, so that they gain by the strength of that excellency a real Authority
in the minds of those men they converse with, and possess themselves of a deep
respect from them. God therefore being an incomprehensible ocean of all
perfection, and possessing infinitely all those virtues, that may lay a claim
to Dominion, has the first foundation of it in his own nature. His
incomparable and unparalleled excellency, as well as the greatness of his work,
attracts the voluntary Worship of him as a Sovereign Lord. Psalm. 86.8. Among
the Gods there is none like unto thee, neither are there any works like unto
thy work. All Nations shall come and Worship before thee. Though his benefits
are great engagements to our Obedience, and Affection, yet his infinite Majesty
and perfection requires the first place in our acknowledgements and adorations.
Upon this account God claims it, Isaiah 46.9. I am God, and there is none like
me, I will do all my pleasure: And the Prophet Jeremy upon the same account
acknowledges it. Jer. 10.6, 7. Forasmuch as there is none like unto thee, Oh
Lord, thou art great, and thy name is great in might: who would not fear thee O
King of Nations? For to thee does it appertain: Forasmuch as there is none like
unto thee. And this is a more noble Title of Dominion, It being an uncreated
Title, and more eminent than that of Creation or Preservation. (...). Th^olog
Not. page 757.
This is the natural order, God has placed in his Creature's, that the more
excellent should rule the inferior. He committed not the Government of lower
Creatures to Lions, and Tigers, that have a delight in blood, but no knowledge
of virtue; but to man, who had an eminence in his nature above other Creatures,
and was formed with a perfect rectitude, and a height of reason to guide the
reins over them. In man the Soul being of a more sublime nature, is set of
right to rule over the Body; the Mind, the most excellent Faculty of the Soul,
to rule over the other Powers of it; and Wisdom the most excellent habit of the
Mind, to guide and regulate that in its determinations; and when the Body and
sensitive Appetite control the Soul and Mind, it is an Usurpation against
Nature, not a rule according to Nature; the excellency therefore of the Divine
Nature is the natural foundation for his Dominion. He has Wisdom to know what
is fit for him to do, and an immutable Righteousness whereby he cannot do any
thing base and unworthy. He has a foreknowledge whereby he is able to order
all things to answer his own glorious designs, and the end of his Government;
that nothing can go awry, nothing put him to a stand, and constrain him to
meditate new Counsels. Ca^^^^. p. ^^1 A^^^^^ Dissert p. 72, 73.
So that if it could be supposed, that the World had not been created by him,
that the parts of it had met together by chance, and been compacted into such a
Body; none but God the supreme and most excellent being in the World, could
have merited, and deservedly challenged the Government of it: Because nothing
had an excellency of Nature, to capacitate it for it, as he has, or to enter
into a contest with him for a sufficiency to Govern.

2. It Is founded in his act of Creation. He is the Sovereign Lord, as he is the
Almighty Creator. The relation of an entire Creator, induces the relation of
an absolute Lord; he that gives Being, Life, Motion, that is the sole cause of
the being of a thing, which was before nothing, that has nothing to concur
with him, nothing to assist him, but by his sole power Commands it to stand up
into being, is the unquestionable Lord and Proprietor of that thing, that has
no dependence but upon him. And by this act of Creation which extended to all
things, he became universal Sovereign over all things. And those that wave the
excellency of his Nature as the foundation of his Government, easily acknowledge
the sufficiency of it upon his actual Creation. His Dominion of Jurisdiction
results from Creation. When God himself makes an oration in defense of his
Sovereignty, Job 38. His chief arguments are drawn from Creation, and Psalm.
95.3, 5. The Lord is a great King above all Gods, the Sea is his, and he made
it. And so the Apostle in his Sermon to the Athenians. As he made the World and
all things therein, he is styled Lord of Heaven and Earth. Acts 17.24. His
Dominion also of Property stands upon this Basis. Psalm. 89.7. The Heavens are
thine, the Earth also is thine, as for the World and the fullness thereof thou
have founded them. Upon this Title of forming Israel as a Creature, or rather
as a Church, he demands their service to him as their Sovereign. Oh Jacob and
Israel, thou art my Servant, I have formed thee, thou art my servant Oh Israel.
Isaiah 44. 21. The Sovereignty of God naturally arises from the relation of
all things to himself as their entire Creator, and their natural and
inseparable dependence upon him in regard of their being, and well beings. It
depends not upon the election of Men; God has a natural Dominion over us as
Creatures, before he has a Dominion by consent over us as converts. As soon as
ever any thing began to be a Creature, it was a vassal to God, as a Lord. Every
man is acknowledged to have a right of possessing what he has made, and a
power of Dominion over what he has framed. He may either cherish his own work,
or dash it in pieces; he may either add a greater comeliness to it, or deface
what he has already imparted. He has a right of property in it; no other man
can without injury pilfer his own work from him. The work has no propriety in
its self: the right must lie in the immediate framer, or in the person that
employed him. The first Cause of every thing has an unquestionable Dominion of
propriety in it upon the score of Justice. By the Law of Nations, the first
finder of a Country, is esteemed the rightful possessor, and Lord of that
Country, and the first inventor of an Art has a right of exercising it. If a
man has a just claim of Dominion over that thing, whose materials were not of
his framing, but from only the addition of a new figure from his skill; as a
Limner over his picture, the Cloth whereof he never made, nor the colors
wherewith he draws it, were ever endued by him with their distinct qualities,
but only he applies them by his art, to compose such a figure; much more has
God a rightful claim of Dominion over his Creatures, whose entire being both in
matter and form, and every particle of their excellency was breathed out by the
word of his mouth. He did not only give the matter a form, but bestowed upon
the matter its self a being; It was formed by none to his hand, as the matter
is on which an Artist works. He had the being of all things in his own power,
and it was at his choice whither he would impart it or no; there can be no
juster, and stronger ground of a claim than this. A man has a right to a piece
of brass, or Gold by his purchase, but when by his engraving he has formed it
into an excellent Statue, there results an increase of his right upon the
account of his artifice. Gods Creation of the the matter of man gave him a
right over man; but his Creation of him in so eminent an excellency, with
reason to guide him, a clear eye of understanding to discern Light from
Darkness, and Truth from falsehood, a freedom of Will to act accordingly, and an
original Righteousness as the varnish and beauty of all: Here is the strongest
foundation for a claim of Authority over man, and the strongest obligation on
man for subjection to God. If all those things had been past over to God by
another hand, he could not be the supreme Lord, nor could have an absolute
right to dispose of them at his pleasure: That would have been the invasion of
another right. Besides, Creation is the only first discovery of his Dominion.
Stoughton Righteous Man's Plea, Sermon. 6. p. 28.
Before the World was framed there was nothing but God himself, and properly
nothing is said to have Dominion over its self; this is a relative Attribute,
reflecting on the works of God. He had a right of Dominion in his Nature from
eternity, but before Creation he was actually Lord only of a nullity: Where
there is nothing, it can have no relation, nothing is not the subject of
possession, nor of Dominion. There could be no exercise of this Dominion
without Creation; What exercise can a Sovereign have without Subjects?
Sovereignty speaks a relation to Subjects; and none is properly a Sovereign
without Subjects. To conclude, from hence does result Gods universal Dominion:
For being maker of all, he is the Ruler of all. And his perpetual Dominion: For
as long as God continues in the relation of Creator, the right of his
Sovereignty as Creator cannot be abolisht.

3. As God is the final Cause, or End of all, he is Lord of all. Vid. Lessium
de perfect. Divin. p. 77. 78.
The End has a greater Sovereignty in actions, than the Actor it self: The
Actor has a Sovereignty over others in action, but the end for which any one
works has a Sovereignty over the Agent himself. A Limner has a Sovereignty
over the Picture he is framing, or has framed, but the end for which he framed
it, either his profit he designed from it, or the honor and credit of skill he
aimed at in it, has a Dominion over the Limner himself. The end moves, and
excites the Artist to work, it spirits him in it, conducts him in his whole
business, possesses his mind, and sits triumphant in him in all the progress of
his work; It Is the first cause for which the whole work is wrought. Now God in
his actual Creation of all, is the Sovereign end of all; for thy pleasure they
are, and were created, Rev. 4.11. The Lord has made all things for himself,
Prove. 16.4. Man indeed is the subordinate and immediate end of the lower
Creation: And therefore had the Dominion over other Creatures granted to him.
But God being the ultimate and principal end, has the Sovereign and principal
Dominion; all things as much refer to him as the last end, as they flow from
him as the first Cause. So that as I said before, if the World had been
compacted together by a jumbling chance without a wise hand, as some have
foolishly imagined, none could have been an Antagonist with God for the
Government of the World, but God in regard of the excellency of his nature
would have been the Rector of it, unless those Atoms that had composed the
World, had had an ability to Govern it. Since there could be no universal end
of all things but God, God only can claim an entire right to the Government of
it: For though man be the end of the lower Creation, yet man is not the end of
himself, and his own being, he is not the end of the Creation of the supreme
Heavens, he is not able to govern them, they are out of his ken, and out of his
reach. None fit in regard of the excellency of Nature, to be the chief end of
the whole World but God: And therefore none can have a right to the Dominion of
it but God. In this regard Gods Dominion differs from the Dominion of all
Earthly Potentates. All the subjects in Creation were made for God as their
end, so are not People for Rulers, but Rulers made for People for their
protection, and the preservation of Order in Societies.

4. The Dominion of God is founded upon his preservation of things. Ps. 95.3,
4. The Lord is a great King above all Gods. Why? In his hand are all the deep
places of the Earth. While his hand holds things, his hand has a Dominion over
them. He that holds a stone in the Air, exercises a dominion over its natural
inclination in hindering it from falling. The Creature depends wholly upon God
in its preservation; as soon as that Divine hand which sustains every thing,
were withdrawn, a languishment and swooning would be the next turn in the
Creature. He is called Lord, Adonai in regard of his sustentation of all things
by his continual influx. The Word coming of (...) which signifies a basis or
pillar, that supports a building. God is the Lord of all, as he is the
sustainer of all by his power, as well as the Creator of all by his Word. The
Sun has a Sovereign dominion over its own beams, which depend upon it, so that
if he withdraws himself, they all attend him, and the World is left in
darkness. God maintains the vigor of all things, conducts them in their
operations; so that nothing that they are, nothing that they have, but is owing
to his preserving power. The Master of this great Family may as well be called
the Lord of it, since every member of it depends upon him for the support of
that being, he first gave them, and holds of his Empire. As the right to govern
resulted from Creation, so it is perpetuated by the preservation of things.

5. The dominion of God is strengthened by the innumerable benefits, he bestows
upon his Creatures. The benefits he conferrs upon us after Creation, are not
the original ground of his dominion. A man has not Authority over his Servant,
from the kindness he shows to him, but his Authority commenceth before any act
of kindness, and is founded upon a right of purchase, conquest, or compact.
Dominion does not depend upon mere benefits: Then Inferiors might have dominion
over Superiors. A Peasant may save the Life of a Prince, to whom he was not
subject; he has not therefore a right to step up into his Throne, and give
Laws to him. And Children that maintain their Parents in their poverty, might
then acquire an Authority over them, which they can never climb to: Because the
benefits they confer, cannot parallel the benefits they have received from
the Authors of their Lives. The bounties of God to us add nothing to the
intrinsic right of his natural dominion, they being the effects of that
Sovereignty, as he is a Rewarder and Governor. As the benefits a Prince
bestows upon his favorite increases not that right of Authority, which is
inherent in the Crown; but strengthens that dominion, as it stands in relation
to the receiver, by increasing the obligation of the favorite to an observance
of him, not only as his natural Prince, but his gracious Benefactor. The
beneficence of God adds, though not an original right of power, yet a
foundation of a stronger upbraiding the Creature, if he walks in a violation
and forgetfulness of those benefits, and pull in pieces the links of that
ingenuous duty they call for; and an occasion of exercising of Justice in
punishing the delinquent; which is a part of his Empire. Isaiah 1.2. Hear O
Heavens, and give Ear O Earth, the Lord has spoken, I have nourished Children,
and they have rebelled against me. Thus the fundamental right as Creator, is
made more indisputable by his relation as a Benefactor, and more as being so
after a forfeiture of what was enjoyed by Creation. The benefits of God are
innumerable, and so magnificent, that they cannot meet with any compensation
from the Creature: And therefore do necessarily require a submission from the
Creature, and an acknowledgement of Divine Authority. But that benefit of
Redemption does add a stronger right of dominion to God: Since he has not only
as a Creator given them Being, and Life as his Creatures, but paid a price, the
price of his Sons blood for their rescue from Captivity, so that he has a
Sovereignty of Grace as well as Nature, and the ransomed ones belong to him as
Redeemer, as well as Creator. 1 Cor. 6.19, 20. Ye are not your own: For ye are
bought with a price, therefore your Body and your Spirit are Gods. By this he
acquired a right of another kind, and bought us from that uncontrollable
Lordship, we affected over our selves by the sin of Adam, that he might use us
as his own peculiar for his own glory and service, By this Redemption there
results to God a right over our bodies, over our Spirits, over our services, as
well as by Creation, and to show the strength of this right, the Apostle
repeats it; you are bought, a purchase cannot be without a price paid; but he
adds price also [bought with a price.] To strengthen the Title, purchase gave
him a new right; and the greatness of the price established that right. The
more a man pays for a thing, the more usually we say, he deserves to have it,
he has paid enough for it. It was indeed price enough, and too much for such
vile Creatures as we are.

III. The third thing is, The Nature of this Dominion.

1. This Dominion is Independent. His Throne is in the Heavens; the Heavens
depend not upon the Earth, nor God upon his Creatures. Since he is Independent
in regard of his Essence, he is so in his dominion, which flows from the
excellency and fullness of his Essence. As he receives his Essence from none, so
he derives his dominion from none. All other dominion except paternal Authority
is rooted originally in the wills of men. Raynaud. Theolog. Natural. p. 760,
761, 762.
The first Title was the consent of the People, or the conquest of others by
the help of those People that first consented. And in the exercise of it,
Earthly dominion depends upon assistance of the Subjects, and the Members being
joined with the head carry on the work of Government, and prevent Civil
dissentions; in the support of it, it depends upon the Subjects Contributions,
and Taxes. The Subjects in their strength are the Arms, and in their Purses the
Sinews of Government. But God depends upon none in the foundation of his
Government; he is not a Lord by the Votes of his Vassals. Nor is it
successively handed to him by any Predecessor, nor constituted by the power of
a Superior. Nor forced he his way by War, and conquest, nor precariously
attained it by suit or flattery, or bribing promises. He holds not the right of
his Empire from any other; he has no Superior to hand him to his Throne, and
settle him by Commission. He is therefore called King of Kings, and Lord of
Lords, having none above him. A great King above all Gods, Psalm. 95.3. Needing
no License from any when to act, nor direction how to act, or assistance in his
action: He owes not any of those to any person; he was not ordered by any other
to Create, and therefore receives not orders from any other to rule over what
he has created. He received not his power and wisdom from another, and
therefore is not Subject to any for the rule of his Government. He only made
his own Subjects, and from himself has the sole Authority; his own will was
the cause of their beings, and his own will is the director of their actions.
He is not determined by his Creatures, in any of his motions, but determins the
Creatures in all. His actions are not regulated by any Law without him, but by
a Law within him, the Law of his own Nature. It Is impossible he can have any
rule without himself: because there is nothing Superior to himself. Nor does he
depend upon any in the exercise of his Government, he needs no Servants in it,
when he uses Creatures it is not out of want of their help, but for the
manifestation of his wisdom and power. What he does by his Subjects, he can do
by himself: The Government is upon his Shoulder, Isaiah 9.6. To show that he
needs not any supporters. All other governments flow from him, all other
Authorities depend upon him; Dei Gratia, or Dei Providentia is in the style of
Princes. As their being is derived from his power, so their Authority is but a
branch of his dominion. They are governors by Divine Providence; God is
Governor by his sole nature. All motions depend upon the first Heaven, which
moves all; but that depends upon nothing. The Government of Christ depends upon
God's increated dominion, and is by Commission from him; Christ assumed not
this honor to himself, But he that said unto him thou art my Son, bestowed it
upon him. He put all things under his feet, but not himself. 1 Cor. 15.27. When
he says all things are put under him, he is excepted, which did put all things
under him. He sits still as an independent Governor upon his Throne.

2. This dominion is Absolute. If his Throne be in the Heavens, there is
nothing to control him. If he be independent, he must needs be ^bsolute; since
he has no cause in conjunction with him as Creator, that can share with him in
his right, or restrain him in the disposal of his Creature. His Authority is
unlimited; in this regard the Title of Lord becomes not any but God properly.
Tiberius tho^ght none of the best, though one of the subtilest Princes,
accounted the Title of Lord a reproach to him: Since he was not absolute.
Sueton. de Tiberio cap. 27.


1. Absolute in regard of Freedom and Liberty.

1. Thus Creation is a work of his mere Sovereignty; he Created, because it was
his pleasure to Create. Rev. 4.11. He is not necessitated to do this or that.
He might have chosen, whether he would have framed an Earth, and Heavens, and
laid the foundations of his Chambers in the Waters. He was under no obligation,
to reduce things from nullity to existence.

2. Preservation is the fruit of his Sovereignty. When he had called the World
to stand out, he might have ordered it to return into its dark den of
nothingness, ripped up every part of its foundation, or have given being to many
more Creatures, than he did. If you consider his absolute sovereignty, why
might he not have divested Adam presently of those rational perfections,
wherewith he had endowed him? And might he not have metamorphos'd him into some
Beast, and elevated some Beast into a rational nature? Why might he not have
degraded an Angel to a Worm, and advanced a Worm to the nature and condition of
an Angel? Why might he not have revokt that grant of dominion, which he had
passed to man over all Creatures? It was free to him to permit sin to enter
into the Earth, or to have excluded it out of the Earth, as he does out of
Heaven.

3. Redemption is a fruit of his Sovereignty. By his absolute Sovereignty he
might have confirmed all the Angels in their standing by Grace, and prevented
the revolt of any of their members from him; and when there was a revolt both
in Heaven and Earth, it was free to him, to have called out his Son to assume
the Angelical, as well as the humane nature, or have exercised his dominion in
the destruction of Men and Devils, rather than in the Redemption of any; he was
under no obligation, to restore either the one or the other.

4. May he not impose what terms he pleases? May he not impose what Laws he
please, and exact what he will of his Creature without promising any Rewards?
May he not use his own for his own honor, as well as men use for their credit
what they do possess by his indulgence?

5. Affliction is an act of his Sovereignty. By this right of Sovereignty may
not God take away any man's Goods, since they were his doles? As he was not
indebted to us, when he bestowed them, so he cannot wrong us, when he removes
them. He takes from us what is more his own, than it is ours, and was never
ours but by his gift, and that for a time only, not for ever. By this right, he
may determine our times, put a period to our days, when he pleases, strip us of
one member, and lop off another. Man's being was from him, and why should he
not have a Sovereignty to take, what he had a Sovereignty to give? Why should
this seem strange to any of us, since we our selves exercise an absolute
Dominion over those things in our possession, which have sense, and feeling; as
well as over those that want it? Does not every man think, he has an absolute
Authority over the Utensils of his house, over his Horse, his Dog, to preserve,
or kill him, to do what he please with him, without rendering any other reason,
than it is my own? May not God do much more? Does not his dominion over the work
of his hands transcend that which a man can claim over his Beast, that he never
gave life unto? He that dares dispute against God's absolute right, fancies
himself as much a God as his Creator; understands not the vast difference
between the Divine nature and his own; between the Sovereignty of God and his
own, which is all the theme God himself discourses upon in those stately
Chapters. Job 38, 39. etc. Not mentioning a Word of Job's sin, but only
vindicating the rights of his own Authority. Nor does Job in his reply, Job
40.4. speak of his sin, but of his natural vileness as a Creature in the
presence of his Creator.

By this right; God unstops the Bottles of Heaven in one place, and stops them
in another, causing it to Rain upon one City, and not upon another, Amos 4.7.
Ordering the Clouds to move to this or that quarter where he has a mind to be
a Benefactor or a Judge.

6. Unequal dispensations are acts of his Sovereignty. By this right, he is
patient toward those, whose sins by the common voice of men deserve speedy
Judgments, and pours out pain upon those, that are patterns of virtue to the
World. By this he gives sometimes the worst of men an Ocean of wealth and honor
to swim in, and reduces an useful and exemplary grace to a scanty poverty. By
this he Rules the Kingdoms of men, and sets a Crown upon the head of the basest
of men, Dan. 4.17. While he deposes another, that seemed to deserve a
weightier Diadem. This is, as he is the Lord of the Ammunition of his Thunders,
and the Treasures of his Bounty.

7. He may inflict what torments he pleases. Some say by this right of
Sovereignty he may inflict what torments he pleases upon an innocent person;
which indeed will not bear the nature of a punishment as an effect of Justice,
without the supposal of a crime; but a torment, as an effect of that Sovereign
right he has over his Creature, which is as absolute over his work, as the
Potters power is over his own Clay, Jerem. 18.6. Romans 9.21. Lessius de perfect.
Divin. p. 66. 67.
May not the Potter after his labor, either set his vessel up to adorn his
House, or knock it in pieces, and fling it upon the Dunghill; separate it to
some noble use, or condemn it to some sordid service. Is the right of God over
his Creatures less than that of the Potter over his Vessel, since God
contributed all to his Creature, but the Potter never made the Clay, which is
the substance of the Vessel, nor the water which was necessary, to make it
tractable, but only molded the substance of it into such a shape? The Vessel
that is framed, and the Potter that frames it differ only in Life, the body of
the Potter whereby he executes his Authority, is of no better a mould than the
Clay the matter of his Vessel; shall he have so absolute a power over that,
which is so near him, and shall not God over that which is so infinitely
distant from him? The Vessel perhaps might plead for its self, that it was once
part of the Body of a man, and as good as the Potter himself; whereas no
Creature can plead, it was part of God, and as good as God himself. Though
there be no man in the World, but deserves affliction, yet the Scripture
sometimes lays affliction upon the score of God's dominion, without any
respect to the sin of the afflicted person. James 5.15. Speaking of a sick
person, if he have committed sins, they shall be forgiven him, whereby is
employed, that he might be struck into sickness by God without any respect to a
particular sin, but in a way of Trial; and that his affliction sprung not from
any exercise of Divine Justice, but from his absolute sovereignty. And so in
the case of the blind man, when the Disciples asked, for what sin it was,
whether for his own, or his Parents sin he was born blind, John 9.3. Neither
has this man sinned nor his Parents; which speaks in its self not against the
whole current of Scripture; but the words import thus much, that God in this
blindness from the birth, neither respected any sin of the man's own, nor of his
Parents, but he did it as an absolute sovereign, to manifest his own Glory in
that miraculous cure, which was wrought by Christ. Though afflictions do not
happen without the desert of the Creature, yet some afflictions may (...) sent
without any particular respect to that desert, merely for the manifestation of
God's Glory, since the Creature was made for God himself, and his honor, and
therefore may be used in a serviceableness to the Glory of the Creator.

2. His Dominion is absolute in regard of unlimitedness by any Law without him.
He is an absolute Monarch, that makes Laws for his Subjects, but is not bound
by any himself, nor receives any rules, and Laws from his Subjects for the
management of his Government. But most Governments in the World are bounded by
Laws made by common consent. But when Kings are not limited by the Laws of
their Kingdoms, yet they are bounded by the Law of Nature, and by the
Providence of God. But God is under no Law without himself, his rule is within
him, the rectitude and Righteousness of his own nature, he is not under that
Law he has prescribed to man. The Law was not made for a Righteous man, 1 Timothy
1.9. Much less for a Righteous God. God is his own Law, his own nature is his
rule, as his own Glory is his end, himself is his end, and himself is his Law.
He is moved by nothing without himself, nothing has the dominion of a motive
over him but his own will, which is his rule for all his actions in Heaven and
Earth. Dan. 4.32. He rules in the Kingdom of men, and gives it to whomsoever he
will. And Romans 9.18. He has Mercy on whom he will have Mercy; As all things
are wrought by him according to his own eternal Ideas in his own mind, so all
is wrought by him according to the inward motive in his own will, which was the
manifestation of his own honor. The greatest motives therefore that the best
persons have used, when they have pleaded for any grant from God, was his own
Glory, which would be advanced by an answer of their Petition.

3. His dominion is absolute in regard of Supremacy and uncontroulableness.
None can implead him, and cause him to render a reason of his actions. He is
the Sovereign King, Who may say unto him what do thou? Eccles. 8.4. It Is an
absurd thing for any to dispute with God. Romans 9.20. Who art thou, O Man, that
replyest against God? Thou a man, a piece of dust, to argue with a God,
incomprehensibly above thy reason about the reason of his works. Let the
Potsheards strive with the Potsheards of the Earth, but not with him that
fashioned them. Isaiah 45.9. In all the desolations he works, he asserts his
own Supremacy to silence men. Psalm. 46.10. Be still, and know, that I am God?
Beware of any quarrelling motions in your minds, it is sufficient, that I am,
God, that is supreme, and will not be impleaded, and censured, or worded with
by any Creature about what I do. He is not bound to render a reason of any of
his proceedings. Subjects are accountable to their Princes, and Princes to God,
God to none; since he is not limited by any Superior, his Prerogative is
supreme.

4. His dominion is absolute in regard of Irresistibleness. Other Governments
are bounded by Law, so that what a Governor has strength to do, he has not a
right to do. Other Governors have a limited ability, that what they have a
right to do, they have not always a strength to do, they may want a power, to
execute their own Counsels. But God is destitute of neither; he has an
infinite right, and an infinite strength; his word is a Law, he commands
things, to stand out of nothing, and they do so. He commanded, or spoke (...),
light to shine out of darkness, 2 Cor. 4.6. There is no distance of time
between his word, Let there be Light, and there was Light. Genesis 1.3.
Magistrates often use not their Authority for fear of giving occasion to
insurrections, which may overturn their Empire. But if the Lord will work, Who
shall let it? Isaiah 43.19. And if God will not work, who shall force him? He
can check, and overturn all other powers, his decrees cannot be stopped, nor
his hand held back by any; if he wills to dash the whole World in pieces, no
Creature can maintain its being against his order. He sets the Ordinances of
the Heavens, and the dominion thereof in the Earth. And sends Lightnings, that
they may go, and say unto him, here we are. Job 38.33.34.

3. Yet this dominion though it be absolute, is not Tyrannical, but it is
managed by the rules of Wisdom, Righteousness, and Goodness. If his Throne be
in the Heavens, it is Pure, and Good: Because the Heavens are the purest parts
of the Creation, and influence by their Goodness the lower Earth. Since he is
his own rule, and his nature is infinitely Wise, Holy, and Righteous, he cannot
do a thing, but what is unquestionably agreeable with Wisdom, Justice and
Purity. In all the exercises of his Sovereign right, he is never unattended
with those perfections of his Nature. Might not God by his absolute power have
pardoned men's guilt, and thrown the invading sin out of his Creatures? But in
regard of his Truth pawned in his threatening, and in regard of his Justice,
which demanded satisfaction, he would not. Might not God by his absolute
sovereignty admit a man into his Friendship, without giving him any Grace? But
in regard of the incongruity of such an act to his Wisdom and Holiness, he will
not. May he not by his absolute power, refuse to accept a man, that desires to
please him, and reject a purely innocent Creature? But in regard of his
Goodness and Righteousness he will not. Though innocence be amiable in its own
Nature, yet it is not necessary in regard of God's sovereignty, that he should
love it; but in regard of his goodness it is necessary, and he will never do
otherwise. As God never acts to the utmost of his power, so he never exerts the
utmost of his sovereignty: because it would be inconsistent with those other
properties, which render him perfectly adorable to the Creature. As no
intelligent Creature, neither Angel nor Man can be framed without a Law in his
Nature; so we cannot imagine God without a Law in his own Nature, unless we
would fancy him a rude, Tyrannical, foolish Being, that has nothing of
Holiness, Goodness, Righteousness, Wisdom. If he made the Heavens in Wisdom,
Psalm. 136.5. He made them by some rule, not by a mere will, but a rule within
himself, not without. A wise work is never the result of an absolute unguided
Will.

1. This dominion is managed by the rule of Wisdom. What may appear to us, to
have no other spring than absolute sovereignty, would be found to have a depth
of amazing Wisdom, and accountable reason, were our short capacities long
enough to fathom it. When the Apostle had been discoursing of the eternal
Counsels of God, in seizing upon one man, and letting go another, in rejecting
the Jews and gathering in the Gentiles, which appears to us to be results only
of an absolute dominion, yet he resolves not those amazing acts into that,
without taking it for granted, that they were governed by exact Wisdom, though
beyond his ken to see, and his line to sound. Romans 11.33. Oh the depth of the
riches both of the Wisdom and Knowledge of God; how unsearchable are his
Judgments, and his Ways past finding out? There are some things in matters of
state, that may seem to be acts of mere Will, but if we were acquainted with
the Arcana Imperii, the inward Engines which moved them, and the ends aimed at
in those undertakings, we might find a rich vein of prudence in them, to
incline us to Judge otherwise than bare Arbitrary proceedings. The other
Attributes of Power and Goodness are more easily perceptible in the works of
God, than his Wisdom. The first view of the Creation strikes us with this
sentiment, that the Author of this great Fabric was mighty, and beneficial;
but his Wisdom lies deeper, than to be discerned at the first glance without a
diligent enquiry. As at the first casting our eyes upon the Sea, we behold its
motion, color, and something of its vastness, but we cannot presently fathom
the depth of it, and understand those lower Fountains, that supply that great
Ocean of Waters: It Is part of God's Sovereignty, as it is of the wisest
Princes, that he has a Wisdom beyond the reach of his Subjects; it is not for a
finite nature to understand an infinite Wisdom, nor for a foolish Creature that
has lost his understanding by the fall, to judge of the reason of the methods
of a wise Counselor. Yet those actions that savor most of Sovereignty,
present men with some glances of his Wisdom. Was it mere will, that he suffered
some Angels to fall? But his Wisdom was in it for the manifestation of his
Justice; as it was also in the case of Pharaoh. Was it mere will, that he
suffered sin to be committed by man? was not his Wisdom in this for the
discovery of his mercy, which never had been known without that, which should
render a Creature miserable? Romans 11.32. He has concluded them all in
unbelief, that he might have Mercy upon all. Though God had such an absolute
right, to have annihilated the World, as soon as ever he had made it, yet how
had this consisted with his Wisdom, to have erected a Creature after his own
image one day, and despised it so much the next, as to Cashier it from Being?
What Wisdom had it been, to make a thing, only to destroy it? To repent of his
work as soon as ever it came out of his hands, without any occasion offered by
the Creature. If God be supposed to be Creator, he must be supposed to have an
end in Creation; what End can that be but himself and his own Glory, the
manifestation of the perfections of his Nature? What perfection could have been
discovered in so quick an annihilation, but that of his power in Creating, and
of his Sovereignty in snatching away the Being of his Rational Creature, before
it had laid the methods of acting? What Wisdom to make a World, and a
reasonable Creature for no use? Not to Praise, and Honor him, but to be broken
in pieces, and destroyed by him?

2. His Sovereignty is managed according to the rule of Righteousness. Worldly
Princes often fancy Tyranny and Oppression to be the chief marks of
Sovereignty, and think their Scepters not beautiful, till died in blood, nor
the Throne secure, till established upon slain Carcasses. But Justice and
Judgment are the Foundation of the Throne of God, Psalm. 89.14. Alluding perhaps
to the supporters of Arms, and Thrones, which among Princes are the figures of
Lions, Emblems of Courage, as Solomon had, 1 Kings 10.19. But God makes not so
much might, as right the support of his. He sits on a Throne of Holiness. Psalm.
47.8. As he reigns over the Heathens, referring to the calling of the Gentiles
after the rejecting the Jews; the Psalmist here praising the Righteousness of
it, as the Apostle had the unsearchable Wisdom of it. Romans 11.33. In all his
ways he is Righteous, Psalm. 145.17. In his ways of Terror, as well as those of
sweetness; in those works wherein little else but that of his Sovereignty
appears to us. It Is always linkt with his Holiness, that he will not do by his
absolute right any thing but what is conformable to it: since his dominion is
founded upon the excellency of his Nature, he will not do any thing but what is
agreeable to it, and becoming his other perfections. Though he be an absolute
Sovereign, he is not an Arbitrary Governor; Shall not the Judge of all the
Earth do right? Genesis 18.25. i. e. It Is impossible, but he should act
righteously in every punctilio of his Government, Since his Righteousness
capacitates him to be a Judge, not a Tyrant of all the Earth. The Heathen Poets
represented their chief God Jupiter with Themis, or Right, sitting by him upon
his Throne in all his Orders. God cannot by his absolute Sovereignty command
some things: Because they are directly against unchangeable Righteousness as to
command a Creature to hate, or blaspheme the Creator, not to own him, nor
praise him. It would be a manifest unrighteousness, to order the Creature not
to own him, upon whom he depends both in its being and well being: This would
be against that natural duty, which is indispensably due from every rational
Creature to God. This would be to order him, to lay aside his reason while he
retains it, to disown him to be the Creator, while man remains his Creature.
This is repugnant to the Nature of God, and the true nature of the Creature: Or
to exact any thing of man, but what he had given him a capacity, in his
original nature to perform. If any command were above our natural power, it
would be unrighteous; as to command a man to grasp the Globe of the Earth, to
stride over the Sea, to lave out the waters of the Ocean; these things are
impossible, and become not the Righteousness and Wisdom of God to enjoin. There
can be no obligation on man to an impossibility. God had a free dominion over
nullity before the Creation, he could call it out into the being of man and
beast: But he could not do any thing in Creation foolishly because of his
infinite Wisdom; nor could he by the right of his absolute Sovereignty make man
sinful, because of his infinite purity. As it is impossible for him not to be
Sovereign; It Is impossible for him to deny his Deity, and his purity. It Is
Lawful for God to do what he will, but his will being ordered by the
Righteousness of his nature, as infinite as his will, he cannot do any thing
but what is just; and therefore in his dealing with men, you find him in
Scripture submitting the reasonableness and equity of his proceedings to the
Judgment of his depraved Creatures, and the inward dictates of their own
Consciences. Isaiah 5.3. And now, Oh Inhabitants of Jerusalem and men of Judah,
Judge I pray you, between me and my Vineyard. Though God be the great Sovereign
of the World, yet he acts not in a way of absolute Sovereignty.

He rules by Law, he is a Lawgiver, as well as a King, Isaiah 33.22. It had
been repugnant to the nature of a rational Creature, to be ruled otherwise; to
be governed as a beast, this had been to frustrate those Faculties of Will and
Understanding, which had been given him. To conclude this; when we say, God can
do this or that, or command this or that his Authority is not bounded, and
limited properly. Who can reasonably detract from his Almightiness, because he
cannot do any thing, which savors of weakness; and what detracting is it from
his Authority, that he cannot do any thing unseemly for the dignity of his
nature? It Is rather from the infiniteness of his Righteousness than the
straitness of his Authority; at most it is but a voluntary bounding his
dominion by the Law of his own Holiness.

3. His Sovereignty is managed according to the rule of Goodness. Some
Potentates there have been in the World, that have loved to suck the blood, and
drink the tears of their Subjects, that would rule more by fear than love,
Causin Poly-Histor. lib. 4. cap. 22.
like Clearchus the Tyrant of Heraclia, who bore the figure of a Thunderbolt
instead of a Scepter, and named his Son Thunder; thereby to Tutor him, to
terrify his Subjects. But as Gods Throne is a Throne of Holiness, so it is a
Throne of Grace. Heb. 4.16. A Throne encircled with a Rainbow. Revel. 4.23. In
sight like to an Emerald. An Emblem of the Covenant, that has the pleasantness
of a green color, delightful to the eye, betokening Mercy. Though his Nature
be infinitely excellent above us, and his power infinitely transcendent over
us, yet the Majesty of his Government is tempered with an unspeakable Goodness.
He acts not so much as an absolute Lord, as a gracious Sovereign and obliging
Benefactor. He delights not to make his Subjects slaves. Exacts not of them any
servile and fearful, but a generous and cheerful obedience. He requires them
not to Fear or Worship him so much for his power as his Goodness. He requires
not of a rational Creature any thing repugnant to the Honor, Dignity, and
Principles of such a nature; not any thing that may shame, disgrace it, and
make it weary of its own being, and the service it owes to its Sovereign. He
draws by the cords of a man; his Goodness renders his Laws as sweet as Honey or
the Honey Comb to an unvitiated Palate, and a renewed mind. And though it be
granted, he has a full dispose of his Creature, as the Potter of his Vessel,
and might by his absolute Sovereignty inflict upon an innocent an eternal
torment, yet his Goodness will never permit him to use this Sovereign right to
the hurt of a Creature, that deserves it not. If God should cast an innocent
Creature into the furnace of his wrath, who can question him? But who can
think, that his Goodness will do so? Since that is as infinite as his
Authority? As not to punish the sinner, would be a denial of his Justice, so to
torment an innocent, would be a denial of his Goodness. A man has an absolute
power over his Beast, and may take away his Life, and put him to a great deal
of pain; but that moral virtue of Pity and Tenderness would not permit him to
use this right, but when it conduces to some greater good, than that can be
evil; either for the good of man which is the end of the Creature, or for the
good of the poor beast it self, to rid him of a greater misery: None but a
savage nature, a disposition to be abhorred, would torture a poor beast merely
for his pleasure. It Is as much against the nature of God, to punish one
eternally, that has not deserved it, as it is to deny himself, and act any
thing foolishly, and unbeseeming his other perfections, which render him
Majestical, and adorable. To afflict an innocent Creature for his own good, or
for the good of the World, as in the case of the Redeemer, is so far from being
against Goodness, that it is the highest Testimony of his tender Bowels to the
Sons of men. God though he be Mighty, withdraws not his Eyes, i. e. his tender
respect from the Righteous, Job 36.5, 7, 8.9, 10. And if he bind them in
Fetters, it is to show them their Transgressions, and open their Ear to
Discipline, and renewing commands in a more sensible strain, to depart from
iniquity. What was said of Fabritius, you may as soon remove the Sun from its
course, as Fabritius from his honesty; may be of God, you may as soon dash in
pieces his Throne, as separate his Goodness from his Sovereignty.

4. Proposition, This Sovereignty is extensive over all Creatures. He rules
all, as the Heavens do over the Earth. He is King of Worlds, King of Ages, as
the word translated eternal signifies, 1 Timothy 1.17. (...). And the same word is
so translated, Heb. 1.2. By whom also he made the Worlds, the same word is
rendered Worlds, Heb. 11.3. The Worlds were framed by the Word of God. God is
King of Ages or Worlds, of the invisible World, and the sensible, of all from
the beginning of their Creation, of whatsoever is measured by a time. It
extends over Angels and Devils, over wicked and good, over rational, and
irrational Creatures; all things bow down under his hand, nothing can be
exempted from him: Because there is nothing but was extracted by him from
nothing into being. All things Essentially depend upon him: And therefore must
be Essentially Subject to him; the extent of his dominion flows from the
perfection of his Essence, since his Essence is unlimited, his Royalty cannot
be restrained. His Authority is as void of any imperfection, as his Essence is;
it reaches out to all points of the Heaven above, and the Earth below. Other
Princes Reign in a spot of ground. Every worldly Potentate has the confines of
his dominions. The Pyrenean Mountains divide France from Spain, and the Alps,
Italy from France. None are called Kings absolutely, but Kings of this or that
place. But God is the King, the spacious Firmament limits not his dominion. If
we could suppose him bounded by any place in regard of his presence; yet he
could never be out of his own dominion; whatsoever he looks upon, wheresoever
he were, would be under his rule. Earthly Kings may step out of their own
Country into the Territory of a Neighbor Prince; and as one leaves his
Country, so he leaves his dominion behind him; but Heaven and Earth and every
particle of both is the Territory of God. He has prepared his Throne in the
Heavens, and his Kingdom Rules over all.

1. The Heaven of Angels and other excellent Creatures belong to his Authority.
He is principally called the Lord of Hosts in relation to his entire command
over the Angelical Legions: Therefore Verse 21. following the Text, they are
called his Hosts, and Ministers that do his pleasure. Jacob called him so
before. Genesis 32.1, 2. When he met the Angels of God, he calls them the Host of
God, and the Evangelist long after calls them so. Luke 2.13. A multitude of the
Heavenly Host praising God, and all this Host he commands. Isaiah 45.12. My
hands have stretched out the Heavens, and all their Host have I commanded. He
employs them all in his service, and when he issues out his orders to them, to
do this or that, he finds no resistance of his Will.

And the inanimate Creatures in Heaven are at his beck, they are his Armies in
Heaven, disposed in an excellent order in their several ranks, Psalm 147.4. He
calls the Stars by Name; they render a due obedience to him, as Servants to
their Master; when he singles them out, and calls them by Name, to do some
special service, he calls them out to their several Offices, as the General of
an Army appoints the station of every Regiment in a Battalia. Or he calls them
by Name. i. e. He imposes names upon them, a sign of dominion. The giving
Names to the inferior Creatures being the first act of Adam's derivative
dominion over them. These are under the Sovereignty of God. The Stars by their
influences fight against Sisera. Judge. 5.20. And the Sun holds in its Reins,
and stands stone still, to light Joshua to a complete victory, Josh. 10.12.
They are all marshalled in their ranks, to receive his word of command, and
fight in close order, as being desirous to have a share in the ruin of the
Enemies of their Sovereign. And those Creatures which mount up from the Earth,
and take their place in the lower Heavens, Vapors whereof Hail and Snow are
formed, are part of the Army, and do not only receive, but fulfill his word of
Command, Psalm. 148.8. These are his stores and Magazines of Judgment against a
time of trouble, and a day of Battle and War, Job 38.22, 23. The Sovereignty
of God is visible in all their motions, in their going and returning. If he
says go, they go, if he say come, they come, if he say do this, they gird up
their Loins, and stand stiff to their duty.

2. The Hell of Devils belong to his Authority. They have cast themselves out
of the Arms of his Grace into the Furnace of his Justice; they have by their
revolt forfeited the Treasure of his Goodness, but cannot exempt themselves
from the Scepter of his dominion; when they would not own him as a Lord Father,
they are under him as a Lord Judge, they are cast out of his affection, but not
freed from his yoke. He rules over the good Angels as his Subjects, over the
evil ones as his Rebels. In whatsoever relation he stands, either as a Friend
or Enemy, he never loses that of a Lord. A Prince is the Lord of his Criminals,
as well as of his Loyallest Subjects. By this right of his Sovereignty, he uses
them to punish some, and be the occasion of benefit to others; on the wicked he
employs them as instruments of vengeance, toward the Godly, as in the case of
Job, as an Instrument of kindness for the manifestation of his sincerity
against the intention of that malicious Executioner. Though the Devils are the
Executioners of his Justice, it is not by their own Authority but God's; as
those that are employed either to rack, or execute a Malefactor, are Subjects
to the Prince not only in the quality of Men, but in the execution of their
function. Suarez. vol. 2. lib. 8. cap. 20. p. 736.
The Devil by drawing men to sin acquires no right to himself over the sinner:
For man by sin offends not the Devil, but God; and becomes guilty of punishment
under God. When therefore the Devil is used by God for the punishment of any,
it is an act of his Sovereignty for the manifestation of the order of his
Justice. And as most Nations use the vilest persons in Offices of execution, so
does God those vile Spirits. He does not ordinarily use the good Angels in
those Offices of vengeance, but in the preservation of his People. When he
would solely punish, he employs evil Angels. Psalm. 78.49. A Troop of Devils.
His Sovereignty is extended over the deceiver and the deceived. Job 12.16. Over
both the Malefactor and the Executioner, the Devil and his Prisoner. He uses
the natural malice of the Devils for his own just ends, and by his Sovereign
Authority orders them to be the Executioners of his Judgments upon their own
vassals, as well as sometimes inflicters of punishments upon his own Servants.

3. The Earth of men, and other Creatures belongs to his Authority. Psalm. 47.7.
God is King of all the Earth, and rules to the ends of it. Psalm. 59.13. Ancient
Atheists confined Gods dominion to the heavenly Orbs, and bounded it within the
Circuit of the Celestial Sphere, Job 22.14. He walks in the Circuit of Heaven.
i. e. he exercises his dominion only there. Bolduc. in loc.
Pedum positio was the sign of the possession of a piece of Land, and the
Dominion of the possessor of it; and Land was resigned by such a Ceremony, as
now by the delivery of a Twig or Turf.

But his Dominion extends.

1. Over the least Creatures. All the Creatures of the Earth are listed in
Christ's Muster-roll, and make up the number of his Regiments. He has an Host
on Earth, as well as in Heaven. Genesis 2.1. The Heavens and the Earth were
finished, and all the Host of them. And they are all his Servants, Psalm.
119.91. and move at his peasure. And he vouchsafes the Title of his Army to the
Locust, Caterpillar, and Palmer Worm, Joel. 2.25. And describes their motions
by Military Words, climbing the walls, marching not breaking their ranks. Verse
7. He has the command as a great General over the highest Angel, and the
meanest Worm; all the kinds of the smallest Insects he presses for his
service. By this Sovereignty he muzled the devouring nature of the fire, to
preserve the three Chi^dren, and let it loose to consume their adversaries; and
if he speaks the word the stormy Waves are hush, as if they had no Principle of
rage within them. Psalm. 89.9. Since the meanest Creature attains it end, and no
arrow that God has by his power shot into the World, but hits the mark he
aimed at; we must conclude, that there is a Sovereign hand, that governs all.
Not a spot of Earth, or Air, or Water in the World, but is his possession, not
a Creature in any Element, but is his Subject.

2. His Dominion extends over Men. It extends over the highest Potentate, as
well as the meanest Peasant, the proudest Monarch is no more exempt than the
most languishing Beggar. He lays not aside his Authority to please the Prince,
nor strains it up to terrify the indigent. He accepts not the persons of
Princes, nor regards the rich more than the Poor: For they are all the work of
his hands. Job 34.19. Both the powers and weaknesses, the Gallantry and
Peasantry of the Earth stand and fall at his pleasure. Man in innocence was
under his Authority as his Creature, and man in his revolt, is further under
his Authority as a Criminal. As a Person is under the Authority of a Prince as
a Governor, while he obeys his Laws, and further under the Authority of the
Prince as a Judge, when he violates his Laws. Man is under God's dominion in
every thing, in his settlement, in his calling, in the ordering his very
Habitation. Acts 17.26. He determines the bounds of their Habitations. He never
yet permitted any to be universal Monarch in the World, nor over the fourth
part of it, though several in the Pride of their heart, have designed, and
attempted it. The Pope who has bid the fairest for it in Spirituals, never
attained it, and when his power was most flourishing, there were multitudes,
that would never acknowledge his Authority.

3. But especially this dominion in the peculiarity of its extent, is seen in
the exercise of it over the Spirits and Hearts of Men. Earthly Governors have
by his indulgence a share with him in a dominion over men's bodies, upon which
account he graceth Princes and Judges with the Title of Gods. Psalm. 82.6. But
the highest Prince is but a Prince according to the Flesh, as the Apostle calls
Masters in relation to their Servants. Colos. 3.22.

God is the Sovereign; Man rules over the Beast in Man, the Body; and God rules
over the Man in Man, the Soul. It sticks not in the outward surface, but
peirceth to the inward Marrow. It Is impossible God should be without this; if
our wills were independent on him, we were in some sort equal with himself, in
part Gods as well as Creatures. It Is impossible a Creature, either in whole or
in part, can be exempted from it: Since he is the fashioner of hearts as well
as of Bodies. He is the Father of Spirits: And therefore has the right of a
paternal dominion over them. When he established man Lord of the other
Creatures, he did not strip himself of the propriety. And when he made man a
free Agent, and Lord of the acts of his Will, he did not divest himself of the
Sovereignty.

His Sovereignty is seen,

1. In Gifting of the Spirits of Men. Earthly Magistrates have hands too short,
to inspire the Hearts of their Subjects with worthy sentiments. When they
confer an employment, they are not able to convey an ability with it fit for
the station. They may as soon frame a Statue of liquid water, and guild, or
paint it over with the costliest colors, as impart to any a State-Head, for a
State-Ministry. But when God chooses a Saul from so mean an employment as
seeking of Asses, he can treasure up in him a Spirit fit for Government. And
fire David, in Age a stripling, and by Education a Shepherd, with Courage to
Encounter, and skill to defeat a massy Goliath. And when he designs a person for
Glory, to stand before his Throne, he can put a new and a Royal Spirit into
him. Ezekiel. 36.26. God only can infuse habits into the Soul, to capacitate it to
act nobly and generously.

2. His Sovereignty is seen in regard of the inclinations of men's Wills. No
Creature can immediately work upon the will, to guide it to what point he
pleases, though mediately it may, by proposing reasons which may Master the
understandi^g, and thereby determine the Will. But God bows the Hearts of men
by the (...) of his dominion, to what Center he pleases. When the more
overweeni^g sort of men, that thought their own heads as fit for a Crown as
Saul's, scornfully d^spis'd him, yet God touched the hearts of a band of men, to
follow and adhere to him, 1 Samuel 10.26, 27. When the Antichristian Whore shall
be ripe for destruction, God shall put it into the Heart of the ten Horns or
Kings, to hate the Whore, burn her with Fire, and fulfill his Will. Rev. 17.16,
17. He Fashions the Hearts alike, and tunes one string to answer another, and
both to answer his own design. Psalm. 33.15. And while men seem to gratify
their own ambition and malice, they execute the Will of God by his secret touch
upon their Spirits, guiding their inclinations, to serve the glorious
manifestation of his Truth. While the Jews would in a reproachful disgrace to
Christ, Crucify two Theives with him, to render him more incapable to have any
followers; they accomplished a Prophecy, and brought to light a mark of the
Messiah, whereby he had been charactered in one of their Prophets; Isaiah
53.12. That he should be numbered among Transgressors. He can make a man of not
willing, willing; the wills of all men are in his hand. i. e. under the power
of his Scepter, to retain, or let go upon this or that Errand, to bend this or
that way, as Water is carried by Pipes, to what house or place the owner of it
is pleased to order. Prove. 21.1. The Kings Heart is in the hand of the Lord, as
the Rivers of waters he turns it, whithersoever he will, without any
limitation. He speaks of the Heart of Princes: Because in regard of their
height they seem to be more absolute and impetuous as waters; yet God holds
them in his hand, under his dominion, turns them to acts of clemency or
severity, like waters, either to overflow and damage, or to refresh and
fructify. He can convey a Spirit to them, or cut it off from them. Psalm.
76.12. It Is with reference to his efficacious power, in graciously turning the
Heart of Paul, that the Apostle breaks of his discourse off the story of his
conversion, and breaks out into a magnifying, and glorifying of God's dominion.
1 Timothy 1.17. Now unto the King eternal, etc. be Honor and Glory for ever and
ever. Our Hearts are more subject to the divine Sovereignty, than our members
in their motions are subject to our own wills. As we can move our hand East or
West to any quarter of the World, so can God bend our Wills to what mark he
pleases. The second Cause in every motion depends upon the first, and that
will, being a second Cause, may be furthered, or hindered in its inclinations
or executions by God; he can bend or unbend it, and change it from one actual
inclination to another. It Is as much under his Authority and Power to move, or
hinder, as the vast engine of the Heavens is in its motion or standing still,
which he can effect by a word. The work depends upon the workman; the Clock
upon the Artificer for the motions of it.

3. His dominion is seen in regard of Terror or Comfort. The Heart or
Conscience is Gods special Throne on Earth, which he has reserved to himself,
and never indulged humane Authority to sit upon it. He solely orders this in
ways of conviction or Comfort. He can flash terror into men's Spirits in the
midst of their Earthly jollities, and put death into the pot of Conscience,
when they are boiling up themselves in a high pitch of worldly delights; and
can raise men's Spirits above the sense of torment under Racks, and Flames. He
can draw a hand Writing not only in the outward Chamber but the inward Closet,
bring the Rack into the inwards of a Man. None can infuse Comfort, when he
writes bitter things, nor can any fill the heart with Gall, when he drops in
Honey. Men may order outward duties, but they cannot unlock the Conscience, and
constrain men, to think them duties, which they are forced by humane Laws,
outwardly to act. And as the Laws of earthly Princes are bounded by the outward
man, so do their executions and punishments reach no further than the case of
the Body. But God can run upon the inward man as a Giant, and inflict wounds
and gashes there.

5. Proposition, It Is an Eternal Dominion. In regard of the exercise of it, it
was not from Eternity: Because there was not from Eternity any Creature under
the Government of it; but in regard of the foundation of it, his Essence, his
Excellency, it is Eternal: As God was from eternity Almighty, but there was no
exercise or manifestation of it, till he began to Create. Men are Kings only
for a time, their lives expire like a Lamp, and their dominion is extinguished
with their lives; they hand their Empire by Succession to others, but many
times it is snapt off, before they are cold in their Graves. How are the famous
Empires of the Chaldeans, Medes, Persians, and Greeks mouldred away, and their
place knows them no more? And how are the wings of the Roman Eagle cut, and
that Empire which overspread a great part of the World, has lost most of its
Feathers, and is confined to a narrower compass. The dominion of God
flourishes from one Generation to another. He sits King for ever, Psalm. 29.10.
His session signifies the establishment and for ever the duration, and he sits
now, his Sovereignty is as absolute, as powerful as ever. How many Lords and
Princes has this or that Kingdom had? In how many Families has the Scepter
lodged? When as God has had an uninterrupted dominion. As he has been always
the same in his Essence, he has been always glorious in his Sovereignty. Among
men, he that is Lord to day, may be stripped of it to morrow; the dominions in
the World vary, he that is a Prince may see his Royalty upon the Wings, and
feel himself laden with Fetters. And a Prisoner may be lifted from his Dungeon
to a Throne. But there can be no diminution of God's Government; His Throne is
from Generation to Generation. Lament. 5.19. It cannot be shaken. His Scepter
like Aarons Rod is alway's green. It cannot be wrested out of his hands; none
raised him to it: N^ne therefore can depose him from it; it bears the same
splendour in all humane affairs, he is an eternal, an immortal King. 1 Timothy
1.17. As he is eternally Mighty, so he is eternally Sovereign, and being an
eternal King, he is a King that gives not a momentary and perishing, but a
durable and Everlasting Life to them that obey him: A durable and eternal
punishment to them that resist him.

IIII. Wherein this Dominion and Sovereignty consists, and how it is manifested;

1. The first act of Sovereignty is the making Laws. This is Essential to God;
no Creatures Will can be the first rule to the Creature but only the Will of
God. He only can prescribe man his duty, and establish the rule of it; hence
the Law is called the Royal Law. James 2.8. It being the first and clearest
manifestation of Sovereignty; as the power of Legislation is of the Authority
of a Prince. Both are joined together in. Isaiah 53.22. The Lord is our
Lawgiver, the Lord is our King. Legislative power being the great mark of
Royalty. God as a King enacts Laws by his own proper Authority, and his Law is
a Declaration of his own Sovereignty, and of men's moral subjection to him, and
dependence on him. Suarez. de Legib. p. 23.
His Sovereignty does not appear so much in his promises as in his precepts: A
man's power over another is not discovered by promising: For a promise does not
suppose the promiser either superior or inferior to the person, to whom the
promise is made. It Is not an exercising Authority over another, but over a
man's self. No man forces another to the acceptance of his promise, but only
proposes, and encourages to an embracing of it. But commanding supposes
always an Authority in the person giving the precept. It obliges the person,
to whom the command is directed. A promise obliges the person by whom the
promise is made. God by his command binds the Creature, by his promise he binds
himself. He stoops below his Sovereignty, to lay obligations upon his own
Majesty. By a precept he binds the Creature, by a promise he encourages the
Creature to an observance of his precept. What Laws God makes, man is bound by
virtue of his Creation to observe; that respects the Sovereignty of God. What
promises God makes, man is bound to believe, but that respects the faithfulness
of God. God manifested his dominion more to the Jews than to any other people
in the World; He was their Lawgiver, both as they were a Church and a
Commonwealth. As a Church, he gave them Ceremonial Laws, for the regulating
their Worship. As a State, he gave them Judicial Laws, for the ordering their
Civil Affairs; and as both he gave them Moral Laws, upon which both the Laws of
the Church, and State were founded.

This dominion of God in this regard will be manifest.

1. In the Supremacy of it. The sole power of making Laws does originally
reside in him. James 4.12. There is one Lawgiver, who is able to save, and to
destroy. By his own Law he Judges of the eternal States of Men, and no Law of
man is obligatory, but as it is agreeable to the Laws of this supreme Lawgiver,
and pursuant to his righteous rules for the Government of the World. The power
that the Potentates of the World have to makes Laws, is but derivative from
God. If their dominion be from him, as it is: For by him Kings Reign. Prove.
8.15. Their Legislative power which is a prime flower of their Sovereignty, is
derived from him also. And the Apostle resolves it into this original, when he
orders us, to be subject to the higher powers not only for wrath but for
Conscience sake. Romans 13.5. Conscience in its operations solely respects God:
And therefore when it is exercised as the principle of Obedience to the Laws of
Men, it is not with a respect to them singly considered, but as the Majesty of
God appears in their station and in their decrees. This power of giving Laws
was acknowledged by the Heathen, to be solely in God by way of original: And
therefore the greatest Lawgivers among the Heathen pretended their Laws to be
received from some Deity, or supernatural power by special Revelation; now
whither they did this seriously, acknowledging themselves this part of the
dominion of God: (For it is certain, that what soever just orders were issued
out by Princes in the World, was by the secret influence of God upon their
Spirits. Prove. 8.15. By me Princes Decree Justice, by the secret conduct of
Divine Wisdom) or whither they pretended it only as a public Engine, to
enforce upon people the observance of their Decrees, and gain a greater credit
to their Edicts, yet this will result from it, that the people in general
entertained this common notion, that God was the great Lawgiver of the World.
The first founders of their Societies could never else have so absolutely
gained upon them by such a pretense. These was always a Revelation of a Law
from the mouth of God in every age: The exhortation of Eliphaz to Job, Job
22.22. Of receiving a Law from the mouth of God at the time before the Moral
Law was published, had been a vain exhortation, had there been no revelation of
the mind of God in all Ages.

2. The dominion of God is manifest in the extent of his Laws. As he is the
Governor and Sovereign of the whole World, so he Enacts Laws for the whole
World. One Prince cannot make Laws for another, unless he makes him his Subject
by right of conquest. Spain cannot make Laws for England, or England for Spain.
But God having the supreme Government as King over all, is a Lawgiver to all,
to irrational, as well as rational Creatures. The Heavens have their
Ordinances. Job 38.33. All Creatures have a Law imprinted on their beings.
Rational Creatures have Divine Statutes Copied in their heart. For men it is
clear. Romans 2.14. Every Son of Adam at his coming into the World, brings with
him a Law in his nature, and when reason clears it self up from the Clouds of
sense, he can make some difference between Good and Evil; discern something of
fit and just. Every man finds a Law within him, that checks him, if he offends
it. No^^ (...) without a legal indictment, and a legal Executioner within them;
God (...) was the Author of this as a Sovereign Lord, in establishing a Law i^
man at the same time, wherein as an Almighty Creator he imparted a being. This
Law proceeds from God's general power of governing, as he is the Author of
nature, and binds not barely as it is the reason of man, but by the Authority
of God, as it is a Law engraven on his Conscience. And no doubt but a Law was
given to the Angels, God did not Govern those intellectual Creatures as he does
brutes, and in a way inferior to his rule of Man. Some sinned, all might have
sinned in regard of the changeableness of their nature. Sin cannot be but
against some rule: Where there is no Law, there is no Transgression; what that
Law was, is not revealed, but certainly it must be the same in part with the
Moral Law, so far as it agreed with their spiritual natures; a love to God, a
Worship of him, and a love to one another in their Societies and Persons.

3. The dominion of God is manifest in the reason of some Laws, which seem to
be nothing else than purely his own Will. Some Laws there are for which a
reason may be rendered from the nature of the thing enjoined, as to Love,
Honor and Worship God. For others, none but this, God will have it so; such
was that positive Law to Adam of not eating of the Tree of Knowledge of Good
and Evil, Genesis 2.17. which was merely an asserting his own dominion, and was
different from that Law of Nature God had written in his heart. No other reason
of this seems to us but a resolve, to try man's Obedience in away of absolute
Sovereignty, and to manifest his right over all Creatures, to reserve what he
pleased to himself, and permit the use of what he pleased to man, and to
signify to man, that he was to depend on him, who was his Lord, and not on his
own will. There was no more hurt in it self, for Adam to have eaten of that,
than of any other in the Garden; the Fruit was pleasant to the Eye, and Good
for Food, but God would show the right he had over his own goods, and his
Authority over man, to reserve, what he pleases of his own Creation from his
touch; that since man could not claim a propriety in any thing, he was to
meddle with nothing but by the leave of his Sovereign; either discovered by a
special or general License. Thus God showed himself the Lord of Man, and that
man was but his Steward, to act by his Orders. If God had forbidden man the use
of more Trees in the Garden, his command had been just: Since as a Sovereign
Lord he might dispose of his own Goods; and when he had granted him the whole
compass of that pleasant Garden, and the whole World round about for him and
his posterity, it was a more tolerable exercise of his dominion, to reserve
this one Tree, as a mark of his Sovereignty, when he had left all others to the
use of Adam. He reserved nothing to himself as Lord of the Manor but this, and
Adam was prohibited nothing else but this one, as a sign of his subjection. Now
for this no reason can be rendered by any man but merely the Will of God, this
was merely a fruit of his Dominion.

For the moral Laws a reason may be rendered; to Love God, has reason to
enforce it besides Gods Will, viz. The Excellency of his Nature, and the
greatness and multitudes of his benefits. To love our Neighbor, has enforcing
reasons, viz. the Conjunction in blood, and the preservation of humane Society,
and the need we may stand in of their love our selves. But no reason can be
assigned of this positive command about the Tree of knowledge of good and evil
but merely the pleasure of God. It was a branch of his pure dominion, to try
man's Obedience, and a mark of his Goodness to try it by so easy and light a
precept, when he might have extended his Authority further. Had not God given
this or the like order, his absolute dominion had not been so conspicuous. It Is
true, Adam had a Law of Nature in him, whereby he was obliged to perpetual
Obedience, and though it was a part of God's dominion to implant it in him, yet
his supreme dominion over the Creatures had not been so visible to man, but by
this, or a precept of the same kind. What was commanded, or prohibited by the
Law of Nature, did bespeak a comeliness in it self, it appeared Good or Evil to
the reason of man, but this was neither Good nor Evil in it self, it received
its sole Authority from the absolute Will of God, and nothing could result from
the fruit it self, as a reason why man should not taste it, but only the sole
Will of God. And as God's dominion was most conspicuous in this precept, so
man's obedience had been most eminent in observing it. For in his obedience to
it, nothing but the sole power and Authority of God, which is the proper rule
of obedience, could have been respected, not any reason from the thing it self.

To this we may refer some other Commands, as that of appointing the time of
solemn and public Worship, the seventh day; though the Worship of God be a part
of the Law of Nature, yet the appointing a particular day, wherein he would be
more formally and solemnly acknowledged than on other days, was grounded upon
his absolute right of Legislation: For there was nothing in the time it self,
that could render that day more Holy than another, though God respected his
finishing the work of Creation in his institution of that day. Genesis 2.3. Such
were the Ceremonial Commands of Sacrifices, and Washings under the Law, and the
Commands of Sacraments under the Gospel: The one to last till the first Coming
of Christ, and his Passion; the other to last till the second Coming of Christ,
and his Triumph. Thus he made natural and unavoidable uncleanness to be sins,
and the touching a dead Body to be pollution, which in their own nature were
not so.

4. The Dominion of God appears in the Moral Law, and his Majesty in publishing
it. As the Law of Nature was writ by his own Fingers in the Nature of man, so
it was Engraven by his own finger in the Tables of Stone; Exodus 31.18. Which is
very emphatically expressed, to be a mark of God's Dominion. Exodus 32.16. And
the Tables were the work of God, and the writing, was the writing of God
Engraven upon the Tables; and when the first Tables were broken, though he
orders Moses to frame the Tables, yet the writing of the Law, he reserves to
himself. Exodus 34.1. It Is not said of any part of the Scripture, that it was
writ by the finger of God, but only of the Decalogue; herein he would have his
Sovereignty eminently appear; it was published by God in state, with a numerous
attendance of his heavenly Militia, Deuteronomy. 32.2. And the Artillery of Heaven was
shot off at the solemnity: And therefore it is called a fiery Law, coming from
his right hand, i. e. His Sovereign power. It was published with all the marks
of supreme Majesty.

5. The Dominion of God appears in the Obligation of the Law, which reaches
the Conscience. The Laws of every Prince are framed for the outward conditions
of Men; they do not by their Authority bind the Conscience; and what
obligations do result from them upon the Conscience, is either from their being
the same immediately with divine Laws, or as they are according to the just
power of the Magistrate, founded on the Law of God. Conscience has a
protection from the King of Kings, and cannot be arrested by any humane power.
God has given man but an Authority over half the man, and the worst half too,
that which is of an Earthly original; but reserved the Authority over the
better and more heavenly half to himself. The Dominion of earthly Princes
extends only to the bodies of men, they have no Authority over the Soul, their
punishment and rewards cannot reach it: And therefore their Laws by their
single Authority cannot bind it, but as they are co-incident with the Law of
God, or as the equity of them is subservient to the preservation of humane
Society, a regular and Righteous thing, which is the Divine end in Government,
and so they bind, as they have a relation to God as the supreme Magistrate. The
Conscience is only intelligible to God in its secret motions; and therefore
only guidable by God; God only pierces into the Conscience by his Eye: And
therefore only can conduct it by his Rule. Man cannot tell whither we embrace
this Law in our Heart and Consciences, or only in appearance. He only can Judge
it. Luke 12.3, 4. And therefore he only can impose Laws upon it; it is out of
the reach of humane penal Authority, if their Laws be transgressed inwardly by
it. Conscience is a Book in some sort as Sacred as the Scripture, no addition
can be lawfully made to it, no substraction from it. Men cannot diminish the
duty of Conscience, or raze out the Law, God has stamped upon it. They cannot
put a supersedeas to the Writ of Conscience, or stop its mouth with a Noli
Prosequi. They can make no addition by their Authority, to bind it; it is a
flower in the Crown of Divine Sovereignty only.

2. His Sovereignty appears in a power of dispensing with his own Laws. It Is as
much a part of his Dominion, to dispense with his Laws, as to enjoin them; he
only has the power of relaxing his own right, no Creature has power to do it;
that would be to usurp a superiority over him, and order above God himself.
Repealing or dispensing with the Law is a branch of Royal Authority. It Is true,
God will never dispense with those Moral Laws, which have an eternal reason in
themselves, and their own nature; as for a Creature, to Fear, Love, and Honor
God: this would be to dispense with his own Holiness, and the Righteousness of
his Nature, to fully the purity of his own Dominion; it would write folly upon
the first Creation of man after the Image of God, by writing mutability upon
himself, in framing himself after the corrupted Image of man. It would null and
frustrate the excellency of the Creature, wherein the Image of God mostly
shines; nay it would be to dispense with a Creatures being a Creator, and make
him independent upon the Sovereign of the World in Moral Obedience.

But God has a right to dispense with the ordinary Laws of Nature in the
inferior Creatures; he has a power to alter their course by an arrest of
Miracles, and make them come short, or go beyond his Ordinances established for
them. He has a right to make the Sun stand still, or move backward; to bind up
the Womb of the Earth, and bar the influences of the Clouds, bridle in the
rage of the fire, and the fury of Lions, make the liquid waters stand like a
Wall, or pull up the dam, which he has set to the Sea, and command it to
overflow the neighboring Countries. He can dispense with the natural Laws of
the whole Creation, and strain every string beyond its ordinary pitch.

Positive Laws he has reversed; as the Ceremonial Law given to the Jews: The
very nature indeed of that Law required a repeal, and fell of Course; when
that, which was intended by it, was come, it was of no longer significancy; as
before it was a useful shadow, it would afterward have been an empty one. Had
not God took away this, Christianity had not in all likelihood been propagated
among the Gentiles. This was the partition wall beetween Jews and Gentiles,
Ephesians. 2.14. Which made them a distinct Family from all the World, and was the
occasion of the enmity of the Gentiles against the Jews. When God had by
bringing in, what was signified by those Rites, declared his decree for the
ceasing of them; and when the Jews, fond of those Divine Institutions, would
not allow him the right of repealing, what he had the Authority of enacting, he
resolved for the asserting his Dominion, to bury them in the ruins of the
Temple and City, and make them for ever incapable of practicing the main and
Essential parts of them: For the Temple being the pillar of the legal Service,
by demolishing that, God has taken away their right of sacrificing, it being
peculiarly annexed to that place; they have no Altar dignifyed with a fire from
Heaven to consume their sacrifices, no legal High Priest to offer them, God
has by his Providence changed his own Law, as well as by his precept.

Yea he has gone higher by virtue of his Sovereignty, and changed the whole
scene and methods of his Government after the fall, from King Creator to King
Redeemer. He has revoked the Law of works as a Covenant, released the penalty
of it from the beleiving sinner, by transferring it upon the surety, who
interposed himself by his own will and divine designation. He has established
another Covenant upon other promises in a higher root, with greater Privileges
and easier terms. Had not God had this right of Sovereignty, not a man of
Adam's posterity could have been blessed; he, and they, must have lain groaning
under the misery of the fall, which had rendered both himself and all in his
Loins, unable to observe the Terms of the first Covenant.

He has, as some speak, dispensed with his own Moral Law in some cases; in
commanding Abraham to Sacrifice his Son, his only Son, a Righteous Son, a Son
whereof he had the promise, that in Isaac should his Seed be called; yet he was
commanded to Sacrifice him by the right of his absolute Sovereignty as the
supreme Lord of the Lives of his Creatures from the highest Angel to the lowest
Worm, whereby he bound his Subjects to this Law, not himself. Our Lives are due
to him, when he calls for them, and they are a just for^^it to him, at the very
moment we sin, at the very moment we come into the World by reason of the venom
of our nature against him, and the disturbance the first sin of man (whereof we
are inheritors) gave to his Glory. Had Abraham sacrificed his Son of his own
head, he had sinned, yea in attempting it; but being Authorized from Heaven,
his act was Obedience to the Sovereign of the World, who had a power to
dispense with his own Law; and with this Law he had before dispensed, in the
case of Cains Murder of Abel as to the immediate punishment of it with death,
which indeed was settled afterward by his Authority, but then omitted because
of the paucity of men, and for the peopling the World; but settled afterward,
when there was almost, though not altogether, the like occasion of omitting it
for a time.

3. His Sovereignty appears in punishing the Transgression of his Law.

1. This is a branch of Gods Dominion as Lawgiver. So was the vengeance God
would take upon the Amalekites. Exodus 17.16. The Lord has sworn, that the Lord
will have War. The Hebrew is, the hand upon the Throne of the Lord, as in the
margent. As a Lawgiver he saves or destroys. James 4.12. He acts according to
his own Law, in a congruity to the sanction of his own precepts; though he be
an Arbitrary Lawgiver, appointing what Laws he pleases, yet he is not an
Arbitrary Judge. As he commands nothing, but what he has a right to command,
so he punishes none, but whom he has a right to punish, and with such
punishment as the Law has denounced. All his acts of Justice and inflictions
of Curses, are the effects of this Sovereign Dominion. Psalm. 29.10. He sits
King upon the Floods. Upon the deluge of Waters wherewith he drowned the World,
say some. It Is a right belonging to the Authority of Magistrates, to pull up
the infectious weeds, that corrupt a Commonwealth. It Is no less the right of
God as the Lawgiver and Judge of all the Earth, to subject Criminals to his
vengeance, after they have rendered themselves abominable in his Eyes, and
carried themselves unworthy Subjects of so great and glorious a King. The first
name whereby God is made known in Scripture, is Elohim. Genesis 1.1. In the
beginning God Created the Heaven and Earth. A name which signifies his power of
judging in the opinion of some Critics; from him it is derived to earthly
Magistrates; their Judgment is said therefore to be the Judgment of God, Deuteronomy.
1.17. When Christ came, he proposed this great motive of Repentance from the
Kingdom of Heaven being at hand; the Kingdom of his Grace, whereby to invite
men; the Kingdom of his Justice in the punishment of the neglecters of it,
whereby to terrify men. Punishments as well as Rewards belong to Royalty; it
issued accordingly; those that believed and repented, came under his gracious
Scepter; those that neglected, and rejected it, fell under his Iron Rod.
Jerusalem was destroyed, the Temple demolished, the Inhabitants lost their
lives by the edge of the Sword, or linger'ed them out in the chains of a
miserable Captivity. This term of Judge which signifies a Sovereign right to
govern and punish Delinquents, Abraham gives him, when (...) came, to root out
the People of Sodom, and make them the examples of his vengeance. Genesis 18.25.

2. Punishing the Transgressions of his Law; This is necessary branch of
Dominion. His Sovereignty in making Laws would be a trifle, if there were not
also an Authority to vindicate those Laws from Contempt and Injury; he would be
a Lord only spurned at by Rebels. Sovereignty is not preserved without Justice.
When the Psalmist speaks of the Majesty of God's Kingdom, he tells us, that
Righteousness and Judgment are the Habitation of his Throne. Psalm. 97.1, 2.
These are the Engines of Divine dignity, which render him glorious and
majestic. A Legislative power would be trampled on without executive; by this
the reverential apprehensions of God are preserved in the W^rld. He is known to
be Lord of the World, by the Judgments which he executes. Psalm. 9.16. When he
seems to have lost his dominion, or given it up in the World, he recovers it by
punishment. When he takes some away with a Whirlwind, and in his Wrath, the
natural consequence men make of it, is this, Surely there is a God that Judges
the Earth. Psalm. 58.9.11. He reduces the Creature by the lash of his
judgments, that would not acknowledge his Authority in his precepts. Those sins
which disown his Government in the Heart and Conscience, as Pride, inward
blasphemy, etc. he has reserved a time hereafter to reckon for. He does not
presently shoot his arrows into the marrow of every delinquent, but those sins
which traduce his Government of the World, and tear up the Foundations of
humane converse, and a public respect to him, he reckons with particularly
here, as well as hereafter, that the Life of his Sovereignty might not always
faint in the World.

3. This of punishing was the second discovery of his dominion in the World.
His first act of Sovereignty was the giving a Law, the next, his appearance in
the State of a judge. When his orders were violated, he rescues the honor of
them by an execution of Justice. He first judged the Angels, punishing the evil
ones for their crime; the first Court he kept among them as a Governor, was to
give them a Law, the second Court he kept, was as a Judge trying the
Delinquents, and adjudging the Offenders, to be reserved in Chains of darkness
till the final Execution. Jude 6. And at the same time probably he confirmed
the good ones in their obedience by Grace. So the first discovery of his
dominion to man, was the giving him a precept, the next was the inflicting a
punishment for the breach of it. He summons Adam to the Bar, indicts him for
his Crime, finds him guilty by his own Confession, and passes sentence on him,
according to the rule he had before acquainted him with.

4. The means whereby he punishes shows his dominion. Sometimes he musters up
Hail and Mildew, sometimes he sends regiments of wild Beasts; so he threatens
Israel. Levit. 26.22. Sometimes he sends out a party of Angels, to beat up the
quarters of men, and make a carnage among them. 2 King 19.35. Sometimes he
mounts his Thundering battery, and shoots forth his Ammunition from the Clouds;
as against the Philistines, 1 Samuel 7.10. Sometimes he sends the slightest
Creatures to shame the Pride, and punish the sin of man; as Lice, Froggs,
Locusts; as upon the Egyptians, the 8, 9, 10. chap. of Exodus.

2. This Dominion is manifested by God as a proprietor and Lord of his
Creatures and his own Goods.

And this is evident.

1. In the choice of some persons from Eternity. He has set a part some from
Eternity, wherein he will display the invincible efficacy of his Grace, and
thereby infallibly bring them to the fruition of Glory. Ephesians. 1.4, 5. According
as he has chosen us in him before the Foundation of the World, that we should
be Holy and without blame before him in Love, having Predestined us to the
Adoption of Children by Jesus Christ to himself, according to the good pleasure
of his will. Why does he write some names in the Book of Life, and leave out
others? why does he enroll some, whom he intends to make Denizons of Heaven,
and refuse to put others in his register? The Apostle tells us, it is the
pleasure of his Will. You may render a reason for many of God's actions, till
you come to this the top and Foundadation of all; and under what head of reason
can man reduce this act but to that of his Royal Prerogative? Why does God save
some, and condemn others at last? Because of the Faith of the one, and unbelief
of the other. Why do some men believe? Because God has not only given them the
means of Grace, but accompanied those means with the efficacy of his Spirit.
Why did God accompany those means with the efficacy of his Spirit in some, and
not in others? Bccause he had decreed by Grace, to prepare them for Glory. But
why did he decree, or choose some, and not others? Into what will you resolve
this but into his sovereign pleasure? Salvation and Condemnation at the last
upshot, are acts of God as the Judge conformable to his own Law of giving life
to Believers, and inflicting death upon unbeleivers; for those a reason may be
rendered; but the choice of some and preterition of others, is an act of God as
he is a sovereign Monarch, before any Law was actually transgrest, because not
actually given. When a Prince redeems a Rebel, he acts as a Judge according to
Law; but when he calls some out, to pardon, he acts as a sovereign by a
Prerogative above Law; into this the Apostle resolves it. Romans 9.13.15. When he
speaks of Gods loving Jacob, and hating Esau, and that before they had done
either good or evil: It is, Because God will have Mercy, on whom he will have
Mercy, and Compassion on whom he will have Compassion. Though the first scope
of the Apostle in the beginning of the Chapter, was to declare the reason of
God's rejecting the Jews, and calling in the Gentiles; had he only intended to
demolish the pride of the Jews, and flat their opinion of merit, and aimed no
higher than that Providential act of God; he might, convincingly enough to the
reason of men, have argued from the Justice of God, provoked by the obstinacy
of the Jews, and not have had recourse to his absolute Will; but since he
asserts this latter, Amyrald. dissert. p. 101, 102.
the strength of his argument seems to lie thus; if God by his absolute
sovereignty may resolve, and fix his love upon Jacob and estrange it from Esau,
or any other of his Creatures before they have done good or evil, and man have
no ground to call his infinite Majesty to account, may he not deal thus with
the Jews, when their demerit would be a bar to any complaints of the Creature
against him? If God were considered here in the quality of a Judge, it had been
fit to have considered the matter of Fact in the Criminal; but he is considered
as a Sovereign, rendering no other reason of his action but his own Will, whom
he will he hardens, ver. 18. And then the Apostle concludes. Ver. 20. Who art
thou, O Man, that replyest against God? If the reason drawn from Gods
Sovereignty, does not satisfy in this enquiry, no other reason can be found,
wherein to acquiesce? For the last condemnation there will be sufficient reason
to clear the Justice of his proceedings. But in this case of Election, no other
reason but what is alleged, viz. The Will of God, can be thought of, but what
is liable to such knotty exceptions, that cannot well be untyed.

1. It could not be any merit in the Creature, that might determine God to
choose him. If the decree of Election falls not under the merit of Christ's
passion, as the procuring cause, it cannot fall under the merit of any part of
the corrupted mass. The decree of sending Christ, did not precede, but followed
in order of nature the determination of choosing some. When men were chosen as
the subjects for Glory, Christ was chosen as the means, for the bringing them
to Glory, Ephesians. 1.4. Chosen us in him, and predestined us to the Adoption of
Children by Jesus Christ. The choice was not merely in Christ, as the moving
cause; that the Apostle asserts, to be the good pleasure of his will; but in
Christ, as the means of conveying to the chosen Ones the fruits of their
Election. What could there be in any man, that could invite Gpd to this act, or
be a cause of distinction of one branch of Adam from another? Were they not all
hewed out of the same Rock, and tainted with the same corruption in blood? Had
it been possible to invest them with a power of merit at the first, had not
that venom contracted in their nature, degraded all of power for the future?
What merit was there in any but of wrathful punishment, since they were all
considered as Criminals, and the cursed brood of an ungrateful Rebel? what
dignity can there be in the nature of the purest part of clay, to be made a
Vessel of Honor, more than in another part of Clay as pure as that which was
formed into a Vessel for mean and sordid use? What had any one to move his
mercy more than another; since they were all Children of wrath, and equally
daubed with Original guilt and filth? Had not all an equal proportion of it, to
provoke his Justice? What merit is there in one dry bone more than another, to
be inspired with the breath of a spiritual life? Did not all lie wallowing in
their own filthy blood, and what could the steam, and noysomness of that,
deserve at the hands of a pure Majesty, but to be cast into a sink furthest
from his sight? Were they not all considered in this deplorable posture with an
equal proportion of poison in their nature, when God first took his pen, and
singled out some Names, to write in the Book of life? It could not be merit in
any one piece of this abominable Mass, that should stir up that resolution in
God, to set apart this person for a Vessel of Glory, while he permitted another
to putrify in his own gore. He loved Jacob, and hated Esau, though they were
both parts of the common Mass, the Seed of the same Loins, and lodged in the
same Womb.

2. Nor could it ^e any foresight of works to be done in time by them, or of
Faith, that might determine God to choose them. What good could he foresee
resulting from extreme corruption, and a nature alienated from him? What could
he foresee of good to be done by them, but what he resolved in his own will, to
bestow an ability upon them, to bring forth? His choice of them was to a
Holiness, not for a Holiness preceding his determination, Ephesians. 1.4. He has
chosen us, that we might be Holy before him, he ordained us to good works, not
for them, Ephesians. 2.10. What is a Fruit, cannot be a moving cause of that whereof
it is a fruit. Grace is a stream from the spring of electing love; the branch
is not the cause of the Root, but the Root of the Branch, nor the stream the
cause of the spring, but the spring the cause of the stream. Good works suppose
Grace, and a good and right habit in the person; as rational acts suppose
reason. Can any man say that the rational acts man performs after his Creation,
were a cause why God Created him? This would make Creation and every thing else
not so much an act of his will, as an act of his Understanding. God foresaw no
rational act in man, before the act of his will to give him reason; nor
foresees faith in any, before the act of his will determining to give him
Faith. Ephesians. 2.8. Faith is the gift of God. In the Salvation which grows up from
this first purpose of God, he regards not the works we have done, as a
principal motive to settle the top-stone of our happiness, but his own purpose,
and the Grace given in Christ. 2 Timothy 1.9. Who has saved us, and called us
with a holy Calling, not according to our own works, but according to his own
purpose, and Grace, which was given to us in Christ, before the World began.
The honor of our Salvation cannot be challenged by our works, much less the
honor of the Foundation of it. It was a pure gift of Grace without any respect
to any spiritual, much less natural, perfection. Why should the Apostle mention
that circumstance, when he speaks of God's loving Jacob, and hating Esau, when
neither of them had done good or evil, Romans 9.11. if there were any foresight
of men's works, as the moving cause of his love or hatred? God regarded not the
works of either as the first cause of his choice, but acted by his own Liberty
without respect to any of their actions, which were to be done by them in time.
If Faith be the fruit of Election, the prescience of Faith does not influence
the Electing act of God. Tit. 1.1. It Is called the Faith of Gods Elect. Paul an
Apostle of Jesus Christ according to the Faith of Gods Elect. i. e. Settled in
this Office to bring the Elect of God to Faith. If men be chosen by God upon
the foresight of Faith, or not chosen till they have Faith, they are not so
much God's Elect, as God their Elect; they choose God by Faith, before God
chooses them by love. It had not been the Faith of Gods Elect, i. e. Of those
already chosen, but the Faith of those that were to be chosen by God
afterward. Dalle in loc.
Election is the cause of Faith, and not Faith the cause of Election. Fire is
the cause of heat, and not the heat of Fire; the Sun is the cause of the day,
and not the day the cause of the rising of the Sun. Men are not chosen because
they believe, but they believe because they are chosen: The Apostle did ill
else, to appropriate that to the Elect, which they had no more interest in by
virtue of their Election, than the veriest Reprobate in the World. If the
foresight of what works might be done by his Creatures, was the motive of his
choosing them, why did he not choose the Devils to Redemption, who could have
done him better service, by the strength of their Nature, than the whole Mass
of Adam's posterity?

Well then, there is no possible way to lay the original Foundation of this act
of Election, and preterition in any thing but the absolute Sovereignty of God.

Justice or Injustice comes not into consideration in this case. There is no
debt, which Justice or Injustice always respects in its acting: If he had
pleased, he might have chosen all, if he had pleased, he might have chosen
none. It was in his supreme power, to have resolved to have left all Adam's
posterity under the rack of his Justice; if he determined to snatch out any, it
was a part of his dominion, but without any injury to the Creatures he leaves
under their own guilt. Did he not pass by the Angels, and take man? And by the
same right of Dominion may he pick out some men from the common Mass, and lay
aside others, to bear the punishment of their Crimes. Are they not all his
Subjects? All are his Criminals, and may be dealt with at the pleasure of their
undoubted Lord and Sovereign? This is a work of arbitrary power: Since he might
have chosen none, or chosen all, as he saw good himself. It Is at the liberty of
the Artificer, to determine his Wood, or Stone to such a figure, that of a
Prince or that of a Toad; and his materials have no right to complain of him,
since it lies wholly upon his own liberty. They must have little sense of their
own vileness and God's infinite excellency above them by right of Creation,
that will contend, that God has a lesser right over his Creatures, than an
Artificer over his Wood or Stone. If it were at his liberty whither to redeem
Man, or send Christ upon such an undertaking; it is as much at his liberty, and
the prerogative is to be allowed him, what persons he will resolve to make
capable of enjoying the fruits of that Redemption. One Man was as fit a subject
for Mercy as another; as they all lay in their orginal guilt. Why would not
Divine Mercy cast its eye upon this Man, as well as upon his Neighbor? There
was no cause in the Creature, but all in God, it must be resolved into his own
will.

Yet not into a Will without Wisdom. God did not choose hand over head, and act
by mere Will without Reason and Understanding; an infinite Wisdom is far from
such a kind of procedure; but the reason of God is inscrutable to us: unless we
could understand God, as well as he understands himself; the whole ground lies
in God himself, no part of it in the Creature. Romans 9.15, 16. Not in him that
Wills, nor in him that Runs, but in God that shows Mercy. Since God has
revealed no other cause than his will, we can resolve it into no other than his
Sovereign Empire over all Creatures. It Is not without a stop to our curiosity,
that in the same place where God asserts the absolute Sovereignty of his mercy
to Moses, he tells him he could not see his face. Exodus 33.19, 20. I will be
Gracious, to whom I will be Gracious: and he said, Thou can not see my face.
The rays of his infinite Wisdom, are too bright and dazzling for our weakness.
The Apostle acknowledged not only a Wisdom in this proceeding, but a riches and
treasure of Wisdom; not only that but a depth and vastness of those riches of
Wisdom, but was unable, to give us an Inventory, and Scheme of it. Romans 11.33.
The secrets of his Counsels are too deep for us to wade into; in attempting to
know the reason of those acts we should find our selves swallowed up into a
bottomless Gulf. Though the understanding be above our capacity, yet the
admiration of his Authority and Submission to it are not. We should cast our
selves down at his feet with a full resignation of our selves to his Sovereign
pleasure This was Dr. Goodwins Speech when he was in trouble.
. This is a more comely carriage in a Christian than all the contentious
endeavors to measure God by our line.

2. In bestowing Grace where he pleases. God in Conversion and Pardon works not
as a natural Agent, putting forth strength to the utmost, which God must do, if
he did renew man naturally, as the Sun shines, and the fire burns, which always
act ad extremum virium, unless a Cloud interpose, to eclipse the one, and water
to extinguish the other. But God acts as a voluntary Agent, which can freely
exert his power, when he please, and suspend it, when he please. Though God be
necessarily good, yet he is not necessitated to manifest all the Treasures of
his Goodness to every Subject; he has power to distill his dews upon one part,
and not upon another. If he were necessitated to express his Goodness without a
liberty, no thanks were due to him. Who thanks the Sun for shining on him, or
the fire for warming him? None: Because they are necessary Agents, and can do
no other.

What is the reason, he did not reach out his hand to keep all the Angels from
sinking, as well as some, or recover them, when they were sunk? What is the
reason, he engrafts one man into the true Vine, and lets another remain a wild
Olive? Why is not the efficacy of the Spirit always linkt with the motions of
the Spirit? Why does he not mould the Heart into a Gospel frame, when he fills
the Ear with a Gospel sound? Why does he strike off the chains from some, and
tear the vail from the Heart, while he leaves others under their natural
slavery, and Egyptian darkness? Why do some lie under the bands of death,
while another is raised to a spiritual life? What reason is there for all this
but his absolute Will? The Apostle resolves the question, if the question be
asked, why he begets one, and not another? Not from the Will of the Creature,
but his own Will is the determination of one. James 1.18. Why does he work in
one, to will, and to do, and not in another? Because of his good pleasure, is
the answer of another. Phil. 2.13. He could as well new create every one, as he
at first created them, and make Grace as universal as Nature and Reason, but it
is not his pleasure so to do.

1. It Is not from want of strength in himself. The power of God is
unquestionably able to strike off the chains of unbeleief from all; he could
surmount the obstinacy of every child of wrath, and inspire every Son of Adam
with Faith as well as Adam himself. He wants not a virtue superior to the
greatest resistance of his Creature; a victorious beam of light might be shot
into their understandings, and a flood of Grace might overspread their Wills
with one word of his mouth without putting forth the utmost of his power. What
hinderance could there be in any created spirit, which cannot be easily peirced
into, and new molded by the Father of Spirits? Yet he only breaths this
efficacious virtue into some, and leaves others under that insensibility and
hardness which they love, and suffers them to continue in their benighting
ignorance, and consume themselves in the embraces of their dear, though
deceitful, Dalilahs.

He could have conquered the resistance of the Jews, as well as chased away the
darkness and ignorance of the Gentiles. No doubt, but he could over power the
Heart of the most malicious Devil, as well as that of the simplest and weakest
man. But the breath of the Almighty Spirit is in his own power, to breath where
he lists. John 3.8. It Is at his liberty, whither he will give to any the
feeling of the invincible efficacy of his Grace. He did not want strength to
have kept man as firm as a Rock against the temptation of Satan, and poured in
such fortifying Grace, as to have made him impregnable against the powers of
Hell, as well as he did secure the standing of the Angels against the Sedition
of their fellows. But it was his will to permit it to be otherwise.

2. Nor is it from any prerogative in the Creature. He converts not any for
their natural perfection: Because he seizes upon the most ignorant. Nor for
their moral perfection: Because he converts the most sinful. Nor for their
Civil perfection: Because he turns the most despicable.

1. Not for their natural perfection of knowledge. He opened the minds and
hearts of the more ignorant. Were the nature of the Gentiles better manured
than that of the Jews, or did the Tapers of their understandings burn clearer?
No, the one were skilled in the Prophesies of the Messiah, and might have
compared the Predictions they owned with the Actions and Sufferings of Christ,
which they were spectators of. He let alone those that had expectations of the
Messiah, and expectations about the time of Christ's appearance, both grounded
upon the Oracles wherewith he had entrusted them. The Gentiles were
unacquainted with the Prophets, and therefore destitute of the expectations of
the Messiah. Ephesians. 2.12. They were without Christ. Without any Revelation of
Christ, because aliens from the Commonwealth of Israel and strangers to the
Covenant of Promise, having no hope and without God in the World, without any
knowledge of God, or promises of Christ. The Jews might sooner in a way of
reason have been wrought upon, than the Gentiles who were ignorant of the
Prophets, by whose writings they might have examined the Truth of the Apostles
Declarations; thus are they refused, that were the kindred of Christ according
to the Flesh, and the Gentiles that were at a greater distance from him,
brought in by God. Thus he catches not at the subtle and mighty Devils, who
had an original in spiritual nature more like to him, but at weak and simple
man.

2. Not for any Moral perfection: Because he converts the most Sinful. The
Gentiles steept in Idolatry and Superstition. He sowed more Faith among the
Romans than in Jerusalem, more Faith in a City that was the common Sewer of all
the Idolatry of the Nations conquered by them; than in that City which had so
signally been owned by him, and had not practiced any Idolatry since the
Babylonish Captivity. He planted Saintship at Corinth, a place notorious for
the infamous Worship of Venus, a Superstition attended with the grossest
uncleanness. At Ephesus, that presented the whole World with a Cup of
Fornication in their Temple of Diana. Among the Colossians, Votaries to Cybele
in a manner of Worship attended with beastly and lascivious Ceremonies. And
what character had the Cretians from one of their own Poets, mentioned by the
Apostle to Titus, whom he had placed among them, to further the progress of the
Gospel, but the vilest and most abominable? Tit. 1.12. Liars, not to be
credited, Evil Beasts not to be associated with, Slow Bellies fit for no
service. What prerogative was there in the nature of such putrefaction. As much
as in that of a Toad to be elevated to the dignity of an Angel. What steam from
such Dunghils could be welcome to him, and move him, to cast his eye on them,
and sweeten them from Heaven? What treasures of worth were here, to open the
treasures of his Grace? Were such filthy snuffs fit of themselves to be kindled
by, and become a lodging for a Gospel beam? What invitements could he have from
Lying, Beastliness, Gluttony, but only from his own Sovereignty? By this he
plucked firebrands out of the fire, while he left straiter and more comely
sticks to consume to ashes.

3. Not for any Civil Perfection: Because he turns the most despicable. He
elevates not nature to Grace upon the account of Wealth, Honor, or any Civil
station in the World; he dispenses not ordinarily those Treasures to those
that the mistaken World foolishly admire, and dote upon, 1 Cor. 1.26. Not many
Mighty, not many Noble. A purple Robe is not usually decked with this Jewel. He
takes more of moldy Clay, than refined dust, to cast into his Image; and
lodges his Treasures more in the earthly Vessels, than in the World's Golden
ones. He gives out his richest doles, to those that are the scorn and reproach
of the World. Should he impart his Grace most to those that abound in wealth,
or honor, it had been some foundation for a conception, that he had been moved
by those vulgarly esteemed excellencies, to indulge them more than others. And
such a conceit languisheth, when we behold the Subjects of his Grace as void
originally of any allurements, as they are full of provocations.

Hereby he declares himself free from all Created engagements, and that he is
not led by any external motives in the object.

4. It Is not from any obligation which lies upon him. He is indebted to none,
disobliged by all. No man deserves from him any Act of Grace, but every man
deserves, what the most deplorable are left to suffer. He is obliged by the
Children of wrath to nothing else but showers of wrath, owes no more a debt to
fallen man, than to fallen Devils, to restore them to their first station by a
superlative Grace; how was he more bound, to restore them, than he was to
preserve them, to catch them after they fell, than to put a bar in the way of
their falling? God as a Sovereign gave Laws to men, and a strength sufficient
to keep those Laws. What obligation is there upon God to repair that strength
man wilfully lost, and extract him out of that condition, into which he
voluntarily plunged himself? What if man sinned by temptation, which is a
reason alleged by some? Might not many of the Devils do so too? Though there
was a first of them, that sinned without a temptation, yet many of them might
be seduced into Rebellion by the Ringleader. Upon that account, he is no more
bound, to give Grace to all men, than to Devils. If he promised life upon
Obedience, he threatened death upon Transgression. By man's disobedience God is
quit of his promise, and owes nothing but punishment upon the violation of his
Law. Indeed man may pretend to a claim of sufficient strength from him by
Creation, as God is the Author of Nature, and he had it; but since he has
extinguished it by his sin, he cannot in the least pretend any obligation on God
for a new strength. If it be a peradventure whither he will give Repentance, as
it is, 2 Timothy 2.25. There is no tie in the case; a tie would put it beyond a
peradventure with a God, that never forfeited his obligation. Claudes sur la
parabole des Noces p. 29.
No Husbandman thinks himself obliged, to bestow cost and pains, manure and
tillage upon one field more than another; though the nature of the ground may
require more, yet he is at his liberty whither he will expend more upon one
than another. He may let it lie Fallow as long as he please. God is less
obliged, to till, and prune his Creatures, than man is obliged to his Field or
Trees. If a King proclaim a pardon to a company of Rebels upon the condition of
each of them paying such a sum of Money; their Estates before were capable of
satisfying the condition, but their Rebellion has reduced them to an indigent
condition; the proclamation it self is an act of Grace, the condition required
is not impossible in it self, the Prince out of a tenderness to some, sends
them that sum of Money, he has by his Proclamation obliged them to pay, and
thereby enabled them to answer the condition he requires; the first he does by
a Sovereign Authority, the second he does by a Sovereign bounty, he was obliged
to neither of them; punishment was a debt due to all of them; if he would remit
it upon condition, he did relax his Sovereign right, and if he would by his
largess make any of them capable to fulfill the condition by sending them
presently a sufficient sum to pay the fine, he acted as proprietor of his own
goods, to dispose of them in such a quantity to those, to whom he was not
obliged to bestow a mite.

5. It must therefore be an Act of his mere Sovereignty. This can only sit
arbitrator in every gracious act. Why did he give Grace to Abel and not to
Cain, since they both lay in the same womb, and equally derived from their
Parents a taint in their Nature: But that he would show a standing example of
his Sovereignty to the future ages of the World in the first posterity of man?
Why did he give Grace to Abraham, and separate him from his Idolatrous Kindred,
to dignifie him to be the root of the Messiah? Why did he confine his promise
to Isaac, and not extend it to Ishmael the Seed of the same Abraham by Hagar,
or to the Children he had by Keturah after Sarahs death? What reason can be
alleged for this but his Sovereign Will? Why did he not give the fallen Angels
a moment of Repentance after their sin, but condemned them to irrevocable
pains? Is it not as free for him, to give Grace, to whom he please, as Create
what Worlds he please; to form this corrupted clay into his own Image, as to
take such a parcel of dust from all the rest of the Creation, whereof to
compact Adam's body? Has he not as much jurisdiction over the sinful mass of
his Creatures in a new Creation, as he had over the Chaos in the old? And what
reason can be rendered, of his advancing this part of matter to the nobler
dignity of a Star, and leaving that other part, to make up the dark body of the
Earth? To compact one part into a glorious Sun, and another part into a hard
Rock; but his Royal Prerogative? What is the reason a Prince subjects one
Malefactor to punishment, and lifts up another to a place of truth and profit?
That Pharaoh honored the Butler with an attendance on his Person, and remitted
the Baker to the hands of the Executioner? It was his pleasure. And is not as
great a right due to God, as is allowed to the worms of the Earth? What is the
reason he hardens a Pharaoh, by a denying him that Grace, which should mollify
him; and allows it to another? It Is because he will. Romans 9.18. Whom he will he
hardens. Has not man the liberty to pull up the sluice, and let the water run
into what part of the ground he pleases? What is the reason some have not a
heart to understand the beauty of his ways? Because the Lord does not give it
them. Deuteronomy. 29.4. Why does he not give all his converts an equal measure of his
sanctifying Grace, some have Mites, and some have Treasures? Why does he give
his Grace to some, sooner, to some, later, some are inspired in their infancy,
others not till a full age, and after, some not till they have fallen into some
gross sin, as Paul; some betimes, that they may do him service, others later,
as the Thief upon the Cross, and presently snatcheth them out of the World?
Some are weaker, some stronger in nature, some more beautiful, and lovely,
others more uncomely and sluggish. It Is so in supernaturals. What reason is
there for this, but his own will? This is instead of all, that can be assigned
on the part of God. He is the free disposer of his own Goods, and as a Father
may give a greater portion to one Child than to another. And what reason of
complaint is there against God; may not a Toad complain that God did not make
it a man, and give it a portion of reason? Or a Fly complain, that God did not
make it an Angel, and give it a Garment of Light, had they but any spark of
understanding; as well as man complain, that God did not give him Grace, as
well as another; Unless he sincerely desired it, and then was denied it, he
might complain of God, though not as Sovereign, yet as a promiser of Grace to
them that ask it. God does not render his Sovereignty formidable; he shuts not
up his Throne of Grace from any that seek him; he invites man, his Arms are
open, and the Scepter stretched out; and no man continues under the arrest of
his Lusts, but he that is unwilling to be otherwise, and such a one has no
reason to complain of God.

3. His Sovereignty is manifest in disposing the means of Grace to some, not to
all. He has caused the Sun to shine bright in one place, while he has left
others benighted, and deluded by the Devils Oracles. Why do the Evangelical
dews fall in this or that place, and not in another? Why was the Gospel
published in Rome so soon, and not in Tartary? Why has it been extinguished in
some places, as soon almost as it had been kindled in them? Why has one place
been honored with the beams of it in one age, and been covered with darkness
the next? One Country has been made a sphere for this Star, that directs to
Christ, to move in, and afterward it has been taken away, and placed in
another: Sometimes more clearly it has shone, sometimes more darkly in the
same place, what is the reason of this? It Is true something of it may be
referred to the Justice of God, but much more to the Sovereignty of God. That
the Gospel is published latter, and not sooner, the Apostle tell us, is
according to the Commandment of the Everlasting God. Romans 16.26.

1. The means of Grace after the Families from Adam became distinct, were never
granted to all the World. After that fatal breach in Adam's Family by the death
of Abel, and Cain's separation, we read not of the means of Grace continued
among Cain's Posterity; it seems to be continued in Adam's sole Family, and not
published in Societies till the time of Seth. Genesis 4.26. Then began men to call
upon the Name of the Lord. It was continued in that Family till the Deluge,
which was 1523 years after the Creation according to some, or 1656 years
according to others. After that, when the World degenerated, it was
communicated to Abraham, and settled in the posterity that descended from Jacob:
Though he left not the World without a witness of himself, and some sprinklings
of revelations in other parts, as appears by the book of Job, and the
discourses of his Friends.

2. The Jews had this privilege granted them above other Nations to have a
clearer Revelation of God. God separated them from all the World to honor them
with the depositum of his Oracles. Romans 3.2. To them were committed the Oracles
of God. In which regard all other Nations are said to be without God, as being
destitute of so great a privilege, Ephesians. 2.12. The Spirit blew in Canaan, when
the Lands about it felt not the saving breath of it. He has not dealt so with
any Nation, and as for his Judgments they have not known them. Psalm. 147.20.
The rest had no warnings from the Prophets, no dictates from Heaven, but what
they had by the light of Nature, the view of the works of Creation, and the
Administration of Providence, and what remained among them of some ancient
Traditions derived from Noah, which in tract of time were much defaced. We read
but of one Jonah sent to Niniveh, but frequent Alarms to the Israelites by a
multitude of Prophets commissioned by God. It Is true, the door of the Jewish
Church was open to what Proselytes would enter themselves, and embrace their
Religion and Worship; but there was no public Proclamation made in the World;
only God by his miracles in their deliverance from Egypt (which could not but
be famous among all the Neighbor Nations) declared them to be a people
favored by Heaven. But the Tradition from Adam and Noah was not publicly
revived by God in other parts, and raised from that Grave of forgetfulness,
wherein it had lain so long buried. Was there any reason in them for this
Indulgence? God might have been as liberal to any other Nation, yea to all the
Nations in the World, if it had been his Sovereign pleasure. Any other people
were as fit to be entrusted with his Oracles, and be subjects for his Worship
as that people; yet all other Nations till the rejection of the Jews, because
of their rejection of Christ, were strangers from the Covenant of Promise.
These people were part of the common mass of the World: They had no prerogative
in nature above Adam's posterity. Were they the extract of an innocent part of
his Loins, and all the other Nations drained out of his putrefaction? Had the
blood of Abraham, from whom they were more immediately descended any more
precious tincture than the rest of mankind? They as well as other Nations were
made of one Blood. Acts 17.26. And that corrupted both in the spring and in the
Rivulets. Were they better than other Nations, when God first drew them out of
their slavery? We have Joshua's Authority for it, that they had complied with
the Egyptian Idolatry, and served other Gods in that place of their servitude.
Joshua 24.14. Had they had an abhorrency of the superstition of Egypt, while
they remained there, they could not so soon have erected a Golden Calf for
Worship in imitation of the Egyptian Idols. All the rest of mankind had as
inviting reasons to present God with, as those people had. God might have
granted the same privilege to all the World, as well as to them, or denied it
them, and endowed all the rest of the World with his Statutes: but the
enriching such a small Company of people with his Divine showers, and leaving
the rest of the World as a barren Wilderness in Spirituals, can be placed upon
no other account originally than that of his unaccountable Sovereignty of his
love to them: There was nothing in them, to merit such high Titles from God as
his first born, his peculiar Treasure, the Apple of his Eye. He disclaims any
Righteousness in them, and speaks a word sufficient to damp such thoughts in
them, by charging them with their wickedness, while he loaded them with his
benefits. Deuteronomy. 9.4.6. The Lord gives thee not this Land for thy Righteousness:
For thou art a stiff-necked people. It was an act of God's free pleasure, to
choose them to be a people to himself. Deuteronomy. 7.6.

3. God afterward rejected the Jews, gave them up to the hardness of their
hearts, and spread the Gospel among the Gentiles. He has cast off the Children
of the Kingdom, those that had been enrol'd for his subjects for many ages, who
seemed by their descent from Abraham, to have a right to the privileges of
Abraham, and called men from the East and from the West, from the darkest
corners of the World, to sit down with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob in the Kingdom
of Heaven. i. e. To partake with them of the promises of the Gospel. Math.
8.11. The people that were accounted accursed by the Jews, enjoy the means of
Grace, which have been hid from those, that were once dignified, this 1600
years; that they have neither Ephod, nor Teraphim, nor sacrifice, nor any true
Worship of God among them. Hos. 3.4. Why he should not give them Grace, to
acknowledge, and own the person of the Messiah, to whom he had made the
promises of him for so many successive ages, but let their heart be fat, and
their Ears heavy. Isaiah 6.10. Why the Gospel at length after the Resurrection
of Christ should be presented to the Gentiles, not by chance, but pursuant to
the resolution, and prediction of God declared by the Prophets, that it should
be so in time? Why he should let so many hundreds of years pass over, after
the World was peopled, and let the Nations all that while soak in their
Idolatrous Customs? Why he should not call the Gentiles without rejecting the
Jews, and bind them both up together in the bundle of Life? Why he should
acquaint some people with it, a little after the publishing it in Jerusalem, by
the descent of the Spirit, and others not a long time after? Some in the first
ages of Christianity enjoyed it, others have it not, as those in America, till
the last age of the World; can be referred to nothing but his Sovereign
pleasure.

What merit can be discovered in the Gentiles? There is something of Justice in
the case of the Jews rejection, nothing but Sovereignty in the Gentiles
reception into the Church. If the Jews were bad, the Gentiles were in some sort
worse: The Jews owned the One true God without mixture of Idols, though they
owned not the Messiah in his appearance, which they did in a promise; but the
Gentiles owned neither the one, nor the other. Some tell us, it was for the
merit of some of their Ancestors. How comes the means of Grace then to be taken
from the Jew, who had (if any people ever had) meritorious Ancestors for a
plea? If the merit of some of their former progenitors were the Cause, what was
the reason the debt due to their merit, was not paid to their immediate
progeny, or to themselves, but to a posterity so distant from them; and so
abominably depraved as the Gentile World was, at the day of the Gospel-Sun
striking into their Horizon? What merit might be in their Ancestors (if any
could be supposed in the most refined rubbish,) 'twas so little for themselves,
that no Oil could be spared out of their Lamps for others. What merit their
Ancestors might have, might be forfeited by the succeeding Generations. It Is
ordinarily seen, that what honor a Father deserves in a State for public
Service, may be lost by the Son, forfeited by Treason, and himself attainted.

Or was it out of a foresight that the Gentiles would embrace it, and the Jews
reject it, that the Gentiles would embrace it in one place and not in another?
How did God foresee it but in his own Grace, which he was resolved to display
in one, not in another? It must be then still resolved into his Sovereign
pleasure. Or did he foresee it in their wills and nature? What, were they not
all one common dross? Was any part of Adam by nature better than another? How
did God forsee that which was not, nor could be, without his pleasure to give
ability and Grace to receive?

Well then, what reason but the Sovereign pleasure of God can be alleged, why
Christ forbad the Apostles at their first Commission to Preach to the Gentiles?
Matthew. 10.15. But at the second and standing Commission orders them to Preach
to every Creature. Why did he put a demurr to the resolutions of Paul and
Timothy, to impart light to Bithynia, or Order them to go into Macedonia? Was
that Country more worthy upon whom lay a great part of the blood of the world
shed in Alexanders time? Acts 16.6, 7, 9, 10. Why should Corazin and Bethsaida
enjoy those means, that were not granted to the Tyrians and Sidonians, who
might probably have sooner reached out their Arms to welcome it? Matthew. 11.21.
Why should God send the Gospel into our Island, and cause it to flourish so
long here, and not send it, or continue it in the furthest Eastern parts of the
World? Why should the very profession of Christianity possess so small a
compass of ground in the world, but five parts in Thirty, the Mahometans
holding six parts, and the other nineteen overgrown with Paganism, where either
the Gospel was never planted, or else since rooted up? To whom will you refer
this, but to the same cause our Savior does the Revelation of the Gospel to
Babes, and not to the wise, even to his Father? For so it seemed good in thy
sight. Matthew. 11.25, 26. For so was thy good pleasure before thee (as in the
original.) It Is at his pleasure whither he will give any a clear Revelation of
his Gospel, or leave them only to the light of Nature. He could have kept up
the first beam of the Gospel in the promise in all Nations among the Apostasies
of Adam's posterity, or renewed it in all Nations, when it began to be darkened,
as well as he first published it to Adam after his fall. But it was his
Sovereign pleasure, to permit it to be obscured in one place, and to keep it
lighted in another.

4. His Sovereignty is manifest in the various influences of the means of
Grace. He says to these waters of the Sanctuary, as to the Floods of the Sea,
Hitherto you shall go and no further. Sometimes they wash away the filth of the
flesh, and outward man, but (...) th^^ of the Spirit. The Gospel Spiritualizeth
some, and only moralizeth others; some are by the power of it struck down to
Conviction, but not raised up to Conversion. Some have only the gleams of it in
their Consciences, and others more powerful flashes; some remain in their thick
darkness under the beaming of the Gospel every day in their face, and after a
long insensibleness are roused by its light and w^rmth. Sometimes there is such
a powerful breath in it, that it levels the haughty imaginations of men, and
lays them at its feet, that before strutted against it in the pride of their
Heart. The foundation of this is not in the Gospel it self, which is always the
same, nor in the Ordinances which are Channels as sound at one time as at
another, but divine Sovereignty that Spirits them as he pleases, and blows
when and where it lists. It has sometimes conquered its thousands, Acts 2.41.
At another time scarce its tens; sometimes the Harvest has been great, when
the Laborers have been but few; at another time, it has been small, when the
Laborers have been many. Sometimes whole sheaves, at another time scarce
gleanings. The Evangelical Net has been sometimes full at a cast, and at every
cast; at another time many have labored all night and day too, and catched
nothing. Acts 2.47. The Lord added to the Church daily. The Gospel Chariot does
not always return with Captives chained to the sides of it, but sometimes
blur'd and reproached, wearing the marks of Hells spite, instead of imprinting
the marks of its own beauty. In Corinth it triumphed over many people; Acts
18.10. In Athens it is mocked, and gathers but a few clusters. Acts 17.32.34. God
keeps the Key of the heart as well as of the Womb. The Apostles had a power of
publishing the Gospel, and working miracles, but under the Divine conduct. It
was an instrumentality durante been placito, and as God saw it convenient.
Miracles were not upon every occasion allowed to them to be wrought, nor
success upon every Administration granted to them. God sometimes lent them the
Key, but to take out no more Treasure, than was alloted to them.

There is a variety in the time of Gospel operation; some rise out of their
Graves of Sin, and Beds of sluggishness at the first appearance of this Sun,
others lie snorting longer. Why does not God Spirit it at one season as well as
at another, but set his distinct periods of time; but because he will show his
absolute freedom?

And do we not sometimes experiment that after the most solemn preparations of
the Heart, we are frustrated of those incomes we expected: Perhaps it was
because we thought Divine returns were due to our preparations and God stops up
the Channel, and we return dryer than we came, that God may confute our false
opinion, and preserve the honor of his own Sovereignty. Sometimes we leap with
John Baptist in the Womb at the appearance of Christ; sometimes we lie upon a
lazy bed when he knocks from Heaven. Sometimes the Fleece is dry and sometimes
wet, and God withholds to drop down his dew of the morning upon it. The dews of
his word, as well as the droppings of the Clouds belong to his Royalty. Light
will not shine into the Heart, though it shine round about us, without the
Sovereign order of that God, who commanded Light to shine out of the Darkness
of the Chaos. 2 Cor. 4.6. And is it not seen also in regard of the refreshing
influences of the word? sometimes the strongest arguments, and clearest
promises prevail nothing toward the quelling black and despairing
imaginations, when afterward we have found them frighted away by an unexpected
word, that seemed to have less virtue in it self, than any that passed in vain
before it. The reasonings of Wisdom have dropped down like arrows against a
braz^n wall, when the speech of a weaker person has found an efficacy. It Is
God, by his Sovereignty spirits one word and not another. Sometim^s a s^cret
word comes in, which was not thought of before, as dropped from Heaven, and gives
a refreshing, when emptiness was found in all the rest. One word from the lips
of a Sovereign Prince is a greater Cordial than all the Harang (...) of
subj^^^^ without it. What is the reason of this variety, but that God wo^l^
increase (...) proof of his own Sovereignty? That as it was a part of his
Dominion to Create the be^uty of a World, so it is no less, to Create the peace
as well as the Gra^e of ^he heart. Isaiah 57.19. I create the fruit of the lips
peace.

Let us learn from hence to have adoring thoughts of, not murmuring fanci^s
against the Sovereignty of God. To acknowledge it with thankfulness in what we
have, to implore it with a holy submission, in what w^ w^nt. To o^n G^^ as a
Sovereign in a way of dependence, is the way to be owned by him as Subjects in
a way of favor.

5. His Sovereignty is manifested in giving a great measure of knowledge to
some, than to others. What Parts, Gifts, excellency of Nature any have above
others, are Gods donative. He gives Wisdom to the wise, and knowledge to them
that know understanding. Dan. 2.21. Wisdom the habit, and Knowledge the right
use of it in discerning the right nature of objects, and the fitness of means
conducing to the end; all is but a beam of Divine Light; and the different
degrees of Knowledge in one man above another, are the effects of his Sovereign
pleasure. He enlightens not the minds of all men, to know every part of his
will; one eats with a doubtful Conscience, another in Faith without any
staggering. Romans 14.2. Peter had a desire to keep up Circumcision, not fully
understanding the mind of God in the abolition of the Jewish Ceremonies. While
Paul was clear in the Truth of that Doctrine. A thought comes into our mind,
that like a Sunbeam makes a Scripture Truth visible in a moment, which before
we were poring upon without any success; this is from his pleasure. One in the
primitive times had the gift of Knowledge, another of Wisdom, one the gift of
Prophecy, another of Tongues, one the gift of Healing, another that of
discerning Spirits; why this gift to one man, and not to another? Why such a
distribution in several Subjects? Because it is his Sovereign pleasure. The
Spirit divides to every man severally as he will, 1 Cor. 12.11. Why does he
give Bezaleel and Aholiah the gift of Engraving, and making curious works for
the Tabernacle, Exodus 31.3. and not others? Why does he bestow the Treasures of
Evangelical Knowledge upon the meanest of Earthen Vessels, the poor Galileans,
and neglect the Pharisees stored with the Knowledge both of Naturals and
Morals? Why did he give to some, and not to others, to know the Mysteries of
the Kingdom of Heaven. Matthew. 13.11. The reason is employed in the words:
Because it was the mystery of his Kingdom, and therefore was the act of his
Sovereignty. How would it be a Kingdom and Monarchy, if the Governor of it
were bound to do what he did? It Is to be resolved only into the Sovereign right
of propriety of his own goods, that he furnishes Babes with a stock of
knowledge, and leaves the Wise and Prudent empty of it. Matthew. 11.26. Even so
Father, for so it seemed good in thy sight. Why did he not reveal his mind to
Eri a grown man, and in the highest office in the Jewish Church, but open it to
Samuel a stripling? Why did the Lord go from the one to the other? Because his
motion depends upon his own will. Some are of so dull a constitution, that they
are incapable of any impression, like Rocks too hard for a stamp; others like
water, you may stamp what you please, but it vanishes as soon as the Seal is
removed. It Is God forms men as he pleases. Some have parts to govern a
Kingdom, others scarce brains to conduct their own affairs. One is fit to rule
men, and another scarce fit to keep Swine. Some have capacious Souls in crazy
and deformed Bodies, others contracted Spirits and heavier minds in a richer
and more beautiful case. Why are not all stones alike? some have a more
sparkling light, as gems, more orient than pebbles. Some are Stars of first,
and others of a less magnitude, others as mean as Glo-worms, a slimy luster:
It Is because he is the Sovereign disposer, of what belongs to him; and gives
here, as well as at the Resurrection, to one a Glory of the Sun, to another
that of the Moon, and to a third a less, resembling that of a Star. 1 Cor.
15.40. And this God may do by the same right of Dominion, as he exercised, when
he endowed some kinds of Crea^^^es with a greater perfection than others in
their Nature. Why may he not as well garnish one man with a greater proportion
of gifts, as make a man differ in excellency from the Nature of a Beast? Or
frame Angels to a more purely spiritual Nature than a man? Or make one Angel a
Cherubim, or Seraphim with a greater measure of light than another? Though the
foundation of this is his Dominion, yet his wisdom is not uninterested in his
Sovereign disposal; he garnisheth those with a greater ability, whom he intends
for greater service, than those that he intends for less, or none at all: As an
Artificer bestows more labor, and carves a more excellent figure upon those
Stones, that he designs for a more honorable place in the building. But though
the intending this or that man for service, be the motive of laying in a
greater provision in him than in others, yet still it is to be referred to his
Sovereignty, Since that first act of culling him out for such an end, was the
fruit solely of his Sovereign pleasure. As when he resolved to make a Creature,
actively to glorify him, in wisdom he must give him reason; yet the making
such a Creature was an act of his absolute Dominion.

6. His Sovereignty is manifest in the calling some to a more special service
in their Generation. God settles some in immediate Offices of his service, and
perpetuates them in those Offices with a neglect of others, who seem to have a
greater pretense to them. Moses was a great sufferer for Israel, the solicitor
for them in Egypt, and the conductor of them from Egypt to Canaan; yet he was
not chosen to the High Priesthood, but that was an office settled upon Aaron,
and his posterity after him in a lineal descent; Moses was only pitched upon
for the present resscue of the Captived Israelites, and to be the instrument of
Divine Miracles; but notwithstanding all the success he had in his conduct, his
faithfulness in his employment, and the transcendent familiarity he had with
the great Ruler of the World, his posterity were left in the common level of
the Tribe of Levi without any special mark of dignity upon them above the rest
for all the services of that great man. Why Moses for a Temporary Magistracy,
Aaron for a perpetual Priesthood above all the rest of the Israelites, has
little reason but the absolute pleasure of God who distributes his employments,
as he pleases; and as a Master orders this Servant to do the noblest work, and
another to labor in baser offices according to his pleasure? Why does he call
out David a Shepherd to sway the Jewish Scepter above the rest of the Brothers,
that had a fairer appearance, and had been bred in arms, and enured to the
Toyls and Watchings of a Camp? Why should Mary be the Mother of Christ, and not
some other of the same Family of David of a more splendid birth, and a nobler
education? Though some other reasons may be rendered, yet that which affords
the greatest acquiescence, is the Sovereign will of God. Why did Christ choose
out of the meanest of the people the Twelve Apostles, to be Heralds of his
Grace in Judaea and other parts of the World? And aftewards select Paul before
Gamaliel his Instructor, and others of the Jews, as Learned as himself, and
advance him to be the most eminent Apostle above the heads of those who had
ministered to Christ in the days of his flesh? Why should he preserve Eleven of
those he first called, to propagate and enlarge his Kingdom, and leave the
other to the employment of shedding his Blood? Why in the times of our
reformation he should choose a Luther out of a Monastery, and leave others in
their superstitious nastiness, to perish in the Traditions of their Fathers?
Why set up Calvin as a Bulwark of the Gospel, and let others as learned as
himself, wallow in the sink of Popery? It Is his pleasure, to do so. The Potter
has power to separate this part of the Clay to form a Vessel for a more
public use, and another part of the Clay to form a Vessel for a more private
one. God takes the meanest Clay to form the most excellent and honorable
Vessels in his House. As he formed man, that was to govern the Creatures, of
the same Clay and Earth, whereof the Beasts were formed, and not of that nobler
Element of water, which gave birth to the Fish and Birds. So he forms some,
that are to do him the greatest service, of the meanest materials, to manifest
the absolute right of his Dominion.

7. His Sovereignty is manifest in the bestowing much Wealth and Honor upon
some, and not vouchsafing it to the more industrious labors, and attempts of
others. Some are abas'd and others are elevated, some are enricht, and others
impoverisht, some scarce feel any Cross, and others scarce feel any comfort in
their whole lives. Some sweat and toil, and what they labor for, runs out of
their reach; others sit still, and what they wish for, falls into their lap.
One of the same Clay has a Diadem to beautify his head, and another wants a
covering to protect him from the weather. One has a stately Palace to lodge
in, and another is scarce Master of a Cottage where to lay his head. A Scepter
is put into one man's hand, and a spade into another. A Rich Purple garnisheth
one man's body, while another wraps himself in Dunghill rags. The Poverty of some
and the Wealth of others is an effect of the divine Sovereignty, whence God is
said, to be the Maker of the Poor as well as the Ri ^ Prove. 22.2. Not only of
their persons but of their conditions. The Earth ^^d the fullness thereof is his
propriety, and he has as much a right, as Jose^ (...), to bestow changes of
Raiment, upon what Benjamins he please. There (...) an Election to a greater
degree of worldly felicity, as there is an Election of some to a greater degree
of supernatural Grace and Glory. As he makes it rain upon one City, and not
upon another, Amos 4.7. So he causes prosperity to distill upon the head of
one, and not upon another, Crowning some with earthly blessings, while he
crosses others with continual afflictions: For he speaks of himself as a great
proprietor, of the Corn that nourishes us, and the Wine that cheers us, and
the VVood that warms us, Hosea 2.8, 9. I will take away, not your Corn and
Wine, but my Corn, my Wine, my Wool. His right, to dispose of the Goods of
every particular person, is unquestionable. He can take away from one, and
pass over the propriety to another; thus he devolved the right of the Egyptian
Jewels to the Israelites, and bestowed upon the Captives, what before he had
vouchsafed to the oppressors. As every Sovereign state demands the Goods of
their Subjects for the public advantage in a case of exigency, though none of
that wealth was gained by any public Office, but by their private industry,
and gained in a Country, not subject to the Dominion of those, that require a
portion of them. By this right, he changes strangely the scene of the world,
sometimes those that are high, are reduced to a mean and ignominious condition,
those that are mean, are advanced to a state of Plenty and Glory. The Counter
which in accounting signifies now but a penny, is presently raised up to
signify a pound. The proud Ladies of Israel instead of a Girdle of curious
needle work, are brought to make use of a Cord; as the vulgar Translates Rent,
a rag or list of Cloth. Isaiah 3.24. And Sackcloth for a stomacher instead of
Silk. This is the Sovereign act of God, as he is Lord of the world. Psalm. 71.6,
7. Promotion comes neither from the East, nor from the West, nor from the
South, but God is Judge, he pulls down one, and sets up another. He does no
wrong to any man, if he lets him languish out his days in poverty, and
disgrace. If he gives, or takes away, he meddles with nothing, but what is his
own more than ours. If he did dispense his benefits equally to all, men would
soon think it their due. The inequality and changes preserve the notion of Gods
Sovereignty, and correct our natural unmindfulness of it; if there were no
changes, God would not be feared as the King of all the Earth. Psalm. 55.19. To
this might also be referred his investing some Countries with greater Riches in
their Bowels and on the surface. The disposing some in the fruitful and
pleasant Regions of Canaan or Italy, while he settles others in the Icy and
barren parts of the Northern Climates.

8. His Sovereignty is manifest in the times and seasons of dispensing his
Goods. He is Lord of the times when, as well as of the Goods which he does
dispose of to any person; these the Father has put in his own power. Acts.
1.7. As it was his Sovereign pleasure, to restore the Kingdom to Israel, so he
would pitch upon the time, when to do it, and would not have his right invaded,
so much as by a question out of curiosity. This disposing of opportunities, in
many things come be referred to nothing else but his Sovereign pleasure. Why
should Christ come at the twilight and evening of the World, at the fullness,
and not at the beginning of time? Why he should be from the infancy of the
world, so long wrapped up in a promise, and not appear in the flesh till the last
times and gray hairs of the world, when so many persons in all Nations had been
hurryed out of the world without any notice of such a Redeemer? What was this
but his Sovereign will? Why the Gentiles should be left so long in the Devils
chains, wallowing in the sink of their abominable superstitions, since God had
declared his intention by the Prophets, to call multitudes of them, and reject
the Jews? Why he should defer it so long, can be referred to nothing but the
same cause? What is the reason the vail continues so long upon the heart of the
Jews, that is promised, one time or other, to be taken off? Why does God delay
the accomplishment of those glorious predictions of the happiness and interest
of that people, is it because of the sin of their Ancestors, a reason that
cannot bear much weight. If we cast it upon that account, their conversion can
never be expected, can never be effected; if for the sins of their Ancestors,
is it not also for their own sins? Do their sins grow less in number, or less
venomous, or provoking in quality by this delay? Is not their Blasphemy of
Christ as malicious, their hatred of him as strong, and rooted, as ever? Do
they not as much approve of the bloody act of their Ancestors, since so many
ages are past, as their Ancestors did applaud it at the time of the Execution?
Have they not the same disposition and will, discovered sufficiently by the
scorn of Christ, and of those that profess his Name, to act the same thing over
again, were Christ now in the same state in the world, and they invested with
the same power of Government? If their Conversion were deferred one age after
the death of Christ for the sins of their pr^ceding Ancestors, is it to be
expected now, since the present generation of the Jews in all Countries have
the sins of those remote, the succeeding, and their more immediate Ancestors
lying upon them. This therefore cannot be the reason, but as it was the
Sovereign pleasure of God to foretell his intention, to overcome the stoutness
of their hearts, so it is his Sovereign pleasure, that it shall not be
performed, till the fullness of the Gentiles be come in. Romans 11.25. As he is
Lord of his own Grace, so he is Lord of the Time, when to dispense it. Why did
God create the world in 6 days, which he could have erected, and beautified in
a moment? Because it was his pleasure so to do. Why did he frame the World,
when he did, and not many ages before? Because he is Master of his own work.
Why did he not resolve to bring Israel to the fruition of Canaan till after
four hundred years? Why did he draw out their deliverance to so long time after
he began to attempt it? Why such a multitude of Plagues upon Pharaoh to work
it, when he could have cut short the work by one mortal blow upon the Tyrant
and his accomplices? It was his Sovereign pleasure to act so, though not
without other reasons intelligible enough by looking into the story. Why does
he not bring man to a perfection of stature in a moment after his Birth, but
let him continue in a tedious infancy in a semblance to beasts for want of an
exercise of reason? Why does he not bring this or that man, whom he intends for
service to a fitness in an instant but by long tracts of Study, and through
many Meanders and Labyrinths? Why does he transplant a hopeful person in his
youth to the pleasures of another World, and let another of an eminent
Holiness, continue in the misery of this, and wade through many Floods of
Afflictions? What can we chiefly refer all these things to, but his
Sovereign pleasure. The times are determined by God. Acts 17.26.

3. The Dominion of God is manifested as a Governor, as well as a Lawgiver and
Proprietor.

1. In disposing of States and Kingdoms. Psa;l. 75.7. God is Judge, he pulls
down one, and sets up another; Judge is to be taken not in the same sense, that
we commonly use the word for a judicial Minister in a way of trial, but for a
Governor; as you know the extraordinary Governors raised up among the Jews,
were called Judges, whence one entire Book in the Old Testament is so
denominated, the Book of Judges. God has a Prerogative, to change times and
seasons. Dan. 2.21. i. e. The Revolutions of Government, whereby times are
altered. Mr. Mede in one of his Letters.
How many Empires that have spread their wings over a great part of the world,
have had their Carcasses torn in pieces; and unheard off Nations plucked of the
wings of the Roman Eagle, after it had preyed upon many Nations of the World?
And the Macedonian Empire was as the dew, that is dried up a short time after
it falls. He erected the Chaldaean Monarchy, used Nebuchadnezzar to overthrow
and punish the ungrateful Jews; and by a Sovereign act gave a great parcel of
Land into his hands; and what he thought was his right by conquest, was Gods
donative to him. You may read the Chart^r to Nebuchadnezzar, whom he terms his
Servant. Jer. 27.6. And now I have given all those Lands, the Lands are
mentioned, verse 3. Into the hands of Nebuchadnezzar the King of Babylon my
Servant. Which Decree he pronounces after his asserting his right of
Sovereignty over the whole Earth. ver. 5. After that, he puts a period to the
Chaldaean Empire, and by the same Sovereign Authority decrees Babylon to be a
spoil to the Nations of the North Country, and delivers her up as a spoil to
the Persian. Jer. 50.9, 10. And this for the manifestation of his Sovereign
Dominion, that he was the Lord, that made peace, and created evil. Isaiah 45.6,
7. God afterward overthrows that by the Grecian Alexander, prophesied of under
the figure of a Goat, with one horn between his Eyes. Dan. 8. The swift current
of his Victories, as swift as his motion showed it to be from an extraordinary
hand of Heaven, and not either from the policy or strength of the Macedonian.
His strength in the Prophet is described to be less, being but one horn running
against the Persian described under the figure of a Ramm with two horns
Josephus.
. And himself acknowledged a Divine motion exciting him to that great attempt,
when he saw Joddus the High Priest, coming out in his Priestly Robes, to meet
him at his approach to Jerusalem; whom he was about to Worship, acknowledging
that the Vision, which put him upon the Persian War, appeared to him in such a
garb. What was the reason Israel was rent from Judah, and both split into two
distinct Kingdoms? Because Rehoboam would not hearken to sober and sound
Counsels, but follow the advice of upstarts. What was the reason he did not
harken to sound advice, since he had so advantageous an Education under his
Father Solomon the wisest Prince of the World? The Cause was from the Lord. 1
Kings 12.15. That he might perform, what he had before spoke. In this he acted
according to his Royal Word, but in the first resolve he acted as a Sovereign
Lord that had the disposal of all Nations in the world. And though Ahab had a
numerous posterity, Seventy Sons to inherit the Throne after him, yet God by
his Sovereign Authority gives them up into the hands of Jehu, who strips them
of their lives and hopes together; not a man of them succeeded in the Throne,
but the Crown is transferred to Jehu by Gods disposal.

In Wars, whereby flourishing Kingdoms are overthrown, God has the chief
hand; in reference to which it is observed, that in the two Prophets, Isaiah
and Jeremy, God is called the Lord of Hosts 130 times. It Is not the Sword of
the Captain, but the Sword of the Lord, bears the first rank; The Sword of the
Lord and of Gideon. Judge. 7.18. The Sword of a Conqueror is the Sword of the
Lord, and receives its Charge and Commission from the great Sovereign. Jerem.
47.6, 7. We are apt, to confine our thoughts to second Causes, lay the fault
upon the miscarriages of persons, the Ambition of the one, and the Covetousness
of another, and regard them not as the effects of Gods sovereign Authority,
linking second Causes together, to serve his own purpose. The skill of one man
may lay open the folly of a Counselor, an earthly force may break in pieces
the power of a mighty Prince. But Job in his consideration of those things,
referrs the matter higher. Job 12.18. He loses the bond of Kings, and girdeth
their Loins with a girdle. He loses the Bonds of Kings, i. ^, takes off the
yokes, they lay upon their Subjects; and girds their Loins with a girdle; A
Cord as the Vulgar; he lays upon them those fetters they framed for others,
such a girdle or band as is the mark of Captivity, as the words ver. 19.
confirm it. He leads Princes away spoiled, and overthrows the mighty. God lifts
up some to a great height, and casts down others to a disgraceful ruin. All
those changes in the face of the World, the revolutions of Em^ires* the
desolating and ravaging wars which are often immediately the birth of the Vice,
Ambition, and fury of Princes, are the Royal Acts of God as Governor of the
World. All Government belongs to him, he is the Fountain of all the Great and
the Petty Dominions in the World: And therefore may place in them what
substitutes and Vicegerents he pleases; As a Prince may remove his Officers at
pleasure, and take their Commissions from them. The highest are settled by God,
durante been placito, and not quamdiu been se g^ss^rint. Those Princes that
have been the Glory of their Country, have swayed the Scepter but a short time,
when the more Wolvish ones have remained long^r in Commission, as God has seen
fit for the ends of his own Sovereign Government. Now by the revolutions in the
World and Changes in Governors and Government, God keeps up the acknowledgment
of his Sovereignty, when he does arrest grand and public offenders, that wear
a Crown by his Providence, and employ it by their pride against him, that
placed it there. When he arraigns such by a signal hand from Heaven, he makes
them the public examples of the rights of his Sovereignty, declaring thereby,
that the Cedars of Lebanon are as much at his foot, as the Shrubs of the
Valley; that he has as Sovereign an Authority over the Throne in the Palace,
as over the Stool in the Cottage.

2. The Dominion of God is manifested in raising up and ordering the Spirits of
men according to his pleasure. He does, as the Father of Spirits, communicate
an influence to the Spirits of men as well as an existence; he puts what
inclinations he pleases into the will, stores it with what habits he please,
whither natural or supernatural, whereby it may be rendered more ready to act
according to the divine purpose. The will of man is a finite principle, and
therefore subject to him who has an infinite Sovereignty over all things; and
God having a Sovereignty over the will in the manner of its acting, as causes
it to will, what he wills, as to the outward act, and the outward manner of
performing it. There are many examples of this part of his Sovereignty. God by
his Sovereign conduct, ordered Moses a Protectoress as soon as his Parents had
formed an Ark of Bulrushes, wherein to set him floting on the River. Exodus 2.3,
4.5.6. They expose him to the waves, and the waves expose him to the view of
Pharoahs Daughter, whom God by his secret ordering her motion, had posted in
that place; and though she was the Daughter of a Prince, that inveterately
hated the whole Nation, and had by various Arts endeavored to extirpate them;
yet God inspires the Royal Lady with sentiments of compassion to the forlorn
Infant, though she knew him to be one of the Hebrews Children, ver. 6. i. e.
one of that race, whom her Father had devoted to the hands of an Executioner,
yet God that does by his Sovereignty rule over the Spirits of all men, moves
her to take that Infant into her protection, and nourish him at her own charge,
give him a liberal Education, Adopt him her Son, who in time was to be the ruin
of her race, and the Savior of his Nation. Thus he appointed Cyrus to be his
Shepherd, and gave him a Pastoral Spirit for the Restoration of the City, and
Temple of Jerusalem. Isaiah 44.28. And Isaiah 45.5. Tells them in the
Prophecy, that he had girded him, though Cyrus had not known him, i. e. God
had given him a military Spirit and strength for so great an attempt, though he
did not know, that he was acted by God for those divine purposes. And when the
time came, for the House of the Lord to be rebuilt, the Spirits of the people
were raised up not by themselves, but by God. Ezra 1.5. Whose Spirit God had
raised to go up. And not only the Spirit of Zerubbabel the Magistrate, and of
Joshua the Priest, but the Spirit of all the people, from the highest to the
meanest that attended him, were acted by God* to strengthen their hands, and
promote the work. Hag. 1.14. The Spirits of men, even in those works which are
naturally desirable to them, as the Restoration of the City, and rebuilding of
the Temple was to those Jews, are acted by God, as the sovereign over them,
much more when the wheels of men's spirits are lifted up above their ordinary
temper and motion. It was this Empire of God, good Nehemiah regarded, as that
whence he was to hope for success; he did not assure himself so much of it,
from the favor he had with the King, nor the reasonableness of his intended
Petition, but the absolute power God had over the heart of that great Monarch:
And therefore he supplicates the heavenly, before he petitioned the earthly
Throne. Nehem. 2.4. So I prayed to the God of Heaven. The Heathens had some
glance of this; it is an expression that Cicero has some where, That the Roman
Commonwealth was rather Governed by the Assistance of the supreme Divinity over
the Hearts of Men, than by their own Counsels and Management. How often has
the feeble courage of men been heightened to such a pitch, as to stare death in
the face, which before were dampt with the least thought or glance of it? This
is a fruit of Gods sovereign Dominion.

3. The Dominion of God is manifest in restraining the furious passions of men,
and putting a block in their way. Sometimes God does it by a remarkable hand,
as the Babel builders were diverted from their proud design by a sudden
confusion of their Language, and rendering it unintelligible to one another;
sometimes by ordinary, though unexpected, means; as when Saul like a Hawk was
ready to prey upon David, whom he had hunted as a Patridge upon the Mountains,
he had another object presented for his arms and fury by the Philistines
sudden invasion of a part of his Territory, 1 Samuel 23.26, 27, 28. But it is
chiefly seen by an inward curbing mutinous affections, when there is no visible
Cause. What reason but this can be rendered, why the Nations bordering on
Canaan, who bore no good will to the Jews, but rather wished the whole race of
them rooted out from the face of the Earth, should not invade their Country,
pillage their Houses, and plunder their Cattle, while they were left naked of
any humane defense, the Males being annually employed at one time at Jerusalem
in Worship; what reason can be rendered, but an invisible curb God put into
their Spirits? What was the reason not a man of all the Buyers and Sellers in
the Temple should rise against our Savior, when with a high hand he began to
whip them out; but a Divine bridle upon them? though it appears by the
questioning his Authority, that there were Jews enough to have chased out him,
and his Company. John 2 15.18. What was the reason that at the publishing the
Gospel by the Apostles at the first descent of the spirit, those that had used
the Master so barbarously a few days before, were not all in a foam against the
Servants, that by preaching that Doctrine upbraided them with the late Murder?
Had they better sentiments of the Lord, whom they had put to death? Were their
natures grown tamer, and their malignity expelled? No, but that sovereign who
had loosed the Reins of their malicious corruption, to execute the Master for
the purchase of Redemption, curbed it from breaking out against the servants,
to further the propagation of the Doctrine of Redemption. He that restrains the
roaring Lion of Hell, restrains also his Whelps on Earth; he, and they must
have a Commission, before they can put forth a finger, to hurt, how malicious
soever their nature and Will be. His Empire reaches over the Malignity of
Devils, as well as the nature of Beasts. The Lions out of the Den, as well as
those in the Den, are bridled by him in favor of his Daniel's. His Dominion is
above that of Principalities and Powers, their Decrees are at his Mercy,
whither they shall stand or fall; he has a vote above their stiffest resolves.
His single word I will, or I forbid outweighs the most resolute purposes of all
the Mighty Nimrods of the Earth in their rendezvouses, and Cabals, in their
Associations and Counsels. Isaiah 8.9, 10. Associate your selves, O ye people,
and ye shall be broken in pieces, take Counsel together, and it shall come to
naught. When the Enemy shall come in like a flood, with a violent and
irresistible force, intending nothing but ravage and desolation, the Spirit of
the Lord shall lift up a standard against them, Isaiah 59.19. shall give a
sudden check and damp their Spirits, and put them to a stand. When Laban
furiously pursued Jacob with an intent to do him an ill turn, God gave him a
Command to do otherwise, Genesis 31.24. Would Laban have respected that command
any more, than he did the light of Nature, when he Worshipped Idols, had not
God exercised his Authority, in inclining his will to observe it, or laying
restraints upon his natural inclinations, or denying his concourse to the
acting those ill intentions, he had entertained? The stilling the principles of
commotion in men, and the noise of the Sea, are arguments of the Divine
Dominion, neither the one, nor the other, is in the power of the most sovereign
Prince without Divine assistance. As no Prince can command a calm to a raging
Sea, so no Prince can order stillness to a tumultuous people; they are both put
together as equally parts of the Divine prerogative, Psalm. 65.7. Which stills
the noise of the Sea, and tumult of the People. And David owns Gods sovereignty
more than his own, in subduing the people under him, Psalm. 18.47. In this his
Empire is illustrious, Psalm. 29.10. The Lord sits upon the floods, yea, the
Lord sits King for ever; a King impossible to be deposed; not only on the
natural floods of the Sea, that would naturally overflow the World; but the
metaphorical floods or tumults of the people, the Sea in every wicked man's
Heart, more apt to rage morally, than the Sea to foam naturally; if you will
take the interpretation of an Angel, Waters and Floods in the Prophetic style
signify the inconstant and mutable people. Revel. 17.1.5. The Waters where the
whore sits, are people, and multitudes, and nations, and tongues. So the Angel
expounds to John the Vision, which he saw ver. 1. The Heathens acknowledged
this part of Gods sovereignty in the inward restraints of Men. Those
Apparitions of the Gods, and Goddesses in Homer to several of the great men,
when they were in a Fury, were nothing else in the Judgment of the wisest
Philosophers, than an exercise of Gods sovereignty in quelling their passions,
checking their uncomely intentions, and controuling them in that which their
rage prompted them to. And indeed did not God set bounds to the storms in men's
hearts, we should soon see the Funeral not only of Religion, but Civility; the
one would be blown out, and the other torn up by the Roots.

4. The Dominion of God is manifest in defeating the purposes and devices of
men. God often makes a mock of humane projects, and does as well accomplish
that which they never dreamt of, as disappoint that which they confidently
designed. He is present at all Cabals, laughs at men's formal and studied
Counsels, bears a hand over every Egg they hatch, thwarts their best compacted
designs, supplants their contrivances, breaks the Engines they have been many
years rearing, diverts the intentions of men, as a mighty Wind blows an arrow
from the mark, which the Archer intended. Job 5.12. He disappointeth the
devices of the crafty, so that their hands cannot perform their enterprise. He
takes the wise in their own craftiness, and the Council of the froward is
carried headlong. Enemies often draw an exact scheme of their intended
proceedings, Marshal their Companies, appoint their Rendezvous, think to make
but one morsel of those they hate; God by his sovereign Dominion turns the
scale, changes the gloominess of the oppressed into a Sunshine, and the
Enemies Sunshine into darkness. When the Nations were gathered together
against Sion, and said, Let her be defiled, and let our Eye look upon Sion.
Micah 4.11. What does God do in this case? Ver. 12. He shall gather them. i. e.
Those conspiring Nations, as sheaves into the floor; then he sounds a Trumpet
to Sion, Arise and thresh O Daughter of Sion, for I will make thy Horn Iron,
and thy Hoofs Brass, and thou shall beat in pieces many people: And I will
consecrate their gain unto the Lord, and their substance unto the Lord of the
whole Earth. I will make them, and their Councels, them, and their strength,
the monuments and signal marks of my Empire over the whole Earth.

When you see the cunningest designs baffled by some small thing intervening,
when you see men of profound Wisdom infatuated, mistake their way, and grope in
the noon day as in the night. Job 5.14. bewildred in a plain way. When you see
the hopes of mighty attempters dashed into despair, their triumphs turned into
funerals, and their joyful expectations into sorrowful disappointments; when
you see the weak devoted to destruction, victorious, and the most presumptuous
defeated in their purposes, then read the divine Dominion in the desolation of
such devices. How often does God take away the Heart and Spirit of grand
designs, and burst a mighty wheel, by snatching but one man out of the World?
How often does he cut off the spirits of Princes, Psalm. 76.12. either from the
World by death, or from the execution of their projects by some unforeseen
interruption, or from favoring those contrivances, which before they
cherished, by a change of their minds? How often has confidence in God, and
religious Prayer, edged the weakest and smallest number of weapons, to make a
carnage of the carnally confident? How often has presumption been
disappointed, and the contemned Enemy rejoiced in the spoils of the proud
expectant of victory. Causin, symb. lib. 2. cap. 65.
Phydias made the Image of Nemesis or revenge at Marathon, of that Marble,
which the haughty Persians despising the weakness of the Athenian forces,
brought with them, to erect a Trophy for an expected, but an ungain'd victory.
Hamans neck by a sudden turn was in the Halter, when the Jews necks were
designed to the block. Julian designed the overthrow of all the Christians,
just before his breast was peirced by an unexpected Arrow. The Powder-Traytors
were all ready to give fire to the Mine, when the Sovereign hand of Heaven
snatched away the match. Thus the great Lord of the World cuts off men on the
pinnacle of their designs, when they seem to threaten Heaven and Earth. Puts out
the Candle of the wicked, which they thought to use to light them to the
execution of their purposes; turns their own Counsels into a curse to
themselves, and a blessing to their Adversaries, and makes his greatest Enemies
contribute to the effecting his purposes. How may we take notice of Gods
absolute disposal of things in private affairs, when we see one man with a
small measure of Prudence, and little Industry have great success, and others
with a greater measure of Wisdom, and greater toil and labor, find their
enterprises melt between their fingers? It was Solomon's observation, That the
race was not to the swift, nor the battle to the strong, neither bread to the
wise, nor riches to men of understanding, nor yet favor to men of skill.
Eccles. 9.11.

Many things might interpose to stop the swift in his race, and damp the
courage of the most valiant. Things do not happen according to men's ability,
but according to the overruling Authority of God. God never yet granted man
the dominion of his own way, no more than to be Lord of his own time; the way
of man is not in himself, it is not in him that walks to direct his steps.
Jerem. 10.23. He has given man a power of acting, but not the sovereignty to
command success. He makes even those things, which men intended for their
security, to turn to their ruin. Pilate delivered up Christ, to be accounted a
friend to Caesar, and Caesar soon after proves an Enemy to him, removes him
from his Government, and sends him into banishment. The Jews imagined by the
crucifying Christ to keep the Roman Ensigns at a distance from them, and this
hasted their march by Gods sovereign disposal, which ended in a total
desolation. He makes the Judges fools. Job 12.17. by taking away his light from
their understanding, and suffering them to go on in the vanity of their own
Spirits; that his sovereignty in the management of things may be more apparent:
For then he is known to be Lord, when he snares the wicked in the work of his
own hands. Psalm. 9.16. You have seen much of this doctrine in your experience;
and if my judgment fail me not, you will yet see much more.

5. The Dominion of God is manifest in sending his Judgments upon whom he
please. He kills, and makes alive, he wounds, and heals whom he pleases. His
thunders are his own, and he may cast them upon what subjects he thinks good.
He has a right in a way of Justice to punish all men, he has his choice in a
way of Sovereignty, to pick out whom he please, to make the examples of it.
Might not some Nations be as wicked as those of Sodom and Gomorrah, yet have
not been scorcht with the like dreadful flames? Zoar was untoucht, while the
other Cities her Neighbors were burnt to ashes. Were there never any places
and persons successors in Sodoms guilt? Yet those only by his Sovereign
Authority are separated by him, to be the examples of his Eternal vengeance.
Jude 7. Why are not sinners as Sodom, like as those ancient ones, scalded to
death by the like fiery drops: it is because it is his pleasure; and the same
reason is to be rendered, why he would in a way of Justice cut off the Jews for
their sins, and leave the Gentiles untoucht in the midst of their Idolatries.
When the Church was consumed because of her iniquities, they acknowledged Gods
Sovereignty in this. Isaiah 64.7, 8. We are the Clay, and thou art our Potter,
and we all the work of thy hands; thou have a liberty either to break, or
preserve us. Judgments move according to Gods order. When the Sword has a
charge against Askelon and the Sea shore, thither it must march, and touch not
any other place or person, as it goes, though there may be demerit enough for
it to punish. Jer. 47.6, 7. When the Prophet had spoke to the Sword, Oh thou
Sword of the Lord, how long will it be, ^re thou be quiet? Put up thy self into
thy scabbard, rest and be still. The Prophet answers for the Sword, how can it
be quiet, seeing the Lord has given it a charge against Askelon, there has he
appointed it? If he has appointed a judgment against London, or Westminster,
or any other place, there it shall drop, there it shall pierce, and in no other
place without a like charge. God as a Sovereign, gives instructions to every
Judgment, when, and against whom it shall march, and what Cities, what Persons,
it shall arrest; and he is punctually obeyed by them as a Sovereign Lord. All
Creatures stand ready for his call, and are prepared to be Executioners of his
vengeance, when he speaks the word; they are his Hosts by Creation, and in
array for his service; at the sound of his Trumpet, or beat of his Drum, they
troop together with their Arms in their hands, to put his Orders exactly in
execution.

6. The Dominion of God is manifest, in appointing to every man his calling and
station in the World. If the hairs of every man's head fall under his Sovereign
care, the Calling of every man, wherein he is to glorify God, and serve his
Generation, which is of a greater concern than the hairs of the head, falls
under his Dominion. He is the Master of the great Family; and divides to every
one his work as he pleases. The whole work of the Messiah, the time of every
action, as well as the hour of his Passion was ordered, and appointed by God.
The separation of Paul to the Preaching of the Gospel, was by the Sovereign
disposal of God, Romans 1.1. By the same exercise of his Authority, that he sets
every man the bounds of his habitation, Acts 17.26. he prescribes also to him
the nature of his work. He that ordered Adam, the Father of mankind his work,
and the place of it, the dressing the Garden. Genesis 2.15. does not let any of
his posterity be their own choosers, without an influence of his Sovereign
direction on them. Though our Callings are our work, yet they are by Gods
order, wherein we are to be faithful to our great Master and Ruler.

7. The Dominion of God is manifest in the means and occasions of men's
Conversion. Sometimes one occasion, sometimes another, one word lets a man go,
another arrests him, and brings him before God, and his own Conscience; it is as
God gives out the order. He lets Paul be a Prisoner at Jerusalem, that his
cause should not be determined there, moves him to appeal to Caesar, not only
to make him a Prisoner but a Preacher in Caesar's Court, and render his chains
an occasion to bring in a Harvest of Converts in Nero's Palace. 1 Phil. 12.13.
His bonds in or for Christ are manifest in all the Palace, not the bare
knowledge of his bonds, but the sovereign design of God in those Bonds, and the
success of them; the bare knowledge of them would not make others more
confident for the Gospel, as it follows v. 14. without a providential design of
them. Onesimus running from his Master, is guided by Gods sovereign order into
Paul's Company, and thereby into Christ's arms, and he who came a fugitive,
returns a Christian. Phil. 10.15. Some by a strong affliction, have had by the
Divine sovereignty their understandings awakened to consider, and their wills
spirited to conversion. Monica being called Meribibula or toss-pot, was brought
to consider her way, and reform her Life. A word has done that at one time,
which has often before fallen without any fruit. Many have come to suck in the
Eloquence of the Minister, and have found in the Honey for their Ears a sting
for their Consciences. Austin had no other intent in going to hear Ambrose, but
to have a taste of his famous Oratory; but while Ambrose spoke a Language to his
Ear, God spoke a heavenly Dialect to his heart. No reason can be rendered of
the order and timing, and influence of those things, but the sovereign pleasure
of God, who will attend one occasion and season with his blessing and not
another.

8. The Dominion of God is manifest in disposing of the Lives of men. He keeps
the key of Death, as well as that of the Womb in his own hand; he has given
man a Life, but not power to dispose of it, or lay it down at his pleasure: And
therefore he has ordered man not to murder, not another, not himself, man must
expect his call and grant, to dispose of the Life of his Body. Why does he cut
the thread of this man's Life, and spin another out to a longer term? Why does
one die an inglorious death, and another more honorable? One silently drops
away in the multitude, while another is made a Sacrifice for the Honor of God,
or the safety of his Country. This is a mark of Honor he gives to one and not
to another. Phil. 1.29. To you it is given. The manner of Peter's death was
appointed. John 21.19. Why does a small and slight Disease against the Rules of
Physic, and the Judgment of the best Practitioners, dislodge one man's Soul out
of his Body, while a greater Disease is mastered in another, and discharges the
Patient, to enjoy himself a longer time in the Land of the Living? Is it the
effect of means so much, as of the sovereign disposer of all things? If means
only did it, the same means would always work the same effect, and sooner master
a dwarfish than a Gyant-like Distemper. Our times are only in Gods hands, Psalm.
31.15. Either to cut short, or continue long. As his sovereignty made the first
Marriage knot, so he reserves the sole Authority to himself to make the Divorce.

4. The Dominion of God is manifest in his being a Redeemer, as well as
Lawgiver, Proprietor and Governor. His Sovereignty was manifest in the
Creation in bestowing upon this or that part of matter a form more excellent
than upon another. He was a Lawgiver to Men and Angels, and prescribed them
rules according to the Council of his own Will. These were his Creatures and
perfectly at his disposal; but in Redemption a sovereignty is exercised over
the Son, the second Person in the Trinity, one equal with the Father in essence
and works, by whom the worlds were created, and by whom they do consist. The
whole Gospel is nothing else but a declaration of his sovereign pleasure
concerning Christ and concerning us in him; it is therefore called the Mystery
of his Will, Ephesians. 1.9. The Will of God as distinct from the Will of Christ, a
purpose in himself, not moved thereunto by any; the whole design was framed in
the Deity, and as much the purpose of his sovereign Will, as the contrivance of
his immense Wisdom. He decreed in his own pleasure, to have the second person
assume our Nature for to deliver mankind from that misery, whereinto it was
fallen: The whole of the Gospel and the Privileges of it are in that chapter
resolved into the will and pleasure of God.

God is therefore called the head of Christ, 1 Cor. 11.3. As Christ is superior
to all men, and the man superior to the woman, so is God superior to Christ,
and of a more eminent dignity; in regard of the constituting him mediator,
Christ is Subject to God, as the Body to the Head. Head is a Title of
Government and Sovereignty, and Magistrates were called the heads of the
People. As Christ is the head of Man, so is God the head of Christ, and as man
is subject to Christ, so is Christ subject to God; not in regard of the Divine
Nature, wherein there is an equality, and consequently no Dominion of
jurisdiction; nor only in his humane nature, but in the Economy of a Redeemer,
considered as one designed, and consenting to be incarnate, and take our flesh,
so that after this agreement, God had a sovereign right to dispose of him
according to the Articles consented to. In regard of his undertaking, and the
advantage he was to bring to the Elect of God upon the Earth, he calls God by
the solemn Title of his Lord, in that prophetic Psalm of him. Psalm. 16.2. Oh
my Soul, thou have said unto the Lord, thou art my Lord, my Goodness extends
not unto thee, but unto the Saints that are in the Earth. It seems to be the
speech of Christ in Heaven, mentioning the Saints on Earth as at a distance
from him. I can add nothing to the glory of thy Majesty, but the whole fruit of
my Mediation and Sufferings will redound to the Saints on Earth; and it may be
observed, that God is called the Lord of Hosts in the Evangelical Prophets
Isaiah, Haggai, Zachary, and Malachy, more in reference to this affair of
Redemption, and the deliverance of the Church, than for any other works of his
Providence in the World.

1. This Sovereignty of God appears, in requiring satisfaction for the sin of
man. Had he indulged man after his fall, and remitted his offense without a
just compensation for the injury he had received by his Rebellion, his
Authority had been vilified, man would always have been attempting against his
jurisdiction, there would have been a continual succession of Rebellions on
man's part, and if a continual succession of indulgences on Gods part, he had
quite disowned his Authority over man, and stripped himself of the flower of his
Crown; satisfaction must have been required sometime or other, from the person
thus rebelling, or some other in his stead; and to require it after the first
act of sin, was more preservative to the right of the Divine sovereignty, than
to do it after a multitude of repeated revolts. God must have laid aside his
Authority, if he had laid aside wholly the exacting punishment for the offense
of man.

2. This Sovereignty of God appears, in appointing Christ to this work of
Redemption. His sovereignty was before manifest over Angels and Men by the
right of Creation, there was nothing wanting to declare the highest charge of
it, but his ordering his own Son to become a mortal Creature; the Lord of all
things to become lower than those Angels, that had, as well as all other
things, received their being and beauty from him, and to be reckoned in his
death among the dust and refuse of the World: He by whom God created all
things, not only became a man, but a crucified man by the Will of his Father.
Gal. 1.4. Who gave himself for our sins according to the Will of God; to which
may refer that expression. Prove. 8.22. of his being possessed by God in the
beginning of his way. Possession is the Dominion of a thing invested in the
possessor; he was possessed indeed as a Son by eternal Generation. He was
possessed also in the beginning of his way or works of Creation as a Mediator
by special constitution; to this the expression, seems to refer, if you read
on to the end of verse 31. wherein Christ speaks of his rejoicing in the
habitable part of his Earth, the Earth of the great God, who had designed him
to this special work of Redemption. He was a Son by Nature, but a Mediator by
Divine Will; in regard of which Christ is often called Gods servant, which is a
relation to God as a Lord. God being the Lord of all things, the Dominion of
all things inferior to him is inseparable from him, and in this regard, the
whole of what Christ was to do, and did actually do, was acted by him as the
Will of God, and is expressed so by himself in the Prophecy, Psalm. 40.7. Lo I
come, verse 8. I delight to do thy will, which are put together, Heb. 10.7. Lo
I come to do thy Will O God. The designing Christ to this work was an act of
mercy, but founded on his sovereignty. His compassionate bowels might have
pitied us without his being sovereign, but without it could not have releived
us. It was the Counsel of his own will, as well as of his Bowels. None was his
Counselor, or perswader to that mercy he showed, Romans 11.34. Who has been his
Counselor, for it refers to that Mercy, in sending the deliverer out of Sion,
verse 26. as well as to other things, the Apostle had been discoursing of. As
God was at liberty to create, or not to create, so he was at liberty to Redeem
or not to Redeem, and at his liberty whither to appoint Christ to this work, or
not to call him out to it. In giving this order to his Son, his sovereignty was
exercised in a higher manner, than in all the orders and instructions he has
given out to Men or Angels, and all the employments he ever sent them upon.
Christ has names which signify an Authority over him. He is called an Angel,
and a Messenger, Mal. 3.1. An Apostle. Heb. 3.1. Declaring thereby, that God
has as much Authority over him, as over the Angels, sent upon his Messages, or
over the Apostles commissioned by His Authority, as he was considered in the
quality of Mediator.

3. This Sovereignty of God appears in transferring our sins upon Christ. The
Supreme Power in a Nation can only appoint or allow of a commutation of
punishment; It Is a part of Sovereignty, to transferr the penalty due to the
crime of one upon an other, and substitute a sufferer with the sufferers own
consent, in the place of a criminal, whom he had a mind to deliver from a
deserved punishment. God transferred the sins of men upon Christ, and inflicted
on him a punishment for them. He summed up the debts of man, charged them upon
the score of Christ, imputing to him the guilt, and inflicting upon him the
penalty. Isa. 53.6. The Lord has laid upon him the iniquity of us all; He made
them all to meet upon his back. He has made him to be sin for us. 2 Cor. 5.21.
He was made so by the Sovereign pleasure of God. A punishment for sin, as most
understand it, which could not be Righteously inflicted, had not sin been first
Righteously imputed by the consent of Christ, and the order of the Judge of the
World. This imputation could be the immediate act of none but God, because he
was the sole Creditor. A Creditor is not bound to accept of another's
suretiship, but it is at his liberty whither he will or no; and when he does
accept of him, he may challenge the Debt of him, as if he were the Principal
Debtor himself. Christ made himself sin for us, by a voluntary submission, and
God made him sin for us, by a full imputation, and treated him penally, as he
would have done those sinners in whose stead he suffered. Without this Act of
Sovereignty in God, we had for ever perished: For if we could suppose Christ
laying down his life for us without the pleasure and order of God, he could not
have been said to have born our punishment; What could he have undergone in his
Humanity, but a temporal death, but more than this was due to us, even the
wrath of God, which far exceeds the calamity of a mere bodily death? The Soul
being principal in the crime, was to be principal in the punishment. The wrath
of God could not have dropped upon his Soul, and rendered it so full of Agonies,
without the hand of God. A creature is not capable to reach the Soul, neither
as to comfort nor terror; and the Justice of God could not have made him a
sufferer, if it had not first considered him a sinner by imputation, or by
inhaerency and actual commission of a crime in his own person. The latter was
far from Christ, who was holy, harmless and undefiled. He must be considered
then in the other state of imputation, which could not be without a Sovereign
appointment, or at least concession of God: For without it, he could have had
no more Authority to lay down his life for us, than Abraham could have had to
have sacrificed his son, or any man to expose himself to death without a call;
Nor could any Plea have been entered in the Court of Heaven, either by Christ
for us, or by us for our selves. And though the death of so great a person had
been meritorious in it self, it had not been meritorious for us, or accepted
for us; Christ is delivered up by him, Romans 8.32. in every part of that
condition wherein he was, and suffered, and to that end, that we might become
the Righteousness of God in him. 2 Cor. 5.21. That we might have the
Righteousness of him that was God, imputed to us, or that we might have a
Righteousness as great, and proportioned to the Righteousness of God, as God
required. It was an act of Divine Sovereignty, to account him, that was
Righteous, a sinner in our stead, and to account us, who were sinners,
Righteous upon the merit of his death.

4. This was done by the command of God, by God as a Lawgiver, having the
supreme Legislative and Praeceptive Authority; In which respect, the whole work
of Christ is said to be an answer to a Law, not one given him, but put into his
heart, as the Law of nature was in the heart of man at first. Psalm. 40.7, 8.
Thy Law is within my heart. This Law was not the Law of Nature, or Moral Law,
though that was also in the heart of Christ, but the command of doing those
things which were necessary for our Salvation, and not a command so much of
doing, as of dying. The Moral Law in the heart of Christ would have done us no
good without the Mediatory Law; We had been where we were by the sole
observance of the Precepts of the Moral Law, without his suffering the penalty
of it. The Law in the heart of Christ was the Law of suffering, or dying, the
doing that for us by his death, which the blood of Sacrifices was unable to
effect. Legal Sacrifices thou would not, thy Law is within my heart. i. e.
thy Law ordered me to be a Sacrifice; It was that Law, his obedience to which
was principally accepted and esteemed, and that was principally his passive,
his obedience to death. Phil. 2.8. This was the special command received from
God, that he should dye. John 10.18. It Is not so clearly manifested, when this
command was given, whither after the incarnation of Christ, or at the point of
his constitution as Mediator, upon the transaction between the father and the
son concerning the affair of Redemption. The promise was given before the World
began. Tit. 1.2. Might not the Precept be given, before the World began, to
Christ, as considered in the quality of Mediator and Redeemer? Precepts and
Promises usually attend one another; Every Covenant is made up of both. Christ
considered here as the Son of God in the Divine Nature, was not capable of a
command or promise, but considered in the relation of Mediator between God and
Man, he was capable of both; Promises of Assistance were made before his actual
incarnation, of which the Prophets are full: why not Precepts for his
obedience, since long before his incarnation this was his speech in the
Prophet, thy Law is within my heart? However, a command, a law it was, which is
a fruit of the Divine Sovereignty: That as the Sovereignty of God was
impeached, and violated by the disobedience of Adam, it might be owned and
vindicated by the obedience of Christ; That as we fell by disloyalty to it, we
might rise by the highest submission to it in another head, infinitely superior
in his person to Adam, by whom we fell.

5. This Sovereignty of God appears, in exalting Christ to such a Sovereign
dignity as our Redeemer. Lessius de perfect. divin. lib. 10. p. 65.
Some indeed say, that this Sovereignty of Christ's Humane Nature was natural,
and the right of it resulted from its Union with the Divine, as a Lady of mean
condition, when Espoused and Married to a Prince, has by virtue of that a
natural right to some kind of jurisdiction over the whole Kingdom: because she
is one with the King. But to wave this, the Scripture places wholly the
conferring such an Authority upon the pleasure and will of God. As Christ was a
gift of God's Sovereign will to us, so this was a gift of God's Sovereign will
to Christ. Matt. 28.28. All power is given me. And he gave him to be head over
all things to the Church. Ephesians. 1.22. God gave him a name above every name.
Phil. 2.9. And therefore his Throne he sits upon, is called the Throne of his
Father. Rev. 3.21. And he committed all Judgment to the Son; i. e. All
Government and Dominion; An Empire in Heaven and Earth: Joh. 5.22. and that
because he is the son of Man. v. 27. which may be understood, that the Father
has given him Authority to exercise that Judgment and Government, as the son
of man, which he Originally had as the son of God; or rather because he became
a servant, and humbled himself to death, he gives him this Authority as the
reward of his Obedience and Humility, conformable to Phil. 2.9. This is an act
of the high Sovereignty of God, to obscure his own Authority in a sense, and
take into association with him, or vicarious subordination to him, the Humane
Nature of Christ as united to the Divine; Not only lifting it above the heads
of all the Angels, but giving that person in our nature an Empire over them,
whose nature was more excellent than ours. Yea the Sovereignty of God appears
in the whole management of this Kingly Office of Christ: for it is managed in
every part of it, according to God's order. Ezekiel. 37.24, 25. David my servant
shall be King over them, and my servant David shall be their Prince for ever.
He shall be a Prince over them, but my servant in that principality, in the
exercise and duration of it. The Sovereignty of God is paramount, in all that
Christ has done as a Priest, or shall do as a King.

The USE.
1. For Instruction.

1. How great is the contempt of this sovereignty of God? Man naturally would
be free from Gods Empire, to be a slave under the Dominion of his own lust. The
sovereignty of God as a Lawgiver is most abhorred by man. Levit. 26.43. The
Israelites, the best people in the World, were apt by nature, not only to
despise, but abhor his Statutes. There is not a Law of God but the corrupt
heart of man has an abhorrency of. How often do men wish, that God had not
enacted this or that Law that goes against the grain, and in wishing so* wish
that he were no sovereign, or not such a sovereign as he is in his own ^^ture,
but one according to their corrupt model. This is the great quarrel between God
and Man, whither he or they shall be the sovereign Ruler. He should not by the
Will of Man rule in any one Village in the World; Gods vote should not be
predominant in any one thing. There is not a Law of his, but is exposed to
contempt by the perverseness of Man. Prove. 1.21. Ye have set at naught all my
Counsel, and would have none of my reproof. Septuag. Ye have made all my
Counsels without Authority. The nature of man cannot endure one precept of God,
nor one rebuke from him: And for this cause God is at the expense of Judgments
in the World, to assert his own Empire to the Teeth and Consciences of men.
Psalm. 59.13. Lord consume them in wrath, and let them know that God rules in
Jacob, to the ends of the Earth. The Dominion of God is not slighted by any
Creature of this World but Man; all others observe it, by observing his Order,
whither in their natural motions or preternaral irruptions; they punctually act
according to their Commission. Man only speaks a Dialect against the strain of
the whole Creation, and has none to imitate him among all the Creatures in
Heaven and Earth, but only among those in Hell. Man is more impatient of the
yoke of God, than of the yoke of Man. There are not so many rebellions
committed by inferiors against their superiors and fellow Creatures, as are
committed against God. A willing and easy sinning is an equalling the
Authority of God to that of Man. Hos. 6.7. They like men have transgrest my
Covenant. Munster.
They have made no more account of breaking my Covenant, than if they had
broken some league or compact made with a mere man, so slightly do they esteem
the Authority of God. Such a disesteem of the divine Authority is a vertual
undeifying of him. To slight his sovereignty is to stab his Deity: Since the
one cannot be preserved without the support of the other, his life would expire
with his Authority. How base and brutish is it for vile dust and mouldring
clay, to lift up it self against the Majesty of God whose Throne is in the
Heavens, who sways his Scepter over all parts of the World? A Majesty before
whom the Devils shake, and the highest Cherubims tremble. It Is as if the
Thistle that can presently be trod down by the foot of a wild Beast, should
think it self a match for the Cedar of Lebanon, as the phrase is, 2 Kings 14.9.

Let us consider this in general, and also in the ordinary practice of men.

First, In General.

1. All sin in its nature is a contempt of the Divine Dominion. As every act of
Obedience is a confirmation of the Law, and consequently a subscription to the
Authority of the Lawgiver, Deuteronomy, 27.26. so every breach to it is a conspiracy
against the sovereignty of the Lawgiver; setting up our Will against the Will
of God is an Articling against his Authority, as setting up our reason against
the methods of God, is an Articling against his Wisdom; the intendment of every
act of sin, is to wrest the Scepter out of God's hand. The Authority of God is
the first attribute in the Deity, which it directs its edge against; it is
called therefore a transgression of his Law. 1 John 3.4. And therefore a slight
or neglect of the Majesty of God; and the not keeping his Commands, is called a
forgetting God. Deuteronomy. 8.11. i. e. a forgetting him to be our absolute Lord. As
the first notion we have of God as a Creator, is that of his Sovereignty, so
the first perfection that sin struck at in the violation of the Law, was his
sovereignty as a Lawgiver. Breaking the Law is a dishonouring God, Romans 2.23. a
Snatching off his Crown; to obey our own Wills before the Will of God, is to
prefer our selves as our own Sovereigns before him. Sin is a wrong and injury
to God, not in his Essence, that is above the reach of a Creature, nor in any
thing profitable to him, or pertaining to his own intrinsic advantage; not an
injury to God in himself but in his Authority, in those things which pertain to
his Glory, a disowning his due right, and not using his goods according to his
will. Thus the whole world may be called, as God calls Chaldea, a Land of
Rebels. Jer. 50.21. Go up against the Land of Merathaim, or Rebels: Rebels, not
against the Jews, but against God. The mighty opposition in the heart of man to
the Supremacy of God is discovered Emphatically by the Apostle. Romans 8.7. in
that expression, The carnal mind is enmity against God, i. e. against the
Authority of God: because it is not subject to the Law of God, neither indeed
can be. It refuses not subjection to this or that part, but to the whole; to
every mark of Divine Authority in it, it will not lay down its arms against it,
nay it cannot but stand upon its terms against it; the Law can no more be
fulfilled by a carnal mind, than it can be disowned by a sovereign God. God is
so Holy, that he cannot alter a Righteous Law, and man is so averse, that he
cares not for, nay cannot fulfill one Tittle; so much does the Nature of man
swell against the Majesty of God. Now an enmity to the Law which is in every
sin, implies a perversity against the Authority of God that enacted it.

2. All sin in its nature is the despoyling God of his sole sovereignty, which
was probably the first thing the Devil aimed at. That pride was the sin of the
Devil, the Scripture gives us some account of, when the Apostle advises not a
novice, or one that has but lately embraced the Faith, to be chosen a Bishop.
1 Timothy 3.6. Least being lifted up with Pride, he fall into the condemnation of
the Devil; Least he fall into the same sin, for which the Devil was condemned.
But in what particular thing this pride was manifest, is not so easily
discernable; the ancients generally conceived it, to be an affecting the Throne
of God, grounding it on Isaiah 14.12. How art thou fallen, O Lucifer, Son of
the morning! for thou have said in thy Heart, I will ascend into Heaven, I will
exalt my Throne above the Stars of God. It Is certain the Prophet speaks there
of the King of Babylon, and taxes him for his pride, and gives to him the
title of Lucifer, perhaps likning him in his Pride to the Devil, and then it
notes plainly the particular sin of the Devil, attempting a share in the
sovereignty of God; and some strengthen their conjecture from the Name of the
Archangel who contended against Satan. Jude 9. which is Michael, which
signifyes, who as God? or, who like God? The Name of the Angel giving the
superiority to God, intimating the contrary disposition in the Devil, against
whom he contended. It Is likely his sin was an affecting an equality with God in
Empire, or a freedom from the sovereign Authority of God: Because he imprinted
such a kind of persuasion on man at his first Temptation, Ye shall be as Gods,
Genesis 3.5. and though it be restrained to the matter of knowledge, yet that
being a fitness for Government, it may be extended to that also. But it is
plainly a persuading them, that they might be in some sort equal with God, and
independent on him as their Superior. What he had found so fatal to himself, he
imagined would have the same success in the ruin of man. And since the Devil
has in all ages of the World usurpt a Worship to himself, which is only due to
God, and would be served by man, as if he were the God of the World. Since all
his endeavor was to be Worshipped as the supreme God on Earth, it is not
unreasonable to think, that he invaded the Supremacy of God in Heaven, and
endeavored to be like the most high before his banishment, as he has
attempted to be like the Most High since. And since the Devil and Antichrist
are reputed by John in the Revelation to be so near of kin, and so like in
disposition, why might not that which is the sin of Antichrist, the image of
him, be also the sin of Satan, To exalt himself above all that is called God. 2
These. 2.4. and sit as God in his Temple, affecting a partnership in his Throne
and Worship? Whither it was this, or attempting an unaccountable Dominion over
created things, or because he was the Prime Angel, and the most illustrious of
that magnificent corporation, he might think himself fit to Reign with God,
over all things else? Or if his sin were envy, as some think at the felicity of
man in Paradise; It was still a quarrelling with God's Dominion, and right of
disposing his own goods and favors; He is therefore called Belial; 2 Cor.
6.14, 15. What concord has Christ with Belial, i. e. with the Devil, one
without yoke, as the word Belial signifies.

3. It Is more plain, that this was the sin of Adam. The first act of Adam was
to exercise a Lordship over the lower Creatures, in giving names to them, a
token of Dominion. Genesis 2.19. The next was, to affect a Lordship over God, in
rebelling against him; After he had writ the first mark of his own delegated
Dominion in the names he gave the Creatures, and owned their dependence on him
as their Governor, he would not acknowledge his own dependence on God. As soon
as the Lord of the World had put him into possession of the power he had
allotted him, he attempted to strip his Lord of that, which he had reserved to
himself; He was not content to lay a yoke upon the other Creatures, but
desirous to shake off the Divine Yoke from himself, and be subject to none but
his own will; Hence Adam's sin is more particularly called disobedience: Romans
5.19. For in the eating the apple, there was no Moral evil in it self, but a
contradiction to the positive command and order of God; whereby he did disown
Gods right of commanding him, or reserving any thing from him to his own use.
The Language all his Posterity speaks, Let us break his bands, and cast away
his cords from us, Psalm. 2.3. was learned from Adam in that act of his. The
next act we read of, was that of Cain's murdering Abel, which was an invading
God's right, in assuming an Authority to dispose of the Life of his Brother, a
Life which God had given him, and reserved the period of it in his own hands.
And he persists in the same usurpation, when God came to examine him, and ask
him where his Brother was, how scornful was his answer? Genesis 4.9. Am I my
Brother's Keeper? as much as if he had said, what have you to do to examine me?
or what obligation is there upon me, to render an account of him? Or as one
says, Trap. in loc.
It Is as much as if he had said, go look him your self. The Sovereignty of God
did not remain undisturbed as soon as ever it appeared in Creation, the Devils
rebelled against it in Heaven, and man would have banished it from the earth.

4. The Sovereignty of God has not been less invaded by the usurpations of
men. One single order of the Roman Episcopacy has endeavored to usurp the
prerogatives of God; The Pope will prohibit what God has allowed; The Marriage
of Priests, the receiving of the Cup as well as of the Bread in the Sacrament,
the eating of this or that sort of meat at special times, meats which God has
sanctified; and forbid them too upon pain of damnation. It Is an invasion of
God's right, to forbid the use of what God has granted, as though the earth,
and the fullness thereof were no longer the Lords, but the Popes; Much more to
forbid what God has commanded, as if Christ over-reacht his own Authority,
when he enjoined all to drink of the Sacramental Wine, as well as eat of the
Sacramental Bread, No Lord but will think his right usurpt by that Steward, who
shall permit to others what his Lord forbids, and forbid that which his Master
allows, and act the Lord instead of the Servant. Add to this the pardons of
many sins, as if he had the sole key to the treasures of Divine Mercy, the
disposing of Crowns and Dominions at his pleasute, as if God had divested
himself of the Title of King of Kings, and transferred it upon the Sea of Rome.
The allowing public Stews, dispensing with incestuous Marriages, as if God had
acted more the part of a Tyrant, than of a Righteous Sovereign in forbidding
them; Depriving the Jews of the propriety in their Estates upon their
Conversion to Christianity, as if the pilfering men's goods were the way to
teach them self-denial, the first Doctrine of Christian Religion, and God shall
have no honor from the Jew without a breach of his Law by theft from the
Christian. Granting many years indulgences upon slight performances, the
repeating so many Ave-Maries, and Pater-Nosters in a day, Canonizing Saints,
claiming the Keys of Heaven, and disposing of the honors and glory of it: And
proposing Creatures as objects of Religions Worship, wherein he answers the
Character of the Apostle, 2 These. 2.4. Showing himself that he is God, in
challenging that power which is only the right of Divine Sovereignty; exalting
himself above God, in indulging those things which the Law of God never
allowed, but has severely prohibited.

This controuling the Sovereignty of God, not allowing him the rights of his
Crown, is the Soul and Spirit of many errors. Why are the decrees of election
and praeterition denied? because men will not acknowledge God the Sovereign
disposer of his Creature. Why is effectual calling and efficacious grace
denied? because they will not allow God the proprietor and distributer of his
own goods. Why is the satisfaction of Christ denied? because they will not
allow God a power to vindicate his own Law, in what way he pleases. Most of
the errors of men may be resolved into a denial of God's Sovereignty; All have
a tincture of the first evil sentiment of Adam.

2. The Sovereignty of God is contemned in the practices of men.

1. As he is a Lawgiver.

1. When Laws are made, and urged in any State contrary to the Law of God. It Is
part of God's Sovereignty to be a Lawgiver; not to obey his Law is a breach
made upon his right of Government; But it is Treason in any against the Crown
of God, to Mint Laws with a stamp contrary to that of Heaven, whereby they
renounce their due subjection, and vy with God for Dominion; snatch the
supremacy from him, and account themselves more Lords than the Sovereign
Monarch of the World. When men will not let God be the Judge of good and evil,
but put in their own vote, controuling his, to establish their own; Such are
not content to be as Gods, subordinate to the supreme God, to sit at his feet;
Nor coordinate with him, to sit equal upon his Throne; but paramount to him,
to overtop, and shadow his Crown. A boldness that leaves the serpent in the
first temptation, under the Character of a more commendable modesty; who
advised our first Parents to attempt to be as Gods, but not above him, and
would enervate a Law of God, but not enact a contrary one to be observed by
them. Such was the usurpation of Nebuchadnezzar, to set up a Golden Image to be
adored, Dan. 3. as if he had power to mint Gods, as well as to conquer men; to
set the stamp of a Deity upon a piece of Gold, as well as his own Effigies upon
his current Coin. Much of the same nature was that of Darius, by the motion of
his flatterers, to prohibit any Petition to be made to God for the space of 30
days, as though God was not to have a Worship without a License from a doting
piece of clay. Dan. 6.7. Trap. in loc.
So Henry the Third of France, by his Edict silenced Masters of Families from
praying with their Houshoulds. And it is a farther contempt of God's Authority,
when good men are oppressed by the sole weight of power, for not observing such
Laws, Faucheur vol. 2. p. 663. 664.
as if they had a real Sovereignty over the Consciences of men, more than God
himself. When the Apostles were commanded by an Angel from God, to preach in
the Temple the Doctrine of Christ. Act. 5.19, 20. they were fetched from thence
with a Guard before the Council. v. 26. And what is the Language of those
Statesmen to them? as absolute as God himself could speak to any Transgressors
of his Law; ver. 28. Did not we straightly command you, that you should not teach
in this Name? It Is sufficient that we gave you a command to be silent, and
publish no more this Doctrine of Jesus; It Is not for you to examine our
decrees, but rest in our order as Loyal Subjects, and comply with your Rulers;
They might have added, though it be with the damnation of your souls. How would
those overruled the Apostles by no other reason but their absolute pleasure?
And though God had espoused their cause, by delivering them out of the Prison,
wherein they had locked them the day before; Yet not one of all this Council had
the wit, or honesty, to entitle it a fighting against God, but Gamaliel, ver.
39. So foolishly fond are men, to put themselves in the place of God, and usurp
a jurisdiction over men's Consciences; And to presume, that Laws made against
the interest and command of God, must be of more force than the Laws of God's
enacting.

2. The Sovereignty of God is contemned in making additions to the Laws of God.
The Authority of a Sovereign Lawgiver is invaded and vilified, when an
inferior presumes to make orders equivalent to his Edicts. It Is a Praemunire
against Heaven, to set up an Authority distinct from that of God, or to enjoin
any thing as necessary in matter of worship, for which a Divine Commission
cannot be shown. God was always so tender of this part of his prerogative, that
he would not have any thing wrought in the Tabernacle, not a Vessel, not an
instrument, but what himself had prescribed. Exodus 25.9. According to all that
I show thee, after the pattern of the Tabernacle, and the pattern of all the
Instruments thereof, even so shall ye make it, which is strictly urged again,
ver. 40. Look that thou make them after their pattern; Look to it, beware of
doing any thing of thine own head, and justling with my Authority. It was so
afterward in the matter of the Temple, which succeeded the Tabernacle; God
gave the model of it to David, and made him understand in writing by his hand
upon him, even all the works of this pattern. 1 Chronicles. 28.19. Neither the Royal
Authority in Moses, who was King in Jesurun; nor in David, who was a man after
God's own heart, and called to the Crown by a special and extraordinary
providence; nor Aaron and the High Priests his Successors invested in the
Sacerdotal Office, had any Authority from God, to do any thing in the framing
the Tabernacle or Temple of their own heads. God barred them from any thing of
that nature, by giving them an exact pattern, so dear to him was always this
flower of his Crown: And afterward, the power of appointing Officers, and
Ordinances in the Church was delegated to Christ, and was among the rest of
those Royalties given to him, which he fully completed for the edifying of the
body. Ephesians. 4.11, 12. And he has the Elogy by the Spirit of God, to be
faithful as Moses was in all his house, to him that appointed him. Heb. 3.2.
Faithfulness in a trust implies a punctual observing directions; God was still
so tender of this, that even Christ the son should no more do any thing in this
concern without appointment and pattern, than Moses a servant, ver. 5.6. It
seems to be a vote of nature, to referr the Original of the modes of all
worship to God: and therefore in all those varieties of Ceremonies among the
Heathens, there was scarce any, but were imagined by them to be the Dictates
and Orders of some of their pretended Deities, and not the resolves of mere
Humane Authority. What intrusion upon God's right has the Papacy made in
regard of Officers, Cardinals, Patriarchs, etc. not known in any Divine Order?
In regard of Ceremonies in worship, pressed as necessary to obtain the favor of
God, Holy Water, Crucifixes, Altars, Images, Cringings, reviving many of the
Jewish and Pagan Ceremonies, and adopting them into the Family of Christian
Ordinances; as if God had been too absolute and arbitrary in repealing the one,
and dashing in pieces the other. When God had by his Sovereign order framed a
Religion for the heart, men are ready to usurp an Authority to frame one for
the sense, to dress the Ordinances of God in new and gaudy habits, to take the
eye by a vain pomp; thus affecting a Divine Royalty, and acting a silly
childishness and after this to impose the observation of those upon the
Consciences of men, is a bold ascent into the Throne of God; To impose Laws
upon the Conscience, which Christ has not imposed, has deservedly been
thought the very Spirit of Antichrist; It may be called also the Spirit of
Anti-God. God has reserved to himself the sole Sovereignty over the
Conscience, and never indulged men any part of it; he has not given man a
power over his own Conscience, much less one man a power over another's
Conscience. Men have a power over outward things, to do this or that, where it
is determined by the Law of God, but not the least Authority to control any
dictate or determination of Conscience: The sole Empire of that is appropriate
to God, as one of the great marks of his Royalty. What an usurpation is it of
God's right, to make Conscience a slave to man, which God has solely, as the
father of Spirits, subjected to himself? An usurpation which though the
Apostles, those extraordinary Officers might better have claimed, yet they
utterly disowned any imperious dominion over the faith of others, 2 Cor. 1.24.
Though in this they do not seem to climb up above God, yet they set themselves
in the Throne of God, envy him an absolute Monarchy, would be sharers with him
in his Legislative power, and grasp one end of his Scepter in their own hands.
They do not pretend to take the Crown from Gods head, but discover a bold
ambition to shuffle their hairy Scalps under it, and wear part of it upon their
own, that they may rule with him, not under him; And would be joint Lords of
his Manor with him, who has by the Apostle forbidden any to be Lords of his
Heritage. 1 Pet. 5.3. And therefore they cannot assume such an Authority to
themselves, till they can show where God has resigned this part of his
Authority to them. If their Exposition of that place. Matthew. 16.18. Upon this
rock I will build my Church, be granted to be true, and that the person and
Successors of Peter are meant by that Rock, it could be no Apology for their
Usurpations; it is not Peter and his Successors shall build, but I will build;
others are instruments in building, but they are to observe the directions of
the grand Architect.

3. The Sovereignty of God is contemned, when men prefer Obedience to men's Laws
before Obedience to God. As God has an undoubted right as the Lawgiver and
Ruler of the World, to enact Laws, without consulting the pleasure of men, or
requiring their consent to the verifying, and establishing his Edicts, so are
men obliged by their Allegiance, as subjects, to observe the Laws of their
Creator, without consulting whither they be agreeable to the Laws of his
revolted Creatures. To consult with Flesh and Blood, whither we should obey, is
to Authorize Flesh and Blood above the purest and most sovereign spirit. When
men will obey their superiors, without taking in the condition the Apostle
prescribes to Servants. Col. 3.22. In singleness of heart fearing God; and
post-pone the fear of God to the fear of man; it is to render God of less power
with them than the drop of a Bucket, or dust of the Balance. When we out of
fear of punishment will observe the Laws of Men against the Laws of God, it is
like the Egyptians, to Worship a ravenous Crocodile instead of a Deity; when we
submit to humane Laws, and stagger at Divine, it is to set man upon the Throne
of God, and God at the footstool of man; to set man above, and God beneath, to
make him the tail, and not the head, as God speaks in another case of Israel.
Deuteronomy. 28.13. When we pay an outward observation to Divine Laws, because they
are backed by the Laws of Man, and humane Authority is the motive of our
observance, we subject Gods sovereignty to Man's Authority; what he has from
us, is more owing to the pleasure of men, than any value we have for the Empire
of God. When men shall commit Murders, and imbrue their hands in blood by the
order of a Grandee; when the worst sins shall be committed by the order of
Papal dispensations; When the use of his Creatures, which God has granted and
sanctified, shall be abstained from for so many days in the week, and so many
weeks in the year because of a Roman Edict; the Authority of man is
acknowledged not only equal, but superior to that of God: The dominion of dust
and clay is preferred before the undoubted right of the sovereign of the World:
The Commands of God are made less than humane, and the orders of men more
authoritative, than Divine, and a grand Rebels usurpation of Gods right is
countenanced. When men are more devout in observance of uncertain Traditions,
or mere humane inventions, than at the hearing of the unquestionable Oracles of
God. When men shall squeeze their countenances into a more serious figure, and
demean themselves in a more religious posture, at the appearance of some mock
Ceremony clothed in a Jewish or Pagan garb, which has unhappily made a rent in
the Coat of Christ; and pay a more exact reverence to that, which has no
Divine, but only a humane stamp upon it, than to the clear and plain Word of
God, which is perhaps neglected with sleepy nodds, or, which is worse,
entertained with profane scoffs; this is to prefer the Authority of man
employed in trifles, before the Authority of the wise Lawgiver of the World.
Besides, the ridiculousness of it is as great, as to adore a Glo-worm, and
laugh at the Sun; or for a Courtier to be more exact in his cringes and starcht
postures before a puppet, than before his sovereign Prince. In all this we make
not the Will and Authority of God our rule, but the Will of man; Disclaim our
dependence on God, to hang upon the uncertain breath of a Creature; in all this
God is made less than man, and man more than God. God is deposed, and man
enthroned, God made a slave, and man a sovereign above him. To this we may
refer the solemn Addresses of some for the maintenance of the Protestant
Religion according to Law, the Law of Man; not so much minding the Law of God;
resolving to make the Law, the Church, the State, the Rule of their Religion,
and change that, if the Laws be changed, steering their Opinions by the compass
of the Magistrates Judgment and Interest.

2. The Dominion of God as a Proprietor is practically contemned.

1. By Envy. When we are not as flush and gay, as well spread and sparkling as
others, this passion gnaws our Souls; and we become the Executioners to wrack
our selves, because God is the Executor of his own pleasure. The foundation of
this passion is a quarrel with God; to envy others the enjoyment of their
Propriety, is to envy God his right of disposal, and consequently the propriety
of his own Goods. It Is a mental Theft committed against God, we rob him of his
right in our will, and wish; it is a Robbery to make our selves equal with God
when it is not our due, which is implied. Phil. 2.6. when Christ is said, to
think it no Robbery, to be equal with God. We would wrest the Scepter out of
his hand, wish he were not the conductor of the world, and that he would resign
his Sovereignty, and the right of the distribution of his own goods to the
Capricios of our humor, and ask our leave to what Subjects he should dispense
his favors. All Envy, is either a tacit accusation of God as an usurper, and
assuming a right to dispose of that, which does not belong to him, and so it is
a denial of his propriety; or else charges him with a blind or unjust
distribution, and so it is a bespattering his wisdom and righteousness. When
God does punish envy, he vindicates his own Sovereignty, as though this passion
chiefly endeavored to blast this perfection. Ezekiel. 25.11, 12. As I live says
the Lord, I will do according to thy anger, and according to thy envy, and thou
shall know that I am the Lord. The sin of envy in the Devils was immediately
against the Crown of God, and so was the sin of envy in the first man, envying
God the sole Prerogative in knowledge above himself. This base humor in Cain at
the preference of Abels sacrifice before his, was the cause that he deprived
him of his life. Denying God first his right of choice, and what he should
accept, and then invading Gods right of propriety, in usurping a power over the
Life and Being of his brother, which solely belonged to God.

2. The Dominion of God as a proprietor, is practically contemned by a violent
or s^rreptitious taking away from any, what God has given him the possession
of. Since God is the Lord of all, and may give the possession and dominion of
things to whom he pleases, all Theft and Purloyning, all cheating and
cousening another of his right, is not only a crime against the true possessor,
depriving him of what he is entrusted with, but against God as the absolute and
universal proprietor, having a right thereby, to confer his own goods, upon
whom he pleases; as well as against God as a Lawgiver forbidding such a
violence. The snatching away what is an others, denies man the right of
possession, and God the right of donation. The Israelites taking the Egyptians
Jewels had been Theft, had it not been by a Divine license and order; but
cannot be slandered with such a term, after the proprietor of the whole World
had altered the Title, and alienated them by his positive grant from the
Egyptians, to conferr them upon the Israelites.

3. The Dominion of God as a proprietor is practically contemned, by not using
what God has given us, for those ends for which he gave them to us. God
passes things over to us with a condition, to use that for his Glory which he
has bestowed upon us by his bounty. He is Lord of the end for which he gives,
as well as Lord of what he gives; the donors right of propriety is infringed,
when the Lands and legacies he leaves to a particular use are not employed to
those ends, to which he bequeathed them. The right of the Lord of a Manor is
violated: when the Copyhold is not used according to the condition of the
conveyance. So it is an invasion of Gods sovereignty, not to use the Creatures
for those ends, for which we are entrusted with them; when we deny our selves a
due and lawful support from them; hence Covetousness is an invasion of his
right; or when we unnecessarily wast them, hence prodigality disowns his
propriety. Or when we bestow not any thing upon the relief of others; hence
uncharitableness comes under the same title, appropriating that to our selves,
as if we were the Lords, when we are but the usufructuaries for our selves, and
Stewards for others; this is to be rich to our selves, not to God. Luke 12.21.
for so are they who employ not their wealth for the service and according to
the intent of the donor. Thus the Israelites did not own God the true
proprietor of their Corn, Wine, and Oil, which God had given them for his
Worship, when they prepared offerings for Baal out of his Stock. Hos. 2.8. For
she did not know, that I gave her Corn, and Wine, and Oil, and multiplied her
Gold and Silver, which they prepared for Baal; as if they had been sole
proprietors, and not Factors by Commission, to improve the Goods for the true
owner. It Is the same invasion of Gods right, to use the parts and gifts, that
God has given us, either as fuel for our pride, or advancing self, or a witty
scoffing at God and Religion. When we use not Religion for the honor of our
Sovereign, but a stool to rise by, and observe his precepts outwardly, not out
of regard to his Authority, but as a stale to our interest, and furnishing self
with a little concern and triflle. When men will wrest his word for the favor
of their lusts, which God intended for the checking of them, and make
interpretations of it according to their humors, and not according to his Will
discovered in the Scripture, this is to pervert the use of the best goods and
depositum he has put into our hands, even divine Revelations. Thus hypocrisy
makes the sovereignty of God a nullity.

3. The Dominion of God as a Governor is practically contemned.

I. In Idolatry. Since Worship is an acknowledgment of Gods sovereignty, to
adore any Creature instead of God, or to pay to any thing that homage of trust
and confidence, which is due to God, though it be the highest Creature in
Heaven or Earth, is to acknowledge that sovereignty, to pertain to a Creature,
which is challenged by God; as to set up the greatest Lord in a Kingdom in the
Government instead of the lawful Prince, is Rebellion and Usurpation. And that
Woman incurs the Crime of Adultery, who commits it with a person of great Port
and Honor, as well as with one of a mean condition. While men Create any thing
a God, they own themselves supreme above the true God, yea and above that,
which they account a God: For by the right of Creation, they have a
superiority, as it is a Deity blown up by the breath of their own imagination.
The Authority of God is in this sin; acknowledged to belong to an Idol, it is
called loathing of God as a husband; Ezekiel. 16.45. all the Authority of God as a
husband and Lord over them. So when we make any thing, or any person in the
World the chief object and prop of our trust and confidence, we act the same
part. Trust in an Idol is the formal part of Idolatry. Psalm. 115.8, So is every
one that trusts in them. i. e. in Idols. Whatsoever thing we make the object of
our trust, we rear as an Idol; it is not unlawful, to have the image of a
Creature, but to bestow divine adoration upon it; it was not unlawful for the
Egyptians, to possess and use Oxen, but to dubb them Gods to be adored, it was.
It Is not unlawful to have Wealth and Honor, nor to have gifts and parts, they
are the presents of God; but to love them above God, to fix our relyance upon
them more than upon God, is to rob God of his due, who being our Creator, ought
to be our confidence. What we want, we are to desire of him, and expect from
him. When we confide in any thing else, we deny God the Glory of his Creation,
we disown him to be Lord of the World, imply that our welfare is in the hands
of, and depends upon that thing, wherein we confide; it is not only to equal it
to God in sovereign power, which is his own phrase, Isaiah 40.25. but to
prefer it before him in a reproach of him. When the Hosts of Heaven shall be
served instead of the Lord of those Hosts; When we shall lacquy after the
Stars, depend barely upon their influences, without looking up to the great
director of the Sun, it is to pay an adoration unto a Captain in a Regiment,
which is due to the General. When we shall make Gold our hope, and say to the
fine Gold thou art my confidence, it is to deny the Supremacy of that God, that
is above, as well as if we kiss our hands in a way of adoration to the Sun in
its splendour, or the Moon walking in its brightness; for Job couples them
together. Job. 31.25. to 28. It Is to prefer the Authority of Earth before that
of Heaven, and honor clay above the Sovereign of the World, as if a Soldier
should confide more in the rag of an Ensign, or the fragment of a Drum for his
safety, than in the orders and conduct of his General; It were as much as is in
his power to uncommission him, and snatch from him his Commanders Staff. When
we advance the Creature in our love above God, and the Altar of our Soul
smoakes with more thoughts and affections to a petty interest than to God, we
lift up that which was given us as a servant in the place of the Sovereign, and
bestow that Throne upon it, which is to be kept undefiled for the rightful
Lord, and subject the interest of God to the demands of the creature. So much
respect is due to God, that none should be placed in the Throne of our
affections equal with him, much less any thing to perk above him.

2. Impatience is a contempt of God as a Governor. When we meet with rubbs in
the way of any design, when our expectations are crossed, we will break through
all obstacles, to accomplish our projects, whither God will or no. When we are
too much dejected at some unexpected providence, and murmur at the instruments
of it, as if God divested himself of his prerogative of conducting humane
affairs. When a little cross blows us into a Mutiny, and swells us into a
sawciness to implead God, or makes us fret against him, (as the expression is,
Isaiah 8.21.) wishing him out of his Throne; No sin is so devilish as this*
there is not any strikes more at all the attributes of God than this, against
his goodness, righteousness, holiness, wisdom, and does as little spare his
Sovereignty as any of the rest; What can it be else, but an impious invasion of
his Dominion, to quarrel with him for what he does, and to say, what reason
have thou to deal thus with me? This Language is in the nature of all
impatience, whereby we question his Sovereignty, and Parallel our Dominion with
his. When men have not that confluence of wealth or honor they greedily
desired, they bark at God, and revile his Government; They are angry God does
not more respectfully observe them, as though he had nothing to do in their
matters, and were wanting in that becoming reverence, which they think him
bound to pay to such great ones as they are. They would have God obedient to
their minds, and act nothing, but what he receives a Commission for from their
wills. When we murmur, it is as if we would command his Will, and wear his
Crown, a wresting the Scepter out of his hands, to sway it our selves, we deny
him the right of Government, disown his power over us, and would be our own
Sovereigns; You may find the Character of it in the Language of Jehoram, (as
many understand it.) 2 King. 6.33. Behold this evil is of the Lord; what should
I wait for the Lord any longer? This is an evil of such a nature, that it could
come from none but the hand of God, why should I attend upon him as my
Sovereign, that delights to do me so much mischief, that throws curses upon me,
when I expected blessings? I Will no more observe his directions, but follow my
own sentiments, and regard not his Authority in the lips of his doting Prophet.
The same you find in the Jews, when they were under God's lash. Jer. 18.12. And
they said, there is no hope, but we will walk after our own devices, and we
will every one do the imagination of his evil heart; We can expect no good from
him, and therefore we will be our own Sovereigns, and prefer the Authority of
our own imaginations before that of his Precepts. Men would be their own
Carvers, and not suffer God to use his right; as if a stone should order the
Mason in what manner to hew it, and in what part of the building to place it;
We are not ordinarily concerned so much at the calamities of our Neigbours, but
swell against Heaven at a light drop upon our selves. We are content God should
be the Sovereign of others, so that he will be a servant to us; Let him deal as
he will himself with others, so he will treat us, and what relates to us, as we
will ourselves. We would have God resign his Authority to our humors, and our
humors should be in the place of a God to him, to direct him what was fit to do
in our cause. When things go not according to our vote, our impatience is a
wish, that God were deposed from his Throne, that he would surrender his seat
to some, that would deal more favorably, and be more punctual observers of our
directions. Let us look to our selves in regard of this sin which is too
common, and the root of much mischief. This seems to be the first bubbling of
Adam's will, he was not content with the condition wherein God had placed him,
but affected another, which ended in the ruin of himself, and of Mankind.

3. Limiting God in his way of working to our methods is another part of the
contempt of his dominion. When we will prescribe him methods of acting, that he
should deliver us in this or that way, we would not suffer him to be the Lord
of his own favors, and have the privilege to be his own director. When we will
limit him to such a time, wherein to work our deliverance, we would rob him of
the power of times and seasons, which are solely in his hand. We would regulate
his conduct according to our imaginations, and assume a power to give Laws to
our Sovereign. Thus the Israelites limited the holy one of Israel. Psalm. 78.41.
They would control his absolute dominion, and of a Sovereign make him their
slave. Man that is God's vassal, would set bounds to his Lord, and cease to be
a servant, and commence Master, when he would give, not take directions from
him. When God had given them Manna, and their fancies were weary of that
delicious food, they would prescribe Heaven to rain down some other sort of
food for them. When they wanted no sufficient provision in the Wilderness, they
quarreled with God for bringing them out of Egypt, and not presently giving
them a place of Seed, of Figgs, Vines and Pomegranates. Numb. 20.5. which is
called a striving with the Lord, ver. 13. a contending with him for his
Lordship. When we tempt God, and require a sign of him as a mark of his favor,
we circumscribe his dominion; when we will not use the means he has appointed,
but father our lazyness upon a trust in his providence, as if we expected he
should work a miracle for our relief; when we censure him for what he has done
in the course of his providence; when we capitulate with him, and promise such
a service, if he will do us such a good turn according to our platform, we
would bring down his Sovereign pleasure to our will, we invade his Throne, and
expect a submissive Obedience from him. Man that has not wit enough to govern
himself, would be governing God, and those that cannot be their own Sovereigns,
affect a Sovereignty over Heaven.

4. Pride and presumption is another invasion of his dominion. When men will
resolve to go to morrow to such a City, to such a Fair and Market, to traffic,
and get gain, without thinking of the necessity of a Divine License, as if our
selves were the Lords of our time, and of our lives, and God were to lacquy
after us. James 4.13.15. Ye that say, to day we will go into such a City, and
buy and sell, whereas ye ought to say, if the Lord will we shall live; As if
they had a free hold, and were not Tenants at will to the Lord of the Manor.
When we presume upon our own strength or wit, to get the better of our
adversaries; As the Germans (as Tacitus relates) assured themselves by the
numerousness of their Army of a victory against the Romans, and prepared
chains to fetter the Captives before the conquest, which were found in their
camp after their defeat; When we are peremptory in expectations of success
according to our will; As Pharaoh, Exodus 15.9. I will pursue, I will overtake,
I will divide the spoil, my lust shall be satisfied upon them, I will draw my
sword, my hand shall destroy them. He speaks more like a God, than a man, as if
he were the Sovereign power, and God only his Vicar and Lieutenant; How he
struts, without thinking of a superior power to curb him! When men ascribe to
themselves what is the sole fruit of God's Sovereign pleasure. As the King of
Assyria speaks a Language, fit only to be spoken by God. Isa. 10 13, 14. etc. I
have removed the bounds of the people, my hand has found as a nest, the riches
of the people, I have gathered all the earth; which God declares to be a wrong
to his Sovereignty by the title wherewith he prefaceth his threatening against
him. ver. 16. Therefore shall the Lord, the Lord of Hosts, send among his fat
ones leanness, etc. It Is indeed a rifling, if not of his Crown, yet of the most
glittering Jewel of it, his Glory. He that mocks the poor reproacheth his
Maker, Prove. 17.5. He never thinks that God made them poor, and himself rich;
He owns not his riches to be dropped upon him by the divine hand. Self is the
great invader of God's Sovereignty, does not only spurn at it, but usurp it,
and assume divine honorus, payable only to the Universal Sovereign. The
Assyrian was not so modest as the Chaldean, who would impute his power and
victories to his Idol, Hab. 1.11. whom he thought to be God, though yet robbing
the true God of his Authority; and so much was signified by their names,
Nebuchadnezzar, Evil-Merodach, Belshazzar, Nebo, Merodach, Bell, being the
Chaldean Idols, and the names signifying Lord of wealth, giver of riches, and
the like. When we behave our selves proudly toward others, and imagine our
selves greater than our Maker ever meant us; When we would give Laws to others,
and expect the most submissive observances from them, as if God had resigned
his Authority to us, and made us in his stead the rightful Monarchs of the
World. To disdain that any creature should be above us, is to disdain God's
Sovereign disposition of men, and consequently his own superiority over us. A
proud man would govern all, and would not have God his Sovereign, but his
Subject; to overvalue our selves, is to under-value God.

5. Slight and careless worship of God is another contempt of his Sovereignty.
A Prince is contemned, not only by a neglect of those reverential postures
which are due to him, but in a reproachful and scornful way of paying them. To
behave our selves uncomely or immodestly before a Prince is a dis-esteem of
Majesty. Sovereignty requires aw in every address, where this is wanting there
is a dis-respect of Authority. We contemn God's Dominion when we give him the
service of the Lip, the Hand, the Knee, and deny him that of the Heart; as they
in Ezekiel, Ezekiel. 33.31. as though he were the Sovereign only of the body, and
not of the soul. To have devout figures of the face, and uncomely postures of
the soul, is to exclude his dominion from our spirits, while we own it only
over our outward man; we render him an insignificant Lord, not worthy of any
higher adorations from us, than a senseless statue; We demean not our selves
according to his Majestical Authority over us, when we present him not with the
Cream and Quintessence of our souls, The greatness of God required a great
house, and a costly Palace; 1 Chronicles. 29.11.16. David speaks it in order to the
building God a house and Temple; God being a great King, expects a Male the
best of our flock. Mal. 1.14. a Masculine and vigorous service. When we present
him with a sleepy, sickly, rheumatick service, we betray our conceptions of him
to be as mean as if he were some petty Lord, whose dominion were of no larger
extent than a Mole hill, or some inconsiderable Village.

6. Omission of the service he has appointed is another contempt of his
Sovereignty. This is a contempt of his dominion, whereby he has a right to
appoint what means and conditions he pleases, for the enjoyment of his
proffered and promised benefits. It Is an enmity to his Scepter not to accept of
his terms after a long series of precepts and invitations, made for the
restoring us to that happiness we had lost, and providing all means necessary
thereunto, nothing being wanting but our own concurrence with it, and
acceptance of it, by rendering that easy homage he requires. By withholding
from him the service he enjoins, we deny that we hold any thing of him; As he
that pays not the quit rent, though it be never so small, disowns the
Sovereignty of the Lord of the Manor; It implies that he is a miserable poor
Lord, having no right, or destitute of any power, to dispose of any thing in
the World to our advantage. Job. 22.17. They say unto God, depart from us, what
can the Almighty do for them? They will have no commerce with him in a way of
duty, because they imagine him to have no Sovereign power to do any thing for
them in way of benefit, as if his dominion were an empty title, and as much
destitute of any Authority to command a favor for them, as any Idol. They
think themselves to have as absolute a disposal of things, as God himself; What
can he do for us? What can he confer upon us, that we cannot invest our selves
in? As though they were Sovereigns in an equality with God; Thus men live
without God in the World, Ephesians. 2.12. as if there were no supreme being to pay a
respect to, or none fit to receive any homage at their hands; Withholding from
God the right of his time, and the right of his service, which is the just
claim of his Sovereignty.

7. Censuring others is a contempt of his Sovereignty. When we censure men's
persons or actions by a rash judgment, when we will be judges of the good and
evil of men's actions, where the law of God is utterly silent, we usurp God's
place, and invade his right, we claim a superiority over the Law, and judge God
defective as the rector of the World, in his prescriptions of good and evil;
Jam. 4.11.12. He that speaks evil of his Brother, and judges his Brother,
speaks evil of the Law, and judges the Law; There is one Lawgiver, who is
able to save, and to destroy; Who art thou that judge another? Do you know
what you do in judging another? You take upon you the garb of a Sovereign, as
if he were more your servant than God's, and more under your Authority than the
Authority of God; it is a setting thy self in God's Tribunal, and assuming his
rightful power of judging; thy Brother is not to be governed by thy fancy, but
by God's Law, and his own Conscience.

2. Information, Hence it follows that God does actually govern the World. He
has not only a right to rule, but he rules over all, so says the Text. He is
King of Kings, and Lord of Lords; what to let them do what they please, and all
that their lusts prompt them to? has God an absolute Dominion? Is it good, and
is it wise? Is it then a useless prerogative of the Divine Nature? Shall so
excellent a power lie idle, as if God were a lifeless Image? Shall we fancy God
like some lazy Monarch, that solaceth himself in the Gardens of his Palace, or
steeps himself in some charming pleasures, and leaves his Lieutenants to govern
the several Provinces, which are all Members of his Empire, according to their
own humor? Not to exercise this Dominion is all one as not to have it; To what
purpose is he invested with this Sovereignty, if he were careless of what were
done in the world, and regarded not the oppressions of men? God keeps no
useless excellency by him; He actually reigns over the Heathen, Psalm. 47.8. and
those as bad, or worse than Heathens. It had been a vanity in David to call
upon the Heavens to be glad, and the earth to rejoice under the rule of a
sleepy Deity, 1 Chronicles. 16.31. No, his Scepter is full of eyes, as it was
painted by the Egyptians; He is always waking, and always more than Ahashuerus,
reading over the records of Humane actions. Not to exercise his Authority, is
all one, as not to regard whither he keep the Crown upon his head, or continue
the Scepter in his hand. If his Sovereignty were exempt from care, it would be
destitute of Justice; God is more Righteous, than to resign the ensigns of his
Authority to blind and oppressive man; to think that God has a power, and does
not use it for just and righteous ends, is to imagine him an unrighteous, as
well as a careless Sovereign, such a thing in a man renders him a base man, and
a worse Governor; It Is a vice that disturbs the World, and overthrows the ends
of Authority, as to have a power, and use it well, is the greatest virtue of an
Earthly Sovereign. What an unworthy conception is it of God, to acknowledge him
to be possessed of a greater Authority than the greatest Monarch, and yet to
think that he uses it less than a petty Lord, that his Crown is of no more
value with him than a Feather? This represents God impotent, that he cannot, or
unrighteous and base, that he will not administer the Authority he has for the
noblest and justest end. But can we say, that he neglects the government of the
World? How come things then to remain in their due order? How comes the Law of
nature yet to be preserved in every man's Soul? How comes Conscience to check,
and cite, and judge? If God did not exercise his Authority, what Authority
could Conscience have to disturb man in unlawful practices, and to make his
sports and sweetness so unpleasant and sour to him? Has he not given frequent
notices and memorials, that he holds a curb over corrupt inclinations, puts
rubs in the way of malicious attempters, and often oversets the disturbers of
the peace of the World?

3. Information, God can do no wrong; since he is absolute sovereign. Man may
do wrong, Princes may oppress, and rifle, but it is a crime in them so to do:
Because their power is a power of Government and not of propriety in the goods
or lives of their subjects; but God cannot do any wrong, whatsoever the
clamours of Creatures are: Because he can do nothing but what he has a
sovereign right to do. If he takes away your goods, he takes not away any thing
that is yours, more than his own, since though he entrusted you with them, he
divested not himself of the propriety. When he takes away our lives, he takes
what he gave us by a temporary donation, to be surrendered at his call. We can
claim no right in any thing but by his will. He is no debtor to us, and since
he owes us nothing, he can wrong us in nothing that he takes away. His own
sovereignty excuses him in all those acts, which are most distastful to the
Creature. If we crop a medicinal plant for our use, or a flower for our
pleasure, or kill a Lamb for our food, we do neither of them any wrong: Because
the original of them was for our use, and they had their life, and nourishment,
and pleasing qualities for our delight and support; and are not we much more
made for the pleasure and use of God, than any of those can be for us? Of him,
and to him are all things, Romans 11.36. Has not God as much right over any one
of us, as over the meanest Worm? Though there be a vast difference in nature
between the Angels in Heaven, and the Worms on Earth, yet they are all one in
regard of subjection to God; he is as much the Lord of the one, as the other;
as much the proprietor of the one, as the other; as much the Governor of the
one, as the other. Not a cranny in the World is exempt from his jurisdiction.
Not a mite or grain of a Creature exempt from his propriety.

He is not our Lord by election; he was a Lord, before we were in being; he had
no terms put upon him who capitulated with him, and set him in his Throne by
Covenant? What Oath did he take to any subject at his first investiture in his
Authority? His right is as natural, as eternal as himself. As natural as his
existence, and as necessary as his Deity. Has he any Law but his own will?
What wrong can he do, that breaks no Law, that fulfils his Law in every thing
he does, by fulfilling his own will, which as it is absolutely sovereign, so it
is infinitely righteous. In what soever he takes from us then, he cannot injure
us; it is no crime in any man, to seize upon his own goods, to vindicate his own
honor; and shall it be thought a wrong in God, to do such things? Besides the
occasion he has from every man, and that every day provoking him to do it. He
seems rather to wrong himself by forbearing such a seizure, than wrong us by
executing it.

4. If God have a sovereignty over the whole World, then merit is totally
excluded. His right is so absolute over all Creatures, that he neither is, nor
can be a debtor to any; not to the undefiled holiness of the blessed Angels,
much less to poor earthly worms; those blessed Spirits enjoy their glory by the
title of his sovereign pleasure, not by virtue of any obligation devolving from
them upon God. Are not the faculties whereby they and we perform any act of
obedience his grant to us? Is not the strength, whereby they and we are enabled
to do any thing pleasing to him, a gift from him? Can a vassal merit of his
Lord, or a slave of his Master by using his tools, and employing his strength
in his service, though it was a strength he had naturally, not by donation from
the man in whose service it is employed? God is Lord of all, all is due to him;
how can we oblige him, by giving him what is his own, more his to whom it is
presented, than ours by whom it is offered? Austin.
He becomes not a debtor by receiving any thing from us, but by promising
something to us.

5. If God has a sovereign dominion over the whole World, then hence it
follows, that all Magistrates are but sovereigns under God. He is King of
Kings, and Lord of Lords, all the Potentates of the World are no other than his
Lieutenants, moveable at his pleasure, and more at his disposal, than their
subjects are at theirs. Though they are dignified with the title of Gods, yet
still they are at an infinite distance from the supreme Lord. Gods under God,
not to be above him, not to be against him. The want of the due sense of their
subordination to God, has made many in the World, act as sovereigns above him,
more than sovereigns under him. Had they all bore a deep conviction of this
upon their spirits, such audacious language had never dropped from the mouth of
Pharaoh, who is the Lord, that I should obey his voice, to let Israel go? Exodus
5.2. Presuming that there was no superior to control him, nor any in Heaven,
able to be a match for him. Darius had never published such a doting Edict, as
to prohibit any petition to God. Nero had never fired Rome, and sung at the
sight of the devouring flames; nor ever had he ripped up his mothers belly, to
see the Womb where he first lodged, and received a life so hateful to his
Country. Nor would Abner and Joab the two Generals have accounted the death of
men but a sport and interlude. 2 Samuel 2.14. Let the young men arise, and play
before us; what play it was, the next verse acquaints you with, thrusting their
Swords into one another sides. They were no more troubled at the death of
thousands, than a man is to kill a fly, or a flea. Had a sense of this but
hovered over their Souls, People in many Countries had not been made their
foot-balls, and used worse than their dogs? Nor had the lives of millions worth
more than a World, been exposed to Fire and Sword, to support some sordid lust,
or breach of Faith upon an idle quarrel, and for the depredation of their
Neighbors estates; the flames of Cities had not been so bright, nor the
streams of blood so d^ep, nor the cries of innocents so loud.

In Particular.

1. If God be sovereign, All under-Soveraigns are not to rule against him, but
to be obedient to his Orders. If they rule by his Authority, Prove. 8.15. they
are not to rule against his interest, they are not to imagine themselves as
absolute as God, and that their Laws must be of as sovereign Authority against
his honor, as the Divine are for it. If they are his Leiutenants on Earth,
they ought to act according to his Orders. No man but will account a Governor
or a Province a Rebel, if he disobeys the Orders sent him by the sovereign
Prince that commissioned him. Rebellion against God is a crime of Princes, as
well as Rebellion against Princes a Crime of Subjects. Saul is charged with it
by Samuel in a high manner for an act of simple disobedience, though intended
for the service of God, and the enriching his Country with the spoils of the
Amalekites. 1 Samuel 15.23. Rebellion is as the sin of Witchcraft, like
Witchcraft or Covenanting with the Devil, acting as if he had received his
commission not from God, but from Satan. Magistrates, as commissioned by God,
ought to act for him. Does humane authority ever give a Commission to any, to
rebel against it self? did God ever depute any earthly sovereignty against his
glory, and give them leave to outlaw his Laws, to introduce their own? No,
when he gave the vicarious dominion to Christ, he calls upon the Kings of the
Earth, to be instructed, and be Wise, and kiss the Son, Psalm. 2.10.12. i. e. To
observe his orders, and pay him homage as their Governor. What a silly doltish
thing is it, to resist that supreme Authority, to which the Archangels submit
themselves, and regulate their employments punctually by their instructions?
Those excellent Creatures exactly obey him in all the acts of their subordinate
Government in the World; those in whose hand the greatest Monarch is no more
than a silly fly between the fingers of a Giant. A contradiction to the
interest of God has been fatal to Kings. The four Monarchies have had their
wings clipped, and most of them have been buried in their own ashes; they have
all like the imitators of Lucifers pride fallen from the Heaven of their Glory
to the depth of their shame and misery. All Governors are bound to be as much
obedient to God, as their Subjects are bound to be submissive to them. Their
Authority over men is limited, Gods Authority over them is absolute, and
unbounded. Though every Soul ought to be subject to the higher powers, yet
there is a higher power of all, to which those higher powers are to subject
themselves; they are to be keepers of both the Tables of the Law of God, and
are then most sovereigns when they set in their own practice an example of
obedience to God, for their Subjects to write after.

2. They ought to imitate God in the exercise of their sovereignty in ways of
Justice and Righteousness. Though God be an absolute sovereign, yet his
Government is not Tyrannical, but managed according to the rules of
Righteousness, Wisdom, and Goodness. If God that created them as well as their
Subjects, does so exercise his Government, it is a duty incumbent upon them, to
do the same: Since they are not the Creators of their people, but the
conductors. As Gods Government tends to the good of the World, so ought theirs
to the good of their Countries. God committed not the government of the World
to the Mediator in an unlimited way, but for the good of the Church, in order
to the Eternal Salvation of his people. Ephesians. 1.22. He gave him to be head over
all things to the Church. He had power over the Devils, to restrain them in
their temptation and malice; power over the Angels, to order their Ministry for
the Heirs of Salvation. So power is given to Magistrates for the Civil
preservation of the World and of humane Society: They ought therefore to
consider, for what ends they are placed over the rest of mankind, and not
exercise their Authority in a licentious way, but conformable to that Justice
and Righteousness wherein God does administer his government; and for the
preservation of those who are committed to them.

3. Magistrates must then be obeyed, when they act according to Gods order and
within the bounds of the divine Commission. They are no friends to the
sovereignty of God, that are Enemies to Magistracy, his Ordinance. Sam was a
good Governor, though none of the best men, and the despisers of his
Government after Gods choice were the Sons of Belial. 1 Samuel 10.27. Christ was
no Enemy to Caesar. To pull down a faithful Magistrate such an one as
Zerubbabel, is to pluck a Signet from the hand of God: For in that capacity he
accounts him. Hag. 2.23. Gods servants stand or fall to their own Master. How
does he check Aaron and Miriam for speaking against Moses his servant. Numb.
12.8. Were you not afraid to speak against my servant Moses; against Moses as
related to you in the capacity of a Governor, against Moses as related to me
in the capacity of my servant. To speak any thing against them, as they act by
Gods order, is an invasion of Gods sovereign right, who gave them their
Commission. To act against just power or the justice of an Earthly power, is to
act against Gods Ordinance, who ordained them in the World, but not any abuse,
or ill use of their power.

2. USE. How dreadful is the consideration of this doctrine to all rebels
against God. Can any man that has brains in his head, imagine it an
inconsiderable thing, to despise the sovereign of the World? It was the sole
crime of disobedience to that positive Law, whereby God would have a visible
memorial of his sovereignty preserved in the eye of Man, that showered down
that deluge of misery, under which the World groans to this day. God had given
Adam a Soul, whereby he might live as a rational Creature; and then gives him a
Law, whereby he might live as a dutiful Subject: For God forbidding him to eat
of the fruit of the Tree of knowledge of good and evil, declared his own
supremacy over Adam, and his propriety in the pleasant World he had given him
by his bounty; he let him know hereby, that man was not his own Lord, nor was
to live after his own sentiments, but the directions of a superior. Chrysostom.
in Genesis Hom. 16.
As when a great Lord builds a magnificent Palace, and brings in tanoher to
inhabit it, he reserves a small duty to himself, not of an equal value with the
House, but for an acknowledgment of his own right, that the Tenant may know, he
is not the Lord of it, but has his grant by the liberality of another. God
hereby gave Adam matter for a pure Obedience, that had no foundation in his own
Nature by any implanted Law; he was only in it, to respect the will of his
sovereign, and to understand, that he was to live under the power of a higher
than himself. There was no more moral evil in the eating of this fruit, as
considered distinct from the command, than in eating of any other fruit in the
Garden. Had there been no prohibition, he might with as much safety have fed
upon it as upon any other. No Law of nature was transgrest in the act of eating
of it, but the sovereignty of God over him was denied by him; and for this the
death threatened was inflicted on him and his posterity: For though Divines take
notice of other sins in the fall of Adam, yet God in his trial charge him
with none but this; and does put upon his question an Emphasis of his own
Authority. Genesis 3.11. Have thou eaten of the Tree whereof I commanded ye, that
thou sho^ld'st not eat? This I am displeased with, that thou should disown
my dominion over thy self, and this Garden. This was the inlet to all the other
sins; as the acknowledgment of God's sovereignty is the first step to the
practice of all the duties of a Creature, so the disowning his sovereignty, is
the first spring of all the extravagancies of a Creature. Every sin against the
sovereign Lawgiver is worthy of Death. The Transgression of this positive
command des^rved death, and procured it to spread it self over the face of the
World. God's dominion cannot be despised, without meriting the greatest
punishment.

1. Punishment necessarily follows upon the Doctrine of Sovereignty. It Is a
faint and a feeble Sovereignty, that cannot preserve it self, and vindicate its
own wrongs against r^bellious subjects; The height of God's dominion infers a
vengeance on the contemners of it, If God be an Eternal King, he is an Eternal
Judge. Since sin unlinks the dependence between God the Sovereign, and man the
subject, if God did not vindicate the rights of his Sovereignty, and the
Authority of his Law, he would seem to despise his own dominion, be weary of
it, and not act the part of a good Governor. But God is tender of his
prerogative, and does most bestir himself when men exalt themselves proudly
against him. Exodus 18.11. In the thing wherein they dealt proudly, he will be
above them. When Pharaoh thought himself a mate for God, and proudly rejected
his commands, as if they had been the messages of some petty Arabian Lord, God
rights his own Authority upon the life of his enemy by the ministry of the Red
Sea. He turned a great King into a beast, to make him know, that the most high
ruled in the Kingdoms of men. Dan. 4.16, 17. The demand is by the word of the
Holy ones, to the intent that the living may know, that the most High rules in
the Kingdoms of men; And that by the Petitions of the Angels, who cannot endure
that the Empire of God should be obscured, and diminisht by the pride of man.
Besides the tender respect he has to his own glory, he is constantly presented
with the solicitations of the Angels, to punish the proud ones of the earth,
that darken the glory of his Majesty. It Is necessary for the rescue of his
honor, and necessary for the satisfaction of his illustrious attendants, who
would think it a shame to them, to serve a Lord that were always unconcerned in
the rebellions of his creatures, and tamely suffer their spurns at his Throne:
and therefore there is a day wherein the haughtiness of man shall be bowed
down, the Cedars of Lebanon over-thrown, and high Mountains levelled, that God
may be exalted in that day. Isa. 2.11, 12. etc. Pride is a sin that immediately
swells against God's Authority, this shall be brought down that God may be
exalted; not that he should have a real exaltation, as if he were actually
deposed from his Government, but that he shall be manifested to be the
Sovereign of the whole World. It Is necessary there should be a day to chase
away those clouds that are upon his Throne, that the luster of his Majesty may
break forth to the confusion of all the children of pride that vaunt against
him. God has a dominion over us as a Lawgiver, as we are his creatures, and a
dominion over us in away of Justice, as we are his criminals.

2. This punishment is unavoidable.

1. None can escape him. He has the sole Authority over Hell and Death, the
Keys of both are in his hand; The greatest Caesar can no more escape him than
the meanest Peasant; Who art thou, O great Mountain before Zerubbabel? Zac.
4.7. The height of Angels is no match for him, much less that of the mortal
grandees of the World; they can no more resist him than the meanest person; But
are rather as the highest Steeples, the fittest marks for his crushing thunder.
If he speaks the word, the principalities of men come down, and the Crown of
their glory. Jer. 13.18. He can take the Mighty away in a moment and that
without hands, i. e. without instruments. Job. 34.20. The strongest are like
the feet of Nebuchadnezzar's Image, Iron and Clay, Iron to man, but Clay to
God, to be crumbled to nothing.

2. What comfort can be reapt from a creature, when the Sovereign of the World
arms himself with terrors, and begins his visitation? Isa. 10.3. What will you
do in the day of visitation, to whom will you fly for help, and where will you
leave your glory? The torments from a Subject may be releived by the Prince,
but where can there be an appeal from the Sovereign of the World? Where is
there any above him to control him, if he will overthrow us; who is there to
call him to account, and say to him, what do thou? He works by an
uncontrollable Authority, he needs not ask leave of any. Isa. 43.13. He works,
and none can let it; As when he will relieve, none can afflict; so when he will
wound, none can relieve. If a King appoint the punishment of a rebel, the
greatest Favorite in the Court cannot speak a comfortable word to him. The most
beloved Angel in Heaven cannot sweeten and ease the spirit of a man, that the
Sovereign power is set against to make the butt of his wrath. The Devils lie
under his sentence, and wear their chains as marks of their condemnation,
without hope of ever having them filed off, since they are laid upon them by
the Authority of an unaccountable Sovereign.

3. By his Sovereign Authority, God can make any creature the instrument of his
vengeance; He has all the creatures at his beck, and can Commission any of
them to be a dreadful scourge. Strong winds and tempests fulfill his word: Psalm.
148.8. The Lightnings answer him at his call, and cry aloud here are we. Job
38.35. By his Sovereign Authority he can render Locusts as mischievous as
Lions, forge the meanest creatures into Swords and Arrows, and commission the
most despicable to be his Executioners; He can cut off joy from our spirits,
and make our own hearts be our tormentors, our most confident friends our
persecutors, our nearest relations to be his avengers; They are more his, who
is their Sovereign, than ours, who place a vain confidence in them. Rather than
Abraham shall want children, he can raise up stones, and adopt them into his
Family; And rather than not execute his vengeance, he can array the stones in
the streets, and make them his armed subjects against us. If he speak the word,
a hair shall drop from our heads to choke us, or a vapor, congealed into Rheum
in our heads, shall dropdown, and putrify our Vitals. He can never want
weapons, who is Sovereign over the thunders of Heaven, and stones of the Earth,
over every creature, and can by a Sovereign word turn our greatest comforts
into curses.

3. This Punishment must be terrible. How does David, a great King, sound in
his body, prosperous in his Crown, and successful in his conquests, settled in
all his Royal conveniences, groan under the wrathful touch of a greater King
than himself, Psalm. 6. Psalm. 38. and his other Paenitential Psalms; Not being
able to give himself a writ of ease, by all the delights of his Palace and
Kingdom. If the wrath of a King be as the roaring of a Lion to a poor subject,
Prove. 19.10. how great is the wrath of the King of Kings, that cannot be set
forth by the terror of all the amazing vollies of thunder, that have been since
the Creation, if the noise of all were gathered into one single crack? As there
is an unconceivable ground of joy in the special favor of so mighty a King, so
is there of terror in his severe displeasure. Psalm. 76.12. He is terrible to
the Kings of the earth, with God is terrible Majesty. What a folly is it then
to rebel against so mighty a Sovereign?

III. USE of Comfort. The Throne of God drops honey and sweetness, as well as
dread and terror; All his other attributes afford little relief, without this
of his dominion, and Universal command; When therefore he speaks of his being
the God of his people, he does often preface it, with the Lord thy God; His
Sovereignty as a Lord being the ground of all the comfort we can take in his
federal relation as our God; Thy God, but Superior to thee; thy God, not as thy
Cattle and Goods are thine, in a way of sole propriety, but a Lord too in a way
of Sovereignty, not only over thee, but over all things else for thee. As the
end of God's settling Earthly Governments, was for the good of the communities
over which the Governors preside; So God exercises his Government for the
good of the World, and more particularly for the good of the Church, over which
he is a peculiar Governor.

1. His love to his people is as great as his Sovereignty over them. He stands
not upon his Dominion with his people so much, as upon his affection to them;
He would not be called Baali, my Lord, i. e. he would not be known only by the
name of Sovereignty, but Ishi, my Husband, a name of Authority and sweetness
together; Hos. 2.16.19. etc. He signifies, that he is not only the Lord of our
spirits and bodies, but a Husband by a Marriage knot, admitting us to a
nearness to him, and Communion of goods with him. Though he Majestically sits
upon a high Throne, yet it is a Throne encircled with a Rainbow; Ezekiel. 1.28. To
show, that his Government of his people, is not only in away of absolute
Dominion, but also in a way of federal relation. He seems to own himself their
Subject, rather than their Sovereign, when he gives them a Charter to command
him in the affairs of his Church; Isa. 45.11. Ask of me things to come,
concerning my sons, and concerning the work of my hands command you me. Some
read it by way of question, as a corrective of a sawcyness; Do you ask of me
things to come, and seem to command me concerning the works of my hands, as if
you were more careful of my interest among my people, than I am, who have
formed them? But if this were the sense, it would seem to discourage an
importunity of Prayer for public deliverance; And therefore to take it
according to our Translation, it is an exhortation to Prayer, and a mighty
encouragement in the management and exercise of it. Urge me with my promise, in
a way of humble importunity, and you shall find me as willing to perform my
word, and gratify your desires, as if I were rather under your Authority, than
you under mine; As much as to say, if I be not as good as my word, to satisfy
those desires that are according to my promise, implead me at my own Throne,
and if I be failing in it, I will give Judgment against my self. Almost like
Princes Charters, and gracious grants, we grant such a thing against us, and
our heirs, giving the subject power to implead them, if they be not punctually
observed by them. How is the love of God seen in his condescension below the
Majesty of Earthly Governors! He that might command by the absoluteness of his
Authority, does not only do that, but entreats in the quality of a subject, as
if he had not a fullness to supply us, but needed something from us for a supply
of himself, 2 Cor. 5.20. As though God did beseech you by us. And when he may
challenge as a due by the right of his propriety, what we bestow upon his poor,
which are his Subjects as well as ours, he reckons it as a loan to him, as if
what we had were more our own than his. Prove. 19.17. He stands not upon his
Dominion so much with us, when he finds us Conscientious in paying the duty we
owe to him. He rules as a Father by Love, as well as by Authority; He enters
into a peculiar Communion with poor Earthly Worms; plants his gracious
Tabernacle among the troops of sinners, instructs us by his word, invites us by
his benefits, admits us into his presence, is more desirous to bestow his
smiles, than we to receive them; And acts in such a manner, as if he were
willing to resign his Scepter into the hands of any that were possessed with
more love and kindness to us than himself. This is the comfort of Believers.

2. In his being Sovereign, his pardons carry in them a full security. He that
has the Keys of Hell and Death, pardons the crime, and wipes off the guilt.
Who can repeal the act of the chief Governor? What tribunal can null the
decrees of an absolute Throne? Is. 43.25. I, even I am he, that blots out thy
transgressions for my names sake. His sovereign dominion renders his mercy
comfortable. The clemency of a Subject though never so great, cannot pardon;
people may pity a criminal, while the Executioner tortures him, and strips him
of his Life; but the clemency of the supreme Prince establishes a pardon.
Since we are under the dominion of God, if he pardons, who can reverse it? If
he does not, what will the pardons of men profit us in regard of an eternal
state? If God be a King for ever, then he whom God forgives, he in whom God
reigns, shall live for ever. Else he would want Subjects on Earth, and have
none of his lower Creatures, which he formed upon the Earth, to reign over
after the dissolution of the World; if his pardons did not stand secure he
would after this Life, have no voluntary subjects that had formerly a being
upon the Earth; he would be a King only over the damned Creatures.

3, Corruptions will certainly be subdued in his voluntary subjects. The
Covenant, I will be your God, implies protection, government, and relief, which
are all grounded upon Sovereignty: That therefore which is our greatest burden,
will be removed by his Sovereign power. Micah 7.19. He will subdue our
iniquities. If the outward enemies of the Church shall not bear up against his
Dominion, and perpetuate their rebellions unpunisht, those within his people
shall as little bear up against his Throne, without being destroyed by him. The
billows of our own hearts, and the raging waves within us, are as much at his
beck as those without us. And his Sovereignty is more eminent in quelling the
corruptions of the heart, than the commotions of the World; in reigning over
men's Spirits, by changing them, or curbing them, more than over men's bodies, by
pinching and punishing them. The remainders of Satan's Empire will moulder away
before him, since he that is in us, is a greater Sovereign, than he that is in
the World, 1 John 4.4. His enemies will be laid at his feet, and so never shall
prevail against him, when his Kingdom shall come. He could not be Lord of any
man as a happy creature, if he did not by his power make them happy; and he
could not make them happy, unless by his Grace he made them holy. He could not
be praised as a Lord of Glory, if he did not make some creatures glorious, to
praise him; And an Earthly Creature could not praise him perfectly, unless he
had every grain of enmity to his Glory taken out of his heart. Since God is the
only Sovereign, he only can still the commotions in our spirits, and pull down
all the Ensigns of the Devil's royalty; he can wast him by the powerful word of
his lips.

4. Hence is a strong encouragement for Prayer. My King was the strong
compellation David used in Prayer, as an argument of comfort and confidence, as
well as that of My God. Psalm. 5, 2. Hearken to the voice of my cry, my King and
my God. To be a King, is to have an Office of Government and Protection. He
gives us liberty, to approach to him as the Judge of all. Heb. 12.23. i. e. As
the Governor of the World; we pray to one that has the whole Globe of Heaven
and Earth in his hand, and can do whatsoever he will. Though he be higher than
the Cherubims, and transcendently above all in Majesty, yet we may soar up to
him with the wings of our Soul, Faith, and Love, and lay open our cause, and
find him as gracious, as if he were the meanest subject on Earth, rather than
the most sovereign God in Heaven.

He has as much of tenderness, as he has of Authority, and is pleased with
Prayer, which is an acknowledgment of his Dominion, an honoring of that, which
he delights to honor: For Prayer, in the notion of it, imports thus much, that
God is the Rector of the World, that he takes notice of humane affairs, that he
is a careful, just, wise Governor, a storehouse of blessing, a fountain of
goodness to the indigent, and a releif to the oppressed. What have we reason to
fear, when the sovereign of the World gives us liberty to approach to him, and
lay open our case? That God who is King of the whole Earth, not only of a few
Villages, or Cities in the Earth, but the whole Earth; and not only King of
this dreggy place of our dross, but of Heaven having prepared, or established
his Throne in the most glorious place of the Creation.

5. Here is comfort in afflictions. As a sovereign, he is the Author of
Afflictions, as a sovereign, he can be the remover of them; he can command the
waters of affliction to go so far and no farther. If he speaks the Word, a
disease shall depart, as soon as a servant shall from your presence with a Nod.
If we are banished from one place, he can command a shelter for us in another.
If he orders Moab, a Nation that had no great kindness for his people, to let
his outcasts dwell with them, they shall entertain them, and afford them
sanctuary. Isaiah 16.4. Again God chastneth as a sovereign, but teaches as a
Father. Psalm. 99.12. The exercise of his Authority is not without an exercise
of his goodness. He does not correct for his own pleasure, or the Creature's
torment, but for the Creature's instruction; though the rod be in the hand of a
sovereign, yet it is tinctured with the kindness of divine bowels. He can order
them as a sovereign to mortify our flesh, and try our Faith. In the severest
tempest, the Lord that raised the Wind against us, which shattered the ship,
and tore its rigging, can change that contrary wind for a more happy one, to
drive us into the Port.

6. It Is a comfort against the projects of the Churches adversaries in times of
public commotions. The consideration of the Divine sovereignty may arm us
against the threatenings of mighty ones, and the menaces of persecutors. God
has Authority above the Crowns of men, and a Wisdom superior to the cabals of
men. None can move a step without him, he has a negative voice upon their
Counsels, a negative hand upon their motions; their politic resolves must stop
at the point he has prescribed them. Their formidable strength cannot exceed
the limits he has set them, their overreaching wisdom expires at the breath of
God, There is no Wisdom, nor Understanding, nor Counsel against the Lord. Prove.
21.30. Not a bullet can be discharged, nor a Sword drawn, a wall battered, nor
a person dispatched out of the world without the leave of God, by the mightiest
in the World. The instruments of Satan are no more free from his sovereign
restraint than their inspirer; they cannot pull the hook out of their nostrils,
nor cast the bridle out of their mouths. This sovereign can shake the Earth,
rend the Heavens, overthrow Mountains, the most Mountainous opposers of his
interest. Though the Nations rush in against his people like the rushing of
many waters, God shall rebuke them, they shall be chased as the chaff of the
Mountains before the Wind, and like a rolling thing before the Whirlwind.
Isaiah 17.13. So does he often burst in pieces the most mischievous designs,
and conducts the oppressed to a happy port. He often turns the severest
tempests into a calm, as well as the most peaceful calm into a horrible storm.
How often has a well-rigg'd ship, that seemed to sp^rn the Sea under her feet,
and beat the waves before her to a foam, been swallowed up into the bowels of
that Element, over whose back she rode a little before. God never comes to
deliver his Church as a Governor, but in a wrathful posture. Ezekiel. 20.23.
Surely says the Lord with a mighty hand, and with an out stretched arm, and
with fury poured out will I rule over you; not with fury poured out upon the
Church, but fury poured out upon her Enemies, as the words following evidence.
The Church he would bring out from the Countries where she was scattered, and
bring the people into the bond of the Covenant. He sometimes cuts off the
Spirits of Princes. Psalm. 76.12. i. e. cuts off their designs, as men do the
pipes of a watercourse. The hearts of all are as open to him, as the riches of
heaven where he resides. He can slip an inclination into the heart of the
mighty, which they dreamed not of before; and if he does not change their
projects, he can make them abortive, and way-lay them in their attempts. La^an
marched with fury, but God put a padlock upon his passion against Jacob. Genesis
31.24.29. The Devils which ravage men's minds, must be still, when he gives out
his sovereign orders. This sovereign can make his people find favor in the
eyes of the cruel Egyptians, which had so long oppressed them. Exodus 11.3. And
speak a good word in the heart of Nebuchadnezzar for the Prophet Jeremy, that
he should order his Captain, to take him into his special protection; when he
took Zedekiah away prisoner in chains and put out his eyes. Jerem. 39.11. His
people cannot want deliverance from him, who has all the world at his command,
when he is pleased, to bestow it: he has as many instruments of deliverance,
as he has Creatures at his beck in Heaven or Earth from the meanest to the
highest. As he is the Lord of Hosts, the Church has not only an interest in
the strength he himself is possessed with, but in the strength of all the
Creatures that are under his command, in the Elements below and Angels above;
in those armies of Heaven, and in the inhabitants of the Earth, he does what he
will; Dan. 4.35. They are all in order, and array at his command. There are
Angels to employ in a fatal stroke, Lice and Froggs to quell the stubborn
hearts of his Enemies. He can range his Thunders and Lightnings, the Canon and
Granado's of Heaven, and the Worms of the Earth in his service. He can muzzle
Lions, calm the fury of the Fire, turn his Enemies Swords into their own
bowels, and their Artillery on their own breasts; set the wind in their Teeth,
and make their Chariot-wheels languish, make the Sea enter a quarrel with them,
and wrap them in its waves, till it has stifled them in its lap. The Angels
have Storms, and Tempests and Wars in their hands, but at the disposal of God;
when they shall cast them out against the Empire of Antichrist Rev. 7.1, 2.
then shall Satan be discharged from his Throne, and no more seduce the Nations;
the everlasting Gospel shall be preached, and God shall reign gloriously in
Sion. Let us therefore shelter our selves in the divine sovereignty, regard God
as the most High in our dangers, and in our petitions. This was David's
resolution. Psalm. 57.1, 2. I will cry unto unto God most high. This Dominion of
God is the true Tower of David, wherein there are a thousand shields for
defense and encouragement. Cant. 4.4.

IV. USE. If God has an extensive Dominion over the whole World, this ought to
be often meditated on, and acknowledged by us. This is the universal duty of
mankind; if he be the sovereign of all, we should frequently think of our great
Prince, and acknowledge our selves his Subjects, and him our Lord. God will be
acknowledged the Lord of the whole Earth, the neglect of this is the cause of
the Judgments which are sent upon the World. All the Prodigies were to this
end, that they might know, or acknowledge that God was the Lord. Exodus 10.2. As
God was proprietor, he demanded the firstborn of every Jew, and the firstborn
of every Beast, the one was to be Redeemed, and the other Sacrificed; this was
the Quit-Rent they were to pay to him for their fruitful Land. The first Fruits
of the Earth were ordered to be paid to him, as a homage due to the Landlord,
and an acknowledgment they held all in chief of him. The practice of offering
first fruits for an acknowledgment of Gods sovereignty was among many of the
Heathens, and very ancient; hence they dedicated some of the chief of their
spoils, owning thereby the Dominion and Goodness of God, whereby they had
gained the Victory. Cain owned this in offering the Fruits of the Earth, and it
was his sin, he owned no more, viz. His being a sinner, and meriting the
Justice of God, as his Brother Abel did in his bloody Sacrifice. God was a
sovereign Proprietor and Governor, while man was in a state of innocence, but
when man proved a Rebel, the sovereignty of God bore another relation toward
him, that of a Judge, added to the other. The First Fruits might have been
offered to God in a state of innocence, as a homage to him as Lord of the
Manor of the World; the design of them was to own Gods propriety in all
things, and men's dependence on him for the influences of heaven in producing
the fruits of the Earth, which he had ordered for their use. The design of
Sacrifices, and placing beasts instead of the criminal, was to acknowledge their
own guilt, and God as a sovereign Judge; Cain owned the first, but not the
second, he acknowledged his dependence on God as a proprietor, but not his
obnoxiousness to God as a Judge, which may be probably gathered from his own
speech, when God came to examine him, and ask him for his Brother. Genesis 4.9. Am
I my Brothers keeper? Why do you ask me; though I own thee as the Lord of my
Land, and Goods, yet I do not think my self accountable to thee for all my
actions. This Sovereignty of God ought to be acknowledged in all the parts of
it, in all the manifestations of it to the creature. We should bear a sense of
this always upon our Spirits, and be often in the thoughts of it in our
retirements. We should fancy that we saw God upon his Throne in his Royal Garb,
and great attendants about him, and take a view of it, to imprint an awe upon
our Spirits.

The meditation on this would,

1. Fix us on him as an object of trust. It Is upon his Sovereign Dominion as
much as upon anything, that safe and secure confidence is built; for if he had
any superior above him, to control him in his designs and promises, his
veracity and power would be of little efficacy, to form our souls to a close
adherency to him. It were not fit to make him the object of our trust, that can
be gainsaid by a higher than himself, and had not a full Authority to answer
our expectations; If we were possessed with this notion fully and believingly,
that God were high above all, that his Kingdom rules over all, we should not
catch at every broken reed, and stand gaping for comforts from a pebble stone.
He that understands the Authority of a King, would not wave a relyance on his
promise, to depend upon the breath of a changeling favorite. None but an
ignorant man would change the security he may have upon the height of a Rock,
to expect it from the dwarfishness of a Molehill. To put confidence in any
inferior Lord, more than in the Prince, is a folly in civil converse, but a
rebellion in Divine; God only being above all, can only rule all, can command
things to help us, and check other things which we depend on, and make them
fall short of our expectations. The due consideration of this Doctrine would
make us pierce through second causes to the first, and look further than to the
smaller sort of Sailers, that clime the ropes, and dress the Sails, to the
Pilot that sits at the Helm, the Master, that by an indisputable Authority
orders all their motions. We should not depend upon second causes for our
support, but look beyond them to the Authority of the Deity, and the dominion
he has over all the works of his hands. Zach. 10.1. Ask ye of the Lord rain in
the time of the latter rain; When the seasons of the year conspire for the
producing such an effect, when the usual time of rain is wheeled about in the
year, stop not your thoughts at the point of the Heavens, whence you expect it,
but pierce the Heavens, and solicit God, who must give order for it, before
it comes. The due meditation of all things depending on the Divine Dominion,
would strike off our hands from all other holds, so that no creature would
engross the dependence and trust which is due to the first cause; As we do not
thank the Heavens when they pour out rain, so we are not to depend upon them
when we want it; God is to be sought to when the Womb of 2d. causes is opened
to relieve us, as well as when the Womb of 2d. causes is barren, and brings not
forth its wonted progeny.

2. It would make us diligent in worship. The consideration of God as the
supreme Lord, is the Foundation of all Religion; Our Father which art in
Heaven, prefaceth the Lord's Prayer; Father is a name of Authority; in Heaven,
the place where he has fixed his Throne, notes his Government; not my Father,
but our Father, notes the extent of this Authority. In all worship we
acknowledge the object of our worship, our Lord, and our selves his vassals; If
we bear a sense that he is our Sovereign King, it would draw us to him in every
exigence, and keep us with him in a reverential posture, in every address; When
we come we should be careful not to violate his right, but render him the
homage due to his Royalty. We should not appear before him with empty souls,
but filled with Holy thoughts. We should bring him the best of our flock, and
present him with the prime of our strength; Were we sensible we hold all of
him, we should not withold any thing from him, which is more worthy than
another. Our hearts would be framed into an awful regard of him, when we
consider that glorious and fearful name, the Lord our God, Deuteronomy. 28.58. We
should look to our feet, when we enter into his house, if we considered him in
Heaven upon his Throne, and our selves on Earth at his Footstool, Eccles. 5.2.
lower before him than a worm before an Angel; It would hinder garishness and
lightness. The Jews says Capel, on the 1 Timothy 1.17. repeat this expression,
(...) King of Worlds, or Eternal King; Probable the first Original of it might
be, to stake them down from wandering. When we consider the Majesty of God
clothed with a Robe of light, sitting upon his high Throne, adorned with his
Royal Ensigns, we should not enter into the presence of so great a Majesty with
the Sacrifice of fools, with light motions and foolish thoughts, as if he were
one of our companions to be droll'd with. We should not hear his word, as if it
were the voice of some ordinary Pesant. The consideration of Majesty, would
engender reverence in our service; It would also make us speak of God with
honor and respect, as of a great and glorious King, and not use defaming
expressions of him, as if he were an infamous being. And were he considered as
a terrible Majesty, he would not be frequently solicited by some, to pronounce
a damnation upon them, upon every occasion.

3. It would make us charitable to others. Since he is our Lord, the great
proprietor of the World, it is sit he should have a part of our goods, as well
as our time: he being the Lord both of our goods and time. The Lord is to be
honored with our substance; Prove. 3.9. Kings were not to be approached to
without a present; Tribute is due to Kings: but because he has no need of any
from us, to bear up his state, maintain the charge of his wars, or pay his
Military Officers and Host, it is a debt due to him, to acknowledge him in his
poor, to sustain those that are a part of his substance; Though he stands in no
need of it himself, yet the poor, that we have always with us, do; As a 7th.
part of our weekly time, so some part of our weakly gains are due to him. There
was to be a weekly laying by in store somewhat of what God had prosper'd them,
for the relief of others. 1 Cor. 16.1, 2. the quantity is not determined, that
is left to every man's Conscience, according as God has prosper'd him that
week. If we did consider God as the donor and proprietor, we should dispose of
his gifts according to the design of the true owner, and act in our places as
Stewards entrusted by him, and not purse up his part as well as our own in our
coffers. We should not deny him a small quit rent, as an acknowledgment that we
have a greater income from him; We should be ready to give the inconsiderable
pittance, he does require of us, as an acknowledgment of his propriety, as well
as liberality.

4. It would make us watchful, and arm us against all temptations. Had Eve
stuck to her first Argument against the Serpent, she had not been instrumental
to that destruction, which Mankind yet feel the smart of. Genesis 3.3. God has
said, ye shall not eat of it; The great Governor of the World has laid his
Sovereign command upon us in this point. The temptation gained no ground, till
her heart let go the sense of this for the pleasure of her eye and palate. The
repetition of this, the great Lord of the World has said, or ordered, had both
unargumented and disarmed the Tempter. A sense of God's Dominion over us would
discourage a temptation, and put it out of countenance; It would bring us with
a vigorous strength to beat it back to a retreat; If this were as strongly
urged as the temptation, it would make the heart of the tempted strong, and the
motion of the tempter feeble.

5. It would make us entertain afflictions, as they ought to be entertained,
viz. with a respect to God. When men make light of any affliction from God,
it is a contempt of his Sovereignty, as to contemn the frown, displeasure and
check of a Prince, is an affront to Majesty: It Is, as if they did not care a
straw what God did with them, but dare him to do his worst. There is a
despising the chastning of the Almighty. Job 5.17. To be unhumbled under his
hand, is as much or more affront to him, than to be impatient under it.
Afflictions must be entertained as a check from Heaven, as a frown from the
great Monarch of the World; Under the feeling of every stroke, we are to
acknowledge his Sovereignty and Bounty; to despise it, is to make light of his
Authority over us; As to despise his favors, is to make light of his kindness
to us. A sense of God's Dominion would make us observe every check from him,
and not diminish his Authority, by casting off a due sense of his correction.

6. This Dominion of God would make us resign up our selves to God in every
thing. He that considers himself a thing made by God, a vassal under his
Authority, would not expostulate with him, and call him to an account why he
has dealt so, or so with him. It would stab the vitals of all pleas against
him. We should not then contest with him, but humbly lay our cause at his feet,
and say with Eli, 1 Samuel 3.18. It Is the Lord, let him do what seems good. We
should not commence a suit against God, when he does not answer our Prayers
presently, and send the mercy we want upon the wings of the wind; He is the
Lord, the Sovereign: The consideration of this would put an end to our quarrels
with God; Should I expect that the Monarch of the World should wait upon me, or
I a poor worm wait upon him? Must I take State upon me before the Throne of
Heaven, and expect the King of Kings should lay by his Scepter, to gratify my
humor? Surely Jonah thought God no more than his fellow, or his vassal, at
that time when he told him to his face, he did well to be angry, as though God
might not do what he pleased with so small a thing as a Gourd; He speaks as if
he would have sealed a lease of ejectment, to exclude him from any propriety in
any thing in the World.

7. This Dominion of God would stop our vain curiosity. When Peter was desirous
to know the fate of John the Beloved Disciple, Christ answers no more than
this. Joh. 21.22. If I will, that he tarry till I come, what is that to thee?
follow thou me. Consider your duty, and lay aside your curiosity, since it is
my pleasure not to reveal it. The sense of God's absolute Dominion would
silence many vain disputes in the World; What if God will not reveal this or
that? the manner and method of his resolves should humble the Creature under
intruding enquiries.

V. USE of Exhortation.

1. The Doctrine of the Dominion of God, may teach us Humility. We are never
truly abas'd, but by the consideration of the eminence and excellency of the
Deity. Job never thought himself so pitiful a thing, so despicable a creature,
as after God's magnificent declamation upon the Theme of his own Sovereignty.
Job 42.5, 6. When God's name is regarded as the most excellent and Sovereign
name in all the earth, then is the Soul in the fittest temper to lie low, and
cry out, what is man, that so great a Majesty should be mindful of him? When
Abraham considers God as the Supreme Judge of all the earth, he then ownes
himself but dust and ashes. Genesis 18.25, 27. Indeed, how can vile and dusty man
vaunt before God, when the Angels, far more excellent creatures cannot stand
before him, but with a Vail on their faces? How little a thing is man in regard
of all the earth? How mean a thing is the earth in regard of the vaster
Heavens? How poor a thing is the whole World in comparison of God? How pitiful
a thing is man, if compared with so excellent a Majesty? There is as great a
distance between God and man, as between being and not being, and the more man
considers the Divine Royalty, the more dis-esteem he will have of himself, it
would make him stoop and disrobe himself, and fall low before the Throne of the
King of Kings, throwing down before his Throne, any Crown he gloryed in. Rev.
4.10.

1. In regard of Authority. How unreasonable is pride in the presence of
Majesty? How foolish is it for a Country Justice of Peace, to think himself as
great as his Prince that Commissioned him? How unreasonable is pride in the
presence of the greatest Sovereignty? What is humane greatness before Divine?
The Stars discover no light when the Sun appears, but in a humble posture
withdraw in their lesser Beams, to give the sole Glory of enlightening the World
to the Sun, who is as it were the Sovereign of those Stars, and imparts a light
unto them. The greatest Prince is infinitely less, if compared with God, than
the meanest scullion in his kitchen can be before him. As the Wisdom, Goodness,
and Holiness, of man is a mere mote, compared to the Goodness and Holiness of
God, so is the Authority of man a mere trifle in regard of the sovereignty of
God. And who but a simple Child would be proud of a mote, or trifle. Let man be
as great as he can, and command others, he is still a subject to one greater
than himself. Pride would then vanish like smoke at the serious consideration
of this sovereignty.

One of the Kings of this Country did very handsomely shame the flattery of his
Courtiers, that cried him up as Lord of Sea and Land, by ordering his chair to
be set on the Sand of the Sea shore, when the Tide was coming in, and
commanding the waters not to touch his feet, which when they did without any
regard to his Authority, he took occasion thereby to put his flatterers out of
countenance, and instruct himself in a lesson of humility; See, says he, how I
rule all things, when so mean a thing as the water will not obey me. It Is a
ridiculous pride that the Turk and Persian discover in their swelling Titles.
What poor sovereigns are they, that cannot command a Cloud, give out an
effectual order for a drop of Rain, in a time of drought, or cause the bottles
of Heaven, to turn their mouth another way in a time of too much moisture. Yet
their own Prerogatives are so much in their minds, that they justle out all
thoughts of the supreme Prerogative of God, and give thereby occasion to
frequent Rebellions against him.

2. In regard of Propriety. And this doctrine is no less an abatement of pride
in the highest, as well as in the meanest, it lowers pride in point of
Propriety, as well as in point of Authority. Raynard de Deo p. 766.
Is any proud of his possessions, how many Lords of those possessions have gone
before you? How many are to follow you? Your Dominion lasts but for a short
time, too short, to be a cause of any pride and glory in it. God by a sovereign
power can take you from them, or them from you, when he pleases. The Traveller
refreshes himself in the heat of Summer under a shady Tree; how many have done
so before him the same day, he knows not, and how many will have the benefit
after, before night comes, he is as much ignorant of; he and the others that
went before him, and follow after him, use it for their refreshment, but none
of them can say, they are the Lords of it. The property is invested in some
other person, whom perhaps they know not; the propriety of all you have, is in
God, not truly in your selves. Does not that man deserve scorn from you, who
will play the proud fool in gay Clothes and attire, which are known to be none
of his own, but borrowed? Is it not the same case with every proud man, though
he has a property in his Goods by the Law of the Land? Is any thing you have
your own truly? Is it not lent you by the great Lord? Is it not the same vanity
in any of you, to be proud of what you have as Gods loan to you, as for such a
one to be proud of what he has borrowed of man. And do you not make your
selves as ridiculous to Angels, and good Men who know, that though it is yours
in opposition to man, yet it is not yours in opposition to God, they are
granted you only for your use, as the Collar of Esses and Sword, and other
Ensigns of the chief Magistrate in the City, pass through many hands in regard
of the use of them, but the propriety remains in the Community and body of the
City. Or as the Silver plate of a person that invites you to a Feast, is for
your use during the time of the invitation. What ground is there, to be proud
of those things, you are not the absolute Lords and Proprietors of, but only
have the use of them granted to you, during the pleasure of the sovereign of
the World?

2. Praise and Thank fullness results from this doctrine of the Sovereignty of
God.

1. He is to be praised for his royalty. Psalm. 145.1. I will extol thee my
God, Oh King. The Psalmist calls upon men five times, to sing praise to him as
the King of all the Earth. Psalm. 47.6, 7. Sing praises to God, sing praises,
sing praises to our King, sing praises: For God is the King of all the Earth,
sing ye praises with understanding. All Creatures even the inanimate ones are
called upon to praise him, because of the excellency of his Name and the
supremacy of his Glory in the 148. Psalm. throughout and ver. 13. That sovereign
power that gave us hearts and tongues, deserves to have them employed in his
praises especially since he has by the same hand, given us so great matter for
it. As he is a sovereign we owe him thankfulness, he does not deal with us in a
way of absolute Dominion, he might then have annihilated us: Since he has as
full a Dominion to reduce us to nothing, as to bring us out of nothing.
Consider the absoluteness of his sovereignty in it self, and you must needs
acknowledge, that he might have multiplied precepts, enjoined us the observance
of more than he has done, he might have made our tedder much shorter, he might
exact obedience, and promise no reward for it; he might dash us against the
walls, as a Potter does his Vessel, and no man have any just reason to say,
what do thou? Or why do thou use me so? A greater right is in him to use us
in such a manner, as we do sensible, as well as insensible things. And if you
consider his dominion, as it is capable to be exercised in a way of
unquestionable Justice, and submitted to the reason and judgments of Creatures,
he might have dealt with us in a smarter way, than he has hitherto done;
instead of one affliction we might have had a thousand. He might have shut his
own hands from pouring out any good upon us, and ordered innumerable scourges
to be prepared for us; but he deals not with us according to the rights of his
Dominion. He does not oppress us by the greatness of his Majesty; he enters
into Covenant with us, and allures us by the Cords of a man, and shows himself
as much a merciful as an absolute sovereign.

2. As he is a Proprietor we owe him thank fullness. He is at his own choice,
whither he will bestow upon us any blessings or no, the more value therefore
his benefits deserve from us, and the Donor the more sincere returns. If we
have any thing from the Creature to serve our turn, it is by the order of the
chief proprietor. He is the spring of honor, and the fountain of supplies; all
Creatures are but as the conduit pipes in a great City, which serve several
houses with water, but from the great spring. All things are conveyed
originally from his own hand, and are dispensed from his Exchequer. If this
great sovereign did not order them, you would have no more supplies from a
Creature, than you could have nourishment from a chip. It Is the Divine will in
every thing that does us good, every favor from Creatures is but a smile from
God, an evidence of his Royalty to move us to pay a respect to him as the great
Lord. Some Heathens had so much respect for God, as to conclude that his Will
and not their own prudence, was the chief conductor of their affairs. His
Goodness to us calls for our thankfulness but his sovereignty calls for a
higher elevation of it; a smile from a Prince is more valued, and thought
worthy of more gratitude, than a present from a Peasant. A small gift from a
great person is more greatefully to be received, than a larger from an inferior
person. The condescension of Royalty magnifies the gift. What is man, that thou
so great a Majesty, art mindful of him, to bestow this or that favor upon him,
is but a due reflection upon every blessing we receive? Upon every fresh
blessing we should acknowledge the donor, and true proprietor, and give him the
honor of his Dominion. His property ought to be thankfully owned, in every
thing we are capable of consecrating to him. As David after the liberal
collection he had made for the building of the Temple, own's in his dedication
of it to that use the propriety of God. 1 Chronicles. 29.14. Who am I? and what is
my people, that we should be able to offer so willingly after this sort? For
all things come of thee, and of thine own have we given thee. It was but a
return of Gods own to him, as the waters of the River are no other than the
return to the Sea, of what was taken from it.

Praise and Thankfulness is a Rent due from all mankind, and from every
Creature to the great Landlord, since all are Tenants, and hold by him at his
Will. Every Creature in Heaven and Earth, under the Earth, and in the Sea, were
heard by John to ascribe blessing, honor, glory, and power to him that sits on
the Throne. Rev. 5.13. We are as much bound to the sovereignty of God for his
pre^^rvation of us, as for his Creation of us. We are no less obliged to him,
that preservs our beings, when exposed to dangers, than we are for bestowing a
being upon us, when we were not capable of danger. Thankfulness is due to this
Sovereign for public concerns; Has he not preserved the Ship of his Church in
the midst of whistling winds, and roaring waves, in the midst of the combats of
men and Devils, and rescued it often, when it has been near ship-wrackt?

3. How should we be induced from hence to promote the honor of this
Sovereign? We should advance him as supreme, and all our actions should concur
in his honor. We should return to his Glory, what we have received from his
Sovereignty, and enjoy by his mercy: He that is the superior of all, ought to
be the end of all. This is the harmony of the Creation, that which is of an
inferior nature, is ordered to the service of that which is of a more
excellent nature, thus water and earth, that have a lower being, are employed
for the honor and beauty of the plants of the earth, who are more excellent in
having a principle of a growing life; These plants are again subservient to the
beasts and birds, which exceed them in a principle of sense, which the others
want; Those beasts and birds are ordered for the good of man, who is superior
to them in a Principle of reason, and is invested with a Dominion over them;
Man having God for his superior, ought as much to serve the glory of God, as
other things are designed to be useful to man. Other Governments are intended
for the good of the Community, the chief end is not the good of the Governors
themselves; But God being every way Sovereign, the Sovereign being, giving
being to all things, the Sovereign Ruler, giving order and preservation to all
things, is also the end of all things, to whose glory and honor all things,
all creatures are to be subservient. Romans 11.36. For of him, and through him,
and to him, are all things, to whom be glory for ever. Of him as the efficient
cause, through him as the preserving cause, to him as the final cause; All our
actions and thoughts ought to be addressed to his glory, our whole beings ought
to be consecrated to his honor, though we should have no reward, but the
honor of having been subservient to the end of our Creation; So much does the
excellency and Majesty of God, infinitely elevated above us, challenge of us.
Subjects use to value the safety, honor and satisfaction of a good Prince
above their own; David is accounted worth 10000 of the people, and some of his
Courtiers thought themselves obliged to venture their lives for his
satisfaction in so mean a thing, as a little water from the Well of Bethlehem.
Does not so great, so good a Sovereign as God, deserve the same affection from
us? Do we swear, says a Heathen, Arrian in Epicter.
to prefer none before Caesar, and have we not greater reason, to prefer none
before God? It Is a Justice due from us to God, to maintain his Glory, as it is
a Justice to preserve the right and property of another. As God would lay aside
his Deity, if he did deny himself, so a creature acts irregularly, and out of
the rank of a creature, if it does not deny it self for God. He that makes
himself his own end, makes himself his own Sovereign. To napkin up a gift he
has bestowed upon us, or to employ what we possess, solely to our own Glory,
to use any thing barely for our selves, without respect to God, is to apply it
to a wrong use, and to injure God in his propriety, and the end of his
donation. What we have, ought to be used for the honor of God; He retains the
Dominion and Lordship, though he grants us the use; We are but Stewards, not
Proprietors, in regard of God who expects an account from us, how we have
employed his goods to his honor. The Kingdom of God is to be advanced by us,
we are to pray that his Kingdom may come, we are to endeavor that his Kingdom
may come, that is, that God may be known to be the chief Sovereign, that his
Dominion, which was obscured by Adam's fall, may be more manifested, that his
Subjects which are suppressed in the World, may be supported, his Laws which are
violated by the rebellions of men, may be more obeyed, and his enemies be fully
subdued by his final judgment, the last evidence of his Dominion in this State
of the World, that the Empire of sin and the Devil may be abolished, and the
Kingdom of God be perfected, that none may rule but the great and rightful
Sovereign. Thus while we endeavor to advance the honor of his Throne, we
shall not want an honor to our selves. He is too gracious a Sovereign to
neglect them, that are mindful of his Glory; those that honor him, he will
honor; 1 Samuel 2.30.

4. Fear and reverence of God in himself, and in his actions, is a duty
incumbent on us from this Doctrine. Jer. 10.7. Who would not fear thee, O King
of Nations! The ingratitude of the World is taxt, in not reverencing God as a
great King, who had given so many marks of his Royal Government among them. The
Prophet wonders, there was no fear of so great a King in the World; Since among
all the wise men of the Nations, and among all their Kings, there is none like
unto this; No more reverence of him, since none ruled so wisely, nor any ruled
so graciously. The dominion of God is one of the first sparks, that gives fire
to Religion and Worship, considered with the goodness of this Sovereign. Psalm.
22.27.28. All the Nations shall worship before thee, for the Kingdom is the
Lord's, and he is Governor among the Nations. Epicurus, who thought God
careless of humane affairs, leaving th^^ at hap-hazard to the conduct of men's
wisdom, and mutability of fortune, yet acknowledged, that God ought to be
worshipped by man for the excellency of his nature, and greatness of his
Majesty. How should we reverence that God, that has a Throne encompast with
such Glorious Creatures as Angels, whose faces we are not able to behold though
shadowed in assumed bodies! How should we fear the Lord of Hosts, that has so
many Armies at his command in the Heavens above, and in the Earth below, whom
he can dispose to the exact obedience of his will; how should men be afraid to
censure any of his actions, to sit judge of their Judge, and call him to an
account to their Bar; How should such an earth-worm, a mean animal as man, be
afraid to speak irreverently of so great a King among his pots and Strumpets!
Not to fear him, not to reverence him, is to pull his Throne from under him,
and make him of a lower Authority than our selves, or any creature that we
reverence more.

5. Prayer to God, and trust in him is inferred from his Sovereignty. If he be
the supreme Sovereign, holding Heaven and Earth in his hand, disposing all
things here below, not committing every thing to the influence of the stars, or
the humors of men: we ought then to apply our selves to him in every case,
implore the exercise of his Authority, we hereby own his peculiar right over
all things and persons. He only is the supreme head in all causes, and over all
persons; Thine is the Kingdom concludes the Lord's Prayer, both as a motive to
pray, Mat. 6.13. and a ground to expect what we want. He that believes not
God's Government, will think it needless to call upon him, will expect no
refuge under him in a strait, but make some creature-reed his support. If we do
not seek to him, but rely upon the dominion we have over our own possessions,
or upon the Authority of any thing else, we disown his Supremacy and Dominion
over all things, we have as good an opinion of our selves, or of some creature,
as we ought to have of God. We think our selves, or some natural cause we seek
to, or depend upon, as much Sovereigns as he, and that all things which concern
us, are as much at the dispose of an inferior, as of the great Lord. It Is
indeed to make a God of our selves, or of the Creature: When we seek to him
upon all occasions, we own this divine eminency, we acknowledge that it is by
him men's hearts are ordered, the World governed, all things disposed; And God
that is jealous of his glory, is best pleased with any duty in the creature,
that does acknowledge and desire the glorification of it, which Prayer and
dependence on him does in a special manner; Desiring the exercise of his
Authority, and the preservation of it in ordering the affairs of the World.

6. Obedience naturally results from this Doctrine, As his justice requires
fear, his goodness thankfulness, his faithfulness trust, his truth belief, so
his Sovereignty in the nature of it demands Obedience. As it is most fit he
should rule in regard of his excellency: so it is most fit we should obey him
in regard of his Authority. He is our Lord, and we his Subjects, he is our
Master, and we his servants; it is righteous we should observe him, and conform
to his will. He is every thing, that speaks an Authority to command us, and
that can challenge an humility in us to obey. As that is the truest Doctrine,
that subjects us most to God, so he is the truest Christian, that does in his
practice most acknowledge this subjection. And as sovereignty is the first
notion a Creature can have of God, so obedience is the first and chief thing
Conscience reflects upon the Creature. Man holds all of God: and therefore owes
all the operations capable to be produced by those faculties to that sovereign
power that endowed him with them. Man had no being but from him, he has no
motion without him; he should therefore have no being but for him, and no
motion but according to him. To call him Lord, and not to act in subjection to
him, is to mock, and put a scorn upon him. Luke 6.46. Why call you me Lord,
Lord, and do not the things that I say? It Is like the Crucifying Christ under
the Title of a King. It Is not by professions, but by observance of the Laws of
a Prince, that we manifest a due respect to him. By that we reverence that
Authority, that enacted them, and the prudence that framed them.

This doctrine affords us motives to obey and directs us to the manner of
Obedience.

1. Motives to obey.

1. It Is Comely and Orderly. Is it not a more becoming thing to be ruled by the
will of our sovereign, than by that of our lusts? To observe a wise and
gracious Authority, than to set up inordinate appetites in the room of his Law?
Would not all men account it a disorder, to be abominated, to see a slave or
vassal control the just orders of his Lord, and endeavor to subject his
Masters will to his own? Much more to expect, God should serve our humor,
rather than we be regulated by his Will? It Is more orderly that subjects should
obey their Governors, than Governors their Subjects; that Passion should obey
Reason, than Reason obey Passion. When good Governors are to conform to
Subjects, and reason vail to passion, it is monstrous; the one disturbs the
order of a community, and the other defaceth the beauty of the Soul. Is it a
comely thing for God to stoop to our meanness, or for us to stoop to his
greatness?

2. In regard of the Divine Sovereignty, it is both honorable and advantageous
to obey God. It Is indeed the glory of a Superior, to be obeyed by his Inferior;
but where the sovereign is of transcendent excellency and dignity, it is an
honor to a mean person, to be under his immediate commands, and enrolled in
his service. It Is more honor to be Gods Subject, than to be the greatest
worldly Monarch; his very service is an Empire, and disobedience to him is a
slavery. Servire deo regnare est.
It Is a part of his sovereignty to reward any service done him. Other Lords may
be willing to recompense the service of their Subjects, but are often rendered
unable; but nothing can stand in the way of God, to hinder your reward, if
nothing stand in your way to hinder your obedience. Levit. 18.5. If you keep my
Statutes, you shall live in them, I am the Lord. Is there any thing in the
World can recompense you for Rebellion against God, and obedience to a Lust?
Saul cools the hearts of his Servants, from running after David, by David's
inability to give them Fields and Vineyards. 1 Samuel 22.7. Will the Son of Jesse
give every one of you Fields, and Vineyards, and make you Captains of
thousands, and Captains of hundreds, that you have conspired against me? But
God has a Dominion to requite, as well as an Authority to command your
obedience. He is a great sovereign, to bear you out in your observance of his
precepts against all reproaches and violences of men, and at last to crown you
with eternal honor. If he should neglect vindicating one time or other your
loyalty to him, he will neglect the maintaining and vindicating his own
sovereignty and greatness.

3. God in all his dispensations to man was careful, to preserve the rights of
his sovereignty, in exacting obedience of his Creature. The second thing he
manifested his sovereignty in, was that of a Lawgiver to Adam, after that of a
Proprietor in giving him the possession of the Garden; one followed immediately
the other. Genesis 2.15, 16. The Lord God took the man, and put him into the
Garden of Eden, to dress it, and the Lord God commanded the man, saying, of
every Tree of the Garden thou may freely eat, but of the Tree of the
knowledge of good and evil thou shall not eat of it, etc. Nothing was to be
enjoyed by man but upon the condition of obedience to his Lord; and it is
observed that in the description of the Creation, God is not called Lord till
the finishing of the Creation, and particularly in the forming of man. Genesis
2.7. And the Lord God formed man. Though he was Lord of all Creatures, yet it
was in man he would have his sovereignty particularly manifested, and by man
have his Authority specially acknowledged. The Law is prefac'd with this Title,
I am the Lord thy God. Exodus 20.2. Authority in Lord, sweetness in God, the one
to enjoin, the other to allure obedience; and God enforces several of the
commands with the same Title. And as he begins many precepts with it, so he
concludes them with the same Title, I am the Lord, Levit. 19.37. and in other
places.

In all his communications of his Goodness to man in ways of blessing them, he
stands upon the preservation of the rights of his sovereignty, and manifests
his graciousness in favor of his Authority. I am the Lord your God, your God
in all my perfections for your advantage, but yet your sovereign for your
obedience. In all his condescensions he will have the rights of this untoucht
and unviolated by us. When Christ would give the most pregnant instance of his
condescending, and humble kindness, he urges his Authority, to ballast their
Spirits from any presumptuous eruptions because of his humility. John 13.13.
You call me Master and Lord, and you say well, for so I am. He asserts his
Authority, and presses them to their duty, when he had seemed to lay it by for
the demeanor of a Servant, and had below the dignity of a Master put on the
humility of a mean underling, to wash the Disciples feet; all which was to
oblige them to perform the command he then gave them. ver. 14. in Obedience to
his Authority, and imitation of his Example.

4. All Creatures obey him. All Creatures punctually observe the Law he has
imprinted on their nature, and in their several capacities acknowledge him
their sovereign, they move according to the inclinations he imprinted on them.
The Sea contains it self in its bounds, and the Sun steps not out of its
sphere, the Stars march in their Order, they continue this day according to thy
Ordinance, for all are thy Servants. Psalm. 119.91. If he Orders things contrary
to their primitive nature, they obey him. When he speaks the word, the
devouring fire becomes gentle, and touches not a hair of the Children, he will
preserve. The hunger-starved Lions suspend their ravenous nature, when so good
a morsel as Daniel is set before them. And the Sun which had been in perpetual
motion since its Creation, obeys the writ of ease God sent it in Joshua's time,
and stands still. Shall insensible and sensible Creatures be punctual to his
Orders, passively acknowledge his Authority? Shall Lions and Serpents obey God
in their places, and shall not man, who can by reason argue out the sovereignty
of God, and understand the sense and goodness of his Laws, and actively obey
God with that will he has enricht him with above other Creatures? Yet the
truth is, every sensitive, yea every senseless Creature obeys God more than his
rational, more than his gracious Creatures in this World. The rational
Creatures since the fall have a prevailing principle of corruption. Let the
Obedience of other Creatures incite us more to imitate them, and shame our
remissness in not acknowledging the dominion of God, in the just way he
prescribes us to walk in.

Well then, let us not pretend to own God as our Lord, and yet act the part of
Rebels. Let us give him the reverence, and pay him that obedience, which of
right belongs to so great a King. Whatsoever he speaks as a true God, ought to
be believed, whatsoever he orders as a Sovereign God, ought to be obeyed. Let
not God have less than man, nor man have more than God. It Is a common principle
writ upon the reason of all men, that respect and observance is due to the
Majesty of a man, much more to the Majesty of God as a Lawgiver.

2. As this Doctrine presents us motives, so it directs us to the manner and
kind of our Obedience to God.

1. It must be with a respect to his Authority. As the veracity of God is the
formal object of faith, and the reason why we believe the things he has
revealed; so the Authority of God is the formal object of our obedience, or the
reason why we observe the things he has commanded. There must be a respect to
his will as the rule, as well as to his Glory as the end. It Is not formally
obedience that is not done with a regard to the order of God, though it may be
materially obedience, as it answers the matter of the Precept. As when men will
abstain from excess and rioting, because it is ruinous to their health, not
because it is forbidden by the great Lawgiver; This is to pay a respect to our
own convenience and interest, not a Conscientious observance to God; a regard
to our health, not to our Sovereign, a kindness to our selves, not a justice
due to the rights of God. There must not only be a consideration of the matter
of the Precept as convenient, but a consideration of the Authority of the
Lawgiver as Obligatory. Thus says the Lord, Ushers in every order of his,
directing our eye to the Authority enacting it. Jeroboam did God's will of
prophecy in taking the Kingdom of Israel; And the devils may be subservient in
God's will or providence; but neither of them are put upon the account of
obedience, because not done intentionally with any Conscience of the
Sovereignty of God. God will have this owned by a regular respect to it; So
much he insists upon the honor of it, that the Sacrifice of Christ, God-man
was most agreeable to him, not only as it was great and admirable in it self,
but also for that ravishing obedience to his will, which was the Life and Glory
of his Sacrifice, whereby the justice of God was not only owned in the
Offering, but the Sovereignty of God owned in the Obedience. Phil. 2.8. He
became obedient unto death; Wherefore God highly exalted him.

2. It must be the best and most exact obedience. The most Sovereign Authority
calls for the exactest and lowest observance, the highest Lord for the deepest
homage: being he is a great King, he must have the best in our flock. Mal. 1.
Obedience is due to God, as King, and the choicest obedience is due to him, as
he is the most excellent King. The more majestic and noble any man is, the
more careful we are in our manner of service to him. We are bound to obey God,
not only under the title of a Lord in regard of jurisdiction and political
subjection, but under the title of a true Lord and Master in regard of
propriety: since we are not only his subjects but servants, the exactest
obedience is due to God Jure servitutis, Luke 17.10. when you have done all,
say you are unprofitable servants, because we can do nothing which we owe not
to God.

3. Sincere and inward Obedience. As it is a part of his Sovereignty to
prescribe Laws not only to man in his outward State, but to his Conscience, so
it is a part of our subjection to receive his Laws into our will and heart. The
Authority of his Laws exceeds Humane Laws in the extent and riches of them, and
our acknowledgment of his Sovereignty cannot be right, but by subjecting the
faculties of our soul to the Lawgiver of our souls; We else acknowledge his
Authority to be as limited, as the Empire of man. When his will not only swayes
the outward action, but the inward motion, it is a giving him the honor of his
high Throne above the Throne of mortals. The right of God ought to be preserved
undamaged in affection, as well as action.

4. It must be sole Obedience. We are ordered to serve him only, Matt. 4.10.
Him only shall thou serve; as the only supreme Lord, as being the highest
Sovereign, it is fit he should have the highest obedience before all Earthly
Sovereigns, and as being unparalleled by any among all the Nations, so none
must have an obedience equal to him. When God commands, if the highest power on
earth countermands it, the Precept of God must be preferred before the
countermand of the creature. Act. 4.18, 19. Whither it be right in the sight of
God, to hearken unto you more than unto God, judge ye. We must never give place
to the Authority of all the Monarchs in the World, to the prejudice of that
obedience we owe to the Supreme Monarch of Heaven and Earth: this would be, to
place the Throne of God at the footstool of man, and debase him below the rank
of a creature. Loyalty to man can never recompense for the mischief accruing
from disloyalty to God. All the obedience we are to give to man, is to be paid
in obedience to God, and with an eye to his Precept: therefore what servants do
for their Masters, they must do as to the Lord, Col. 3.23. and children are to
obey their Parents in the Lord, Ephesians. 6.1. The Authority of God is to be eyed in
all the services payable to man; Proper and true obedience has God solely for
its principal and primary object; all obedience to man that interferes with
that, and would justle out obedience to God, is to be refused. What obedience
is due to man, is but rendered as a part of obedience to God, and a stooping of
his Authority.

5. It must be Universal Obedience. The Laws of man are not to be Universally
obeyed: some may be oppressing and unjust; No man has Authority to make an
unjust Law, and no subject is bound to obey an unrighteous Law; but God being a
Righteous Sovereign, there is not one of his Laws but does necessarily oblige
us to Obedience. Whatsoever this supreme power declares to be his will, it must
be our care to observe; Man being his creature, is bound to be subject to
whatsoever Laws he does impose, to the meanest as well as to the greatest: they
having equally a stamp of Divine Authority upon them. We are not to pick and
choose among his Precepts: this is to pare away part of his Authority, and
render him a half-soveraign.

It must be Universal in all places. An Englishman in Spain is bound to obey
the Laws of that Country, wherein he resides: and so not responsible there for
the breach of the Laws of his native Country. In the same condition is a
Spaniard in England. But the Laws of God are to be obeyed in every part of the
World; wheresoever divine providence does cast us, it casts us not out of the
places where he commands, nor out of the compass of his own Empire. He is Lord
of the World, and his Laws oblige in every part of the World, they were ordered
for a World, and not for a particular Climate and Territory.

6. It must be indisputable Obedience. All Authority requires readiness in the
Subject; the Centurion had it from his Soldiers, they went when he ordered
them, and came when he beckned to them. Matt. 8.9. It Is more fit God should
have the same promptness from his Subjects. We are to obey his Orders, though
our purblind understanding may not apprehend the reason of every one of them.
It Is without dispute that he is Sovereign, and therefore it is without dispute,
that we are bound to obey him, without controuling his conduct. A Master will
not bear it from his slave, why should God from his creature? Though God admits
his creatures sometimes to treat with him about the equality of his Justice,
and also about the reason of some commands, yet sometimes he gives no other
reason, but his own Sovereignty, Thus says the Lord, to correct the
malapertness of men, and exact from them an entire obedience to his unlimited
and absolute Authority. When Abraham was commanded to offer Isaac, God
acquaints him not with the reason of his demand till after, Genesis 22.2, 12. nor
did Abraham enter any demurr to the order, or expostulate with God, either from
his own natural affection to Isaac, the hardness of the command, it being as it
were a ripping up his own Bowels, nor the quickness of it after he had been a
child of the promise, and a divine donation above the course of nature. Nor did
Paul conferr with flesh and blood, and study arguments from nature and
interest, to oppose the divine command, when he was sent upon his Apostolical
employment. Galatians 1.16. The more indisputable his right is to command, the
stronger is our Obligation to obey, without questioning the reason of his
Orders.

7. It must be joyful Obedience. Men are commonly more cheerful in their
obedience to a great Prince, than to a mean Peasant: because the quality of the
Master renders the service more honorable. It Is a discredit to a Prince's
Government, when his Subjects obey him with discontent and dejectedness, as
though he were a hard Master, and his Laws tyrannical and unrighteous. When we
pay obedience but with a dull and feeble pace, and a sour and sad temper, we
blemish our great Sovereign, imply his commands to be grievous, void of that
peace and pleasure he proclaims to be in them; That he deserves no respect from
us, if we obey him, because we must, and not because we will. Involuntary
Obedience deserves not the Title: it is rather submission than obedience, an act
of the body, not of the mind; a Mite of Obedience with cheerfulness, is better
than a Talent without it. In the little Paul did, he comforts himself in this,
that with the mind he served the Law of God; Romans 7.25. The Testimonies of God
were David's delight. Psalm. 119.24. Our Understandings must take pleasure in
knowing him, our wills delightfully embrace him, and our actions be cheerfully
squared to him. This credits the Sovereignty of God in the World, makes others
believe him to be a gracious Lord, and move them to have some veneration for
his Authority.

8. It must be perpetual Obedience. As man is a subject as soon as he is a
creature, so he is a Subject as long as he is a Creature. God's Sovereignty is
of perpetual duration, as long as he is God; Man's obedience must be perpetual,
while he is a man. God cannot part with his Sovereignty, and a creature cannot
be exempted from subjection; We must not only serve him, but cleave to him.
Deuteronomy. 13.4. Obedience is continued in Heaven, his Throne is established in
Heaven, it must be bowed to in Heaven, as well as in Earth. The Angels
continually fulfill his pleasure.

7. Exhortation; Patience is a duty flowing from this Doctrine. In all strokes
upon our selves, or thick showers upon the Church; The Lord reigns, is a
consideration to prevent muttering against him, and make us quietly wait to see
what the issue of his divine pleasure will be. It Is too great an insolence
against the Divine Majesty, to censure what he acts, or quarrel with him for
what he inflicts. Proud clay does very unbecomingly swell against an infinite
superior. If God be our Sovereign, we ought to subscribe to his afflicting will
without debates, as well as to his liberal will with affectionate applauses. We
should be as full of patience under his sharper, as of praise under his more
grateful dispensations, and be without reluctance against his penal, as well as
his preceptive pleasure. It Is God's part to inflict, and the creatures part to
submit.

This Doctrine affords us motives, and shows us the nature of Patience.

1. Motives to it.

1. God being Sovereign, has an absolute right to dispose of all things. His
Title to our persons and possessions is upon this account stronger than our own
can be; We have as much reason to be angry with our selves, when we assert our
worldly right against others, as to be angry with God for asserting the right
of his Dominion over us. Why should we enter a charge against him, because he
has not tempered us so strong in our bodies, drawn us with as fair colors,
embellisht our spirits with as rich gifts as others? Is he not the Sovereign of
his own goods, to impart what, and in what measure he pleases? Would you be
content your servants should check your pleasure, in dispensing your own
favors? It Is an unreasonable thing, not to leave God to the exercise of his own
dominion. Though Job were a pattern of patience, yet he had deep tinctures of
impatience, he often complains of God's usage of him, as too hard, and stands
much upon his own integrity; But when God comes in the latter Chapters of that
book, to justify his carriage toward him, he charge him not as a criminal,
but considers him only as his Vassal. He might have found flaws enough in Job's
carriage, and corruption enough in Job's nature, to clear the equity of his
proceeding as a Judge, but he uses no other medium to convince him, but the
greatness of his Majesty, the unlimitedness of his sovereignty, which so
appales the good man, that he puts his finger on his mouth, and stands mute
with a self-abhorrenc; before him as a sovereign, rather than as a Judge. When
he does pinch us, and deprive us of what we most affect, his right to do it
should silence our lips, and calm our hearts from any boisterous uproars
against him.

2. The property of all still remains in God, since he is sovereign. He did not
divest himself of the property, when he granted us the use. The Earth is his,
not ours, the fullness of the Earth is his, it is not ours, the fullness any of us
have, as well as the fullness others have. After he had given the Israelites
Corn, Wine, and Oil, he calls them all His, and emphatically adds My to every
one of them. Hos. 2.9. His right is universal over every mite we have, and
perpetual too. He may therefore take from us, what he please. He did but
deposite in our hands for a while the benefits we enjoy, either Children,
Friends, Estate or Lives; he did not make a total conveyance of them, and
alienate his own property, when he put them into our hands; we can show no
Patent for them, wherein the full right is past over to us, to hold them
against his will and pleasure, and implead him if he offer to reassume them. He
reserved a power to dispossess us upon a forfeiture, as he is the Lord and
Governor. Did any of us yet answer the condition of his grant? It was his
indulgence, to allow them so long. There is reason to submit to him, when he
reassumes what he lent us, and rather to thank him, that he lent it so long,
and did not seize upon it sooner.

3. Other things have more reason to complain of our sovereignty over them,
than we of God's exercise of his sovereignty over us. Do we not exercise an
Authority over our Beasts, as to strike them, when we please, and merely for
our pleasure; and think we merit no reproof for it, because they are our own,
and of a nature inferior to ours? And shall not God who is absolute, do as much
with us, who are more below him, than the meanest Creatures are below us? They
are Creatures as well as we, and we no more Creatures than they, they were
framed by omnipotence, as well as we; there is no more difference between them
and us in the notion of Creatures.

As there is no difference between the greatest Monarch on Earth, and the
meanest Beggar on the dunghill in the notion of a man: The Beggar is a man, as
well as the Monarch, and as much a man; the difference consists in the special
Endowments we have above them by the bounty of their and our common Creator. We
are less, if compared with God, than the worst, meanest, most sordid Creature
can be, if compared with us. Has not a Bird or a Hare, (if they had a
capacity) more reason to complain of men's persecuting them by their Hawks and
their Dogs? but would their complaints appear reasonable, since both were made
for the use of man, and man does but use the nature of the one, to attain a
benefit by the other? Have we any reason to complain of God, if he lets loose
other Creatures, the devouring Hounds of the World, to bite and afflict us? We
must not open our lips against him, nor let our heart swell against his
scourge, since both they and we were made for his use, as well as other
Creatures for ours. This is a reason to stifle all complaints against God, but
not to make us careless of preventing afflictions, or emerging out of them by
all just ways. The Hare has a nature to shift for it self by its winding and
turning, and the Bird by its flight, and neither of them could be blamed, if
they were able, should the one scratch out the Eyes of the Hounds, and the
other sacrifice the Hawk to its own fury.

4. It Is a folly not to submit to him. Why should we strive against him, since
he is an unaccountable sovereign, and gives no account of any of his matters.
Job 33.13. Who can disannul the judgment God gives? There is no appeal from
the supreme Court; a higher Court can repeal, or null the sentence of an
inferior Court, but the sentence of the highest stands irreversible, but by it
self, and its own Authority. It Is better to lower our Sails, than to grapple
with one, that can shoot us under Water. To submit to that sovereign, whom we
cannot subdue.

2. It shows us the true nature of Patience in regard of God. It Is a
submission to Gods sovereignty. As the formal object of Obedience is the
Authority of God enacting the Law, so the formal object of patience is the
Authority of God inflicting the punishment. As his right of commanding is to be
eyed in the one, so his right of punishing is to be considered in the other.
This was Eli's condition when he had received a message, that might put flesh
and blood into a mutiny, the rending the Priesthood from his Family, and the
ruin of his House, yet this consideration, It Is the Lord, calms him into
submission, and a willing compliance with the Divine pleasure, 1 Samuel 3.18.
it is the Lord, Let him do what seems good in his sight. Job was of the same
strain. Job. 1.21. The Lord gives, and the Lord has taken away, blessed be the
name of the Lord. He considers God as a sovereign, who was not to be
reproached, or have any thing uncomly uttered of him, for what he had done. To
be patient, because we cannot avoid it, or resist it, is a violent not a Loyal
Patience, but to submit because it is the will of God to inflict: To be silent,
because the sovereignty of God does order it, is a patience of a true
complexion. The other kind of patience is no other than that of an Enemy, that
will free himself as soon as he can, and by any way though never so violent
that offers it self. This sort of patience is that of a subject acknowledging
the supreme Authority over him, and that he ought to be ordered by the will,
and to the Glory of God, more than by his own will, and for his own ease. I was
dumb, I opened not my mouth. Psalm. 39.10. Not because I could not help it: But
because thou did it, thou who art my sovereign Lord. The greatness of God
claims an awful and inviolable respect from his Creatures, in what way soever
he does dispose of them; this is due to him, since his Kingdom rules over all,
his Kingdom should be acknowledged by all, and his Royal Authority submitted to
in all that he does.

A DISCOURSE UPON GODS Patience.
NAHUM. I. Verse 3. The Lord is slow to Anger, and great in Power, and will not
at all acquit the Wicked: The Lord has his way in the Whirlwind, and in the
Storm, and the Clouds are the dust of his Feet.


THE Subject of this prophecy is Gods sentence against Niniveh, the Head and
Metropolis of the Assyrian Empire. A City famous for its strength, and
thickness of its Walls, and the multitude of its Towers for defense against an
Enemy. The Forces of this Empire did God use as a scourge against the
Israelites, and by their hands ruined Samaria the chief City of the Ten Tribes,
and transplanted them as Captives into another Country, 2 Kin. 17.5, 6. about
six years after Hezekiah came to the Crown of Judah. 2 Kings 18. compared with
the 17 chap. v. 6. In whose time, or (as some think) later, Nahum uttered this
prophecy. The Name Nahum, signifies Comforter, though the matter of his
prophecy be dreadful to Niniveh, it was comfortable to the people of God: For
a promise is made ver. 7. The Lord is good, a strong hold in the day of
trouble; and he knows them, that trust in him. And an encouragement to Judah,
to keep their solemn Feasts, ver. 15. And also in chap. 2.3. with a declaration
of the misery of Niniveh and the destruction of it.

Observe.

I. In all the fears of Gods people, God will have a Comforter for them. Judah
might well be dejected with the calamity of their Brethren, not knowing but it
might be their own turn shortly after. They knew not where the ambition of the
Assyrian would stop, but God by his Prophets calms their fears of their furious
Neighbor, by predicting to them the ruin of their feared Adversary.

II. The destruction of the Churches Enemies is the comfort of the Church. By
that God is glorified in his Justice, and the Church secured in its Worship.

III. The Victories of Persecutors, secure them not from being the triumphs of
others. The Assyrians that conquered, and captived Israel, were themselves to
be conquered, and captived by the Medes. The whole oppressing Empire is
threatened with destruction in the ruin of their chief City; accordingly it was
accomplished, and the Empire extinguished by a greater power. God burns the Rod,
when it has done the work he appointed it for; and the wisp of straw wherewith
the vessels are scoured is flung into the fire, or upon the Dunghill.

Nahum begins his prophecy majestically, with a description of the wrath and
fury of God. ver. 2. God is jealous, and the Lord revengeth, the Lord
revengeth, and is furious, the Lord will take vengeance on his adversaries, and
reserveth wrath for his Enemies: And therefore the whole of it is called ver.
1. The burden of Niniveh, as those prophesies are, which are composed of
threatenings of judgments, which lie as a mighty weight upon the heads, and
backs of sinners.

God is Jealous,] jealous of his Glory and Worship, and jealous for his people
and their security. He cannot long bear the oppressions of his people, and the
boasts of his Enemies. He is jealous for himself, and is jealous for you of
Judah, who retain his Worship. He is not forgetful of those that remember him,
nor of the danger of those that are desirous to maintain his honor in the
World. In this first expression, the Prophet uses the Covenant Name, God, the
Covenant runs, I am your God, or The Lord your God, mostly God without Lord,
never Lord without God: And therefore his jealousy here is meant of the care of
his people, and the relation that his actions against his Enemies have to his
Servants. He is a lover of his own, and a revenger on his Enemies.

The Lord Revengeth and is Furious.] He now describes God by a name of
sovereignty and Power, when he describes him in his Wrath, and Fury, and is
Furious. Heb. (...) Lord of hot Anger. God will vindicate his own Glory, and
have his right on his Enemies in a way of punishment, if they will not give it
him in a way of Obedience. Ribera in loc.
It Is three times repeated, to show the certainty of the judgment. And the name
of Lord added to every one, to intimate the Power wherewith the Judgment should
be executed. It Is not a Fatherly correction of Children in a way of Mercy; but
an offended sovereigns destruction of his Enemies in a way of vengeance. There
is an anger of God with his own people, which has more of Mercy than Wrath; in
this his Rod is guided by his bowels. There is a fury of God against his
Enemies, where there is sole Wrath without any tincture of Mercy; when his
Sword is all edge without any Balsom-drops upon it. Such a fury as David
deprecates. Psalm. 6.1. Oh Lord rebuke me not in thy Anger, nor chasten me in
thy sore displeasure; with a fury untempered with Grace, and insupportable
Wrath.

He reserves Wrath for his Enemies.] He lays it up in his Treasury, to be
brought out, and expended in a due season. Wrath is supplied by our
Translators, and is not in the Hebrew. He reserves, what? that which is too
sharp to be expressed, too great to be conceived. A vengeance it is. And (...) He
reserves it. He that has an infinite Wrath, he reserves it, that has a
strength, and power to execute it.

VERSE 3.
The Lord is slow to Anger,] Heb. (...) Of broad Nostrils. The Anger of God is
expressed by this word, which signifies Nostrils. As Job 9.13. If God will not
withdraw his Anger, Heb. his nostril. And the Anger whereby the wicked are
consumed, is called the breath of Nostrils, Job 4.9. and when he is angry,
smoke and fire are said to go out of his Nostrils. 2 Samuel 2.9. and in the 74th.
Psalm 1. Why does thy anger smoke, Heb. Why do thy Nostrils smoke. So the rage
of a Horse when he is provokt in battle, is called the Glory of his Nostrils.
Job 39.20. He breaths quick fumes, and neighs with fury.

And slowness to anger is here expressed by the phrase of long or wide Nostrils:
Because in a vehement anger the blood boiling about the heart, exhales men's
Spirits, which fume up, and break out in dilated Nostrils. But where the
passages are straiter, the spirits have not so quick a vent; and therefore
raise more motions within. Or because, the wider the Nostrils are the more cool
Air is drawn in, to temper the heat of the heart; where the angry spirits are
gathered. And so the passion is allayed, and sooner calmed. God speaks of
himself in Scripture often after the rate of Men, Jeremy prays. Jer. 15.15.
That God would not take him away in his long-suffering, Heb. in the length of
his Nostrils. i. e. Be not slow and backward in thy anger against my
Persecutors, as to give them time, and opportunity to destroy me. The Nostrils
as well as other members of a humane Body are ascribed to God. He is slow to
anger, he has anger in his nature, but is not always in the execution of it.

And great in Power.] This may refer to his Patience as the cause of it, or
as a bar to the abuse of it.

1. He is slow to anger, and great in power, i. e. his power moderates his
Anger; he is not so impotent, as to be at the command of his passions, as men
are. He can restrain his anger under just provocations to exercise it. His
power over himself is the cause of his slowness to wrath. As Numb. 14.17. Let
the power of my Lord be great, says Moses, when he pleads for the Israelites
pardon. Men that are great in the World, are quick in passions, and are not so
ready to forgive an injury, or bear with an offender, as one of a meaner rank.
It Is a want of a power over a man's self, that makes him do unbecoming things
upon a provocation. A Prince that can bridle his passion, is a King over
himself, as well as over his Subjects. God is slow to Anger, because great in
Power. He has no less power over himself, than over his Creatures. He can
sustain great injuries without an immediate and quick revenge. He has a power
of Patience, as well as a power of Justice.

2. Or thus, he is slow to Anger, and great in Power. He is slow to Anger, but
not for want of Power to revenge himself; his Power is as great to punish, as
his Patience to spare. It seems thus, that slowness to Anger is brought in as
an objection against the revenge proclaimed. What do you tell us of vengeance,
vengeance, nothing but such repetitions of vengeance? As though we were
ignorant, that God is slow to Anger? It Is true, says the Prophet, I
acknowledge it as much as you, that God is slow to Anger; but withal great in
Power. His Anger certainly succeeds his abused Patience; he will not always
bridle in his Wrath, but one time or other let it march out in fury against his
Adversaries. The Assyrians who had captived the Ten Tribes, and been victorious
a little against the Jews, might think that the God of Israel had been
conquered by their Gods, as well as the People professing him had been subdued
by their arms. That God had lost all his power, and the Jews might argue from
Gods Patience to his Enemies, against the credit of the Prophets denouncing
revenge. The Prophet answers to the terror of the one, and the comfort of the
other. That this indulgence to his Enemies, and not accounting with them for
their Crimes, proceeded from the greatness of his Patience, and not from any
debility in his power. As it refers to the Assyrian, it may be rendered thus:
You Ninivites upon your Repentance after Jonahs thundering of Judgments are
Witnesses of the slowness of God to Anger, and had your punishments deferred.
But falling to your old sins, you shall find a real punishment, and that he
has as much Power, to execute his ancient threatenings, as he had then
compassion to recall them. His Patience to you then was not for want of power
to ruin you, but was the effect of his goodness toward you. As it refers to
the Jews, it may be thus paraphrased: do not despise this threatening against
your Enemies, because of the greatness of their might, the seeming stability of
their Empire, and the terror they posse^s all the Nations with round about
them. It may be long before it comes, but assure your selves, the threatening I
denounce, shall certainly be executed, though he has Patience to endure them a
hundred thirty five years, (for so long it was before Nineveh was destroyed
after this threatening, as p. 359. col. 1^
Ribera in loc. computes from the years of the reign of the Kings of Judah) yet
he has also power to verify his word, and accomplish his will: assure your
selves, he will not at all acquit the wicked.

He will not acquit the wicked.] He will not always account the criminal an
innocent, as he seems to do by a present sparing of them, and dealing with them
as if they were destitute of any provoking carriage toward him, and he void of
any resentment of it. He will not acquit the wicked, how is this, who then can
be saved? Is there no place for remission? He will not acquit the wicked i. e.
He will not acquit obstinate sinners. As he has Patience for the wicked, so he
has Mercy for the penitent. The wicked are the subjects of his long suffering,
but not of his acquitting grace. He does not presently punish their sins,
because he is slow to anger; But without their Repentance he will not blot out
their sins, because he is righteous in judgment. If God should acquit them
without Repentance for their crimes, he must himself repent of his own Law, and
Righteous Sanction of it.

He will not acquit, i. e. he will not go back from the thing he has spoken,
and forbear, at long run, the punishment he has threatened.

The Lord has his way in the Whirlwind,] The way of God signifies sometimes
the Law of God, sometimes the providential operations of God. Ezekiel. 18.25. Is
not my way equal? It seems there to take in both.

And in the Storm, and the Clouds are the dust of his feet.] Tirinus in loc.
The Prophet describes here the fight of God with the Assyrians, as if he rusht
upon them with a mighty noise of an Army, raising the dust with the feet of
their horses, and motion of their Chariots. Symbolically, it signifies the
multitude of the Chaldean, and Median forces invading, besieging and storming
the City.

It signifies,

1. The rule of Providence. The way of God is in every motion of the creature;
He rules all things, Whirlwind, Storms, Clouds, his way is in all their walks,
in the whirlings and blustrings of the one, in the raising and dissolving the
other. He blows up the Winds, and compacts the Clouds, to make them serviceable
to his designs.

2. The management of wars by God. His way is in the storm; As he was the
Captain of the Assyrians against Samaria, so he will be the Captain of the
Medes against Niniveh. As Israel was not so much wasted by the Assyrians, as by
the Lord, who levied, and armed their Forces; So Niniveh shall be subverted,
rather by God than by the Arms of the Medes. Their force is described not to be
so much from Humane power as Divine; God is President in all the commotions of
the World, his way is in every Whirlwind.

3. The easiness of executing the judgment. He is of so great power that he can
excite Tempests in the Air, and overthrow them with the Clouds, which are the
dust of his feet. He can blind his enemies, and avenge himself on them: he is
Lord of Clouds, and can fill their womb with Hail, Lightnings, and Thunders, to
burst out upon those he kindles his anger against. He is of so great force,
that he needs not use the strength of his Arm, but the dust of his Feet, to
effect his destroying purpose.

4. The suddenness of the judgment. Whirl-winds come suddenly without any
harbingers to give notice of their approach; Clouds are swift in their motion.
Isa. 60.8. Who are those that fly as a Cloud, i. e. with a mighty nimbleness;
What God does, he shall do on the sudden, come upon them before they are aware,
be too quick for them in his motion to overrun, and overreach them. The winds
are described with wings, in regard of the quickness of their motion.

5. The terror of judgments, The Lord has his way in the Whirlwind, i. e. in
great displeasure. The anger of the Lord is often compared to a storm; He shall
bring Clouds of judgments upon them, many and thick, as terrible as when a day
is turned into night, by the mustering of the darkest clouds, that interpose
between the Sun and the Earth. Clouds and darkness are round about him, and a
fire goes before him, when he burns up his enemies. Psalm. 97.2, 3. The
judgments shall have terror without mercy, as clouds obscure the light, and are
dark masks before the face and glory of the Sun, and cut off its refreshing
Beams from the Earth. Clouds note multitude and obscurity; God could crush them
without a Whirlwind, beat them to powder with one touch, but he will bring his
judgments in the most surprising and amazing manner to flesh and blood, so that
all their Glory shall be changed into nothing but terror, by the noise of the
bellowing winds, and the clouds like ink blacking the Heavens.

6. The confusion of the Offenders upon God's proceeding. A Whirlwind is not
only a boisterous wind, that hurls and rouls every thing out of its place, but
by its circular motion, by its winding to all points of the compass, it
confounds things, and jumbles them together. It keeps not one point, but by a
circumgyration touches upon all. Clouds like dust shall be blown in their
face, and gumm up their eyes. They shall be in a posture of confusion, not know
what counsels to take, what motions to resolve upon; Let them look to every
point of Heaven and Earth, they shall meet with a Whirlwind to confound them,
and cloudy dust to blind them.

7. The irresistibleness of the judgment. Winds have more than a Giant like
force, a torrent of compacted Air, that with an invincible wilfulness bears all
before it, displaceth the firmest Trees, and levels the tallest Towers, and
pulls up bodies from their natural place. Clouds also are over our heads, and
above our reach; When God places them upon his people for defense, they are an
invincible security. Isa. 4.5. And when he moves them as his Chariot against a
people, they end in an irresistible destruction; Thus the ruin of the wicked
is described. Prove. 10.25. As the Whirlwind passes, so is the wicked no more.
It blows them down, sweeps them away, they irrecoverably fall before the force
of it. What heart can endure, and what hands can be strong, in the days wherein
God does deal with them? Ezekiel. 22.14. Thus is the judgment against Niniveh
described; God has his way in the Whirlwind to thunder down their strongest
Walls, which were so thick, that Chariots could march abreast upon them, and
batter down their mighty Towers, which that City had in multitudes upon their
Walls.

They are the first words I intend to insist upon, to treat of the Patience of
God, described in those words; The Lord is slow to anger.

Doct. Slowness to anger, or admirable Patience, is the property of the divine
nature. As Patience signifies suffering, so it is not in God. The divine nature
is impassible, incapable of any impair, it cannot be touched by the violences
of men, nor the essential Glory of it be diminisht by the injuries of men; But
as it signifies a willingness to deferr, and an unwillingness to pour forth his
wrath upon sinful creatures; He moderates his provoked justice, and forbears to
revenge the injuries he daily meets with in the World. He suffers no grief by
men's wronging him, but he restrains his arm from punishing them according to
their merits; And thus there is Patience in every cross a man meets with in the
World: because though it be a punishment, it is less than is merited by the
unrighteous rebel, and less than may be inflicted by a righteous and powerful
God.

This Patience is seen in his providential works in the World; He suffered the
Nations to walk in their own way, and the witness of his Providence to them was
his giving them Rain, and fruitful seasons, filling their heart with food and
gladness. Act. 16.17. The Heathens took notice of it, and signified it, by
feigning their God Saturn, to be bound a whole year in a soft cord, a cord of
wool, and expressed it by this Proverb; The Mills of the Gods grind slowly; i. e.
God does not use men with that severity that they deserve: The Mills being
usually ^^nn'd by criminals, condemned to that work. Rhodigi. l. 6. c. 14.
This in Scripture is frequently expressed by a slowness to anger, Psalm. 103.8.
sometimes by long suffering, which is a patience with duration; Psalm. 145.8.
and Joel 2.13. He is slow to anger, he takes not the first occasions of a
provocation; He is long suffering, Romans 9.22. and Psalm. 86.15. he forbears
punishment upon many occasions offered him. It Is long before he consents to
give fire to his wrath, and shoot out his Thunderbolts; Sin has a loud cry,
but God seems to stop his ears, not to hear the clamor it raises, and the
charge it presents. He keeps his Sword a long time in the sheath; One calls the
Patience of God, the sheath of his sword, upon those words, Ezekiel. 21.3. I will
draw forth my sword out of his sheath. (...) Theodoret in loc.
This is one remarkable letter in the name of God, he himself proclaims it;
Exodus 34.6. The Lord, the Lord God, merciful, gracious and long suffering. And
Moses pleads it in the behalf of the people, Numb. 14.18. where he places it
in the first rank; The Lord is long suffering, and of great mercy: It Is the
first spark of mercy, and ushers it to its exercises in the World. In the
Lord's Proclamation, it is put in the middle link, Mercy and Truth together;
Mercy could have no room to act, if Patience did not prepare the way; And his
truth and goodness in his promise of the Redeemer would not have been manifest
to the World, if he had shot his Arrows as soon as men committed their sins,
and deserved his punishment. This perfection is expressed by other phrases, as
keeping silence; Psalm. 50.21. These things have thou done, and I kept silence,
(...) it signifies to behave ones self as a deaf or dumb man. I did not fly in
thy face, as some do with great a noise, upon a light provocation, as if their
Life, Honor, Estates were at the stake. I did not presently call thee to the
bar, and pronounce judicial sentence upon thee according to the Law, but
demeaned my self, as if I had been ignorant of thy crimes, and. had not been
invested with the power of judging thee for them, Chald. I waited for thy
Conversion. God's Patience is the silence of his Justice, and the first whisper
of his mercy.

It Is also expressed by not laying folly to men. Job 24.12. Men groan under the
oppressions of others, yet God lays not folly to them, i. e. to the
oppressors, God suffers them to go on with impunity. He does not deliver his
people, because he would try them, and takes not revenge upon the unrighteous,
because in Patience he does bear with them. Patience is the Life of his
Providence in this World. He charge not men with their crimes here, but
reserves them upon impenitency for another trial. This attribute is so great a
one, that it is signally called by the name of perfection. Matt. 5.45, 48. He
had been speaking of Divine goodness, and Patience to evil men, and he
concludes, be you perfect, etc. Implying it to be an amazing perfection in the
divine nature, and worthy of imitation.

In the prosecution of this, 1. Let us consider the nature of this Patience. 2.
Wherein it is manifested. 3. Why God does exercise so much Patience. 4. The USE.


1. The nature of this Patience.

1. It Is part of the divine goodness and mercy, yet differs from both. God
being the greatest goodness, has the greatest mildness; Mildness is always the
companion of true goodness, and the greater the goodness, the greater the
mildness. Who so Holy as Christ, and who so meek? God's slowness to anger is a
branch, or slip from his mercy. Psalm. 145.8. The Lord is full of compassion,
slow to anger. It differs from mercy in the formal consideration of the object;
Mercy respects the creature as miserable, Patience respects the creature as
criminal: Mercy pities him in his misery, and Patience bears with the sin,
which engendered that misery, and is giving birth to more.

Again, Mercy is one end of Patience, his long suffering is partly to glorify
his Grace, so it was in Paul. 1 Timothy 1.16. As slowness to anger springs from
goodness, so it makes mercy the butt, and mark of its operations; Isa. 30.18.
He waits that he may be gracious; Goodness sets God upon the exercise of
Patience, and Patience sets many a sinner on running into the arms of mercy.
That mercy which makes God ready to embrace returning sinners, makes him
willing to bear with them in their sins, and wait their return.

It differs also from goodness, in regard of the object. The object of goodness
is every creature, Angels, Men, all inferior creatures, to the lowest worm
that crawls upon the ground. The object of Patience is primarily man, and
secondarily, those creatures that respect men's support, convenience and
delight; But they are not the objects of Patience, as considered in themselves,
but in relation to man, for whose use they were created, and therefore God's
Patience to them is properly his Patience with man. The lower creatures do not
injure God, and therefore are not the objects of his Patience, but as they are
forfeited by man, and man deserves to be deprived of them; As man in this
regard falls under the Patience of God, so do those creatures which are
designed for man's good. That Patience which spares man, spares other creatures
for him, which were all forfeited by man's sin, as well as his own life, and
are rather the testimonies of God's Patience, than the proper objects of it.
The object of God's goodness then is the whole Creation, not a Devil in Hell,
but as a creature is a mark of his goodness, but not of his patience. There is
a kind of sparing exercised to the Devils, in deferring their complete
punishment, and hitherto keeping off the day, wherein their final sentence is
to be pronounced, yet the Scripture never mentions this by the name of slowness
to anger, or long suffering. It can no more be called Patience, than a Princes
keeping a Malefactor in chains, and not pronouncing a condemning sentence, or
not executing a sentence already pronounced, can be called a Patience with him,
when it is not out of kindness to the Offender, but for some reasons of State.
God's sparing the Devils from their total punishment (which they have not yet,
but are reserved in chains, under darkness for it. Jude 6.) is not in order to
Repentance, or attended with any invitations from God, or hopes in them: and
therefore cannot come under the same title as Gods sparing man; Where there is
no proposal of mercy, there is no exercise of Patience. The fallen Angels had
no mercy reserved for them, nor any Sacrifice prepared for them, God spared not
the Angels, 2 Pet. 2.4. but delivered them into chains of darkness, to be
reserved unto judgment, i. e. he had no Patience for them: For Patience is
properly a temporary sparing a person, with a waiting for his relenting, and a
change of his injurious demeanor; The object of goodness is more extensive
than that of Patience: Nor do they both consider the object under the same
relation. Goodness respects things in a capacity, or in a state of Creation,
and brings them forth into Creation, and nurseth, and supports them as
Creatures. Patience considers them already Created, and fallen short of the
duty of creatures; It considers them as sinners, or in relation to sinners. Had
not sin entered, Patience had never been exercised; but goodness had been
exercised, had the creature stood firm in its Created State without any
transgression; Nay Creation could not have been without goodness: because it
was goodness to Create; But Patience had never been known without an object,
which could not have been without an injury. Where there is no wrong, no
suffering, nor like to be any, Patience has no prospect of any operation. So
then goodness respects persons as creatures, Patience as transgressors; Mercy
eyes men as miserable and obnoxious to punishment: Patience considers men as
sinful, and provoking to punishment.

2. Since it is a part of goodness and mercy, it is not an insensible patience.
What is the fruit of pure goodness, cannot be from a weakness of resentment; he
is slow to anger; The Prophet does not say, he is incapable of anger, or cannot
discern what is a real object of anger; It implies, that he does consider every
provocation, but he is not hasty to discharge his arrows upon the Offenders; He
sees all, while he bears with them: his omniscience excludes any ignorance; He
cannot but see every wrong; every aggravation in that wrong, every step and
motion from the begi^^ing to the completing it: For he knows all our thoughts;
he sees the sin, and (...) sinner at the same time, the sin with an eye of
abhorrency, and the sinner with an eye of pity. His eye is upon their
iniquities, and his hatred edged against them; while he stands with arms open,
waiting a penitent return. When he publishes his patience in his keeping
silence, he publishes also his resolution, to set sin in order before their
Eyes. Psalm. 50.21. I will reprove thee, and set them in order before thy Eyes.
Think me not such a piece of phlegm and so dull as not to resent your
insolences; you shall see in my final charge, when I come to Judge, that not a
wry look escaped my knowledge, that I had an eye to behold, and a heart to
loath every one of your Transgressions. The Church was ready to think, that
Gods slowness to deliver her, and his bearing with her oppressors, was not from
any Patience in his nature, but a drowsy carelessness, a senseless Lethargy.
Psalm. 44.23. Awake, why sleep thou, Oh Lord? We must conclude him an
inapprehensive God, before we can conclude him an insensible God. As his
delaying his promise, is not slackness to his people, 2 Pet. 3.9. So his
deferring of punishment, is not from a stupidity, under the affronts offered
him.

3. Since it is a part of his Mercy and Goodness, it is not a constrained or
faint-hearted Patience. It Is not a slowness to Anger, arising from a
despondency of his own p^^er to revenge. He has as much power to punish, as he
has to forbear punishment. He that created a World in six days, and that by a
word, wants not a strength to crush all mankind in one minute; and with as much
ease as a Word imports, can give satisfaction to his Justice in the blood of
the offender. Patience in man is many times interpreted, and truly too, a
cowardice, a feebleness of Spirit and a want of strength. But i^ (...) not from
the shortness of the divine arm, that he cannot reach us, nor from the (...) of
his hand, that he cannot strike us. It Is not because he cannot lev^ (...) dust
(...) us in pieces like a Potters Vessel, or consume us as a Moth^ (...)
^tiest, to fall before him, and lay the strongest at his fe^ (...) crime. He
that did not want a powerful Word, to (...) want a powerful Word, to dissolve
the whole frame of (...) it out of being. It Is not therefore out of a distrust
of his own power, that he has supported a sinful World for so many ages, and
patiently born the Blasphemies of some, the neglects of others, and the
ingratitude of all, without inflicting that severe Justice which righteously he
might have done; he wants no thunder to crush the whole generation of men, nor
waters to drown them, nor Earth to swallow them up. How easy is it for him to
single out this or that particular person, to be the object of his Wrath, and
not of his Patience? What he has done to one, he may to another; any signal
judgment he has sent upon one, is an evidence, that he wants not power to
inflict it upon all. Could he not make the motes in the Air to choke us at
every breath, Rain thunderbolts instead of drops of water, fill the Clouds with
a consuming Lightning, take off the reverence and fear of man, which he has
imprinted upon the Creature, Spirit our domestic Beasts to be our
Executioners, unloose the Tiles from the house top to brain us, or make the
fall of a house to crush us? It Is but taking out the pins, and giving a blast,
and the work is done. And does he want a power to do any of those things? It Is
not then a faint-hearted, or feeble Patience, that he exercises toward Man.

4. Since it is not for want of power over the Creature, it is from a fullness of
power over himself. This is in the Text; The Lord is slow to Anger, and great
in Power; it is a part of his Dominion over himself, whereby he can moderate,
and rule his own affections according to the holiness of his own Will. As it is
the effect of his power, so it is an argument of his power; the greatness of
the effect demonstrates the fullness, and sufficiency of the Cause. The more
feeble any man is in reason the less command he has over his passions, and he
is the more heady to revenge. Revenge is a sign of a Childish mind; the
stronger any man is in reason, the more command he has over himself. Prove.
16.32. He that is slow to Anger is better than the mighty, and he that rules
his own Spirit, than he that takes a City. He that can restrain his Anger, is
stronger than the Coesars, and Alexanders of the World, that have filled the
Earth with slain Carcasses, and ruined Cities. By the same reason, God's
slowness to Anger is a greater argument of his Power, than the creating a
World, or the power of dissolving it by a Word. In this he has a Dominion over
Creatures, in the other over himself. This is the reason he will not return to
destroy; because I am God, and not Man. Hosea 11.9. I am not so weak and
impotent as man, that cannot restrain his Anger. This is a strength possessed
only by a God, wherein a Creature is no more able to parallel him, than in any
other. So that he may be said to be the Lord of himself; as it is in the verse
before the Text, that he is the Lord of Anger, in the Hebrew instead of furious
as we translate it, so he is the Lord of Patience. The end why God is Patient,
is to show his Power. Romans 9.22. What if God willing to show his Wrath, and to
make his Power known, endured with much Long-suffering, the Vessels of Wrath
fitted to destruction? To show his Wrath upon Sinners, and his Power over
himself, in bearing such indignities, and forbearing punishment so long, when
men were vessels of wrath fitted for destruction, of whom there was no hopes of
amendment. Had he immediately broken in pieces those Vessels, his power had not
so eminently appeared, as it has done, in tolerating them so long, that had
provoked him to take them off so often. There is indeed the power of his Anger,
and there is the power of his Patience; and his power is more seen in his
Patience, than in his Wrath. It Is no wonder that he that is above all, is able
to crush all. But it is a wonder, that he that is provoked by all, does not
upon the first provocation, rid his hands of all. This is the reason, why he
did bear such a weight of provocations from vessels of wrath, prepared for
ruin, that he might (...), show what he was able to do, the Lordship and
Royalty he had over himself. The power of God is more manifest in his Patience
to a multitude of Sinners, than it could be in Creating Millions of Worlds out
of nothing; this was the (...), a power over himself.

5. This Patience being a branch of Mercy, the exercise of it is founded in the
Death of Christ. Without the consideration of this, we can give no account, why
Divine Patience should extend it self to us, and not to the fallen Angels. The
threatening extends it self to us, as well as to the fallen Angels. The
threatening must necessarily have sunk man, as well as those glorious Creatures,
had not Christ stepped into our relief. Testa^d. de nature. and Great. These. 119.
Had not Christ interposed to satisfy the Justice of God, man upon his sin had
been actually bound over to punishment, as well as the fallen Angels were upon
theirs, and been fettered in chains as strong as those Spirits feel. The reason
why man was not hurled into the same deplorable condition upon his sin, as they
were, is Christ's promise of taking our nature, and not theirs. Had God designed
Christ's taking their nature, the same Patience had been exercised toward
them, and the same offers would have been made to them, as are made to us. In
regard of these fruits of this Patience, Christ is said to buy the wickedest
Apostates from him. 1 Pet. 2.1. Denying the Lord that bought them; such were
bought by him, as bring upon themselves just destruction, and whose damnation
slumbers not, ver. 3. he purchased the continuance of their lives, and the stay
of their execution, that offers of Grace might be made to them. This Patience
must be either upon the account of the Law, or the Gospel; for there are no
other rules, whereby God governs the World; a fruit of the Law it was not, that
spoke nothing but Curses after Disobedience, not a letter of Mercy was writ
upon that: And therefore nothing of Patience.

Death and Wrath was denounced, no slowness to Anger intimated. It must be
therefore upon the account of the Gospel, and a fruit of the Covenant of Grace,
whereof Christ was Mediator. Besides this perfection being God's waiting that
he might be Gracious. Isai^h 30.18. that which made way for Gods Grace, made
way for his waiting to manifest it. God discovered not his Grace, but in
Christ: And therefore discovered not his Patience but in Christ; it is in him he
met with the satisfaction of his Justice, that he might have a ground for the
manifestation of his Patience. And the Sacrifices of the Law, wherein the Life
of a beast was accepted for the sin of a man, discovered the ground of his
forbearance of them, to be the expectation of the great sacrifice, whereby sin
was to be completely expiated. Genesis 8.21. The publication of his Patience to
the end of the World is presently after the sweet savor he found in Noah's
sacrifice. The promised and designed coming of Christ was the cause of that
Patience God exercised before in the World. And his gathering the Elect
together, is the reason of his Patience since his death.

6. The naturalness of his Veracity and Holiness, and the strictness of his
Justice, are no bars to the exercise of his patience.

1. His Veracity. In those threatenings where the punishment is expressed, but not
the time of inflicting it prefixed, and determined in the threatening, his
veracity suffers no damage by the delaying Execution; so it be once done,
though a long time after, the credit of his Truth stands unshaken: As when God
promises a thing without fixing the time, he is at liberty to pitch upon what
time he pleases for the performance of it without staining his faithfulness to
his Word, by not giving the thing promised presently. Why should the deferring
of Justice upon an offender, be any more against his Veracity, than his
delaying an answer to the petitions of a suppliant? But the difference will lie
in the threatening. Genesis 2.17. In the day thou eatest thereof, thou shall dye
the death. The time was there settled, In that day, thou shall dye; some refer
day to eating, not to dying; and render the sentence thus, I do not prohibit
thee the eating this fruit for a day or two, but continually. In whatsoever day
thou eatest thereof, thou shall dye; but not understanding his dying that very
day he should eat of it. Referring [day] to the extensiveness of the
prohibition, as to time. But to leave this as uncertain, it may be answered;
that as in some threatenings, a condition is employed, though not expressed; as in
that positive denouncing of the destruction of Niniveh. Jonah 3.4. Yet forty
days and Nineveh shall be destroyed; the condition is implied, unless they
humble themselves, and repent, for upon their Repentance, the sentence was
deferred. So here, in the day thou eatest thereof, thou shall dye the death, or
certainly dye, unless there be a way found for the expiation of thy crime, and
the righting my honor; This condition in regard of the event, may as well be
asserted to be employed in this threatening, as that of Repentance was in the
other. Or rather, thou shall dye, thou shall die spiritually, thou shall loose
that image of mine in thy nature, that Righteousness which is as much the Life
of thy Soul, as thy Soul is the life of thy Body; that Righteousness whereby
thou art enabled to live to me, and thy own happiness. What the Soul is to the
Body, a quickening Soul, that the image of God is to the Soul, a quickening
image. Or thou shall dye the death, or certainly dye, thou shall be liable to
death. Perer in loc.
And so it is to be understood, not of an actual death of the Body, but the
merit of death, and the necessity of death; thou will be obnoxious to death,
which will be avoided, if thou do forbear to eat of the forbidden fruit; thou
shall be a guilty person, and so under a sentence of death, that I may when I
please inflict it on thee. Death did come upon Adam that day, because his
nature was vitiated. He was then also under an expectation of death, he was
obnoxious to it, though that day it was not poured out upon him in the full
bitterness and gall of it. As when the Apostle says, Romans 8.10. The Body is
dead because of sin, he speaks to the Living, and yet tells them, the body was
dead because of sin; he means no more than that it was under a sentence, and so
a necessity of dying though not actually dead. So thou shall be under the
sentence of death that day, as certainly as if that day thou should sink into
the dust. And as by his Patience toward man, not sending forth death upon him
in all the bitter ingredients of it, his Justice afterward was more eminent
upon man's surety, than it would have been, if it had been then employed in all
its severe operations upon man. So was his Veracity eminent also in making good
this threatening, in inflicting the punishment included in it upon our nature
assumed by a mighty person, and upon that person in our nature, who was
infinitely higher than our nature.

2. His justice and righteousness are not prejudiced by his patience. There is
a hatred of the sin in his holiness, and a sentence past against the sin in his
justice, though the execution of that sentence be suspended, and the person
reprieved by patience, which is employed; Eccles. 8.11. Because sentence against
an evil work is not executed speedily: therefore the heart of the sons of men
is fully set in them to do evil; Sentence is past, but a speedy execution is
stopped.

Some of the Heathens who would not imagine God unjust, and yet seeing the
villainies and oppressions of men in the World remain unpunisht, and frequently
beholding prosperous wickedness, to free him from the charge of injustice,
denied his providence, and actual Government of the World: for if he did take
notice of humane affairs, and concern himself in what was done upon the Earth,
they could not think an infinite goodness and Justice could be so slow, to
punish oppressors, and relieve the miserable, and leave the World in that
disorder under the injustice of men. They judged such a patience as was
exercised by him, if he did govern the World, was drawn out beyond the line of
fit and just. Is it not a presumption in men to prescribe a rule of
Righteousness and convenience to their Creator? It might be demanded of such,
whether they never injured any in their lives? and when certainly they have one
way or other; would they not think it a very unworthy, if not unjust thing,
that a person so injured by them should take a speedy and severe revenge on
them? And if every man should do the like, would there not be a speedy dispatch
made of Mankind? Would not the World be a shambles, and men rush forwards to
one another destruction, for the wrongs they have mutually received? If it be
accounted a virtue in man, and no unrighteousness, not presently to be all on
fire against an offense; by what right should any question the consistency of
Gods patience with his justice? Do we praise the lenity of Parents to children,
and shall we disparage the long suffering of God to men? We do not censure the
righteousness of Physicians and Surgeons, because they cut not off a corrupt
member this day as well as to morrow? And is it just to asperse God, because he
does deferr his vengeance, which man assumes to himself a right to do? We never
account him a bad Governor, that deferrs the trial, and consequently the
condemnation and execution of a notorious offender, for important reasons, and
beneficial to the public, either to make the nature of his crime more evident,
or to find out the rest of his accomplices by his discovery. A Governor indeed
were unjust, if he commanded that which were unrighteous, and forbad that which
were worthy and commendable; But if he delays the execution of a convict
offender, for weighty reasons, either for the benefit of the state whereof he
is the Ruler, or for some advantage to the offender himself, to make him have a
sense of, and a regret for his offense, we account him not unjust for this. God
does not by his patience dispense with the holiness of his Law, nor cut off any
thing from its due Authority. If men do strengthen themselves by his long
suffering against his Law, it is their fault, not any unrighteousness in him. He
will take a time to vindicate the Righteousness of his own commands, if men
will wholly neglect the time of his patience, in forbearing to pay a dutiful
observance to his Precept. If Justice be natural to him, and he cannot but
punish sin, yet he is not necessitated to consume sinners, as the fire does
stubble put into it, which has no command over its own qualities, to restrain
them from acting; But God is a free agent, and may choose his own time, for the
distribution of that punishment his nature leads him to. Though he be naturally
just, yet it is not so natural to him, as to deprive him of a dominion over his
own acts, and a freedom in the exerting them what time he judges most
convenient in his Wisdom. God is necessarily holy, and is necessarily angry
with sin, his nature can never like it, and cannot but be displeased with it;
yet he has a liberty to restrain the effects of this anger for a time, without
disgracing his holiness, or being interpreted to act unrighteously; As well as
a Prince or State may suspend the execution of a Law, which they will never
break, only for a time, and for a public benefit.

If God should presently execute his Justice, this perfection of patience which
is a part of his goodness, would never have an opportunity of discovery. Part
of his Glory, for which he Created the World, would lie in obscurity from the
knowledge of his creature. His Justice would be signal in the destruction of
sinners, but this stream of his goodness would be stopped up from any motion. One
perfection must not cloud another, God has his seasons to discover all, one
after another. The times and seasons are in his own power. Act. 1.7. The
seasons of manifesting his own perfections as well as other things; Succession
of them in their distinct appearance makes no invasion upon the rights of any.
If justice should complain of an injury from patience, because it is delaid,
patience has more reason to complain of an injury from justice, that by such a
plea it would be wholly obscured and unactive. For this perfection has the
shortest time to act its part of any, it has no stage but this World to move
in; Mercy has a Heaven, and Justice a Hell, to display it self to Eternity,
but long suffering has only a short lived earth for the compass of its
operation.

Again Justice is so far from being wronged by Patience, that it rather is made
more illustrious, and has the fuller scope to exercise it self; It Is the more
righted for being deferred, and will have stronger grounds than before for its
activity. The equity of it will be more apparent to every reason, the
objections more fully answered against it when the way of dealing with sinners
by patience has been slighted. When this dam of long suffering is removed, the
floods of fiery justice will rush down with more force and violence; Justice
will be fully recompensed for the delay, when after Patience is abused, it can
spread it self over the offender with a more unquestionable Authority, it will
have more arguments to hit the sinner in the teeth with, and silence him. There
will be a sharper edge for every stroke, the sinner must not only pay for the
score of his former sins, but the score of abused patience; so that justice
has no reason to commence a suit against God's slowness to anger. What it
shall want by the fullness of mercy upon the truly penitent, it will gain by the
contempt of patience on the impenitent abusers. When men by such a carriage are
ripened for the stroke of justice, justice may strike without any regret in it
self, or pull-back from mercy. The contempt of long suffering will silence the
pleas of the one, and spirit the severity of the other. To conclude, since God
has glorified his justice on Christ, as a surety for sinners, his patience is
so far from interfering with the rights of his justice, that it promotes it;
It Is dispensed to this end, that God might pardon with honor, both upon the
score of purchased mercy, and contented justice; that by a penitent sinners
return his mercy might be acknowledged free, and the satisfaction of his
Justice by Christ be glorified in believing: for he is long suffering from an
unwillingness, that any should perish, but that all should come to Repentance.
2 Pet. 3.9. i. e. All to whom the promise is made, for to such the Apostle
speaks, and calls it long suffering to us ward; And Repentance being an
acknowledgment of the demerit of sin, and a breaking off unrighteousness, gives
a particular glory to the freeness of mercy, and the equity of Justice.

II. The 2d. thing; How this patience or slowness to anger is manifested.

1. To our First Parents. His slowness to anger was evidenced, in not directing
his Artillery against them, when they first attempted to rebel. He might have
struck them dead, when they began to bite at the temptation, and were
inclinable to a surrender; for it was a degree of sinning, and a breach of
Loyalty, as well, though not so much as the consummating Act. God might have
given way to the floods of his wrath at the first spring of man's aspiring
thoughts, when the monstrous motion of being as God began to be curdled in his
heart; But he took no notice of any of their Embryo sins, till they came to a
ripeness, and started out of the womb of their minds, into the open Air; And
after he had brought his sin to perfection, God did not presently send that
death upon him, which he had merited, but continued his Life to the space of
930 years. Genesis 5.5. The Sun and Stars were not arrested, from doing their
Office for him. Creatures were continued for his use, the earth did not swallow
him up, nor a Thunderbolt from Heaven raze out the memory of him. Though he had
deserved to be treated with such a severity for his ungrateful demeanor to his
Creator and Benefactor, and affecting an equality with him, yet God continued
him with a sufficiency for his content, after he turned rebel, though not with
such a liberality as when he remained a Loyal Subject; And though he foresaw;
that he would not make an end of sinning, but with an end of living, he used
him not in the same manner, as he had used the Devils. He added days and years
to him, after he had deserved death, and has for this 5000 years continued the
propagation of Mankind, and derived from his loins an innumerable posterity,
and has crowned multitudes of them with hoary heads; He might have extinguished
humane race at the first, but since he has preserved it till this day, it must
be interpreted nothing else, but the effect of an admirable Patience.

2. His slowness to anger is manifest to the Gentiles. What they were, we need
no other witness than the Apostle Paul, who sums up many of their crimes. Romans
1.29.30, 31, 32. He does preface the Catalogue with a comprehensive expression,
being filled with all unrighteousness; And concludes it with a dreadful
aggravation; They not only do the same, but have pleasure in them that do them.
They were so soakt and naturalized in wickedness, that they had no delight and
found no sweetness in any thing else, but what was in it self abominable; All
of them were plunged in Idolatry and Superstition: none of them but either set
up their great men, or creatures beneficial to the World, and some the damned
Spirits in his stead, and paid an adoration to insensible Creatures or Devils,
which was due to God. Some were so depraved in their lives and actions, that it
seemed to be the interest of the rest of the World, that they should have been
extinguished for the instruction of their contemporaries and posterity. The best
of them had turned all Religion into a fable, coined a World of rites, some
unnatural in themselves, and most of them unbecoming a rational creature to
offer, and a Deity to accept; Yet he did not presently arm himself against them
with Fire and Sword, nor stopped the course of their Generations, nor tare out
all those relics of natural light, which were left in their minds. He did not
do what he might have done, but he winkt at the times of that ignorance, Act.
17.30. their ignorant Idolatry: for that it referrs to, ver. 29. They thought
the Godhead was like to Gold or Silver, or stone graven by Art, and men's
device; (...) overlooking them; He demeaned himself so, as if he did not take
notice of them. He winkt as if he did not see them, and would not deal so
severely with them: the eye of his Justice seemed to wink, in not calling them
to an account for their sin.

3. His slowness to anger is manifest to the Israelites. You know how often
they are called a stiff-necked people; they are said to do evil from their
youth, i. e. from the time wherein they were erected a Nation and
Commonwealth; and that the City had been a provocation of his anger, and of
his fury from the day that they built it, even to this day, i. e. the day of
Jeremiah's Prophecy, that he should remove it from before his face. Jer.
32.31. From the days of Solomon say some, which is too much a curtailing of
the Text, as though their provocations had taken date no higher than from the
time of Solomon's rearing the Temple, and beautifying the City, whereby it
seemed to be a new Building. They began more early, they scarce discontinued
their revolting from God, they were a grief to him 40 years together in the
Wilderness, Psalm. 95.10. Yet he suffered their manners, Act. 13.18. He bore
with their ill behavior, and sawcyness toward him; And no sooner was Joshua's
head laid, and the Elders that were their conductors, gathered to their
fathers, but the next Generation forsook God, and smutted themselves with the
Idolatry of the Nations; Judge. 2.7.10, 11. And when he punished them by
prospering the Arms of their enemies against them, they were no sooner
delivered upon their cry and humiliation, but they began a new Scene of
Idolatry. And though he brought upon them the power of the Babylonian Empire,
and laid chains upon them, to bring them to their right mind. And at 70 years
end he struck off their chains, by altering the whole posture of affairs in
that part of the World for their sakes; Overturning one Empire, and settling
another for their Restoration to their ancient City. And though they did not
after disown him for their God, and set up Baal in his Throne, yet they
multiplied foolish traditions, whereby they impaired the Authority of the Law;
yet he sustained them with a wonderful Patience, and preferred them before all
other people in the first offers of the Gospel; And after they had outrag'd not
only his servants the Prophets, but his Son the Redeemer, yet he did not
forsake them, but employed his Apostles to solicit them, and publish among
them the Doctrine of Salvation. So that his treating this people, might well be
called much long suffering, it being, above 1500 years, wherein he bore with
them, or mildly punished them, far less than their deserts. Their coming out of
Egypt being about the year of the World 2450, and their final destruction as a
Commonwealth, not till about 40 years after the death of Christ; And all this
while his Patience did sometimes wholly restrain his Justice, and sometimes let
it fall upon them in some few drops, but made no total devastation of their
Country, nor wrote his revenge in extraordinary bloody Characters, till the
Roman conquest, wherein he put a period to them, both as a Church and State.

In particular this Patience is manifest.

1. In his giving warnings of Judgments, before he orders them to go forth. He
does not punish in a passion, and hastily; He speaks before he strikes, and
speaks that he may not strike. Wrath is published, before it is executed, and
that a long time; An 120 years Advertisement was given to a debauched World,
before the Heavens were opened, to spout down a deluge upon them. He will not
be accused of coming unawares upon a people; He inflicts nothing, but what he
foretold either immediately to the people that provoke him, or anciently to
them that have been their forerunners in the same provocation. Hos. 7.12. I
will chastise them, as their Congregation has heard. Many of the leaves of the
Old Testament are full of those Presages and Warnings of approaching judgment.
These make up a great part of the Volume of it in various Editions, according
to the State of the several provoking times. Warnings are given to those people
that are most abominable in his sight; Zeph. 2.1, 2. Gather your selves
together, yea gather together Oh Nation, not desired; it is a Meiosis, Oh Nation
abhorred, before the decree bring forth. He sends his Heralds, before he sends
his Armies; He summons them by the voice of his Prophets, before he confounds
them by the voice of his Thunders. When a parley is beaten, a white flagg of
Peace is hung out, before a black flagg of fury is set up. He seldom cuts down
men by his Judgments, before he has hewed them by his Prophets; Hos. 6.5. Not
a remarkable judgment, but was foretold: the Flood to the Old World by Noah:
The Famine to Egypt by Joseph; The Earthquake by Amos. Amos 1.1. The storm from
Chaldea by Jeremy; The Captivity of the Ten Tribes by Hosea; The total
destruction of Jerusalem, and the Temple by Christ himself; He has chosen the
best persons in the World to give those intimations; Noah, the most Righteous
person on the earth for the Old World; And his Son the most beloved person in
Heaven for the Jews in the later time. And in other parts of the World, and in
the later times, where he has not warned by Prophets, he has supplied it by
Prodigies in the Air and Earth; Histories are full of such Items from Heaven.
Lesser judgments are fore-warners of greater, as Lightnings before Thunder, are
Messengers to tell us of a succeeding clap.

1. He does often give warning of Judgments. He comes not to extremity, till he
has often shaken the rod over Men; He thunders often, before he crusheth them
with his Thunderbolt, He does not till after the first and second admonition
punish a rebel, as he would have us reject a Heretic. He speaks once, yea
twice, Job 33.14. and man percieves it not; He sends one Message after another,
and waits the success of many messages, before he strikes. Eight Prophets were
ordered to acquaint the Old World with approaching judgment: 2 Pet. 2.5. He
saved Noah the 8th. person, a Preacher of Righteousness, bringing in the Flood
upon the World of the ungodly, called the 8th. in respect of his Preaching, not
in regard of his preservation; He was the 8th. Preacher, in order from the
beginning of the World, that endeavored to restore the World to the way of
Righteousness. Most indeed consider him here, as the 8th person saved, so do
our Translators: and therefore add Person, which is not in the Greek. Some
others consider him here, as the 8th. Preacher of Righteousness, reckoning
Enoch the Son of Seth the first: grounding it upon Genesis 4.26. Then began men to
call on the Name of the Lord, Hebr. Then it was began to call in the Name of
the Lord; (...). Sept. He began to call in the Name of the Lord, which others
render, he began to preach, or call upon men in the Name of the Lord. The word
(...) signifies to Preach, or to call upon men by Preaching. Prove. 1.21. Wisdom
cries, or preaches; And if this be so, as it is very probable, it is easy to
reckon him the 8th. Preacher, by numbering the successive heads of the
Generations; Genesis 5. Beginning at Enosh the first Preacher of Righteousness,
Vid. Gells (...).
So many there were before God choakt the Old World with water, and swept them
away; It Is clear he often did admonish by his Prophets, the Jews of their sin,
and the wrath which should come upon them. One Prophet, Hosea, Prophesied 70
years; for he Prophesied in the days of 4 Kings of Judah, and one of Israel,
Jeroboam, the Son of Joash, Hos. 1.1. or Jeroboam the second of that name.
Vzziah King of Judah, in whose Reign Hosea Prophesied, lived 38 years after the
death of Jeroboam. The Second Jotham, Vzziah's Successor, Reigned 16 years,
Ahaz 16, Hezekiah 29 years; Now take nothing of Hezekiah's time, and Date the
beginning of his Prophecy from the last year of Jeroboam's Reign, and the time
of Hosea's Prophecy, will be 70 years complete; Wherein God warned those
people, and waited the return particularly of Israel; Sanctius. Prolegom. in
Hosea Prolog. the 3d.
and not less than 5 of those, we call the lesser Prophets, were sent to
foretell the destruction of the Ten Tribes, and to call them to Repentance:
Hosea, Joel, Amos, Micah, Jonah; And though we have nothing of Jonah's
Prophecy in this concern of Israel, yet that he lived in the time of the same
Jeroboam, and Prophesied things, which are not upon record in the book of
Jonah, is clear; 2 King. 14.25. And besides those, Isaiah Prophesied also in
the Reign of the same Kings, as Hosea did; Isa. 1.1. And it is God's usual
method, to send forth his servants, and when their admonitions are slighted, he
Commissions others, before he sends out his destroying Armies. Mat. 22.3, 4, 7.

2. He does often give warning of Judgments, that he might not pour out his
wrath. He summons them to a surrender of themselves, and a return from their
Rebellion, that they might not feel the force of his Arms. He offers peace
before he shakes off the dust of his feet, that his despised peace might not
return in vain to him, to solicit a revenge from his anger. He has a right
to punish upon the first Commission of a crime, but he warns men of what they
have deserved, of what his Justice moves him to inflict, that by having
recourse to his mercy, he might not exercise the rights of his Justice. God
sought to kill Moses for not circumcising his Son. Exodus 4.24. Could God, that
sought it, miss of a way to do it? Could a creature lurch, or fly from him?
God put on the garb of an enemy, that Moses might be discouraged from being an
instrument of his own ruin: God manifested an anger against Moses for his
neglect, as if he would then have destroyed him, that Moses might prevent it,
by casting off his carelessness, and doing his duty. He sought to kill him by
some evident sign, that Moses might escape the judgment by his obedience. He
threatens Niniveh by the Prophet with destruction, that Niniveh's Repentance
might make void the Prophecy. He fights with men by the Sword of his mouth,
that he might not pierce them by the Sword of his wrath. He threatens, that men
might prevent the execution of his threatening; He terrifies, that he might not
destroy, but that men by humiliation may lie prostrate before him, and move the
bowels of his mercy to a louder sound, than the voice of his Anger. He takes
time to whet his Sword, that men may turn themselves from the edge of it. He
roars like a Lion, that men, by hearing his voice, may shelter themselves from
being torn by his Wrath. There is patience in the sharpest threatening, that we
may avoid the scourge. Who can charge God with an eagerness to revenge, that
sends so many Heralds, and so often before he strikes, that he might be
prevented from striking? His threatenings have not so much of a black flag, as
of an Olive branch. He lifts his up hand, before he strikes, that men might See
and avert the stroke. Isaiah 26.11.

2. His Patience is manifest, in long delaying his threatened Judgments, though
he finds no Repentance in the Rebels. He does sometimes delay his lighter
punishments, because he does not delight in torturing his Creatures; but he
does longer delay his destroying punishments, such as put an end to men's
happiness, and remit them to their final and unchangeable state; because he
does not delight in the death of a Sinner. While he is preparing his arrows, he
is waiting for an occasion to lay them aside, and dull their points, that he
may with honor march back again, and disband his Armies. He brings lighter
smarts sooner, that men might not think him asleep, but he suspends the more
terrible judgments, that men might be led to Repentance. He scatters not his
consuming fires at the first, but brings on ruining vengeance with a slow pace;
sentence against an evil work is not speedily executed. Eccles. 8.11. The Jews
therefore say that Michael, the Minister of Justice, flies with one wing, but
Gabriel the Minister of Mercy with two. An 120 years did God wait upon the old
World, and delay their punishment, all the time the Ark was preparing. 1 Pet.
3.20. Wherein that wicked Generation did not enjoy only a bare patience, but a
striving patience. Genesis 6.3. My Spirit shall not always strive with man, yet
his days shall be one hundred and twenty years, the days wherein I will strive
with him; that his Long-suffering might not lose all its fruit, and remit the
objects of it into the hands of consuming Justice. It was the Tenth Generation
of the World from Adam, when the deluge overflowed it, so long did God bear
with them. And the Tenth Generation from Noah wherein Sodom was consumed. God
did not come to keep his Assizes in Sodom, till the cry of their sins was very
strong, that it had been a wrong to his Justice to have restrained it any
longer. The cry was so loud, that he could not be at quiet, as it were, on his
Throne of Glory for the disturbing noise. Genesis 18.20, 21. Sin transgresses the
Law, the Law being violated, solicites Justice, Justice being urged pleads for
punishment; the cry of their sins did as it were force him from Heaven to come
down, and examine what cause there was for that clamor. Sin cries loud and
long, before he takes his Sword in hand. Four hundred years he kept off
deserved destruction from the Amorites, and deferred making good his promise to
Abraham, of giving Canaan to his Posterity out of his Long-suffering to the
Amorites. Genesis 15.16. In the fourth Generation they shall come hither again,
for the iniquity of the Amorites is not yet full. Their measure was filling
then, but not so full as to put a stop to any further patience till four
hundred years after. The usual time in succeeding Generations from the
denouncing of Judgments to the execution, is forty years, this some ground upon
Ezekiel. 4.6. thou shall bear the iniquity of the House of Judah forty days,
taking each day for a year. Though Hosea lived seventy years, yet from the
beginning of his prophesying Judgments against Israel to the pouring them out
upon that Idolatrous People, it was forty years. Hosea as was mentioned before,
prophesied against them in the days of Jeroboam the second, in whose time God
did wonderfully deliver Israel. 2 Kings 14.26.27. From that time till the total
destruction of the ten Tribes it was forty years, as may easily be computed
from the Story, 2 Kings 15, 16, 17. chapters. by the Reign of the succeeding
Kings. So forty years after the most horrid villainy that ever was committed in
the face of the Sun, viz. The Crucifying the Son of God, was Jerusalem
destroyed, and the inhabitants captived; so long did God delay a visible
punishment for such an outrage. Sometimes he prolongs sending a threatened
judgment upon a mere shadow of humiliation; so he did that denounced against
Ahab. He turned it over to his posterity, and adjourned it to another season. 1
Kings 21.29. He does not issue out an Arrest upon one Transgression, you often
find him not commencing a suit against men, till three and four Transgressions.
The first of Amos, all along that chapter, and the second chapter; for three
and four, i. e. seven. A certain number for an uncertain. He gives not orders
to his judgments to march, till men be obstinate, and refuse any commerce with
him. He stops them, till there be no remedy. 2 Chronicles. 36.16. It must be a great
wickedness that gives vent to them, Hos. 10.15. Heb. your wickedness of
wickedness. He is so slow to anger, and stays the punishment his enemies
deserve, that he may seem to have forgot his kindness to his Friends. Psalm.
44.24. Wherefore hidest thou thy face, and forgettest our affliction, and
oppression? He lets his people groan under the yoke of their Enemies, as if he
were made up of kindness to his Enemies, and anger against his Friends. This
delaying of punishment to evil men, is visible in his suspending the terrifying
acts of Conscience, and supporting it only, in its checking, admonishing, and
controuling acts. The patience of a Governor is seen in the patient mildness
of his Deputy. David's Conscience did not terrify him, till nine months after
his sin of Murder. Should God set open the Mouth of this power within us, not
only the Earth, but our own bodies, and Spirits, would be a burden to us. It Is
long before God puts Scorpions into the hands of men's Consciences, to scourge
them. He holds back the rod, waiting for the hour of our return, as if that
would be a recompense for our offenses, and his forbearance.

III. His Patience is manifest in his unwillingness to execute his Judgments,
when he can delay no longer. He does not afflict willingly, nor grieve the
Children of Men. Lament. 3.33. Hebr. He does not afflict from his Heart. He
takes no pleasure in it, as he is Creator. The height of men's provocations. and
the necessity of the preserving his rights, and vindicating his Laws, obliges
him to it, as he is the Governor of the World. As a Judge may willingly
condemn a Malefactor to death out of affection to the Laws, and desire to
preserve the order of Government, but unwillingly out of Compassion to the
offender himself. When he resolved upon the destruction of the old World, he
spoke it, as a God grieved with an occasion of punishment, Genesis 6.6, 7.
compared together. When he came to reckon with Adam, be walked, he did not run
with his Sword in his hand upon him, as a mighty man with an eagerness to
destroy him. Genesis 3.8. And that in the cool of the day, a time when men tired
in the day, are unwilling to engage in a hard employment. His exercising
judgment, is a coming out of his place. Isaiah 26.21. Micah 1.3. He comes out
of his station, to exercise judgment; a Throne is more his place than a
tribunal. Every prophecy loaded with threatenings, is called the Burden of the
Lord, a burden to him to execute it, as well as to men to suffer it. Though
three Angels came to Abraham about the punishment of Sodom whereof one Abraham
speaks to as to God, yet but two appeared at the destruction of Sodom; as if
the Governor of the World were unwilling to be present at such dreadful work.
Genesis 19.1. And when the Man that had the inkhorn by his side, that was
appointed, to mark those that were to be preserved in the common destruction,
returned to give an account of the performing his commission, Ezekiel. 9.10. We
read not of the return of those that were to kill, as if God delighted only to
hear again of his works of Mercy, and had no mind to hear again of his severe
proceedings. Mercer in Genesis 1.5.
The Jews to show Gods unwillingness to punish, imagine that Hell was created
the second day: Because that days work is not pronounced good by God, as all
the other days works are, Genesis 1.8.

1. When God does punish, he does it with some regret. Cressol. Decad. 2. p.
163.
When he hurles down his thunders, he seems to do it with a backward hand:
Because with an unwilling heart. He created, says Chrysostom, the World in six
days, but was seven days in destroying one City Jericho, which he had before
devoted to be razed to the ground. What is the reason says he, that God is so
quick to build up, but slow to pull down? His Goodness excites his power to the
One, but is not earnest to persuade him to the Other. When he comes to strike,
he does it with a sigh or groan. Isaiah 1.24. Ah I will ease me of my
adversaries, and avenge me on my Enemies. (...) Ah, a note of grief. So Hos.
6.4. Oh Ephraim what shall I do unto thee? Oh Judah, what shall I do unto thee?
It Is an Addubitatio a figure in Rhetoric as if God were troubled, that he must
deal so sharply with them, and give them up to their Enemies. I have tried all
means to reclaim you, I have used all ways of kindness, and nothing prevails.
What shall I do? my Mercy invites me to spare them and their ingratitude
provokes me to ruin them. God had born with that people of Israel almost three
hundred years, from the setting up of the Calves at Dan and Bethel; sent many a
Prophet to warn them, and spent many a rod to reform them. And when he comes to
execute his threatenings, he does it with a conflict in himself. Hosea 11.8. How
shall I give thee up Oh Ephraim? How shall I deliver thee, Israel? As if there
were a pull-back in his own Bowels, he solemnizeth their approaching funeral
with a hearty groan; and takes his farewell of the dying Malefactor with a pang
in himself. How often in former times when he had signed a warrant for their
Execution, did he call it back? Psalm. 78.38. Many a time turned he his anger
away. Many a time he recalled, or ordered his Anger, to return again as the
word signifies, as if he were irresolute what to do. He recalled it, as a man
does his Servant several times, when he is sending him upon an unwelcome
message; or as a tender hearted Prince wavers, and trembles, when he is to sign
a Writ for the death of a Rebel, that has been before his favorite, as if when
he had signed the Writ, he blotted out his name again, and flung away the Pen.
And his method is remarkable, when he came to punish Sodom; though the cry of
their sin had been fierce in his ears, yet when he comes to make inquisition,
he declares his intention to Abraham, as if he were desirous, that Abraham
should have helped him to some arguments, to stop the outgoings of his
judgment. He gave liberty to the best person in the World, to stand in the gap,
and enter into a treaty with him, to show (says one Pierce sinner implead.
Page 227.
) how willingly his mercy would have compounded with his justice for their
Redemption. And Abraham interceded so long, till he was ashamed for pleading
the cause of patience and Mercy, to the wrong of the rights of divine Justice.
Perhaps had Abraham had the courage to ask, God would have had the compassion
to grant a reprieve just at the time of Execution.

2. His Patience is manifest, in that when he begins to send out his judgments,
he does it by degrees. His Judgments are as the Morning Light, which goes forth
by degrees, in the Hemisphere. Hos. 6.5. He does not shoot all his thunders at
once, and bring his sharpest judgments in array at one time, but gradually,
that a people may have time to turn to him. Joel 1.4. First the Palmer-worm,
then the Locust, then the Canker-worm, then the Caterpillar; What one left, the
other was to eat, if there were not a timely return. A Jewish Writer Kimchi.
says, these judgments came not all in one year, but one year after another.
The Palmer-worm and Locust might have eaten all, but divine Patience set bounds
to the devouring creatures. God had been first as a moth to Israel; Hos. 5.12.
Therefore will I be to the house of Ephraim as a Moth; Rivet translates it, I
have been, in the Hebr. it is I without adding, I have been, or I will be, and
more probably I have been; I was as a Moth, which makes little holes in a
garment, and consumes it not all at once; And as rottenness to the house of
Judah, or a worm that eats into wood by degrees. Indeed this people had
consumed insensibly, partly by civil combustions, change of Governors,
Foreign Invasions, yet they were as obstinate in their Idolatry as ever; At
last God would be no longer to them as a Moth, but as a Lion, tear, and go
away; ver. 14. So, Hos. 2. God had disowned Israel for his Spouse, ver. 2. She
is not my Wife, neither am I her Husband, yet he had not taken away her
Ornaments, which by the right of divorce he might have done, but still expected
her Reformation, for that the threatening intimates, ver. 3. let her put away
her Whoredom, least I strip her naked, and set her as in the day when she was
born. If she returned, she might recover what she had lost, if not, she might
be stripped of what remained. Thus God dealth with Judah, Ezekiel. 9.3. The Glory of
God goes first from the Cherub to the Threshhold of the house, and stays
there, as if he had a mind to be invited back again; then it goes from the
Threshold of the house, and stands over the Cherubims, as if upon a penitent
call it would drop down again to its ancient Station and Seat, over which it
hoverd; Ezekiel. 10.18. And when he was not solicited to return, he departs out
of the City, and stood upon the Mountain, which is on the East part of the
City, Ezekiel. 11.23. looking still toward, and hovering about the Temple, which
was on the East of Jerusalem, as if loath to depart, and abandon the place and
people. He walks so leasurely with his Rod in his hand, as if he had a mind
rather to fling it away, than use it. His Patience in not pouring out all his
Vials, is more remarkable than hi^ wrath in pouring out one or two. Thus has
God made his slowness to anger visible to us in the gradual punishment of us;
First, the Pestilence on this City, then Firing our Houses, Consumption of
Trade, these have not been answered with such a carriage as God expects,
therefore a greater is reserved. I dare prognosticate, upon reasons you may
gather from what has been spoke before, if I be not much mistaken, the 40
years of his usual Patience are very near expired, he has inflicted some,
that he might be met with in a way of Repentance, and omit with honor the
inflicting the remainder.

4. His Patience is manifest, in moderating his judgments, when he sends them.
Does he empty his Quiver of his Arrows, or exhaust his magazines of thunder?
No, he could roll one Thunderbolt successively upon all Mankind; It Is as easy
with him to Create a perpetual motion of Lightning and Thunder, as of the Sun
and Stars, and make the World as terrible by the one, as it is delightful by
the other. He opens not all his store, he sends out a light party to skirmish
with men, and puts not in array his whole Army, He stirs not up all his wrath,
Psalm. 78.38. he does but pinch, where he might have torn asunder; When he takes
away much, he leaves enough to support us. If he had stirred up all his anger,
he had taken away all, and our lives to boot. He rakes up but a few sparks,
takes but one firebrand to fling upon men, when he might discharge the whole
Furnace upon them; He sends but a few drops out of the Cloud, which he might
make to break in the gross, and fall down upon our heads to overwhelm us; he
abates much of what he might do. When he might sweep away a whole Nation by
deluges of water, corruption of the Air, or convulsions of the Earth, or by
other ways that are not wanting at his order. He picks out only some Persons,
some Families, some Cities, sends a plague into one house, and not into
another; here is Patience to the stock of a Nation, while he inflicts
punishment upon some of the most notorious sinners in it. Herod is suddenly
snatched away, being willingly flattered into the thoughts of his being a God;
God singl'd out the chief in the herd, for whose sake he had been affronted by
the rabble. Act. 12.22, 23. Some find him sparing them, while others feel him
destroying them; He arrests some, when he might seize all, all being his
Debtors; And often in great desolations brought upon a people for their sin, he
has left a stump in the Earth, as Daniel speaks, Dan. 4.15. for a Nation to
grow upon it again, and arise to a stronger constitution. He does punish less
than our iniquities deserve, Ezra 9.13. and rewards us not according to our
iniquities. Psalm. 103.10. The greatness of any punishment in this Life, answers
not the greatness of the crime. Though there be an equity in whatsoever he
does, yet there is not an equality to what we deserve. Our iniquities would
justify a severer treating of us; His Justice goes not here to the end of its
line, it is stopped in its progress, and the blows of it weakened by his
Patience; He did not curse the Earth after Adam's fall, that it should bring
forth no fruit, but that it should not bring forth fruit without the wearysome
toil of man, and subjected him to distempers presently, but inflicted not death
immediately; while he punished him, he supported him; And while he expelled him
from Paradise, he did not order him not to cast his eye toward it, and
conceive some hopes of regaining that happy place.

5. His Patience is seen in giving great mercies after provocations. He is so
slow to anger, that he heaps many kindnesses upon a rebel, instead of
punishment. There is a prosperous wickedness, wherein the provokers strength
continues firm; The troubles, which like Clouds drop upon others, are blown
away from them, and they are not plagued like other men, that have a more
worthy demeanor toward God. Psalm. 73.3, 4, 5. He does not only continue their
lives, but sends out fresh beams of his goodness upon them, and calls them by
his Blessings, that they may acknowledge their own fault, and his bounty, which
he is not obliged to by any gratitude, he meets with from them, but by the
richness of his own patient nature: for he finds the unthank fullness of men, as
great as his benefits to them. He does not only continue his outward mercies,
while we continue our sins, but sometimes gives fresh benefits after new
provocations: that if possible he might excite an ingenuity in men. When Israel
at the Red Sea flung dirt in the face of God, by quarrelling with his servant
Moses for bringing them out of Egypt, and mis-judging God in his design of
deliverance, and were ready to submit themselves to their former oppressors,
Exodus 14.11, 12. which might justly have urged God to say to them, take your
own course; yet he is not only patient under their unjust charge, but makes
bare his Arm in a deliverance at the Red Sea, that was to be an amazing
monument to the World in all Ages; and afterward when they repiningly
quarrelled with him in their wants in the Wilderness, he did not only not
revenge himself upon them, or cast off the conduct of them, but bore with them
by a miraculous long suffering, and supplied them with miraculous provision,
Manna from Heaven, and Water from a Rock. Food is given to support us, and
Clothes to cover us, and Divine Patience makes the creatures, which we turn to
another use, than what they were at first intended for, serve us contrary to
their own Genius: For had they reason, no question but they would complain, to
be subjected to the service of man, who has been so ungrateful to their
Creator, and groan at the abuse of God's Patience, in the abuse they themselves
suffer from the hands of man.

6. All this is more manifest, if we consider the provocations he has. Wherein
his slowness to Anger infinitely transcends the Patience of any creature; nay
the Spirits of all the Angels and Glorified Saints in Heaven, would be too
narrow to bear the sins of the World for one day, nay not so much as the sins
of Churches, which is a little spot in the whole World: it is because he is the
Lord, one of an infinite power over himself, that not only the whole Mass of
the Rebellious World, but of the Sons of Jacob (either considered as a Church
and Nation springing from the loins of Jacob, or considered as the Regenerate
part of the World, sometimes called the Seed of Jacob,) are not consumed. Mal.
3.6. A Jonah was angry with God, for recalling his Anger from a sinful people;
Had God committed the Government of the World to the Glorified Saints, who are
perfect in Love and Holiness, the World would have had an end long ago; They
would have acted that, which they sue for at the hands of God, and is not
granted them. Rev. 6.10. How long Lord holy and true, do thou not avenge our
blood, on them that dwell on the Earth? God has designs of Patience above the
World, above the unsinning Angels, and perfectly renewed Spirits in Glory. The
greatest Created long suffering is infinitely disproportioned to the Divine;
Fire from Heaven would have been showred down before the greatest part of a day
were spent, if a Created Patience had the conduct of the World, though that
creature were possessed with the spirit of Patience, extracted from all the
creatures which are in Heaven, or are, or ever were upon the earth. Methinks
Moses intimates this; for as soon as God had passed by proclaiming his Name
gracious, and long suffering; As soon as ever Moses had paid his Adoration, he
falls a Praying, that God would go with the Israelites; Exodus 34.8, 9. For it
is a stiffneck'd people: What an Argument is here for God to go along with
them? He might rather, since he had heard him but just before say, he would by
no means clear the guilty, desire God to stand further off from them, for fear
the fire of his wrath should burst out from him, to burn them as he did the
Sodomites. But he considers, that as none but God had such anger to destroy
them, so none but God had such a Patience to bear with them; It Is as much as if
he should have said, Lord! if thou should send the most tender hearted Angel
in Heaven to have the guidance of this people, they would be a lost people; A
period will quickly be set to their lives, no Created strength can restrain its
power from crushing such a stiff-neck'd people; Flesh and Blood cannot bear
them, nor any Created Spirit of a greater might.

1. Consider the greatness of the provocations. No light matter, but actions of
a great defiance: What is the practical Language of most in the World, but that
of Pharaoh? Who is the Lord, that I should obey him? How many question his
being, and more, his Authority? What blasphemies of him, what reproaches of his
Majesty? Men drinking up iniquity like water and with a have and ardency
rushing into sin, as the horse into the battle. What is there in the reasonable
creature, that has the quickest capacity, and the deepest obligation to serve
him, but opposition and enmity, a slight of him in every thing, yea the
services most seriously performed, unsuited to the royalty and purity of so
great a Being? Such provocations as dare him to his face, that are a burden to
so righteous a Judge, and so great a lover of the Authority and Majesty of his
Laws; That were there but a spark of anger in him, it is a wonder it does not
show it self; When he is invaded in all his attributes, it is astonishing that
this single one of Patience and Meekness, should with-stand the assault of all
the rest of his perfections; His being which is attacked by sin, speaks for
vengeance, his Justice cannot be imagined to stand silent, without charging the
sinner. His Holiness cannot but encourage his Justice to urge its pleas, and be
an Advocate for it. His Omniscience proves the truth of all the charge; and his
abused mercy has little encouragement, to make opposition to the Indictment;
Nothing but Patience stands in the gap to keep off the arrest of judgment from
the sinner.

2. His Patience is manifest, if you consider the multitudes of these
provocations. Every man has sin enough in a day to make him stand amazed at
Divine Patience, and to call it as well as the Apostle did, all long suffering.
1 Timothy 1.16. How few duties of a perfectly right stamp are performed? What
unworthy considerations mix themselves like dross, with our purest and
sincerest Gold? How more numerous are the respects of the Worshippers of him to
themselves, than unto him? How many services are paid him, not out of love to
him, but because he should do us no hurt, and some service; When we do not so
much design to please him, as to please our selves by expectations of a reward
from him? What Master would endure a servant that endeavored to please him,
only because he should not kill him? Is that former charge of God upon the Old
World yet out of date, That the imagination of the thoughts of the heart of man
was only evil, and that continually? Genesis 6.5. Was not the New World as
chargeable with it as the Old? Certainly it was; Genesis 8.21. And is of as much
force this very minute, as it was then; How many are the sins against
knowledge, as well as those of ignorance; Presumptuous sins as well as those of
infirmity? How numerous those of Omission and Commission? Lessius page 152.
It Is above the reach of any man's understanding to conceive all the
Blasphemies, Oaths, Thefts, Adulteries, Murders, Oppressions, contempt of
Religion, the open Idolatries of Turks and Heathens, the more spiritual and
refined Idolatries of others. Add to those the ingratitude of those that
profess his name, their pride, earthlyness, carelessness, sluggishness to divine
duties; and in every one of those a multitude of provocations; The whole man
being engaged in every sin, the understanding contriving it, the will embracing
it, the affections complying with it, and all the members of the body
instruments in the acting the unrighteousness of it; Every one of these
faculties bestowed upon men by him, are armed against him in every act: and in
every employment of them there is a distinct provocation, though centered in
one sinful end and object. What are the offenses, all the men of the World
receive from their fellow creatures, to the injuries God receives from men, but
as a small dust of earth to the whole mass of Earth and Heaven too? What
multitudes of sins is one profane wretch guilty of in the space of 20, 40, 50
years? Who can compute the vast number of his transgressions, from the first
use of reason to the time of the separation of his Soul from his Body; from his
entrance into the World to his exit? What are those, to those of a whole
Village of the like Inhabitants? What are those, to those of a great City? Who
can number up all the foul mouthed Oaths, the beastly excess, the goatish
uncleanness committed in the space of a day, year, twenty years in this City,
much less in the whole Nation, least of all in the whole World? Were it no more
than the common Idolatry of former ages, when the whole World turned their
backs upon their Creator, and passed him by to sue to a Creature, a stock or
stone, or a degraded spirit. How provoking would it be to a Prince to see a
whole City under his Dominion deny him a respect; and pay it to his scullion,
or the common Executioner he employs? Add to this the unjust invasions of
Kings, the oppressions exercised upon men, all the private and public sins
that have been in the World, ever since it began. The Gentiles were described
by the Apostle, Romans 1.29, 30, 31. in a black character, They were haters of
God; yet how did the Riches of his patience preserve multitudes of such
disingenuous persons, and how many millions of such haters of him breath every
day in his Air, and are maintained by his bounty, have their tables spr^^d and
their cups filled to the brim, and that too in the midst of reiterated
belchings of their enmity against him? All are under sufficient provocations of
him to the highest indignation. The presiding Angels over Nations could not
forbear, in Love and Honor to their Governor, to arm themselves to the
destruction of their several charges, if Divine patience did not set them a
pattern, and their obedience incline them to expect his Orders, before they act
what their zeal would prompt them to. The Devils would be glad of Commission to
destroy the World, but that his patience puts a stop to their fury (...) well
as his own Justice.

3. Consider the long time of this patience. He spread out his hand^ all the
day to a rebellious World. Isaiah 65.2. All men's day, all Gods day, which is a
thousand years, he has born with the gross of mankind, with all the Nations of
the World in a long succession of ages for five thousand years and upwards
already, and will bear with them, till the time comes for the World
dissolution. He has suffered the monstrous acts of men, and endured the
contradictions of a sinful World against himself, from the first sin of Adam to
the last committed this minute. The line of his patience has run along with
the duration of the World to this day; and there is not any one of Adams
posterity but has been expensive to him, and partaked of the riches of it.

4. All these he bears when he has a sense of them. He sees every day the Roll
and Catalogue of sin increasing, he has a distinct view of every one from the
sin of Adam to the last, filled up in his Omniscience; and yet gives no order
for the arrest of the World. He knows men fitted for destruction, all the
instants he exercises long-suffering toward them, which makes the Apostle
call it not simply long suffering without the addition of (...), much
long-suffering. Romans 9.23. There is not a grain in the whole Mass of sin, that
he has not a distinct knowledge of, and of the quality of it. He perfectly
understands the greatness of his own Majesty that is vilified, and the nature
of the offense that does disparage him. He is solicited by his Justice,
directed by his Omniscience, and armed with judgments to vindicate himself, but
his arm is restrained by patience. To conclude no indignity is hid from him, no
iniquity is beloved by him, the hatred of their sinfulness is infinite, and the
knowledge of the malice is exact. The subsisting of the World under such
weighty provocations, so numerous, so long time, and with his full sense of
every one of them, is an evidence of such a forbearance and long-suffering,
that the addition of Riches which the Apostle puts to it. Romans 2.4. labors
with an insufficiency clearly to display it.

III. Why God does exercise so much patience.

1. To show himself appeaseable. God did not declare by his patience to former
ages, or any age, that he was appeased with them, or that they were in his
favor; but that he was appeasable, that he was not an implacable Enemy, but
that they might find him favorable to them, if they did seek after him. The
continuance of the World by patience, and the bestowing many mercies by
goodness were not a natural revelation of the manner how he would be appeased:
That was made known only by the Prophets, and after the coming of Christ by the
Apostles; and had indeed been intelligible in some sort to the whole World, had
there been a faithfulness in Adams posterity, to transmit the tradition of the
first promise to succeeding Generations. Had not the knowledge of that dyed by
their carelessness, and neglect, it had been easy to tell the reason of Gods
patience to be in order to the exhibition of the Seed of the woman, to bruise
the Serpents head.

They could not but naturally know themselves sinners, and worthy of death,
they might be easy reflections upon themselves, collect that they were not in
that comely and harmonious posture now, as they were, when God first wrought
them with his own finger, and placed them as his Lieutenants in the World; they
knew they did grievously offend him, this they were taught by the sprinklings
of his judgments among them sometimes. And since he did not utterly root up
mankind, his sparing patience was a prologue of some further favors, or
pardoning Grace to be displayed to the World by some methods of God yet unknown
to them. Though the Earth was something impaired by the curse after the fall,
yet the main pillars of it stood; the strate of the natural motions of the
Creature was not changed, the Heavens remained in the same posture, wherein
they were Created, the Sun and Moon and other heavenly bodies continued their
usefulness and refreshing influences to man. The Heavens did still declare the
Glory of God, day unto day did utter speech, their line is gone throughout all
the Earth, and their words to the end of the World. Psalm. 19.1, 2, 3. 4. Which
declared God to be willing to do good to his Creatures, and were as so many
legible letters or rudiments, whereby they might read his patience, and that a
further design of favor to the World lay hid in that Patience. Paul applies
this to the Preaching of the Gospel. Romans 10.18. Have they not heard the word
of God? yes verily their sound went into all the Earth, and their words unto
the end of the World. Redeeming grace could not be spelled out by them in a
clear notion, but yet they did declare that which is the Foundation of Gospel
Mercy. Were not God patient there were no room for a Gospel Mercy, so that the
Heavens declare the Gospel, not formally but fundamentally in declaring the
long-suffering of God without which no Gospel had been framed, or could have
been expected. They could not but read in those things favorable inclinations
toward them. And though they could not be ignorant, that they deserved a mark
of justice, yet seeing themselves supported by God, and beholding the regular
motions of the Heavens from day to day and the Revolutions of the seasons of
the year, the natural conclusion they might draw from thence was, that God was
placable: Since he behaved himself more as a tender Friend, that had no mind to
be at War with them, than an enraged Enemy. The good things which he gave them,
and the patience whereby he spared them, were no arguments of an imp^acable
disposition: And therefore of a disposition willing to be appeased. This is
clearly the design of the Apostles arguing with the Lystrians, when they would
have offered Sacrifices to Paul. Acts 14.17. When God suffered all Nations to
walk in their own ways, he did not leave himself without witness, giving Rain
from Heaven, and fruitful seasons. What were those Witnesses of? Not only of
the Being of a God, by their readiness to sacrifice to those that were not
Gods, only supposed to be so in their false imaginations; but witnesses to the
tenderness of God, that he had no mind to be severe with his Creatures: But
would allure them by ways of Goodness. Amyrald. dissert page 191. 192.
Had not Gods patience tended to this end, to bring the World under another
dispensation, the Apostles arguing from it had not been suitable to his design,
which seems to be a hindering the sacrifices they intended for them, and a
drawing them to embrace the Gospel, and therefore preparing the way to it, by
speaking of the Patience and Goodness of God to them, as an unquestionable
testimony of the reconcileableness of God to them, by some sacrifice which was
represented under the common notion of Sacrifices. These things were not
Witnesses of Christ, or syllables whereby they could spell out the redeeming
person; but Witnesses that God was placable in his own nature. When man abused
those noble faculties God had given him, and diverted them from the use and
service God intended them for, God might have stripped man of them, the first
time that he mis-employed them; and it would have seemed most agreeable to this
wisdom, and Justice, not to suffer himself to be abused, and the World to go
contrary to its natural end. But since he did not level the World with its
first nothing, but healed the World so favorably, it was evident, that his
patience pointed the World to a further design of Mercy and Goodness in him. To
imagine, that God had no other design in his long-suffering but that of
vengeance, had been a notion unsuitable to the Goodness and Wisdom of God. He
would never have pretended himself, to be a Friend, if he had harbored nothing
but enmity in his heart against them.

It had been far from his Goodness, to give them a cause to suspect such a
design in him, as his patience certainly did, had he not intended it. Had he
preserved men only for punishment, it is more like, he would have treated men,
as Princes do those they reserve for the Axe, or Halter, give them only things
necessary, to uphold their lives till the day of Execution, and not have
bestowed upon them so many good things, to make their lives delightful to them;
nor have furnished them with so many excellent means to please their senses, and
recreate their minds; it had been a mocking of them to treat them at the rate,
if nothing but punishment had been intended toward them. If the end of it to
lead men to Repentance, were easily intelligble by them, as the Apostle
intimates. ( Romans 2.4. Which is to be linkt with the former chapter, a
discourse of the Gentiles. Not knowing, says he, that the riches of his
forbearance and goodness leads thee to repentance.) it also gives them some
ground to hope for pardon. For what other argument can more induce to
Repentance than expectation of Mercy upon a relenting, and acknowledging the
crime. Without a design of pardoning Grace, his patience would have been in a
great measure exercised in vain: For by mere patience God is not reconciled to
a sinner, no more than a Prince to a Rebel by bearing with him. Nor can a
sinner conclude himself in the favor of God, no more than a Rebel can conclude
himself in the favor of his Prince; only this he may conclude, that there is
some hopes, he may have the grant of a pardon, since he has time to sue it
out. And so much did the patience of God naturally signify, that he was of a
reconcilable temper, and was willing men should sue out their pardon upon
Repentance; otherwise, he might have magnified his Justice, and condemned men
by the Law of Works.

2. He therefore exercised so much patience to wait for men's Repentance. All
the notices and warnings that God gives men of either public or personal
calamities, is a continual invitation to Repentance. This was the common
interpretation the Heathens made of extraordinary Presages and Prodigies, which
showed as well the delays as the approaches of Judgments. What other notion but
this, that those warnings of Judgments witness a slowness to Anger, and a
willingness to turn his arrows another way, should move them to multiply
sacrifices, go weeping to their Temples, sound out prayers to their Gods, and
show all those other Testimonies of a Repentance, which their blind
understandings hit upon. If a Amyraldus moral. Tom. 2. p. 186.
Prince should sometimes in a light and gentle manner punish a criminal, and
then relax it, and show him much kindness, and afterward inflict upon him
another kind of punishment as light as the former, and less than was due to his
crime, what could the Malefactor suspect by such a way of proceeding, but that
the Prince by those gently repeated chastisements, had a mind to move him to a
regret for his crime? And what other thoughts could men naturally have of Gods
conduct, that he should warn them of great judgments, send light afflictions,
which are Testimonies rather of a Patience, than of a severe wrath, but that it
was intended to move them to a relenting, and a breaking off their sins by
working Righteousness? Though Divine patience does not in the event, induce men
to Repentance, yet the natural tendency of such a treatment, is to mollify
men's Hearts, to overcome their obsstinacy, and no man has any reason to judge
otherwise of such a proceeding. The long suffering of God is Salvation, says
Peter. 2 Pet. 3.15. i. e. has a tendency to Salvation, in its being a
solicitation of men to the means of it: For the Apostle cites Paul for the
confirmation of it, Even as our beloved Brother Paul has written unto you,
which must refer to Romans 2.4. It leads to Repentance, (...), it conducts, which
is more than barely to invite, it does as it were take us by the hand, and
point us to the way wherein we should go, and for this end it was exercised not
only toward the Jews, but toward the Gentiles, not only toward those that
are within the pale of the Church, and under the dews of the Gospel, but to
those that are in darkness, and in the shadow of death: For this discourse of
the Apostle was but an inference from what he had treated of in the first
chapter concerning the Idolatry and ingratitude of the Gentiles; since the
Gentiles were to be punished for the abuse of it as well as the Jews, as he
intimates. ver. 9. it is plain that his patience which is exercised toward the
Idolatrous Gentiles, was to allure them to Repentance as well as others; and it
was a sufficient motive in it self to persuade them to a change of their vile
and gross acts, to such as were morally good. And there was enough in Gods
dealing with them, and in that light they had to engaged them to a better
course, than what they usually walked in. And though men do abuse Gods
long-suffering, to encourage their impenitence, and persisting in their crimes,
yet that they cannot reasonably imagine that to be the end of God, is evident
their own gripes of Conscience; would acquaint them, that it is otherwise. They
know that Conscience is a principle that God has given them as well as
Understanding, and Will and other Faculties. That God does not approve of that,
which the voice of their own Consciences, and of the Consciences of all men
under natural light, are utterly against. And if there were really in this
forbearance of God an approbation of men's crimes, Conscience could not
frequently and universally in all men check them for them. What Authority could
Conscience have to do it? But this it does in all men. As the Apostle. Romans
1.22. They know the judgment of God, that those that do such things, which he
had mentioned before, are worthy of death. In this thing the Consciences of all
men cannot err: They could not therefore conclude from hence Gods approbation
of their iniquities, but his desire that their Hearts should be touched with a
Repentance for them.

The Sin of Ephraim is hid. Hosea 13.12.13. i. e. God does not presently take
notice of it, to order punishment; he lays it in a secret place from the Eye of
his Justice, that Ephraim might not be his unwise Son, and stay long in the
place of the breaking forth of Children. i. e. That he should speedily reclaim
himself and not continue in the way of destruction. God has no need to abuse
any, he does not lie to the Sons of men, if he would have men perish, he could
easily destroy them, and have done it long ago. He did not leave the woman
Jezabel in being, nor lengthned out her time, but as a space to Repent.
Revelations 2.21. That she might reflect upon her ways, and devote her self
seriously to his service, and her own happiness. His patience stands between
the offending Creature and Eternal misery a long time, that men might not
foolishly throw away their Souls, and be damned for their impenitency; by this
he shows himself ready to receive men to mercy upon their return. To what
purpose does he invite men to Repentance, if he intended to deceive them, and
damn them after they Repent?

3. He does exercise Patience for the propagation of Mankind. If God punished
every sin presently, there would not only be a period put to Churches, but to
the World; without Patience Adam had sunk into Eternal anguish the first moment
of his provocation; and the whole World of Mankind in his loins, had perished
with him, and never seen the light. If this perfection had not interposed,
after the first sin, God had lost his end in the Creation of the World, which
he Created not in vain, but formed it to be inhabited. Isa. 45.18. It had been
inconsistent with the wisdom of God to make a world to be inhabited, and
destroy it upon sin, when it had but two principal inhabitants in it; the
reason of his making this earth had been insignificant; He had not had any upon
earth to Glorify him, without erecting another World, which might have proved
as sinful, and as quickly wicked as this; God should have always been pulling
down, and rearing up, creating and annihilating, one world would have come
after another, as wave after wave in the Sea. His Patience stepped into support
the honor of God, and the continuance of men, without which one had been in
part impaired, and the other totally lost.

4. He does exercise Patience for the continuance of the Church. If he be not
patient toward sinners, what stock would there be for believers to spring up
from? He bears with the provoking carriage of men, evil men; because out of
their loins he intends to extract others, which he will form for the glory of
his grace. He has some unborn, that belong to the election of Grace, which are
to be the seed of the worst of men; Jeroboam the chief incendiary of the
Israelites to Idolatry, had an Abijah, in whom was found some good thing
toward the Lord God of Israel. 1 King. 14.13. Had Ahaz been snapt in the first
act of his wickedness, the Israelites had wanted so good a Prince, and so good
a man as Hezekiah, a branch of that wicked predecessor. What Gardener cuts off
the thorns from the Rose-bush, till he has gathered the Roses? And men do not
use to burn all the Crab-tree, but preserve a Stock, to engraft some sweet
fruit upon. There could not have been a Saint in the Earth, nor consequently in
Heaven, had it not been for this perfection. He did not destroy the Israelites
in the Wilderness, that he might keep up a Church among them, and not
extinguish the whole seed that were heirs of the promises and Covenant made
with Abraham. Had God punished men for their sins as soon as they had been
committed, none would have lived to have been better, none could have continued
in the World, to honor him by their virtues? Manasseh had never been a
convert, and many brutish men had never been changed from beasts to Angels, to
praise, and acknowledge their Creator. Had Peter received his due recompense
upon the denial of his Master, he had never been a Martyr for him; Nor had Paul
been a Preacher of the Gospel, nor any else: and so the Gospel had not shined
in any part of the world. No seed would have been brought into Christ, Christ
is beholding immediately to this attribute, for all the seed he has in the
world; It Is for his Name sake that he does deferr his Anger, and for his
praise, that he does refrain from cutting us off. Isa. 48.9. And in the next
chapter follows a Prophecy of Christ. To overthrow Mankind for sin, were to
prevent the spreading a Church in the world. A woman that is guilty of a
Capital Crime, and lies under a condemning sentence, is reprieved from
Execution, for her being with child. It Is for the Child's sake, the Woman is
respited, not for her own; It Is for the Elects sake in the loins of
transgressors, that they are a long time spared, and not for their own. Isa.
65.8, 9. As the new Wine is found in the cluster, and one says, destroy it not
for a blessing is in it; So will I do for my servants sake, that I may not
destroy them all: as a Husbandman spares a Vine for some good clusters in it.
He had spoke of vengeance before, yet he would reserve some, from whom he would
bring forth those, that should be inheritors of his Mountains: that he might
make up his Church of Judea, Jerusalem being a Mountainous place, and the type
of the Church in all Ages. What is the reason he does not level his Thunder at
the heads of those, for whose destruction he receives so many Petitions from
the Souls under the Altar; Rev. 6.9, 10. Because God had others to write a
Testimony for him in their own blood, and perhaps out of the loins of those
for whom vengeance was so earnestly supplicated; Smith on the Creed, p. 404.
And God, as the Master of a Vessel, lies Patiently at Anchor, till the last
Passenger he expects, be taken in.

5. For the sake of his Church he is Patient to wicked men. The tares are
Patiently, endured till the Harvest, for fear in the plucking up the one, there
might be some prejudice done to the other. Upon this account he spares some,
who are worse than others, whom he crusheth by signal judgments; The Jews had
committed sins worse than Sodom, for the confirmation of which we have God's
Oath, Ezekiel. 16.48. and more by half than Samaria, or the Ten Tribes had done;
ver. 51. Yet God spared the Jews, though he destroyed the Sodomites. What was
the reason, but a larger remnant of Righteous persons, more clusters of good
grapes were found among them, than grew in Sodom. Isa. 1.9. A few more
Righteous in Sodom had dampt the Fire and Brimstone designed for that place;
And a remnant of such in Judea was a bar to that fierceness of anger, which
otherwise would have quickly consumed them. Had there been but Ten Righteous in
Sodom, Divine Patience had still bound the Arms of justice, that it should not
have prepared its Brimstone, notwithstanding the clamor of the sins of the
multitude. Judea was ripe for the sickle, but God would put a lock upon the
torrent of his judgments, that they should not flow down upon that wicked
place, to make them a desolation and a curse, as long as tender hearted Josiah
lived, who had humbled himself at the threatening, and wept before the Lord; 1
King. 22.19, 20. Sometimes he bears with wicked men, that they might exercise
the Patience of the Saints. Rev. 14.12. The whole time of the forbearance of
Antichrist in all his intrusions into the Temple of God, invasions of the
rights of God, usurpations of the Office of Christ, and besmearing himself with
the blood of the Saints, was to give them an opportunity of Patience. God is
Patient toward the wicked, that by their means he might try the Righteous. He
burns not the wisp, till he has scowred his vessels; Nor lays by the hammer,
till he has formed some of his matter into an excellent fashion. He uses the
worst men as rods to correct his people, before he sweeps the twiggs out of his
house. God sometimes uses the thorns of the World, as a hedge to secure his
Church, sometimes as instruments to try, and exercise it. Howsoever he uses
them, whither for security or trial, he is Patient to them for his Churches
advantage.

6. When men are not brought to Repentance by his Patience, he does longer
exercise it, to manifest the equity of his future justice upon them. As Wisdom
is justified by her obedient children, so is justice justified by the rebels
against Patience, the contempt of the later is the justification of the former.
The Apostles were unto God a sweet savor of Christ in them that perish, as
well as in them that were saved by the acceptance of their message. 2 Cor.
2.15. Both are fragrant to God, his Mercy is Glorified by the ones acceptance
of it, and his Justice freed from any charge against it by the others refusal.
The cause of men's ruin cannot be laid upon God, who provided means for their
Salvation, and solicited their compliance with him. What reason can they have
to charge the Judge with any wrong to them, who reject the tenders he makes,
and who has forborne them with so much Patience, when he might have censured
them by his Righteous Justice, upon the first crime they committed, or the
first refusal of his gracious offers? Quanto Dei magis Judicium tardum est
tanto magis justum. Minuc Felix page 41.
After the despising of Patience, there can be no suspicion of an irregularity
in the acts of Justice. Man has no reason to fall foul in his charge upon God,
if he were punished for his own sin, considering the dignity of the injured
person, and the meanness of himself the offender; But his wrath is more
justified, when it is poured out upon those whom he has endured with much long
suffering. There is no plea against the shooting of his Arrows into those, for
whom this voice has been loud, and his arms open for their return. As Patience
while it is exercised, is the silence of his justice, so when it is abused, it
silenceth men's complaints against his justice. The riches of his forbearance
made way for the manifesting the treasures of his wrath. If God did but a
little bear with the insolences of men, and cut them off after two or three
sins, he would not have opportunity to show either the power of his Patience,
or that of his wrath; But when he has a right to punish for one sin, and yet
bears with them for many, and they will not be reclaimed, the sinner is more
inexcusable, divine Justice less chargable, and his wrath more powerful; Romans
9. 22. What if God willing to show his wrath, and to make his power known,
endured with much long suffering, the vessels of wrath fitted for destruction?
The proper and immediate end of his long suffering, is to lead men to
repentance, but after they have by their obstinacy, fitted themselves for
destruction, he bears longer with them, to magnify his wrath more upon them,
and if it is not the finis operantis, it is at least the finis operis, where
Patience is abused. Men are apt to complain of God, that he deals hardly with
them; The Israelites seem to charge God with too much severity, to cast them
off, when so many promises were made to the fathers for their perpetuity and
preservation, which is intimated; Hos. 2.2. Plead with your mother, plead; by
the double repetition of the word plead; Do not accuse me of being false, or
too rigorous, but accuse your Mother, your Church, your Magistracy, your
Ministry, for their spiritual fornications which have provoked me; For their
(...) intimating the greatness of their sins by the reduplication of the word;
lest I strip her naked. I have born with her under many provocations, and I
have not yet taken away all her Ornaments, or said to her according to the rule
of divorce, res tuas tibi habeto. God answers their impudent charge, She is not
my Wife, nor am I her Husband; He does not say first, I am not her Husband, but
she is not my Wife; She first withdrew from her duty, by breaking the Marriage
Covenant, and then I ceased to be her Husband. No man shall be condemned, but
he shall be convinced of the due desert of his sin, and the justice of God's
proceeding. God will lay open Men's guilt, and repeat the measures of his
Patience, to justify the severity of his wrath, Hos. 7.10. Sins will testify
to their face. What is in its own nature a preparation for Glory, men by their
obstinacy make a preparation for a more indisputable punishment. We see many
evidences of God's forbearance here, in sparing men under those blasphemies
which are audible, and those profane carriages which are visible, which would
sufficiently justify an act of severity; Yet when men's secret sins both in
heart and action, and the vast multitude of them, far surmounting what can
arrive to our knowledge here, shall be discovered, how great a luster will it
add, to God's bearing with them, and make his justice triumph without any
reasonable demurr from the sinner himself! He is long suffering here, that his
justice may be more public hereafter.

IV. The USE.
I. For Instruction.

1. How is this Patience of God abused! The Gentiles abused those Testimonies
of it, which were written in showers, and fruitful seasons. No Nation was ever
stripped of it, under the most provoking Idolatries till after multiplied spurns
at it. Not a person among us but has been guilty of the abuse of it. How have
we contemned that which demands a reverence from us? How have we requited God's
waitings with rebellions, while he has continued urging and expecting our
return? Saul relented at David's forbearing to revenge himself, when he had his
prosecuting and industrious enemy in his power. 1 Samuel 24.17. Thou art more
Righteous than I, thou have rewarded me good, whereas I have rewarded thee
evil. And shall we not relent at God's wonderful long suffering, and silencing
his anger so much? He could puff away our lives, but he will not, and yet we
endeavor to strip him of his being, though we cannot.

1. Let us consider the ways, how slowness to anger is abused.

1. It Is abused by mis-interpretations of it, when men slander his Patience, to
be only a carelessness, and neglect of his providence; as Averroes argued from
his slowness to anger, a total neglect of the Government of the lower World. Or
when men from his long suffering charge him with impurity, as if his Patience
were a consent to their crimes; and because he suffered them, without calling
them to account, he were one of their partisans, and as wicked as themselves,
Psalm. 50.21. Because I kept silence, thou thoughtest I was altogether such a
one as thy self. His silence makes them conclude him to be an abetter of, and a
consort in their sins; And think him more pleased with their iniquity, than
their obedience. Or when they will infer from his forbearance a want of his
Omniscience: Because he suffers their sins, they imagine he forgets them. Psalm.
10.11. He has said in his Heart, God has forgotten. Thinking his patience
proceeds not from the sweetness of his nature, but a weakness of his mind. How
base is it instead of admiring him, to disparage him for it; and because he
stands in so advantageous a posture toward us, not to own the choicest
prerogatives of his Deity? This is to make a perfection so useful to us, to
shadow, and extinguish those others, which are the prime flowers of his Crown.

2. His Patience is abused, by continuing in a course of Sin under the
influences of it. How much is it the practical language of men, Come let us
commit this, or that iniquity; since Divine patience has suffered worse than
this at our hands? Nothing is remitted to their sensual pleasures and eagerness
in them. How often did the Israelites repeat their murmurings against him, as
if they would put his patience to the utmost proof, and see how far the line of
it could extend? They were no sooner satisfied in one thing, but they
quarrelled with him about another, as if he had no other attribute to put in
motion against them. They tempted him, as often as he releived them, as though
the declaration of his name to Moses, 34 of Exodus To be a God gracious, and
Long-suffering, had been intended for no other purpose but a protection of them
in their Rebellions. Such a sort of men the Prophet speaks of, that were settled
in their Lees, or dregs. Zeph. 1.12. They were congealed, and frozen in their
successful wickedness; such an abuse of Divine patience is the very dreggs of
sin; God charge it highly upon the Jews. Isaiah 57.11. I have held my peace
even of old, and thou fear me not, my silence made thee confident yea
impudent in thy sin.

3. His patience is abused, by repeating sin, after God has, by an act of his
patience, taken off some affliction from men. As metals melted in the fire
remain fluid under the operations of the flames, yet when removed from the
Fire, they quickly return to their former hardness, and sometimes grow harder,
than they were before. So men who in their afflictions seem to be melted, like
Ahab confess their sins, lie prostrate before God, and seek him early, yet if
they be brought from under the power of their afflictions, they return to their
old nature, and are as stiff against God, and resist the blows of the Spirit,
as much as they did before. They think they have a new stock of patience, to
sin upon. Pharaoh was some what thawed under judgments, and frozen again under
forbearance, Exodus 9.27.34. Many will howl when God strikes them, and laugh at
him when he forbears them. Thus that patience which should melt us, does often
hard'n us, which is not an effect natural to his patience, but natural to our
abusing corruption.

4. His patience is abused, by taking encouragement from it to mount to greater
degrees of Sin. Because God is slow to Anger, men are more fierce in sin, and
not only continue in their old Rebellions, but heap new upon them. If he spare
them for three transgressions they will commit four, as is intimated in the
first and second of Amos; Men's hearts are fully set in them to do evil, because
sentence against an evil work is not speedily executed. Eccles. 8.11. Their
Hearts are more desperately bent; before they had some waverings, and
pull-backs, but after a fair Sunshine of Divine patience, they entertain more
unbridled resolutions, and pass forward with more liberty and licentiousness.
They make his long-suffering subservient to turn out all those little
reletings, and regrets they had before, and banish all thoughts of barring out
a Temptation. No encouragement is given to men by Gods patience, but they force
it by their presumption. They invert Gods order, and bind themselves stronger
to iniquity by that which should bind them faster to their duty. A happy escape
at Sea makes men go more confidently into the deeps afterward. Thus we deal
with God, as Debtors do with good natured Creditors: Because they do not dunn
them for what they owe, they take encouragement to run more upon the score,
till the sum amounts above their ability of payment.

But let it be considered.

1. That this abuse of patience is a high Sin. As every act of forbearance
obliges us to duty, so every act of it, abused, increases our guilt. The more
frequent its solicitations of us have been, the deeper aggravations our sin
receives by it. Every sin, after an act of divine patience, contracts a blacker
guilt. The sparing us after the last sin we committed was a superadded act of
long-suffering, and a laying out more of his riches upon us: And therefore
every new act committed, is a despite against greater riches expended, and
greater cost upon us, and against his preserving us from the hand of Justice
for the last transgression. It Is disingenuous not to have a due resentment of
so much Goodness, and base to injure him the more, because he does not right
himself. Shall he receive the more wrongs from us, by how much the sweeter he
is to us? No man's Conscience but will tell him, it is vile to prefer the
satisfaction of a sordid Lust, before the Council of a God of so gracious a
disposition. The sweeter the nature, the fouler is the injury, that is done
unto it.

2. It Is dangerous to abuse his patience. Contempt of kindness is most irksom
to an ingenuous spirit, and he is worthy to have the arrows of Gods indignation
lodged in his heart, who despises the Riches of his long-suff^^^ng. For,

1. The time of patience will have an end. Though his Spirit strives with man,
yet it shall not always strive. Genesis 6.3. Though there be a time wherein
Jerusalem might know the things, that concerned her peace, yet there is another
period wherein they should be hid from her Eyes. Luke 19.43. Oh that thou had
known in this thy day? Nations have their day, and persons have their day, and
the day of most persons is shorter than the day of Nations. Jerusalem had h^^
day of forty years, but how many particular persons were taken off, before the
last or middle hours of that day were arrived? Forty years was God grieved with
the Generation of the Israelites. Heb. 3.11. One Carcass dropped after another in
that limited time, and at the end not a man but fell under the judicial stroke,
except Caleb and Joshua. One hundred and twenty years was the Term set to the
mass of the old World, but not to every man in the old World; some fell while
the Ark was preparing, as well as the whole stock, when the Ark was completed.
Though he be patient with most, yet he is not in the same degree with all;
every sinner has his time of sinning, beyond which he shall proceed no
further, be his lusts never so impetuous, and his affections never so
imperious. The time of his patience is in Scripture set forth sometimes by
years; three years he came to find fruit on the Fig Tree; sometimes by days,
some men's sins are sooner ripe, and fall. There is a measure of sin, Jer.
51.13. Which is set forth by the Ephah, Zach. 5.8. Which when it is filled, is
sealed up, and a weight of lead cast upon the mouth of it. When judgments are
preparing, once and twice the Lord is prevailed with by the intercession of the
Prophet. The prepared Grasshoppers are not sent to devour, and the kindled Fire
is not blown up to consume. Amos 7. from ver. 1. to ver. 8. But at last God
takes the plumb-line to suit, and measure punishment to their sin, and would
not pass by them any more, and when their sin was ripe, represented by a basket
of Summer fruit, God would withhold his hand no longer, but brought such a day
upon them, wherein the Songs of the Temple should be howlings, and dead bodies
be in every place. Amos 8.2.3. He lays by any further thoughts of patience to
speed their ruin. God had born long with the Israelites, and long it was
before he gave them up. He would first break the bow in Jezreel, Hos. 1.5. take
away the strength of the Nation by the death of Zachariah, the last of Jehu's
race, which introduced civil dissentions and ambitious Murders, for the Throne,
whereby in weakening one part, they weakened the whole; or as some think,
alluding to Tiglah Pilezar, who carried Captive two Tribes and a half. If this
would not reclaim them, then fallows Loruhamah, I will not have Mercy, I will
sweep them out of the Land, verse 6. If they did not Repent they should be
Loammi. verse 9. You are not my people, and I will not be your God, They should
be discovenanted, and stripped of all federal relation. Here patience for ever
withdrew from them, and wrathful anger took its place. And for particular
persons, the time of life, whither shorter or longer, is the only time of
long-suffering. It has no other stage, than the present state of things to act
upon. There is none else to be expected after, but giving account of what has
been done in the Body, not of any thing done after the Soul is fled from the
body. The time of patience ends with the first moment of the Souls departure
from the Body. This time only is the day of Salvation, i. e. The day wherein
God offers it, and the day wherein God waits for our acceptance of it. It Is at
his pleasure to shorten, or lengthen our day, not at ours. It Is not our long
suffering, but his, he has the command of it.

2. God has wrath to punish, as well as patience to bear. He has a fury to
revenge the outrages done to his meekness; when his Messages of peace sent to
reclaim men are slighted, his Sword shall be whetted, and his instruments of
War prepared. Hos. 5.8. Blow ye the Cornet in Gibeah, and the Trumpet in Ramah.
As he deals gently like a Father, so he can punish capitally as a Judge. Though
he holds his peace for a long time, yet at last he will go forth like a mighty
man; and stir up jealousy as a man of War to cut in pieces his Enemies. It Is
not said, he has no anger, but that he is slow to anger, but sharp in it. He
has a Sword to cut, and a Bow to shoot, and Arrows to pierce. Psalm. 12.13.
Though be be long a drawing the one out of its Scabbard, and long a fitting the
other to his Bow, yet when they are ready, he strikes home, and hits the mark.
Though he has a time of patience, yet he has also a day of rebuke. Hos. 5.9.
Though patience overrules Justice by suspending it, yet Justice will at last
overruled patience by an utter silencing it. God is Judge of the whole Earth to
right men, yet he is no less Judge, of the injuries he receives to right
himself. Though God a while was pressed with the murmurings of the Israelites,
after their coming out of Egypt, and seemed desirous to give them all
satisfaction upon their unworthy complaints, yet when they came to open
hostility, in setting a Golden Calf in his Throne, he commissions the Levites,
to kill every man his Brother, and companion in the Camp. Exodus 32.27. And how
desirous soever he was to content them before, they never murmured afterward,
but they severely smarted for it. When once he has begun to use his Sword, he
sticks it up naked, that it might be ready for use upon every occasion. Though
he has feet of Lead, yet he has hands of Iron. It was long that he supported
the peevishness of the Jews, but at last he captived them by the arms of the
Babylonians, and laid them wast by the power of the Romans. He planted by the
Apostles Churches in the East, and when his Goodness and Long-suffering
prevailed not with them, he tore them up by the roots. What Christians are to
be found in those once famous parts of Asia, but what are overgrown with much
error and ignorance?

3. The more his patience is abused, the sharper will be the wrath he inflicts.
As his wrath restrained, makes his patience long, so his compassions
restrained, will make his wrath severe. As he does transcend all Creatures in
the measures of the one, so he transcends all Creatures in the sharpness of the
other. Christ is described with feet of brass, as if they burned in a Furnace.
Revel. 1.15. slow to move, but heavy to crush, and hot to burn. His wrath
loses nothing by delay; it grows the fresher by sleeping, and strikes with
greater strength when it awakes. All the time men are abusing his patience, God
is whetting his Sword, and the longer it is whetting, the sharper will be the
edge. The longer he is fetching his blow, the smarter it will be. The heavier
the Canons are, the more difficulty are they drawn to the besieged Town, but
when arrived they recompense the slowness of their march by the fierceness of
their battery. Because I have purged thee, i. e. used means for thy
reformation, and waited for it, and thou wast not purged, thou shall not be
purged from thy filthiness any more, till I have caused my fury to rest upon
thee. I will not go back, neither will I spare, according to thy ways, and
according to thy doings shall they Judge thee. Ezekiel. 24.13.14. God will spare
as little then, as he spared much before. His wrath shall be as raging upon
them, as the Sea of their wickedness was within them. When there is a bank to
forbid the irruption of the streams, the waters swell, but when the bank is
broke, or the lock taken away, they rush with the greater violence, and ravage
more, than they would have done, had not they met with a stop. The longer a
stone is in falling, the more it bruiseth, and grinds to powder. There is a
greater treasure of Wrath laid up by the abuses of patience. Every sin must
have a just recompense of reward; and therefore every sin in regard of its
aggravations must be more punished, then a sin in the singleness and simplicity
of its own nature. As treasures of mercy are kept by God for us, he keeps mercy
for thousands, so are treasures of wrath kept by him, to be expended; and a
time of expense there must be, Patience will account to Justice, all the good
offices it has done the sinner, and demand to be righted by Justice. Justice
will take the account from the hands of Patience, and exact a recompense for
every disingenuous injury offered to it. When Justice comes to arrest men for
their debts, Patience, Mercy, and Goodness will step in as Creditors, and clap
their actions upon them, which will make the condition so much more deplorable.

4. When he puts an end to his abused patience, his wrath will make quick, and
sure work. He that is slow to Anger will be swift in the execution of it. The
departure of God from Jerusalem, is described with wings and wheels. Ezekiel.
11.23. One stroke of his hand is irresistible, he that has spent so much time
in waiting, needs but one minute to ruin; though it be long ere he draws his
Sword out of his scabbard, yet when once he does it, he dispatcheth men at a
blow. Ephraim or the Ten Tribes, had a long time of patience, and prosperity,
but now shall a month devour him with his portion. Hosea 5.7. One fatal month
puts a period to the many years peace, and security of a sinful Nation. His
Arrows wound suddenly. Psalm. 64.7. And while men are about to fill their
Bellies, he casts the fruits of his wrath upon them. Job 20.23. Like thunder
out of a Cloud, or a Bullet out of a Cannon that strikes dead, before it is
heard. God deals with sinners, as Enemies do with a Town, batter it not by
planted Guns, but secretly undermines, and blows up the Walls, whereby they
involve the Garrison in a sudden ruin, and carry the Town. God spared the
Amalekites along time after the injury committed against the Israelites in
their passage out of Egypt to Canaan, but when he came to reckon with them, he
would wast them in a trice, and make an utter consumption of them. 1 Samuel 15.2,
3. He describes himself by a traveling Woman. Isaiah 42.14. That has born
long in her Womb, and at last sends forth her Birth with strong cries. Though
he has held his peace, been still and refrained himself, yet at last, he will
destroy, and devour at once. The Ninivites spared in the time of Jonah for
their Repentance, are in Nature threatened with a certain and total ruin; when
God should come, to bring them to an account for his length and patience, so
much abused by them. Though God endured the murmuring Israelites so long in the
Wilderness, yet he paid them off at last, and took away the Rebels in his
Wrath. He uttered their sentence with an irreversible Oath, that none of them
should enter into his rest, and he did as surely execute it, as he had solemnly
sworn it.

5. Though he does defer his visible wrath, yet that very delay may be more
dreadful than a quick punishment. He may forbear striking, and give the Reins
to the hardness and corruption of men's hearts. He may suffer them, to walk in
their own Counsels, without any more striving with them, whereby they make them
selves fitter fuel for his vengeance. This was the fate of Israel, when they
would not hearken to his voice, he gave them up to their own hearts lusts, and
they walked in their own Counsels, Psalm. 81.12. Though his sparing them, had
the outward aspect of patience, it was a wrathful one, and attended with
spiritual judgments, thus many abusers of patience may still have their line
lengthned, and the Candle of prosperity to shine upon their heads, that they
may increase their sins, and be the fitter mark at last for his arrows. They
swim down the stream of their own sensuality with a deplorable security, till
they fall into an unavoidable gulf, where at last it will be a great part of
their Hell, to reflect on the length of divine patience on Earth, and their
inexcusable abuse of it.

2. It informs us of the reason, why he lets the Enemies of his Church oppress
it, and deferrs his promise of the deliverance of it. If he did punish them
presently, his holiness and Justice would be glorified, but his power over
himself in his patience would be obscured. Well may the Church be content, to
have a perfection of God glorified, that is not like to receive any honor in
another World by any exercise of it self. If it were not for this patience, he
were incapable to be the Governor of a sinful World; he might without it be
the Governor of an innocent World, but not of a criminal one; he would be the
destroyer of the World, but not the orderer and disposer of the extravagancies,
and sinfulness of the World. The interest of his Wisdom in drawing good out of
evil, would not be served, if he were not clothed with this perfection as well
as with others. If he did presently destroy the Enemies of his Church upon the
first oppression, his wisdom in contriving, and his power in accomplishing
deliverance against the united powers of Hell and Earth, would not be visible,
no nor that power in preserving his people unconsumed in the furnace of
Affliction. He had not got so great a name in the rescue of his Israel from
Pharaoh, had he thundered the Tyrant into destruction upon his first Edicts
against the innocent. If he were not patient to the most violent of men, he
might seem to be cruel. But when he offers peace to them under their
rebellions, waits that they may be members of his Church, rather than Enemies
to it; he frees himself from any such imputation, even in the judgment of those
that shall feel most of his wrath; it is this renders the equity of his Justice
unquestionable, and the deliverance of his people righteous in the Judgment of
those from whose fetters they are delivered. Christ Reigns in the midst of his
Enemies, to show his power over himself, as well as over the heads of his
Enemies, to show his power over his Rebels. And though he retards his promise,
and suffers a great interval of time between the publication and performance,
sometimes years, sometimes ages to pass away, and little appearance of any
preparation, to show himself a God of Truth; It Is not that he has forgotten
his Word, or repents, that ever he passed it, or sleeps in a supine neglect of
it: but that men might not perish, but bethink themselves, and come as friends
into his bosom rather than be crushed as enemies under his feet. 2 Pet. 3.9.
The Lord is not slack concerning his promise, but is long-suffering to usward,
not willing that any should perish, but that all should come to Repentance.
Hereby he shows, that he would be rather pleased with the conversion, than the
destruction of men.

3. We see the reason, why sin is suffered to remain in the Regenerate; To show
his Patience toward his own; for since this attribute has no other place of
appearance but in this World, God takes opportunity to manifest it: because at
the close of the World, it will remain closed up in the Deity, without any
further operation. As God suffers a multitude of sins in the World, to evidence
his Patience to the wicked, so he suffers great remainders of sin in his
people, to show his Patience to the Godly. His sparing mercy is admirable,
before their conversion, but more admirable in bearing with them after so high
an Obligation, as the conferring upon them special converting Grace.

2. The second Use is of comfort. It Is a vast comfort to any, when God is
pacified toward them; but it is some comfort to all, that God is yet Patient
toward them, though but very little to a refractory sinner. His continued
Patience to all, speaks a possibility of the cure of all, would they not stand
against the way of their recovery. It Is a terror, that God has anger, but it
is a mitigation of that terror, that God is slow to it; While his Sword is in
his sheath, there is some hopes to prevent the drawing of it; Alas, if he were
all fire and sword upon sin, what would become of us? We should find nothing
else but overflowing deluges, or sweeping Pestilences, or perpetual flashes of
Sodom's Fire and Brimstone from Heaven. He doomes us not presently to
execution, but gives us a long breathing time after the crime, that by retiring
from our iniquities, and having recourse to his mercy, he may be withheld for
ever from signing a Warrant against us, and change his Legal Sentence into an
Evangelical pardon. It Is a special comfort to his people, that he is a
Sanctuary to them. Ezekiel. 11.16. A place of refuge, a place of Spiritual
Communications; But it is some refreshment to all in this life, that he is a
defense to them: for so is his Patience called. Numb. 14.9. Their defense is
departed from them; Speaking to the Israelites, that they should not be afraid
of the Canaanites, for their defense is departed from them. God is no longer
Patient to them, since their sins be full and ripe. Patience as long as it
lasts, is a temporary defense, to those that are under the wing of it; but to
the believer it is a singular comfort; And God is called the God of Patience
and consolation in one breath. Romans 15.5. The God of Patience and Consolation
grant you to be like-minded; All interpreters understand it effectively. The
God that inspires you with comfort, and cheares you with comfort, grant this to
you. Why may it not be understood formally, of the Patience belonging to the
nature of God? and though it be expressed in the way of Petition, yet it might
also be proposed as a pattern for imitation, and so suits very well to the
Exhortation laid down, ver. 1. which was to bear with the infirmities of the
weak, which he presses them to, ver. 3. by the example of Christ; And ver. 5.
by the Patience of God to them, and so they are very well linkt together. God
of Patience and Consolation may well be joined, since Patience is the first
step of comfort to the poor creature. If it did not administer some comfortable
hopes to Adam, in the interval between his fall, and God's coming to examine
him; I am sure it was the first discovery of any comfort to the creature, after
the sweeping the destroying deluge out of the World; Genesis 9.21. After the
savor of Noah's Sacrifice, representing the great Sacrifice which was to be in
the World, had ascended up to God, the return from him is a publication of his
forbearing to punish any more in such a manner: And though he found man no
better than he was before, and the imaginations of men's hearts as evil as
before the deluge, that he would not again smite every living thing, as he had
done. This was the first expression of comfort to Noah, after his exit from the
Ark; And declares nothing else but the continuance of Patience to the New
World, above what he had shown to the Old.

1. It Is a comfort, in that it is an argument of his Grace to his people. If he
has so rich a Patience to exercise toward his enemies, he has a greater
treasure to bestow upon his friends. Patience is the first attribute, which
steps in for our Salvation, and therefore called Salvation. 2 Pet. 3.15.
Something else is therefore built upon it, and intended by it, to those that
believe. Those two letters of his name, a God keeping Mercy for Thousands, and
forgiving iniquity, transgressions and sin, follows the other Letter of his
long suffering in the Proclamation. Exodus 34.6, 7. He is slow to anger, that he
may be merciful, that men may seek, and recieve their pardon. If he be long
suffering, in order to be a pardoning God, he will not be wanting in pardoning
those who answer the design of his forbearance of them. You would not have had
sparing mercy to improve, if God would have denied you saving mercy upon the
improvement of his sparing goodness. If he has so much respect to his enemies,
that provoke him, as to endure them with much long suffering, he will surely be
very kind to those that obey him, and conform to his will. If he has much long
suffering to those that are fitted for destruction, Romans 9.22. he will have a
muchness of mercy for those that are prepared for Glory by Faith and
Repentance. It Is but a natural conclusion a gracious Soul may make, if God had
not a mind to be appeased toward me, he would not have had a mind to forbear
me; but since he has forborne me, and given me a heart to see, and answer the
true end of that forbearance, I need not question, but that sparing Mercy will
end in saving, since it finds that Repentance springing up in me, which that
Patience conducted me to.

2. His Patience is a ground to trust in his promise. If his slowness to anger
be so great, when his Precept is slighted, his readiness to give what he has
promised, will be as great, when his promise is believed. If the provocations
of them meet with such an unwillingness to punish them, Faith in him will meet
with the choicest embraces from him. He was more ready to make the promise of
Redemption after man's Apostasy, than to execute the threatening of the Law. He
does still witness a greater willingness to give forth the fruits of the
promise, than to pour out the vials of his curses. His slowness to anger is an
evidence still, that he has the same disposition, which is no slight Cordial
to Faith in his Word.

3. It Is a comfort in infirmities. If he were not patient, he could not bear
with so many peevishnesses, and weaknesses in the hearts of his own. If he be
patient to the grosser sins of his enemies, he will be no less to the lighter
infirmities of his people. When the Soul is as a bruised Reed, that can emit no
sound at all, or one very harsh and ungrateful, he does not break it in pieces,
and fling it away in disdain, but waits to see, whether it will fully answer
his pains, and be brought to a better frame, and sweeter note. He brings them
not to account for every slip, but as a Father spares his son that serves him.
Mal. 3.17. It Is a comfort to us in our distracted services; for were it not for
this slowness to anger, he would stifle us in the midst of our Prayers, wherein
there are as many foolish thoughts to disgust him, as there are petitions to
implore him. The Patientest Angels would hardly be able to bear with the
follies of good men in Acts of worship.

3. The Third Use is for Exhortation.

I. Meditate often on the patience of God. The Devil labors for nothing more,
than to deface in us the consideration and memory of this perfection. He is an
envious creature, and since it has reached out it self to us, and not to him,
he envies God the Glory of it, and man the advantage of it. But God loves to
have the Volumes of it studied, and daily turned over by us. We cannot without
an inexcusable wilfulness miss the thoughts of it, since it is visible in every
bit of bread, and breath of Air in our selves, and all about us.

1. The frequent consideration of his patience, would render God highly amiable
to us. It Is a more endearing argument, than his mere goodness; His goodness to
us as creatures, endowing us with such excellent faculties, furnishing us with
such a commodious World, and bestowing upon us so many attendants for our
pleasure and service, and giving us a Lordship over his other works, deserves
our affection, But his patience to us as sinners after we have merited the
greatest wrath, shows him to be of a sweeter disposition, than creating
Goodness to unoffending Creatures; and consequently speaks a greater love in
him, and bespeaks a greater affection from us. His Creating goodness discovered
the Majesty of his Being, and the greatness of his mind, but this the sweetness
and tenderness of his Nature. In this patience he exceeds the mildness of all
Creatures to us; and therefore should be enthroned in our affections above all
other Creatures. The consideration of this would make us affect him for his
nature, as well as for his benefits.

2. The consideration of his patience, would make us frequent and serious in
the exercise of Repentance. In its nature it leads to it, and the consideration
of it would engage us to it, and melt us in the exercise of it. Could we deeply
think of it, without being touched with a sense of the kindness of our
forbearing Creditor and Governor? Could we gaze upon it? nay could we glance
upon it without relenting at our offending one of so mild a nature, without
being sensibly affected, that he has preserved us so long from being loaded
with those chains of darkness, under which the Devils groan? This forbearance
has good reason to make sin, and sinners ashamed. That you are in being, is
not for want of advantages enough in his hand against you, many a forfeiture
you have made, and many an engagement you have broke; he has scarce met with
any other dealing from us, than what had treachery in it. Whatsoever our
sincerity is, we have no reason to boast of it, when we consider, what mixtures
there are in it, and what swarms of base motions taint it. Has he not lain
pressed and groaning under our sins, as a Cart is pressed with sheaves. Amos
2.13. when one shake of himself as Sampson, might have rid him of the burden,
and dismissed us in his fury into Hell? If we should often ask our Consciences,
why have we done thus, and thus against so mild a God? Would not the reflection
on it, put us to the blush? If men would consider, that such a time they
provoked God to his face, and yet have not felt his Sword; such a time they
blasphemed him, and made a reproach of his name, and his thunder did not stop
their motion; such a time they fell into an abominable brutishness, yet he kept
the punishment of Devils, the unclean Spirits from reaching them; such a time
he bore an open affront from them, when they scoft at his Word, and he did not
send a destruction, and laugh at it. Would not such a meditation work some
strange kind of relentings in men? What if we should consider, that we cannot
do a sinful act without the support of his concurring Providence? We cannot
see, hear, move without his concourse. All Creatures we use for our necessity,
or pleasure, are supported by him in the very act of assisting, to pleasure us;
and when we abuse those Creatures against him, which he supports for our use,
how great is his patience to bear with us, that he does not annihilate those
Creatures, or at least imbitter their use? What issue could reasonably be
expected, from this consideration, but Oh wretched man that I am, to serve my
self of Gods power, to affront him, and of his Long-suffering to abuse him? Oh
infinite patience to employ that power to preserve me, that might have been
used to punish me! He is my Creator, I could not have a being without him, and
yet I offend him. He is my preserver, I cannot maintain my being without him,
and yet I affront him. Is this a worthy requital of God? Deuteronomy. 32.6. Do you
thus requite the Lord, would be the heart breaking reflection. How would it
give men a fuller prospect of the depravation of their nature, than any thing
else; that their corruption should be so deep and strong, that so much patience
could not overcome it? It would certainly make a man ashamed of his nature as
well as his actions.

3. The consideration of his patience, would make us resent more, the injuries
done by others to God. A Patient sufferer, though a deserving sufferer,
attracts the pity of men, that have a value for any virtue, though clouded with
a heap of vice. How much more should we have a concern for God, who suffers so
many abuses from others? And be grieved, that so admirable a patience should be
slighted by men, who solely live by, and under the daily influence of it? The
impression of this would make us take Gods part, as it is usual with men, to
take the part of good dispositions that lie under oppression.

4. It would make us patient under Gods hand. His slowness to Anger and his
forbearance is visible, in the very strokes we feel in this Life. We have no
reason to murmur against him, who gives us so little cause, and in the greatest
afflictions gives us more occasion of thankfulness, than of repining. Did not
slowness to the extremest Anger, moderate every affliction, it had been a
Scorpion instead of a rod. We have reason to bless him, who from his
long-suffering sends temporal sufferings, where eternal are justly due. Ezra
9.13. Thou have punished us less than our iniquities do deserve. His
indulgences toward us have been more than our corrections, and the length of
his patience has exceeded the sharpness of his rod, Upon the account of his
long-suffering our mutinies against God have as little to excuse them, as our
sins against him have to deserve his forbearance.

The consideration of this would show us more reason, to repine at our own
repinings, than at any of his smarter dealings. And the consideration of this
would make us submissive, under the Judgments we expect. His undeserved
patience has been more than our merited judgments can possibly be thought to
be. If we fear the removal of the Gospel for a season, as we have reason to do,
we should rather bless him, that by his waiting patience, he has continued it
so long, then murmur, that he threatens to take it away so late. He has born
with us many a year, since the light of it was re-kindled, when our Ancestors
had but six years of patience between the rise of Edward the VI, and the ascent
of Queen Mary to the Crown.

2. Exhortation is, to admire and stand astonished at his patience, and bless
him for it. If you should have defiled your Neighbors bed, or sullyed his
reputation, or rifled his Goods, would he have withheld his vengeance, unless
he had been too weak to execute it? We have done worse to God, then we can do
to man, and yet he draws not that Sword of Wrath out of the scabbard of his
patience, to sheath it in our hearts. It Is not so much a wonder, that any
Judgments are sent, as that there are no more and sharper. That the World shall
be fired at last, is not a thing so strange, as that fire does not come down
every day upon some part of it. Had the disciples, that saw such excellent
patterns of mildness from their Master, and were so often urged to learn of
him, that was lowly, and meek, the Government of the World, it had been long
since turned into ashes, since they were too forward to desire him, to open his
magazine of judgments, and kindle a fire, to consume a Samaritan Village, for a
slight affront in comparison of what he received from others, and afterward
from themselves in their forsaking of him. Luke 9.52, 53, 54. We should admire,
and praise that here, which shall be praised in Heaven; though patience shall
cease as to its exercise after the consummation of the World, it shall not
cease from receiving the acknowledgments, of what it did, when it traversed the
stage of this Earth. If the Name of God be glorified, and acknowledged in
Heaven, no question but this will also; since long-suffering is one of his
Divine Titles, a letter in his name, as well as Merciful, and Gracious,
Abundant in Goodness and Truth. And there is good reason, to think that the
patience exercised toward some, before converting grace was ordered to seize
upon them, will bear a great part in the Anthems of Heaven. The greater his
long-suffering has been to men, that lay covered with their own dung, a long
time before they were freed by grace from their filth; the more admiringly, and
loudly they will cry up his Mercy to them, after they have past the gulf, and
see a deserved Hell at a distance from them, and many in that place of
torments, who never had the tastes of so much forbearance. If mercy will be
praised there, that which began the Alphabet of it, cannot be forgot. If Paul
speak so highly of it in a damping World, and under the pull-backs of a body of
death, as he does. 1 Timothy 1.16, 17. For this cause I obtained mercy; that
Christ might show forth all long-suffering. Now unto the King Eternal,
Immortal, Invisible, the Only Wise God, be Honor, and Glory for ever and ever
Amen. No doubt, but he will have a higher note for it, when he is surrounded
with a heavenly flame, and freed from all remains of dullness, shall it be
praised above, and have we no notes for it here below? Admire Christ too, who
sued out your repreive upon the account of his merit. As mercy acts not upon
any but in Christ, so neither had patience born with any but in Christ. The
pronouncing the arrest of Judgment Genesis 8.21. was when God smelled a sweet
savor from Noah's sacrifice, not from the Beasts offered, but the Antitypical
sacrifice represented.

That we may be raised, to bless God for it, let us consider,

1. The multitude of our provocations. Though some have blacker guilt than
others, and deeper stains, yet let none wipe his mouth, but rather imagine
himself to have but little reason to bless it. Are not all our offenses as
many, as their have been minutes in our lives? All the moments of our
continuance in the World, have been moments of his Patience, and our
ingratitude. Adam was punished for one sin, Moses excluded Canaan for a
passionate unbelieving word. Ananias and Saphira lost their lives for one sin
against the Holy Ghost. One sin sullyed the beauty of the World. defaced the
works of God, had cracked Heaven and Earth in pieces, had not infinite
satisfaction been proposed to the provoked Justice by the Redeemer; And not one
sin committed, but is of the same venomous nature; How many of those
contradictions against himself has he born with? Had we been only unprofitable
to him, his forbearance of us had been miraculous; But how much does it exceed
a miracle, and lift it self above the meanness of a conjunction with such an
Epithet, since we have been provoking? Had there been no more than our impudent
or careless rushings into his presence in Worship. Had they been only sins of
Omission, and sins of Ignorance, it had been enough to have put a stand to any
further operations of this perfection toward us. But add to those, sins of
Commission, sins against knowledge, sins against spiritual motions, sins
against repeated resolutions, and pressing admonitions, the neglects of all the
opportunities of Repentance; put them all together, and we can as little
recount them, as the sands on the sea shore. But what do I only speak of
particular men? view the whole World, and if our own iniquities render it an
amazing Patience; what a mighty supply will be made to it in all the numerous
and weighty provocations, under which he has continued the World for so many
revolutions of Years and Ages? Have not all those pressed into his presence
with a loud cry, and demanded a sentence from Justice? yet has not the Judge
been overcome by the importunity of our sins? Pont. part. 1. 42.
Were the Devils punished for one sin, a proud thought, and that not committed
against the blood of Christ, as we have done numberless times? yet has not God
made us partakers in their punishment, though we have exceeded them in the
quality of their sin? Oh admirable patience! that would bear with me under so
many, while he would not bear with the sinning Angels for one.

2. Consider how mean things we are, who have provoked him. What is man but a
vile thing, that a God abounding with all riches, should take care of so abject
a thing, much more to bear so many affronts from such a drop of matter, such a
nothing creature! That he that has anger at his command, as well as pity,
should endure such a detestable, deformed creature by sin, to fly in his face.
What is man, that thou art mindful of him? Psalm: 8. (...) miserable, incurable
man, derived from a word, that signifies to be incurably sick. Man is Adam,
Earth from his Earthly Original, and Enosh incurable from his corruption. Is it
not worthy to be admired, that a God of infinite Glory should wait on such
Adams, worms of earth, and be as it were a servant, and attendant to such
Enoshes, sickly and peevish creatures?

3. Consider who it is, that is thus patient. He it is that with one breath,
could turn Heaven and Earth, and all the inhabitants of both into nothing; That
could by one Thunderbolt have razed up the Foundations of a cursed World. He
that wants not instruments without to ruin us, that can arm our own
Consciences against us, and can drown us in our own Phlegm. And by taking out
one pin from our bodies, cause the whole frame to fall asunder. Besides, it is a
God, that while he suffers the sinner, hates the sin, more than all the Holy
men upon Earth, or Angels in Heaven can do; So that his patience for a minute
transcends the patience of all creatures from the Creation to the Dissolution
of the World: because it is the patience of a God, infinitely more sensible of
the cursed quality of sin, and infinitely more detesting it.

4. Consider how long he has forborne his anger. A reprieve for a Week or a
Month is accounted a great favor in Civil States; The Civil Law enacts, Cod.
Lib. 9. Titul. 47 6. 20.
that if the Emperor commanded a man to be condemned, the Execution was to be
deferred 30 days: because in that time the Princes anger might be appeased.
But how great a favor is it to be reprieved 30 years for many offenses, every
one of which deserves death more at the hands of God, than any offense can at
the hands of man? Paul was according to the common account but about 30 years
Old at his Conversion, and how much does he elevate Divine long suffering?
Certainly there are many, who have more reason, as having larger quantities of
patience cut out to them, who have lived to see their own gray hairs in a
rebellious posture against God, before Grace brought them to a surrender. We
were all condemned in the Womb, our Lives were forfeited the first moment of
our breath, but patience has stopped the Arrest; The merciful Creditor deserves
to have acknowledgment from us, who has laid by his Bond so many years,
without putting it in suit against us. Many of your companions in sin have
perhaps been surprised long ago, and haled to an Eternal Prison; Nothing is
remaining of them but their dust, and the time is not yet come for your
Funeral. Let it be considered, that that God, that would not wait upon the
fallen Angels one instant after their sin, nor give them a moments space of
Repentance, has prolonged the Life of many a sinner in the World to
innumerable moments, to 420000 minutes in the space of a Year, to 8 Millions,
and 400000 Minutes in the space of 20 Years. The damned in Hell would think it
a great kindness, to have but a Year's, Month's, nay Daye's respite, as a space
to Repent in.

5. Consider also, how many have been taken away under shorter measures of
patience. Some have been struck into a Hell of misery, while thou remainest
upon an Earth of forbearance. In a Plague, the destroying Angel has hewed down
others, and past by us; The Arrows have flew about our heads, past over us, and
stuck in the heart of a neighbor. How many Rich men? How many of our Friends
and Familiars have been seized by death, since the beginning of the year, when
they least thought of it, and imagined it far from them? Have you not known
some of your acquaintance snatched away in the height of a crime? Was not the
same wrath due to you as well as to them? And had it not been as dreadful for
you to be so surprised by him, as it was for them? Why should he take a less
sturdy sinner out of thy company, and let thee remain still upon the Earth? If
God had dealt so with you, how had you been cut off, not only from the
enjoyment of this Life, but the hopes of a better? And if God has made such a
Providence beneficial for reclaiming you, how much reason have you to
acknowledge him? He that has had least patience, has cause to admire, but
those that have more, ought to exceed others in blessing him for it. If God had
put an end to your natural Life, before you had made provision for Eternal, how
deplorable would your condition have been?

Consider also, who ever have been sinners formerly of a deeper note; Might not
God have struck a man in the embraces of his Harlots, and choked him in the
moment of his excessive and intemperate healths, or on the sudden have spurted
Fire and Brimstone into a blasphemers mouth? What if God had snatched you away,
when you had been sleeping in some great iniquity, or sent you, while burning
in lust, to the fire it merited? Might he not have cracked the string, that
linkt your souls to your bodies, in the last sickness you had? And what then
had become o^ you* What could have been expected to succeed your impenitent
state in this World, but howlings in another? But he reprieved you upon your
petitions, or the solicitations of your friends; and have you not broke your
word with him? Have your hearts been steadfast, has he not yet waited,
expecting when you would put your vows and resolutions into Execution? What
need had he to cry out to any so loud and so long, Oh you fools, how long will
you love foolishness? Prove. 1.22. when he might have ceased his crying to you,
and have by your death prevented your many neglects of him? Did he do all this,
that any of us might add new sins to our old, or rather, that we should bless
him for his forbearance, comply with the end of it, in reforming our lives, and
having recourse to his mercy?

3. Exhortation, therefore presume not upon his patience. The exercise of it is
not Eternal; you are at present under his Patience, yet while you are
unconverted, you are also under his anger; Psalm. 7.11. God is angry with the
wicked every day. You know not how soon his Anger may turn his Patience aside,
and step before it. It may be his Sword is drawn out of his Scabbard, his
Arrows may be settled in his Bow; and perhaps there is but a little time,
before you may feel the edge of the one, or the point of the other; and then
there will be no more time for Patience in God to us, or petition from us to
him. If we repent here, he will pardon us. If we defer Repentance, and dye
without it, he will have no longer mercy to pardon, nor Patience to bear.

What is there in our power but the present? the future time we cannot command,
the past time we cannot recall, squander not then the present away. The time
will come, when time shall be no more, and then long-suffering shall be no
more. Will you neglect the time, wherein patience acts, and vainly hope for a
time beyond the resolves of patience? Will you spend that in vain, which
Goodness has allotted you for other purposes? What an estimate will you make
of a little forbearance to respite death, when you are gasping under the stroke
of its Arrows? How much would you value some few days, of those many years you
now trifle away? Can any think God will be always at an expense with them in
vain, that he will have such riches trampled under their feet, and so many
editions of his patience, be made wast Paper? Do you know how few sands are yet
to run in your glass? Are you sure that he that waits to day, will wait as well
to morrow? How can you tell, but that God that is slow to anger to day, may be
swift to it the next? Jerusalem had but a day of peace, and the most carel^^^
sinner has no more. When their day was don they were destroyed by (...),
Pestilence, or Sword, or led into a doleful Captivity. Did God make our lives
so uncertain, and the duration of his forbearance unknown to us, that we should
live in a lazy neglect of his Glory, and our own happiness? If you should have
more patience in regard of your lives, do you know whither you shall have the
effectual offers of Grace? As your lives depend upon his will, so your
conversion depends solely upon his Grace. There have been many examples of
those miserable wretches, that have been left to a reprobate sense, after they
have a long time abused Divine forbearance. Thoug^ (...) he binds up sin. Hos.
13.12. The sin of Ephraim is b^^^d up, as bonds are bound up by a Creditor till
a fit opportunity; when God comes to put the bond in suit, it will be too late,
to wish for that patience we have so scornfully despised. Consider therefore
the end of Patience. The Patience of God considered in it self, without that
which it tends to, affords very little Comfort, it is but a step to pardoning
Mercy, and it may be without it, and often is. Many have been repreived, that
were never forgiven; Hell is full of those, that had Patience as well as we,
but not one that accepted pardoning grace, went within the gates of it.
Patience leaves men, when their sins have ripened them for Hell; but pardoning
Grace never leaves men, till it has conducted them to Heaven. His Patience
speaks him placable, but does not assure us, that he is actually appeased. Men
may hope that long-suffering tends to a pardon, but cannot be assured of a
pardon, but by something else above mere long-suffering. Rest not then upon
bare Patience, but consider the end of it; it is not, that any should sin more
freely, but repent more meltingly; it is not to spirit rebellion, but give a
merciful stop to it. Why should any be so ambitious of their ruin, as to
constrain God, to ruin them against the inclinations of his sweet disposition?

4. The fourth Exhortation is, let us imitate Gods patience in our own to
others. He is unlike God, that is hurryed with an unruly impetus, to punish
others for wronging him. The consideration of Divine Patience should make us
square our selves according to that pattern. God has exercised a
long-suffering from the fall of Adam to this minute on innumerable subjects,
and shall we be transported with desire of revenge upon a single injury? If God
were not slow to wrath, a sinful World had been long ago torn up from the
foundation. And if Revenge should be exercised by all men against their
Enemies, what man should have been alive, since there is not a man without an
Enemy? If every man were like Saul, breathing out threatenings, the World would
not only be an Aceldama, but a Desert. How distant are they from the nature of
God, who are in a flame upon every slight provocation from a sense of some
feeble and imaginary honor, that must bloody their Sword for a trifle, and
write their revenge in wounds and death? When God has his Glory every day
bespattered, yet he keeps his Sword in his sheath; what a woe would it be to the
World, if he drew it upon every affront? This is to be like Brutes, Dogs, or
Tigers, that snarle, bite, and devour upon every slight occasion: But to be
Patient, is to be divine, and to show our selves acquainted with the
disposition of God. Be you therefore perfect, as your heavenly father is
perfect. Matthew. 5.48. i. e. Be you perfect, and good; for he had been exhorting
them, to bless them, that cursed them, and to do good to them that hated them,
and that from the example God had set them, in causing his Sun to rise upon the
evil as well as the good. Be you therefore perfect. To Conclude, as Patience is
Gods perfection, so it is the accomplishment of the Soul. And as his slowness
to anger argues the greatness of his power over himself, so an unwillingness to
revenge, is a sign of a power over our selves, which is more noble than to be a
Monarch over others.

A TABLE OF THE Places of Scripture Explained in this BOOK.
Some few of the Numbers being twice gone over, the Reader may observe that
this Mark, where it is set after the Figures in this Table, and the following
Index, directs him to the first of those Folio's; and where he finds no Mark at
all, he is to consult the second.

GENESIS.
Chapters, Verses, Pages, 1. 1. 346, 439, 440 26. 443 2. 7. 30, 608 17. 796 3.
8. 803 15. 457 4. 26. 140, 801 6. 6. 225 18. 19. 287 22. 12. ibid. 32. 30. 116
46. 4. 657, 658 47. 31. 141

EXODUS
Chapters, Verses, Pages, 3. 11. 328 14. 187, 188 4. 24. 801 6. 3. 439, 440 9.
16. 454 15. 11. 494 32. 10. 602 33. 19. 585 34. 9. 806

NUMB.
34. 10. 116

DEUTERONOMY.
Chapters, Verses, Pages, 32. 33, 34. 300 34. 10. 116

I KINGS.
8. 27. 250 39. 316

II KINGS.
10. 9. 64 20. 1, 4, 5. 226, 227

II CHRON.
11. 15. 68

JOB.
4. 18. 500 9. 21. 320 12. 18. 742, 743 14. 5. 293 17. 282 16. 19. 331 22. 14.
718 24. 12. 792 26. from v. 5. to the end of the Chapter, 417, 418, 419, 420
31. 26, 27, 28. 88 34. 21. 285 38. 7. 615

PSALM.
Psalms, Verses, Pages, 1. 4. 233 2. 4. 257 8. 4. 824 10. 11, 13. 1 14. 1. 1, 2
16. 2. 749 19. 1, 2, 3, 4. 809 4. 348 9. 510 12. 288 22. 2, 3, 4. 558 26. 8.
257 27. 4. 497 10. 267 29. 10. 726 32. 1, 2. 326 50. 21. 792, 794 23. 326 51.
4. 303 6. 384 58. 3. 48 4. 49 10. 603 62. 11. 421 69. 19. 328 74. 14. 407 76.
12. 771 78. 36. 327 38. 804 90. 1. 179, 180 2. 180, 181 8. 318 102. 25, 26, 27.
203, 4, 5, 6, 7 from v. 3 to v. 28. 229, 230 103. 3. 699 14. 333 19. 700, 701,
702 104. 2. 15 31. 206, 207 105. 25. 534 106. 19, 20. 122 111. 10. 14 113. 5.
257 130. 4. 130 139. 2. 300 7, 8, 9. 247, 248 15, 16. 30 16. 293 23, 24. 233
145. 17. 584 147. 1, 2, 3. 272, 273 4. 273, 717, 718 5. 273, 274

PROVE.
Chapters, Verses, Pages, 8. 12. 346 22. 192, 749 30. 343 9. 10. 14 15. 11. 285
16. 4. 528

ECCL.
8. 11. 48

ISAI.
1. 10, 11, 14. 137 4. 2. 457 9. 6. 315 29. 15. 328 34. 4. 205 38. 1, 5. 226,
227 40. 15, 17. 252 41. 21, 22. 290, 291 43. 20, 21. 66 45. 5. 743 11. 769 48.
10. 657 52. 4, 5. 658 54. 16. 346 66. 1. 251

JEREMY.
Chapters, Verses, Pages, 6. 21. 534 7. 21. 137 12. 9. 233 15. 15. 789 16. 17.
287 21. 35, 36. 205 23. from v. 16 to 24. 241, 2, 3 32. 31. 799

LAM.
3. 33. 803

EZEKIEL.
4. 6. 802 8. 2. 497 9. 10. 803 11. 16. 657 18. 25. 790 20. 33. 771

DAN.
7. 9. 124

HOSEA.
1. 5. 816 2. 2, 3. 804, 814 16. 147 19. 769 5. 5. 513 12. 804 6. 4. 803, 804
7. 752 7. 3. 69 15. 669 8. 12. 55 10. 15. 122 11. 10. 150, 151 8. 804 13. 12,
13. 336, 811, 826 14. 2. 149

JOEL
1. 4. 804

AMOS.
2. 6. 87 3. 2. 277

JONAH.
3. 4, 10. 226, 227

MICAH.
5. 2. 192

NAHUM.
Chapters, Verses, Pages, 1. 1, 2. 787, 788 3. 788, 789, 790, 791

HABAK.
1. 16. 86

ZEPH.
2. 1, 2. 800

ZECH.
6. 1. 214 8. 3. 257 14. 16. 149

MAL.
1. 13, 14. 64 3. 5. 319 6. 806

MATT.
1. 18. 457 3. 9. 423 5. 48. 792, 827 7. 11. 551 23. 277 15. 6. 62 18. 10. 278
25. 12. 277

MARK.
10. 18. 577, 578, 579

LUKE.
1. 35. 456 10. 20. 235

JOHN.
1. 3. 474.5 4. a 10 ad 24. 109, 110 24. 110, 111, 112, 129, 130 5. 19. 472 6.
64. 317 7. 37. 149 9. 3. 712 10. 30. 262 12. 38. 303 39, 41. 551 17. 5. 192,
224

ACTS.
7. 51. 57 17. 18. 461 28. 244, 248 30. 799

ROMANS
Chapters, Verses, Pages, 1. 9. 143 19, 20, 21. 4, 5, 14, 15, 346, 582 23. 257
25. 41 2. 4. 810, 811 3. 9, 10, 11, 12. 48 23. 546, 547 5. 7. 584 7. 6. 135 8.
57 8. 4. 384 10. 796 21. 206 38, 39. 333 9. 728 6. 135 22. 795, 814 10. 18. 809
12. 1. 139 15. 5. 820 16. 25, 26, 27. a 341 ad 337

I COR.
1. 21. 346 2. 2. 287 10, 11. 278 10. 20, 21. 68

II COR.
3. 18. 373

GAL.
3. 3. 135

EPHESIANS.
1. 10. 619 18. 374 2. 3. 102 12. 47, 97 3. 10. 374 4. 6. 246

PHIL.
2. 6. 71

COL.
1. 16. 473 20. 609 2. 3. 395

II TIM.
1. 10. 630 631 2. 2. 235

TITUS.
1. 16. 2.49 2. 19. 277

HEB.
1. 1, 2, 10, 11. 229, 230, 473 9. 514 4. 12. 286 11. 3. 16, 489 6. 4 16. 631
21. 141

JAMES.
2. 10, 11. 61 3. 15. 49

II PET.
2. 1. 795 2. 5. 801 3. 9. 798 12, 13. 205

REV.
1. 10. 174 2. 18, 19, 22. 329 6. 10. 806 14. 205

THE INDEX.
A
MEN are unwilling to have any Acquaintance with God. Page 97 Vide Communion.
Actions a greater proof of Principles than words. Page 49 All are known by
God. Page 285
Activity required in Spiritual Worship. Page 144, 145 Adam, the greatness of
his sin. Page 625, 754 Vide Man, and Fall of man.
Additions in matters of Religion an invasion of God's Sovereignty. Page 756,
757 Vide Worship and Ceremonies.
Admiration ought to be exercised in Spiritual worship, Page 148 Affections
human, in what sense ascribed to God. Page 224, 225, 226 Sharp Afflictions make
Atheists fear there is a God. Page 42, 43 Make us impatient, Vide Impatience.
We should be patient under them, v. Patience. Many call on God only under them.
Page 92 Fill us with distraction in the Worship of God. Page 166 The Presence
of God a comfort in them Page 267 And his knowledge, Page 322 The wisdom of God
apparent in them. Page 369, 370, 371 The wisdom of God a comfort in them Page
405 And his Power, Page 485, 486 And his Sovereignty. Page 771 Do not impeach
his Goodness, Page 604 The Goodness of God seen in them. Page 657, 658 His
Goodness a comfort in them, Page 683 Acts of God's Sovereignty, 711, 712. The
consideration of which would make us entertain them as we ought, Page 774, 775
Many neglect the serving of God till old Age. Page 65 Air, how useful a
Creature. Page 23 Almighty, how often God is so called in Scripture. Page 421
How often in Job. Page 440
Good Angels, what benefit they have by Christ, Page 360, 618, 619 Not
Instruments in the Creation of Man. Page 443 Evil not redeemed. Page 619, 620
Angels, not Governors of the world, Page 673, 674 Subject to God, Page 717, 718
Men Apostatize from God, when his will crosses theirs, Page 80 In times of
Persecution, Page 90 By reason of practical Atheism, Page 102, 103
Apostles, the first Preachers of the Gospel, mean and worthless men, Page 463,
464 Spirited by Divine Power for spreading of it, Page 464, 465 The Wisdom of
God seen in using such Instruments, Page 393, 394
Applauding our selves, v. Pride. Atheism opens a Door to all manner of
wickedness, Page 2. Some spice of it in all men, Page 2, 4 The greatest folly 3
ad Page 39 Common in our days, Page 3, 41 Strikes at the Foundation of all
Religion, Page 3 We should establish our selves against it, ibid. It Is against
the light of Natural Reason, Page 4 Against the universal consent of all
Nations, Page 6 But few, if any, professed it in former Ages, Page 8, 41 Would
root up the Foundations of all Government, Page 39 Introduce all evil into the
world, Page 39, 40 Pernicious to the Atheist himself, Page 40, 41 The cause of
Public Judgments, Page 41 Men's Lusts the cause of it, Page 43 Promoted by the
Devil most since the destruction of Idolatry, Page 44 Uncomfortable, Page 44,
45 Directions against it, Page 45, 46 All sin founded in a secret Atheism, Page
50
Practical Atheism natural to Man, Page 47 Natural since the Fall, Page 48 To
all men, ibid. Proved by Arguments, 54 ad Page 99 We ought to be humbled for
it, both in our selves and others, Page 103, 104 How great a sin it is, 104 ad
Page 106 Misery will attend it, Page 106 We should watch against it, ibid.
Directions against it, Page 106, 107
Atheist can never prove there is no God, Page 41, 42 All the Creatures fight
against him, Page 42 In Afflictions, suspects and fears there is one, Page 42,
43 How much pains he takes to blot out the notion of a God, Page 43 Suppose it
were an even lay that there were no God, yet he is very imprudent, ibid. Uses
not means to enform himself, ibid.
Atoms, the World not made by a casual concourse of them, Page 20 Attributes of
God bear a comfortable respect to believers, Page 342 Authority, how
distinguished from Power, Page 704
B.
THe Best we have ought to be given to God, Page 155, 156 Blessings Spiritual,
God only the Author of, Page 698 Temporal, God uses a Sovereignty in bestowing
them, 740 Vide Riches.
Body, of Man, how curiously wrought, Page 30, 31, 350 Every Human one has
different Features, Page 31, 32 God has none; v. Spirit. We must worship God
with our Bodies, Page 139, 140, 141 Yet not with our Bodies only; Vide Soul and
Worship.
We must not conceive of God under a Bodily shape, Page 124, 125 Bodily Members
ascribed to him. Vide Members Brain, how curious a workmanship, Page 30
C.
THe Israelites worshipped the true God under the golden Calf, Page 122 God
fits and enclines men to several Callings, Page 356, 357, 650 Appoints every
man's Calling, Page 747
There is a first Cause of all things, Page 20, 21 Which does necessarily
exist, and is infinitely perfect, Page 21
We must not Censure God in his Counsels, Actions, or Revelations, Page 192,
193, 403, 404 Or in his ways, Page 415, 416
Censuring the hearts of others, is an injury to God's Omniscience, Page 324,
325 Men is a contempt of God's Sovereignty, Page 763
Ceremonial Law abolisht to promote Spiritual Worship, Page 135 Called Flesh,
ibid. Not a fit means to bring the heart into a spiritual frame, Page 135, 136
Rather hindered than furthered Spiritual Worship, Page 136, 137 God never
testified himself well-pleased with it, nor intended it should always last,
Page 137, 138 The abrogating of it does not argue any change in God, Page 228,
229 The Holiness of God appears in it, Page 510, 511
Men are prone to bring Ceremonies of their own into God's Worship, 79 Vide
Worship and Additions, etc. Chance, the World not made nor governed by it, Page
26 Charity, men have bad ends in it, Page 93 We should exercise it, Page 691,
692 The consideration of God's Sovereignty would promote it, Page 774
We should be Cheerful in God's worship Page 150 Christ, his Godhead proved
from his Eternity, Page 191, 192 From his Omnipresence, Page 261, 262 From his
Immutability, Page 229, 230 From his Knowledge of God, all Creatures, the
hearts of men and his prescience of their Inclinations, Page 315, 316, 317 From
his Omnipotence manifest in Creation, Preservation, and Resurrection, Page 472
ad 476 From his Holiness, Page 551 From his Wisdom, Page 395 Is God-man, Page
458 Spiritual Worship offered to God through him, Page 154, 155 The
imperfectness of our Services should make us prize his Mediation, Page 168 The
only fit Person in the Trinity to assume our Nature, Page 378, 379 Fitted to be
our Mediator and Savior by his two Natures, Page 381 382, 383 Should be
imitated in his Holiness, and often viewed by us to that end, Page 559, 563 The
greatest Gift, Page 622 ad 625 Appointed by the Father to be our Redeemer, Page
749, 750, 751
The Christian Religion, its Excellency, Page 103 Of Divine Extraction, Page
551 Most opposed in the World, Page 63 Vide Gospel.

Church, God's Eternity a comfort to her in all her Distresses and Threatenings
of her Enemies, Page 193, 194 Under God's special Providence, Page 272, 273 His
Infinite Knowledge a comfort in all subtle contrivances of men against her,
Page 328, 329 Troublers of her Peace by corrupt Doctrines, no better than
Devils, 341 God's Wisdom a comfort to her in her greatest dangers, Page 406
Has shown his Power in her deliverance in all Ages, Page 180, 453, 454 And in
the destruction of her Enemies, Page 454, 455, 456 Ought to take comfort in his
Power in her lowest Estate, Page 487, 488 Should not fear her Enemies; v. Fear.
His Goodness a comfort in dangers, Page 684 How great is God's love to her,
Page 769, 820 His Sovereignty a comfort to her Page 771, 772 He will comfort
her in her ^ears, and destroy her Enemies, Page 787, 788 God exercises Patience
toward her, Page 812 For her sake to the wicked also, Page 812, 813 Why her
Enemies are not immediately destroyed, Page 819
Commands of God; v. Laws. The Holiness of God to be relied on for Comfort,
Page 551 God gives great Comforts in or after Temptations, Page 659 Creatures
cannot Comfort us if God be angry Page 768 Communion with God, man naturally
has no desire of, Page 98 The advantage of Communion with him, Page 106, 107
Can only be in our Spirits, Page 127 We should desire it, Page 201, 202 Cannot
be between God and sinners, Page 548, 549 Holiness only fits us for it, Page 562
Conceptions, we cannot have adequate ones of God, Page 123 We ought to labor
after as high ones as we can, Page 123, 124 They must not be of him in a
corporeal shape, Page 124, 125 There will be in them a similitude of some
corporeal thing in our Fancy, Page 125, 126 We ought to refine and spiritualize
them, Page 126
Right Conceptions of him, a great help to Spiritual Worship, Page 176, 177 God
Concurs to all the Action of his Creatures, Page 529 His concurring to sinful
actions no blemish to his Holiness, Page 530 ad 533 Various Conditions of men,
a fruit of Divine Wisdom, Page 356 Conditions of the Covenant; v. Covenant,
Faith, and Repentance. Confession of sin, men may have bad ends in it, 93.
Partial ones a practical denial of God's Omniscience, Page 326 Conscience,
proves a Deity, Page 33 ad 36 Fears and stings of it in all men upon the
commission of sin, Page 34, 35 Though never so secret, ibid. Cannot be totally
shaken off, Page 35, 36 Comforts a man in well-doing, Page 36 Necessary for the
good of the world, ibid. Terrified ones wish there were no God, Page 52, 53 Men
naturally displeased with it, when it contradicts the desires of self Page 71,
72 Obey carnal self against the light of it, Page 84 Accusations of it evidence
God's Knowledge of all things, Page 313 God, and he only can speak peace to it
when troubled, Page 471, 720, 721 His Laws only reach it, Page 724, 725, 756,
757
Constancy in that which is good, we should labor after, and why? Page 238
Nothing but an Infinite good can content the Soul, Page 36, 37 Vide
Satisfaction and Soul.
Contingents, all foreknown by God. Vide Knowledge of God. Contradictions
cannot be made true by God, Page 432, 433, 434, 435 Yet this does not overthrow
God's Omnipotence, ibid. It Is an abuse of God's Power, to endeavor to justify
them by it, Page 483
Contrary qualities linkt together in the Creatures, Page 22, 351 Conversion,
carnal Self-love a great hindrance to it, Page 82 There may be a conversion
from sin which is not good, Page 90, 91 Men are Enemies to it Page 98, 99 The
necessity of it, Page 100 The difficulty of it, Page 101 God only can be the
Author of it, Page 102, 655 The Wisdom of God appears in it, in the Subjects,
Seasons, and Manner of it, Page 367, 368, 369 And his Power, Page 467 ad 470
And his Holiness Page 516 And his Goodness, Page 654, 655 And his Sovereignty,
Page 730 ad 734 He could convert all Page 730, 731 Not bound to convert any,
Page 732, 733 The various means and occasions of it, Page 747, 748
Genuine Convictions would be promoted by right and strong Apprehensions of
God's Holiness, Page 552, 553 Corruptions, the Knowledge of God a a comfort
under fears of them lurking in the heart, Page 333 The Power of God a comfort,
when they are strong and stirring, Page 486 In God's People shall be subdued,
Page 770 The Remainders of them God orders for their good, Page 362 ad 366
The Covenant of God with his People eternal, 194. and unchangeable, Page 234,
235 God in Covenant an eternal good to his people, Page 194, 195 The Conditions
of the Covenant of Grace evidence the Wisdom of God, Page 388 Suited to man's
lapsed state, and Gods glory ibid. Opposite to that which was the cause of the
Fall, ibid. Suited to the common Sentiments and Customs of the World and
Consciences of men Page 388, 389 Only likely to attain the end, ibid. Evidence
Gods Holiness, Page 515, 516 The Wisdom of God made over to Believers in it,
Page 4^5 And Power Page 485 And Holiness, Page 552 A Promise of Life employed in
the Covenant of Works, Page 612 Why not expressed, Page 614, 615 The Goodness of
God manifest in making a Covenant of Grace, after Man had broken the first,
Page 629. In the na^^^ (...) ^o^ of it, Page 629, 630, 631 In the ^^^^ice gift
of himself made over ^n it, Page 631, 632 In its confirmation, Page 632 Its
Conditions easy, reasonable, necessary, Page 533, 534, 535, 536 It promises a
more excellent Reward than the life in Paradise, Page 642, 643
Covetousness, vide Riches and World. Creation, the Wisdom of God appears in
it, 347 ad 351. and should be meditated upon, 351. motives to it, Page 417 ad
4^0 His Power, Page 439 ad 445 His Holiness, Page 507, 508 His Goodness, Page
604 ad 615 Goodness the end and motive of it, Page 592, 593 Ascribed to Christ,
Page 472 ad 475 The Foundation of God's Dominion, Page 707, 708
Creatures evidence the Being of God, 5 and Page 14 ad 29 In their production,
Page 15 ad 21 In their harmony, Page 21 ad 27 In pursuing their several ends,
Page 27 28, 29 In their preservation, Page 29 Were not, and cannot be from
Eternity, Page 16, 17, 190, 191 None of them can make themselves, Page 17, 18,
19 Or the World, Page 20 Subservient to one another, Page 22 251, 252 Regular,
uniform, and constant in it, Page 24, 25 Are various, Page 25, 26, 347, 348
Have several Natures, Page 27 All fight against the Atheist, Page 42 God ought
to be studied in them Page 45 All manifest something of God's perfections,
ibid. Setting them up as our end, v. End. Must not be worshipped, v. Idolatry.
Used by man to a contrary end than God appointed, Page 89 All are changeable,
Page 220, 221 Therefore an immutable God to be preferred before them, Page 237
Are nothing to God, Page 264 Are all known by God, Page 284, 285 Shall be
restored to their primitive end, Page 205, 206, 207, 644, 645 Their beautiful
order and situation Page 348, 349 Are fitted for their several ends, Page 349,
350 None of them can be Omnipresent, Page 251, 252 Or Omnipotent; Page 426, 427
Or infinitely perfect, Page 431 God could have made more than he has, Page 427
ad 430 Made them all more perfect than they are, Page 430 Yet all are made in
the best manner, Page 431 The Power that is in them demonstrates a greater to
be in God, Page 436 Ordered by God as he pleases, Page 455 The meanest of them
can destroy us by God's order, Page 491, 768 Making different ranks of them,
does not impeach God's Goodness, Page 595, 596, 597 Cursed for the sin of man,
Page 609, 643 What benefit they have by the Redemption of man, Page 643, 644
Cannot comfort us if God be angry, Page 768 All subject to God, Page 717 ad 721
All obey God, Page 781
Curiosity in enquiries about God's Counsels and Actions, a great folly, Page
192, 193 It Is an injuring God's knowledge, Page 323 It Is a contempt of Divine
wisdom Page 404 Should not be employed about what God has not revealed, Page
414 The consideration of God's Sovereignty would check it, Page 775

D.
DAy, how necessary, Page 350 Death of Christ, its value is from his Divine
Nature, Page 382 Vindicated the honor of the Law, both as to precept and
penalty, Page 383 Overturned the Devils Empire, Page 385 He suffered to rescue
us by it, Page 623 By the command of the Father, Page 750
Debauched persons wish there were no God, Page 53 Decrees of God, no
succession in them, Page 186 Unchangeable, 397, 477. v. Immutability.
Defilement, God not capable of it from any Corporeal thing, Page 126, 260 261
Delight, holy Duties should be performed with it, Page 149, 150 All delight in
worship does not prove it to be spiritual, Page 150
We should examine our selves after worship, what delight we had in ^t, Page 164
Deliverances chiefly to be ascribed to God, Page 272, 273 The Wisdom of God
seen in them, Page 371, 372 373
Desires, of Man, naturally after an infinite good, Page 36, 37 Which evidences
the being of a God, Page 37 Men naturally have no desire of Remembrance of God,
converse with him, thorough return to him, or imitation of him, Page 97, 98, 99
Devil, Man naturally under his Dominion, Page 67, 68 God's restraining him,
how great a mercy; v. Restraint. Shall be totally subdued by God, Page 341
Outwitted by God, Page 385, 386 His first sin, what it was, Page 753, 754 Vide
Angel.

Direction, Men neglect to ask it of God, Vide Trusting in our selves. Should
seek it of him, Page 399 Not to do it, how sinful, Page 403 Should not presume
to give it to him, Page 404
Disappointments make many cast off their Obedience to God, Page 66 God
Disappoints the devices of Men, Page 745, 746 Dispensations of God with his own
Law Page 725, 726 Distance from God naturally affected by Men, Page 97 How
great it is, Page 546, 547
Distractions in the Service of God, how natural, Page 65, 66, 165 Will be so
while we have natural Corruption within, Page 165, 166 While we are in the
Devil's Precinct, Page 166 Most frequent in time of Affliction, ibid. May be
improved to make us more Spiritual, Page 166, 167, 168 When we are humbled for
them in worship, Page 166, 167 And for the baseness of our Natures, the cause
of them, Page 167 Make us prize Duties of Worship the more, ibid. Fill us with
admirations of the graciousness of God, Page 167, 168 Prize the mediation of
Christ, 168 They should not discourage us, if we resist them, Page 168, 169 And
if we narrowly watch against them Page 169 Should be speedily cast out, Page
178 Thoughts of God's Presence a remedy against them, Page 270
Distresses, v. Afflictions. Distrust of God, a contempt of God's Wisdom, Page
405 And of his Power, Page 481 And of his Goodness, Page 665 Too great fear of
man arises from it, Page 481, 482 Vide Trusting in God, and in our selves.
Divinity of Christ, v. Christ. Of the Holy Ghost, v. Holy Ghost.
Doctrines that are self-pleasing desired by men, Page 83 Vide Truths.
Dominion of God, distinguished from his Power, Page 704 All his other
Attributes fit him for it, ibid. Acknowledged by all, Page 704, 705 Inseparable
from the notion of God, ibid. We cannot suppose God a Creator without it, Page
705 Cannot be renounced by God himself, ibid. Nor communicated to any Creature,
Page 706 Its foundation, Page 706 ad 710 It is independent, Page 710, 711
Absolute, Page 711 ad 714 Yet not tyrannical, 714 Managed with Wisdom,
Righteousness and Goodness, Page 714 ad 717 It Is Eternal, Page 721 It Is
manifested as he is a Lawgiver, Page 721 ad 727 As a Proprietor, Page 727 ad
741 As a Governor, Page 741 ad 748 As a Redeemer, Page 748 ad 751 The contempt
of it, how great, Page 752 All sin is a contempt of it, Page 752, 753 The first
thing the Devil aimed against, Page 753 And Adam, Page 754 Invaded by the
Usurpations of men, Page 754, 755 Wherein it is contemned as he is a Lawgiver,
Page 755 ad 758 As a Proprietor, Page 758, 759 As a Governor, Page 759 ad 763
It is terrible to the wicked, Page 766, 767, 768. Comfortable to the Righteous,
Page 769 ad 772 Should be often meditated upon by us, Page 772 The Advantages
of so doing, Page 773, 774, 775 It should teach us Humility, Page 775, 776
Calls for our praise and thanks, Page 776, 777, 778 Should make us promote his
Honor, Page 778, 779 Calls for Fear, Prayer, and Obedience, Page 779, 780
Affords motives to obedience, Page 780, 781 And shows the manner of it, Page
782, 783, 784 Calls for Patience, Page 784 Affords motives to it, Page 784,
785, 786 Shows us the true nature of it, Page 786
Duties of Religion performed often merely for self interest, Page 91 ad 94 Men
unwieldy to them, Page 91 Perform them only in affliction, Page 92 Vid. Service
of God, and Worship.
Dwelling in Heaven, and in the Ark, how to be understood of God, Page 257, 258
E.
EAr of man how curious an Organ, Page 31 Earth, how useful, Page 23 The Wisdom
of God seen in it, Page 348, 849
Earthly things, v. World. Ejaculations, how useful, Page 176 Elect, God knows
all their persons, Page 330 Election evidenced by Holiness, Page 562 The
Sovereignty of God appears in it, Page 727, 728 Not grounded on Merit in the
Creature, Page 728, 729 Nor on foresight of Faith and Good Works, Page 729, 730
Elements, though contrary, yet linkt together, Page 22 End, All Creatures
conspire to one common one Page 22 ad 27 Pursue their several Ends, though they
know them not, Page 27, 28
Men have corrupt Ends in Religious Duties, Page 78, 91, 92, 93, 94 For evil
Ends, Page 58 Desire the knowledge of God's Law for by Ends, Page 57, 58
Man naturally would make himself his his own End, Page 80 ad 84 How sinful
this is, Page 84, 85
Man would make any thing his End rathan God, Page 85, 86, 87 A Creature, or a
Lust, Page 87, 88 How sinful this is, ibid. Would make himself the End of all
Creatures, Page 88, 89 How sinful this is, Page 89 Would make himself the End
of God, Page 90 ad 94 How sinful this is, Page 94 Cannot make God his End, till
converted, Page 100 Spiritual ones required in Spiritual Worship, Page 153, 154
Many have other Ends in it, Page 154 God orders the Hearts of all men to his
own, Page 452, 453 God has one, and Man another in sin, Page 532, 533 We
should make God our end, Page 563 God makes himself his own End, how to be
understood, Page 592 His Being the End of all things is one foundation of his
Dominion, Page 708, 709 Not using God's gifts for the End for which he gave
them, how great a sin, Page 758, 759
Enemies of the Church; v. Church. We should be kind to our worst Enemies Page
692 Enjoyment of God in Heaven always fresh and glorious, Page 195 We should
endeavor after it here, Page 685, 686
Men Envy the gifts and prosperities of others, Page 77, 78 An imitation of the
Devil, ibid. A sense of God's Goodness would check it, Page 689 A contempt of
God's Dominion, Page 758
Essence of God cannot be seen, Page 115, 116 is unchangeable Page 210, 211
Eternity a property of God and Christ, Page 181, 191, 192 What it is, Page 182
In what respects God is eternal, Page 183 ad 186 That he is so, proved, 186 ad
190 God's incommunicable property, Page 16, 17, 190, 191 Dreadful to sinners,
Page 193, 194 Comfortable to the Righteous, Page 194 ad 197 The thoughts of it
should abate our Pride, Page 197, 198, 199 Take off our love and confidence
from the World, Page 199, 200 We should provide for an happy Interest in it,
Page 200, 201 Often meditate on it, Page 201 Renders him worthy of our choicest
Affections, Page 201, 202 And our best Service, Page 202
Exaltation of Christ, the Holiness of God appears in it, Page 514, 515 His
Goodness to us as well as to Christ, Page 624 And his Sovereignty, Page 751
Examination of our selves before and after worship, and wherein our duty Page
162, 163, 164, 178 Experience of God's Goodness a Preservative against Atheism,
Page 45, 46 Extremity, then God usually delivers his Church, Page 487, 488
F.
FAith, the same thing may be the object of it, and of Reason too, Page 4 Must
be exercised in Spiritual worship, Page 146, 147 The Wisdom, Holiness, and
Goodness of God in prescribing it as a Condition of the Covenant of Grace; v.
Covenant. Must look back as far as the foundation promise, Page 341 Only the
obedience flowing from it acceptable to God, Page 336 Distinct, but inseparable
from Obedience, Page 336, 337 Foresight of it not the ground of Election, Page
729, 730
Fall of man, God no way the Author of it, Page 505, 506, 519 How great it is,
Page 546, 547 Does not impeach God's Goodness, Page 594, 595 It Is evident, Page
670, 671 Brought a Curse on the Creatures v. Creatures.
Falls of God's Children turned to their good, Page 361 ad 369 Fear, not the
cause of the Belief of a God, Page 14 Men that are under a slavish fear of him
wish there were no God, Page 53, 54 Of Man a contempt of God's Power, Page 481,
482 Should be of God, and not of the pride or force of man, Page 491, 492 God's
Sovereignty should cause it Page 779
Features different in every man, and how necessary it should be so, Page 31,
32, 348 Fervency, v. Activity. Flesh, the Legal Services so called, Page 135
Fools, wicked men are so, Page 1, 400 Folly, sin is so; v. Sin. Forgetfulness
of God, men naturally are prone to it, Page 97 Of his Mercies a great sin; v.
Mercies. How attributed to God, Page 283
Foreknowledge in God of sin, no blemish to his Holiness, Page 520 521 Vide
Knowledge of God.
Future things, men desirous to know them, Page 323 Known by God; v. Knowledge
of God.

G.
GAbriel, on what Messages he was sent, Page 468 Generation, could not be from
Eternity Page 16, 17. Gifts, God can bestow them on men, Page 719 His
Sovereignty seen in giving greater measures to one than another, Page 738
Glory of all they do or have, men are apt to ascribe to themselves, Page 82,
83 Of God little minded in many seemingly good actions, Page 72, 73
Men are more concerned for their own reputation than God's glory, Page 83
Should be aimed at in Spiritual worship, Page 153 God's permission of sin is in
order to it, Page 528, 529 Sold be advanced by us, Page 778
God, his Existence known by the light of Nature, Page 4, 5 By the Creatures,
Page 5, 14 ad 29 Miracles not wrought to prove it Page 5 Owned by the universal
consent of all Nations, Page 6 Never disputed of old, Page 7 Denied by very
few, if any, Page 8 Constantly owned in all changes of the world, Page 9 Under
anxieties of Conscience, ib. The Devil not able to root out the belief of it,
Page 9, 10 Natural and innate Page 10 Not introduced merely by Tradition Page
11 Nor Policy Page 12, 13 Nor Fear Page 14 Witnessed to by the very Nature of
Man Page 29 ad 37 And by extraordinary Occurrencies Page 37, 38 Impossible to
demonstrate there is none, Page 41. 42 Motives to endeavor to be settled in the
belief of it, Page 44, 45 Directions, Page 45 Men wish there were none, and who
they are, Page 52, 53, 54 Two ways of describing him, Negation and Affirmation,
Page 113 Is active and communicative, Page 126, 127 Propriety in him a great
Blessedness. Vide Covenant. Infinitely happy, Page 476, 477
Good, That which is materially so may be done, and not formally, Page 69, 72,
73 Good Actions cannot be performed before Conversion, Page 100 The thoughts of
Gods Presence a Spur to them, Page 270 God only is so, Page 578, 579
Goodness, pure and perfect, the Royal Prerogative of God only, Page 581 Owned
by all Nations, Page 582 Inseparable from the Notion of God, Page 582, 583 What
is meant by it, Page 583 How distinguished from Mercy, Page 584 Comprehends all
his Attributes, Page 585 Is so by his Essence, Page 586 The Chief, Page 587
It Is communicative, Page 588 Necessary to him. Page 589 Voluntary, Page 590
Communicative with the greatest pleasure, Page 591 The displaying of it, the
Motive and End of all his Works, Page 592 Arguments to prove it a Property of
God, Page 593, 594 Vindicated from the Objections made against it, Page 594 ad
604 Appears in Creation, Page 604 ad 615 In Redemption, Page 615 ad 645 In his
Government, Page 645 ad 660 Frequently contemned and abused, Page 660, 661 The
Abuse and Contempt of it, base and disingenuous, Page 661, 662 Highly resented
by God, Page 662 How it is contemned and abused, Page 660 ad 670 Men justly
punished for it, Page 671 Fits him for the Government of the World, and engages
him actually to govern it, Page 671, 6 2 The ground of all Religion, Page 673,
674 Renders God amiable to himself, Page 674, 675 Should do so to us, and why,
Page 675 ad 678 Renders him a fit object of Trust, with Motives to it, drawn
hence, Page 678, 679, 680 And worthy to be obeyed and honored, Page 680, 681,
682 Comfortable to the Righteous, and wherein, Page 682 ad 685 Should engage us
to endeavor after the enjoyment of him, with Motives, Page 685, 686 Should be
often meditated on, and the Advantages of so doing, Page 681, 682, 683 We
should be thankful for it, Page 690 And imitate it, and wherein, Page 691, 692
Gospel; Men greater Enemies to, than to the Law, Page 101 Its Excellency, Page
103, 334 Called Spirit, Page 135 The only Means of establishment, Page 333 Of
an Eternal Resolution, tho of a Temporary Revelation, Page 334 Mysterious,
ibi^. The first Preachers of it. Vide Apostles. Its Antiquity, Page 335 The
Goodness of God in spreading it among the Gentiles, ibid. Gives no
encouragement to Licentiousness, Page 336 The Wisdom of God in its Propagation,
Page 390 ad 395 And Power, Page 461 ad 467
Vide Christian Religion. Government of the World; God could not manage it
without Immutability, Page 220 And Knowledge, Page 314, 315 And Wisdom, Page
344, 345 The Wisdom of God appears in his government of Man, as Rational, Page
352 ad 357 As Sinful, Page 357 ad 366 As Restored, Page 367, 368, 369 The Power
of God appears in Natural government, Page 445 ad 451 Moral, Page 451, 452, 453
Gracious and Judicial, Page 453 ad 456 The Goodness of God in it, Page 645 ad
660 God only fit for it, Page 395, 396, 477, 478, 551, 671, 672 Does actually
manage it, Page 396, 672 ad 675 Is contemned, Page 759 ad 763
Vide Laws. Governor; God's Dominion as such, Page 741 ad 748 Grace; the Power
of God in planting it, Page 467 ad 470 Vide Conversion. And preserving it, 471
V. Perseverance. God's withdrawing it no blemish to his Holiness, Page 536,
537, 538 Shall be perfected in the Upright, Page 552 God exercises a
Sovereignty in bestowing and denying it, Page 731 ad 734

Means of Grace, vide Means. Graces must be acted in Worship, Page 145 ad 149
We should examine how we acted them, after it, Page 163
Growth in Grace annexed to true Sanctification, Page 699 Should be labored
after, Page 563, 564

H.
HAbits Spiritual to be acted in Spiritual Worship, Page 145, 146 The rooting
up Evil ones shows the Power of God, Page 469, 470
Christ's sitting at Gods Right Hand does not prove the Ubiquity of his Human
Nature, Page 251, 252 Hardness; how God, and how Man is the cause of it, Page
536, 537 Harmony of the Creatures, show the Being and Wisdom of God, Page 21 ad
27 Heart of Man, how curiously contrived, Page 30 We should examine our selves,
how our Hearts are prepared for Worship, Page 162 How they are fixed in it, and
how they are after it, Page 162, 163, 164 God orders all Men's to his own ends,
Page 452, 453
Heaven; the enjoyment of God there will be always fresh and glorious, Page 195
Why called God's Throne, Page 257
Heavenly Bodies subservient to the good of the World, Page 22, 23 Hosea; when
he Prophesied, Page 801 Holiness a necessary ingredient in Spiritual Worship,
Page 152, 153 A glorious Perfection of God, Page 495 Owned to be so both by
Heathens and Heretics, ibid. God cannot be conceived without it, Page 495, 496
It has an excellency above all his other Perfections, Page 496 Most loftily
and frequently sounded forth by the Angels, ib. He Swears by it. ib. It Is his
glory and life, Page 496, 497 The glory of all the rest, Page 497, 498 What it
is, and how distinguished from Righteousness, Page 498 His Essential and
necessary Perfection, Page 498, 499 God only absolutely Holy, Page 499, 450
Causes him to abhor all Sin necessarily, intensly, universally, and
perpetually, Page 501, 502, 503 Inclines him to love it in others, Page 503,
551, 552 So Great, that he cannot positively will and encourage Sin in others,
or do it himself, Page 504, 505, 506 Appears in his Creation, Page 507, 508 In
his Government, Page 508 ad 513 In Redemption, Page 513, 514, 515 In
Justification, Page 515, 516 In Regeneration, Page 516 Defended in all his Acts
about Sin, Page 517 ad 540 How much it is contemned in the World, and wherein,
Page 540 ad 546 To hate and scoff at it in others, how great a Sin, Page 543,
544 Necessarily obliges him to punish Sin, Page 547, 548 And exact satisfaction
for it, Page 549, 550 Fits him for the government of the World, Page 551
Comfortable to Holy men, Page 552 Shall be perfected in the Upright, Page 552
We should get and preserve right and strong Apprehensions of it, and the
advantage of so doing, Page 552 ad 556 We should glorify God for it, and how,
Page 556, 557, 558 And labor after a conformity to it, and wherein, Page 558,
559, 563 Motives to do so, Page 559 ad 562 And Directions, Page 563 We should
labor to grow in it, Page 563, 564 Exert it in our Approaches to God, Page 564
Seek it at his hands, Page 564, 565
Holy Ghost; his Deity proved, Page 476 Humility; a necessary ingredient in
Spiritual Worship, Page 151, 152 We should examine our selves about it after
Worship, Page 164 A Consideration of God's Eternity would promote it, Page 197,
198, 199 And of his Knowledge, Page 339 And of his Wisdom, Page 409 And of his
Power, Page 491 And of his Holiness, Page 553, 554 And of his Goodness, Page
668 And his Sovereignty, Page 775, 776
Hypocrites; their false Pretenses a virtual denial of God's Knowledge, Page
328 It is Terrible to them, Page 335, 336

I.
IDleness; it is an abuse of Gods Mercies, to make them an occasion of it, Page
668 Idolatry, of the Heathens, proves the belief of a God to be Universal, Page
6, 7 The first Object of it was the Heavenly Bodies, Page 15 Springs from
unworthy Imaginations of God, Page 95 Not countenanced by Gods Omnipresence,
Page 260 Springs from a want of due Notion of God's Infinite Power, Page 480 A
contempt of God's Dominion, Page 759
Jehovah signifies God's Eternity, Page 189 And his Immutability, Page 217 God
called so but once in the Book of Job, Page 440
Image of God in Man, consists not in external form and figure, Page 119, 120
Unreasonable to make any of him, Page 120, 121, 122, 123 It Is Idolatry so to
do, Page 123 The defacing it an injury to God's Holiness, Page 541, 542 Man at
first made after it, Page 607
Imaginations; Men naturally have unworthy ones of God, Page 94 Vain ones, the
cause of Idolatry and Superstition, and Presumtion, Page 95, 96 Worse than
Idolatry or Atheism, Page 96, 97 An injury to God's Holiness, Page 541
Imitation of God; Man naturally has no desire of it, Page 99 We should strive
to imitate his Immutability in that which is good, Page 238, 239 In Holiness,
wherein, and why, and how, Page 558 ad 563 And in Goodness, Page 691, 692
Immortal; God is so, Page 127 Vide Eternity of God.
Immutability; a Property of God, Page 208 It Is a Perfection, Page 208, 209 A
glory belonging to all his Attributes, Page 209 Necessary to him, Page 209, 210
God is Immutable in his Essence, Page 210, 211 In Knowledge, Page 211 ad 214 In
his Will, though the things willed by him are not, Page 214, 215, 216 This does
not infringe his liberty, Page 216 Immutable in regard of place, Page 216, 217
Proved by Arguments, Page 217 ad 220, and 397, 477 Incommunicable to any
Creature, Page 221, 222, 517, 518 Objections against it answered, Page 222 ad
229 Ascribed to Christ, Page 229, 230 A ground and encouragement to Worship
him, Page 230, 231 How contrary to God in it Man is, Page 231, 232, 233
Terrible to Sinners, Page 233, 2^4 Comfortable to the Righteous, and wherein,
Page 234, 235, 236 An Argument for Patience, Page 237 Should make us prefer God
before all Creatures, Page 237 We should imitate this his Immutability in
Goodness: Motives to it, Page 238, 239
Impatience of Men is great, when God crosses them, Page 76 A Contempt of Gods
Wisdom, Page 404, 405 And of his Goodness, Page 663, 664 And of his Dominion,
Page 760
Impenitence, an Abuse of Gods Goodness, Page 664, 665 It will clear the Equity
o^ God's Justice, Page 813, 814 An Abuse of Patience, Page 815
Imperfections in Holy Duties, we should be sensible of, Page 148 Should make
us prize Christ's Mediation, Page 168
Impossible; some things are in their own nature, Page 432, 433 Some things so
to the Nature and Being of God, and his Perfections, Page 433, 434 Some things
so, because of Gods Ordination, Page 435 Do not infringe the Almightiness of
God's Power, Page 432 ad 435
Incarnation of Christ; the Power of God seen in it, Page 456 ad 460
Incomprehensible; God is so, Page 263 Inconstancy; natural to Man, Page 231,
234 In the knowledge of the Truth, Page 231, 232 In Will and Affections, Page
232 In Practice, Page 233, 234 It Is the Root of much Evil, ibid.
Infirmities; the Knowledge of God a comfort to his People under them, Page
332, 333 The Goodness of God in bearing with them, Page 656, 657 His Patience a
Comfort under them, Page 821
Injuries; Men highly concerned for those that are done to themselves, little
for those that are done to God, Page 83 Gods Patience under them should make us
resent them, Page 822
Injustice; a Contempt of Gods Dominion, Page 758 Innocent Person; whether God
may inflict eternal Torments upon him, Page 712, 716, 717 Instruments; Men are
apt to pay a Service to them, rather than God, Page 86 Which is a Contempt of
Divine Power, Page 482 And of his Goodness, Page 669, 670 Deliverances not to
be chiefly ascribed to them, Page 272 273 God makes use of Sinful ones, Page
358, 359 None in Creation, Page 443 444 The Power of God seen in effecting his
Purposes by weak Ones, Page 455, 456
Inventions of Men. Vide Addition and Worship. Job; when he lived, Page 439
Jonah; how he came to be believed by the Ninivites, Page 361 Joy; a necessary
Ingredient in Spiritual Worship, Page 150 Should accompany all our Duties, Page
784
Judging the Hearts of others, a great Sin, Page 324 Their Eternal state a
greater, Page 325
Judgment Day; a necessity of it, Page 318, 319, 398 Judgments, Extraordinary,
prove the Being of God, Page 37, 38 Men are apt to put bold Interpretations on
them, Page 78, 79 God is Just in them, Page 100 Especially after the abuse of
his Goodness and Patience, Page 671, 813, 814 On God's Enemies matter of
Praise, Page 494. 495 Declare God's Holiness, Page 511, 512, 513 Which should
be observed in them, Page 557 Not sent without warning, Page 602, 800, 801, 802
Mercy mixed with them, Page 602, 603, 604 God sends them on whom he pleases,
Page 746, 747 Delayed a long time where there is no Repentance, Page 802, 803
God unwilling to pour them out, when he cannot delay them any longer, Page 803
Poured out with regret, Page 803, 804 By degrees, Page 804 Moderated, Page 805
Vide Punishments. Justice of God, a motive to Worship, Page 130 Its plea
against Man, Page 375, 376 Reconciled with Mercy in Christ, Page 377
Vindictive, natural to God, Page 547, 548, 549 Requires Satisfaction, Page 550
Justification cannot be by the best and strongest works of Nature, Page 102,
320, 544, 545, 550 The Holiness of God appears in that of the Gospel, Page 515
The expectations of it by the outward observance of the Law cannot satisfy an
Inquisitive Conscience, Page 579 Men naturally look for it by Works, Page 580

K.
KIngdoms are disposed of by God, Page 742, 743 Knowledge in God has no
succession, Page 185, 186, 192, 307, 308 Immutable, Page 211, 212, 213, 311,
312 Arguments to prove it, 263, and Page 312 ad 316 The manner of it
Incomprehensible, Page 214, 215, 288, 295 God is Infinite in it, Page 274 Owned
by all, Page 274, 275 He has a Knowledge of Vision and Intelligence,
speculative and practical, Page 276, 277 Of Apprehension and Approbation, Page
277, 278 Has a knowledge of himself, Page 278, 279, 280 Of all things
possible, Page 280, 281, 282 Of all things past and present, Page 282, 283 Of
all Creatures, their Actions and Thoughts, Page 283 ad 287 Of all Sins, and
how, Page 287, 288, 289 Of all future things, he alone, and how, Page 289 ad
296 Of all future Contingences, Page 296 ad 301 Does not necessitate the Will
of Man, Page 301 ad 304 It Is by his Essence, Page 305, 306 Intuitive, Page 306,
307, 308 Independent, Page 308, 309 Distinct, Page 309, 310 Infallible, Page
310, 311 Arguments to prove it, Page 263, and 312 ad 315 No blemish to his
Holiness, ib. Infinite attributed to Christ, Page 315, 316, 317 Infers his
Providence, Page 317, 318 And a Day of Judgment, Page 318, 319 And the
Resurrection, Page 319, 320 Destroys all hopes of Justification by any thing in
our selves, Page 320 Calls for our adoring Thoughts of him, Page 320, 321 And
Humility, Page 321, 322 How injured in the World, and wherein, Page 322 ad 228
Comfortable to the Righteous, and wherein, Page 328 ad 334 Terrible to Sinners,
Page 334 ad 337 We should have a sense of it on our hearts, and the advantages
of it, Page 337, 338, 339
Knowledge of God's Will, Men negligent in using the Means to attain it, Page
55 Enemies to it, and have no delight in it, Page 56 Seek it for by-ends, Page
57, 58 Admit it with wavering Affections, Page 58 Seek it to improve some Lust
by it, Page 58, 59 A sense of Man's, has a greater Influence on us, than that
of God, Page 86, 87, 325, 326 Sins against it should be avoided, Page 107
Distinct from Wisdom, Page 338, 339 Of all Creatures is derived from God, Page
313 Ours, how imperfect, Page 321

L.
LAw of God, how opposite Man naturally is to it. Vide Man. There is one in the
Minds of Men, which is the Rule of Good and Evil, Page 33, 34 A change of them
does not infer a change in God, Page 228. 229 Vindicated, both as to the
Precept and Penalty, in the death of Christ, Page 383 Suited to our Natures,
Happiness, and Conscience, Page 352, 353, 354 610, 611 We should submit to
them, Page 414, 415 The Transgression of them punished by God, Page 511, 512,
726, 727 God's enjoining one, which he knew Man would not observe, no blemish
to his Holiness, Page 519, 520 To charge them with Rigidness, how great a Sin,
Page 545 We should imitate the Holiness of them, Page 559 The Goodness of God
in that of Innocence, Page 610 ad 615 Cannot but be good, Page 681, 682 He
gives Laws to all, Page 722, 723 Positive ones, Page 723, 724 His only reach
the Conscience, Page 724, 725 Dispensed with by him; but cannot by Man, Page
725, 726, 754, 755 To make any contrary to God's, how great a Sin, Page 755 Or
make Additions to them, Page 756, 757 Or obey those of Men before them, Page
757, 758, 782, 783
V. Governor and Magistrates: Licentiousness; the Gospel no friend to, Page
336 Life Eternal, expected by Men from something of their own, vide
Justification. Assured to the People of God, Page 236, 683, 684
Light; a glorious Creature, Page 588 Light of Nature shows the Being of a God,
Page 4, 5 Limiting God; a contempt of his Dominion, Page 761 Lives of Men, at
God's disposal, Page 748 Love, to God, sometimes arises merely from some
self-pleasing benefits, Page 90 A necessary ingredient in Spiritual Worship,
Page 147, 148 A great help to it, Page 176 God is highly worthy of it, Page
201, 202, 556, 557, 563, 675, 676, 677, 778 Outward expressions of it
insignificant without Obedience, Page 580, 581 God's Gospel name, Page 616 Of
God to his People, great, Page 769
Lusts of Men make them Atheists, Page 2
M.
MAgistracy; the Goodness of God in settling it, Page 650 Magistraees are
inferior to God, to be obedient to him, Page 765, 766 Ought to govern Justly
and Righteously, Page 766 To be obeyed, ib.
Man could not make himself, Page 17, 18, 19, 20 The World subservient to him,
Page 23 The abridgement of the Universe, Page 29, 30, 608 Naturally disowns the
Rule God has set him, Page 54 ad 67 Owns any Rule rather than God's, Page 67
ad 70 Would set himself up as his own Rule, Page 70 ad 74 Would give Laws to
God, Page 74 ad 80 Would make himself his own End. V. End. His Natural
Corruption, how great, Page 452 Made holy at first, Page 507, 508, 607 Yet
mutable, which was no blemish to God's Holiness, Page 517, 518, 519 Made after
God's Image, Page 607 The World made and furnished for him, Page 608, 609, 610
In his Corrupt estate, without any motives to excite Gods Redeeming love, Page
625 ad 628 Restored to a more excellent state than his first, Page 641, 642
Under God's Dominion, Page 719, 720
Means. Vide Instrument. To depend on the Power of God, and neglect them is an
abuse of it, Page 483, 484 Of Grace to neglect them, an affront of God's
Wisdom, Page 402, 403 Given to some, and not to others, Page 734 ad 737 Have
various influences, Page 737, 738
Meditation on the Law of God, Men have no delight in, Page 56 Members bodily
attributed to God, do not prove him a Body, Page 118, 119 What sort of them
attributed to him, ib. With a respect to the Incarnation of Christ, ib.
Mercies of God to Sinners, how Wonderful, Page 99, 100 A Motive to Worship,
Page 130 Former ones should be remembered, when we come to beg new ones, Page
180 Its Plea for Fallen Man, Page 376, 377 It and Justice reconciled in Christ,
Page 377 Holiness of God in them to be observed, Page 557 Contempt and abuse of
them, vide Goodness. One foundation of God's Dominion, Page 709, 710 Call for
our Love of him, Page 676, 677, 678 And Obedience to him, Page 680, 681 Given
after great Provocations, Page 805, 806
Merit of Christ, not the cause of the first resolution of God to Redeem, Page
621, 622 Not the cause of Election, Page 728, 729 Man incapable of, Page 764
Miracles prove the Being of a God, though not wrought to that end, Page 5, 38
Wrought by God but seldom, Page 371 The Power of God, Page 438 The Power of God
seen no more in them, than in the ordinary works of Nature, Page 450, 451 Many
wrought by Christ, Page 460
Moral Goodness encouraged by God, Page 652 Moral Law, commands things good in
their own Nature, Page 51, 723 The Holiness of God appears in in it, Page 508
Holy in the matter and manner of his Precepts, Page 508, 509 Reaches the Inward
Man, Page 509, 510 Perpetual, ib. V. Law of God. Published with Majesty, Page
724
Mortification; how difficult, Page 101 Motions of all Creatures in God, Page
449 Variety of them in a single Creature, Page 449, 450
Mountains; how useful, Page 23 Before the Deluge, Page 181
Mouth; how curiously contrived, Page 30
N.
NAture of Man must be sanctified before it can perform Spiritual Worship, Page
142 Human highly advanced, by its union with the Son of God, Page 628, 629
Human and Divine in Christ, vide Union.
Night, how necessary, Page 350
O.
OBedience to God, not true unless it be universal, Page 61 Due to him upon the
account of his Eternity, Page 202 To him, should be preferred before Obedience
to Men. V. Laws. Of Faith only, acceptable to God, Page 336 Distinct, but
inseparable from Faith, ib. Shall be rewarded, Page 354 Redemption, a strong
Incentive to it, Page 387, 388 Without it nothing will avail us, Page 580, 581
The goodness of God in accepting it, tho imperfect, Page 656, 657 Due to God
for his goodness, Page 680, 681, 682 Due to God as a Sovereign, Page 779, 780,
781 What kind of it due to him, Page 781, 782, 783, 784
Objects; the proposing them to Man, which God knows he will use to sin, no
blemish to Gods Holiness, Page 533 ad 536 Obstinacy in Sin, a contempt of
Divine Power, Page 480, 481 Omissions of Prayer, a practical denial of God's
Knowledge, Page 328 Of Duty, a contempt of his Goodness, Page 666
Omnipresence; an Attribute of God, Page 243 Denied by some Jews and Heathens;
but acknowledged by the wisest amongst them, Page 244, 245 To be understood
negatively, Page 245 Influential on all Creatures, Page 245, 246 Limited to
Subjects, capacitated for this or that kind of it, Page 246 Essential, ib. In
all places, Page 246, 247, 248 With all Creatures, Page 248 Without mixture
with them, or division of himself, Page 248, 249 Not by multiplication or
extension, Page 249 But totally, ib. In imaginary spaces beyond the World, Page
249, 250, 251 God's incommunicable Property, Page 251, 252 Arguments to prove
his Omnipresence, Page 252 ad 256 Objections against it answered, Page 257 ad
261 Ascribed to Christ, Page 261, 262 Proves God a Spirit, Page 262 And his
Providence, ib. And Omniscient and Incomprehensible, Page 263 Calls for
Admiration of him, Page 264 Forgotten and contemned, 264, Page 265 Terrible to
Sinners, Page 265, 266 Comfortable to the Righteous, and wherein, Page 268
Should be often thought of, and the advantages of so doing, Page 268 ad 270
Opposition in the hearts of Men naturally against the Will of God, Page 57
P.
PArdon; Gods Infinite Knowledge a comfort when we reflect on it, or seek it,
Page 334 The Power of God in granting it, and giving a sense of it, Page 470,
471 The Spring of all other Blessings, Page 698 Always accompanied with
Regeneration, ib. Punishment remitted upon it, Page 698, 699 It Is perfect, Page
699 Of God, and his alone, gives a full security, Page 769, 770
Patience under Afflictions a duty, Page 415 God's Immutability should teach us
it, Page 237, 238 A sense of God's Holiness would promote it, Page 555, 556 And
his Goodness, Page 688 Motives to it, Page 784, 785, 786 The true Nature of it,
Page 786 Consideration of Gods Patience to us would promote it, Page 822
Patience of God, how admirable, Page 99, 100, 263, 806, 807, 808 His Wisdom
the ground of it, Page 396 Evidences his Power, Page 460, 789 It Is a Property
of the Divine Nature, Page 791 A part of Goodness and Mercy, but differs from
both, Page 792, 793 Not insensible, constrained or faint-hearted, Page 793, 794
Flows from his fullness of Power over himself, Page 794, 795 Founded in the
Death of Christ, Page 795, 796 His Veracity, Holiness and Justice, no bars to
it, Page 796, 797, 798 Exercised toward our First Parents, Gentiles and
Israelites, Page 799, 800 Wherein it is evidenced, Page 800 ad 808 The reason
of its exercise, Page 808 ad 814 It Is abused, and how, Page 814, 815 The abuse
of it sinful and dangerous, Page 816, 817, 818 Exercised toward Sinners and
Saints, Page 819 Comfortable to all, Page 819, 820 Especially to the Righteous,
ib. Should be meditated on, and the advantage of so doing, Page 821, 822 We
should admire and bless God for it, with Motives so to do, Page 823, 824, 825
Should not be presumed on, Page 825 826 Should be imitated, Page 826, 827
Poems; fewer Sacred ones good, than of any other kind, Page 86 Peace; God only
can speak it to troubled Souls, Page 471 Permission of Sin, what it is, and
that it is no blemish to Gods Holiness, Page 522 ad 529 Persecutions; the
Goodness of God seen in them, Page 657, 658 Vide Apostasy.
Perseverance of the Saints a Gospel Doctrine, Page 333 Certain, Page 235, 486,
487, 551 Motives to labor after it, Page 238, 239 Depends on God's Power and
Wisdom, Page 333, 471
Pleasures, Sensual men strangely addicted to, Page 86 We ought to take heed of
them, Page 107
Poor, the Wisdom of God in making some so, Page 356, 357 Power infinite
belongs to God, Page 421 The meaning of the word, Page 421 Absolute and
ordinate Page 421, 422, Distinct from Will and Wisdom, Page 424 Gives life and
activity to his other Perfections, Page 425 Of a larger extent than some
others, ibid. Originally and essentially in the Nature of God, and the same
with his Essence, Page 426, 427 Incommunicable to the Creature ibid. and Page
431 Infinite and Eternal, Page 427 ad 432 Bounded by his Decree, Page 432 Not
infringed by the impossibility of doing some things, Page 432 ad 435 Arguments
to prove it is in God, Page 435 ad 439 Appears in Creation, Page 439 ad 445 In
the Government of the world, Page 445 ad 456 In Redemption, Page 456 ad 461 In
the publication and propagation of the Gospel, Page 461 ad 467 In planting and
preserving Grace and pardoning sin, Page 467 ad 472 Ascribed to Christ, Page
472 ad 476 And to the Holy Ghost, Page 476 Infers his Blessedness, Immutability
and Providence, Page 476, 477 A ground of Worship, Page 478 And for the belief
of the Resurrection, Page 479 Contemned and abused, and wherein, Page 480 ad
484 Terrible to the Wicked, Page 484 Comfortable to the Righteous, and wherein
Page 485 ad 487 Should be meditated on, Page 488 And trusted in, and why, Page
489, 490 Should teach us humility and submission, Page 491 And the fear of him,
and not of man, Page 491, 492
Praise, consideration of God's Wisdom and Goodness, would help us to give it
to him, Page 409, 689, 690 Men backward to it, Page 697 Due to him, Page 776
Prayer, men impatient if God do not answer it, Page 92, 93 We should take the
most melting opportunities for secret Prayer, Page 178 Not unnecessary, because
of God's Immutability and Knowledge, Page 220, 231, 335 to Creatures a wrong to
God's Omniscience, Page 322, 323 Omission of it a practical denial of God's
Knowledge, Page 328 It Is a comfort that the most secret ones are understood by
God, Page 331 God's Wisdom a comfort in delaying or denying an answer to them,
Page 406 For success on wicked Designs, how sinful, Page 543 God fit to be
trusted in for an answer of them, Page 551 The goodness of God in answering
them, Page 654, 655 His Goodness a comfort in them Page 682 God's Dominion an
Encouragement to, and ground of it, Page 770, 771, 779
Preparation, we should examine our selves concerning it before worship, Page
162 Consideration of God's Knowledge would promote it, Page 338 How great a sin
to come into God's Presence without it, Page 544
Presence of Men more regarded than God's, Page 86, 87 We should seek for God's
special and influential Presence, Page 270, 271 Vide Omnipresence.

Preserve himself no Creature can, Page 19, 447, 448 God only can the World,
Page 29 The Power of God seen in it, Page 445 One foundation of God's Dominion,
Page 709
Presumption springs from vain imaginations of God, Page 95, 96 A contempt of
God's Dominion, Page 761, 762
Pride how common, Page 82, 83 An exalting our selves above God, Page 89 The
thoughts of God's Eternity should abate it, Page 197, 198, 199 An affront to
God's Wisdom, Page 405 Of our own Wisdom, foolish, Page 411 God's Mercies
abused to it, Page 668 A contempt of his Dominion, Page 761
Principles, better known by actions than words, Page 49 Some kept up by God to
facilitate the Reception of the Gospel, Page 392
Propagation of Creatures, the Power of God seen in it, Page 448, 449 Of
Mankind, one end of God's patience, Page 811, 812
Prophecies prove the Being of God, Page 39 Promises, Men break them with God,
Page 66, 67, 232, 233 Of God shall be performed, Page 196, 486, 821 We should
believe them, and leave God to his own season of accomplishing them, Page 342
Distrust of them a contempt of God's Wisdom, Page 405 The Holiness of God in
the performance of them to be observed, Page 557
Providenc of God proved, Page 262, 317, 318, 477 Vide Government of the World.
Especially to his Church, and the meanest in it, 272, 273 Extends to all
Creatures, 646 ad 649 Distrust of it a contempt of God's Goodness, 665

Punishments, v. Judgments. God always just in them, Page 100, 671 Of sinners
Eternal, Page 193, 194 The wisdom of God seen in them Page 370 Necessarily
follow sins, Page 547, 548, 549 Do not impeach God's Goodness Page 598, ad 604
Not God's primary intention, Page 601 Inflicting them a branch of God's
Dominion, Page 726, 727 Necessarily follow upon it, Page 767 Of the Wicked
unavoidable and terrible, Page 767, 768
Purgatory held by the Jews, Page 73
R.
RAin, an instance of God's Wisdom and Power, Page 349, 418 Reason should not
be the measure of God's Revelations, Page 413, 414 Repentance, how ascribed to
God, Page 224, 225, 2^6 A reasonable Condition, Page 389 The end of God's
patience, Page 810, 811 The consideration of God's patience would make us
frequent and serious in the practice of it, Page 821
Reprobation consistent with God's Holiness and Justice, Page 522 Reproof may
be for evil ends, Page 93 Reputation, men more concerned for their own, than
Gods glory, Page 83 Resignation of our selves, would flow from consideration of
God's Wisdom, Page 414, 415 Should from that of his Sovereignty, Page 775
Restraint of Men and Devils by God in mercy to man, Page 357, 451, 452, 527,
528, 650, 744, 745 Resolutions good, how soon broken, Page 232 Resurrection of
the Body no incredible Doctrine, Page 319, 320, 479, 480 The Power of God in
that of Christ, Page 460 Of Men, ascribed to Christ, Page 476
Reverence necessary in the worship of God, Page 150, 151 Revelations of God
are not to be censured, Page 403, 404 Riches, inordinate desire after them a
hindrance to Spiritual worship Page 177 God exercises a Sovereignty in
bestowing them, Page 740
Rivers, how useful, Page 349 Rome, why called Babylon Page 13
S.
SAcraments, the goodness of God in appointing them, Page 639 Salvation of men,
how desirous God is of it, Page 636, 637, 638, 808, 809, 810 Sanctification
deserves our thanks as much as Justification, Page 698 Vide Holiness.
Satisfaction of the Soul only in God, Page 36, 37, 127, 128, 200 Necessary for
sin, Page 549, 550
Scepticks must own a first Cause, Page 21 Scoffing at Holiness a great sin,
Page 543, 544 And at Convictions in others, Page 553
Scriptures are wrested and abused, Page 58, 59, 79 Ought to be prized and
studied, Page 107 The not fulfilling some Predictions in them, does not prove
God to be changeable, Page 226, 227 Of the Old Testament give credit to the
New, and of the New illustrate those of the Old Page 334, 335 All Truth to be
drawn thence, ibid. Of the Old Testament to be studied, ibid. Something in them
suitable to all sorts of men, Page 354, 355 Written so as to prevent foreseen
Corruptions, Page 355, 356 To study Arguments from them to defend sin, a
contempt of God's Holiness, Page 542, 543 The goodness of God in giving them as
a Rule, Page 652, 653, 654
Sea, how useful, Page 23 The Wisdom of God seen in it, Page 349 And his Power,
Page 419, 446, 447
Searching the Hearts of Men, how to be understood of God, Page 287 Seasons,
the variety of them necessary, Page 350 Secrecy a poor refuge to sinners, Page
335 Secret sins cause stings of Conscience, Page 35, 313 Known to God, Page
263, 265, 334, 335 Shall be revealed in the Day of Judgment, Page 318, 319
Prayers and Works known to God, Page 331
Security, Men abuse God's blessings to it Page 668 Self, man most opposite to
those Truths that are most contrary to it, Page 60 Man sets up as his own Rule,
Page 70 Dissatisfied with Conscience when it contradicts its desires, Page 71,
72 Merely the agreeableness to it the spring of many materially good Actions,
Page 72, 73, 90 ad 94, 153, 154 Would make it the rule of God, Page 74 ad 80
And his own end, and the end of all Creatures, and of God; vid. End. Applauding
thoughts of it, how common, Page 82 Men ascribe the glory of what they have or
do to it, Page 82, 83 Desire Doctrines pleasing to it, Page 83 Highly concerned
for any injury done to it, ibid. Obey it against the light of Conscience, Page
84 How great a sin this is, Page 84, 85 The giving mercies pleasing to it, the
only cause of many men's love to God Page 90, 91 Men unweildy to their duty
where it is not concerned, Page 91 How sinful this is, Page 94 The great Enemy
to the Gospel and Conversion, Page 101, 102
Self-love threefold, Page 80, 81 The cause of all sin, and hindrance of
Conversion, Page 81, 82
Service of God, how unwilling men are to it, Page 63, 64 Slight in the
performance of it Page 64 65 Show not that natural vigor in it, as they do in
their worldly business, Page 65 Quickly weary of it, Page 65, 66 Desert it,
Page 66 The presence of God a comfort in it, Page 268 Hypocritical pretenses
for avoiding it, a denial of God's Knowledge Page 328 A sense of God's Goodness
would make us faithful in it, Page 681 Some called to and fitted for more
eminent ones in their Generation, Page 739 ad 744 Omissions of it a contempt of
God's Sovereignty, Page 762, 763
Sin founded in a secret Atheism and Self-love. Page 50, 81 Reflects a
dishonor on all the Attributes of God, Page 50 Implies God is unworthy of a
Being, Page 50, 51 Would make him a foolish, impure and miserable Being, Page
51, 52 More troublesome than Holiness, Page 63 To make it our end, a great
debasing of God, Page 87, 88 No excuse, but an aggravation that we serve but
one, Page 87 Abstinence from it proceeds many times from an evil Cause, Page
90, 91, 325, 326 God's name, word and mercies made use of to countenance it,
Page 94, 542, 543, 668, 669, 815 Spiritual to be avoided, Page 128 It Is folly,
Page 193 Past ones we should be humbled for, Page 197, 336 Has brought a Curse
on the Creation, Page 207 Vide Creatures.
Past known to God, Page 282, 283 All known to him, and how, Page 287, 288,
289, 336, 337 A sense of God's Knowledge and Holiness would check it, Page 337,
338, 554, 555 Bounded by God, Page 357 God brings glory to himself, and good to
the Creature out of it, Page 358 ad 366 God has shown the greatest hatred of
it in redemption, Page 384, 385 A contempt of God's Power, Page 480, 481
Abhorred by God. Page 501, 502, 503, 547 In God's People more severely punished
in this World than in others, Page 502, 503 God cannot be the Author of in
others, or do it himself, Page 504, 505, 506 God punishes it, and cannot but do
so, Page 511, 547, 548, 549 The Instruments of it detestable to God, Page 512
Opposite to the Holiness of God, Page 540 To charge it on God, or defend it by
his word, a great sin, Page 542 543 Entrance of it into the World, does not
impeach God's goodness, Page 594, 595 Those that disturb Societies most
signally punished in this life, Page 651 A contempt of God's Dominion, Page 752
753, 754 How much God is daily provoked by it, Page 806, 807, 808, 823 An abuse
of God's Patience, Page 815, 816
Sincerity required in Spiritual worship, Page 143 Cannot be unknown to God,
Page 330, 331 Consideration of God's Knowledge would promote it, Page 338, 339
Sinful times, in them we should be most holy, Page 558 Sinners, God has shown
the greatest love to them, and hatred to their sins, Page 384, 385 Every thing
in their possession detestable to God, Page 512
Society, the goodness of God seen in the preservation of it, Page 649 ad 652
Could not subsist without restraining Grace; v. Restraint.
Soul, the vastness of its capacity, and quickness of its motion, Page 32, 33
Its union to the Body wonderful, ibid. God only can satisfy it; v.
Satisfaction. They only can converse with God, Page 127 Should be the Objects
of our chiefest care, Page 128 We should worship God with them, Page 132, 133
The Wisdom and Goodness of God seen in them, Page 450, 607
Spaces imaginary beyond the World God is present with, Page 249, 250, 251
Spirit; that God is so plainly asserted but once in Scripture, Page 112 Various
acceptations of the word, Page 113 That God is so, how to be understood, ibid.
God the only pure one, Page 114 Arguments to prove God is one, Page 115 ad 118.
Objection against it answered, Page 118, 119
Spirit of God, his assistance necessary to Spiritual Worship, Page 142 Spirits
of men raised up, and ordered by God as be pleases, Page 743, 744 Subjection to
our Superiors, God remits of his own right for preserving it, Page 651, 652
Success, men apt to ascribe to themselves Page 82 Not to be ascribed to our
selves, Page 669, 670 Denied by God to some, Page 740
Summer, how necessary, Page 350 Sun conveniently placed, Page 22, 148 Its
motion useful, Page 22, 23, 25, 148 The Power of God seen in it, Page 450
Lord's Supper, the goodness of God in appointing it, Page 639 Seals the
Covenant of Grace, Page 640, 641 In it we have Union and Communion with Christ,
Page 641, 642 The neglect of it reproved, Page 642
Supererogation, an Opinion that injures the Holiness of God, Page 546
Superstition proceeds from vain imaginations of God, Page 95 Swearing by any
Creature an injury to God's Omniscience, Page 323, 324
T.
TEmptations, the Presence of God a comfort in them, Page 266 The thoughts of
it would be a Shield against them, Page 269 The Wisdom and Power of God a
comfort under them, Page 406, 486 The goodness manifested to his people under
them, Page 658, 659, 660 The thoughts of God's Sovereignty would arm and make
us watchful against them, Page 774
Thankfulness, a necessary ingredient in Spiritual worship, Page 148 Due to
God, Page 689, 690, 777, 778, 823, 824, 825 A sense of his Goodness would
promote it, Page 689
Theft, an Invasion of God's Dominion, Page 758 Thoughts should be often upon
God, Page 46 Seldom are on him, Page 86, 97, 98 All known by God only, Page
285, 286 287 And by Christ, Page 316, 317 Cherishing evil ones, a practical
denial of God's Knowledge, Page 327 Thoughts of God's Knowledge would make us
watchful over them, Page 338
Threatenings, the not fulfilling them sometimes argue no change in God, Page
226, 227 Are conditional ibid. The goodness of God in them; Page 613 Go before
Judgments; v. Judgments.
Time cannot be infinite, Page 16 Times of bestowing Mercy God orders as a
Sovereign, Page 741 Tongue, how curious a Workmanship, Page 31 Traditions, old
ones generally lost, Page 11 Belief of a God not owing merely to it, ibid.
Transubstantiation an absurd Doctrine, Page 483 Trees, how useful, Page 23,
350 Trust in themselves men do, and not in God, Page 83, 84 We should not in
the World, Page 199, 200, 236 God the fit Object of it, Page 329, 386, 397,
489, 551, 552, 678, 779 Means to promote it, Page 339, 773 Should not in our
own Wisdom, Page 411, 412 In our selves, a contempt of God's Power and
Dominion, Page 482, 759 God's Power the main ground of trusting him, Page 489,
490 And sometimes the only one, Page 490 Should be placed in God against
outward appearances, Page 558 Goodness the first motive of it, Page 678 More
foundations of it, and motives to it under the Gospel, than under the Law, Page
679 Gives God the glory of his goodness, Page 679, 680 God's Patience to the
Wicked a ground for the Righteous to trust in his promise, Page 821
Truths of God most contrary to self, man most opposite to. And to those that
are most holy, spiritual, lead most to God, and relate most to him, Page 59, 60
Men unconstant in the belief of them, Page 231, 232 Corrupters of them no
better than Devils, Page 541 Evangelical shall prevail, ibid.

U.
UBiquity of Christ's Human Nature confuted, Page 252 Venial sins, an opinion
that reproaches God's Holiness, Page 546 Virtue and Vice not Arbitrary things,
Page 51 Unbelief, the Reason of it, Page 101, 102 A contempt of Divine Power,
Page 483 And Goodness, Page 664, 665
Union of Soul and Body, an effect of Almighty Power, Page 33 Of two Natures in
Christ, made no change in his Divine Nature, Page 224 Shows the Wisdom of God,
Page 339 ad 383 How necessary for us, Page 381, 382, 383 Shows the Power of
God, Page 458, 459, 460 Explained, Page 459, 460 Vide Incarnation.

Usurpations of Men an Invasion of God's Sovereignty, Page 754 755
W.
WAter, an excellent Creature, Page 588 Weakness, a sensibleness of it a
necessary ingredient in Spiritual Worship, Page 148 Will of God cannot be
defeated, Page 52 Man averse to it; vide Man. The same with his Essence, Page
214 Always accompanied with his Understanding, ibid. Unchangeable, Page 214,
215 The unchangeableness of it does not make things willed by him so, Page 215,
216 Free, Page 216 How conversant about Sin, Page 522
Will of Man not necessitated by God's Foreknowledge, Page 301 ad 304 Of Man
subject to God, Page 720
Winds how useful, Page 349 Winter, how useful, Page 350 Wisdom an Attribute of
God, Page 337 What it is, and wherein it consists Page 338 Distinct from
Knowledge, Page 338, Essential, which is the same with his Essence, and
personal, Page 339 In what sense God is only wise, Page 339 ad 343 Proved to be
in God, Page 343 ad 346 Appears in Creation, Page 346 ad 351 In government of
Man as Rational, Page 352 ad 357 As fallen and sinful, Page 357 ad 367 As
restored, Page 367 ad 373 In Redemption, Page 373 ad 388 In the Condition of
the Covenant of Grace, Page 388 ad 390 In the propagation of the Gospel Page
390 ad 395 Ascribed to Christ, Page 395 Renders God fit to govern the World,
and enclines him actually to govern it, Page 395, 396 A ground of his Patience
and Immutability in his Decrees, Page 396, 397 Makes him a fit Object of our
Trust, Page 397 Infers a Day of Judgment, Page 398 Calls for a Veneration of
him, ibid. A ground of Prayer to him, Page 399 Prodigiously contemned, and
wherein, Page 399 ad 405 Comfortable to the Righteous, Page 405, 406, 407 In
Creation and Government, should be meditated on, and Motives to it, Page 407 ad
410 In Redemption to be studied and admired, Page 410, 411 To be submitted to
in his Revelations, Precepts, Providence, Page 413, 414, 415 Not to be
censured in any of his ways, Page 415
Wisdom; no Man should be proud of, or trust in, Page 411, 412 Should be sought
from God, Page 412, 413
World; was not, and could not be from Eternity, Page 16, 17 Could not make it
self, Page 17, 18, 19 No Creature could make it, Page 20 Its Harmony, Page 21
ad 27 Greedily pursued by Men, Page 86 Inordinate desires after it a great
hindrance to Spiritual Worship, Page 177 Our Love and Confidence, not to be
placed in it, Page 199, 200, 207 Shall not be annihilated, but refined, Page
205, 206, 207 Vide Creatures.
We should be sensible of the unconstancy of all things in it, Page 236 Our
Thoughts should not dwell much on them, ib. We should not trust or rejoice in
them, ib. Not to be preferred before God, Page 237 Made in the best manner,
Page 431, 432 Made and richly furnished for Man, Page 608, 609, 610 A sense of
God's Goodness would lift us up above it, Page 689
Worship of God; a folly to neglect it, Page 46 If not according to his Rule,
no better than a worshipping the Devil, Page 68 Men prone to corrupt it with
their own Rites and Inventions, Page 79 Spiritual, Men naturally have no heart
to, Page 98 Cannot be right without a true Notion of God, Page 124, 125 Should
be Spiritual, and Spiritually performed, Page 129 God's Spirituality the Rule,
tho his Attributes be the foundation of it, Page 130, 131, 478, 479 Spiritual
to be due to him, manifest by the light of Nature, tho not the outward Means
and matter of an acceptable Worship discoverable by it, Page 131, 132, 133
Spiritual, owned to be due to God by Heathens, Page 132 Always required by God,
133 Men as much obliged to it, as to worship him at all, Page 134, 135
Ceremonial Law abolished to promote it, Page 135 ad 138 Legal Ceremonies did
not promote, but rather hinder it, Page 136, 137 By them God was never
well-pleased with, nor intended it should be durable, Page 137, 138 Under the
Gospel it is more Spiritual, than under the Law, Page 138, 139 Yet does not
exclude Bodily worship, Page 139, 140, 141 In Societies, due to God, Page 140
Spiritual, what it is, and wherein it consists, Page 141 ad 155 Due to God,
proved, Page 155 ad 160 Those reproved that render him none at all, Page 160 A
Duty incumbent on all, ib. Wholly to neglect it a great degree of Atheism, Page
160 To a false God, or in a false manner, better than a total neglect of it.
Page 160, 161 Outward, not to be rested in, Page 161 We should examine our
selves of the manner of it, and in what particulars, Page 162 ad 164 Spiritual,
it is a comfort that God requires it, Page 165 Not to give it to God, is to
affront all his Attributes, Page 170 ad 175, 327 To give it him, and not that
of our Spirits, is a bad sign, Page 173, 174 Merely Carnal, uncomfortable,
unacceptable, abominable, Page 174 Directions for Spiritual, Page 175 ad 178
Immutability of God, a ground of worsh p, and encouragement to it, Page 230,
231 Bringing Human Inventions into it, an affront to God's Wisdom, Page 402 V.
Ceremonies.
A strong sense of God's Holiness would make us Reverent in it, Page 554 We
should carry it holily in it, Page 564 Ingenuous, would be promoted by a sense
of God's Goodness, Page 687 Slight and careless, a contempt of God's
Sovereignty, Page 762 And so is omission of it, Page 762, 763 Thoughts of God's
Sovereignty would make us diligent in it, Page 773, 774
Worship of Creatures is Idolatry, Page 123 Not countenanced by God's
Omnipresence, Page 260
Wrong; God can do none, Page 106, 764
Z.
Zeal; sometimes a base end in it, Page 93, 94
ERRATA.
PAge 7. line 17. read Principle, l. 54. what, p. 18. l. 6. Creator must, p.
50. l. 6. Principle, p. 66. l. 5. beck, p. 75. l. 22. dele a, p. 76. l. 6.
discontentedly, p. 78. l. 43. contrivance, p. 103. l. 29. Man, but, p. 110. l.
48. that upon, p. 124. l. 41. a Body, but we, p. 127. l. 16. as Bodies do, p.
151. l. 31. glorious, p. 153. l. 53. seeks, p. 166. l. 37. asunder, p. 170. l.
7, Internal, p. 174. l. 37. Motive, p. 206. l. 49. dele and, p. 241. l. 30. my,
p. 263. l. 16. Omniscience, p. 275. l. 17 mote, p. 307. l. 45 extent, p. 362.
l. 17. add not, p. 373. l. 22. an, p. 401. l. 27. own, p. 411. l. 43. since, p.
463. l. 19. add not, p. 506. attack, p. 555. l. 7. is no, p. 585. l. 56. deify,
p. 598. l. 41. nocent, p. 599. l. 56. as, p. 601. l. 29. intends, p. 641, l.
47. after Blood add, if there were not, p. 662. l. 34. upon, p. 701. l. 35.
Peculiarity, p. 732. l. 48. for And r. But, p. 743. l. 33. dele as, p. 766. l.
52. another.

FINIS.

