AN EPISTLE TO Charles the second King of ENGLAND, And to every individual
Member of His COUNCIL.
Presented to them in pure love and good will, that they might consider of the
things herein contained before the King was Crowned, or had taken his Oath;
forasmuch as a necessity from the Lord was laid upon the Penman of the said
Epistle, in order thereto. Who is known to diverse people by the name of
Christopher Cheesman.
From the Town of Reading in Berkshire the 15. of the 2d. month, 1661.
GIve ear, O King, and hearken to Counsel, let thy heart be inclined to
understanding, and diligently consider the things that concern thy everlasting
Peace, and the well-being of all people under thy Government. And Oh you
Counselors of the King, know you this, that the God of Israel, who governs in
the Heavens, and in the earth, has appeared in these Nations, in the absence
of the King, and since his Fathers days, to bring to pass his great work, in
performance of his promises, and returning the captivity of his people, who
have been many Ages past most cruelly afflicted and oppressed under Pharaohs
hard Taskmasters, who have exercised Authority over their Consciences But now
the Lord God is come to deliver his Israel in the Spirit, by the hand of the
Great Prophet that Moses prophesied of, saying, The Lord your God shall raise
up a PROPHET like unto me; one from among your brethren, him shall you hear in
all things: And whosoever shall withdraw his ear from hearing that Prophet,
shall be cut off from among the people. This is the Prophet, O King and
Council, that is worthy to reign, and by the Hand of this Prophet will the Lord
bring to pass the purposes of his heart, and will set up Justice and
Righteousness, in the Earth: and who ever they be that will not bow down and
hearken to this Prophet (whether King, Councils, Parliaments, Armies, Synods,
or others) shall assuredly be destroyed and cut off from among the people. For
this Great Prophet of whom Mo^es spoke, is the only begotten of God, the
Christ, the Savior, the Light of the World that enlightneth every one that
comes into the World. This is he, O King and Council that the Lord God has
raised up in these. Nations since thy Fathers days, and in thy absence, and he
alone is worthy to Reign (not Synods, not Hireling Ministers) and thousands
there be within thy Dominions, O King, that have received this great Prophet
and true Light, and a good understanding thereby (Glory, glory to the Lord God
for evermore) and now are making War with the Nations in Righteousness; and in
particular with thee, O King, and with thy Council; not with Sword, nor Spear,
nor plottings, nor Combinations, to hurt thee, O King, or any of thy family or
people, nor any ways seeking to remove thee from thy Crown and Dignity, but
with the Spirit of God striving to establish thy Throne in Righteousness, and
to Crown thee with everlasting Honor and Dignity. And know this, O King and
Council, that the people and servants of the Lord do not strive against flesh
and blood, neither are their weapons carnal, but Spiritual, and mighty through
God to make war with the man of sin in all his appearances and forms of
Governments, whether Presbytery, or Episcopacy, or any other Antichristian
Form, which must all be thrown down in this day of the Lords mighty power,
wherein he has made bare, and will yet more and more make bare his Arm, and
his power and authority shall be known against the Hierarchy of Antichrist, in
the utter destruction thereof, the Lord will dash to pieces all the Powers and
authorities of the earth that stand in his way, or any way seek to uphold the
Kingdom and Authority of the Beast, and of the false Prophet which is full of
darkness. And the Lord God will bring in his Kingdom of Righteousness which he
has begun to set up, and the same will finish, though it be to the everlasting
destruction of all Earthly Potentates and people that stand in opposition
thereto.

Therefore, O King, take heed what thou do in this thy day, and power; and O
Council of the King, take heed least you counsel the King either to swear, or
to go about to establish, or set up the Kingdom of Antichrist, under any form
whatsoever, whether Episcopacy, or Presbytery, or any other; for assuredly if
you so do, it will be the utter destruction both of You, and Your King. And
again I say, Oh King and Council take heed: for your Enemy, and the Enemy of
man's salvation is very active in this day, and will ^ot cease tempting of you
both within and without to make ^ou Instruments to obstruct the work of the
Lord to whose temptations if you yield the Lord will dash you to pieces, and so
you will become miserable as those that are gone before you.

And Oh King! in the fear and dread of the Lord, prize thy time, and the Lords
mercies toward thee and thy family; for they have been very great in this day
of thy visitation, wherein the Lord has not been wanting to thee, but has
sent his servants time after time to Counsel thee, and to forewarn thee, of the
sore Judgments that are hastening upon these Nations for the wickedness
thereof.

And the Lord God has been striving with thee, not only by his spirit in his
Ministers and Servants, But his witness in thine own Conscience also since he
has set thee upon thy Fathers Throne.

And my self as one of the least to whom the Lord has showed mercy in bringing
me into the good Land, wherein every one that is faithful, receives of the
fruits and increase thereof and drink of the pleasent streams that therein run,
which more refresh then all the increase of earthly treasure; do now in
obedience to the motions of Gods Spirit, and in his fear and dread, give in my
testimony before thee O King, and before thy Counsel, for the Lord God, though
King of kings, yet not Obeyed by the people out of his fear and teachers of
these Nations, and for his truth that is fallen in the Gates, and for his
people though harmless and just, yet more oppressed than any other people in
the Nations by reason of the hireling Ministry which teach the people to err,
and are Enemies to Gods truth and people.

Know this now therefore, O King, that if thou will not Regard the Lord Gods
striving with thee, by his Servants, nor hearken to nor return at the reproofs
of Gods witness in thy own conscience, then the Lord will with hold his
servants from thee, and his spirit from striving with thee, and give thee up to
hardness of heart; and then thou will be ruled by blood-thirsty men (enemies to
Gods truth and his people) who will cause thee to do such things which may be
was once far from thy heart to do; and then the Lord God, who respects no man's
person, will smite thee and them with a very terrible overthrow, and utter ruin
and destruction, as he has done to those that has gone before thee, who would
not hearken to Gods servants nor Return at his reproofs. For known be it to
thee O King, God did not remove those men from the throne of Government in
these Nations, for their well doing but for their evil, for their unrighteous
and unjust actions, because they Governed not for God; and therefore as the
Kingdoms of the Earth are the Lords, so he disposes of them as he pleases: He
plucks down the Governors therein, whose actions proclaims them Traitors to
their Lord and Master who entrusted them, and set up others to try them also,
whether they will obey and do his commands and the things that he delights in:
To wit, Mercy and Justice, true Judgment and Righteousness, and the contrary
he denis with the workers thereof, from the highest to the lowest. And so when
that wicked and perfideous Generation of men, would by no means be reformed,
then the wrath of the Lord was kindled, and his decree went forth against them;
And so they were dashed in pieces even like a Potters Vessel; 'twas their
wickedness caused them to fall, and nothing else; for they still obstructed the
Lords work, and yet he bore with them a long time, and would not that any
should break them to pieces, but disappointed all plottings and combinations
against them from time to time, and also councelled them by his Ministers and
Servants, which he sent unto them, and did warn them of the evil that fell upon
them long before it came, and Reproved them of their evil deeds, and diverse
times suffered their own servants to take their power from them, and then they
lay under shame and Contempt for some time, and then Restored to Government
again; but still they went on in their evil Practices, being Coveteous
self-seeking men, having a form of Godliness, but denied the power thereof;
they were Great Oppressors and Hard Hearted men; And Imprisoned the Ministers
and Servants of the Lord; And maintained an Idle, Dronish, Idolatrous,
Hireling, Tyth-taking Ministry in the Nations; And suffered them to persecute,
Oppress and Afflict the most precious Ministers and Servants of God, whose
Estates they took away, and whose bodies they Imprisoned, and some of them most
cruelly abused in prison, even unto death; (Mark) therefore O King, had the
Lord been pleased with such things, then doubtless thou and thy party had
never returned to Govern in these Nations any more; if the Lord had seen good
that Oppression and Grinding the faces of the poor, and maintaining a Hireling
Ministry, and forcing the people of God to pay Tithes, and persecuting, and
Imprisoning of Gods Ministers and Servants should have continued in these
Nations, then those men (which he removed to bring thee in) might have been fit
Instruments for such a work, and no need for Thee to have been brought in, in
so eminent a manner, to do the work with which the Spirit of the Lord was
burdened and grieved from day to day, and for which his wrath brake forth
against those men, whose names now rot in perpetual infamy.

Theresore, does it not concern Thee, O King, and thy Council to consider what
you are doing? For the Lord is the same now as ever he was, and regards not
Kings, Councels, Parliaments, Armies, Protectors, (so called) or any one, more
than another, otherways then they are found in the path of Righteousness,
Mercy, and true Judgment.

Therefore, Awake, Awake, O KING, with Thy COUNCEL, stand up, and see whereon
the Basis of Thy Kingdom stands, least Thy Crown and Dignity fall in the dust
in these great Overturnings; for verily, verily there is yet a greater Oturning
then has been, that will suddenly come upon these Nations: In which
Overturning, O King, Thou, and Thy party, if you proceed as you have begun,
must be the very subject matter of the day, and must drink the very bottom and
dregs of that Cup, which all persons that have miscarried in Government for
diverse years past have tasted of; for the Lord has tried you many years by sore
and grievous affliction, and now has restored you, that all People and Nations
may see what you will do; And Thou, O King, and thy party, has begun to set up
and maintain that false Ministry and worship, and Idolatrous practice and vain
sports (for which the wrath of God brake forth about twenty years since against
thy family) that is to say EPISCOPACY, with all the Abominations both in
Worship and Practice, which it brings along with it, notwithstanding the light
that shines in this day of the Lords mighty power, and this glorious day of
visitation, wherein the Lord has admitted you to stand for trial: And know
this, O King! Thy Father and his party deceased never saw such a day, nor
received so much mercy (as Thee and thy party that now survives have done) but
were in the dark and cloudy day, folded up under the Hireling Ministers, and
had not the Ministers of Christ, the light of the world sent unto them, with
message after message, as to Thee and Thy party has been done, counselling
Thee, O King, and thy Council to fear God, and to work righteousness; and the
Ministers and servants of the Lord have been faithful unto Thee, O King, in
every thing, and in this thing in particular, that is, Thou limit not the
Spirit of God in forcing all to worship God after the manner of the Nations and
Heathen, nor to maintain a hireling Ministry; for where there is such a thing
done by authority, there must of necessity follow great ignorance; and gross
darkness will soon cover the face of such a Nation; for a forced Uniformity in
matters of Gods worship, and the hireling Ministry, are not of God, but of the
devil, not of Christ, but Antichrist; and such a Ministry I do affirm, and
shall maintain, was the cause of Thy Fathers fall: for the hireling Ministry at
that time had their hearts full of war, and were divided, and so ministered
death unto the people on both sides. And if thou, O King, shall suffer Religion
to be established by a Law, and shall force people thereunto, it will be Thy
utter ruin, and thou will assuredly miscarry in Government, as any that has
gone before thee.

And this I declare to thee in tender love and pity toward thee, and likewise
exhort thee in the fear and dread of the Lord God that thou swear not at all;
for if thou do, thou breakest the Command of Christ Jesus the Light of the
World, who is the wisdom of God (By whom Princes rule, and the Kings of the
earth decree Justice) who said, Swear not all. Consider O King, what advantage
is swearing to the Just man? Will he be the more just for swearing? Or, is the
command of Christ of none effect? Nay, O King, the Just man need not swear,
thereby to add to his integrity; nor does the Unjust man any ways abate or
destroy the deceit or hypocrisy of his wicked heart, whereby he may become
more juster by swearing. Therefore O King, if thou can not do Justice and
Right for the People over whom God has made thee chief Ruler and Magistrate
without swearing, thou will never be able to do it by Swearing: Nay, O King,
but on the contrary, for thee to swear that thou will maintain such Religion,
or do such and such Justice for the people, puts thee into an absolute
incapability to do Justice, forasmuch as that thou refuses that wisdom by
which Kings decree Justice, as aforesaid, that is, Christ Jesus the Wisdom of
God, who said, Swear not at all, and so said his Apostle James. And under the
Old Covenant, An Oath was an end to all strife; but Christ the Oath of God, and
New Covenant, said, Swear not at all; and Christ the New Covenant is the
Prophet that Moses prophesied of, and said, whosoever would not hear him,
should be cut off from among the people.

Therefore O King and Council, swear not at all; neither establish Religion by
a Law, to force an Uniformity thereunto, nor maintain a Hireling Ministry; for
such a thing was the overthrow, not only of thy Father, but of all that have
followed after, till thy self by the mighty hand of God were set in the place
where now thou art. The Parliaments, Protectors, and Armies were all Swearers,
and high pretenders to Religion in the form, but nothing in the power, but
persecuted all the upright in heart, who were in the power, but out of their
Form; So I say, those Governors who have miscarried in Government did busy
themselves very much in matters of God, touching the Consciences of other men,
whereof they had nothing to do; but in the mean time neglected the witness of
God in their own particulars, and so were mindlesse and careless of their
duties, as civil Magistrates, professing themselves wise, and exalting
themselves into the Temple of God, wherein they had not to do, save in their
own particulars; They became fools even in the management of their Civil
affairs, and so laid a sandy foundation, and like foolish builders continued
building their own, till such time their building did fall, and great was the
fall thereof. And all this did proceed from the Hireling Ministry, which has
in all ages brought forth the same fruits, being still fawning upon, and
tampering with the great men of the Earth, and Kings, and Councils, and
Parliaments, and all men in Authority to establish Religion, and to settle
their maintenance, and then as the Prophet says of them, He that will not put
into their mouths, they presently make war against him: and this has been the
state and condition of this Nation and others.

And therefore, O King, and Council, be wise, and learn by other men's harms
(who not contenting themselves in their places, to do the work God set them
about, but leaving their own work undone, did intermeddle and busy themselves
about Gods work, and the Consciences of men (of which Christ alone is Lord) and
for this has the Lord dashed them to pieces one after another since Thy
Fathers days. First the Parliament, then Protector, so called, and Protector
again; then Parliament, then Army and Committee of Safety, so called, then
Parliament again, against all which the Lord has appeared in much severity,
and has removed all out of his way, and has brought Thee and Thy party into
their place and Authority to try you: Take heed, I say, therefore, O King, and
Council of running against this rock, for if you do, you will assuredly be
dashed to pieces, as they already are; for false worship and false Ministers
must down, and all that take part with them, and till that time there will
never be peace on Earth; for it is the false Ministry that divides the people,
and causes them to run into factions and divisions, and that sets people at
variance one with another.

The false Ministry O King, that's the evil tree which brings forth bad fruit;
And indeed they can do no otherwise, for they are not of God, but of the evil
one. Its clearly so, O King, for the tree was to be known by his fruit, and he
is now grown so big, and his fruit so numerous, that one may run and read of
what sort the tree is; and they that see it not to be the evil tree, are very
near the pit of everlasting destruction.

Thou wast a child O King in thy Fathers days, and knew not to what perfection
this evil tree was then grown; but withdraw thy self a little into thy private
chamber, and there inquire of the Ancient of days, and ask counsel at the
Oracle of God, the Light in thine own conscience, and therewith compare the
Doctrine of Christ, who is the Word of God, and is very near thee, even in thy
heart and in thy mouth, and thou will then see, hear, and understand what
Christ and his Apostles says, and the Prophets before them, concerning the
false Prophets, and the false Ministers.

C. C.

THE END.

