VIA LACTEA, or THE SAINTS Only Way to True Blessedness. Opened in a SERMON
from MATTHEW. 5.8. ALSO, The Danger of neglecting Gospel-Salvation, from Heb 2.3.

By Thomas Cheesman, Master of Arts, and formerly a Member of Pembrook-Colledge
in Oxford.

With his Epistle to Vindicate Himself from those Absurdities of Method and
Language, and little less then Blasphemies, with which he was abused by a
Mercenary Pen, in the former Impression.

London, Printed for the Vindication of the Author, and Satisfaction of the
Reader. 1663.

TO THE READER.
Courteous Reader,
MY poor Labors in the Gospel have been of late so wretchedly abused, and
falsely represented to the World, as that I have been in a manner constrained
to Print these following Sermons, for a necessary vindication of my Ministry,
from the contempt of those profane adversaries, who would gladly lay hold upon
any occasion to vilify it, and load it with disgraceful imputations. In
partieular, that Sermon upon Mat. 5.8. Has been most barbarously handled, and
contumeliously dealt with, for I dare appeal to any judicious auditor, which
was present at the delivery of it, whither the counterfeit Copy can show almost
any thing true and genuine, save only the Text; that absurd Pamphlet, in which
these unparalled forgeries are comprised, carries a fair and plausible Title,
flattering the Reader into expectations of some rich spiritual treasure, but he
which would take the pains to search, shall find his deluded hopes entertained
with nothing but dross and dung, the very excrements of a sottish distempered
brain; in a word, the discourse is altogether wild, brutish, and extravagant,
as if it were ambitious to derive its pedigree from a pure frenzy, and were
calculated for Bedlam, rather then any serious Christian auditory, or were
penned by an author who had publicly renonnced all congruity of language, and
had professed himself a sworn Enemy both to reason and conscience, before he
could be qualified for the work; and therefore Christian Reader, for the
future, I desire thee neither to receive or give credit to any thing that shall
come abroad in the like nature as mine But I shall dwell no longer upon this
unpleasing subject, be it known for thy further satisfaction, that what is here
Printed, is the same for the main substance of it, with that which was formerly
Preached, without any considerable addition; concerning the whole, I shall
venture to, say thus much, that there is the clear water of life drawn from the
wells of salvation, though not presented to thee in a golden cup; wholesome
food, though the dish be not artificially garnished; yet if thou be in the
number of hungering and thirsting souls, such as relish the simplicity of the
Gospel, thou will not stand upon niceness or delicacy. I Entreat that thou do
not only read, but weigh and consider; never rest satisfied until the truths
here contained have made some lively impression upon thy heart, so this and all
other discourses of the like nature may build thee up in thy most holy faith,
and bring thee nearer to God, which shall be the Prayer of him who would gladly
approve himself a faithful Witness to the truth,

Tho. Cheesman.

MAT. 5.8. Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see God.


HEre is a description of happiness, quite contrary to the expectation of
Scribes and Pharisees, who being strangers to the spiritual interpretation of
the Law, did commonly teach their Disciples, that they need not doubt of
obtaining Salvation, if they did but lead civil lives; if they did but bring
forth the fruits of moral honesty, and were exactly conformable to the
Tradition of their Elders. But says our Savior, Do not satisfy your selves
with such an empty shadow of outward Traditional, and Ceremonial holiness;
Know, it is the inward frame and disposition of heart, which you are
principally engaged to regard, and look after; Blessed are the pure in heart,
etc. though there are many persons zealous in the observation of superstitious
customs, which their own fancy has made choice of though they stand much upon
clean Garments, and clean Vessels; Though they do much for the purifying of the
flesh, yet notwithstanding this their outward purity, they may be objects of
Gods reprobating anger, they may be condemned to perish with the unbeleiving
world, and fall short of eternal happiness; But blessed are the pure in heart,
for they shall see God. By heart here is meant all the powers and faculties of
the inward man; so purity of heart does imply an understanding free from error,
a conscience void of offense toward God and toward man, a will freed from the
Dominion of sin and Satan, affections clarified and refined from the dross of
this present World. Blessed are they that are thus pure in heart, for they
shall see God; that is, they shall enjoy him.

Vision is commonly put for fruition in the Scripture, so in that place, Heb.
12.14. Follow Peace and holiness, without which no man shall see the Lord; that
is, none shall enjoy him; no man without holiness, shall be admitted to taste
that fullness of joy, or bath in those Rivers of pleasures that are at the right
hand of God; or else we may understand it according to the more plain and
familiar signification, and thus the pure in heart shall see God, in his work
of creation, they shall behold him in the beautiful frame of Heaven and earth;
every thing which they see, will put them in mind of their creatours wisdom,
goodness, and power; they shall see him likewise in the works of providence,
taking notice of his hand in every mercy, and in every judgment; and they
shall see him present in all his Ordinances; but more especially they shall see
him in the life to come; they shall see the blessed person of Jesus Christ, who
is the glass of the Trinity, and in whom those who are pure in heart shall one
day behold the fullness of the Godhead dwelling bodily; this glass is of a
transforming nature; for they which see it, shall be changed into the same
likeness, from glory to glory. Thus much for the meaning of the words, the pure
in heart shall see God, while they continue in this World, by an eye of faith;
they shall likewise have a more clear immediate ravishing and refreshing vision
of him, when they are perfectly glorified in the life to come.

The Text may be divided into a Proposition, and a Demonstration. The
Proposition asserts that the pure in heart are blessed; The Demonstration or
Argument which the Holy Ghost makes use of in this place, to prove their
blessedness, is taken from their seeing of God; blessed are the pure in heart,
for they shall see God.

The principal Doctrine, resulting from the words, may be this, That the pure
in heart, they, and only such as they, are blessed; or, that true blessedness
can never be obtained without purity of Heart.

In the Prosecution of it, I shall first show, what precious ingredients are
required to make up this purity of heart. Secondly, why we should labor to get
purity of heart. Thirdly, what means we should use to have our hearts purified.
Fourthly, in what particulars this purity of heart will especially discover it
self.

I. There are many things employed or comprehended in this purity of heart.
First, the justification of our persons; civilizing morality does only furnish
men with some sweet sented flowers, which may perfume their outward
conversation, rendering it more acceptable to humane society, though still their
hearts may continue as filthy and impure as ever they were before. Moral men
commonly have a high conceit of themselves, and yet they may be abominable in
the sight of God, as Solomon speaks, Prove. 30.12. There is a Generation that
are pure in their own eyes, and yet is not washed from their filthiness; but no
true purity can be effectually produced in our inward parts, until we come to
be sprinkled in the blood of Christ, Rev. 1.5. Who has loved us and washed us
from our sins in his own blood. We can never be cleansed from our sinful
abominations, until we be washed in the blood of that immaculate Lamb, which
takes away the sins of the World; when the soul is brought into a state of
justification, it is clothed in the wedding Garment of Christ's imputed
righteousness, which is large enough to cover all its natural deformities, and
then though it were never so black and filthy before, it presently appears full
of amiable luster, and shining excellency, bright, and clear, beautiful as an
Angel, without spot or blemish in the sight of God.

Secondly, Purity of heart does imply a renovation of our nature. We are all
defiled in our very birth and conception; the poisonous Leprosy of Original
sin has spread it self over every faculty of the soul, and member of the body;
therefore if ever we obtain any acceptable purity, this corrupt depraved nature
must be changed; hence is that Petition of the Prophet David, which you may
read in Psalm. 51.10. Create in me a clean heart, O God, and renew a right
spirit within me. Tit. 3.5. we are said to be saved by the washing of
Regeneration, and renewing of the Holy Ghost. And the Apostle Paul likewise
prays in the behalf of his Thessalonians, that they may be sanctified
throughout, both in body, soul, and spirit, 1 These. 5.23. The soul and the
spirit are here to be distinguished. The Spirit here signifies the most Noble
sublime and Angelical part of man, comprehending his will, conscience and
understanding; the soul, that signifies the inferior faculties of sensitive
desires and affections, and the body that is the outward man, the instrument of
the soul. In Ezekiel. 36.25, 26. you have an excellent Gospel promise, I will
sprinkle clean water upon you, and you shall be washed from all your
filthiness, and from all your Idols will I cleanse you; a new heart also will I
give you, and a new spirit will I put within you. Oh that men were generally
more convinced about the excellency and necessity of this sanctifying work!

Thirdly, purity of heart requires the casting out of defiling sins; all sin is
of a very defiling nature, therefore its shadowed forth in the book of
Leviticus, under the notion of a spreading Leprosy; it is compared likewise to
the vomit of a Dog, and to that filthy mire which Swine delight to wallow in.
But more particularly, sinful pleasures must be cast out of the heart. In the
47. of Ezekiel. there you read concerning the River of the Sanctuary, that is, the
Doctrine of the Gospel, which is dispersed amidst the wilderness of the
Gentiles; and most places where it came, received a healing virtue from it, but
in the 11 verse. the Miry places, and the Marshes thereof shall not be healed.
By the Marshes and Miry places, some fitly understand those men and women that
have given themselves over to sinful pleasures; these kind of persons are very
unlikely to be healed by the waters of the Sanctuary; what gross defilement do
many contract, while they let loose the raines to vile affections, and drown
the masculine activity of their spirit in a loathsome pudle of sensuality! Also
earthly-mindedness is another sin, which must be cast out, if we desire to have
a pure heart. When a thing is mingled with that which is of a superior nature,
its thereby made more rich and precious, as when silver is mingled with gold;
but if it be mingled with that which is of an inferior nature, as silver
mingled with lead, such a heterogeneus mixture does debase and impoverish it;
thus when the soul of man is as I may so speak, mingled with the graces of the
spirit, this makes it more Noble, exalting it to a higher degree of perfection.
But if it be mingled with the drossy vanities of the world, this makes it base
and vile. The Scripture tells us concerning the pollutions of the World, 2
Epist. of Peter, Cap. 2. verse. 20. and in James 1.27. says he, This is pure
Religion and undefiled before God, and the father, to visit the fatherless and
the widows in their afflictions, and to keep himself unspotted from the world;
the things of the world, they are a dirty defiling nature; they are like Pitch,
it is hard to touch them and not contract some defilement or other. How is it
possible that that man should have a pure heart that can be contented from
morning to night, to entertain nothing but the world in his soul! John 17.15.
(says Christ,) I pray not that thou should take them out of the world, but
that thou should keep them from the evil.

Fourthly, Purity of heart requires that we should adorn our selves with
purifying Graces; First, Hope, 1 John 3.3. He that has this hope, purifieth
himself even as he is pure. Raised expectations of future happiness, should
stir up in the soul strong and vigorous endeavors after present holiness;
because a defiled heart, and a undefiled inheritance, cannot stand together.
Secondly, Faith, that's another purifying grace; as you have it, Acts 15.9.
Purifying their hearts by faith. Those which persuade themselves, that they do
believe in Christ; and yet their hearts are as carnal, and corrupt, as filthy,
and impure as ever they were before, They may know that their faith is but a
fantastic dream, or deluding shadow; there is nothing of truth nothing of
reality in it: Faith having tied a marriage knot between Christ and the soul,
lays a strong engagement upon her, to keep her self chaste and pure till the
approach of her glorious Bridegroom, when she shall be taken into the
everlasting embraces of his love. Thirdly, Repentance, that is another
purifying grace: Repentance pulls off the mask from the face of sin, causing it
to appear in its proper colors; so that it has no alluring paint nor
counterfeit dress, by which it should ensnare, or delude the soul any longer.
Repentance fills the soul of a sinner with hatred and detestation against sin;
making him restless in his desire, till he can procure an universal divorce,
and perpetual separation from it. Those that continue impenitent, can lie
soaking in the mire of bloody, reigning lust, and yet not be sensible of the
least defilement; but the truly penitent soul is solicitous to wash out every
spot and stain. Fourthly, Love that has a notable purifying influence upon the
heart; Love chiefly stands in a reciprocal similitude of disposition. They that
love God, will strive every day to have more and more of his likeness, of his
picture they are ambitious to be beautified with the most plentiful
participation of his image. They that love God, will endeavor for such a
measure of holiness and purity as may dispose and fit them to maintain a
refreshing fellowship and communion with God. You that can wallow in the fink
of common profaness, without the least check or remorse of conscience, Oh! it
is a sign you have not the least dram of true love to God. Fifthly, Purity of
heart requires that we should be consecrated, devoted and given up to the
service of God. Men of drossy impure spirits look after carnal self in
whatsoever they do; they aim at nothing but the pleasing and gratifying of
their flesh; that's the great end which they propose to themselves in all their
actions; but those who have a pure heart endeavor to glorifye God by yiedling
impartial obedience to his Commands. They act according to the simplicity of
the Gospel; walking in the plainess, candor and ingenuity of a gracious spirit.
Pharisaical Hypocrites, how ever they may cleanse the outside, yet their hearts
are rotten and impure; because they only serve God for by-ends and self
respects. Sixthly, purity of heart requires that we should resist vain
thoughts, Jerem. 4.14. Oh Jerusalem, wash thy heart from wickedness, that thou
may be saved; what wickedness was this which must be washed away, lest it did
hinder salvation? the holy Ghost tells you in the following words, how long
shall vain thoughts lodge within thee! Those which indulge themselves in the
harboring of vain thoughts, must never look to have their hearts cleansed;
therefore when ever thoughts begin to rise in thy soul, command them to stand
and undergo a serious examination; if they can show a pass from the Scripture,
let them go on, and be encouraged, but if they appear to be vain, idle, and
impertinent, send them back to hell from whence they came, not giving them the
least countenance or approbation.

In the last place purity of heart requires that we should bridle immoderate
affections. You know, water though it be never so fresh and pure, while it runs
in its proper Channel, yet if it overflow the banks, it will quickly grow mudy
and defiled; thus thy affections if they be kept within due bounds, and proper
limits, they may be pure; but when once they overflow the banks of sobriety and
moderation, they presently are defiled. Take heed therefore lest thy spirit be
defiled by the irregular distempers and corrupt excess of joy, anger, carnal
love, or other the like transporting violent passions.

In the next place I proceed to show why we should labor after this purity.

1. Because without this we cannot hear the word; so as to profit by it; If the
stomach be filled with corrupt matter, the most wholesome food will prove
distastful; thus when the heart abounds with impurity, the most spiritual and
heavenly truths that can be delivered, will scarce find any acceptable or
savoury relish; those which cannot feed upon the word with such sweetness,
delight, satisfaction, if they would seriously examine themselves, they may
possibly find that they have defiled their consciences by some secret way of
sinning against God, and that's the reason why their hearts are so little
affected under the Preaching of those Gospel truths, which were formerly
entertained with highest esteem, and were thought worthy of all acceptance.

2. Without this we cannot draw nigh to God in any other Religious duties.
James 4.8. Draw nigh unto God, and he will draw nigh unto you; but how shall we
be made partakers of this incomparable privilege? the former words direct us,
cleanse your hands you sinners, and purify your hearts you double-minded.
Isaiah 1.16. wash ye, make ye clean, put away the evil of your doings from
before mine eyes; come now let us reason together, says the Lord; there is no
coming unto God, except we be first washed and made clean, Heb. 9.13. How much
more shall the blood of Christ, who through the eternal spirit offered himself
up without spot unto God, cleanse your consciences from dead works, that you
serve the living God? you cannot serve the everliving God in an acceptable
manner, unless your consciences be cleansed from dead works, and this can only
be done by the blood of Jesus Christ, who through the eternal spirit offered
himself up without spot unto God.

3. We should therefore labor for purity of heart, because without this we can
have no true peace; peace and purity go together. When God appears in his
Majesty and Glory, when he arises terribly to shake the earth, and magnifies
his excellent power, working wonders amongst the children of men, this is the
privilege of those which are pure in heart, that they shall remain undaunted,
because conscience will speak peace to them. Job 11.14, 15. If iniquity be in
thy hand, put it far away, and let not wickedness dwell in thy Tabernacles; for
then shall thou lift up thy face without spot; yea, thou shall be steadfast, and
shall not fear. So Psalm. 51.7, 8. says David, purge me with Hysop, and I shall
be clean; wash me and I shall be whiter then snow; make me to hear joy and
gladness, that the bones which thou have broken may rejoice; as if he had said,
Lord, I have defiled my self by this bloody sin which I have committed, and
because of my defilement, joy and gladness has been banished from my spirit;
but do thou wash me, purge me clean, and then the joy of thy salvation will be
restored, peace will return again. Many they complain for want of comfort, for
want of peace; let them consider whither there be not some sin or other that
they harbor with allowance; for believe it, one sin will fill the heart with
bitterness, vexation, and galling perplexity. Sin is a Jonah that raises
storms and tempests where ever it comes.

Fourthly, We should labor for purity, because without this there can be no
scriptural well grounded hope of getting to heaven. David says, Psalm. 24.3, 4.
Who shall ascend into the Hill of the Lord? who shall stand in his holy place?
he that has clean hands, and a pure heart, who has not lift up his soul unto
vanity. Those that live after the flesh, wallowing in all impurity, it is
strange, that they should cheat themselves with such confident expectation of
future blessedness; The new Jerusalem is, Civitas Sancta, gloriosa, tota ex
auro, tota gemmis et margaritis decorata, (as Zanchy speaks) Consider that
magnificent description of this City, which is laid down in the Revelation, and
then judge whether Goats and Swine are fit to be admitted to be its
Inhabitants: A bare profession may give you admission into the Church Militant;
but it is nothing but Scriptural holiness, and real purity that can give you
admission into the Church Triumphant; as for profane persons, however they may
flatter themselves with vain hopes, yet while they continue in sin, every leaf
almost in the Bible, stands as a flaming sword to keep them out of Paradise.

Fifthly, We should labor after purity of heart, because without this, there
can be no perseverance. Those whose Religion stands only in a glistering show
of outward profession, though they may seem steadfast and flourishing for a
while, yet they will certainly fall away in an hour of temptation: What is the
reason that so many have begun in the spirit, and ended in the flesh; so many
with the Church of Ephesus have forsaken their first love? It is because their
hearts were rotten, and corrupt from the beginning; perhaps their heads were
enriched with choice notions, curious speculations, and the like; but still
they were strangers to purity of heart, they looked upon Religion as that which
could only afford matter of discourse, or did consist in disputing for opinions.

Sixthly, We should labor for purity of heart, that so we may plentifully taste
the goodness of God in all conditions; that is a very remarkable place, in
Psalm. 73.1. Truly God is good to Israel, even to them that are of a clean
heart; Whatsoever Changes, Vicissitudes, and Revolutions, there may be in the
world, yet the pure in heart shall experience the mercy and goodness of God.

In the last place, We should labor to get purity of heart, because the very
life of Christianity does consist in this. In 1 Peter 3.21. Baptism also now
saves, (not the putting away the filth of the flesh, but the answer of a good
conscience toward God.) We must consider whether grace have enabled us to
answer those solemn engagements, which our baptismal Covenant laid upon us; it
is inward washing which does principally denominate a Christian. Thus much for
the reasons and motives, stirring up to labor after purity of heart.

But in the third place, What must we do to get our hearts purified?

First, Labor to be heavenly-minded; you may observe, the nearer things are to
heaven, the more pure they are. Water is more pure than the earth, as being
higher in its situation; Air is more pure then water, and the Fire is more pure
than the Air, because it is nearest to the heavenly bodies. If thy heart were
turned and taken off from the world, if it were more raised to converse with
heaven, and things of an heavenly nature, this would mightily increase the
purity of it.

Secondly, Attend upon the word, John 15.3. Now you are clean, says Christ to
his Disciples, through the word that I have spoken unto you. So Psalm. 119.9.
Wherewith shall a young man cleanse his way? by taking heed according to thy
word.

And then get the spirit of grace to dwell in thy heart; that is the most
effectual way to have the heart purified; the spirit is sometimes compared to
water for its purifying nature, John 3.5. Except a man be born again; of water
and the spirit, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of God; by water here is not
meant the Element of water made use of in baptism; none can conclude baptismal
Regeneration from such a place of Scripture as this; no, but except a man be
born of water and the spirit, that is, of the spirit that resembles water,
compared to water for its cleansing virtue and efficacy; so likewise the Spirit
is compared to fire, Mat. 3.11. John speaking concerning Christ, One comes
after me, greater then I, whose Shoe Latchets I am not worthy to unloose, he
shall baptize you with the Holy Ghost, and with fire; that is, with the Holy
Ghost, that does resemble fire, so called from its refining virtue.

In the fourth place I proceed to show wherein this purity of heart does
discover it self.

It discovers it self chiefly in these four things, an understanding free from
error, in purity of Works, in purity of Words, and in purity of Worship.

First, An understanding free from error; those that have a pure heart they
will strive against Errors in Doctrine, as well as Errors in Practice; for if
the head be once poisoned, the venomous influences of it will quickly distend
to the heart, infecting the very vitals of Christianity; corrupt opinions, and
corrupt practices commonly go together; they that have purity of heart, will be
filled with a love to truth.

Secondly, Purity of heart discovers it self in purity of works; if there be a
conformity to the Image of God in the heart, there will also be a conformity to
the Law of God in the outward conversation; you may as well suppose the Sun to
be without light, the fire without heat, and honey without sweetness, as that
saving grace should be rooted in the heart, and not bring forth the fruits of
holiness in the life, Mat. 5.16. Let your light so shine before men, that they
may see your good works, and glorify your Father which is in Heaven; therefore
those do miserably cheat their own souls, which boast as if their hearts were
good, though they live in the daily practice of gross and scandalous sins; a
pure fountain would never send forth muddy streams, a good tree would never
bring forth corrupt fruit; if filthiness appear in the outward behavior, you
may certainly conclude that there is much more impurity in the inward parts.

Thirdly, Purity of heart shows it self in purity of words, James 1.26. If
any man among you seem to be Religious, and bridle not his tongue, but
deceives his own heart, this man's Religion is vain. How can the heart be
chaste, when the words are loose and immodest? how can the heart be humble, when
the speech is swelling and lofty? how can the heart be heavenly, when the
discourse constantly runs out, and spends it self upon the things of the World?
the words are still suitable to that treasure which is laid up in the heart,
Mat. 12.35. A good man out of the good treasure of the heart, brings forth
good things; and an evil man out of the evil treasure, brings forth evil
things.

Fourthly, They that are endued with purity of heart, labor for purity of
worship; they are Enemies to Will Worship, they cannot endure to serve God in
any way save that which he has appointed; they would not have the gold of the
Sanctuary mingled with the dross of humane invention; it is the coruption and
uncleanness of men's spirits, which makes them so violently contend for, and
obstinately addicted to the observation of Idolatrous customs.

HEB. 2.3. How shall we escape if we neglect so great Salvation.


THe Apostle had told us, in the foregoing verse, that if the word which was
spoken by the Angels, that is, the Law which was published upon Mount Sinai, by
the subordinate administration of Angels: If that Word, the Law, were so
steadfast; if it obtained full authority, so that every transgression, every
disobedience against it, received a just recompense of reward; If men were
severely punished for transgressing the Law of Moses; how much more shall we be
severely punished, if we sin against the glorious Gospel of Jesus Christ! How
shall we escape, if we neglect so great Salvation.

I would willingly spend the short time allotted for the present exercise, in
that discourse which might most conduce to general edification: And therefore I
shall without further delay present to you this doctrinal point of Observation,
from the words to be insisted upon, Namely, Doct. That those which go on in the
final neglect of that Salvation which is offered and held forth in the Gospel,
they must unavoidably perish.

In the Handling of the point I shall propose this ensuing method.

First, I shall show what this salvation is.

Secondly, Why it is called a great Salvation.

Thirdly, How many ways men are guilty of neglecting this great Salvation.

Fourthly, What are the causes from whence the general neglect of this great
Salvation may proceed.

Fifthly, I shall wind up all in some useful application.

First, What this Salvation is.

The word (...), properly signifies the preservation of any thing or Person in
a state of safety. But in the Scripture it is taken diverse ways.

First, It is taken for a Deliverance from some temporal danger or calaminity.
Thus you have it in Exodus 14.13. When the Israelites were encompassed with an
Army of Egyptians at their backs, and the Red Sea was before them, and that the
murmuring of the people might be satisfied, Moses stands up, and bids them
stand still and see the salvation of the Lord; as if he had said, Let not your
hearts be troubled, let not your spirits sink under a load of discouraging
fears, do not fall into the hands of unbelief; for that is worse than if you
should fall into the hands of your enemies; but have a steadfast eye unto the
God of Israel, and so take notice what a seasonable and speedy deliverance he
will work for you.

Secondly, Salvation is taken for the providential care and power of God,
whereby he will not let his people want those things that are needful. Thus
you have it, Psalm. 78.22. When the Israelites murmured against God in the
Wilderness for want of food, why says the Psalmist, They trusted not in his
salvation, they believed not in God, and trusted not in his salvation; that is,
They trusted not in that wonderful providence of God which would certainly make
a provision for them in their wants and difficulties, had they but patience to
wait for it.

Thirdly, Salvation is taken in scripture for the Author of salvation, Psalm.
27.1. The Lord is my light and my salvation; whom shall I fear? so in Luke
2.30. they are the words of Simeon, Now let thou thy servant depart in
peace, verse 30. for mine eyes have seen thy salvation, that is, I have beheld
him that shall be the Author of salvation both to the Jews and to the Gentiles.

Fourthly, Salvation is taken for that state of Glory and perfect Blessedness
which the souls of Gods people shall enter upon immediately after the
dissolution of their bodies.

Thus you have it in Heb. 1.14. speaking there conc rning the Angels, Are they
not all ministering spirits sent forth that they may minister for those which
shall be the heirs of salvation? the heirs of salvation, that is, the heirs of
future Glory.

And Lastly, Salvation is sometimes Metonymically taken for the doctrine of the
Gospel, because that is the only way which God has ordinarily appointed for
the salvation of his rational creatures.

And thus it is taken in the words of the Text, How shall we escape if we
neglect so great salvation!

I have finished the first Branch, and proceed to the second, to enquire why
this is here called a great Salvation.

And First, It is so called because it does concern our souls.

Oh! that men were more deeply sensible of the incomparable excellency and
preciousness that is in their souls! Why, Pleasure is a Dream, Honor is a
smoke, Wealth is a deceitful shadow; Our souls are the only jewels, that are
worth the preserving. If these be saved, no matter what is lost; and if these
be lost, no matter what is saved.

Alas! What would all the preferments the world can give, avail us if after the
enjoyment of all, our souls should be swallowed up in a gulf of remediless
torment? I tell you, and there is ground for it in the word of God, that the
loathsome toad and the venomous snake, they are in a better condition than the
highest unsanctified Monarch upon the earth who shall be condemned to have his
portion in this present life. If you highly esteem those things or persons
which may be instrumental for the saving of your estates, or to save the life
of your bodies; are you not infinitely much more engaged to set an high esteem
upon the Gospel which God has appointed to be the only instrument for the
saving of your souls? Why, our time is here spent to very little purpose,
unless we do industriously promote the salvation of our souls. We live here in
vain unless that short time which is allotted for us to continue here upon the
earth, be wisely improved to prepare us for an everlasting enjoyment of God in
heaven; it had been better for us that our bodies had never lived the life of
nature, unless a life of grace here, dispose our souls for a life of Glory
hereafter.

Those which lay out all their care to cherish frail perishing bodies, and in
the mean time neglect their souls, they go the ready way to plunge both body
and soul in everlasting ruin. For oh sinner, do thou not know, that at the
Resurrection thy body shall be in the same condition with thy soul? when they
are reunited together, they must be both companions in joy, or companions in
torment.

But, when the care which we lay out upon our bodies, is nothing, if compared
with the care which we lay out upon our souls, we go the ready way to save
both, to make both eternally happy; that is the first reason, it is called a
great salvation because it concerns our souls.

Secondly, That salvation which the Gospel brings, is therefore called a great
salvation, because it is often bestowed upon the greatest Sinners.

There is no person so deeply defiled with the pollutions of the world, or
grown so black with the guilt of high and heinous sins, but that the Gospel can
furnish him with a robe of imputed Righteousness large enough to cover all his
spots, and stains, to conceal all his shame and nakedness in the presence of
God.

No person has so much run upon the score of divine justice, but the Gospel
can bring him acquainted with a Surety which is able to discharge his debt, and
pay the utmost farthing. Never yet did any sinner come to Christ, and Christ
refused to save him, merely upon this account because his sins were too great
to be pardoned; there never was any had occasion for such a complaint; No, the
greatest sinner in this congregation may be encouraged; Those which for many
years together have continued slaves to the Prince of darkness, those which
have spent the flower of their age, in the service of sin, and making provision
for their lusts, those that have trifled away their time, that have abused the
patience of God, that have trampled under foot the riches of his goodness, that
have resisted the work of grace, and grieved the Spirit, why yet if they will
accept Christ, and come up to the terms of the Gospel, they shall not miss of a
full salvation.

Thirdly, This is called a very great salvation in regard of the great price
which was laid down to procure it. God scorns to sell salvation to any
creature; it is therefore freely offered unto us; we may have it without money,
and without price; Oh! but it cost Christ full dear; it cost him no less than
the shedding of his own precious Blood, the least drop of which was more worth
than the whole frame of this material world; if all the mountains had been
turned into gold, and every blade of grass on the face of the earth, had been
changed into a precious Jewel, and all this laid together had been offered up
to procure the salvation of but one single person, yet it would not have been
accepted.

Fourthly, This is a very great salvation if we consider those great benefits
that are comprehended in it; why, this salvation, it does comprehend Adoption,
Justification, and Eternal life. The benefits are exceeding great; though men
are naturally born vessels of wrath, and fire-bands of hell; why yet the Gospel
shows them how they may get into a state of peace and reconciliation with God.

The Gospel shows them how they may have their sins forgotten and forgiven; how
they may have their persons justified, and their natures sanctified, that they
may be made meet to be partakers of an inheritance with the saints in light.

Fifthly, This is called a great salvation because it brings a great revenue of
Glory to the excellent Name of God: God is more glorified in that salvation
which is extended to sinners in the Gospel, than by any thing else; why, here
in this Salvation the riches of his wisdom are discovered, his justice is
satisfied, his grace and love are exalted, his mercy sparkles forth to the
greatest advantage.

And then in the sixth place, It is a great salvation if we consider its
everlasting nature. Those that are once effectually called, and justified,
though they may fall under the merit of condemnation, yet they shall never be
brought into a state of condemnation; they that are once the children of God,
shall so remain for ever; for the gifts of God are unchangable; they shall sure
enough be kept by the mighty power of God through faith unto salvation. They
that are once made partakers of this Salvation, though they may be encompassed
with trouble, why yet their graces are safe, their comforts are safe; Christ,
their head, their hope, and all is safe. This is the salvation concerning our
souls, being bestowed upon the greatest sinners, having a great price laid
down to purchase it, comprehending great benefits, bringing great glory to the
name of God, and being of an everlasting nature, justly called a very great
Salvation.

I have finished the second thing proposed, and come to the third, inquiring
how many ways persons may be guilty of neglecting this great Salvation.

And first, men are guily of neglecting this great Salvation when they will not
obey the Gospel; whosoever lives in the practice of any known sin, in a state
of open rebellion against God, presuming to outface the Sun of Gospel light,
(Oh that God would powerfully speak to his heart, and effectually convince him
of it!) this person is guilty of neglecting this great Salvation. Why sirs, why
does the great God of Heaven speak to poor worms here upon the earth, unless
it be that they should obey him? and how can persons more evidently discover
that they despise the Gospel of Christ, then when they will not give up
themselves to be ruled and governed by it? when they will not suffer it to have
any transforming or reforming efficacy upon their hearts, and when they
peremptorily refuse to live up to the purity of a Gospel conversation; but
though the word be never so much Preached, yet they still wallow in their
filthiness; the Swearer, the Sabbath-breaker, the Perfidious person, the Scorner
at an holy life, will still be the same, say the Preacher what he will. If
Gospel Ministers call upon the Drunkard to be sober, and watch least he be
drowned in the next intemperate cup of Wine, and he be snatched away by death in
the midst of his sin, as many others have been in the like condition, before
him: why yet he will not be prevailed upon, to break off his revelling courses.
Though Ministers would fain persuade the covetous wretch to seek after the
Kingdom of God, and to lay up treasure in Heaven, and to look after an
inheritance of a better nature then the World can give, why yet he still
remains a slave to unrighteous Mammon, he still continues rooting like a Swine
in the earth. Though they call upon the lascivious person to put on the
Ornaments of chastity, and to possess his vessel in sanctification and honor;
why yet when they have spoken all that can be spoken, the Whore must still be
followed, and Christ be rejected. Alas! Friends, mere nominal Christians, by
their wicked conversation they are a perpetual reproach to the name of Christ.
Cyprian brings the Heathens in his days, thus upbraiding the Christians, Quare
in ore semper evangelium, evangelium, cum tua vita ab evangelii praeceptis
discrepat?

Why is the Gospel so much in their lips, when there is nothing of Gospel
purity that appears in their lives? Why? you may be sure that Ministers were
not sent that they should be as musical Instruments to gratify the ears of the
people with pleasant sounds, nor to feed the wanton curiosity of nice critical
hearers with choice refined notions; Christ did not send his Gospel that it
should only furnish men with matter of discourse and empty speculations; No,
but the holy Apostle tells you why the Gospel was sent, Tit. 2.11, 12, 13, 14.
The grace of God that brings salvation, has appeared to all men; to what end?
why, Teaching us, that denying ungodliness and worldly lusts, we should live
soberly, and righteously, and godly in this present world, looking for that
blessed hope, and the glorious appearing of the great God, and our Savior
Jesus Christ, who gave himself for us, that he might redeem us from all
iniquity, and purify to himself a peculiar people, zealous of goodworks.

Secondly, men are guilty of neglecting this great salvation, when they will
not lay to heart the things of the Gospel; when they count it a burden to be
engaged in meditating upon them, when they will not consider nor allow the
Gospel any room in their serious thoughts, but rather do what they can to
banish and cast it out of their minds; how can you more evidently discover that
you despise a thing, then when you do not judge it worth the thinking upon?

Oh! how many are there, that melt themselves into luxury, and wantonness,
rufling it out into pride and bravery, and wasting their precious time? yet
they never took any successful care for their impartial souls; they never set
apart one hour seriously to consider how they might provide for their
everlasting state.

Alas! what will become of those men? do they not think that they shall taste
of Death as well as others? and then how can they look their Judge in the face?
I beseech you sinners, take notice of the indispensible necessity that lies
upon you to practice the duty of consideration. Is Christ before you, is grace
and a crown of glory before you, and will you not consider? why is Death ready
to seize upon you, is the judge at the door, and yet will ye not consider? why,
have you any better things to consider upon then the Gospel does afford? what
is not a God and a Christ, is not the state of your souls worth the considering
upon? why, Crowns, and Kingdoms, Lands, and Lordships, they are but toys and
trifles, but chaff and stubble, dross and dung, if compared with those
everlasting things; and yet will you not be persuaded to consider? Alas! does
not Conscience tell you that you can entertain wanton, and covetous, and
revengeful thoughts from morning until night, and that is no wearisomeness to
your spirits; and have you no leisure, no time to think how you may make your
peace with God, and procure the pardon of your sins? That is the second; Men
are guilty of neglecting this great Salvation, when they will not meditate upon
the Gospel.

Thirdly, Men are guilty of neglecting this great Salvation, when they will not
put forth their strength to work out their own Salvation; when they resolve to
be at no further cost for the saving of their souls, then the laying out of a
few cold customary desires, and sluggish wishes; why consider what work you
have to do, if ever you will enter into life; you have a dark understanding to
be enlightened, an hard heart to be softened, a stubborn will to be subdued,
defiled affections that must be cleansed, strong corruptions that must be
mortified, violent temptations that must be resisted, and can all this be done,
while you sleep in the bosom of brutish security, and slothful negligence?
why, does not the Scripture tell you that if you will be saved, you must strive
to enter in at the straight gate? for many shall seek to enter and shall not be
able; you must wrestle with Principalities and Powers, so run that you may
obtain, and fight the good fight of faith, that you may lay hold upon eternal
life; and do such expressions as these, give the least encouragement to sloth.
Oh! that men should take more pains to get a morsel of bread, then they do to
get an immortal Kingdom of glory! that they should go to bed late, and rise
early, and eat the bread of carefulness, as if they never could take too much
pains for the getting of earthly riches! yet think every hour too much that is
spent for the things of eternity; those which will not put forth their strength
in working out Salvation, they are guilty of neglecting it.

But in the fourth place, what are the causes from whence the general neglect
of this salvation may proceed.

Why, first ignorance, many are so ignorant, as that they do not understand the
common terms of Christianity; though Ministers do cloth their matter in the
plainest and most familiar expressions, yet they hear all as if the discourse
were delivered in an unknown language.

Secondly, another cause is unbelief, why men neglect this great Salvation;
though they have a competent measure of knowledge, yet they do not believe the
Gospel of Christ to be true, they don't heartily believe that it is the word of
God, though perhaps with their tongues they may profess to believe as well as
others, least they should be shamed by the company with whom they converse yet
in their hearts they have no steadfast persuasion concerning the truth of these
things; if there were not so much unbeleif, men would be a great deal more
diligent in working out their Salvation.

Multorum fides natat in labris, dum nulla est in cord, aut vehementer
languet; (as says Cyprian) many profess to have faith, when nothing but the
works of infidelity appear in their lives.

Thirdly, Hardness of heart, that is another reason; men are hard enough by
nature; but by customary continuance in sin, and by grieving the spirit, and by
slighting the means of grace, they grow harder; so that their hearts will not
be broken under the threatenings of the Law, nor melted under the promises of
the Gospel; A broken heart can no more neglect the Gospel, than an hungry man
can neglect his food.

But Fourthly, The greatest cause of all in the generality of men, is
earthly-mindedness; they are so taken up with the things of the world, that
they have no leisure to think of heaven; their thoughts are earthly, their
project and endeavors are earthly, their affections earthly; head, heart,
hand, and all conspire to carry on those designs, on which their temporal
advantages do especially depend. You know in Matthew 13.22. those hearers that
are compared to the thorny ground, they received the word, but the cares of the
world, and the deceitfulness of riches, choked the word, so that it became
unfruitful; they were never the better for it. If a person goes aside to
consider about the matters of his salvation, presently some worldly business or
other steps in and interrupteth his thoughts. The young man in Matthew 19. was
very fair for heaven; yet notwithstanding the world that was a bar to him; for
says the text, he went away sorrowful, because he had great possessions;
Christ and the world, they are contrary Masters, and they set their servants
about a contrary work; therefore none can serve both of these together.

I come to the first and last thing, which is to wind up all in some useful
application.

And first, If those which neglect the salvation of the Gospel, must
unavoidably perish: then let all take heed how they do attend and give ear to
the preaching of the Gospel.

For first, there is much of God and Christ in the Gospel, there are thousands,
amongst the glorified saints and Angels, blessing the Name of God for ever for
that which they met withal in the preaching of the word; if it were possible
that sin should be committed in heaven, that would be greater than sin here
committed upon the earth; therefore the sin of the fallen Angels was the
greater, because committed in a place, where God was pleased to make special
and extraordinary discoveries of his presence; the more of God there is in any
thing, the greater is their sin who abuse it; there is more of God in the
Gospel, then there is in all the works of the Creation and providence.

Secondly, We should have a care, least we be found guilty of neglecting the
Gospel, because that is the conduit, which God has appointed to convey the
choicest blessings to the hearts of his people; Those that live under the
faithful and powerful dispensations of the Gospel, let them know that they
enjoy the greatest privilege, which they are capable of receiving in this
life. Oh then what shall we think of those poor souls, which have continued
for many years, and are grown gray headed under the preaching of the Gospel,
and yet are never the better for it! every Sermon has been like a shower of
water, falling upon a rock, making no impression at all.

Thirdly, Therefore do not neglect the Gospel, because it is very quick and
lively in its working; it will quickly bring men into a state of Salvation, or
else sink them deeper into perdition, Heb. 4.12. the word of God is quick and
powerful (says the Apostle) and sharper than a two-edged sword, and pierces
even to the dividing asunder of the soul and spirit: Math. 3.10. Now the Ax
(says he) is laid unto the root of the Tree, and every Tree that brings not
forth good fruit, is hewn down and cast into the fire; The Ax is laid to the
root of the Tree; When was that? Why, when John the Baptist came preaching
repentance, because the kingdom of God was at hand; the preaching of the
Gospel was at hand; though the tree was barren before, yet it might stand
still, and not be cut down; but now when the powerful ministration of the word
comes, either close with the Gospel and be saved, or else refuse the Gospel
and perish, So Mar. 16.15, 16. Go (says Christ) and preach the Gospel to
every creature. He that believes, and is baptized shall be saved; and he that
believes not shall be damned.

Fourthly, therefore we should not neglect the Gospel, because it is that by
which we must be judged at the last day. Heathens that never heard of Christ,
they shall not be punished for not beleiving in him; for obligation unto duty
does necessarily presuppose the promulgation of a Law; but as for those that
have lived under the Gospel, without controversy they shall be judged
according to the Gospel; what would many a person give to know how it shall
speed with him in that great and notable day, when the Heavens shall pass away
with a mighty noise, and the Elements melt with fervent heat, when all the
beauty and bravery of the World, shall sink into a bed of ashes? what would
many a man give to know how he shall speed then? why, the Gospel tells you;
those which the Gospel does condemn now, they shall be condemned then; and they
that are acquitted by the Gospel now, they shall be acquitted then.

Fifthly, All that neglect the Gospel, they are near to a curse, etc. There is
a clear place for it in Heb. 6.7, 8. The Earth which drinks in the rain, that
comes often upon it, and brings for Herbs, meet for them by whom it is
dressed, receives a blessing from God, but that which brings forth briars
and thorns, is rejected, and is nigh unto cursing, whose end is to be burned;
the meaning of it is briefly thus, the good soil are those honest hearers which
receive the word, and bring forth fruit, and receive a blessing from God; but
that which bears briars and thorns, the bad ground, is those hearers which
receive the word, hear as many Sermons as others, yet they bring nothing forth
but briars and thorns, repining and murmuring against the purity and truth of
Gospel Ordinances; these are rejected, and are nigh unto cursing.

Then in the last place those that do neglect the Gospel, it will deeply
agravate their condemnation. The Sodomites that were consumed with fire and
brimstone from Heaven, you will say they were great sinners, and yet Christ
tells us plainly, it will be more tolerable for them at the day of judgment,
then for those that neglect the Gospel.

Secondly, if it be so dreadful to neglect the Gospel; then endeavor to
receive the Preaching of the Gospel, as Christ has appointed; receive with
meekness that ingrafted word which is able to save your souls. I shall only
name these three.

1. Receive it with reverence and attention, as those which must give an
account to the Lord of Glory for every Sermon which (...).

2. Receive it with thankfulness; we give (...) for the shining of the Sun, and
for the dropping of the clouds, and for fruitful seasons; (...) seldom do we
break forth into (...) Christ, for the unspeakable benefit of his Gospel!

3. Receive it with an holy hunger, and (...) after it; as new born Babes
desire the (...) Milk of the word, that you may (...) thereby.

FINIS.

