THE Charter of Londons ANSWER To A Scurilous LIBEL, ENTITLED, Its Last Will
and Testament, etc.
Mr. Babylonish-Bully,
THese are to Inform you that I -- Philojuris -- Loyal Charter of the City of
London, (not yet so Blinded with the mist of Ignorance, but that I can discern
between Honesty and Knavery, Wisdom and Folly) having the other day perused a
Paper, (much to the Scandal of the English Nation, whose Metropolis I Grace)
Entitled, My last Will and Testament, I could not but stand in Admiration that
Impudence or rather Ignorance, should be so predominant in any Person, to
Induce him to dispose of (as his Phranzy directed) my Privileges, Imunities,
Enfranchisements, and what not, without my Privity or any directions from the
least of my Loyal Members; as who should say there is the Moon catch it, and
take it, nay further, to proclaim me Mortus est to three Kingdoms, at a
Juncture wherein my apparent vivacity declares my Body Politic, with all its
Members, sound and Temperate, not Subject to any Heats or other disorders, that
have formerly afficted me: But whilst I was musing, who this Scribe should be,
one of my Children who had been Inquisitive in that matter, Informed me that it
was drawn up by Mr. Babilonish-Bully one of his Holiness Pentioners, who has a
long time gaped to devour me at a Morsel, and that it was contrived at a
Consult of Bethlehemites, where Olivers Porter sat Chairman, which welcome
discovery did not a little Calm my Anger, for if it be so, (said I) I rather
pity the Brain sick Rout, then cavel at their Simplicity, taking it for
Granted, that it is only a Prodrome or Forerunner of the dismal effects of the
next Midsummer Moon. Yet to let the World know that I am Alive, and in good
Health, I shall not think it amiss, in Vindication of my self, and to wipe of
the aspersions cast by this Infamous Tyburn Scribler, upon many of my Loyal and
Obedient Children, to declare my mind.

Then be it known to all my Neighbor Citys, that I owe my Original to the many
Royal Grants of the Kings of England, His Majesty's, my now Dread Sovereigns
Predecessors, concerned by Charters and diverse Acts of Parliament, and that
since I was first modelled into a Body Politic, consisting of Body and
Members, as one Man to Plead or be Impleaded, I have frequently and in most
urgent occasions, freely expose my Treasure, and hazzarded the Lives of my
Children to the utmost, in supporting that Royal Dignity, from which I received
my Life and Vigor to Act, and do whatsoever is Just and Lawful, ever
acknowledging as in Allegiance I am Bound, all Submission and Obedience to my
Lord and Maker, by whose Power I am Protected, and do Protect my Children from
those that greedily gape for their Destruction, hoping so to continue firm and
Inviolable, without any Let or Alteration, or if I should fall (which Heaven
avert) I doubt not but to rise by the Indulgence of the best of Kings, in
greater Splendour then (ever though to the great Regret of those) that grow big
with the expectation of my utter dissolution, As for the Halters and Newgates
mentioned in my Pretended Last Will and Testament, had they been decently
bestowed upon the Scribe, and those of his Confedracy, e're they with false
Rumors, Idle Reports, needless Fears, and Evil Representations of things, etc.
had divided my Children, so to work their pernicious Ends, and bring about what
otherwise was not in their Power, I had now rested in Peace, all had been Calm
as the Halcyon-Seas, a right understanding amongst my Members had continued,
and my Ancient Luster had not in the least been Impaired, had the Wolves in
Sheeps Clothing been detected; the Folds had rested Secure, but as it is, I
cannot persuade my self, but what is past will be forgoten and forgiven, and
that I and my dear Consort, Not yet a Widow, Gay as at first, may many years
walk Hand in Hand, and yet produce a numerous offspring, whose Loyalty and
Obedience to their Prince may raise their Envy higher, who would rejoice in
nothing more then my Anihilation, especially those who Viper like seek to
destroy what is gave them, being whose understanding are so shallow, that like
Quickset, they cannot discern the difference twixt a Windmill and an Armed
Knight. These are the greatest cause of my Grief, these are my ungracious
Children, which I could well spare, to Caper betwixt Heaven and Earth, yet to
have access to neither but like Mahomet, be famed for Hanging in the Air.

As Touching my Children aspersed by the Scandalous Libeller, who would needs
undertake to be my Scribe, though Indeed a very Pharisee or time Serving
Hypocrite, it is apparent that his Gaul has overflowed upon them, not so much
in hatred to their Persons, as for that they earnestly Labored to support me
in a time when nothing could more demonstrate their Gratitude for all the good
things that I have heaped upon them, and therefore seeing the Malice is
altogether Levelled at me, I shall only say, that their well deservings shall
stand Recorded to all Posterity, whose Candid Actions like Christial, will not
long admit of stains, but self Purged shine bright, though never so many
Vapors rise to Eclipse or dimm the Luster.

And now Mr. Babilonish-Bully, since in my Life time, nay, at a time when I was
least apprehensive of any danger, you would needs procure my Will and Testament
to Wrighting and exposed as portentious, freely distributing what was not your
own; It will not be amiss if I settle and dispose of a few Legacies, with far
more Justice then any thing you can pretend too.

Imprimus. To his Majesty; I tender all Loyalty and Submissive Obedience, as in
Allegiance and Duty ought and am bound to do.

Item. I appoint all my Lands, Tennements, Goods, Chattels, Enfranchisements,
Privilidges, Grants, Customs, Freedoms and Immunities, with all my Ensigns of
Honor, to remain in the care of those that now possess them, till other Loyal
Gentlemen are duly Authorized to take upon them those great Trusts.

Item. To those that seek to set my Members at Variance, and to Stir up
Divisions, and Crease a wrong understanding amongst my Children, to prevert
them from their Duty and Allegiance, I give Free-quarters in the Goal of
Newgate, and other such like Mansions within my Liberties, there to take their
several Degrees till they come to be exalted on the Triple-tree.

Item. To those Time Servers, who like Cammelions can change their Colors to
what they Fancy, and alter more frequent then Proteous their shapes, as best
Suits to their present purpose, I give all the Weather-Cocks from Newgate to
Ald Gate, to make them Head pieces, that by those Marks they may be known.

Item. To Mr. Babilonish Bully and his Scribe, in point of Civillity, for the
pains they took in writing and Publishing my Last Will and Testament, I
bequeath all the Whiping-posts from the Stocks-Market to Temple Bar, to their
peculiar uses, and strictly commanded my Beadles when ever they meet them, or
either of them, within my Liberties, without delay to put them in possession of
my Donation, and without Favor or Affection supply them with such Materials as
thereto appertain, and for so doing, this shall be their sufficient Warrant.

Item. I lastly Order, that my Grave Council, Learned in the Law, by whose
Wisdom I have hitherto been preserved in prefect health, be encouraged to
proceed in what they have undertaken, for the performance of which, and the
several particulars above mentioned, I bind my self and my Members, in one
Entire Body politic, in the Four Hundred Year of my Age, etc.

Entered According to Order.

LONDON, Printed for Langley Curtis, 1683.


