A CONFERENCE OF FAITH. Written in Latin by SEBASTIANUS CASTELLIO. Now
Translated into English.

Mark 9.23. All things are possible to him that believes. Phil. 4.13. I can do
all things through Christ. LONDON, Printed by J. R. for John Barksdale at the
Five Bells in New-street, near Shooe-lane, 1679.

To his Friend D. of C.
SIR,
I Confess I was glad when I heard you lately (being with you in your well
chosen Library) Commend Castellio; whose Dialogue De Fide, I told you I had
Translated, and taught Ludovic and Federic to speak English. I shall be willing
(as you moved me) to do the rest, if I see this does any good to the English
Reader, and serves toward the plucking up of that vulgar noxious Error
concerning Faith, rooted in the hearts of our People so deep, that there is
need of more hands to join with yours for the Eradication thereof, I commend
your holy Studies to the Father of Lights.

Your Servant, R. of N.

Theodorus Zuingerus in Theatro vitae humanae. p. 2808.
SEBASTIANUS CASTELLIO, a most Learned and most Holy man, when he came from
Geneva to Basil with his Wife, was so pressed with poverty, that he was near
famishing, unless JOANNES OPORINUS the Printer had sustained him by his
Liberality, and encouraged him to the Translation of the Bible. Having then
obtained the profession of the Greek Tongue, he had greater relief of his
poverty, especially his Fame (which yet he never affected (as all good men can
witness) drew unto him Scholars from the remotest Nations. At his death he left
Riches, worthy of a Christian man, seeking his Treasure in Heaven. Therefore
his Scholars of Polonia were at the charge of his Funeral, and they honored him
with a fair Elogy. He has left ample matter for Pious and Learned men to
exercise their liberality upon, a good number of poor Children.

He deceased 4. Call. Jan. An. Chapter 1563.

Philip. Melanch. to Castellio.
WHen I considered the Ornaments wherewith you are endowed, I could not choose
but love you, though we had no familiarity; and here are many Witnesses, of the
honorable mention I do often make of you among my Friends.

A CONFERENCE OF FAITH. The Persons LUDOVIC and FEDERIC.
The Argument.
What it is to believe in God: What is the Virtue either of Worldly or of
Divine Faith: What are the Impediments of Faith: By what means a man may be
able to hate himself, and to renounce himself by Faith, and by the Spirit to
kill the deeds of the Flesh. In sum, He that believes in God, and in his Son
Jesus Christ, is able by the Virtue of that Faith, and by the Holy Spirit, to
mortify his Flesh with the Lusts thereof, and to serve God in Spirit and in
Truth.

LUDOVIC. I have willingly heard bost yesterday and to day, your discourses,
Federic, and I have learned out of them many things whereof I was Ignorant: and
that especially moved me, which you showed, that God commands nothing which
cannot be done. For I was persuaded before, as is it commonly heard and taught,
that we are not able to Obey God's Precepts: which persuasion surely (that I
may confess the truth to you, Federic,) made me slack in my obedience, so that
I never put my whole strength toward it.


FEDERIC, And I have found the same by my Experience, Ludovic; nor could I
apply my self truly and seriously to obey before I did believe it possible for
us to obey. Whence I learned the force and virtue of Faith. For Faith drives a
man to the study and resolution to obey. To which study afterward, when aid
from Heaven is added, a man is enabled to do what he believes possible to be
done by him, and so is saved by obeying, as before he was lost by disobeying.
But it is a small matter to believe obedience is possible, unless you know also
the way, by which you may be able to obey, without which obedience no man can
be saved. I would have you assure your self, Ludovic, ours and others
Disputations are (that I say no worse) unprofitable, except they bring us to
obedience, and to the new man.


Lud. These things are true, Federic, therefore to the End I may reap some
profit from our Conference, I entreat you, show me by what way I may be able to
obey God, since by this your Speech of the possibility of it, I have conceived
a desire of Obeying.


Fed. O my Ludovic, would to God I my self were truly obedient, that I might
lead you to obedience as it were by the hand. Now it cannot be that I should
lead you further then I have gone my self.


Lud. Yet I believe (and methinks I see it) that you have made further progress
than I; wherefore, pray show me the way, at least so far as you have proceeded.


Fed. I will gladly do it, Ludovic, as I am able, God being my Guide. But I
fear least the difficulty and roughness of the way may deter you.


Lud. Be not afraid. I hope I am ready for all things, though difficult, so
that I may come whither I desire.


Fed. I pray God to confirm in you this Will, and bring you to perfection. To
begin therefore: Do you know what the Author of the Epistle to the Hebrews has
Written: That without Faith it is impossible to please God.


Lud. I know it.


Fed. Therefore it is first of all necessary, that you believe in God, if you
will be saved.


Lud. Go on therefore, Federic, to other things; for as to Faith, I have ever
from my Childhood believed in God, and truly I think there be very few, if any
at all, which do not believe in God.


Fed. Indeed, that is easy to be said, and so they are commonly persuaded: but
I fear least it be said rather rashly and of custom, than sincerely. For I
sometime also have believed the same, both of my self and others: but when I
came to Examine, I saw how far I was absent from it.


Lud. Do you think then, that I have not Faith?


Fed. Ludovic, I do not think that you have no Faith, but I think you have so
little, that it cannot be truly called Faith, or such as can save you. And I
pray be not offended. For having said you are ready for all things though
difficult, it is fit you should suffer this first, that I may show, you have
not that, wherewith you suppose your self to abound. And indeed the first step
to the knowledge of the Truth, is to unlearn Error: otherwise, there will be no
place for good Seed, where all is full of Thorns. Well then that we may examine
your Faith, When you were a Child, Ludovic, did you believe in your Father?


Lud. What do you mean by believing in my Father?


Fed. To have him truly for your Father, and depend wholly upon him.


Lud. I did believe in him certainly.


Fed. Therefore if you had need of any thing, as Shoes or Coat, or Bread, you
did run to him alone, and doubted not at all of his good Will toward you.


Lud. No more than I did of my own.


Fed. Then if any ill happened to you, you looked only to him.


Lud. I did so.


Fed. And if he promised you any thing, you doubted not of his fidelity and
performance.


Lud. No more, than if I had the thing promised in my own possession.


Fed. You were then not follicitous about his Office but your own only.


Lud. You say true.


Fed. Moreover, if he either commanded you any thing, or did any thing himself,
whereof you being a Child knew not the reason, or which seemed to you absurd,
nevertheless you did it, and not doubtingly enquired into his doing.


Lud. It is so indeed. For when at a time were brought fresh Grapes, and he bad
me tread them with my Feet, it seemed to me absurd, to tread upon such fair and
good Grapes, which I would rather have been preferred to eat. But because it
was my Father, I thought he commanded not without a cause, therefore I obeyed.
Also when my Father sometime pruned his Vines, and Grafted Trees, it seemed
absurd and unreasonable to me, that the Branches were cut off, which nature had
made, and which seemed fit to bring forth Fruit. But allways this thought was
in my mind: unless this were good, my Father would not do it.


Fed. Now let us come to God. You say you believe in God your Father, and so
you call upon him: Our Father which art in Heaven. It is right therefore, that
you should certainly depend no less on him, than you depended on your Father.
Therefore if you want any thing do you fly to God alone, nor doubt at all but
he will bountifully supply you with all things? Why do you stick at it? Why do
you not answer, Ludovic? Confess the truth, nor let a vain carnal fear move
you, which is wont to keep men from confessing their faults, because they are
afraid, least he to whom they are to be confessed be alienated in mind from
them, as vicious, or have them in less esteem. You are in no such danger with
me. For I cannot be alienated from any one for those vices, which I see
heretofore in my self, and deplore them, and I doubt not, they are in others;
unless they have already gone through the way, which certainly, you and I have
not gone through. Neither will I esteem you the less, if you confess with your
mouth before a Friend, what I know you confess in your mind already.


Lud. O my Federic, I am ashamed to confess, but shame is to be swallowed. I
truly am often, and very vehemently sollicitous and anxious about necessary
things, least Bread, or Wine, or other things fail me; especially when I see I
have little Money remaining, and have no ready way to get more Money.


Fed. But if you have your Purse full, or if you have any ready way of supply,
then you have no solicitude at all, or surely less.


Lud. It is so.


Fed. You trust therefore to your Money, or to your Industry, more than to God.


Lud. It is so certainly.


Fed. But when you were a child, you trusted your Father only.


Lud. Yes.


Fed. You see now, you do not believe in God, but in your Money, and in your
industry. I think these words seem to you violent, that you cannot deny, and yet
doubt, or are ashamed so quickly to confess. But compel your self, Ludovic;
many things are to be learned, which lie hid in our hearts, and we must come to
the very root; unless that be plucked out, we cannot be safe. Let us proceed.
In adversity, what say you Ludovic, is not your mind somewhat troubled?


Lud. Yes very much, I am not patient in adversity, and turn my mind every way
to all human remedies.


Fed. What do you concerning things promised? God has promised you, that he
will supply you with all necessaries for life, If you first seek the Kingdom of
God and his righteousness. Do you certainly believe his promise, so that you
are no more doubtful of his truth, than you were of your Fathers in your
Childhood?


Lud. Truly I am very short of it.


Fed. But if Henricus Rotenfeldius your neighbor, a Rich man, and (as he is
accounted) an honest man, had promised you three hundred Growns, you would for
some years be freed from that solicitude.


Lud. Yes.


Fed. Now God has promised you not three hundred Crowns, but all things
necessary, and you distrust, and are sollicitous.


Lud. You say true.


Fed. Therefore you believe in God less than in, I will not say your Father,
but Henrieus Rotenfeldius.


Lud. I am forced to confess the Truth.


Fed. And yet men may either through their falsehood or inability, not stand to
their promises; neither of which falls upon God. Wherefore by your distrust in
God, you falsely accuse him either of want of Truth, or want of Power.


Lud. It Is true.


Fed. But if you do not trust God for the food of your body who has never yet
failed you, can you trust him for a blessed and Eternal life, whereof as yet
you have never tasted? For weigh the matter thus. If the King should now send a
Messenger to you, by whom he would adopt you to be his Son and you believed it,
in what manner would you behave your self?


Lud. Verily, I should value all that I have as nothing, and as here a
stranger, have my mind already at Court. For such a thing happened to me in my
Youth. Being in a very mean condition, I was called into the Family of a
certain Noble and Wealthy man. Whereupon I found my mind so changed, that I had
no such thoughts as I had formerly, nor was troubled with any such care and
solicitude, as before; yea, when money was to be sent me from my Parents, I
sent them word they need not send it: for I should henceforth want no money. In
short, I formed in my mind the bravery of the House, and place, and persons,
where I should dwell, which yet I had never seen.


Fed. I believe you Ludovic: for I have had the like experience in my self. But
what if you had not believed that messenger?


Lud. I had continued in the same state I was in.


Fed. And what if one had seen you remaining in that state, would he not easily
have affirmed, you did not believe the Messenger.


Lud. Easily.


Fed. Now let us come to the purpose. God has promised to those that love Him,
such good things as neither Eye has seen, nor Ear heard, nor the Heart of man
comprehended. Let us, Ludovic, confess the truth here also. Should we not, if
we did verily believe this promise, be so carried in our minds to Heaven, that
no earthly care should trouble us, no solicitude or vexation touch us.


Lud. Yes certainly.


Fed. Now, when we rejoice in gain, grieve in loss, are sorely affected and
dejected with disgrace, exult and are glad of honor and pleasure, all which are
earthly things; is not this a plain Argument, that we do not believe Gods
promises, but cleave to an earthly inheritance.


Lud. It is.


Fed. What if God should promise us something which might seem impossible, as
to Abraham, to whom in his Old Age, by an Old and Barren Woman, he had promised
a Son?


Lud. Surely I fear, we should not believe him.


Fed. And yet Abraham was the Father of the Faithful: So that if we would be
Saved, we have need of such a Faith as Arahams was. Thus much for belief in the
Father. If we come to the Son, I fear we believe much less. For I do not mean
the Faith, which many think of, to believe that Jesus has done and suffered
the things that are Written of him. For this Faith the Devils also have. I
speak of a true and lively Faith, the mighty Faith, to which all things are
possible, which can even remove mountains of which the Lord says, Mark 16.
These signs shall follow them that believe, In my name shall they cast out
Devils, they shall speak with new Tongues; they shall take up Serpents, and if
they drink any deadly thing, it shall not hurt them. They shall lay Hands on
the Sick, and they shall recover. Do these signs follow your Faith, Ludovic?


Lud. Nothing less.


Fed. Therefore you have not Faith.


Lud. But they say that there is no need of Miracles now.


Fed. Neither do I require them now, nor were they then the works of all men.
For St. Paul writes, 1 Cor. 12. Are all workers of Miracles? Have all the Gifts
of Healing? Do all speak with tongues? But I require that which St. Peter
exacts, Add, says He, to your Faith Virtue. Surely it is necessary that the
Faith of every man, and of every time, have Virtue, if it be joined with Love.
Which that you may the more easily understand, consider what is the Virtue of
Worldly Faith. A man believes Riches to be good, and that he can attain to them
by Merchandise: Therefore he leaves at home oft-times a beautiful and beloved
Wife with tender Children, and ventures upon great perils of ways, Robbers,
and the Sea, and suffers intolerable labors, that he may fetch those believed
and beloved Riches, even from the farthest parts of the World. Such vigor and
strength does his Faith beget in him. For unless he did, believe he would not
venture. Thus it may be said: This man was enriched by Faith. What shall we say
of Letters? A Child believes Letters and humane arts to be an Excellent thing,
and worthy of his greatest pains. Therefore he falls to his Study with all his
might, night and day, endures poverty, cold, and what not? That he may attain
to that which he believes to be good. What do Soldiers? To obtain victory and
spoil, what kind of hardship do they not undergo? How many nights do they keep
Watch? How often are they distressed with Famine, so that they eat Mice,
Horses, yea their own Shoes, and afterward glory in it? Whence have they so
great courage? Whence, but from Faith? For they believed that to be good which
they desire. What do Huntsmen? Do they not often pass whole Winter Nights under
the open Air, when the Cold is so great that it breaks even the Stones? What do
Lovers? What evil do they not bear most cheerfully to please their Mistress?
and account themselves happy in suffering for her. Moreover the same virtue and
force of Faith is seen, not only in single Persons, but in Nations also. For,
whence do either the Italians so easily abstain from Drunkenness; or the
Helvetians are so constant in Battles, that they had rather dye than fly?
Truly from hence, that they are verily persuaded they ought to do so. And had
they so persuaded themselves in all virtues, they would be as excellent in all.
Many other things of this kind might be Collected. Such is the force of Faith
working in the Hearts of men. Let us now examine our Faith, and see whether the
Spirit of Christ dwell in us. Christ pronounces them blessed, who hunger and
thirst after Righteousness; and has commanded us to lay up our Treasure in
Heaven. Go too now Ludovic, do you feel in your self so great a thirst of
Righteousness, as you have felt of Water sometimes? Or so great a desire of the
Kingdom of God, as the Covetous man perceives he has of money? Do you watch
day and night, that you may please God? Have you ever bestowed a whole year or
two, upon the Study of Piety?


Lud. Nothing less.


Fed. What say you for the hearing of injuries? What strength have you? If one
strike you on the right Cheek can you turn the left? Can you Bless him that
Curses you? Wish well and Pray for him that revileth you? Endeavor his safety,
who plots your destruction.


Lud. Indeed I am very far from it.


Fed. Therefore you do not believe in Christ. For if you did believe, you would
obey his Commands.


Lud. But I did not refer Faith to this obedience.


Fed. What manner of Faith then did you conceive?


Lud. A belief of the free mercy of God, exhibited to us in Christ.


Fed. To what purpose then, did you think the Precepts of Christ are.


Lud. To admonish us of our infirmity, who cannot perform the things we ought
to do; that so we might wholly depend on Christ, who has performed them for
us, and will communicate his performances to us.


Fed. The Apostle also, Ludovic, trusted in the free mercy of God, and
nevertheless obeyed the Precepts of Christ. Neither do I place our safety in
our obedience and works, but in the free mercy of God. But this I say; if a man
does truly believe in the free mercy of God, he does obey the commands of
Christ. And if a man does only believe the free mercy of God, and does not also
believe his Precepts, threats, and promises, and all the words of God, his
Faith is lame and invalid: For the complete and mighty Faith, is that by which
they subdued Kingdoms, wrought Righteousness, attained the promises, and
performed things worthy of every considering man's admiration. Heb. 11. For he
does not verily believe in God, who only promises unto himself safety from his
free mercy (such was the Faith of the Jews, and still is) but who does also so
fully believe and assent, not unto some, but unto all the deeds and sayings of
God; as you said, you believed your Father when you were a child; or as we said
of Covetous, Luxurious, Ambitious men, which have a Faith not dead and lazy,
but Efficacious and active, never resting until it has attained unto the
things desired. Such is the true Faith in Christ, which works by charity.
Such a Faith if a man have not, he falsely boasts himself of Faith. Therefore,
whereas men commonly challenge to themselves Faith, when they do nevertheless
live in all kinds of wickedness, they Lie, nor have they a lively, but a dead
Faith; which does no more deserve the name of Faith, then a dead man the name
of a man. Christ himself sufficiently shows, this is not Faith, when he says,
he shall not find Faith on earth at his coming: And when to those that say,
Lord, Lord, have we not cast out Devils in thy Name? Done Miracles? Have thou
not taught in our Streets? He shall answer I know you not. Depart from me ye
workers of Iniquity. Really, he will take those alone for Faithful, who are
well doers and obedient. For they alone have true Faith, of whom it is Written:
These are they which keep the commands of God, and the Faith of Jesus, Rev. 14.
But Ludovic, if you have not that Faith which may make you Righteous, that is,
chaste, humble, benign, liberal, and endued with the rest of such Virtues, see
how far absent you are from showing those Miracles which Christ has said
should be the signs of Faith. I do not here mean Corporal Miracles given for
the Planting of the Churches Faith: But this I require, that the Believer in
Christ beget in others the same Virtues which Christ has begotten in him; that
is, that he make of Drunkards, Sober men; of Riotous, chaste; of Angry, Mild;
and of Unjust men, Righteous. For this is to cast out the Devils of Luxury,
Avarice, Anger and the rest. Likewise that he speak with new Tongues, that is,
fiery and burning, which no man may be able to resist; such as is the Tongue of
them, who speak not what they have read, but what they have seen with their
Eyes, heard with their Ears, touched with their hands; that is, what they find
thoroughly Imprinted on their Hearts, and believe as surely, as you do surely
believe, either that it is now day or that it will anon be night. By these
Tongues they are able truly and effectually to comfort the afflicted, to
encourage the tender, to give hope to the dispairing, to strengthen the weak,
to give counsel to the doubtful, and to perform other things of this sort,
which I much prefer before the doing of external Miracles, and pertaining only
to the Body. These things if one has not himself, nor can bestow on others,
truly I see not by what right he may challenge unto himself Faith, except that
perhaps, which the Devils also have, who believe there is a God and tremble
Jam. 2. But I speak of true and justifying Faith, which makes a man partaker of
the Divine Nature, and renders all things possible unto him. I have showed
above how great force Faith has in human affairs. The same we may perceive
also in Religion, whether false or true. The Turks believe they ought not to
drink Wine. The Jews believe they must abstain from things forbidden by the
Law, they do abstain. There are found some men, who pine themselves away with
long Fasting; some that Scourge their bodies, I will not say severely, but
indeed most cruelly, fetching blood: Some that for Religion sake undergo very
long pilgrimages, wherein they endure beggary, and many other evils and
dangers. What shall I speak of them that have castrated themselves? What of the
Circumcellions who (as it is related of them) that they might be Martyrs, and
make other men also Martyrs, killed themselves with many kinds of death, and
persuaded others to do the same. And all these things they did by Faith. For
had they not believed they must be done, they had never done them. In a word,
whatsoever almost men believe ought to be done, they are able to do. Now, if
their false Faith, and not only not founded in the command of God, but plainly
contrary to Gods command, has so great force; I pray what will not the Faith
be able to do, which is both commanded by God, and procured and confirmed by
him. Shall the Spirit of God have less strength in man than the Spirit of
Satan? Shall Darkness have more power than Light? You see what was the power of
St. Paul's Faith, 1 Cor. 4. Even unto this presedt time, we both hunger and
thirst, and are naked, and are Buffeted, and have no certain dwelling place,
and labor working with our own hands, 2 Cor. 11. Are they Ministers of Christ?
I am more: in labors more abundant, in stripes above measure, in Prisons more
frequent, in Death often. Of the Jews received I Forty Stripes save one. Thrice
was I beaten with Rods, once was I Stoned, thrice I suffered Shipwreck, a
night and a day have I been in the Deep. In Journeying often, in perils of
Waters, in perils of Robbers, in perils by my own Countrymen, in perils by the
Heathen, in perils in the City, in perils in the Wilderness, in perils in the
Sea, in perils among false Brethren: In weariness and painfulness, in watchings
often, in hunger and thirst, in fastings often, in cold and nakedness. Besides
those things which are without, that which comes upon me daily, the care of
all the Churches. Who is weak and I am not weak? Who is offended and I burn
not? This, Ludovic, this is that omnipotency of Faith, wherewith being Armed he
was able to do all things by Christ who gave him strength. And if we have the
same strength to obey, then we have reason to ascribe unto our selves the same
Faith: If not, let us not persuade our selves we have that which we want, least
we be like him who Dreams he has found a Treasure, and being awaked has not a
farthing.


Lud. O my Federic, I indeed have been in a Dream that I abounded in Faith, and
now being awaked, with your words, I see plainly, that I and all the World are
utterly void of it. For I neither feel in my self that power of Faith, nor find
it in the World.


Fed. That you are void of Faith, Ludovic, is a thing indeed worthy of sorrow;
but being so, you see you are such, in this case you are not only not to be
sorry, but to rejoice. As a Disease is ill, but the knowledge of the Disease is
good: for it cannot be cured unless it be known.


Lud. By what means then, or by what Medicine, may this Disease of my unbelief
be cured?


Fed. The Impediments of Faith are to be removed.


Lud. What are they?


Fed. That you have heard already of me in our former Conferences; but because
you have not well understood it, being perhaps new to you, (we are wont not to
retain words nor things which we understand not.) I will declare it more
plainly. Attend; what think you to be the reason that no man is admitted at a
Trial to be a Witness in his own Cause.


Lud. Because all men love themselves: and therefore will always either speak
for themselves, or at least not against themselves.


Fed. You say right. But if they will not speak against themselves, neither are
they willing to hear what is spoken against themselves. For truth which is
contrary to them, does not less displease them in the mouth of another, than in
their own mouth.


Lud. So it is.


Fed. And what they do not willingly hear, they do not willingly believe. For
no man is willing to believe the things which he is unwilling to hear. No man
easily believes what he would not: And almost all do easily believe what they
would. I will give you Examples. If one should say, that the Goods of
Christians ought to be common, whether would more readily believe this, the
Rich or the Poor?


Lud. The poor.


Fed. Why?


Lud. Because the poor should loose nothing by it, but rather gain.


Fed. What would the Rich?


Lud. They would hardly, or not at all believe it, because thereby they should
become poorer, which they would not.


Fed. What if one denied Souls to be delivered out of Purgatory by saying Mass?
Whether would more hardly believe it, the Priests, or the Lay?


Lud. The Priests: because by that opinion their profit would be diminished.


Fed. What if one should say Usury is unlawful to Christians? could that be
persuaded to them that live and grow Rich by Usury?


Lud. Scarcely.


Fed. And what if a man Teach this Doctrine, that men are not to be put to
death for Religion, whether would be more apt to believe it; They that have
Authority with the Magistrate, and are themselves Divines, and persecute or
desire to persecute others, or they that are contrary to them.


Lud. They that are contrary to them. For I have known some Divines, who when
they wanted that Authority and were infested for Religion, have taught that for
Religion no man ought to be infested: the same having gotten Wealth and
Authority, have both taught and done quite otherwise.


Fed. You see then, that self-love is an impediment of Faith. That is, men do
not easily believe what is contrary to that they love.


Lud. I see it clearly.


Fed. Let us now consider, if the same be the Impediment of our Faith in
Christ. In the Institution of Christ there be Histories, Promises, Precepts.
Almost all believe the Histories and Promises, wherein no duty of man is
required; nor do any Controversies among Christians arise, whether Christ has
done the things that are related of him in Holy Writ, or has promised the
things that are therein contained. But the Precepts, why do so few believe them?


Lud. Do fewer believe the Precepts than the History or Promises?


Fed. Do you doubt? First, that which the Masters are wont to teach in General
touching Gods commands; that they are not delivered that we should keep them,
but that we should acknowledge our infirmity; what is it else, then to derogate
Faith from his commands and not to believe them? For when the Lord has said,
All things are possible to him that believes: And St. Paul, I can do all
things through Christ that strengthens me; Certainly, whosoever does not only
not obey the Precepts, but believes it impossible for them to be obeyed, he
does not truly believe the Precepts. Whence it follows, that how few soever
they are that obey the Precepts (and they are very few) so few they are that
believe the Precepts.


Lud. But that which you say, All things are possible to him that believes,
seems to have been spoken, not of obedience, but of miracles.


Fed. 'Twas spoken in General of all the works of Faith, which we have
discoursed of before, alleging that place out of the Epistle to the Hebrews,
The Saints by Faith have subdued Kingdoms, wrought righteousness: For to work
righteousness certainly is the act of Faith. Moreover, if it were Gods
pleasure, that by Faith miracles might be wrought, which yet are not necessary
to man's Salvation; much more would he have obedience to his commands possible
by the same Faith; since without obedience man cannot be saved; and besides it
being not more difficult to obey, than to do miracles; and to obey being the
duty of all Believers, to do miracles not of all, as before we have demonstrated.


Lud. These things are true, Federic, but there remains one thing which I
desire you to Explain for me. You have said before, that almost all believe the
History, not the Precepts. But if men did believe the whole History of Christ,
and especially the Resurrection, the rest also, as I think would be believed.
No doubt if men did believe that Jesus Christ is Risen, they would believe
withal, that he is truly the Son of God, and so believe all his sayings
likewise. For this cause (St. John says) These things are Written, that ye
might believe that Jesus is the Son of God, and that Believing ye might have
life through his Name.


Fed. When I deny that they believe his Precepts, I would not have it so taken,
as if they believe not that he has given Precepts, and given them well, as is
worthy of the Son of God: but whereas they believe the things he has
commanded, either not possible to be done, or not necessary, or else interpret
them amiss, and according to their own will, not according to the mind of
Christ; I say they do not believe his Precepts, that is, not believe them well.
Which that you may the more easily understand, I will bring an example. When
God having brought the Israelites out of Egypt, commanded them to invade the
Land of Canaan, did they believe God commanded it?


Lud. Yes surely: otherwise they would never have sent their Spies into Canaan.


Fed. Why then did they not obey?


Lud. Because they did not hope the Canaanites could be overcome, nor think
that God had brought them out of Egypt to possess Canaan, but miserably to
perish in the Wilderness.


Fed. Therefore they did not believe Gods commands according to Gods mind, when
his mind was, that they should invade and subdue the Canaanites.


Lud. You say the truth.


Fed. Therefore they did not believe well.


Lud. Not well.


Fed. Are they then to be called Believers or Unbelievers?


Lud. Unbelievers, in that respect.


Fed. Directly Unbelievers, Ludovic, for God calls them Unbelievers in these
words, Numbers 14. How long will this people provoke me? And how long will it
be e're they believe me, for all the signs which I have showed amongst them?
Now if these be rightly named Unbelievers, they may also by the same reason be
called so, and said not to believe the Precepts of Christ, who interpret them
no better than these Israelites did the commands of God. For Christ has showed
us as many miracles, as Moses them; as seriously commands us to subdue our
sins, as they were commanded to subdue the Canaanites: nor are we less
contumelious and diffident in respect of Christ, if when he commands us and
promises strength, we deny it possible to subdue our sins, then they were in
respect of God, while they deny it possible to subdue the Canaanites: nor do we
less offend against the mind of Christ, while we say, what Christ commanded he
did not command, with a meaning that it should be done, or be possible; then
they while they drew the meaning of God another way from the sense of his plain
words. Wherefore in that I deny them to believe the precepts of Christ, I do
them no wrong. As to the place of St. John cited by you, it is to be
understood, as if one had said then to the Israelites: God has done those
miracles for you in Egypt, that ye may believe him, and believing come into the
rest of Canaan. But they came not all thither though that was the mind of God;
for some of them hardened their hearts. Which I would it were not so in Christ.
We see it is so, and that it may not be so, the Author of the Epistle to the
Heb. admonishes, citing that of the Psalm: To day if you will hear his voice,
harden not your hearts, as your Fathers, viz. hardened their hearts. Therefore
to return to our purpose, whereas those things are by them so studiously
selected to believe, which God is to do, and those refused which belong to the
Duty of man, I pray, what a thing is this? The beneficence and grace of God
which brings salvation to all men has appeared: How gladly is this received?
But that which follows, teaching us to deny ungodliness and worldly lusts, and
to live soberly, righteously and Godly in this present world, how few do
embrace this? Most men believe this is so performed by Christ, that it is
unnecessary for us to perform it. Again, Blessed is the man to whom the Lord
does not impute sin. This all men easily believe: But that which is subjoined,
and in whose Spirit there is no guile, this they believe is not possible to be
attained. Again, there is no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus:
This is pronounced with full mouth; for it is a most sweet sentence: But that,
who walk not after the Flesh but after the Spirit, is bitter and believed by
very few. Briefly, men easily believe, we shall mow with joy; but if you say we
most sow in tears, this part they cast upon Christ. Hence it is, that false
Prophets, because they preach pleasing things, and either feign pleasing
promises of God, or apply them to such, to whom they do not belong, easily find
credit: When the true Prophets, because they urge the threats of God, and teach
the truth severely, have place among the fewest, as Esaias exclaims; Lord, who
has believed our speech? These things being so, it is manifest, Ludovic, that
men are hindered from believing the truth by the love of themselves. But, if
selflove were quitted, they would believe nothing so easily, as Truth; being
naturally inclined to truth, and owning it presently as our ally, if there be
no impediment. Wherefore it is necessary, Ludovic, if you are willing truly to
believe truth, that is God, you must lay aside self love, or rather conceive
the hatred of your self.


Lud. O Federic, you persuade me thus, but it is no small matter to hate one
self, nor do I see the way to atain unto it, nor know whether I can do it, so
much do I love my self.


Fed. I know, Ludovic, it is a very difficult matter, and above humane
strength, but here we ought to remember what the Lord said of Sarah, when she
could not believe she should be great with Child, is any thing to hard for the
Lord? What is impossible to man, is possible to God; and under his conduct
nothing is to be dispaired of.


Lud. I beseech you therefore, show me the way whereby I may attain unto it.


Fed. I will do so, if God please: Lend me your ear. If I had a servant most
pleasant, kind and officious, and one who provided dainties for my palate, but
mixed with poison to take away my life, and you knew it, Ludovic, who love me,
what would you do?


Lud. Verily, I would with all speed and diligence advice you to take heed of
tasting those dainties, or loving that servant; for he would secretly take away
your life.


Fed. What if I should say, I am delighted with the obsequiousness of my
servant, and the daintiness of the dish?


Lud. I would admonish you, not to value so much the present pleasure, as to
loose your life for it.


Fed. What if your friend were in love with a flattering and painted harlot,
one infected with the French disease, and you knew it, what would you do?


Lud. I would tell him of the disease, and as much as I am able dehort him from
her company.


Fed. What if he said, I am delighted with her?


Lud. I would answer, Fishes also are delighted with the bait: But it is a folly
to buy so little pleasure with so great pain, or rather with death.


Fed. What if he say, I cannot choose but desire the pleasure.


Lud. I would admonish him, that if he cannot as yet quench his lust, he would
at least resist it and not obey it.


Fed. What if he obeyed it?


Lud. Then truly I should think him more foolish then the bruits, and worthy of
any Evil. For Fishes, Wolves, Foxes, Kites, though very hungry, yet if they
either see or suspect a hook, a snare, a trap, they abstain from the prey.


Fed. You say well, Ludovic; Thus then. Every man's flesh is as it were a
harlot, and that painted, which allures and delights him with her enticements,
and flatteries, drives him to sin and detains him in sin, and at last casts him
headlong into the death of his soul. Now man ignorant of the poison, embraces
pleasures and gives himself to them. Then there comes upon him his friend truth
minding him, that the wages of sin is death; and demonstrates the flesh, which
the man took for his friend, to be his capital enemy. Wherefore if you desire
to be saved, you must believe, that you have no enemy so pern cious as your
self, that is, your flesh, which hitherto because pleasing, you have favored
and obeyed, you must henceforth, because noxious and deadly, hate and resist.
Now if you cannot presently drive away the enticements of it (as indeed you
cannot for they cleave fast) truth says to you as of old to Moses: Go into
Egypt; for thou can; I will be with thy mouth, I wili enable thee to do what
thou can not. So truth speaks now to you, Ludovic; do what you are able, God
will make thee do more then thou art able. For example: Thou sit at a full
Table, and have eaten enough to renew thy strength, and to satisfy thy hunger:
Then comes in some dish more delicate, made to provoke the appetite. Here thy
flesh instantly rises up and suggesteth to thee such a thought: It is a
delicate mess; if thou eat of it, it will be pleasant. But the Spirit opposes
the Flesh, and thus admonishes. Take heed, Ludovic, of indulging thy pleasure,
there is poison in it. For first it calls off thy mind from God, then which
evil no evil can be greater; for whereas no man can serve two Masters, thou
can not serve God and pleasure; because pleasure oppresses the soul and
draws it down to the Earth, and separates it from God. Next, intemperance hurts
the body, so that if thou had no soul, thou ought even for thy bodies sake
to abstain from immoderate eating. I do not now require thee, not to be tempted
with the allurements of the Flesh, but not to obey them. But if you deny your
self to have power, not to obey them, you shall easily be refused. Suppose a
man did give you one Floren to abstain from such a dish, would you not abstain?
And will you not abstain for the truth? Do not you show truth is of less value
with you, then a peace of money? or, suppose one threatened you with a blow on
the face, unless you forbear; Sure you would forbear. See, God threatens to
strike thy soul, and do thou not abstain? Do thou not herein more highly
esteem thy soul, then thy body? I say the same of the rest. Thou would
fornicate, but because a Child is present, thou do not; see, God is present,
and thou do it. Surely thou have not so must regard to the presence of God,
as of a little Child. But if thou abstainest for fear of humane punishment, and
not of Divine, do thou not prefer men above God? Thou art angry with one and
would beat him, but dare not for fear of the magistrate, why does not the
fear of God keep thee in awe? If thou do esteem God as much as men, why does
the fear of God less prevail with thee then the fear of men? Thou do
calumniate another, God sees thy calumny, and do it thou? If men did see,
thou would not do it. Run through all things, Ludovic, whosoever does more
for the love or fear of men, or of any other thing, then of God, he does more
believe in men then in God.


Lud. O my Federic, my conscience witnesses to me that the things you say are
right and true, and thence arises sorrow in my heart.


Fed. What, when we conferred about predestination, or free will; did you feel
any such sadness?


Lud. None at all.


Fed. I believe you, Ludovic, for science brings no sadness, but rather
gladness; being that, which leaves the old man unhurt. For although you know
all mysteries, yet may you still serve the Devil. Now when we treat of
renouncing ones self, the Flesh is sensible, she must perish; and she does as
harlots use to do, when they are forsaken of young men, they torment them with
desire, and by all means endeavor to retain them: So that harlot, the Flesh,
which has bewitched all men with the cup of her impurity, so often as she
perceives a man willing to depart from her, vexes him with desire, and
leaves nothing unassayed, whereby she may hold him fast. Hence arises grief,
as great as the love of the Flesh was. So likewise, if you must leave your
country, such as your love to your country was, such will be your sorrow. Sin
is our country (for in sin has our mother conceived us) which without sorrow
cannot be renounced. This sorrow is that cross of which he speaks: If any one
will come after me, let him deny himself and take up his Cross and follow me.
And, if any man come unto me, and hate not his Father, and Mother, and Wife,
and Children; and Brethren, and Sisters, and his own Life also, he cannot be my
Disciple. And he that bears not his Cross and follows me cannot be my
Disciple. That you may understand what the hatred of ones self is, and what
Cross it brings, weigh it with the hatred of another. If you Ludovic, should
have one in deadly hatred, how would you be affected toward him, or what would
you do to him?


Lud. Truly I would heartily wish him all evil, envy him all good, grieve at
his prosperity, rejoice at his adversity. If one should tell me any ill news of
him, I should be glad and receive the Messenger courteously, use him kindly and
reward him. Farther, I would love and do good to my enemies enemies, and I
would hate and do ill to my enemies friends. All the words and deeds of my
enemy I would watch and carp, and by all possible ways and means, yea often
with my own harm would I hurt him. Lastly, I would kill him, if I could, not
with an ordinary but most cruel death, and blot out his memory from the Earth.


Fed. Now, Ludovic, turn this hatred upon your self. For you are your own
capital enemy, and ought to bear a capital hatred against your self, not
against others, who are not able to kill thee, that is, thy soul. Wherefore you
must wish to your self, that is, to your Flesh, all evil, even death it self,
and envy all good to it: You must grieve at the welfare and rejoice at the evil
thereof. If any one bring you ill news of the Flesh, you must rejoice in the
Spirit, and reward the messenger. Further you must devise and act all things
against your self, which men use to do against such as they hate with an
irreconcilable hatred, and never rest till the Flesh be destroyed. And because
no man ever hated his own Flesh, as S. Paul says, you must with all care make
a divorce and put it from you, that it may be no longer yours, the Spirit being
taken in the place, which has no more agreement with the Flesh than fire with
water.


Lud. O my Federic, let me confess the Truth, you have seemed to me to speak
stones.


Fed. I believe it, Ludovic, and it must needs be so. But be of good cheer, and
now begin to love me in the Spirit, because I am an enemy to your Flesh. For
this is for your good, nor can you be safe, while your Flesh is living.
Wherefore, Ludovic, take care as you tender your salvation, to hate your self
and renounce your Flesh. And I will show you an example of this renouncing. If
one deliver himself up to you to be your servant, he renounceth himself, that
is, his own liberty and will, so that henceforth, he serves not his own, but
your will and pleasure. Often when he wouid sleep, he must watch, at his
masters command: he must stay within, when he would go abroad; work, when he
would play. In a word, he so loses his own freedom, that if he be asked,
what he is about to do, or what is his will, he answers what pleases the
Master, in whose power he is. So it is with us, Ludovic, if we be Christ's, who
has bought us with a great price, we are not in our own power, or at our own
pleasure but Christ's. Therefore we ought not to do what we please, but what
pleases him. And justly. For, if he being the way, the truth and the life,
submitted his will to the will of his Father, so that he said, not my will but
thine be done; what is it fit for us to do, who are full of errors and
mistakes? Wherefore, when you are ready to be angry without a cause, restrain
your anger at the command of Christ: When you would indulge and give your self
to pleasure, you must abstain and bear grief: If you would be revenged, you
must forgive; if you would do evil to any one, do him good: You must weep when
you would laugh, fast when you would feast; bear disgrace when you desire
honor; poverty, when riches. Lastly, you must so depart from your own will,
that if you be asked, what you would, you may answer, nothing but what Christ
wills. And all this you shall do by Faith: For unless you did believe, you
would not do; really it is Faith by which men do all things. Now, we must
understand, what S. Paul means by that saying of his, we must go from Faith to
Faith. There is a first and imperfect Faith, whereby a man is driven to
renounce himself: This being increased, the man persevering; becomes daily
greater, till at length he comes to such perfection that he does believe all
Gods Words, precepts, promises, threats, as certainly as you believe it will be
day after night. Hence arises that Omnipotence, whereby he removes Mountains,
thus there is no pride so losty, no avarice so great, no luxury so vast;
briefly, no vice at all of such a magnitude, which this Faith cannot remove,
pull down and destroy. But before a man can come to that complete victory, many
sharp things are to be endured in the way, in renouncing himself, without which
asperity there is no attaining of that virtue: As a fig, or a grape comes not
to his sweetness, but after sharpness. Now, Ludovic, because I have not yet
gotten the victory, but sweat in the combat of renouncing my self, and am yet
far from the Crown, I will say no more of the victory, being a thing to me
unknown. But in the fight if you will be my fellow Soldier, I will (by Gods
help) give you the best assistance I can.


Lud. I truly, though my Flesh trembles and is afraid, am inclined by the
Spirit of my mind, and resolve to follow you. For I see there is no other way
of safety, then for a man to go forth of his own Nature, that he may put on the
nature of Christ, and to take care, study, contend and sweat, that he may
restore the image after which we were created. Therefore to Gods glory be it,
and to my salvation, at this instant I give up my self, to be your companion in
this way, under the conduct of Almighty God.


Fed. And I give thanks to God, for the good resolution he has put into your
heart, praying him to finish the work he has begun in you, and bring you to
this, that as you have served unrighteousness, so you may be henceforth the
servant of righteousness: Which he will do undoubtedly, unless you grieve, and
by disobedience reject his Spirit. Last of all, I advise you to have a rich
Faith, being you believe in him who is rich in mercy. Very often have men
offended, by too sparing and narrow a belief of Gods power and goodness.
Abraham and Sarah are reprehended for laughing, as if it were ridiculous for
God to promise them a Son, being both aged and Sarah barren. Zacharias the
Father of John Baptist, is struck dumb for a time, because he believed not the
Angels word. We truly are more propense to imitate the weak Faith (not to say
incredulity) of pious men, then to believe with a rich Faith and complete. Why
do we not rather follow them, who dared to believe all things? Elizaeus was
bold to ask, Elias Spirit to be doubled on him, a great matter by the testimony
of Elias himself, yet he obtained it. So sure it is, no Faith can be so great,
but the benignity and power of God is greater. All things (says he) are
possible to the believer. And whatsoever ye shall ask, believe you shall
obtain, and you shall obtain it. Remember that saying of Elizaeus who bespeaks
the poor Widow thus: Go borrow vessels of thy neighbors, as many as thou can,
God will fill them all. So let us, Ludovic, do our Endeavor and get a faith
capable of all good things, and let us confidently believe, God is willing and
able to make us love him with all our heart, all our mind, all our strength;
and will out of his goodness give us all things more abundantly then we can
conceive, in the name of his Son Jesus Christ our Lord: To whom be all Honor
and Glory and Dominion for ever and ever.


Lud. Amen.


Sebastianus Castellio TO Bonifacius Amerbachius A Famous Councillor.
BEing the admirable frame of Heaven and Earth, and the perpetual vicissitude
of Night and Day, do continually set forth the Praises of God All-mighty and
All-merciful; nor is there any Nation of the World, that does not hear the
Speech and Doctrine of them; it follows, that the God, who is Maker and
Governor of this Universe, ought to be Worshipped and Praised by all Men every
where. And, had not men degenerated from that goodness of Nature, wherein they
were created, they might have learned Piety and Religion, from this making of
the World, and from so great and perpetual benefits of God toward them; but
because, being corrupted by the transgression of the first man, they run
headlong into all Sin, and so unto Death, it pleased God, (in opposition to
this license and mischief) to deliver a Law of Holy living, which whosoever
would obey, they might avoid the evil of Sin and punishment, and attain unto a
happy life.

Now, because that Law, neither was extant among all Nations, nor was able
(through their obstinacy) to retain the Israelites, to whom was given, within
the compass of their duty; God at last sent his Son into the World, who might
take away the Partition Wall, and spread his Gospel amongst all Mankind, and
Redeem us by his Blood, and by the instinct of his Divine Spirit sweetly draw
us into the right and the good way, and so conduct us to blessedness eternal.

Wherefore, being obliged by so great beneficence of God, it is not only
commendable, but (if we would be Saved) neccssary for us to bear grateful
Minds, and to our power answer his benefits by doing our duty to him. And our
duty is (as Christ our Master and Savior has taught us in Brief) to love God
with all our Heart, with all our Mind, and with all our Strength, and to love
men as well as we love our selves. And, whereas it is the part of humane love,
to do good to all as you are able, and to hurt none; Divine love, because we
can do no good to God, exacteth at our hands, that every day we be employed in
celebrating his goodness, and Singing Praises to his Name. Whosoever is endued
with this Love, is carried unto God with such a strong inclination and desire,
that he esteems Riches, Honors, Glory, (for which others do and suffer all
things) nothing worth; and is so much delighted in God's Law, that he Meditates
upon it Day and Night, thinking all time lost, which is not bestowed upon him,
from whom all good things descend.

If this were deeply fixed in our minds, surely we should not lay out so great
a Portion of so short a life upon those Arts and Matters, which do so little
conduce either to the Glory of God, or the profit of Mankind; but not do it our
selves wholly to this heavenly Philosophy, or Sophy rather, that is, to Wisdom.
For indeed, this Discipline is not (as some imagine) such as cannot be well
learned without the aid of profane Letters. It were absurd, if not impious,
being profane Wits (whose Authors were not only ignorant of God but most of
them evil men) can be without this Heavenly Doctrine, to say, the Christian
Doctrine cannot consist without them, whose Masters pronounces St. Paul
foolish and unlearned. For, as God would have nothing in the Sacred Books which
is not pertinent to his Worship; so is there nothing wanting, which is
pertinent. We must not believe a Master infinitely perfect to have furnished us
with maimed and imperfect instructions.

Yet I say not this, as if I thought the use of profane Letters were to be laid
aside; for if one learn in them the Nature of things, and the actions of men,
to this end that he may adore and Honor God, the Author and Governor of them,
he does well, in my judgment, and seems to be conversant, not in a profane,
but a Sacred work: because he so follows that Study, that it may not hinder,
but serve and advance Religion. But to have good manners, and the right way of
life may be learned either from the trifles of Poets, or from Sentences of
Philosophers, being uncertain, and most part false and contrary each to other:
this were all one, as if men since the Invention of Guns, would Fight Battails
with their Fists. I conclude therefore, my honored Amerbachius, that the
sacred Scriptures are to be turned and studied Night and Day; so studied, that
both we our selves may frame our lives according to their prescripts, and teach
others committed to our trust to do likewise.

Basil. Aug. 10. An. 1547.
THE END.

