OF WISDOM.

THREE BOOKS.

Written Originally in French, BY THE Sieur de CHARRON.

With an Account of the AUTHOR.

Made English By GEORGE STANHOPE, D. D. late Fellow of King's-College in
Cambridge, from the best Edition, Corrected and enlarged by the Author a little
before his Death.

LONDON, Prin^ed for M. Gillyflower, M. Bentley, H. Bonwick, J. Tonson, W.
Freeman, T. Goodwin, M. Wotton, J. Walthoe, S. Manship, and R. Parker, 1697.

THE Sieur de CHARRON's Three Books of WISDOM Made English London Printed for
Mat Gillyflower M: Bentley H. Bonwick. J. Tonson. W. Free man T. Goodwin M.
Wotton J. Walthoe S. Manship and R. Parker.


TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE WILLIAM Lord Dartmouth.
My Lord,
IT is now near Two Years, since I was desired to employ some of my leisure
Hours in considering this Book, and putting it into a Condition of becoming
somewhat more useful and acceptable, than (it may without any suspicion of
Vanity be said) the former. Translation could pretend to be. A little Time
spent in the Perusal satisfied me, that there was Matter in it not unworthy my
Pains, and such as it was great Pity Men should want the Knowledge of, who
understand not the Original. And as unreasonable did it seem, that others
should be discouraged from enquiring into this Author, by the Misfortunes which
naturally attend even the best Undertakings of this Nature, when Time, and
Improvements of Language have given another Turn to Writing, and created a
Disrelish for every thing, which is not suitable to the Genius of the present
Age.

The greatest Difficulty which lay upon me, was that of finding Opportunities,
in the midst of those more important Cares of my Profession, which neither
This, nor any other Attempt or Consideration, however commendable or beneficial
in it self, must prevail with me to neglect. But here I found even my Duty
assisting; for That requiring part of my Attendance in a Place of somewhat more
Retirement and Ease than where Your Lordship's Father was pleased to fix me, I
made use of those Advantages to this purpose, and finished much the greatest
part of the following Book, in a way of Diversion, as it were, and unbending
from severer Studies, and a more Laborious Station.

The particular Liberty taken by this Author, is a Qualification, which the
present Generation, at least in our Parts of the World, will certainly be fond
of. But it happened to have the same Effect upon Him sometimes, which we are
not much to wonder if we find very frequent in those of less Judgment; and that
is, over-straining Points of Dispute, by affecting to say all, which either the
Case will bear, or which any other Person has said before. This gave Occasion
for my interposing sometimes with an Advertisement; and that I hope in such a
manner, as may not have injured the Author, while it designs the Benefit and
Security of my Reader. One thing only I cannot forbear adding upon this
Occasion, that in the midst of all his Free-Thinking, he constantly expresses a
due and absolute Deference for Revelation and Divine Truths. And This indeed
was by no means the Effect of his Profession, but of his Judgment; for Your
Lordship is too discerning, not to know, that, as a little and superficial
Knowledge in Physic makes Men Quacks, so it is not the Abundance, but the
Defect of Reason and good Sense, which makes them Infidels and Scepticks in
Religion.

How little the Sieur de Charron suffered his Thoughts to be under the Bondage
of any private Respects, will be sufficiently evident to any considering
Reader, from sundry Instances. Particularly from what he has delivered upon
the Subject of Government, in his Third Book: In which, though some Moot Points
may seem a little uncouth to Us of this Nation, yet if we reflect upon the
Constitution, under which he lived, we shall rather have occasion to wonder at
his admitting so few reserved Cases, than mentioning so many. Besides, that
even those mentioned would be of no mighty ill Consequence, if always confined
to those Conditions, and Occasions, which He has tempered and restrained them
with. But, passing from the Mysteries of State, and pressing unusual
Emergencies, to the Ordinary Measures of a Public Administration, there is
somewhat of an Air so full of Ingenuity, and such regard had to the Great Ends
for which Government was instituted, as a very gentle Application would think
an Encomium upon the English Constitution, and a sort of Prophetic Satyr upon
the late Oppressions of a People to whom he stood nearly related.

Upon the whole Matter (My Lord) I have Reason to hope, This may prove not only
a Book of Good Entertainment, but Great Benefit, to Persons who have the
Capacity, and will give themselves the Pains, to consider it. Were it not so, I
should not have thought it worth my Trouble; and should yet much less have
presumed to make an Offer of it to Your Lordship. I can with good Confidence
say, that no Man is better qualified to be a Master of the Subject it treats
of. The particular and intimate Knowledge of Your Abilities, which my being
Honored with the Care of Your Lordship at the University gave me, would bear
me out in delivering more upon this Occasion, than Your Modesty will permit.
And indeed the General Opinion of all that have the Honor of Your Lordships
Acquaintance, saves You that Decency, and has prevented me in this Point. The
Manly Sense, and Wonderful Penetration, which appeared very early in You, have
given me many pleasing Reflections; and I am sure are Foundation sufficient for
making Your Lordship a Greater Ornament and Honor to Your Family, than even
that Nobility which You have by Descent.

But I must beg leave (My Lord) to put you in mind, that besides Your Own, Your
Lordship has a mighty Stock of Honor and Esteem to set out upon, derived from
the Memory of a Father, than whom Few, if Any, of his Condition, are more
universally loved and admired. I say, loved, my Lord, for This, as a more rare,
so is it a more valuable Tribute, than that of Honor, to Persons of Quality,
and in Great Offices. For where so much is paid to the Station, we can make
very little Judgment, what is sincere, and what is the Effect of Formality, or
Fear, or Interest. But in His Lordship's Case there was something so
Distinguishing, in all the Respects paid to Him, as plainly showed a particular
Regard to his Person, and that the outward Testimonies were not Things of
Course, but that he had engaged the very Hearts of Those who paid them.

I will not so far seem to distrust Your Lordship's Acceptance of this Address,
as to make the least Apology for it. You will interpret it, I doubt not, as a
Testimony of the Honor I have for You, and a Desire to publish my having it,
to the World: And Your Lordship will do me the Justice too to believe, that
were it in my Power to give any other Evidence of This, than such an open
Declaration; nothing should be wanting on my Part, which might prove the
Sincerity of those Professions I am Proud to make, of being,

My LORD, Your Lordship's most Obedient, and Most Devoted Servant, Geo.
Stanhope.
Lewisham, May. 6. 1697.
A TABLE OF THE CHAPTERS of the First BOOK.
THE Introduction, Page 1 Chap. 1. Of the Formation of Man, Page 15 Chap. 2.
The First and General Distinction of Man, Page 22 Chap. 3. Of the Humane Body
and its constituent Parts, Page 25 Chap. 4. Of the singular Properties of the
Body of Man, Page 30 Chap. 5. Of the Advantages of the Body, etc. Page 32 Chap.
6. Of Apparel for the Body, Page 41 Chap. 7. Concerning the Soul in general,
Page 45 Chap. 8. Of the Soul in particular; and First, of the Vegetative
Faculty, Page 74 Chap. 9. Of the Sensitive Faculty, Page 76 Chap. 10. Of the
Senses, which are the most Exalted and Noble Parts of the Body, Page 80 Chap.
11. Of Sight, Hearing, Speech, Page 102 Chap. 12. Of the other Faculties, viz.
Imagination, Memory, and Appetite. Page 109 Chap. 13. Of the Intellectual
Faculty; which is Peculiar to the Humane Soul, Page 110 Chap. 14. Of the Parts
of the Humane Soul: And First, of the Understanding, which is its Noblest
Function; Imagination, Reason, Wit, Judgment, etc. Page 129 Chap. 15. Of the
Memory, Page 157 Chap. 16. Of Imagination and Opinion, Page 158 Chap. 17. Of
the Will. Page 163 Chap. 18. Of the Passions in general, Page 168 Chap. 19. Of
Love in general and at large, Page 178 Chap. 20. Of Ambitiom, Page 179 Chap.
21. Of Avarice, and the Passions opposite to it, Page 190 Chap. 22. Of
Sensuality; and Carnal Love in particular, Page 197 Chap. 23. Desires. Page 201
Chap. 24. Hope and Despair, Page 204 Chap. 25. Of Anger. Page 205 Chap. 26.
Hatred. Page 213 Chap. 27. Envy, Page 215 Chap. 28. Jealousy, Page 216 Chap.
29. Revenge, Page 217 Chap. 30. Cruelty, Page 221 Chap. 31. Grief, Page 223
Chap. 32. Compassion, Page 233 Chap. 33. Fear, Page 234 Chap. 34. The Second
Way of considering Man; which is, by stating the Comparison between Him and
Other Animals, Page 240 Chap. 35. Of the true Value, the Continuance and
Description of Humane Life, and the several Parts or Stages of it, Page 274 A
general Draught of Man, Page 288 Chap. 36. I. His Vanity, Page 291 Chap. 37.
II. Weakness, Page 301 Chap. 38. III. Inconstancy, Page 328 Chap. 39. IV.
Misery, Page 331 Chap. 40. V. Presumption, Page 360 Chap. 41. Of the
Differences and Inequality of Men in general, Page 380 Chap. 42. The First
Difference whereby Men are distinguished, which is Natural and Essential, and
derived from the several Climates of the World, Page 383 Chap. 43. The Second
Distinction, and nicer Difference, which regards the Souls of Men, or the
Internal Qualifications and Capacities of their Minds, Page 395 Chap. 44. The
Third Distinction and Difference between Men, which is Accidental, and relates
to their Degrees, Conditions, and Offices, Page 402 Chap. 45. Of Command and
Obedience, Page 408 Chap. 46. Of Marriage, Page 410 Chap. 47. Of Parents and
Children, Page 430 Chap. 48. Of Lords and their Slaves; Masters and Servants,
Page 437 Chap. 49. Of Public Government, Sovereign Power, and Princes, Page
443 Chap. 50. Of Magistrates, Page 459 Chap. 51. Lawgivers and Teachers, Page
461 Chap. 52. Of the Common People, Page 467 Chap. 53. The Three Sorts or
Degrees of Life, as it is common to the Generality of Men, distinguished and
compared together, Page 476 Chap. 54. A Life of Company and Business compared
with one of Retirement and Solitude, Page 480 Chap. 55. A Life in Common
compared with that of distinct Properties, Page 485 Chap. 56. A Town and a
Country Life compared together, Page 487 Chap. 57. Of a Military Life, Page 489
Chap. 58. Of Liberty and Servitude, Page 493 Chap. 59. Of Nobility, Page 495
Chap. 60. Of Honor, Page 503 Chap. 61. Of Learning, Page 508 Chap. 62. Of
Riches and Poverty, Page 512
OF WISDOM.
Three BOOKS.
The Author's Preface.
Wherein the Title, the Subject Matter, the Design, and the Method of this
Treatise are explained.
BEfore we enter upon the Book it self, it is requisite the Reader should be
well informed what he is to understand by that Wisdom, which is the Name, the
Subject, and the End of it; and after what manner it is intended to be treated
of in the following Sheets.

Now every one at the very first hearing, understands by Wisdom some particular
and uncommon Accomplishment, whereby a Man is distinguished and set above the
Vulgar, by a greater Ability, and more masterly Readiness, whether in Good or
Evil. For though there be not the same Propriety indeed in the Expression, when
converted to the worse Sense; yet it is used either way, and the Scripture it
self makes mention of some Persons Wise to do Evil. Thus then it does not by
any means import a really Good and Commendable Quality of the Mind, but in
general any sort of Knowledge or Skill, exquisite in the Degree, be the Object
and Employment of it what it will. In this Sense a Tyrant, or a Pyrate, or a
Robber, may have this Title applied to him; no less than a King, or a Pilot, or
a Captain; because all we intend by it is only Prudence, and Conduct, and a
perfect Understanding in the business of his Profession. Hence it comes to
pass, that Folly is opposed to Wisdom, not only as it denotes Extravagance and
Vice, but in general any sort of Indiscretion, or meanness of Seize. For
Wisdom gives us an Idea of something extraordinary and losty in its kind; as
the contrary does of somewhat little, and low, and short of the common Pitch.
Take Wisdom in a Good or a Bad Sense, Two Things are manifestly included in it;
First, A Sufficiency of Mind, which implies its being furnished with all things
necessary for its purpose; and, Secondly, The Excellency or more than common
measure of that Provision; for to give a Man right to this Denomination, it is
no less necessary that he should enjoy these Qualities in a great and eminent
degree. Thus you see the largest and most vulgar Notion of Wisdom, according to
which Men commonly tell you; that Wise Men are very scarce; that they who are
such, have a Right to direct and preside over Others; and, in matters of
difficulty, to be consulted like so many Oracles; from whence it is very
frequently said, that Men take the Judgment of the Wise, and let better Heads
determine for them But now, if we come to define the thing more nicely, and fix
a right Notion of it, we shall not find so general an Agreement. For Wisdom
means one thing with the generality of the World, another among Philosophers,
and somewhat different from both, in the Acceptance and Treatises of Divines.
These Three are the several Stages and Classes of Men, under which all the
World is comprehended. The Two last have the Advantage, and lead Men by Rules
and Precepts, and a strider Consideration of Things: The First looks upon
Things but very slightly, and take up with very loose and imperfect Notions of
them.

Now it may very truly be said, that there are Three sorts of Wisdom, Divine,
Humane, and Worldly; these relate and bear proportion to God, to Nature in its
primitive Purity and Perfection; and to Nature lapsed and depraved. Concerning
each of these sorts, the Three Orders of Men just now instanced in deliver
themselves, each according to their Condition and Capacity. But more properly
and peculiarly thus; The Vulgar are most skilled and conversant in the Worldly,
the Philosophers about the Humane, and the Divines about the Divine Wisdom, as
their particular Business and Study.

The Lowest of these is Worldly Wisdom, and this varies according to the great
Ends which it proposes to it self, Riches, Pleasure, or Honor. With regard to
these it degenerates into Avarice, Luxury, or Ambition; according to St. John's
Division of it, 1 John iii. 16.
All that is in the World is the Lust of the Flesh, the Lust of the Eyes, and
the Pride of Life. From whence St. James has given it those scandalous
Characters of Earthly, Jam. iii. 15
Sensual, Devilish. Now This is what both Philosophy and Divinity take upon
them to reprove, and endeavor to suppress and reform. They pronounce it to be
no better than Folly and Madness, and so accounted in the sight of God. And
accordingly you will find no mention made of This in the following Treatise of
Wisdom, except it be, to disallow, and to condemn it.

The Divine, and Highest of these Three sorts is treated of by Philosophy and
Religion, after a manner somewhat different from each other. As for what the
Common and Vulgar sort of People usually say, or are capable of saying upon
this Occasion, I omit it all, as too mean and low to have any place in our
Consideration, and rather a Profanation of the Subject, than otherwise.
Philosophers represent it as a Matter wholly Speculative, the Knowledge of
First Principles, and the Hidden Causes of Things; and lastly, the Highest and
Supreme Cause, GOD Himself; which with other abstracted Notions, is the proper
Business of Metaphysics in particular. This resides entirely in the
Understanding, and is its chief Happiness and Perfection; it is the first and
most sublime of all the Intellectual Virtues and Excellencies, which are
capable of subsisting without Probity, or Action, or any Moral Virtue. Divines
on the contrary do not so consine it to Speculation, as not to extend it to
Practice too; for they make it the Knowledge of things pertaining to God, such
as should enable us to form a Judgment of Matters to regulate our Lives and
actions by: And This they tell you is of Two Sorts; The One acquired by Study
and Industry, not much unlike what I mentioned to be the Science intended by
Philosophers; The Other infused, and coming from above; This is the First of
those, (which are sometimes termed the Seven) Gifts of the Spirit, with regard
whereunto he is styled The Spirit of wisdom; such as rests only upon the
Righteous, and the Pure; and, as the Book of Wisdom truly observes, Wisd. 1. iv.
will not enter into a malicious Soul, nor dwell in the Body that is subject
unto Sin. This is what the present Treatise is not intended for neither; but is
the Subject of my First Truth and those other Works of mine, which, are
properly Treatises of Divinity, and Religious Discourses.

From hence my Reader easily perceives that Humane Wisdom is the real Title,
and Subject of the following Book; of which it is fit some short Description
should here be premised, which may stand for the Argument, or summary Account
of the whole Work. Now, the Common Accounts of this Matter, as they are various
and very distant from one another, so are they all narrow and imperfect. The
vulgar and most general Notion of it, amounts to no more than Circumspection,
Address, and Prudent Behavior in Business and Conversation. This indeed is
like the Vulgar and a Thought worthy of Them; who place all Excellence in
Action, and Show, and outward Advantages; and consider no good Quality any
farther, than as it is observed and admired. They are entirely devoted to Eyes
and Ears; the Internal Motions of the Mind are of little or no Consequence with
this sort of Men; and therefore, in their Acceptance of the Matter, Wisdom may
subsist without either Piety or Pobity; for All they require from it is a good
Outside, and Appearance, and such Easiness of Conduct and Agreeable Management,
as shall approve a Man's Discretion and his Parts. Others again mistake it for
a Roughness and Singularity of Temper and Behavior; a particular Stiffness of
Fashion, Obstinacy in Opinions, Affected Expressions, and a Way of Living out
of the Common Road. And therefore those that value themselves upon these
Qualities they call Philosophers, when in truth, to return a little of their
own Jargon back again upon them, They are nothing better than conceited
Humourists, Fantastical and Capricious Coxcombs. This now, according to the
Scheme and Measures pursued in this Book, is, in plain English, Extravagance
and Folly. The Nature then of this Wisdom must be learned from some other Hand;
that is, from Philosophers and Divines, who have both explained and treated of
this Matter in their Moral Tracts. The Former handle it as their proper
Business. For they consider Men as they are by Nature, and with regard to
practice: But the Latter rise higher, and aspire to infused and supernatural
Graces, such as are Speculative and more than Humane; that is, Divine Wisdom,
and with Regard to Faith. Hence it comes to pass, that the Former is more
extensive and large, as undertaking not only to direct private, but public
Duties, Societies as well as single Persons are instructed by it; Whatever can
be necessary or advantageous to Families, Communities, Common Wealths and
Kingdoms, all falls within its Compass and Jurisdiction. Divinity on the Other
Hand is more silent and sparing upon these Accounts and Aims chiefly, at the
Eternal Happiness and Salvation of particular Persons. Besides, The Manner and
Air of their Treatises is very different; That of Philosophy more free, and
easy, and entertaining; that of Divinity, more plain, and authoritative, and
with less Pains to recommend it self to Men's Fancies and Palats. Philosophy
therefore, which is the Elder of the Two, as Nature must have been antecedent
to our Supernatural Assistances, tries to insinuate it self and win Men's
Favors, Simul and Jucunda and idonea dicere vitae.
Lectorem delectando, pariterque monendo --
Horat.
So as to join Instruction with Delight,
Profit with Pleasure --
Lord Roscommon. And therefore she dresses and adorns her self with Discourses,
Arguments, Turns of Wit and Flights of Fancy; Apt Examples, and moving
Similitudes. Ingenious Expressions, useful Apothegms, and all the Graces of Art
and Eloquence Divinity comes in a commanding strain, and thinks it a Diminution
of her Majesty to descend to such popular and mean Methods. And accordingly
there wants a great deal of that Freedom and Gaiety, and (if I may so say)
Cheerfulness and good Humor in this, which you are to expect in Philosophy,
which yet must be so tempered, as not to degenerate into Triste and Meanness,
but still continue to be truly Generous and Brave. It must be allowed, that
Philosophers have acquitted themselves admirably well in this particular; not
only in the Instructive, but the Moving and Persuasive Part; setting off all
their Vntues to the best Advantage, and taking Care, that all the Heroic
Excellence of them shall appear in its just Dignity and Proportions. Under
which Title of Philosophers I comprehend not only such as the World have
thought sit to Dignify with the Fame of Wisdom, as Thales, Solon, and those
that were of the same Strain, about the time of Cyrus, Croesin, and
Pisistratus; Nor them only of the next in Succession, who taught and professed
Wisdom publicly, as Pythagoras, Socrates, Plato, Aristotle, Aristippus, Zeno,
Antisthenes; who are all of them Heads and Masters in their Art; nor their
Disciples and Followers who afterward divided into particular Sects; but I
include likewise all those great Men who rendered themselves exemplary for
Virtue and Wisdom, as Phocion, Aristides, Pericles, Alexander, (whom I (...)
dignifies with the Character of Philosopher as well as King) Epaminondas, and
the rest of the brave Greeks. The Fabricii, Fabrii, Camilli, the Cato's, the
Torquati, Reguli, Lelii, and Scipio's among the Romans, most of them Military
Men and Commanders of Armies.

Upon this Account, though I do not refuse, or disregard the Authorities of
Divines, yet I have more frequent recourse to those of Humanists and
Philosophers in the following Treatise. Had I designed to prepare Men for a
Cloister, or a Life of such Perfection, as aspires above the Precepts, and aims
at the Perfection of Evangelical Counsels, then indeed my Subject would have
obliged me to keep close to those Authors: But since I am training a Man up for
the World, and forming him for Business and mixed Conversation, Humane and not
Divine Wisdom is the proper Accomplishment for me to recommend, and the Method
of answering my Purpose.

Speaking therefore in general Terms, and according to the Nature of the Thing,
We must, in Agreement with Philosophers and Divines, acknowledge, that this
Humane Wisdom consists in a Rectitude of the Man, when every part within and
without, his Thoughts, and Words and Actions, and every Motion is Graceful, and
Noble, and what is for the Honor of his Nature. For this is the Excellence of
a Man, considered as a Man; so that, as we call That Piece of Workmanship
Perfect, which has all its Parts entire, and is finished according to the
ni^est Rules of Art: He is in like manner said to be a wise Man who understands
upon all Occasions how to show himself a Man, by acting in perfect Conformity
to the Fundamental and First Rules of Humane Nature; Or, to speak more
Particularly, He that is well acquainted with himself in particular, and
Mankind in general; that preserves himself from all the Vices, the Errors, the
Passions, the Defects incident to him, as well from the inward Causes of his
own Mind; as the outward, proceeding from Custom and Common Opinion; that
asserts the Native Freedom of his Mind, and has a large universal Soul; that
considers and judges every thing, without enslaving himself to any; that
directs all his Aims and Actions so as that they shall agree with Nature, that
is, Pure, uncorrupted Reason, the Primitive Law and Light inspired by God, and
which shines still in every Breast; The Model by which the wise Man squares his
own private Judgment. That in his outward Behavior complies with the Laws, and
Customs, and Ceremonies of the Country where he dwells; that demeans himself
toward others with Discretion and Prudence; is always firm and consistent with
himself, pleased and contented; without any discomposure of Mind expecting and
entertaining any Accident whatsoever, and especially Death, the last and most
terrible of them all. All these Strokes or Lines, which go to the making up
this Idea, may be reduced to Four, that are the principal and most commanding
of all the rest. The Knowledge of a Man's self; Free and Generous Largeness of
Mind; The acting in Conformity with Nature which is of an Extent so large as
when rightly understood, to be singly and by it self a Rule sufficient) and
true Content and evenness of Temper. For these are Qualifications which never
meet, except only in the wise Man. He that is defective in any one of them,
does not come up to the Character. He that either mistakes his own Condition,
or whose Mind is in any sort of Bondage either to his own Passions, or to the
Common Vogue; that is partial, and tied up to any particular Notions, cramps up
his Thoughts, and cuts himself out from his Native Right of examining, and
judging every Thing. He that lives in Contradiction to Nature (that is, Right
Reason) upon what Pretense soever he forsake it; whether he be seduced by
Passion, or Opinion; He that trips and staggers through Trouble, or Terror, or
Discontent; and lives in dread of Death; This Man is not, cannot be Wise. Thus
you have in little the Piece, which this following Treatise designs to draw in
its full Proportions. Particularly the Second Book, which consists of the
General Rules, and a Description of Wisdom in the gross; and this indeed is
more properly mine, than either of the others; so peculiarly such, and so full
to my purpose, that I once had Thoughts of sending it into the World alone. And
what I have here described in Words, the Graver has done with his Style, in
the Frontis-Piece of this Book, which the Reader will find an Explanation of,
immediately after this Preface.

Now there are two Things, which principally conduce to this Wisdom, and help
Men forwards in the Attainment of it. The First of These is a Good
Constitution, or Temperament of the Brain, which makes us capable of such
Improvements, as our own Care and Industry shall be able to acquire. Of how
very great Consequence this is, and how far it falls under the Power of Men to
contribute to it, you will find at large in the XIII. Chap. of the First, and
the XIV. Chap. of the Third Book.

The Second is the Study of Philosophy; not all the Branches of it equally, but
the Moral Part chiefly; yet so as that the Natural be not wholly neglected
(...) this is our Candle to enlighten, our (...) to arre^t, our Rule to chalk
out the Way for us; It explains and gives us true Idea's of the Law of Nature,
and by this means furnishes a Man for every part of his Duty as a Man; whether
it concern him in Public or in Private; in Company or Alone; as a Member of a
Family, or of a State; it sweetens and takes off all the Beast in us, makes us
tame, and gentle, and good-natured; fashions and polishes this rude Mass, and
forms it into Wisdom. In short, This is the true Learning; all the rest a Man
is capable of is mere Vanity in comparison; at least it is in no degree
necessary, and in a much less degree useful. For here we learn both to Live and
to Die well; and this is the whole we have to take Care of: It teaches a
generous and noble Integrity, and Honest Prudence; and well advised Probity;
such as raise a Man above little Ends, and low Respects, and put him upon
Virtue from the more exalted and Divine Principles, for the sake of its own
Excellence, and the Sense that this is what becomes him to do. But alas! This
Second Help is almost as generally neglected, or as ill used as the former. For
the generality of the World are so entirely taken up with worldly Wisdom, that
they give themselves little or no trouble about this which I am now mentioning.

Thus Nature and Industry must both do their parts, in order to a Man's
obtaining Wisdom. He who has been kindly dealt with by Nature, and brings the
Disposition to Wisdom with him, in a convenient Temper of Brain, will find good
Actions and Manners flow very naturally from hence, and feel himself advanced a
great way, without his own Pains: And those Pains need not be very great, where
he is not so much obliged to conquer, as to promote Nature, and moves with
speed and inclination toward the Prize he aims at: But if the Temper on the
other hand be amiss, All will be difficult and strained: Industry must then
correct and supply, oppose and subdue Nature; as Socrates observed of himself,
that by infinite Pains, and laborious Study of Philosophy, he had at last got
the better of a very ill Disposition.

In proportion to these two Helps, there are on the other Hand two Hindrances,
or powerful Countermines, which carry Men into Folly; the one natural, the
other acquired. The Former proceeds from the Distemper of the Brain, whether
that be Original or Accidental; by this means it happens sometimes to be too
soft, or too moist, or the Parts of which it consists are too heavy and gross;
from whence proceed Dullness of Apprehension, Weakness of Judgment, Dark and
confused Notions of Things, flat, and low, and little Thoughts, such as we
generally sind among the mean and illiterate sort of People: Or else in the
other Extreme, It is too hot and dry, which disposes the Person to be furious
and bold, extravagant and intractable in Vice. These are the two Extremes, like
Fire and Water, Mercury and Lead, each of them improper for Wisdom, which
requires a strong and vigorous, but at the same time a sixth and steady Mind;
and such as in the midst of all its Gallantry and Firmness, may be manageable,
and yielding, and modest. This Second Desect however, of the two, seems the
easier to be redrest; the First is hardly curable.

The acquired Obstruction proceeds either from Want of all Instruction, or from
being Ill instructed; which, among other things, consists very much in strong
Prepossessions, wherewith the Mind was early tinctured, and so sinds it self
captivated to them, not able to get above these first Impressions, nor to think
freely and impartially. Such Men we commonly say are Headstrong, and touched in
the Crown, Whimsical, and wedded to their own Opinions: And, if to that
Obstinacy of Humor, there happen to be added any degree of Learning, This
blows them up into Presumption and Arrogance, puts Weapons into their Hand to
defend their Prejudices, finishes them in Folly, and renders their Disease
incapable of all Remedy. Natural Defects, and Acquired Prepossessions, are
indeed two very formidable Obstructions; and if Learning do not, as in truth it
very seldom does, cure them, it adds to the Disease, and renders them
impregnable. Which yet is by no means any Reflection upon Learning, or
Dishonor to it, as some may be apt to imagine, but rather a Commendation, and
to its Advantage.

Learning is, without all Controversy, a most excellent Weapon, but not fit to
be trusted in every Hand; and he who knows not how to manage it, will find more
hurt than good from it. For it makes sick and weak Minds giddy and conceited,
perfects and polishes Fools, no less than it does those of good Capacities and
Dispositions. A weak and injudicious Man knows not how to use his Weapon; on
the contrary it weakens and over-powers Him: He is oppressed with it, like a
Stomach overcharged with more Meat than it can digest, or an Arm that is
benumbed and born down by a Staff heavier than it can use. The strong and sound
Mind, quite contrary, plays with it dexterously, shows a masterly Skill in the
use of it, turns it to Advantage perpetually, forms his Judgment, rectifies his
Will, pours in this Oil to make the Lamp of Nature burn stronger and brighter;
is the wiser and better for that very thing which makes the other but the more
exquisite and more insupportable Fool. But, all this while, Learning is not
accountable for those ill Consequences, any more than Wine is guilty of all the
Excesses committed by it, or a good Medicine ill applied, for the Patient's
growing worse upon it. Now against these conceited half-witted Fellows, whom
Nature has disposed to Folly, and their own Acquisitions have perfected in it,
I denounce formal War in my Book, as looking upon them to be irreconcilable
Enemies to Wisdom; and the sit Title I can find to distinguish them by, is
that of Pedants; for which I have the Authority of several good Writers, who
have used the Word in this Signification. It is confessed, that in its Original
Language and proper Sense, it is taken in a very good and commendable Meaning;
but in latter Times, and other Languages, the great Abuse and Corruption of
Learning has given occasion for the fixing a very ill and contemptible one
upon it; a vile, sordid, peevish, stiff way, that makes no other use of
Learning, but for Gain and Ostentation, Arrogance and Presumption; In short,
all That which makes Learning despicable and derided, is signified by it. And
so this, like Tyrant, Sophister, and the like, is one of those Words which has
absolutely lost its first Signification, and is now become a Mark of Reproach
and Contempt.

It is very possible some Persons may be offended at my using this Term,
imagining that I design an Affront to those who make Learning their Business
and Profession. But they, I hope, will be satisfied with this ingenuous
Declaration, that I have not the least Intention of reflecting upon any Science
or Condition of Men, particularly not the Gown, which I have the honor to
wear, and to be one of those who are called Men of Letters, my self; my meaning
is only to charge a certain Quality of Mind, a sort of Souls which I have been
describing, of mean and low Capacity, but moderately provided by Nature, and
afterward depraved by Art and Study; Men prepossest, and obstinate, and sierce
in certain Opinions; and these are to be found in all Robes, and all
Conditions; as in truth there is a World of Mobb in the Pit and Boxes, as well
as in the Upper-Gallery. Vulgum tam chlamydatos quam coronam voco. Let these
Objectors but find me another Word as expressive of those Qualities, and I will
most readily consent to the Exchange. In the mean while, after this
Declaration, I think I may justly say, that whoever shall still be peevish, and
have any resentment upon this account, does but injure Me, and accuse Himself.
It Is true, there are other Terms of Opposition to the Wise Man; but not any, I
think, so extensive and significant as This. The Vulgar, the Ignorant, and
Others, which I frequently take occasion to make use of; These are opposed more
directly, like Low to High, Weak to Strong, Common to Scarce, a Servant to his
Master, Profane to Sacred: Thus likewise Fool is set the most directly in
opposition to Him; but then This is, as Crooked is opposed to Straight,
Vainglorious to Modest, Constraint to Freedom, Sickness to Health. But now
Pedant includes all this, and a great deal more, in the Sense which I apply it
to: For it gives us an Idea of a Man, not only different from, and contrary to
a Wise Man, as the rest of them do, but a Fellow that has the Impudence to
oppose and make Head against him; that comes armed Cap-a-pe, sawcily challenges
him to Combat, and talks magisterially and dogmatically. And, because in the
midst of all this Vanity and sierce Arrogance, he has some sort of Misgivings,
and thinks himself discovered; therefore he bears an inveterate Spite to this
Person who checks his Follies; is eternally censuring, condemning, running him
down; esteeming and behaving himself as the only Person who has any Right to
that Character of Wisdom; though in reality he infinitely exceed all others in
the exquisiteness and troublesomness of his Folly.

Having thus given my Reader a short Account of the Argument and Design of the
following Treatise, it may not be unseasonable to premise one Word or two
concerning the Order and Method observed in it. He must know then, that it
consists of Three Books. The First directs the Knowledge of a Man's Self, and
the Condition of Human Nature in general. This is laid as a necessary
Preparation to Wisdom; and largely illustrated under Five General
Considerations, each of which is subdivided into several Particulars. The
Second contains the principal Lines and general Rules of Wisdom. The Third
descends to particular Instructions and Circumstances, branched out under the
Four Cardinal Virtues, of Prudence, Justice, Fortitude, and Temperance; and
here every Part and Relation of Human Life, has some provision made for the
Duties it engages us in.

I add too, that I write and treat my Subject, not after a Pedantick manner,
and in set Forms, according to the Methods of the Schools; nor with regular
Arguments in Mood and Figure, nor with Pompous Eloquence, nor any other
Artifice whatsoever. I am verily persuaded what Tully says is most true, That
Wisdom, could she but render her-self visible to Human Eyes, would charm our
Souls, and ravish our Affections, and make every Creature strangely in Love
with her. De Offic. Lib. 1.
(Quae si oculis ipsis cerneretur, mirabiles excitaret amores sui.) And
therefore she need only discover her native Beauties, and is too noble, too
glorious, to use any of those little modish Garbs, to adorn and set her off;
but this I do too with a Liberty which all, perhaps, will not be well pleased
with. The Propositions and Truths are compact and close, but ofientimes very
dry, and served up crude and coursely, like Aphorisms, Overtures, or short
Hints of Discourses.

Some Persons, I am sensible, may be apt to think me too bold with some
commonly-receiv'd Opinions, and take offense that I pay them no greater
Deference. To these Persons, and the Fault they sind with my free way of
expressing my Thoughts; I answer,

First, That Wisdom, when above the common Standard, has a Right to this
Liberty. It is the Privilege and Jurisdiction of a Wise Man, to call Matters
before him, to examine and try them, to censure and condemn vulgar Notions,
which indeed, for the most part, are no better than vulgar Errors. And who
shall pretend to bar this Privilege? Why should he who has it, decline the
Exercise of it though he knows at the same time that this cannot be done,
without incurring the Envy and Displeasure of a great part of the World?

Nay, Secondly, I cannot but think, the juster ground of Complaint lies on my
side, and must therefore reprove Them for this foolish and feminine Niceness,
as a thing that is infinitely too squeamish and tender to bear necessary Truth,
or attain to sound Wisdom. The boldest Expressions and Truths are most becoming
a truly great Soul; and a Man who has at all studied the World, will not think
any thing strange or shocking. For this proceeds from Weakness of Judgment
only, which ought to be corrected; and a Man must harden his mind, and accustom
himself to consider patiently, even the oddest and most uncouth things, in
order to giving them a fair Trial. There is nothing so extravagant, but the
Mind of Man you see is capable of thinking it; and consequently nothing so
extravagant, but that a Man may, and will do very properly and well, to give it
the hearing. All the Care to be taken upon this Occasion is, that we be not
wanting to our Selves; That while we endure to examine every thing, though never
so generally exploded, yet we yield our Assent to nothing, but what is good and
decent, though never so universally commended or received. For the Wise Man gives
instances of his Courage and Greatness of Soul in both these Cases, whereas
these nice Persons betray an Effeminate Weakness and Delicacy, and are
manifestly defective in them both.

Thirdly, Whatever I propose here, it is only with an Intention to have it
considered: I pretend not to oblige Others to think as I do; I Offer my
Thoughts, but I do not Impose them. If They differ in Judgment from Me, it
breeds no Quarrel; I should injure my self extremely if it did; because this is
one of those detestable Qualities that concur to make up a Pedant. Passion is
generally an Argument that Reason is defective; and He that is disposed to any
Opinion upon One of these Motives, has seldom any great Mixture of the Other
with it. Wherefore then are these Gentlemen Angry? Is it because I am of
another Opinion? Let them give me fair Quarter at least, for I am not in any
Degree displeased with Them for differing from me. Is it for saying some things
not agreeable to their Taste, and that of the World? Alas, It Is for this very
Reason, that I mention them. I hope at least, there is nothing said without
Reason for it; if they can relish it, and discern the Force of that Reason,
it is well: If they have better for the other side of the Question, and such as
will overthrew mine, I am always ready to hear it; and shall be both pleased
and thankful for better Information. But let them not think to run me down with
Numbers and Authority, for These have no weight with me, except in Matters of
Religion only; and there Authority single is Argument sufficient to induce my
Belief of things, which my Reason cannot comprehend. This is its proper Empire,
but out of these Territories Reason reigns and has absolutely Jurisdiction, as
St. Augustine himself has very truly and very ingenuously acknowledged. It Is a
most unjust Usurpation over our Native Rights and Liberties, the very Madness
of Tyranny and Rage, to think to enslave us to All that either the Ancients
have delivered, or the Generality of the World entertained: But especially the
Latter, since the greater Part of Mankind know neither what they do, nor say.
None but Fools will suffer themselves to be led by the Nose at this rate; and
for such this Book I confess is not calculated; if it should meet with Popular
Acceptance, I should suspect it did not answer its Character. The Ancient
Authors ought indeed to be heard, and considered and duly respected; but to be
captivated by them, is an Excess of Veneration they must not pretend to. For
though a Man should hear all, and pay a Deference to some, yet he must assent
and yield up his Mind to none, but Reason only. And indeed put the Case we
might, and would be governed by Authorities; yet I would be glad to know how
this is possible to be done; or how we shall find such an Agreement among them,
as shall enable us to say, Authority is on our side. Aristotle, for Instance,
pretended to be the greatest Man that had then appeared in the World; he took
upon him to arraign and condemn all that had gone before him; and yet he said
and wrote more absurd things, than all of Them put together had ever thought
of. Nay, he is inconsistent with himself, and many times does not know what he
would be at; of which his wild Notions, concerning The Soul of Man, The
Eternity of the World, The Generation of Winds and Waters, etc. are undeniable
Testimonies. And in truth a Man who considers the Matter will find, that to
have all People of the same Opinion would be infinitely more prodigious and
amazing, than to find them otherwise. For Diversity of Opinions is as comely
and beautiful in the Minds of Men, as Variety is in the Works of Nature. That
Wise as well Inspired Apostle St. Paul allows a great Liberty, in these Two
Rules; Let every Man be fully persuaded in his own Mind; Romans 14. iii, v.
and Let no Man condemn or despise others of a different Judgment and
Behavior. And it is observable, that these Directions are given in a Matter
much nicer and of greater consequence, than what we now treat of. For they do
not concern Actions merely Humane, and External, and civil Compliances, in
which I have declared, that my Wise Man should not take upon him to be
singular, nor think it any Diminution of his Character, to submit and conform
to Custom and Prescription: But St. Paul's Rules are of a Religious
Consideration; and relate to such Distinctions of Meats and Days, as Men
thought themselves bound upon a Principle of Conscience to make; Whereas all
the Hardiness and Freedom I contend for, is only that which enlarges a Man's
Thoughts and private Opinions from Captivity and Restraint; and such as no
other Person is or can be concerned in, but what a Man is entirely and solely
accountable to himself for.

Fourthly, However, to give all reasonable Satisfaction even in this Point too;
In regard some things might seem too crude and hard for the weaker sort of
People, (those of strong and sound Constitutions I am sensible will relish and
digest them all very well,) in Tenderness and Condescension to such queasie
Stomachs, I have taken Care, in this Second Edition, to explain, illustrate,
and soften any thing that might offend their seebler Judgments. And accordingly
do now present you with a Book diligently revised, and considerably enlarged
above what it was before.

Lastly, I beg leave of the Reader, who undertakes to pass a Judgment upon this
Work, that he will permit me to fore-warn him of Seven dangerous Mistakes,
which other Persons by falling into already, have entertained a less favorable
Opinion of the Former Edition, than I have the Vanity to think it deserved.

The First is, That he would make a Difference between Matter of Fact and
Right; and not from what is related as Done, conclude That ought to be Done.

Secondly, To make a great Difference between Acting and Judging; and not
conclude from any Liberty of Opinion maintained by me, that I pretend to
vindicate the same Liberty in Behaviorr.

Thirdly, That he would not look upon all That as Resolved and Determined, and
Declared in Favor of, which is only offered to Consideration, Argued and
Disputed Problematically, and in the old Academick Way.

Fourthly, That what I relate from, or concerning other People, be not imputed
to Me, or pass for my own Sense and Judgment of the Thing.

Fifthly, That what is spoken of the Mind and its internal Qualifications, be
not appropriated to any Sort or Profession of Men, or extended to outward and
Particular Circumstances and Conditions.

Sixthly, That what is spoken of Humane Opinion, be not applied to Religion and
Matters of Faith.

And Seventhly, That what belongs to Virtue, and Actions merely Natural and
Moral, be not interpreted of Grace and Supernatural Operations.

Let my Reader but lay aside all Prejudice and Passion, and take these Cautions
along with him, and I am well assured, his own Scruples may be resolved by
them, the Objections raised by himself or others against this Treatise
abundantly answered, and the Design I had in it, cleared from all Blame or
Suspicion. But if, after all, he be still dissatisfied, let him come forth into
fair Combat, and attack me openly. For to traduce, and snarle and mangle an
Author's Reputation in a Corner, is I confess an casie, but withal a Base, and
Pedantick Practice, unworthy Men of Sense or Honor. And, since this Book makes
particular Pretenses to Ingenuity, and fair Dealing, I promise any generous
Adversary, either to do him the Honor of freely Acknowledging my Mistakes, and
submitting to his better Reasons; or else to examine his Objections, and
endeavor to make both Him and the World, sensible of their Impertinence and
Folly.

An Explanation of the Figure in the Frontispiece of this Book.
AT the upper end of the Page, and over the Title of the Book, you have Wisdom
represented by a beautiful Woman; She is naked; yet so that there is no offense
given to the Chastest Eyes, (intimating, that she needs not any Additional
Beauties, or the Assistance of Art to recommend her, but is natural, plain, and
simple; yet so as in the midst of Nature and Simplicity to have always a strict
regard to Modesty.) Her Countenance is Healthful and Masculine, Smiling and
Cheerful, Strong and Authoritative. Her Body Straight, with her Feet fixed
close together, upon a Cube, that denotes Justice, and Firmness. Her Arms
across, as if she were embracing her self; intimating, that she is happy in,
and satisfied with her self. Upon her Head she wears a Crown of Laurel and
Olive, which imports Victory and Peace. The void Space round about her,
signifies Liberty: She looks in a Glass, held by a Hand coming out of a Cloud,
at some distance from her, which presents her with the Reflection of her own
Face; for Wisdom is employed in the Knowledge and Contemplation of her self.
Upon her Right side are these Words, I know not; not thereby to give
Countenance to perpetual Doubt and Skepticism; but arguing, that she is mature
and cautious in Deliberating, slow in Determining; not positive or peremptory,
but reserving an Ear open for fresh Reasons, and not ashamed to confess, that
the best Human Knowledge is still dark and imperfect. On the Left side are
those other Words, Peace, and a little; See Book II. Chap. vi. Fig. 6.
which are the Author's own Device, represented by a Root impaled, wound about
with an Olive Branch, and incircled with two Branches of Laurel in an Oval
Form; implying, that a Competency is sufficient; and that Men have it in their
own Power to be easy and contented.

Below, on each side the Title, are Four little, deformed, wretched, wrinkled
Old Women, bound in Chains; the End of which is fastened to the Pedestal of
Wisdom; who despises, condemns, and tramples them under her Feet. The Two on
the Right side of the Title are Passion and Opinion; Passion has a meagre and
discomposed Countenance, intimating Disorder and Fury. Opinion has wild
staring Eyes, an unsettled and sturdy Face: She is supported by several
Persons, denoting the Extravagance and general Infection of vulgar Errors, and
how fond of, and how stiff the common People are in them. The other Two on the
Left side of the Inscription are Superstition, with an amazed Look, her Hands
clasped together like a Slave trembling for Fear; showing the Terrors and
Astonishments of People possessed with this Frenzy of the Mind: And Lastly,
there is Learning, which is a counterfeit, artificial, acquired, and Pedantic
Virtue; a Slave to Laws, and Customs, and Forms; with a swelled Face, a haughty
arrogant Look, bold staring Eyes; and she reads in a Book, wherein is written,
Yea, Nay; importing the Vanity and Confidence of Learned Men, their Eternal
Disputes, and the wide Disagreement of their Notions; and yet the Presumption
and Positiveness they betray in the midst of all this Difference and
Uncertainty. And Lastly, The Chains which terminate in the Footstool of Wisdom,
show that Captivity of the Mind, which all these Qualities bring Men under,
which they who study Wisdom labor to get above; and they who attain to it,
break those Fetters, and are wholly free from that miserable Bondage.

A Brief Account OF THE AUTHOR.
From the French.
PETER CHARRON was born at Paris, in the Year 1541. and Baptized in St.
Hilary's Church in the Clos Brunean. His Father was one Theobald Charron, a
Bookseller; and his Mother's Name was Nicole de la Bar. By Her, Theobald had
One and Twenty Children; and Four more by a former Wife: So that our Author had
no less than Four and Twenty Brothers and Sisters; and yet, which is very
remarkable, among all this numerous Family, there is not any Male-Issue now
remaining. The Condition of his Parents was not very plentiful; and their
Expense, it is plain, was great; but however, in regard they saw something in
their Son Peter, which was very forward and promising, and argued a more than
common Capacity, they took the Hint from Nature's Kindness, and put him out to
a very good School. After he had made sufficient progress in Greek and Latin,
he took care to qualify himself with other Sciences, and Parts of Human
Learning, and studied Logic, Metaphysics, Moral and Natural Philosophy. From
thence he proceeded to the Civil and Canon Law in the Universities of Orleans
and Bourges, where he commenced Doctor in that Faculty. At his return to Paris,
he betook himself to the Profession of the Law, and was admitted Advocate in
the Court of Parliament; Where Business often called him to the Bar, which he
always declared to be the best and most imporving School in the World: And
accordingly, he took care to lose none of the Public Hearings; From whence his
Mind took so strong a Tincture, that a Man may plainly discern the Effects of
it in his Discourses, by the proper Application of Maxims and Terms of Law.
This Course he continued some Five or Six Years; but foreseeing, that
Preferment this way, if ever attained at all, was like to come hard and slow,
(he neither having Relations among the Sollicitors and Proctors of the Court,
nor particular Interest, nor Spirit little enough to cringe, and flatter, and
wriggle himself into Business) he gave over that Employment, and applied
himself close to the study of Divinity. To this purpose he read the Fathers,
and eminent Doctors of the Church; and having a Tongue well hung, and a Style
free and easy, but yet refined and lofty too, above the rate of common
Preachers; he made use of this Talent, by the Permission of the Parochial
Clergy, and that with so good Success, that he quickly came into Reputation and
Esteem with the Greatest and most Learned Men of his Time; Insomuch that the
Bishops and greatest Prelates about the Town, seemed to be in some sort of
Strife, which of them should get him into his Diocese. Particularly my Lord
Arnaud de Pontac, Bishop of Bazas, a Prelate of excellent Learning, having
heard him preach at St. Paul's Church, in the Year 1571. was so in love with
him, that he took him away from the place of his Birth, and carried him to
Xaintes and Bourdeaux, and into his Bishopric of Bazas, and several other
places in Gascony, and Languedoc, where his admirable Eloquence acquired so
just Renown, that he had Proffers made by several Bishops, of being the
Theological Canon (or Divinity-Lecturer) in their Churches; and of several
other Dignities and Benefices, besides several noble Presents made him. In
short, he was Theologal at Bazas, Ars, Lethoure, Again, Chaors, and Condom
successively; Canon and Schoolmaster in the Church of Bourdeaux, and Chanter in
the Church of Condom. Queen Margarel, Duchess of Valois, was pleased to
entertain him for her Preacher in Ordinary; and the then King, though at that
time of the Reformed Religion, was extremely pleased with his Sermons, and
frequently did him the Honor to hear them. He was also a Retainer to the late
Cardinal d' Armagnac, Legate to his Holiness at Avignon, who had a great value
for him. He did great good by his persuasive way of Preaching, and by the
Excellencies both of his Life and Doctrine, for Two and Thirty Years together,
converted and established many. He never took any Degree or Title in Divinity,
but satisfied himself with deserving and being capable of the Highest; and had
therefore no other Title or Character but That of Priest only. He never saw
Paris in Seventeen or Eighteen Years, and then resolved to come and end his
days there; but being a great lover of Retirement, he had obliged himself by
Vow to become a Carthusian; and was absolved of it about the end of the Year
1588. He went from Bourdeaux coming by Xaintes and Angers, where he made
several learned Sermons, and arrived at Paris, at the time the States were
convened at Blois. Then he presented himself to the Prior of the Carthusians,
one John Michel, a Person of great Piety, who since died Prior-General of the
great Carthusian Monastery in Dauphine. To Him he communicated his Intention;
but it was not accepted, by reason of his Age, which was not less than Seven or
Eight and Forty. And all the most pressing Entreaties he could use were
ineffectual; for the Excuse was still this, That That Order required all the
Vigor of Youth to support its Austerities. Hereupon he addressed himself to the
Provincial of the Celestines in Paris; but there too with the same Success, and
upon the same Reasons alleged for repulsing him. Thus after having done his
utmost to fulfill his Vow, and himself not being in any degree accessory to its
not taking effect, he was assured by Faber Dean of the Sorbon, Tyrius a Scotch
Jesuit, and Feuardent a Franciscan, all very learned and able Divines, that
there lay no manner of Obligation upon him from that Vow: But that he might
with a very safe and good Conscience, continue in the World as a Secular, and
was at large, and at his own Disposal, without any need of entering into any
other Religious Order. Hereupon, in the Year 1589. he returned back by Angers,
where he preached the whole Lent, to the great Admiration and Benefit of the
People. From thence he went back again to Bourdeaux, where he contracted a very
intimate Acquaintance and Friendship with Monsieur Michel de Montagne, Knight
of the Order of the King, and Author of the Book so well known by the Title of
Montagne's Essays. For him Monsieur Charron had a very great Esteem, and did
from him receive all possible Testimonies of a reciprocal Affection: For,
(among other things) Monsieur Montagne ordered by his last Will, that in regard
he left no Issue-Male of his own, Monsieur Charron should after his decease, be
entitled to bear the Coat of Arms, plain, and as they belonged to his Noble
Family. The Troublesome Times detaining Monsieur Charron at Bourdeaux, from the
Year 1589. to that of 1593. he composed his Book called Les Trois Veritez, The
Three Truths, and published it in 1594. but without his Name to it. This was
received with great Applause of Learned Men, and they printed it after the
Bourdeaux Copy two or three times at Paris, and afterward at Brussels in
Flanders, under the Sham-Name of Benedict Valiant, Advocate of the Holy Faith;
because the Third Part of that Book contains a Defense of the Faith, in answer
to a little Tract concerning the Church, written formerly by the Sieur Plessis
de Mornay. The Publication of this Book brought him into the Acquaintance of
Monsieur Antony d' Ebrard de S. Sulpice, Bishop and Count of Caors, who upon
perusing and liking the Book, sent for Monsieur Charron, though he had never seen
him before, made him his Vicar General, and Canon-Theologal in his Church,
which he accepted; and there he put out the Second Edition, with his own Name
to it in 1595. enlarging it also with a Reply to an Answer, printed at
Rochelle, and written against what he called his Third Truth.

While he was at Caors, the King was pleased to summon him to the General
Assembly of all the Clergy of France, held the same Year 1595. Hither he came
in the Quality of a Deputy, and was chosen first Secretary to the Assembly. As
he was in this Attendance, an Invitation was sent him to preach at St.
Eustache's Church, the most populous Parish in the whole City of Paris, which
he did upon All-Saints-Day 1595, and two Days after. As also the Six Sundays in
Lent 1596. In 1599 he returned to Caors, and in that Year, and 1600. he
composed Eight Discourses upon the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper; as many
others upon the Knowledge and Providence of God, the Redemption of the World,
the Communion of Saints: And likewise his Books of Wisdom. While he was thus
employing himself, and enjoying that Retirement at Caors, my Lord John Chemin
Bishop of Condom presented him with the Chantership in his Church, to draw him
over into that Diocese: But having at the same time an Offer from M. Miron,
Bishop of Angiers, and being courted by Him, to reside at Anjou, this was most
agreeable to his Inclination. The making a determinate Resolution was a Work of
Time; for his Affection and Convenience drawing several Ways, kept the Balance
long in suspense. Anjou he looked upon as the sweetest Dwelling, the most
delightful Retreat that France could give him; but that Province being then
embroiled in Civil Wars, (for Bretany was not then reduced, and so like to make
a very troublesome Neighbor) Condom carried the Point. It happened too, that
the Theologal Chair at Condom was just then void, and this being tendered him by
the same Bishop, he accepted that, and resolved to set up his Staff there. To
this purpose he bought a House, which he built new, and furnished to his own
Fancy and Convenience; resolving to give himself all the Ease and Diversion he
could, and make the best of his growing Years, the Infirmities whereof would be
softened at least by good Humor, and a pretty Dwelling. After he was settled at
Condom, he printed those Christian Discourses mentioned just now, which were
Sixteen in all; and also his Books of Wisdom at Bourdeaux, in the Year 1601.
which gave him a great Reputation, and made his Character generally known: So
that Monsieur Charron began from that time to be reckoned among the Glories and
topping Wits of France. Particularly Messieur Claude Dormy, Bishop of Bologne
by the Sea, and Prior of St. Martin's in the Fields at Paris, wrote him several
Letters upon that occasion; expressing the great Esteem he had for Him and his
Writings, and as a Testimony of his Value and Opinion of him, offered him the
Theologal's Place in his Church. These Letters made Monsieur Charron desirous
to see Paris once more, that so he might contract a Personal Acquaintance with,
and express his Acknowledgments for the Favors of this great Prelate; and at
the same time, in hope to get an Opportunity of reprinting his Books and
Discourses, with the Addition of some new Tracts. For indeed the Impression at
Bourdeaux he thought wanted correcting; and upon a Review was not at all to his
Satisfaction.

In pursuance of this Design, he arrived at Paris the Third of October, 1603.
and in a convenient time afterward he went to pay his Respects to the Bishop
of Bologne, who received him with great Civility and Kindness, and repeated his
Offer of that Preferment, merely to have him near himself, and more within the
Eye of the Court. Monsieur Charron returned him many Thanks for the Honor he
had done him, and the good Intentions he was pleased to entertain for his
Advancement. And with his usual Freedom, told an Advocate in the Parliament,
who was a particular Friend of his, that he could be well pleased to accept
that Preferment for some Years, but that the Moisture and Coldness of the Air,
and its Nearness to the Sea, did not only make it a Melancholy and Unpleasant
Place, but very Unwholesome, and Rheumatick, and Foggy too. That the Sun was his
visible God, as God was his invisible Sun; and therefore, since he had no Hope
of seating himself at Bologne with Safety to his Health, he thought it much
better not to venture thither at all.

During his Stay at Paris, he lodged at one Bertand's a Bookseller, that he
might be near the Press, and correct the new Edition of his Books of Wisdom, of
which he lived to see but Three or Four Sheets wrought off. For on Sunday the
Sixteenth of Novembber, 1603. going out of his Lodging, about one of the Clock,
at the Corner of St. John Beanvais Street, he called to his Servants and
complained he found himself Ill: And immediately, while they ran to hold him up
he sell upon his Knees, and with his Hands and Eyes lifted up to Heaven, he
expired upon the Spot, without the least Agony or Appearance of Pain. His
Disease was an Apoplex, and the Quantity of extravasated Blood was so great,
that no Humane Help could have preserved him. The Body was kept Two Days, but
the Physicians being well satisfied that he was actually dead, and the Blood
too which settled about his Throat, beginning to mortify, and grow offensive,
they buried him with great Decency, and a very Honorable Attendance, in St.
Hilary's Church, the Eighteenth of the same Month; where his Father, Mother,
most of his Brothers and Sisters, and a great many other Relations were
Interred. The Day of his Funeral he had his Face exposed to view, and his Body
dressed in the Priest's Habit, as if he had been going to Officiate at Mass. And
this was done by a particular Direction of his own; for he had frequently left
those Orders in Charge, provided his Death happened to be such, as wrought no
mighty Change or Deformity in his Person.

As to his Person, He was of a moderate Stature, inclining to Fat; of a smiling
Countenance and cheerful Humor; a large open Forehead; straight Nose, pretty
large downwards; light blue Eyes; his Complexion Fresh and Ruddy; his Hair and
Beard very White, though he had not yet got through his Climacterick, being
about Sixty Two Years and a Half when he died. The Air of his Face was always
Gay, without the least Allay of Melancholy; his Mien Graceful; his Voice Strong
and Distinct; his Expression Masculine and Bold: His Health Firm and Constant;
he had no Complaints, either from Age or Indispositions, till about Three Weaks
before his Death. Then indeed he now and then, while he was in Motion, felt a
Pain in his Breast, and found himself oppressed with Shortness of Breath. But
this presently went off again after a little Rest, and fetching his Breath
deep. However he acquainted his Physician the eminent Sieur Marscot with his
Case, who advised him by all means to open a Vein; assuring him, that all his
Illness proceeded from fullness of Blood, and, if some Course were not taken
speedily to prevent it, a Suffocation might ensue. And accordingly it happened;
for in all probability, the neglecting this Advice of bleeding quickly, was the
very thing that cost Monsieur Charrou his Life.

His Books of Wisdom and Christian Discourses were printed off after his Death,
by the Particular Care of an Intimate Friend, whom he had charged with the
Inspection of them in hi^ Lifetime: And abundant Satisfaction was given to the
World, that the Author himself had in this Impression added, and corrected
several Passages. Some particularly, which not Others only, but Himself also
thought necessary to be changed from that first Impression at Bourdeaux, in
1601, By these Alterations he has explained his Meaning, strengthened his
Arguments, softened many Expressions without any Material Alteration of the
Sense. All which was done Principally in Compliance with the World; to obviate
the Malice of Some, and condescend to the Infirmities of Others. The whole had
been perused and approved by some very good Friends, and Persons of sound
Judgment; and till They had declared themselves satisfied and pleased, he could
not prevail with himself to be so. But above all, he submitted his Writings to
the Church; and hoped there was nothing there, that might call for a just
Censure, or Minister ground of Offense, either to Religion in general, or to
that Communion, of which he was a Member in particular.

As to his peculiar Manner of handling the Subjects he undertook to treat of,
whether in Books or Sermons, he was used to say, that there are Three Ways of
expressing and communicating a Man's Thoughts, which bear Proportion, and seem
to be adapted to the Three Several Faculties of the Mind; the Imagination, the
Memory, and Understanding. One of these proceeds upon Rules of Art, runs upon
Etymologies and Distinctions of Words and Things, Definitions, Divisions,
Subdivisions, Causes, Effects, Accidents, and the like. A Second collects
together what other People have thought or said upon the Occasion, and values
it self upon the nicety of quoting Books, and Chapters, and Pages: The Third is
free and generous, including and doing in a manner all that both the former
pretend to, but without any Ostentation of doing so, or enslaving it self to
Niceties of Method, and Rules of Art. The First of These he used to say was sit
for Schools, and to instruct young Beginners: The Second too much in Vogue with
Preachers and Orators, who in Effect only tack together other Peoples Notions,
and those too very often after an affected and impertinent Manner; for having
nothing to say for themselves, they make other People speak for them, though
never so little to the Purpose. In respect of this Way he declared himself of a
Judgment directly opposite to the generality of the World; That to stuff a
Discourse with Quotations was an Argument rather of Weakness and Ignorance,
than of Wisdom. That Men took this Course in all likelihood to set themselves
and their great Reading off to the World, which after all amounts to no more
than a good Memory: And This, if not attended with Judgment, is no such mighty
Commendation. That These things are oftentimes brought in at random, and all
Adventures; picked up from Commonplace Books, and Indexes, where they find
Stuff ready made up to their Hands, and so they vend it without more to do.
Allegations indeed have their Uses and proper Seasons; they are absolutely
necessary in controverted Points, where the Cause is to be decided by
Authorities; But then they ought to be used with Moderation, and in Measure;
and good Care taken, that they be home to the purpose; that Prudence be used in
the Choice of them; for generally the Fewer and the Weightier, to be sure the
Better they are. For it was his Opinion, that of all the Three Manners of
Expressing our Thoughts, This was the least valuable.

As for the Third, That indeed was infinitely the best, and the Persons who
make it their Method, are by much the greatest and most significant Men.
Antiquity and Authority were thus far of his side; The Ancient Homilists being
so many Examples of it, in whose Writings and Orations you very seldom, or
never, find a Quotation; and in truth the old Authors, of all Sorts and
Professions, seem to make sound Reason, and good Sense their Business. This
being the proper, the generous Food for entertaining Men desirous of Knowledge,
and of distinguishing Minds; This relishes and shows more of Judgment, and
Understanding, which are Nobler, and more Exalted Parts of the Mind, than
Memory. Lastly, This is infinitely the most Free and Noble in it self, and more
Delightful and Improving to Hearers, Readers, and the Person who makes Use of
it too, than any other Method whatsoever: For by this, Men are rather made Wise
than Learned; and more accustomed to examine and make a Judgment of things.
Consequently the Will is directed, and the Conscience informed this way,
whereas the rest are good for nothing, but to stuff his Memory, and
Imagination, with other Peoples Notions, or little trifling Niceties. This
Account I thought not improper to trouble the Reader with, because from hence
he will guess, what he is to expect in this Treatise, and see withal what kind
of Taste our Author had in Matters of this Nature.

As for what relates to his Temper, Manners, Conversation, and Actions, whether
in Public or Private, I shall need to say only thus much; That he made it his
Constant Business, to render them conformable to those Rules and Maxims
contained at large in this Second Book of the following Treatise; and was very
successful, and very accurate in the Undertaking: What Persuasion and Church he
was of, his Three Verities abundantly declare; as do likewise his Christian
Discourses, which were printed since his Death, and make a convenient Volume by
themselves. How strict and conscientious he was, may appear from this single
Instance; That, though he were possessed of several Theologal Canonries one after
another, yet he would never be prevailed with to resign any of them, in Favor
of any Person; nor to name his Successor; for fear of giving Occasion to the
Censure, of having upon private Respects put in an unqualify'd Man, and One who
was not worthy to fill such a Post. But he constantly gave them up freely and
clearly, into the Hands of those Bishops who had collated him.

The last thing I shall mention upon this Occasion is his Last Will; which was
made and written all with his own Hand in January 1602. and after his Decease,
registered in the Office at Condom. In This he first returns most humble Thanks
to God, for all the Mercies and Benefits which by His Bounty he had enjoyed in
his Lifetime; begs him most earnestly for his infinite and incomprehensible
Mercies Sake, in the Name of his Well-beloved Son, and our Blessed Savior
Jesus Christ; and for His Merits shed and multiplied upon all his Members the
Elect Saints, to grant him Favor, and full Pardon for all his Offenses; to
receive him for his own Child; to assist and conduct him with his Holy Spirit,
during his Continuance in this World, that he might ever remain in a sound
Mind, and the true Love and Service of Him his God; and that at the Hour of
Death, he would receive his Soul to himself, admit him into the Society and
sweet Repose of his Well-beloved ones, and inspire all his Holy and Elect
Saints with a Pious and Charitable Disposition, to pray, and make intercession
for him.

Then proceeding to the Legacies, he bequeaths among other things; To the
Church of Condom, provided his Corpse be Interred there, Two Hundred Livres
(Tournois) upon Condition that every Year upon the Day of his Death, High Mass
shall be once said in his Behalf, and Absolution once pronounced over his
Grave. He gives moreover to the Maintenance of poor Scholars, and young Girls,
Two Thousand Four Hundred Crowns, the yearly Income hereof to be distributed
for ever, the one Moiety to Three or Four Scholars; the other to Three, Four,
or Five young Maidens, at the Discretion of his Executors, of which he
constituted Five: The Master of St. Andrew's School, and Rector of the Jesuits
at Bourdeaux for the time being; his Heir, and Two of his Friends; the Three
Last to name some other Persons to succeed in this Trust after their Decease,
with This Qualification, that they nominate such only, as are well known and
reputed for their Abilities, Honesty, and Charity. And that any Three of these
in the Absence of the rest, might manage, and dispose things as they should see
convenient: Likewise he gives, and bequeaths to Mrs. Leonora Montagne, Wife to
the Sieur de Camin, Kings Counsel in the Parliament at Bourdeaux, half Sister
to the late Sieur de Montagne, the Sum of Five Hundred Crowns. And her
Husband, Monsieur Camin, he constitutes his sole Heir; He paying the Charges,
and Legacies contained in his Will, amounting in the whole to about Fifteen
Thousand Livres Tournois, in the Gross Sum.

What has been thus lightly touched upon, is a sufficient Evidence how
Religious and Conscientious a Person Monsieur Charron was; that he feared God,
led a pious and good Life, was Charitably disposed; a Person of Wisdom and
Conduct, Serious and Considerate; a great Philosopher, an eloquent Orator, a
famous and powerful Preacher; richly furnished and adorned with the most
excellent Virtues and Graces both Moral and Divine: Such as made him very
remarkable and singular; and deservedly gave him the Character of a Good Man
and a good Christian; such as preserve a great Honor and Esteem for his Memory
among Persons of Worth and Virtue, and will continue to do so, as long as the
World shall last.

OF WISDOM, THE FIRST BOOK; Which consists of the Knowledge of a Man's own
self; and the Condition of Humane Nature in general.
An Exhortation to the Study and Knowledge of ones self.
The Introduction to this whole First Book.
Knowledge of our selves. This is in Truth the Foundation, upon which all
Wisdom is built, the direct and high Road to all Happiness. And sure no Folly
can be compared to that which draws off Men's Attention, and employs their
Diligence and Pains in the Search of other Objects, and fixes them every where,
any where, rather than upon themselves: For when all is done, the true Learning
is at home, and the proper Science and Subject for Man's Contemplation, is Man
himself.

The Dictates of Universal Reason.
But the Matter is quite otherwise: For God, Nature, Wise Men, the World, All
conspire to inculcate it; and both by the Instructions they give, and the
Examples they set, preach this Doctrine, and loudly call upon Man to make
Himself the Employment of his own Thoughts, and the Object of his own Studies.
God we know, is perpetually taken up with the Contemplation of himself; and the
unspeakable Happiness, as well as constant Business of that vast Eternity, is
the viewing, considering and knowing his own infinite Perfections.

The World is so contrived, as to have all its Eyes turned inward; and the
several Parts of this Universe are ever beholding the Beauties and Conveniences
of themselves, or of one another: For Heaven, and Earth, and Air, and Sea may
seem so many independent Bodies, yet are they in reality but so many distinct
Parts of one Body; and the mutual Regards of these to each other, are but the
several Prospects which one vast united Whole takes of it self. So perpetually
are the Eyes of the World open upon it self, so necessarily contracted and
determined to it self alone. But why should we go abroad for Arguments, who
have such convincing ones at home? For Man has this Engagement to study and
know Himself, which no other Part of the World has, that it is Natural to him
to think. This is the peculiar Character, the very Essence of Man, and nothing
is so near, nothing presents it self so immediately to his Thought, as Himself.
So that Nature here has plainly taught our Duty, and showed that this is the
Work she cuts out for every Man. Nothing can be so easy, as for a Man to
meditate, and entertain his Thoughts. It is incomparably the most frequent,
most common, most natural Practice. Thought is the Food, the Support, the Life
of the Mind; it must needs be so indeed, since the very Cujus vivere est
cogitare.
Essence of Mind is Cogitation. And where, I pray, shall this Mind begin? where
will you find a more proper Subject for its Exercise and Entertainment than its
own self? Can there be any more natural, any that has a greater Right to this
Contemplation? any that is nearer related, or that more highly concerns it to
be well acquainted with? Certainly to ramble abroad and fix upon Foreign
Matters, and at the same time quite overlook and forget ones self, is the
greatest Injustice, and the most unnatural Neglect that can be. No doubt, every
Man's true Business, and the Thing he is properly called to, is the thinking of
Himself, and being well employed to see how Matters go at home. These are our
Trade and our Concern; the rest but Entertainment and Diversion. And thus we
see it is in every other Creature. Each of these takes care of it self, makes
the Study of its self the first and principal Business, has Bounds set to its
Desires, and employs not it self, nor has any Aim beyond such a certain
Compass: And yet thou, O vain Man, who wilt be grasping at the Universe, who
pretendest to Knowledge unlimited, and take upon thee to control and to
judge every thing, art perfectly ignorant of thy own self, and not at any Pains
to be otherwise. Thus whilst thou labourest to render thy self the most
accomplished Part of the Creation; whilst thou sit like a Censor upon
Nature, and determinest magisterially, and with an Air of Wisdom; Thou, in
reality, art the greatest Ignorant; Thou, all the while, the only Fool in the
whole World: Thou art the emptiest and most wanting, the most impotent and most
wretched; and yet in despite of all these Mortifications, the proudest and
most conceited, the most arrogant and disdainful Creature upon Earth. Look at
home then for shame; turn thine Eyes inward, and employ thy Senses there. Call
back thy wandering Mind, thy Understanding and thy Will, which rove and spend
their Strength unprofitably abroad, and fix them in the Consideration of
themselves. Thou art Busy, and yet Negligent; Beggarly, and yet profuse: For
thou losest and wastest thy self in things without, and forgettest quite what
is thy own within. Thus thou art a Thief and a Traitor to thy self: Restore
then what thou have thus falsely stolen away; and instead of gazing round, and
looking always before thee, collect thy self, and confine thy Thoughts at home:
Look diligently within thee; search curiously there, and know thy self
perfectly. Thus our wise Masters have advised.

Nosce teipsum! -- nec te quaesiveris extra.
Respue quod non es. --
Pers. Sat. 1. Tecum habita, and noris quam sit tibi curta supellex. Pers. Sat.
4.
Dryden.
Dryden.
Weigh no Merit by the common Scale.
The Conscience is the Test of every Mind;
Seek not thy self without thy self to find.
Please not thy self the flattering Crowd to hear;
It Is fulsom Stuff to feed thy itching Ear.
Reject the nauseous Praises of the Times: --
Survey thy Soul; Dryden. Eng. Pers.
not what thou do appear,
But what thou art, and find the Beggar there.
-- Tu te consule.
Teipsum concute, nunquid vitiorum,
Inseverit olim natura, aut etiam consuerudo mala.

Sift well thy Soul, its Product nicely view,
And learn from whence thy Tares and Darnel grew;
Which are to Nature, which to Custom due.
If the thin Crop sprung from a Soil too lean,
Or long neglected Weeds have choked the generous Grain.
Knowledge of a Man's self is a Step to the Knowledge of God: The best and
shortest Method we can possibly take of raising our Minds up to Heaven. A State
leading to Divine Wisdom.
It must needs be so, because there is no other thing capable of being known by
us, which carries such lively Strokes, such express Images and Characters, such
clear and convincing Testimonies of God, as Man does: And also because whatever
there is of this kind, may be more perfectly known by us: For a Man must be of
necessity more sensible of those Faculties and Motions, which are within
himself, and better qualified to give an Account of them, than he can be of
those which belong to any other Creature; because these are at some distance
from him, and he cannot possibly be alike conscious of them. Mirabilis facta
est scientia tua. i. e. tui ex me.
Thou have fashioned and closed me in, Psalm 1 39.5.6.
and laid thy hand upon me: therefore is thy Knowledge become wonderful. That
is, The Knowledge of thea, which results from the Contemplation of my self, and
the Resemblance of the Humane to the Divine Nature (as some interpret that
Passage.) From hence perhaps it was, that Apollo (who among the Heathens was
esteemed) the God of Knowledge and of Light, had this Inscription KNOW THY
SELF, engraven in Characters of Gold upon the Front of his Temple, as a
necessary Greeting, and Advertisement from the God, to all that should approach
him; intimating that this was the first Motion from Ignorance and Darkness; the
most necessary Qualification for gaining Access to such a Deity: That upon
these Terms only they could be admitted to his Temple, and fit for his Worship;
and that all who were not acquainted with themselves, must be excluded from
that Place and Privilege. Cant. 1.8.
(...) O pulcherrima, egredete. and abi post hoedos tuos.
If thou know not, who thou art, O thou fairest among Women, go thy way forth
and follow thy Kids.

Would a Man make it his Business (as every Man sure ought to do) to lead the
most regular, It disposes Men to be wise.
composed, and pleasant Life that can be, we need go no further to fetch
Instructions for it, than our own selves. Had we but the Diligence and
Application, as we have the Capacity and the Opportunity to learn, every Man
would be able to teach himself more and better than all the Books in the World,
and all his poring there can ever teach him.

He that shall remember, and critically observe the extravagant Sallies of his
Anger, to what Furies and Frenzies this raging Fever of the Mind has formerly
transported him, will more distinctly see the Monstrous Deformity of this
Passion, and conceive a juster Abhorrence, and more irreconcilable Hatred
against it, than all the fine things that Aristatle and Plato have said upon
the Point, can ever work him up to. And the same in Proportion may be expected
from a Reflection in all other Cases, where there is a vicious Excess, or
violent Concussion of the Soul. He that shall recollect the many false
Conclusions, which an erroneous Judgment has led him into, and the Slips and
Miscarriages which an unfaithful Memory has been guilty of, will learn to be
more Cautious, how he trusts either of these for the future: And especially
when a Man calls to mind, how many Cases he is able to quote to himself,
wherein he thought, all Difficulties sufficiently considered, that he was a
perfect Master of his Point; how assured and peremptory he has been, how
forward to answer to himself, and to all he conversed with; nay, to stake his
Reputation for the Truth of an Opinion; and yet Time and After-Thought have
demonstrated the direct Contrary; This bold confiding Man, I say, will be
taught from hence to distrust such hasty Arrogance, and abandon all that
unreasonable and peevish Positiveness and Presumption, which, of all Qualities
in the World, is the most opposite, most mortal Enemy to better Information and
Discovery of the Truth. The Man that shall reflect upon the many Hazards and
Sufferings, in which he has been actually involved, and the many more that
have threatened him; how slight and trifling Accidents have yet given great
Turns to his Fortunes, and changed the whole Face of his Affairs; how often he
has been forced to take new Measures, and found Cause to dislike what once
appeared well designed and wisely managed: This Man will expect and make
Provision for Changes hereafter, will be sensible how slippery Ground he stands
upon, will consider the Uncertainties of Humane Life, will behave himself with
Modesty and Moderation, will mind his own Business, and not concern himself
with other People, to the giving them any Offense, or creating any Disturbance,
and will undertake or aim at nothing too big for him. And were Men all thus
disposed, what a Heaven upon Earth should we have? Perfect Peace and Order and
Justice every where. In short, the truest Glass we can consult, the most
improving Book we can read, is Our own selves, provided we would but hold our
Eyes open, and keep our Minds fixed with all due Attention upon it; so bringing
to a close and distinct View, and watching every Feature, every Line, every Act
and Motion of our Souls so narrowly, that none may escape us.

Against those who know not themselves.
Nemo in sese rentat descendere.
Into himself none labors to descend.And hence it is that we fall so low and
so often. To this must be imputed our perpetual Relapses into the same Fault,
without being ever touched with a Sense of our Error, or troubling our selves
at all about the matter. We play the fool egregiously, at our own vast Expense:
For Difficulties in any case are never rightly understood, except by such as
have measured their own Abilities. And indeed as a Man must thrust at a Door
before he can be sure that it is shut against him; so there is some degree of
Application and good Sense necessary in order to the perceiving the Defects of
ones own Mind. And we cannot have a more infallible Demonstration of the
universal Ignorance of Mankind than this, that every body appears so gay, so
forward, so undertaking, so highly satisfied; and that none can be found, who
at all question the Sufficiency of their own Understanding. For were we
thoroughly acquainted with our selves, we should manage our selves and our
Affairs after quite another manner: We should be ashamed of our selves and our
Condition, and become a new kind of Creatures. He that is ignorant of his
Failings, is in no pain to correct them; and he that knows not his Wants, takes
no manner of care for Supplies; and he that feels not his Disease and his
Misery, never thinks of repairing the Breaches of his Constitution, or is
solicitous for Physic. Deprehendas te oportet priusquam emendas; sanitatis
initium sentire sibi opus esse remedio.
You must know your self before you can mend your self; the first Step to
Health and Recovery, is the being sensible, that you need a Cure. And this very
thing is our Unhappiness; that we think all is safe and well. We are highly
contented with our selves, and thus all our Miseries are doubled. Socrates was
pronounced the wisest Man; not for any Excellencies of natural or acquired
Parts, which rendered him superior to all the World: But because he understood
himself better, behaved himself with Modesty and Decency, and acted like a Man.
Thus Socrates was a Prince among Men, as we commonly say, He that has one Eye
is a King among them that have none. Such as are doubly blind, and have no
Sense at all left; (For so are the Generality of the World;) Nature makes them
weak and wretched at first; but they make themselves doubly so afterward, by
their Pride and lofty Conceits of their own Sufficiency, and an absolute
Insensibility of their Wants and their Miseries. The former of these
Misfortunes Socrates shared as well as others; for he had his blind Side too:
That is, he was a Man, and consequently had the same Allay of Infirmity and
Misery with other Men: But here was the difference, that he knew he was but a
Man: He considered his Condition, and made no difficulty to acknowledge all the
Imperfections of it; and therefore he dealt honestly and acted wisely; for he
lived, and behaved himself as a Man should do. To this Purpose may that Reply
be taken, which Truth it self made to the haughty Pharisees, Joh. 9.41.
who in Derision said unto him, What then? Are we blind also? If you were blind
(says he) that is, if ye were sensible of your Blindness, ye would see better;
But because you say, we see, therefore ye remain stark-blind. For those who
have an Opinion of their own good Sight, are really blind, and those who are
conscious of their own Blindness, are the Men that see best. How wretched a
Folly is it to degenerate into Beasts, by not considering carefully that we are
Men? Homo cum sis, id fac semper intelligas.
Since Nature has made thee a Man, take care constantly to remember that thou
art such. We read, that several great Persons have ordered that their
Attendants should often ring it in their Ears, That they were Men, intending
that Admonition for a Curb to their Exorbitancies. And sure the Practice was
admirable, if, as the Sound struck upon their Ears, the Consideration entered
their Hearts too. What the Athenians said to Pompey the Great, was not much
amiss, You are so far a God, as you acknowledge your self a Man. For thus much
at least is beyond Contradiction, That the way to be an excellently good Man,
is to be thoroughly possessed with the sense of one's being a Man.

Means of coming to the Knowledge of one's self. False ones.
and scarce to be met with; as, on the contrary, the mistaking and passing
wrong Judgments of one's self, is exceeding obvious and easy) This Knowledge,
I say, is never to be acquired by the help of others. My meaning is; Not by
comparing our selves with others, measuring by them, depending upon their
Characters, or observing what Agreement or Disagreement there is between our
Practice and their Example, so that a Man shall applaud or condemn himself, for
doing or not doing as they do, or as they like or dislike. Plus aliis de te
quam tu tibi credere noli.
What the World says thou art, believe not true,
This Credit only to thy self is due.
Nor indeed can we depend upon our own Word or Opinion in the case; For This
oftentimes is shortsighted; it discovers not all that is to be seen, and it
makes a false Report of what it discovers; like a treacherous or a bribed
Witness, that shuffles in his Evidence, and is afraid to speak out. Nor can we
form a Judgment from any single Action; for this may come from a Man without
being intended, or so much as thought of; it may be a sudden Push upon an
unusual pressing occasion; the Work of Necessity, or the Work of Chance; a
lucky Hit, or a sudden Sally; and owing to Heat or Passion; to one, to all of
these, to any thing indeed, rather than to the Man himself. And therefore we
can fix no Character from a thing which is not of our own growth. One
courageous Action no more proves a Man Brave, nor one Act of Justice Just, than
the breadth and depth of a River, and the strength of its Current, is to be
taken from a sudden accidental Flood, when all the neighboring Brooks empty
themselves into it, and swell it above its Banks. For thus there are
Circumstances and Accidents in Humane Life too, which like strong Winds, and
rapid Torrents, change our usual Course, and carry us beyond our selves; and
this in so surprising a manner, that Vice it self has sometimes put Men upon
doing very good things: So extremely nice a thing it is, to know Men truly.
Again, We can learn nothing to purpose by all the outward Appendages of the
Man; his Employments, Preferments, Honors, Riches, Birth, good Acceptance, and
general Applause of great and common Men; no, nor yet by his Deportment when he
appears abroad; for there the Man plays in Check, stands upon his Guard, and
every Motion is with Reserve and Constraint. Fear, and Shame, and Ambition, and
a thousand other Passions, put him upon playing the Part you see then acted. To
know him thoroughly, you must follow him into his Closet, see him in the
Tireing-Room, and in his every-day Garb. Alas! he is oftentimes quite another
thing at Home, than what he appears in the Street, at Court, or upon the
Exchange; one sort of Man to Strangers, and another to his own Family. When he
goes out of his House, he dresses for the Stage, and the Farce begins; you can
lay no stress upon what you see of him there. This is not the Man, but the
Character he sets himself to maintain: And you will never know any thing of
him, till you make a difference between the Person of the Comedian that plays,

The knowledge of a Man's self then is not to be compassed by any, True ones.
or all of these four ways, nor can we rely upon, or make any sure Conclusions
from them. The only way to arrive at it, is by a true, long, constant study of
a Man's self; a serious and diligent Examination, such as shall observe and
nicely weigh, not only his Words and Actions, but even his most secret
Thoughts, (and that so critically, as to discern how they are first born, upon
what they feed, and by what degrees they grow, the time of their Continuance,
the manner and the frequency of their Returns upon him.) In short, no Motion of
his Mind must escape his notice; no, not his very Dreams: He must view himself
near, must be eternally prying, handling, pressing, probing, nay pinching
himself to the quick: For there are many Vices in us, that lurk close, and lie
deep; and we know nothing of them because we do not take the pains to search
far enough, and ferret them out: As the venomous Serpent while numm'd with
cold, is handled safely, and stings not till he is warmed. And further yet,
when all this is done, a sense and acknowledgment of particular Failings, and
personal Faults, and an endeavor to mend them, will not do the business; but a
Man must be convinced of his Weakness and Misery throughout, that every part of
him is tainted with it; and from thence he must proceed to amend the whole, and
make the Reformation equally general.

The Division of this First Book.
looking upon him in the several Prospects he is capable of; feeling his Pulse,
sounding him to the bottom, going into him with Candles, searching and
ransacking every Hole and Corner, every Maze and Labyrinth, every Closet and
false Floor, and all the subtle Windings of his Hypocrisy. And all this
Niceness little enough, God knows; for he is the cunningest and most
dissembling, the closest and most disguised Creature alive, and indeed almost
incapable of being perfectly known. Upon this account we will attempt the
Consideration of him under the Five Heads represented by the Table here
annexed, which sets before you at one general View, the Substance and the
Method of this First Book.

Five Considerations of Man, and the Condition of Human Nature, taken as
follows. I. Natural, consisting of the Parts whereof he is compounded, with
their several Appurtenances. II. Natural and Moral; by stating the Comparison
between Him and Brutes. III. By giving a Summary Account of his Life. IV. A
Moral Description of his Qualities and Defects, under Five Heads, 1. Vanity. 2.
Weakness. 3. Inconstancy. 4. Misery. 5. Presumption.
V. Mixed of Natural and Moral; resulting from the Differences between some Men
and others, in, 1. Their Temper. 2. Their Minds and Accomplishments. 3. Their
Stations and Degrees of Quality. 4. Their Professions and Circumstances. 5.
Their advantages and disadvantages; and, these again either Natural, Acquired,
or Accidental.




THE First Consideration.
Which is purely Natural; consisting of the several Parts whereof Man is
compounded.
CHAP. I. Of the Formation of Man.
THIS is twofold, and therefore capable of a double Consideration: For the
First and Original Formation was the immediate Work of God's own Hand; and this
was Supernatural and Miraculous. The Second is the Work of ordinary Generation,
and lineal Descent, according to the common and established Course of Nature.

According to that Image given us by Moses, of the Creation of the World, which
(for the Nine first Chapters of Genesis, wherein we have an account of the
first and second Birth of the Universe) is without dispute, the boldest,
noblest, and most satisfactory System, that ever was published, we may observe
several Preferences and Privileges peculiar to Man. For he was made by God, not
only after all other living Creatures, as the most exquisite and complete; the
Master and Superintendent over the rest (so runs his Original Commission, Genesis
1.
Let him have dominion over the Fishes of the Sea, and over the Fowls of the
Air, and over the Beasts of the Field;) made the same Day with Land-Animals,
and Four-footed Beasts; which bear the nearest resemblance to him of any other
Animals: But made, after all the rest was ended, as the last and finishing
Stroke; the Seal with which it pleased Almighty God to close up the whole
Creation. And accordingly he has given him such a Bearing and Impress, as
plainly speak how nobly he is descended. Signatum est in nos lumen vultus tui.
The Brightness of the Divinity strongly reflected upon him. Exemplumque Dei
quisque est in Imagine parva.
So that each Man is a sort of God in Miniature; expressly said to be formed in
His own Image, and after His Likeness. Man is likewise not only the Creator,
but the whole Creation in Little; the Universe in one small Volume: Whence it
is that Man is sometimes styled a Little World; and by the same reason the
World might be called a Great Man. He is, as it were, the Mediator of the
different parts of Nature, that Link of this long Chain, by which Angels and
Brutes, Heaven and Earth, the Spiritual and Corporeal Creation, are tied
together; and that void Space supplied, which would make a wide and most
unseemly Gap in the Universe, if not filled up, and the Series thus continued,
by a Creature partaking of both Extremes. In a word, This was the last Touch,
the Masterpiece, the Honor, and Ornament, nay, the Prodigy, and miraculous
Production of Nature. Hence it is that God is represented to us as entering into
Consultation, and making this Noble Creature with Deliberation and Thought. God
said, let us make Man. Genesis 2:
And when he had formed Man, he is said to have ended all his Work, and to have
rested. Nay, even that Rest it self, and the perpetual Commemoration of it, was
for His Sake and Bensit. The Sabbath was made for Man, Mark 2.
and not Man for the Sabbath, says Truth it self. After this there was no New
thing formed, till that most stupendous Miracle of Mercy, when God made himself
Man: And this too, as we most truly confess, in one of our Creeds, was for Us
Men, and for Our Salvation. From whence it is most evident, that God, in all
his Actions and Dispensations, has a constant and more particular regard to
Mankind, that They have a Concern in the greatest Works of Providence, and that
almost all God's Doings and Administrations are begun and ended with great
Respect to Man's Advantage; and so as that the promoting of this, shall be the
best and most effectual means of accommodating and reducing all things at last
to himself; and Our Happiness be made the proper Instrument of His Glory.



nearer to the One, and some nearer to the Other of those Extremes. As to the
true Cause of this upright Figure, it is plain, the Rational Soul cannot be It:
For the Crooked, the Lame, the Deformed, are so many living Instances, and
undeniable Proofs to the Contrary: Nor can it be the Backbone formed in a
direct Line; for Serpents have the same: Nor is it surely the Excess of Natural
and Vital Heat above other Creatures; for many other Animals equal, and some
excel us in this Respect; though I will not deny, but each of these may
contribute somewhat toward it: (And that of the Serpent is the less Objection
against the Form of the Backbone; because the Crawling of that Creature upon
his Belly, is expressly declared to be a Punishment and lasting Reproach, for
the Tempter's having assumed this Form in working the Seducement and Ruin of
our first Parents.) But the very Truth is, Our great and mighty Maker and
Master thought this the most convenient Posture, and such as best agreed with
the Dignity and Preeminence of Humane Nature, particularly upon two Accounts,

Partly, as a Mark of Distinction due to the Excellencies of the Humane Mind:
Thus the old Poets represented it, Sanctius his Animal, etc. --
A Creature of a more exalted kind
Was wanting yet; Ovid Met. Lib. 1.
and then was Man designed:
Conscious of Thought, of more capacious Breast.


And partly as an Ensign of Royalty; some Characters whereof Naturalists have
observed in some other petty Principalities; such as the Crown in the Dolphin,
the Diadem in the Basilisk, the Lion's stately Mane, which serves as a Collar
of Honor; the Color and the Eyes in the Eagle, and the King among the Bees.
But Man being vested with an universal Monarchy, walks stately upon the Earth,
like a Master in his own House: He subdues and manages All either by fair means
or by foul; captivates and brings them to his hand by force; or makes them
tractable and tame, by gentle and winning Usage. Hence the same Poet proceeds,
For Empire formed, and fit to rule the rest,
He, while the mute Creation downward bend
Their Sight, and to their Earthy Mother tend,
Looks up aloft, and with erected Eyes
Beholds his own Hereditary Skies.
Dryden.

Adam was derived: Adom Rufus. Heb. Genesis 2.6, 7.
For the common Appellative of the Species in general is Ish. And This well
moistened, was the common Materials of our Body. So again the Poet, -- Mixtam
fluvialibus undis
Finxit in effigiem. --

Earth the wise Maker tempered into Paste,
And mixed with living Streams the God-like Image cast.


In all Reason, the Body must be before the Soul, as we naturally conceive
Matter antecedent to its Form; as the House must be framed and fitted up,
before we can suppose an Inhabitant in it; and a Shop made and furnished,
before any Trade can be exercised there.

When This was prepared and done, the next thing in order was to animate this
Body, by the Infusion of a Soul, conveyed thither by Divine Inspiration; For
God, (says Moses) breathed into him the breath of Life, and so Man became a
living Soul. Of which, what Tradition the Heathen World retained, may be
learned from the same Author, who proposes This as the first probable Solution
of that wonderful Production. -- -- Hunc divino semine fecit
Ille opifex rerum. --

With Particles of Heavenly Fire
The God of Nature did his Soul inspire.
And closes his Account, Sic modo quae fuerat rudis, and sine imagine tellus:
Induit ignotas hominum conversa figuras.

From such rude Principles our Form began,
And Earth was metamorphos'd into Man.


Job might allude, Chap. X. v. 10. The next seven Days are taken up in
Concocting, Digesting and Changing those first Elements into Flesh and Blood;
which is as yet an unformed Mass, but the proper Ground and Matter of the
Humane Body. In the third Week, the Body in gross is formed, so that after some
one and twenty Days the three most Noble and Useful Parts of the Body are
fashioned; the Liver, the Heart and the Brain; and These lie at length, distant
from one another in a kind of oval or oblong Figure, and connected, or just
tacked together by some thin loose Joynings, which are afterward sill'd up,
and resemble the Form of an Ant; where you may observe Three grosser and fuller
Parts, coupled and held together by Two slenderer, that lie betwixt. The fourth
Week, which raises the Account to very near Thirty Days, the whole Body is
perfected, and the Parts and Organs of it distinguishable; and from thenceforth
it ceases to be an Embryo, as that denotes a rude shapeless Mass; and is now in
a Condition to receive the Soul; which accordingly loses no time, but comes and
takes Possession of its new Dwelling, at or before the Term of Forty Days; that
is, at five or six Weeks. When this proportion of Time is doubled, namely after
three Months, the Animated Infant usually begins to move; and much about the
fourth Month the Hair and Nails set forward. And after the same Term three
times told; that is, after nine Months, is the usual time of Maturity, and
coming into the World. These may perhaps to some seem useless Curiosities, and
not altogether becoming a Treatise of this Nature: But I must own, that I
think, one great Advance toward the true and the best Wisdom, would be to
understand this part of our selves; and sure Men could not but express a
greater and more awful Regard of Almighty God, did they but consider whose
Hands have fashioned and finished them; who watched and brought forward their
Substances when crude and imperfect; wrote their Members in his Book; and made
them to be what they are, after a fearful and very wonderful Manner.

CHAP. II. The first and general Distinction of Man.
MAN, as if designed to be all over Wonder, is a Creature made up of
Ingredients vastly different, First into Two Parts.
nay directly opposite to one another: For what can be more so, than those two
Constituent Parts, His Soul and His Body? Look upon him with regard to the
former of These, and He is a sort of inferior Deity: Turn your Eyes down to
the latter, and that Person which before you almost adored, you will now be
tempted as much to loath and despise; For what is Man thus above a Beast? What
but a Load of Corruption, and a Sink of Ill-Humours? And yet, this wonderful
disparity notwithstanding, these two so distant Parts are linked together with
such amazing Art, and embrace each other so close and kindly, that there is at
the same time eternal Quarrels, and yet an inviolable Friendship between them.
They cannot live together peaceably, and yet they cannot part contentedly: Like
a Man, that has a Wolf by the Ears, and neither knows how to hold him, nor to
let him go: So is each of these Principal Parts in Man; and each may say to the
other what the Poet did.

Nec tecum possum vivere, nec sine te.
My Help and Hindrance, Health and Sickness; I
Cannot live with thee; and without thee die.
Then into Three.
the One part Noble and Pure, Intellectual and Divine; the Other Mean, and
Sensual, and Brutish; The best and most lively Representation of Man, and the
surest Method of attaining to the Knowledge of him, seems to be the making of
this first Division to consist of Three Branches; and saying, That the
Constituent Parts of Man are, the Mind, the Soul, and the Flesh. Of these the
Mind and the Flesh are the two distant Extremes, distant as Heaven and Earth
are from each other; and the Soul has a middle Station between both, like the
Region where all the Storms and Meteors are formed. The Mind is the most
Heroic and exalted Part; the Breath, the Beam, the Image, the Efflux of the
Divinity. This in the Man is as the King in the Body Politic; its Tendencies
and Motions are to Heaven and Happiness; and it breaths nothing but what is
Pure, and Spiritual, and Divine. The Flesh, quite contrary, is like the Dregs
of the People, a vile and stupid, rude and Tumultuous Mob, the Sediment and
Lees, the Brutish part of Man; and this is perpetually disposed to Evil, and
sunk into Matter. The Soul, in its middle State, like Persons of Quality in a
Kingdom, below the Best, and above the Worst, is capable of inclining to Good
or to Evil; and accordingly it is continually solicited on both sides with
great Importunity: The Mind and the Flesh are ever struggling to win it over,
and, according to the Side it takes, it becomes either a Spiritual and
Virtuous, or a Vicious and Carnal Soul. This is the Seat of all those Appetites
and Passions implanted in us by Nature, which, considered simply, and in
themselves, have neither Virtue nor Vice in them: Such, for Instance, as Love,
(that kind of it which we bear to our Friends and Relations) and Fear, such as
that of Shame, Compassion for Persons in Distress, and Desire of a good
Reputation.

Others, as to please our Selves.

CHAP. III. Of the Humane Body, and its Constituent Parts.
Body of Man is built and put together, so as to consist of Parts vastly
numerous, both Within and Without: And of These by far the greater Number, are
either Round, or of a Figure not far distant from it.

Two sorts: Some dispersed all over the Body in large Quantities, and great
Numbers; as for Instance, The Bones, which are the Bases and Pillars that
support this Structure: The Muscles, which are the Instruments of Strength and
Motion: The Veins, which are the Channels for conveying the Blood to the Heart;
and the Arteries, which like so many Pipes, feed them perpetually, by sending
it from the Heart to the several parts of the Body. The Nerves, which are
distributed by Pairs, and are the Instruments of Sense and Motion, by virtue of
the Animal Spirits contained in, and diffused by them. Of These some are soft,
which serve the Head, and assist Our Sight, our Hearing, our Taste, and our
Speech: Others are hard, and these are laid along the Spina Dorsi, and so
inserted into the Muscles; The Tendons, the Ligaments, and the Cartilages.
There are likewise the Four Humors, the Blood; Choler, which provokes and
hinders Obstructions, throws off the the Excrementitious Parts, and excites
Cheerfulness: Melancholy, which whets the Appetite, and moderates sudden
Motions: Phlegm, which sweetens the two Humors last mentioned, (Yellow and
Black Choler) and checks inordinate Heats. The Spirits, which are a sort of
generous Fumes, evaporated by the Natural Heat, and Radical Moisture; and of
These there are Three Degrees of Excellency, the Natural, the Vital, and the
Animal. The Fat, which is the thickest and Oyliest part of the Blood.

Entrails, the Bowels, and Stomach, which in Situation enclines somewhat to the
Left-Side; its Form is round, streighter below than above, with two Orisices,
one at the Top, to receive Nourishment; another at the Bottom, answering to the
Guts, whose Business it is to discharge and empty it. This Vessel receives,
collects, mingles, and concocts the several sorts of Nourishment taken in at
our Mouths; and from thence works off a Whitish Juice called Chyle, proper for
the Sustenance and Nutriment of the Body, and afterward wrought over again
more accurately in the Meseraick Veins, through which it passes into the Liver.
The Liver is hot and moist, lying somewhat more to the Right-Side. This is the
proper Workhouse of the Blood, the great Source of the Veins, the Seat of the
Vegetative Faculty: Here the Chyle drawn off from the Meseraick Veins is
converted into Blood; which is taken into its Cavities by the Vena Porta, and
discharged again by the Vena Cava, (which issues from the Unequal part,) and its
Branches, in abundance of Ducts, like Rivulets or Streams from a Fountain. In
the Left-Side lies the Spleen, which receives the Discharge and Excrementitious
Humors of the Liver. Then follow the Reins and the Guts, which hang altogether
in one Link, and, as according to the usual Proportion, the Stature of a Man is
seven times as much as the length of a common Foot; so the Bowels, when drawn
out, are usually seven times the length of a Man. These Two former Apartments,
which some contract into One, (though the Offices of them are so very
different, as to justify the distinguishing them into Two) are by many Authors
resembl'd to the lowest Region of the Universe; the Elementary one, which is
the Seat of Generation and Corruption; and here that which goes by the Name of
the Concupiscible Soul, keeps its peculiar Residence.

Diaphragme, as it is from That still above it by the Throat: Here the
Irascible Soul has its Dwelling; and Here those parts in the Breast lie, which
are termed the Praecordia; as the Heart, whose Situation is much about the
Fifth Rib, and its Point a little diverting toward the Left-Pap. This is
exceeding Hot; the common Source of all the Arteries, by which it distributes
the Vital Blood there concocted, through the whole Body, and in that Blood the
Vital Spirits: And all this by a discharge so sensible and strong, that each
Evacuation creates that Motion which we call the Pulse. Here likewise are the
Lungs, a soft, rare, and spongy Substance, supple and pliable in their Motions,
like a pair of Bellows; and thus they become the Instruments of Respiration: By
which the Heart is cooled with fresh Air, the Blood kept in perpetual
Agitation; the Fumes and Excrements that oppress it are by this means
discharged, and the Voice formed by the help of the Aspera Arteria, or
Windpipe.

Heaven, is the Head; and this contains the Brain, a Substance cold and spongy,
covered over, and wrapped up in two Membranes, One hard and thick, which touches
the Skull, and is termed the Dura Matter: The Other more gentle and thin,
contiguous to the former, and known by the Name of Pia Matter. From the Brain
are derived all the Nerves, and that Marrow which runs all along through the
Backbone. This Brain is the Seat of the Reasonable Soul, the Source of Sense
and Motion, and of all those Noble Spirits called the Animal and extracted from
the Vital Spirits, which when sent up through the Arteries into the Brain, are
concocted, refined, wrought off, and subtiliz'd, by means of an infinite number
of small and exceeding fine Arteries, which, like so many little Threads
plaited and interwoven with each other, make a sort of Labyrinth, or double
Net, (the Rete Mirabile) in which the Vital Spirit being kept, by perpetual
Motion backward and forward, is exalted and refined, till it becomes Animal,
that is, sublimated and spirituous to the last and highest Degree.

Nose, which serves us in Breathing and Smelling, and conveys Comfort and
Refreshment to the Brain; as it is also useful for the discharge of any Humors
which happen to annoy the Head: And through this Passage the Air goes in and
out, both for the Service of the Lungs below, and of the Brain above. The
Mouth, which assists us in Speaking and Eating; and as the Uses of it are
different, so are the Parts likewise which qualify it for those Uses. Without,
there are the Lips; Within, you have the Tongue, extremely nimble in Motion,
and a nice Distinguisher of Tastes: The Teeth, to bruise and chew our Meat, and
prepare it for the Stomach.

Head be double and alike, they are placed collaterally, and answer exactly to
each other: So do the Eyes, which, like Sentinels or Spies, are posted at the
top of the House, for the gaining a more advantageous Prospect: These are made
up of wonderful variety; each has Three Humors, Seven Coats, Seven Muscles,
different Colors, and are formed with infinite Artifice, and inexpressible
Contrivance. They are indeed the noblest and most admirable Parts of any that
appear outwardly in the Body: Their Beauty, their Usefulness, the Sprightliness
of their Motion, their strange Attractive Power in creating Love. These are to
the Face what the Face is to the rest of the Body; the Life and Air of the
Countenance it self: And in regard they are exceeding tender, and nice, and
valuable, therefore provident Nature has covered and fenced them in very
carefully on all sides, with Skins, and Lids, and Brows, and Hair. The Ears are
near upon the same Level with the Eyes; these being a sort of Scouts to the
Body, and Porters for the Mind; they receive, report, and distinguish Sounds,
which naturally ascend upward. The Approaches and Entries of this Organ of
Sense, are intricate and crooked, full of Windings and Turnings, to prevent the
Air from rushing in too quick, and with too great Violence, by which means the
Hearing might be extremely impaired, the Organ wounded and strained, and the
Sound more confused by its excessive loudness.

To all these we must add the Hands and Arms, by which all manner of
Workmanship is performed; and our Legs and Feet, which like Pillars support
this wonderful Edifice, and which, although not of the Trunk and main part of
the Body, are yet Instruments of such universal Use, that the Body can very
hardly subsist without them; and it would be very ungrateful not to allow These
an honorable Mention in this Account, whose Labors make Provision for the
whole.

CHAP. IV.
Body of Man has several very particular and distinguishing Qualities, which
are Excellencies peculiar to himself, and such as Beasts have no share at all
in. The first and most remarkable seem to be these that follow: Speech, an
Erect Stature, that Form and Port which has been in so high Esteem among wise
Men, nay, even with the Stoics, the Rigidest and most Abstracted of all
Philosophers, that they declared it more eligible to be a Fool in Human Shape,
than to be Wise in the Form of a Brute; So preferring the advantage of this
Frame of Ours, before even Wisdom it self, and all the Beauties of the Soul
without it: The Hand, which is a Prodigy in Nature, and no other Creature, not
even the Ape it self, has any thing comparable to it; the Natural Nakedness
and Smoothness of our Skin; Laughing and Crying; the Sense of being Tickled;
the Eye-Lash upon the lower Lid of the Eye; a visible Navel; the Point of the
Heart inclining toward the Left-Side; the Knee, which is said to stand forward
in no other Creature whatsoever; the Palpitation of the Heart; Bleeding at the
Nose, which you will think very odd, when you recollect that Men carry their
Heads upright, and Beasts hang theirs down toward the Ground; Blushing for
Shame; Looking Pale for Fear; Multiplying at all times indifferently; not
moving their Ears, which in other Animals is a signification of their inward
Passions: But These are sufficiently discovered in Mankind by looking Red or
Pale; and particular Motions of the Eyes and Nose.

Others, though they are not altogether his own, and incommunicable, yet may be
styled Peculiar, in respect of the Degree, and the Advantage he has above
others which partake of them: Such are the Number of his Muscles, and vast
Quantity of Hair upon his Head; the Nimbleness and wonderful Variety of Motions
in his Limbs and Joints; the great Abundance of the Brain; the Largeness of his
Bladder; the Form of the Foot, so very long forward, and so short a Heel
behind; the vast Quantity, the Clearness, and the Fineness of the Blood; the
Easiness and Agility of the Tongue; the Multitude, and unspeakable Variety of
his Dreams, so extremely above all other Animals, that Man alone deserves the
Name of a Dreaming Creature; the Faculty of Sneezing: And, to be short, the
innumerable different Motions of his Eyes, and Nose, and Lips.

Some there are that have particular Countenances and Looks, Gestures and
Motions, which Art and Affectation have accustomed them to; and sonle others
who have these from Nature: They are particular indeed, and so distinguish them
from other Men; but yet they are so Natural, that the Persons are not at all
sensible of them when they do them; as leaning the Head on one side, blowing
the Nose, and a hundred other such Gestures. But some again there are common to
all Mankind, such as Reason and Contrivance has nothing to do in, but they are
the effect of mere Natural Impulse; as for Instance, that of putting our Hands
before us when we are falling; which all do without thinking; and some do it we
see at a time when they cannot think at all.

CHAP. V. Of the Advantages of the Body, etc.
Health, Beauty, Health preferred.
Sprightliness, Agility, Vigor, Dexterity, Gracefulness in Motion and
Behavior; but Health is infinitely above all; Health is the loveliest, the
most desirable, the richest Present in the power of Nature to make: It justly
challenges precedence above all Temporal Blessings and Advantages. Not only
Learning and Knowledge, Wealth and Greatness, and Noble Blood, but even Wisdom
it self, in the Judgment of the severest Philosophers, is inferior to it. This
is the only thing, that deserves our utmost Endeavors, our greatest Hazards,
the only one, which is worth the venturing our very Lives for the acquiring and
enjoyment of it: For indeed our very Lives without it are flat and insipid, nay
they are troublesome and painful; and Virtue and Wisdom languish, and decay,
and die, if this do not keep them in Beauty, and Vigor, and Exercise. Suppose
a Man of the greatest Abilities that ever Human Nature had, or is capable of,
what Advantage would all this be to him in a Fit of an Apoplex, or a Fever, or
any other violent Distemper? Certainly there can be but one thing in the World
more valuable, and that is Probity; for Probity is to the Soul what Health is
to the Body. Now, though this be commonly the Gift of Nature, and the effect of
an originally good Constituon, a just and proper Temperament of Humors, and
fit Disposition of Parts and Vessels in the first Formation of the Body; yet no
doubt can be made, but the Nourishment and Methods afterward contribute very
much to it also. The wholsomness of the Milk, and a good sound Nurse in the
time of Infancy; and a regular way of Living, when Men come to their own
Conduct and Management; Sobriety and Temperance of all kinds; moderate
Exercise; Appetites well governed, and keeping one's self from Melancholy, and
all violent Passion and Disorder of the Mind, do assist, preserve, confirm, and
finish what Nature and Complexion at first begun. Sickness and Pain are its
Opposites and Enemies, and these are the sorest, perhaps indeed (when all
things are rightly considered) the Only Evils incident to Mankind: Concerning
which more will be said hereafter. But both in Enjoying and Preserving this,
the Brutes seem to have the better of us; for Man often ruins himself, and pays
dear for his Frolicks and Excesses.

Beauty; Beauty.
which is a very great Recommendation, and of mighty influence in Conversation
and Society: This is the first thing that conciliates Men's Favor, and unites
them to one another; and it is highly probable, that this was the first and
principal Mark of Distinction, the first Consideration, which gave Men any
Preference and Authority over their Fellows. The Power and Efficacy of this
Quality is indisputable; every one sees and feels it; no other Accomplishment
gains more Esteem; none is so General and so Commanding in all the Affairs of
Human Life. None are so Barbarous, none so Stupid or so Obstinate, as not to be
smitten with it: It steps forward, and offers it self to public View; it
bespeaks our Favor, prepossesses our Fancy, seduces and bribes our Judgment,
makes strong and deep Impressions, and is full of Importunity, full of
Authority. Socrates understood its Power full well, when he called it, a short
Tyranny upon the Mind; and Plato, when he termed it the Privilege of Nature.
For a Man can hardly forbear thinking, that the Persons, to whom Nature has
been so partial in her Favors, and signalized with charming and uncommon
Graces, have a sort of lawful inborn Power over us, and were made to command.
These, when they draw our Eyes and Observation, do insensibly attract our
Hearts too, and fasten our Affections upon them, and captivate and enslave us,
whether we will or no. Aristotle says, that Superiority and Government belongs
to the Comely; that They command our Veneration next after the Gods, as being
the liveliest and fairest Copies of those Glorious Originals; and that all but
the Blind must, and ought to be affected with their Excellencies. The three
great Princes, Cyrus, Alexander, and Coesar, found This of mighty Importance,
and made the Gracefulness of their Persons turn to good Account in their
weightiest Affairs; and so did Scipio more than any of them. Handsome and Good,
have a great Affinity, and both the (...).
Greek Language, and the Style of Holy Scriptures, seem to express this, by
using one and the same Word, to signify both. Several great Philosophers found
their Beauty Serviceable, in their Study, and Acquisition of Wisdom; and to
show, that this Recommendation is universal, it is not consined to Men only,
but is valued, and of great Request, even among Brutes.

Different Sorts of it
That which is proper to Men, consists chiefly in a Majestic Form and goodly
Stature; The other sorts of Beauty are of a softer and more Esseminate Kind;
they may be rather called Prettinesses, and these are more peculiar to the
Female Sex. In each of These, there is a Subdivision; One, which is a fixed and
lasting Beauty, and this consists in having the Parts well proportioned, and
the Colors justly mixed; A Body not swelled nor bloated, and yet not so thin
and meager neither, that the Nerves should show themselves, or the Bones start
out of the Skin; but full of Blood, and Spirits, and well in Flesh; the Muscles
high and clear; the Skin smooth and soft; the Complexion fresh and ruddy. The
Other is a moveable and inconstant Beauty, which may be termed Gracefulness;
and this consists in a good Air, and becoming Motions; wherein All the parts of
the Body are concerned, but the Eyes more so, than any of the rest. The former
is as it were Dead, when not attended with This, for all the Life and Action is
in the latter. There are also some Beauties of a more masculine, and rough, and
fierce Air; and others of a softer, sweet, tender, and languishing Kind.

Of the Face
and our Measures of it are chiefly taken from thence. The loveliest Thing in
the Person of a Man, is, his Soul; and in the Body of a Man, it is his Face;
For this is as it were the Abstract, the Copy and Image of the Soul. It is a
piece of Natural Heraldry, where all the Advantages and Coats of Pretense are
distinctly Quartered and Blazoned; and This, like a Scutcheon, is placed upon
the Front of the House, that you may know whose Seat it is, and who, and of
what Quality the Person is, that owns and inhabits it. For the Face is an
Abridgment of the whole Man; and this seems to be the Reason, why Art, which
always follows Nature, and treads in Her Steps, troubles it self little farther
in Paintings and Carvings, than to give you an exact Representation of the Face
from the Life; and leaves the rest of the Picture or Statue to the Artist's own
Discretion.

Some particular Properties of the Face.
particularly observable in Humane Faces; such as may very truly be termed
Properties of the Face, since neither Brutes, nor any other part of our own
Bodies, can pretend to the like. And indeed, for want of These, Brutes can
scarce be truly said to have any Face. First, The Great Number and Variety of
distinct Features, and the several Fashions of them. For those of Beasts
consist of much fewer; The Cheeks, the Chin, and the Forehead, are There all in
one, and not distinguished like Ours; nor have they the Figure of ours at all.
Secondly, The Wonderful Diversity of Colors; for in the Eye it self, there is
a mixture of Black and White, and Green, and Blue, and Red, and Crystalline.
Thirdly, The Regular Symmetry of the Parts, whereby the Proportions answer to
each other. And this is observable in the Organs of Sense, being double, and
exactly corresponding; and in the different Relations, which the rest bear
mutually, in Length and Breadth. Thus the largeness of each Eye, measuring at
the Top of the Socket, gives you the Wideness of the Mouth; the Breadth of the
Forehead is the same with the Length of the Nose; and that again is of the same
Dimension with the Lips, and the Chin below. Fourthly, The wonderful Diversity
of Faces, so Nice, so astonishing; that among so many Millions of People, there
are not two to be found exactly, and all through alike. This is such a
Masterpiece, as all Nature cannot furnish such another Instance of. And this
deserves a little more particular Attention; because it shows the Goodness, as
well as the Power and Wisdom of our Adorable Maker, upon the Account of the
mighty Consequence and Benefit such Variety is of to Humane Society. First, In
regard it supplies us with Marks of Distinction, sufficient to know one another
asunder by. For infinite and unconceivable Mischiefs must needs follow, no less
indeed than utter disbanding and breaking off all Commerce and Communication,
if Men's Faces were so like, as to make us liable perpetually, to mistake one
Person for another: A Daughter for a Wife, an Enemy for a Friend; and thus a
second and worse Babel would follow. Were there no Resemblance at all indeed,
then Men would not be distinguished from Brutes; but were there not some
Unlikeliness too, than any one Man could not be discerned from any other Man.
And, which is yet more wonderful; Nature has dealt these Differences so
artificially, as to satisfy all Parties; and found out a Secret, that those
who are most unlike should be highly contented themselves, and should please
others also. For the Matter is so ordered, that there is no Person, but is
approved, and thought very well to pass, by some body or other; and the Faces
themselves do not disagree more than Peoples Fancies, and their Inclinations to
several sorts of That which they call Beauty. A Fifth Quality peculiar to
Humane Faces, is the Dignity and Honor of them, resulting from the Oval
Figure, the Straight Position, the Elevation above the Body, their Direction
upwards to Heaven, their naked Graces, without any Covering of Shag, or Hair,
or Feathers, or Scales, as Beasts and Birds have. A Sixth is the Air of the
Face, a pleasant Agreeable Sweetness; so insinuating, so engaging, that (as was
said before) Hearts are immediately caught, and our Wills and Affections
violently born away with it. In a Word, The Face is the Throne of Beauty and of
Love; Seat of Smiles, and of Kisses, two things peculiar to Mankind; agreeable
and innocent, when used as Nature intended them, for true and affectionate
Expressions of Civility, and Friendship, and Kindness, and a good Understanding
between Man and Man, and once a Ceremony used in the most Solemn, Religious
Assemblies. Lastly, This is adapted to all manner of Changes in the Temper; it
expresses all the inward Motions and Passions of the Soul. Joy and Grief, Love
or Hatred, Envy and Malice, Shame and Anger, Indignation and Jealousy, and the
rest of them, immediately betray themselves here. This is like the Hand to the
Watch, which tells us the Hours and the Minutes, while all the Wheels and
Springs, by which those Movements are made, lie within and out of sight. And as
the Air receives all Colors, and all Alterations of the Weather, and so lets
us know what Changes are coming: So may it be said of the Countenance too.
Cor^us animum tegit and detegit: In facie legitur homo.
The Bedy (says one) both covers and discovers the Mind, and you may read the
Man in his Face.

Beauty of a Face, ^ D^se^^^tion of the Beauty (...) a (...)
consists in a large, square, well spread Forchead; Clear and unclouded; even,
small and fine Lyebrows; a well cut, brisk and sparkling Eye; a straight well
proportioned Nose; a little Mouth with red Lips; High full Cheeks, with a
pleasant Dimple in smiling; a round compact Ear; and all over These a lively
Complexion of good wholesome White and Red. But yet this Description is not
allowed Universally; for several Nations and Climates have several Opinions of
Beauty. The Indians particularly esteem That the most exquisite Beauty, which
We look upon to be the greatest Desormity; a Tawny Complexion, large thick
Lips, a flat wide Nose, and Teeth stained with Black or Red; long hanging Ears;
a low hairy Forehead; vast pendulous Breasts, so large, that they may fling
them over their Shoulders, and give Suck to the Children at their Backs; and
these are so much in Esteem, so desirable Qualities, that they use all possible
Art and Industry, to bring themselves to this Shape. But what need we go to the
Indies, when our very next Neighbors differ so much in their Notions of the
Matter? For the Spaniards think none Beauties, but the Lean and Slender; and
the Italians on the other Hand prefer the the well-set, the strong, and the
plump; and think there can be no such thing as Hands^meness without these
Qualifications. And indeed in every Country some are for the soft, the weak,
the tender, and the little Women; and others for the tall, the strong, the
masculine, and bolder Beauties.

Gracefulness of the Body, Beauty of Boly and Mind.
and more particularly that of the Face, ought in all reason to be an
Indication, and certain Evidence of the inward Beauties of the Soul. (And these
consist in an Evenness of Temper, a Regularity of Opinions and Judgments,
steadily maintained, and a Firmness and Constancy of Mind resulting from hence)
For surely nothing is more agreeable to Nature, than the mutual Relation and
Conformity of the Body and the Mind. And where this Correspondence and
Similitude does not appear, we are to conclude, that some Accident has
unfortunately interposed, and broken the ordinary Course of Nature; as it very
often happens, and is very apparent, that there does. For the Milk of a base
Nurse; the First Advances in Education and Instruction, the Company they
frequent, and sund^y other things may leave a strong Tincture behind, wor^
mighty Changes in the Natures and Humors of Men, and give them Dispositions
quite different from those they were born with, either toward Virtue, or to
Vice. Socrates acknowledged, that the Deformity of his Body, testified against
him for the Deformity of his Soul; and that the Evidence it gave was true; but
that by Study and Pains added to a good Education, he had amended his Mind. The
Air and Face of a Man is no good Rule, and very dangerous it is to depend upon
it either way. But they who have an honest engaging Look, ought to suffer
double Punishment, if they belie it in their Actions. For they betray and
deceive People by their fair Promises, which Nature has written in their
Foreheads, and which they themselves make so ill a Use of, as to trapan and
cheat the World with them.

It were well indeed, if we would follow Socrates his Advice upon this
Occasion, as all of us ought to do, in becoming more nice and attentive in
observing and considering curiously the Beauties of Men's Minds; and in taking
the same Satisfaction in beholding those Charms, as we do in gazing upon these
of the Body; And so to come up close to them, contract an Alliance, and
Friendship with them; and unite our selves to them inseparably, by admiring,
loving, imitating them with all imaginable Affection and Zeal. This were an
Object worthy our Passion indeed. But alas! all People are not qualisied for
it, none but Philosophical Eyes can behold and discover Those Graces, and none
but pure and resined Souls can take Delight in the Love and Practice of them.

CHAP. VI. Of Apparel for the Body.
MAny probable Reasons may be given that may induce us to believe the way of
going Naked, which is still continued in a considerable part of the World, to
have been the Original, and once Universal Mode of all Mankind, how odd and
singular soever it may seem to Us at this Day. The other of Clothing seems the
Effect of Art and Invention, contrived to abolish Nature upon pretense of
mending it; as fantastical People shut out the Sun, and enlighten their Rooms
at Midday with Tapers and Candles. And surely this is not so much the dictate
of Necessity, as some would make us believe. For it is by no means to be
imagined, that Nature, which has been so Liberal in all her Provisions for
every other Creature, and particularly in Point of warm and convenient
Covering, has dealt so much worse by Man, than all the rest, as to leave him
the only indigent Child she has, and in such Need of Help from other Hands,
that he must starve and perish presently, if he be not succored, and supplied
with it. This is one of the Reproaches, which fanciful and melancholy People
cast upon Nature, when they call her a hard and cruel Stepmother, to Mankind;
but that Charge against her is false and unjust. Upon the supposition, that Men
had from the Beginning been all accustomed to Cloths, it is not easy to
conceive how any Number of them should ever take up a Fancy of throwing them
aside again, and going Naked; both because a Regard to their Health, which must
needs have suffered extremely by so disadvantageous an Exchange, and a Regard
to Modesty and Shame too, must in all reason have persuaded the Contrary. And
yet we see, this is still the Fashion in several Nations, which is a great
Presumption of its having once been the Fashion of all Mankind Naturally. For
what can be alleged for the Contrary Opinion? Will you urge the Two common
Reasons, that Clothes were always necessary to cover our Shame, and to defend
us against the Cold? (I mention not the Heat, because it is not likely they
were taken up for a Protection against That) These Arguments are plainly
insufficient. Look back to the Primitive State of our First Ancestors, and you
will find that Nature never taught them to be out of Countenance at their
Nakedness. The Distinctions of this Kind are of a later Date; and it was Guilt
First, and then Custom, that introduced Shame. Besides, even those very Parts,
which we take Pains to conceal, Nature has been beforehand with us, in keeping
out of Sight. But if we should allow this for one Reason of Clothing, yet the
Argument can only concern the Covering of these Parts. The Consequence of it
cannot possibly extend to the rest, and thus we see in some Countries some
Persons of Better Condition, do consult their own and the Beholders Modesty,
without troubling themselves for any farther Garments; though the Common People
in the same Places go stark naked. Some have thought it a Disparagement, that
Man, who challenges a Precedence and Authority over all Things here below,
should not dare to show himself to the World, as God Almighty made him; but
though that Thought be liable to some Exception, yet I think truly, it cannot
be for his Honor, to think himself Enriched with the Spoils of his Subjects;
to be Proud of the Ornaments they furnish him with, and value himself, or
disesteem others, according as he possesses, or they want these poor
Advantages, (if they are sit to be called Advantages even in the last and
lowest Degree.) And yet this is a Vanity so prevailing, that, as if Reason
could not urge enough to make People ashamed of it, Religion has interposed
her Authority too, to forbid Affectation and Pride in tricking and setting off
our Persons, and teaches us, that we should never think our selves truly
adorned, except when the virtuous and shining Qualities of the Mind render us
agreeable and lovely in the Eyes of God and Man. These are the Jewels, these
the Ornaments which would most effectually repair that Shame which all our
outward Dresses were so industriously contrived to cover.

As to that other Argument, which proceeds upon Cold, and some other things
that render Apparel necessary, either to particular Persons of a Constitution
more feeble, or to all that dwell under one Climate, sharper than the rest; we
know full-well, that some go naked, and others dressed, in the very same
Latitude, and the very same Air; and there is never a one of us but exposes the
tenderest Part about him to all Weathers continually: Which gave occasion to
that Reply of a sturdy Beggar, who when he was asked how he could endure to go
naked in the midst of Frost and Snow, made only this Answer, That other People
could bear their Faces naked, and he was Face all over. History tells us of
several very great Persons who went constantly bare-headed, as Masinissa, and
Caesar, and Hannibal, and Severas; And some Nations there are, who being
accusiom'd to no Defense for their Bodies at other times, never trouble
themselves for any when they go into the Wars, but engage in the hottest
Action, whole Armies of naked Men together. Plato thinks it advisable for the
Health never to cover either the Head or the Feet at all. Varro pretends, that
when Men were commanded to stand bare in the Temple of the Gods, and in the
Presence of the Magistrates; it was not only the Respectfulness of the
Ceremony, but the Wholsomness of it, that the Law had regard to; since Men by
this means hardened their Bodies against the Injuries of Wind and Weather, and
strengthened themselves, while they paid a due Reverence to their Superiors.

In a Word, abstracting from what Revelation has taught us, and looking at
Nature only, I should make no doubt but the Contrivances of Hutts and Houses,
and other Shelters against the Violence of the Seasons, and the Assaults of
Men, was a much more ancient Institution than that of Clothing; and there
seems to have been more of Nature, and universal Practice in it; for we see
that Beasts and Birds do the same thing. The Care and Provision of Victuals was
unquestionably of far greater Antiquity than either of the former, for this
seems to have been one of the first Impulses and Dictates of Nature; the
Necessities and Appetites whereof return so thick upon us, that it is not easy
to suppose Man could subsist at all without this Care. Book III. In the Virtue
of Temperance.
But of these Matters we shall have other Opportunities to treat more fully,
when we come to give Rules for the Use and Regulation both of Food and Raiment,
hereafter.

CHAP. VII. Concerning the Soul in general.
WE are now entering upon a Subject of all others the most difficult and nice;
One which has been treated of, and particularly canvassed by the greatest
Philosophers, and most penetrating Wits of all Ages and Countries: Egyptian,
Greek, Arabian, and Latin Authors; but yet so that their Opinions have been
infinitely various, according to the several Nations from whence they sprung,
the Religions they embraced, the Professions in which they had been educated,
and the Reasons that offered themselves to their Thoughts: So that how far
soever each Man might satisfy his own Mind, yet they have never been able to
come to any general good Agreement or certain Determination in the Matter. Now
the main Points in Controversy upon this occasion, are those Ten that follow:
What may be the Definition of the Soul; What its real Essence and Nature; Its
Faculties and Actions; Whether there be One or More Souls in a Man; Whence its
Original; What the Time and Manner of its entering the Body; the Manner of its
Residence; the Seat where it dwells; the Sufficiency to exercise the several
Functions belonging to it; and lastly, Its End or Separation from the Body.

Definition of the Soul, Its Defin^tion.
or be able to say exactly What it is. And this in truth is the Case of all
Forms in general; and we cannot well conceive how it should be otherwise with
Things which are Relative, and have no proper and independent Subsistence of
their own, but are only Parts of some Whole. Hence without question it has
come to pass, that the Definitions of it put abroad have been so many, and at
the same time so infinitely various too, that not any one of them has been
received without Clashing or Contradiction. Aristotle has rejected no less
than Twelve among the Philosophers who had written before him; and yet he has
found but little better success with That of his own, which he labored (but in
vain) to establish in the room of them.

Nothing can indeed be more easy and obvious than to determine what the Soul
is not. We dare be confident that it is not Fire, Air, nor Water, nor a Mixture
and due Temperament of the Four Elements together, the Qualities or the Humors
nicely adjusted: For This is a thing in perpetual Flux and Uncertainty; the
Animal subsists and lives without it: And besides, This is manifestly an
Accident, whereas the Soul is a Substance. To this we may add, that Minerals,
and several inanimate Creatures, have a Temperament of the Four Elements, and
prime Tactile Qualities, and still continue Inanimate notwithstanding. Nor can
the Soul be the Blood; for several Instances may be given of Animated and
Living Creatures, without any Blood at all belonging to them; and several
Creatures die without losing one Drop of Blood. Nor is it the Principle and
First Cause of Motion in us; for several Inanimate things impart Motion: So
does the Loadstone to the Iron; the Amber to the Straw; Medicines, and Drugs,
and Roots of Trees, when dried, and cut to pieces, draw and create very strong
Motions. Nor is it the Act, Life, Energy, or Perfection, (for Aristotle's Term
Eutclechia has been interpreted in all these dissering Senses) For all this
cannot be the very Essence of the Soul it self, but only the Operation and
Effect of it, as Living, Seeing, and Understanding are plain and proper Actions
of the Soul. Besides, admitting this Notion, it would follow from thence, that
the Soul were not a Substance, but an Accident only, that it could not possibly
subsist without that Body, whose Act and Perfection it is, any more than the
Roof of a House can subsist as such, without the Building which it covers and
is supported by, or a Relative without its Correlate. In a word, When we
express our selves after this manner, we only declare what the Soul does, and
what it is with respect to something else; but we pronounce nothing of its
proper and abstracted Nature, or what it is in it self.

Now, though things are thus far clear and easy, yet when we go farther the
Case alters extremely. A Man may say indeed, that the Soul is an Essential
Life-giving Form, which distributes this Gift as the Receiver is capable of it.
To the Plant it imparts Vegetation; to the Brute Sense, which includes and
contains Vegetation under it; and to Man Intellectual Life, in which both the
former are implied, as the Greater Numbers comprehend the Less; and as in
Figures, a Pentagone includes a Quadrangle, and That again a Triangle. I rather
choose to term this the Intellectual Life than the Rational, (which is
comprised and understood by it, as the Less is within the Greater) and that
particularly in deference to those many renowned Philosophers, who have allowed
Reason in some Sense, and some Degree, even to the Brutes; but not Any of them
have ever gone so high, as to attribute the Intelligent Faculty to Them; and
therefore I take Intellectual Life to be a more unexceptionable, more
distinguishing Character of the Humane Soul, than the other, which some have
thought not entirely and peculiarly our own. The Soul in the mean while is not
the Principle and Original of Life; (This, in my Judgment, is a Term due to
none but the Sovereign Author of our Being, the Lord and Giver of Life) but it
is the Internal Cause (if you please) of Life and Motion, of Sense and
Understanding: It moves the Body, but is not moved it self; as on the contrary,
the Body is moved, but moves not; I say it moves the Body, but it moves not it
self; for though Self-Motion be in some sense a Character by which we express
the Freedom of the Humane Will, yet, considering the depending State of a
Creature, I rather forbear a Term which, in its strict and most exalted Sense,
cannot, in my Apprehension, belong to any but God himself: For whatsoever moves
it self thus, must be Absolute and Eternal; and that Power of moving the Body
which the Soul has, it has not from it self, but from Above.

Essence or Nature of the Soul, Its Nature.
(the Humane one I mean; for as to That of Brutes, little doubt is to be made
but this is Corporeal and Material, conceived, born, and bred with Matter, and
corruptible with it too) and this is no such inconsiderable Dispute as some
perhaps may imagine; for some have affirmed it to be Corporeal; others again
contend as vehemently, that it is Incorporeal: Which Opinions we will beg the
Reader's leave to compare a little, and how wide soever they may seem, we'll
try if it be not possible to reconcile them. The Arguments which have persuaded
Men to believe the Soul Corporeal, are such as follow. First, The Authority of
the most Eminent Philosophers and Divines; and of the latter, no less than
Tertullian, Origin, St. Basil, Gregory, Augustine, and Damascene, who all admit
that the Spirits, both Good and Bad, which are entirely separated from Matter,
are yet Corporeal; and if They be so who have nothing to do with Matter, how
much more probable is this Notion of the Humane Soul, which is in constant
Dealings with, and closely united to it? The Ground of their determining these
things to be Corporeal, is a Notion, that All Creatures of what kind soever,
when compared with God, are Gross, Corporeal, and Material; and that God
Himself alone is so excellent a Substance as to be Incorporeal; and therefore
every Spirit is Body, and of a Corporeal Nature. To this of Authority may be
added another Argument, drawn from Reason. All that is contained in this Finite
World, must needs be Finite it self; limited in Virtue and in Essence;
circumscribed by some Supersicies, consigned within some place; all which are
the true and natural Conditions of a bodily Substance. God alone is every
where; He alone is Insinite, and therefore He alone is Incorporeal. The common
Distinctions of a Circumscriptive, Definitive, Effective Presence, seem to be
merely verbal, and to carry very little or no Force at all: For still it is
undeniably certain, See Advertisements.
That Spirits are in a place after such a manner, that at the same time they
are there, they are not elsewhere too, nor can be in more places than one at
once. They are not in Insinite Space, nor in extreme Little, nor extremely
Large room, but take up so much as is proportionable to their Size, and equal
to their Finite Substance. And, did not the Case stand thus with them, how
could Spirits change their Place and Residence? how could they Ascend or
Descend, which yet the Scripture frequently takes notice of their doing? For,
if Incorporeal, they must be incapable of Motion, Indivisible, and so every
where indisserently. Since then it is evident they change their places, is not
this sufficient to convince us that they are capable of Motion and Division,
subject to Time, and the Successions of it, which is requisite for the
adjusting of Motion, and measuring the Passages and mutual Distances from one
place to another? All which are Qualities belonging to a Body. But now, in
regard that the generality of People, who see not to the bottom of these
Distinctions, by the Word Corporeal, form to themselves an Idea of something
Visible and Palpable, and so gross as must affect our Senses: Since they have
no Notion of pure and subtle Air, nor entertain any Conception of Fire
abstracted from Fuel and Flame; since, I say, they cannot persuade themselves
that things so subtiliz'd are Corporeal, hence it has grown into Use, to say
that Spirits in a State of Separation, and Humane Souls in the Body, are not
Corporeal Substances: Nor are they so indeed in this gross and vulgar Sense;
for they are of an Invisible Substance, whether that be Airy, as many
Philosophers and Divines have persuaded themselves; or whether Celestial and
yet more refined, as some Hebrew and Arabian Authors, who call Heaven and
Spirit both by the same Name, of an Essence proper to Immortality; or whether
it consist of a Substance still more subtle and purified than even the
Ethereal or Celestial it self; but still Corporeal nevertheless, since
subject to all those Conditions of a Body, of being consigned and circumscribed
within a certain Space; capable of Motion, and measurable in that Motion, by
the successive Periods of Time. Again, Were they not Corporeal, they must be
impassible; for which way could they suffer as we find they do? The Soul of Man
manifestly receives and is assected with Satisfaction and Uneasiness, Pleasure
and Pain; and as deeply as sensibly touched with these things in her Turn, as
the Body is from Her Dictates and Her Passions. Again, She is likewise wrought
upon and distinguished by Good and Ill Qualities, Virtues and Vices, Affections
and Inclinations of all sorts; All which are Accidents; and as such require
some Bodily Substance for their Support and Subsistence. Lastly, All Souls,
whether separated or united, evil Angels and Spirits, as well as Men, are
obnoxious to Punishment and Torture: From whence it must follow, that they are
Corporeal; For nothing can be in a Condition of enduring Torment, which is not
so; and so the Subject of Accidents is one particular Property of a Bodily
Substance.

See Advertisement at the End of this Chapter; and also That at the Conclusion
of the Tenth.

Soul abounds exceedingly in Faculties and Powers, as many almost as the Body
has Members. Its Faculties and Operations
Some of these she exerts in Plants; a greater number yet in Beasts; but vastly
more in Mankind: Such as the Vital, Locomotive, Appetitive, Attractive,
Collective; the Retentive, Concocting, Digestive, Nutritive; those of Growing,
Sprouting, Hearing, Seeing, Tasting, Smelling, Speaking, Respiration,
Generation, Cogitation, Reasoning, Contemplating, Assenting, Dissenting,
Remembering, Judging: All which Faculties are by no means parts of the Soul; for
at that rate we must admit the Soul to be capable of Division, and made up of
nothing but Accidents and Properties; but they are the Natural Qualities and
Powers of it. Upon these follow the Actions or Operations of the Soul, which
must needs in order of Nature be after those Faculties that qualify it for the
performance of them. And thus the great Dionysius, whose Doctrine in this
particular is universally assented to, observes, That in Spiritual Creatures
there are Three things to be considered; The Essence, the Faculty, and the
Operation. By the Last of these, which is the Action, we are led to the
Knowledge of the Faculty; and from the Faculty again we are carried on to the
Essence. Now we must take notice by the way, that the Actions may be
obstructed, suspended, or a final Stop, and absolute Cessation put to them,
without any Prejudice at all being done by this means to the Soul, or its
Faculties: As the Skill and Faculty of Painting shall remain entire in the
Artist, though his Hands be tied up, or he be otherwise disabled from exerting
that Skill. But, upon a Supposal that the Faculties themselves perish, the Soul
must perish with them; as the Fire can be no longer Fire, if we suppose the
Faculty of Warming to be taken away from it.

Nature and Essence of the Soul being thus in some measure explained, In Vaity.
there is another Enquiry which offers it self to our Consideration, and That
indeed of very great Intricacy and Importance both, which is, Whether each
Animal (but more especially each Man) have a Complication of several Souls, or
but One only. Concerning which a multitude of Arguments have been offered on
all Sides, and great variety of Opinions have grown; but they may, I think, be
reduced to Three. Some of the Greek Philosophers, and almost all the Arabian,
after Their Examples, have fancied that there is but One Immortal Soul, not
only in each distinct Individual Person, but in all Mankind; and distributed
throughout the whole Species in general. The Egyptians are in the other
Extreme, and conceive that each Person has several Souls totally and
essentially distinct from one another. That every Brute has Two of these, and
every Man has Three. Two of which (the Vegetative and Sensitive) are Mortal;
and the Third (which is the Intellectual) Immortal. The Third Opinion lies
between these Two, and as it is more moderate, so has it likewise been more
generally entertained than either of the Former; for most Nations seem to be
agreed, that however Men may have been obliged to consider the several
Faculties distinctly, yet there is in reality no actual Plurality, and but One
Soul in each Person, which extends to all those Operations assigned to several.

The First of these Opinions I shall say nothing to, thinking it too absurd,
and too generally exploded, to stand in need of any particular Confutation.

The Second, which asserts a Plurality of Souls in each Animal, and
particularly in each Man, must be confessed on the one hand exceeding
mavelous, if not altogether incredible and absurd; For what Philosophy will
allow us in giving several Essential Forms to one and the same thing? But then,
on the other hand, it must be acknowledged too, that this Notion makes the Way
fair and smooth for that of the Intellectual Soul's being Immortal: Because
upon a Supposition of Three distinct Souls, there is no great Difficulty or
Inconvenience in admitting that Two of these may die, without at all impairing
the Immortality of the Third; Whereas the Unity of the Soul seems to make War
upon its Immortality: For which way can we conceive the same Thing to be Mortal
in one part, and Immortal in another? which yet seems to have been Aristotle's
Notion. Certainly there is an absolute necessity of concluding, that it is All
of a piece in this respect, and either entirely Mortal or Immortal throughout;
which yet are each of them loaded with very absurd Consequences: For the Former
Conclusion is destructive of all Religion and sound Philosophy; and the Latter
advances the Brutes to the same Dignity, the same Immortal State with our
Selves. But the most general, and in my poor Judgment, the most probable
Opinion is, that each Animal has but One Soul; but One in Substance; That This
is the Cause of Life, and the Universal Source of all the Actions performed by
him; That though it have but One Essence entire and undivided, yet is it
adorned, enriched, diversified with a vast number of Faculties and distinct
Powers, wonderfully different, and some contrary to each other; according to
the vast Variety of Instruments made use of by it, the Vessels in which they
are contained, and the Objects they are employed about; Thus the Soul exercises
what we call the Sensitive and Reasonable Faculties more peculiarly in the
Brain; there being the Instruments adapted to such Operations: The Vital and
Irascible in the Heart; the Natural and Vegetative, (which are sometimes
distinguished by the Concupiscible) in the Liver: These are the Chief and most
Material Distinctions. But these so many, and so different Operations,
Instruments, and Faculties, no more impair the Unity of the Soul, or argue a
Plurality of Causes, than a Multitude of Streams conclude against One Fountain
or common Source; or the different Effects of the Sunbeams prove more Suns
than One in the Universe: For thus we daily see he sheds his Rays, and shines
upon different Places and Objects with very different Success: To One he
administers Heat; to Another Light: The Wax he softens and melts; the Clay he
dries and stiffens: He makes the Snow Whiter, and the Complexion Blacker: He
scatters the Clouds, and contracts the standing Pools. And if all this be done
by One Sun in the Firmament, what should hinder the Former to be effected by
One Soul in the Body? Why should That be admitted for an Argument against the
Essential Unity of the Cause in One of these Instances, which we our selves are
content to allow, and constant Experience makes it plain beyond all
Contradiction, is of no weight at all in a Case so very parallel as This I have
last mentioned.

As to the other Difficulty, which relates to the Soul's Immortality, when the
Matter is carefully considered, it will appear, that this Opinion of the Unity
of the Humane Soul, does it no manner of Injury. For this Soul does not suffer
in its proper Essence, by the Death of the Vegetative and Sensitive Faculties;
by which Death in Reality is meant no more, than an Incapacity of exercising,
and exerting those Powers in a State of Separation from the Body. Which must
necessarily follow, upon the Want and Absence of the Proper Subject, and
Instrument, to exercise them upon. But all this hinders not, but that the Third
and most exalted, which is the Intellectual Faculty, may still exert it self;
because a Body, though at present it be made use of as its Instrument, is not
yet so necessary and essential to that, that it should not be able to subsist
and act without it. Supposing then this Soul to return to the Body a second
time, it would return at the same time to the Exercise of its Vegetative and
Sensitive Powers, as we see plainly by Instances of Persons, who have been
raised from the Dead, to live here below: But this would not infer a Necessity
of the same things for living in another State. For those Faculties, whose
Exercise supports this Life we now lead, are not thereby proved of such
Consequence, that no other kind of Life could be supported or enjoyed without
them. It is in this Case with the Soul, as with the Sun (for the same Instance
will be of Use to illustrate our Argument in this Branch also) which continues
the same in himself, every whit as entire and unblemished, not in any Degree
enfeebled, though his Luster and Vital Influences be sometimes intercepted and
obstructed. When his Face is covered with a Total Eclipse, we lose the cheerful
Light and cherishing Heat; but though no sensible Effects of him appear, yet he
is in his own Nature, the same Powerful Principle, and Glorious Creature still.

Unity of the Soul, Its Origin
in each Individual animated by it: let us in the next Place proceed to observe
from whence it is derived, and how it makes its Entry into the Body.

Concerning the Former of these Particulars, great Disputes have been
maintained, by Philosophers and Divines of all Ages. Concerning the Origin of
the Humane and Intellectual Soul, I mean; for as to the Vegetative and
Sensitive attributed to Plants and Beasts, those by general Consent have been
esteemed to consist entirely of Matter, to be transferred with the Seminal
Principles, and accordingly subject to Corruption and Death. So that the whole
Controversy turns upon the single Point of the Humane Soul; and concerning
this, the Four most Celebrated Opinions have been these which follow. I omit
the Mention of any more, which are almost lost in the Crowd, because These have
obtained so much more generally, and gained greater Credit than the Rest.

The First of these is that Notion of the Stoics, embraced by Philo the Jew,
and after Him, by the Manichees, Priscillianists, and others. This maintains
Reasonable Souls to be so many Extracts, and genuine Productions of the Divine
Spirit; Partakers of the very same Nature and Substance with Almighty God
himself; who being said expressly to have breathed it into the Body; these
Persons have taken the Advantage of Moses's Words, and fixed the sublimest
Sense imaginable upon them. He Breathed into him the Breath of Life; by which
they are not content to understand, that the Soul of Man is a distinct Thing,
and of a different, and more exalted Original than the Body; a Spirit of
greater Excellence than that which quickens any other Animal, but they stretch
it to a Communication of God's own Essence.

The Second was derived from Aristotle, received by Tertullian, Apollinaris,
the Sect of the Luciferians, and some other Christians; and This asserts the
Soul to be derived from our Parents, as the Body is; and in the same Manner,
and from the same Principles with that, whence the Soul of Brutes, and all that
are confined to Sense and Vegetation only, are generally believed to spring.

The Third is that of the Pythagoreans and Platonists; entertained by most of
the Rabbinical Philosophers and Jewish Doctors; and after them by Origin, and
some other Christian Doctors too; Which pretends that all Souls were created by
God at the beginning of the World; that they were then by Him commanded, and
made out of Nothing; that they are reserved and deposited in some of the
Heavenly Regions; and afterward, as his Infinite Wisdom sees Occasion, sent
down hither into Bodies ready fitted for, and disposed to entertain them. Upon
this Opinion was built another, of Souls being well or ill dealt with here
below, and lodged in sound and healthful, or else in feeble and sickly Bodies,
according to their Good or Ill Behavior in a State and Region above,
antecedent to their being thus Incorporated with these Mortal and Fleshly
Tabernacles. How generally this Notion prevailed, we have a notable Hint from
that great Master of Wisdom, who gives this Account of his large improvements,
Wisd. VIII. 19, 20.
above the common Rate of Men, I was a Witty Child, and had a good Spirit; yea,
rather being Good, I came into a Body undefiled. Thus intimating a Priority of
Time, as well as of Order and Dignity in the Soul, and that its good
Dispositions qualified it for a Body so disposed too.

The Fourth, which has met with the most general Approbation, among Christians
Especially, holds that the Soul is created by God, infused into a Body prepared
duly for its Reception: That it has no Pre-existence in any separate State, or
former Vehicle, but that its Creation and Infusion are both of the same Date.

These Four Opinions, are all of them Affirmative. There is yet a Fifth, more
modest and reserved than any of the former. This undertakes not to determine
Positively one way or other; but is content Ingenuously to confess its own
Ignorance and Uncertainty: declares this a Matter of very abstruse Speculation,
a dark and deep Mystery, which God has not thought fit particularly to reveal;
and which Man by the Strength, and Penetration of his own Reason, can know but
very little or nothing of. Of this Opinion we find St. Augustine, St. Gregory
of Nice, and some others. But though they presume not so far, as to give any
definitive Sentence, on any Side; yet they plainly incline to think, that, of
the Four Opinions here mentioned; the Two latter carry a greater Appearance of
Truth, than the Two former.

The Entrance into the Body.
and when this Humane Soul (for of the Brutal there is little or no Dispute,
nor is the present Enquiry concerned in it) Whether This, I say, make its
Entrance all at once, or whether the Approaches are gradual and slow; Whether
it attain its just Essential Perfections in an Instant; or whether it grow up
to them, by Time and Succession; is another very great Question. The More
general Opinion, which seems to have come from Aristotle, is, That the
Vegetative and Sensitive Soul, whose Essence is no other than Matter and Body,
is in the Principles of Generation; that it descends lineally, and is derived
to us from the Substance of our Parents; that This is finished and Perfected in
Time and by Degrees, and Nature acts in this Case a little like Art, when That
undertakes to form the Image of a Man; where first the Out-Lines and rude
Sketches are drawn; then the Features specified; yet These, not of his whole
Body at once, but first the Painter finishes the Head, then the Neck, after
that the Breast, the Legs and so on, till he have drawn the whole Length. Thus
the Vegetative and Sensitive Soul (they tell you) forms the Body in the Womb:
and when That is finished, and made fit for the Reception of its new
Inhabitant, the Intellectual Soul comes from abroad, and takes Possession of
its Dwelling. But that (all this notwithstanding) They are not Two, nor Three
distinct Souls, neither together, nor in Succession. That the Vegetative
suffers no Diminution by the Accession of the Sensitive; nor that again by the
Addition of the Intelligent Mind. But all Those coalesce into One, and are
formed and finished, according to the stated Times, and usual Process of Nature.

Others rather incline to believe, that the Soul enters the Body entire, and
takes Possession with her Faculties of every kind at the same Instant: That
This is done, when all the Organs of the Body are framed, and the whole Shell
finished and compacted: that till Then, the Body is only a senseless dead Mass,
without any Soul at all: that it had only a Virtue or Natural Energy, (The
Essential Form of that Matter out of which it is made) and this acting upon the
Spirituous Parts, does, by the Agitation and Ferment These are put into, form
and build the whole Body, and adjust every Part of this Structure duly. When
things are brought to this Head, then that Energy vanishes, and is quite lost,
and the Soul succeeds into its Place. And when this New, this Noble Guest
arrives, all things change their Form; and That, which before was nothing but
Dead Senseless Matter, exalts its Name and Nature, and from thenceforth
commences Man.

Its Residence and the manner of it.
and dwells in it. Some Philosophers, whose Notions of this Matter seem to have
been much perlex'd, and at a mighty Loss, how to make out any tolerable
Conjunction between these Two, have imagined the Soul to reside in the Body,
like a Master in his House, or the Pilot in a Ship. But though, as to the
Governing and Directing Part, the Comparison be not much amiss; yet when
applied to explain the particular Mode of its Existence, it is absolutely
improper, and stark naught. For at this rate the Soul would not be the Form,
the Internal or Essential Part of the Animal or the Man: It would have no
Occasion for the Members of this Body to give it reception; would not be
affected in any kind from this close Affinity, nor have any of those tender and
mutual Resentments and Sufferings, arising from Bodily Pains and Pleasures; but
would be a Substance entirely distinct: subsisting from and by it self; at its
own disposal to go or come to separate from the Body, without making any
Difference in it; or any way taking from its own Functions, or the Exercise of
them. All which are intolerable and most notorious Absurdities. The Soul then
in the Body, is like Form in Matter, dispersed and extended over every Part of
it: Giving Life, Motion, and Sense, all thorough; and both These taken
together, make one Person or Hypostasis; that is, one entire Subject, which we
call an Animal. Nor are we to be Solicitous for the finding out any
intermediate Quality, which should connect these Two; for there is no such
thing in Nature. All Philosophers consenting in This, That there can nothing
come between Matter and Form, no Common Link or Band more intimate for them.
The Soul then is all in all the Body; but as for what is commonly added, of its
being all in every Part too, I forbear the Expression; because, in my
Apprehension, it divides the Soul, and implies a Contradiction.

The Seat of the Soul.
although the Soul (in Agreement to what we have but just now asserted) be
really communicated and diffused, through the whole Body in general; yet it
must be acknowledged, that she is more Eminently present and powerful, in some
Parts than others. Where, for the Sake of a clearer and more visible Exercise
of her Respective Faculties, she may be said to keep her Residence, or have her
Seat; though not to Be Entirely there; because This would import Confinement;
and the other Parts, upon the Account of her Absence, would be left void of all
Soul and Form. In regard therefore that the Soul is Remarkable for the Exercise
of Four Predominant Faculties above the Rest; Four Principal Places of Action
and Residence have accordingly been assigned to her. Now these are the Four
distinct Apartments or Workhouses, taken Notice of formerly, when we had
occasion to treat of the Fabric and Contexture of the Humane Body. These are
the most Important and Prime Instruments of the Soul; the Rest are subordinate
too, and reducible under them, as the other Faculties are likewise to those
exercised in these Parts. Namely, the Continuation of the Species in the lowest
Region: The Natural or Nutritive Faculty in the Liver: The Vital in the Heart;
and the Animal and Intellectual in the Brain.

Its Sufficiency.
concerns the Exercise of these Faculties in geral, and how the Soul is
qualified for this Purpose. Now we shall do well to take Notice that the very
Nature and Form of every living Creature, cosisting in This Soul, it cannot be,
but the Soul must be abundantly provided with necessary Knowledge, and
understand its Business, without Pains or Industry, or the slow and laborious
Methods of acquired Instruction. As certain is it too, that what she is thus
instructed in by Nature, she fails not to exert, and punctually to fulfill, as
Need requires. Provided no Accidental Obstruction prevent or interrupt her, and
that the Instrument she is obliged to make Use of, be rightly disposed to
follow her Directions. The Philosophers therefore were much in the Right, when
they styled Nature a Wise, Skilful, and Industrious School-Mistress: One that
qualifies her Children and Scholars for all that is required from them. Insita
sunt nobis omnium artium ac virtutum Semina. Magisterque ex occulto Deus
producit Ingenia.
The Seeds of all Art and Virtue (says one of them) are implanted in us
Originally; and Almighty God, the Great Master, brings forward our Natural
Abilities, and draws them forth into Action. It were easy to prove this, by
pregnant Instances of every Kind. The Vegetative Soul of its own Accord,
without Artifice or Institution, forms the Embryo in the Womb, so curiously, so
conveniently, so wonderfully, that we can never sufficiently express, and extol
the Excellence of this Skill. Afterward it takes equal Care of the Nourishment
and Growth; conveys, seeks, and receives Sustenance; Retains what is eaten;
digests and lives upon it; throws off the Superfluous and Excremental Parts;
Refreshes, recruits, repairs those Parts which sink or faint, or fall to decay.
And These are all of them Operations Manifest and Constant, not in Men only,
but in Brutes and Plants also.

The Sensitive Soul in like manner, of her own Accord puts Men and Brutes upon
all necessary Actions. Such as Moving their Feet, their Hands, and Other Limbs
and Parts, which may be of use to them, to scratch, to rub, to shake
themselves, to suck, to manage their Lips and Mouth, to cry, to laugh, and
other Expressions of Want, and Grief, and Pleasure.

The Reasonable and Intellectual Soul does the very same thing in Its Capacity:
And Thus it acts not by virtue of any Reminiscence, or Recollection of any
Knowledge it had before with this Union with the Body, as Plato fondly
imagined; a Notion which proceeds upon the supposal of another State, in which
the Soul pre-existed before its Entrance into, or the Formation of this Body;
Nor does it owe this Power to Knowledge received in at the Senses, and acquired
by Their means upon Use and Observation, as Aristotle conceives, who represents
the Soul at the Birth, to be a Perfect Blank, utterly void of all Characters or
Images, but ready to receive Impressions of any kind: But it seems rather to
discharge this Office by the Original Strength of its own Native Powers: It
Imagines, Understands, Retains, Argues, Reasons, Concludes of it self, without
any Instruction or additional Helps at all. This Assertion, I must own, seems
more difficult to comprehend than the Former; and we can more readily assent to
such a Native Aptitude in the Vegetative and Sensitive, than we do in the
Intellectual Soul. It is manifest too, that Aristotle's Authority lies in some
Degree against the Thing: And therefore to satisfy all these Difficulties, I
will allow this Matter a more particular Consideration, when we come to
discourse of the Intellectual Soul distinctly.

Its Separation Twofold Natural
which relates to its Separation from the Body: Now This may happen different
ways, and be of sundry kinds. The only Usual and Natural Separation is by
Death. Only herein is a mighty difference between Other Animals and Mankind,
that when the Rest die, their Soul dies too; agreeably to that Rule in
Philosophy, That when the Subject Matter is corrupted, the Form is perfectly
lost, though the Matter still remain. Whereas the Soul of Man is indeed
separated from his Body by Death, but by no means lost or annihilated: So far
from Perishing, that it remains entire and unhurt, as having the Privilege of
an Immortal and Incorruptible Nature.

There is not in the World any One Opinion which has been more universally
entertained, more eagerly embraced, more plausibly defended, more religiously
stuck to (I may well say Religiously, since this Doctrine is in truth the very
Foundation of all Religion) than That which asserts the Immortality of the
Soul. All this now is meant of an External and Public Profession; for, alas!
it is but too manifest and too melancholy a Truth; (and the prodigious numbers
of dissolute Epicures, abandoned Libertines, and profane Scoffers at God and a
Future State, bear Testimony to it;) That what Pretense soever the Generality
of the World may make of receiving this Doctrine in Words and Speculation,
there are but very few who express an inward Sense, and serious Belief of it,
by living like Men that believe it indeed. Of that practical Assent, I shall
take occasion to speak more largely hereafter. In the mean while, give me leave
to lament, that so little and so poor Effects appear, of an Opinion capable of
producing so many and so noble: For certainly there is not any one Point
whatsoever, the Persuasion whereof can bring greater Benefit, or have a
stronger Influence upon Mankind. It may be objected, I confess, that all the
Arguments which Humane Discourse, and mere Natural Reason endeavor to
establish it by, cannot amount to a Demonstration. But it must be confessed,
that there are several other things, which Men are content to yield their
Credit to, upon far more weak and insufficient Suggestions. And whereinsover
Reason falls short, it is abundantly supplied by Revelation; which as it is the
Best, so is it the Proper Evidence in Matters of this kind. But yet to show the
Importance of this Doctrine, even Nature herself has implanted in all Mankind
a strong Inclination to think it true: For it is natural for us to desire the
legthening out, nay the perpetuating our own Existence. And no Reflection is
more uneasy, than That which attempts to persuade us that we must once cease
to be. This Disposition is interwoven with our very Frame; and has given Birth
to another no less general than it self, which is That anxious Care, and
impatient Regard for Posterity, that takes such fast hold on every Man of us.

Nor would I be so far misunderstood, as to have it thought, that this
Disposition of Mind is the only Humane Foundation upon which our Belief of the
Soul's Immortality stands: For there are Two other Moral Arguments in
particular, which give it great Credit, and, to say the very least of the Case,
render it exceeding probable.

The First is, that Hope of Glory and Reputation, and the tender Care of
preserving a Good Name when we are gone; nay, the Thought and Endeavor that
our Fame should be Immortal. Now though I cannot but condemn this solicitude
of Vanity, when Men pretend to place their Happiness in the Opinions of other
People after themselves are dead; yet the mavelous Regard, and universal
Concern Mankind express for it, seems to say, that Nature inspires those
Desires and Expectations. And Nature, we know, is a Wise Agent, and does not
use to cheat Men with Hopes, which are altogether impossible and vain.

Another Reason, not easy to be got over by Them who oppose this Doctrine, is,
That common Impression that Those Crimes which are committed in secret, or
which otherwise escape the Observation and Punishment of Civil Justice, and the
Vengeance of Man, are still reserved to a farther Reckoning; that Almighty God
supplies the Defects of Temporal Judicatures, and has a severe Judgment in
store for such Offenders as Those cannot extend to. And since we find by
frequent Instances, that many Enormities of this kind are not made the Marks of
the Divine Vengeance in The Present World; it is a good Consequence of all the
Idea's we can reasonably entertain of God, that He should pursue the Guilty
Wretches into another World, and chastise them as they deserve, even after
Death. And now I would be glad to know, what greater Moral Assurance can be
expected for a Subject of this kind, than, that Humane Nature disposes every
Man to look forward to it, to desire, and to think it probable; and that the
Consideration of the Divine Justice, represents it as a thing not only greatly
probable, but absolutely necessary.

This last Reflection will lead us to the Discovery of Three different Kinds and
Degrees of Souls; all which become proper Objects of the Divine Justice: Nor
need we credit it upon that Account only, but even Natural Reason, the Order
and Harmony of the Universe will persuade us, that such a sort of Being, and so
Immortal as we have been describing the Humane Soul, is requisite to make the
Series of the Creation Beautiful and Complete. Of these Three sorts we may
observe that Two are in Extremes: The One consisting of such Souls as are
gross; sunk down, immerst in, inseparable from, and compounded of mere Matter:
Such are the Souls of Brutes. The Other quite contrary, such as have no manner
of Communication with Matter and Body, as Angels, and Immortal Spirits, whether
Good or Bad. In the midst, and between these two, is the Humane Soul; and this
is neither entirely and necessarily confined and fastened to Matter, nor
entirely separated from it, but joined and wedded to it in this present State;
yet so, that its Divorce is not its Destruction, but it can subsist and live
without Matter in Another State.

Such an Order and Distinction as This, is no despicable Argument for the
Immortality of the Soul, since otherwise we must suppose a wide Gap, a vast
Defect, and foul Deformity in Nature, such as carries Absurdity in it self,
casts a Reflection upon its Author, and threatens Ruin to the World. Which is
supported by nothing more than by the Gradual and Contiguous Order and
Succession of the Creatures: And therefore between Distances so wide as
altogether Corruptible, and absolutely Incorruptible, Nature requires some
middle Condition of a Substance, partly the One, and partly the Other. Such a
Link as this is necessary to tie the two Ends of this Chain together; and such
a Link can be no other Creature than Man: For if we carry our Thoughts farther,
we shall find that Other Beings are without the Compass of this Length, and so
there are Five Stages of Beings in all. One below the meanest, and even those
Souls which are said to consist entirely of Matter, such as Stones, which we
cannot say have any Soul at all. Another far above even the most exalted, the
most pure, and immortal Souls; which is the Ever-Blessed and Eternal Spirit,
the Great and Only God.

Separation Unnatural.
there is Another Unnatural and Uncommon One; and this happens by Fits and
Starts, is out of the way, and consequently very intricate, and hard to give
our selves any tolerable Account of: Such I mean as comes upon Men in Ecstasies
and Raptures, which, as they differ very much in their Symptoms and
Circumstances, so do they likewise in their Causes and Occasions. Of these some
are Divine Ecstasies, wrought by the express and immediate Operation of God:
Such are those Trances which the Scripture takes notice of, in Araham, Daniel,
Ezechiel, Zacharias, St. Peter, and St. Paul. Others are Daemoniacal, procured
by the Interposition of Good or Evil Spirits, many whereof are mentioned in
Story: And we are told of John Duns-Scotus in particular, that having lain a
long time in a Trance, and being taken for dead, he was carried to be buried,
and put into his Grave; but being roused with the Blows and Bruises of the
Mould thrown upon him, he came to himself, and was taken up again; and in a few
Days after died in good earnest, with the loss of Blood, and the Bruises he had
received upon his Head. Cardan mentions somewhat of this Nature, with which
both Himself and his Father were possessed. And many Creditable Authentic
Relations have been made from several distant parts of the World, of abundance
of People, most of them of the Vulgar sort, too weak and ignorant to contrive
such Stories; and of Women possessed, whose Bodies have not only continued long
without any Sense, or Motion, or Pulse, but have been cut, bruised, burnt,
without ever feeing it, and afterward when they came to themselves, they have
complained of intolerable Torture, and exquisite Pain, and have given very
strange Accounts of what they have seen and done in places a great way off.

A Third Separation there is, which we may call Humane, because proceeding from
Humane Means, and such as no Superior or Invisible Power seems to be concerned
in: This comes either from that Disease which from Hippoerates is called Morbus
Sacer, but commonly known by the Name of the Falling Sickness, (attended with
Foamings at the Mouth, which are looked upon as the Mark and Character of it,
and distinguish this Distemper from Possessions, in which the Patients are said
to have none of these Frothings, but a very noisome Stench in the room of
them:) Or this Separation may be owing to the Force of Stupifying and Sleeping
Medicines: Or to the Strength of Imagination, which being vehemently intent
upon some One thing, perfectly carries away the Soul, and renders it stupid and
insensible to all other Objects besides.

Now in these Three kinds of Ecstasy and Transport, whether Divine,
Daemoniacal, or Humane, the great Doubt arising is, Whether the Soul be really
and truly separated from the Body; or whether, without any such Separation, it
still continue there, but be so entirely taken up with some External Object, as
perfectly to forget the Body belonging to it: So that its Natural Operations,
and the Exercise of its proper Offices and Vocation, are, during that time,
suspended, and wholly superseded.

As to Divine Ecstasies; The Apostle speaking of Himself, and what happened in
his own Case, 2 Cor. 11.
will not presume to define any thing: * Whether in the Body, or out of the
Body I cannot tell, (says he) God knows. And this Caution of His, is methinks
a good Warning to all other People, that They too should be modest and
reserved, and not rash in determining any thing positively, not only in These,
but even in less Abstractions of the Mind.

As to the Second Case, That of Demoniacks, Their having no sense of great
Blows, and exquisite Tortures, and reporting things transacted at Two or Three
Hundred Leagues distance; these, I confess are great Conjectures, and very
violent Presumptions of an actual Separation; but yet, I think, they are not
conclusive and necessary Arguments for it: For the Devils may amuse the Soul,
and keep it so fully employed even when at home, that it shall have no Commerce
or Communication with the Body for some considerable time; and at the very same
time too he may represent to the Imagination what passes at a great distance,
in so lively and clear a manner, as to fool the Man with a Persuasion, that he
has really been there, and seen those very things which the Images thus
strongly imprinted upon his Fancy, have enabled him so particularly to relate.
How far the Activity of Evil or Good Spirits extends, is not possible for us to
say. But it is a very bold Assertion, and what Nature will very hardly endure,
that the Whole Soul, formally taken, goes out, and abandons the Body; for upon
these Terms the Body must die to all Intents and Purposes: And such Men's coming
to themselves again, would not be a Recovery of their Senses, but a
Resurrection from the Dead. And yet to say, That the Soul does not All go, but
the Imaginative and Intellectual Faculties rove abode, while the Vegetative
stay behind and keep House, is still more Monstrous and Absurd: For at this
rate, the Soul, which is entire, and One in her Essence, would be divided; or
else we must suppose the Accident only to be transported and born away, and the
Substance to remain fixed in its proper place; and therefore we have reason to
admit any other Solution of the Case, rather than that of an Actual Separation.

As to the Third and Last sort, which was termed Humane, the Thing is clear
beyond a Doubt, that there is no real Separation in it, since all that can be
pretended to in this Case, amounts to no more than some present Stupefaction
and Disorder, by means whereof such of the Soul's Operations as are Visible and
External, cease in appearance, and are suspended for some time.

What becomes of this Soul, and in what State or Condition she continues after
that Real and Natural Separation made by Death, Wise Men have not been able to
agree; nor does this Point fall properly within the Compass and Design of the
present Treatise. The Transmigration of Souls, advanced by Pythagoras, has
found (in some parts of the Notion especially) tolerable good acceptance with
the Stoics, the Academicks, the Egyptian Philosophers, and some others. Not
that they all admitted it in the same Sense and Extent, or to all the Purposes
he intended it should serve: Some allowed it only so far as it might contribute
to the Punishment of Wicked Men, who might suffer by being turned into Brutes,
in a manner like that miraculous Infliction upon Nebuchadnezzar, Dan. iv.
as a Scourge from God for his Vanity and Atheistical Pride. Some again, and
those of considerable Eminence and Authority, have imagined, that Pure and
Pious Souls, upon their quitting this Body, are translated into Angels; and the
Black and Guilty ones transformed into Fiends and Devils. Methinks it were more
prudent to soften the former Branch of this Notion, as our Blessed Savior has
done already, by saying, Luke xx.
That they neither marry nor die any more, but are as the Angels, and are the
Children of God. Some again have fancied, that the Souls of the wickedest and
most profligate Wretches, after a very long Term of Time and Punishment,
utterly perish, and are reduced to their First Nothing. But Humane Reason is,
and must needs be for ever, in the Dark about all such Matters. And therefore
these Disquisitions should be constantly referred to their proper Topic of
Instruction: For, as nothing but Revelation and Religion can inform us truly in
what concerns a Future State, so they have not been wanting to declare what is
full and sufficient for our purpose, and therefore it is our Duty, as well as
our Wisdom, to receive this without more ado, and steadfastly to rest in it.

ADVERTISEMENT.
IN the Second Particular which concerns the Essence and Nature of the Soul,
the Author makes a very odd Distinction between Matter and Body, and tries to
reconcile the Opinion of Those who say the Soul is Immaterial, with Theirs who
affirm it to be Corporeal. The Result of which is, That the Souls of Men do not
consist of gross and palpable Matter, but of a Body thin and subtle, even
beyond all Imagination: And therefore in the Sequel of this Discourse, he
continues to make a Difference between the Souls of Men and those of Brutes,
even in this very Point of Materiality it self.

But now, Since Body and Matter, strictly and Philosophically taken, come all
to one; and since No Subtlety, or Fineness of Composition makes any Body the
less a Material Substance; Since again the Humane and Intellectual Soul has
evidently several Faculties, and performs several Operations, (such as
Cogitation, Volition, nay even Sensation it self) which are neither inherent
Qualities of Matter, as such; nor what any Motion or Modification whatsoever,
can render it capable of; Monsieur Charron's Subtlety of the Body will not help
the Cause at all: For Ethereal, or Celestial Bodies are as truly Matter as
any of the Coursest and Grossest whatsoever. And the Notion of Matter is not to
be taken from its Purity or Foeculency, its Palpability or its Fineness; but
from its Essential Properties, such as Extension, and quantity, Divisibility,
Being purely Passive, and Acting only as it is acted upon; Its being subject to
the Laws of Motion; and the like: These now are the inseparable Properties of
every thing that is Body; and from hence it must needs follow, that all Bodies
whatsoever are equally distant from, equally unqualify'd for Thought, and
Perception, and all other Operations and Faculties, which are the proper and
distinguishing Characters of a Reasonable Soul. Concerning which, if my Reader
desire farther Satisfaction than the Nature of a single Advertisement allows me
room for, I referr him to Dr. Bentley's Second Sermon against Atheism, where he
will find this Argument handled at large.

When once such an Absurdity as This has been shown to attend that Notion
which maintains the Soul's Corporeity; it is to very little Purpose to urge us
with the Difficulties concerning the mutual Intercourse of our Souls and
Bodies; or what the Soul suffers either in her united, or in her separate
State: Some of which are capable of the same Resolutions with those given in
the Case of Brutes, (by those Philosophers who allow them Sense:) and are not
the Actions or Affections of the Intelligent, but of the Sensitive Powers: And
for Others, which are superior to Humane Discourse, we acknowledge our
Ignorance, and resolve all into the sole Will, and wonderful Wisdom of our
Almighty Creator. He has not told us what is the Band of Union between these
Two; nor how this Communication and intimate Correspondence is kept up, and
carried on: And we think it is impossible for any to acquaint us with this
Process, except Him only, who contrived and constituted it. But Ten Thousand
such Objections weigh little, when balanced against a Flaw in the very
Foundation: Every thing at this rate may be disputed, and Universal Skepticism
be advanced, for we are able to trace nothing through all its Motions and
Operations. But an Argument ab Absurdo, made evident in the First and most
substantial Principles, is allowed, even in that Science, which professes the
greatest accuracy in Arguing, to be a Just and Legitimate Demonstration against
any thing, which such Principles are alleged to establish.

See more concerning the Immateriality of the Soul, and her Operations, in the
Advertisement at the End of the Tenth Chapter.

CHAP. VIII. Of the Soul in Particular; and First, of the Vegetative Faculty.
HAving thus given a General Description of the Soul in the Ten Points already
insisted on, I come in the next Place to treat of it somewhat more distinctly;
by considering its respective Principal Faculties apart. And the most
convenient Order, as I apprehend, will be to begin with the Lowest first, and
so proceed from the Vegetative to the Sensitive, from thence to that of
Imagination and Appetite, and last of all to the Intellectual, which is the
Supreme of all the Faculties, and that which is the true and peculiar Character
of the Humane Soul. Under each of These, there are several subordinate Powers,
of less Note and Figure, which hold, as Branches of, or Deputies under those,
and will fall in naturally to be mentioned, in the Profecution of that Method I
have here proposed.

As for That, which concerns Vegetation, it is the meanest by much, and given
us in common with the very Plants. I shall therefore say but very little of it,
not only because the subject is not of Dignity enough to bear me out in long
Enlargements; but also because this is more properly the Business of
Physicians, whose Profession leads to the Study of Health and Sickness, the
Preservatives of the One, and the Remedies against the Other. I shall only call
upon my Reader at present to observe, that under this Faculty, there are Three
Great and very Important Subalterns concerned, and each of them subsequent and
assisting to each other in a regular Progression. For the First promotes the
Second, and the Second the Third: but not so, as that the Order can be
inverted, and the Remark hold back again.

The First of these is the Nutritive; Instituted for the Preservation of the
Individual; and under This there are several Assistants, such as the Attractive
or seeking of Necessary Sustenance; that of Concoction and Digestion, which
separates the good and useful Parts, from those which are noxious and naughty:
The Retentive for what is necessary, and the Expulsive, to throw off what is
offensive or superfluous.

The Second is that of Growing, which tends to the Perfection of the
Individual, and giving it all its just Proportions.

The Third is the Generative; for the Continuance and Succession of the Species.

From hence now it is plain, that the Two former of these were instituted by
Nature, for the Sake and Benefit of the Individual; and terminate in the
Advantage of one single Person, and his own Body. The Third extends to the
Species in general, and its Effects do not, cannot center in the Person
himself; and therefore This, as more Extensive and Beneficial, is esteemed
superior in Dignity, to the other Two; and advancing nearer to That Faculty
next above it, which is the Sensitive. For Producing ones own Likeness, is a
very Eminent Perfection in Nature, and gives us the Honor of some distant
Resemblances, even to the Great Creator himself.

CHAP. IX. Of the Sensitive Faculty.
THE Exercise of this Faculty, or the Operations of Sense, require the
Concurrence of no less than Six several things; Four within, and Two without
the Body. And they are These which follow. I. The First, is the Soul: This is
the Prime Efficient Cause of Perception. II. The Second is the Faculty of
Sensation, (which I distinguish here from the Former, having already proved,
that it is only a Quality of the Soul, and not the very Essence, or Soul it
self.) This consists in the Perception, and Apprehending of External Objects:
Which may be done Five several Ways; for which Reason, we are commonly said to
have Five Senses. Concerning that Number I shall say something in the next
Chapter; in the mean while my Reader need scarce be told that these Senses are
called, Hearing, Seeing, Smelling, Tasting, and Feeling. III. The Third thing
necessary is the Bodily Instrument, or Organ of Sense; and these are
proportionably Five too: The Eye for Sight; The Ear for Hearing; The Cavity at
the Top of the Nose (which goes into the first Ventricle of the Brain) for
smelling: The Tongue for Tasting, and the Skin all over the Body for that of
the Touch, or Feeling. IV. The Fourth Requisite is that Animal Spirit, derived
from the Brain, (which is the Origin and Seat of the Sensitive Soul) and
conveyed through the Nerves, to these several Organs: by the Motion and
Mediation of which Spirit, and Organ, the Soul exercises her Faculty. V. The
Fifth is, what the Philosophers were used to call the Species Sensibilis, which
is in plain English, the Object which moves, and affects, or is propounded to
the Organ: and This is of a different kind, according to the different Sense
excited, or applied to by it. That of Sight, or the Eye (according to the
commonly received Opinion,) is Color; A Quality or Accident inherent in the
Body colored. Six of these are Styled Simple Colors, as White, Yellow, Red,
Purple, Green, and Blue: To which some add Black, and call them Seven. But,
strictly speaking, Black is not any Color, but only a Privation of Light,
resembling Darkness; as other Colors do more or less resemble Light: The
Number of Compounded Colors is infinite. And indeed if we go to the
Philosophical Nicety of the Thing, there is no Color at all in any Body,
whatsoever; for This is nothing else in Truth but the various Representation,
which Light differently modified makes upon our Senses. For when the Light is
gone, all Color is gone with it, and as this never appears without some
Color, so it never disappears, so as to leave Color behind.


Now Light is a Quality proceeding from a Luminous Body, which creates in us a
Perception and Sight of it self, and of all things else within our View. When
this terminates upon, and is stopped by any solid Body, it rebounds back again,
and doubles its Rays by Reflection: But if it peetrate the Body, and find
farther Passage, it cannot be seen except only in its first Source, the
Luminous Body from whence it was shed originally; nor does it then do us any
Service in showing other Objects.

The Object of Hearing is Sound; by which we are to understand that Noise which
results from the mutual Collision of two Bodies; and this is very various: For
some Sounds are sweet and melodious, they sooth and charm the Soul, calm the
Passions, compose the Humors of the Body, and chase away the Disorders of the
whole Man. Others again are smart and piercing, strike through the very Soul,
wound and disturb our Faculties with an ungrateful Harshness. But of all our
Senses, the Mind seems to be most under the Power of This; none entertains it
with greater Variety; none takes more absolute Possession of it.

The Object of Taste is what we call Savor or Relishes; of which the Simple
are Sweet, Bitter, Sour, Sharp, Salt, Acid: But of the Compounds there is no
Number; they are made so exquisite, and multiplied so industriously.

That of Smelling is Flavor; which is a sort of Vapor arising from the
Odoriferous Object, and ascending through the Nose into the first and most
prominent Ventricles of the Brain. Such Perfumes as are very strong, commit a
sort of Violence upon the Brain, and are prejudicial or offensive to it: But
those that are agreeable and moderate, minister wonderful Comfort and
Refreshment, and both delight and do good to the Head.

The Objects of Feeling are such as usually are termed the Tactile Qualities,
Hot, Cold, Moist, Dry; to which we may add Soft and Sharp, Rough and Smooth,
Motion and Rest, Tickling, etc.

VI. The Last thing which must concur in Sensation, is the Medium, or Space
betwixt the Object and the Organ; and this, to render the Operation what it
ought to be, is the Air, not in any wise changed or corrupted, but free, and in
its Natural Purity and Disposition.

sensible Species presents it self by the help of a Medium disposed to convey
this Representation to the proper Organ sitted to receive it; and that the
Animal Spirits lodged there do accordingly take the Impression, and apprehend
the thing: So that here is Action and Passion both; and the Senses are not
purely Passive; for, notwithstanding that they receive an Impression, and in
that respect are acted upon, yet do they likewise act in some Degree
themselves, so far as they perceive the Image, and apprehend the Object
propounded to them.

See the Advertisement at the End of the next Chapter.

Aristotle's Time, made a very remarkable Difference between the Sight and the
rest of the Senses: Supposing This to be merely Active, and imagining, that,
whereas the Others received the Object and Impression from without, and so
could only be Passive; The Eye quite contrary shot out its Rays of Light from
within, and made an Impression upon the Visible Object. But ever since
Aristotle, this Account of Vision has been better stated, and all the Senses
are allowed to be equally Passive, equally wrought upon from without: All the
Arguments of the Ancients to the contrary being very easily answered and set
aside.

Common Sensory within. Here it is that the several Objects of every sort,
perceived by the Corporeal Organs, make their Rendezvous: Hither they are
brought to be examined, compared, sorted out, and distinguished asunder: For
were there no such Office of Enquiry, all would end in Confusion. This
discerning Power is above the Capacity of any particular Organ of Sense; for
each of these is intent upon his own Business; and whatever his Fellows do, is
out of His Sphere; he knows nothing at all of the Matter; nor can he be a
competent Judge in it.

CHAP. X. Of the Senses, which are the most Exalted and Noble Parts of the Body.
Of what Consequence they are to us.
is by the Assistance and Ministry of our Senses; so say the Schools, but it is
not universally true. These are our first Instructers: See Chapter xv. 11.
All our Learning begins with them, and is at last resolved into them: We can
go no farther back than they lead us, or give occasion for us to build
Consequences upon. Each of These is supreme within its own Territories; and a
large Dominion each of them possesses: An infinite Number of Reflections and
Notions arise from each; nor does any One of them hold under, depend upon, or
stand in need of the rest: Thus the Power of them all is equally absolute,
though some of them have a wider Range, and more Business, and a longer Train
of Consequences and Instructions, than some others. Nor are we to wonder at
This, since the Case is the same in other Instances: For a Petty Prince is as
independent, as truly Sovereign within his own small Territories, as the
greatest Monarch upon Earth in Kingdoms of the largest extent.

Their Number.
That there are but Five Senses in Nature; and that which inclines all the
World to think so, is, because we can observe no more in our selves: But
possibly there may be more, and some question may be made of it; nay indeed
some probable Reasons may be offered, that there are more. But supposing that
there are, it is certainly not in our Power to know it; nor can we possibly
assert or deny the thing positively; For there is no way to discover the Want
or Defect of a Sense we never had. Several Brutes enjoy all the Advantages of
Life that are necessary to them, notwithstanding they do not enjoy all the
Methods of Sensation, which Nature has given to Mankind; and I see no Reason,
why an Animal may not subsist without any of the Five Senses, that of Touch
only excepted, which alone would supply the bare Necessities of Life. It is
plain we live very conveniently with Five; and yet perhaps there may be One, or
Two, or Three more in Nature, which we in no degree partake of. But, as I said,
this is more than we do or can know; for each Sense is consigned within its own
Division, and can make no Discoveties, nor has any Jurisdiction out of its own
Compass. A Man Blind from his Birth can never be brought to any Idea of Sight;
nor can he (strictly speaking) either desire it, or be concerned for the want
of it. It Is true, he will tell you perhaps, that he wishes to See, but this is
spoke by rote, and according as he hears other People express themselves; for
indeed he wishes he knows not what: And all it comes to at last is, that he
would be glad to have somewhat which he is told the rest of the World have, and
himself has not. The reason of all This is, Because the Senses are the Doors,
See Note.
at which all our Knowledge makes its first Entrance; and that which did not
begin, and is not let in that way, cannot come in at all. Thus a Man is not
capable of forming to himself a Conception of more Senses, than those Five
which himself has, and consequently cannot persuade himself, that there are,
or can be more in Nature; but it does not follow from hence that there can be
no more, because he has no Notion of any more. Who knows whether the many
Difficulties which still remain unaccounted for in many of the Works of Nature,
and the Operations of Animals, that escape the nicest Enquiry, and subtilest
Penetration of Humane Wit, may not be charged upon the Want of some Sense,
which we are not provided with to discern them? What the World usually
expresses by the Title of Sympathies, Antipathies, and Occult Qualities, may
have some Sensitive Faculties in Nature, accommodated to perceive, and make a
competent Judgment of them; and perhaps our Ignorance of them is owing to our
being desicient in this Point. Who can tell, whether it be not some particular
Sixth Sense, which informs the Cock, when it is Midnight, and the first Dawning
of the Day, and by some secret Impulse, puts him constantly upon Crowing at
those times? The same may be said of that Direction, by which some Brutes are
led to such Herbs, as are proper for their Recovery, when sick or surfeited;
and of many other such things as these, which are notorious Matters of Fact,
but the reasons of them perfectly unknown. This is a Case in which we are
utterly in the Dark; and no Man can be positively assured on either side of the
Question.

Five Senses, Whether enough of them.
and to prove that These are suflicient, by comparing and distinguishing them,
and the Uses they serve. All Bodies (say they) without us, which are Objects of
our Senses, are either very near and close to Our Body, or they are at some
distance from it: If they be close to us, and still remain without us, then
they fall under our Touch: If they approach, and come into us, then they are
the Objects of our Taste: If they are more remote, and stand before us, so that
their Distances are measured by a Right Line, then the Sight discerns them: If
the Line be Oblique, and the Motion Reflex, then the Hearing does it. Now
methinks the Distinction were better thus: Of the Five Senses accommodated for
the Service of the whole Man, as he is compounded of Body and Soul, some are
appropriated to the Use of the Body only; and These are the Touch and the
Taste; the One for all that enters within, the Other for that which continues
still without it. Some again are first and chiefly designed for the Benefit of
the Soul, and those are Sight and Hearing; the Former to assist Invention, the
Latter for Improvement, and Instruction, and all manner of Communication. And
One more in the midst of these Extremes, sitted to those Spirits and Avenues,
that belong to Soul and Body both, which is Smelling. Again, They answer to the
Four Elements, and their respective Qualities; The Touch to the Earth; Hearing
to the Air; Taste to Water and Moisture; Smelling to Fire; and Sight to a
Compound of Water and Fire, because of the Brightness of the Eye. It is
likewise pretended, that there are as many Senses, as there are General
Divisions of sensible Objects; and these are Colors, Sounds, Scents, Relishes,
and a Fifth sort, which wants a Name to express it, adapted to the Touch, and
comprehending all the Tactile Qualities, as Hot, Cold, Hard, Soft, Rough,
Smooth, Sharp, and the rest of them. But This is evidently a Mistake; for the
Number of the Senses is by no means adjusted, according to the Number of the
Objects they are capable of. Nor are these Objects the Cause of their being
just so many, and no more. Were this a good Account, it would follow, that we
must have been endu'd with a great many more than we now have; whereas now one
and the same Sense entertains Objects of different Kinds; and one and the same
Object creates a Perception, and impresses it self upon several Senses at once.
The most probable Account of this Matter seems rather to be, That the Senses
were intended for Means and Instruments of conveying Knowledge to us; and that
Nature, which, as she is not niggardly, so neither is she profuse, has given
us as many Senses as are suflicient for this purpose; and that when she had
supplied us with enough for our Use, she did not think sit to give us any more.

Seeing does surpass all the rest in the Quickness of its Operation; A
Comparision of them.
For it reaches the very Heavens in an Instant, and acts in the Air, which is
full of Light and Images, without any Trouble or Motion; whereas all the rest
of the Senses receive their Impression by the Motion of those Bodies which make
it. And all Motion requires Time to be performed in; so that all the other
Senses must needs proceed more slowly than This, which need but open its Organ,
and is sure to find Light and Colors stand always ready to be discerned by it.
All the Senses are likewise capable of Pleasure and Pain; but This is
observable of the two grossest of them, That the Touch is capable of abundance
of Pain, and but very little Pleasure; and the Taste, just contrary, feels a
great deal of Pleasure, and little or no Pain.

Weakness and Uncertainty of our Senses is the Great Cause of our Ignorance,
and Error, The Weakness and Uncertainty of them.
and all sort of Misapprehension: For, since Knowledge is attained by the
Mediation of the Senses only, if these make a false Report, what can we do but
receive and stick to it? But after All, who can tell what Reports they make, or
how can any Man accuse them of Falsehood, since we learn all from Them, and
consequently even That which gives us this Jealousy, and is the Ground of the
Accusation? Some indeed affirm, That the Senses are faithful in all their
Messages, and represent the very Truth; That, when we imagine they deceive us,
the Fault is not in Them, but in something else; and that we ought rather to
lay it at any other Door; for no other thing is so free from, so incapable of
imposing upon us. Some again run into the contrary Extreme, cry out upon the
Senses as downright infamous Liars, and tell you, that nothing at all of
Certainty can be had from them. See Advertisement.
But the Truth lies between these Extremes.

The mutual Deceits of the Mind, and the Senses.
that they put a Cheat, nay sometimes a Constraint upon Reason; and that by an
unhappy Vicissitude, Reason pays them back in their own Coin, and returns the
Cheat upon Them. And is not Man, think you, like to be wonderful Wise and
Knowing, when the outward and the inward Instruments of Instruction are
Eternally tricking one another, and his whole Composition is full of Falsehood
and Weakness in the most necessary and essential Parts of it? Now, that the
Senses deceive, and commit a Violence upon the Understanding, we see plain
enough in those Instances, where Some of them immediately put us in a Rage,
Others sweeten and appease the Soul, and Others again tickle and please it
exceedingly. And why should Men turn their Heads away, when they are let Blood,
or lanced, or suffer Incisions and Burnings, but from their Consciousness of
the Power the Senses have to disturb their Reason; and that the same thing is
better born, when the Eyes do not observe the Operation? The Looking down a
Pit, or vast Precipice, disorders and confounds a Man, though he knows at the
same time, that he stands safe himself, and cannot reasonably apprehend any
danger of salling into it? And, to instance in no more, it is evident, that
Sense of Pain and Pleasure both, does every Day vanquish, and utterly confound
the best and bravest Resolutions of Virtue, and Temperance, and Patience.

Again, It is no less evident, that the Senses on the other hand are cheated by
the Understanding. This is demonstrated by those Agitations of Anger, and Love,
and Hatred, and other Passions, which impose upon us, and make us see and hear
things quite otherwise than they really are. Nay sometimes our Senses are not
only deceived, but perfectly stupify'd, and bound up from all power of Action,
by violent Disorders of the Soul, as if the Soul retired inwards, and were
entirely taken up there; For thus it often happens, when our Mind is very
intent upon somewhat else, the Eye never sees, nor takes the least notice of
those Objects that stand directly before it, and present themselves to our
View. And Reason and Sense judge very differently of the Magnitude of the Sun
and Stars, and of the Shape of a Stick in the Water.

These Senses are common to Men and Brutes.
and sometimes are more liberally dealt with in it: For Some are quicker of
Hearing than Men; Others have a stronger and clearer Sight; Others a nicer
Smell; and Others a more distinguishing Taste. The general Opinion is, that a
Stag excells all other Creatures in Hearing, an Eagle in Seeing, a Dog in
Smelling, an Ape in Tasting, and a Tortoise in Feeling. But yet the
Pre-eminence in this last has been allowed to Man; which is not much for our
Credit, since This of all the Senses is reckoned the grossest and most Brutal.
In the mean while, this Reflection upon what has gone before, may not be
unseasonable; That if the Senses are the Means and Instruments of Knowledge,
and Brutes have Senses too, nay frequently more acute and penetrating than
Ours, there may a fair Argument be drawn from hence, for Their partaking in
Knowledge with us, as well as they partake of the Helps and Means that convey
it to us.

Instruments of Knowledge, yet are they not the only Instruments; It is hard to
trust our Senses.
much less are our own Senses alone to be consulted or depended upon in the
Case: For if it happens that Brutes have from Their Senses a Report different
from that which Ours make, and the Judgment given upon that Evidence do
consequently disagree with the Notions we form to our selves, (as in sundry
Instances it is plain it does happen) which of these two Testimonies shall we
believe? Our Fasting-Spittle cleanses and heals our own Wounds, and yet it
kills a Serpent; Now from Two so different Effects, what Conclusion can be made
concerning the true Nature of Humane Spittle? Shall we say that it is of a
Drying and a Cleansing, or of a Poisonous and Killing Quality? To make any
certain Determination of the Operations of Sense, we should do well, methinks,
to agree with the Brutes, who have the same Faculties as well as We. But the
least that can possibly be required in order to it, is That we should be
consistent with our own selves, and that the same Judge, and the same Evidence
should always concur in the same Sentence. And yet even This we are not come
to: Shut your Eye, and put your Finger upon part of the Lid, and this Eye so
pressed sees things after another manner, than it does in the Natural and
Common Posture. Stop your Ear, and the Sound is vastly different from what it
is in the ordinary Impression: These Disserences every Man, when he will, may
make for himself. But some there are which Nature has made to our Hand: A
Child Tastes, and Hears, and Sees much otherwise than a Grown Man; and a Man in
his full Strength dislers no less from an Old Man; One in perfect Health, from
a sick Person; a Wise Man from a Fool. Now where the Diversity and Distance is
so great, nay, where there is even a Contrariety of Perceptions, where shall we
fix, or what can we depend upon for Truth? Even One Sense contradicts, and
gives the Lie to another; for a Piece of Painting which seems Raised, and in
Relief (as they term it) to the Eye, when we come to feel it with the Hand, is
perfectly flat and smooth.

ADVERTISEMENT.
IN order to giving the Reader a right Notion of the Matter treated of in this
Chapter, I shall beg leave to detain him a little, with the Consideration of
these Three Particulars. First, What dependence may be had upon the Evidence of
Sense. Secondly, Whence those Mistakes do really proceed, which we find
sometimes charged upon the Deceivableness of our Senses. Thirdly, Whether All
our Knowledge depends upon our Senses, so as that we can know nothing but by
Their means.


I. As to the Evidence of Sense; This is what all Mankind, who have ever
allowed any thing of Knowledge or Certainty at all, constantly looked upon, as
the surest and most irrefragable in all those Cases, which are the proper
Objects of it: And therefore He that went about to evacuate or weaken this, was
esteemed a Man not fit to be disputed with: Because one must needs despair of
producing any better and more convincing Proofs, and so he must continue in
incurable Ignorance, unless we could suppose so absurd a Process in arguing, as
that a Man should be persuaded of a thing more manifest, by a Medium which is
less so. It were an Assront to Humane Nature, to endeavor the establishing
this by Arguments, since none ever disclaimed the Truth of it, but They who
would not allow us to be sure that any Thing was true; and consequently, could
no more depend upon their own Objections against it, than they could upon the
Thing they brought them against. Therefore Lucretius has very deservedly
exposed the Folly of such perverse Scepticks, in his Fourth Book. Denique nil
sciri siquis putat, etc. He that says Nothing can be known, o'erthrows
His own Opinion; for He Nothing knows;
So knows not That. What need of long dispute?
Those Maxims kill Themselves, Themselves confute:
But grant This might be known, and grant He knew;
Yet since he has discovered nothing true.
What Mark, and what Criterion then can show,
Or tell, what it is to know, or not to know?
Or how could He what is Truth, what is Falsehood learn?
How what was Doubt, what Certainty discern? From Sense all Truth and Certainty
infer,
In vain some strive to prove that Sense can err;
For that which would convince, which would oppose
The Senses, must be surer far than those.


So that upon these Terms, it is evident all Knowledge must be given up,
because if our Senses be false, we can have no stronger Conviction than what
arises from Them, that any thing is true; nor that there is such a thing as
Truth or Falsehood in the World. But besides, if it were proper to argue in such
a Case, any reasonable Person would find no difficulty in the Belief of this
Matter; For if he only allow the Being of a God, and considers the mighty
consequence of our Senses to us in all our Affairs whatsoever; it can never
enter into one's Head, that a Being of such Perfections would leave his
Creatures in perpetual Ignorance and Uncertainty, and give them such Organs and
Instruments, as should only deceive and confound them: For God indeed is the
true Efficient Cause of all our Sensations, and the Foundation of our
Certainty; and his Goodness and Truth are our Pledges, that we are not mistaken
staken, and always in the wrong, in the due Use of those Faculties he has
given us to distinguish things by.

Again: If we observe the manner how these Operations are performed, that it is
by External Impressions, by which the Object strikes upon the proper Organ, and
that Impression is continued till it be carried on to that, which is called the
Common Sensory, or the inward Seat of Sense; All this must depend upon the same
necessary Laws of Matter and Motion, by which Bodies in general act upon one
another. And therefore, supposing the same Object, the same force of
Impression, the same Situation, the same Disposition of the Organ, the same
Medium, and the like; the Report of the Sense cannot but be the same: But where
there is a Variation in any of these, the Perception is under a necessity of
Varying too. Thus, (to use the Instance mentioned by Charron) When part of the
Eyelid is pressed down by the Finger, the Rays are differently admitted into
the Pupil, and fall upon two several places of the Tunica Retina, which
consequently creates a twofold Impression of the Object: And This Duplicity is
as natural and necessary in such a Disposition of the Eye, as truly agreeable
to all the Rules of Matter and Motion, as a single Representation would be in
the usual Posture; so far from a Reflection upon the Truth of Sense, that our
Senses could not be true, if the thing were otherwise represented. A
proportionable Difference must needs follow in the different Modifications of
Light and Shades; (which is the Reason of that Appearance taken notice of here,
of Pieces in Relief) the dextrous Management whereof makes the great Secret of
the Art of Painting. So it is again, if there be any thing uncommon in the
Medium through which the Rays pass from the Object to the Organ of Sense; which
is the Case of Prismes, or of Eyes, either distorted in their Situation, or
discolored in any of the Humors: And as These make a Change in the
represented Color of the Object, so does the Contraction or Dilatation of the
Pupil, in the Magnitude or Figure of it. And the Eye, and other Organs of
Sense, varying by Age, Sickness, Nature, or Accidents, unavoidably require
different Sensations, in Persons of different Years and Conditions. The Matter
coming much to one, whether the Object be variously represented through
Distance, or its own Posture and Form, or through some Change and Defect of the
Organ, which receives the Impression. All Which sufficiently accounts for the
differing Sensations of Children, Grown-Men, and Aged Persons; the different
Tastes of the Sick and the Healthful; and indeed the vast Diversity of Palats
among Mankind in general: For here is a mighty Diversity in the Organ of Sense;
and the making one and the same Report is therefore impossible: For our Senses
are like Messengers, and all their Business is, To be Faithful and True in
delivering their Errand, as they have received it. If it were not given as it
ought to be at first, (that is, if there be any accidental Defects to change
the Appearance) This they are not responsible for; but they are to tell what
they feel, and hear, and see; and in This they are faithful, and may be
depended upon. For, That they may be trusted even in Matters of the greatest
Consequence, is beyond all reasonable Contradiction; not only from the most
necessary and important Matters of Humane Life, being carried on upon the
Confidence of this Testimony, but (which to a Christian is much more
considerable) from all the External Evidences of Religion being put upon this
Issue. The Life and Death, the Resurrection and Ascension of our Blessed
Savior, the Doctrines he taught, and the Miracles he did in Confirmation of
them, being so many Appeals to the Senses of those with whom he conversed, and
the great Motive to Persuasion, which the Apostle urges, is, that he delivered
That to his Proselytes concerning the Word of Life, of which they had had all
possible Demonstrations, since it was what He and his Fellow-Preachers had
heard, what they had seen with their Eyes, what they had looked upon, 1 John I.
1.
and their Hands had handled. All which was certainly a very weak and
impertinent Allegation, if the Senses are so liable to Mistakes, and so
uncertain a Foundation of Knowledge, that we cannot with safety fix any
Conclusions from the Reports they make to us. And yet it cannot be denied, but
Men do very frequently err by too easy a Credulity in this respect, which
ministers sufficient ground for our Second Enquiry.

II. Whence those Errors do really proceed, which we find sometimes charged
upon the Deceiveableness of our Senses. In This, as well as some Other
Particulars, Epicurus seems to have been very unfairly dealt withal by the
Stoics, and some other Philosophers of a contrary Party; who, because he
asserted the Truth of the Senses, and vindicated their Fidelity in Reporting,
have charged him with affirming, that a Man could not possibly mistake in
forming Judgments according to those Appearances. Whereas in Truth Epicurus
only places the Senses in the Quality of Evidence, whose business it is to
relate bare Matter of Fact, but does by no means deny the Jurisdiction of the
Court to which those Accounts are given, to pass Sentence as shall seem just
and equal. To this purpose is that (...), which Diogenes Laertius in his Tenth
Book mentions; and Gassendus in his Comment upon it, so rationally enlarges
upon. By which is meant, that Men ought to avoid Precipitation, and not rashly
pronounce, that things are in reality as they are represented; but calmly and
slowly examine Circumstances, and observe the Causes of such Representations.
Thus likewise Lucretius in his Fourth Book, after having instanced in several
Appearances, which, when strictly inquired into, are found to differ from the
Nature of the things themselves, closes his Account with these very significant
Verses, Caetera de genere hoc mirando multa videmus,
Quae violare fidem quasi sensibus omnia quaerunt.
Nequicquam. Quoniam pars horum maxima fallit,
Propter Opinatus animi, quos addimus ipsi, etc.
Which the English Reader may take from Mr. Creech thus: Ten Thousand such
appear, Ten Thousand Fees
To Certainty of Sense; and All oppose:
In vain. It Is Judgment, not the Sense mistakes,
Which fancied Things for real Objects takes.


If then One Light appear to be Two, when the Eyelid is pressed; if a Square
Building at a Distance seem Round; if a Piece in Perspective seem a Cloister or
a Portico; a Man is not presently to conclude that these are really such; nor
can he be excused if he do so. For Reason and Considederation would convince
him, that these Idea's must be so, and could not be otherwise; That the
unnatural Disposition of the Eye must needs double the Image in the first
Instance; That the Distance of the Object will naturally cut off the Angles,
and render the Perception less distinct, in the second; and that Shades
artificially cast, and some Strokes of the Pencil or Style bolder and stronger
than the rest, will of necessity create Imaginary Protuberances, and imaginary
Distances in the Last. What Course then shall one take to prevent Errors in
these Cases? In general; he must not be too hasty in giving Judgment, but bring
these things to the Test. The First must be viewed with his Eye in its usual
Form and Condition; the Second he must make nearer Approaches to, and view it
close at Hand: For the Third he may call in another Sense to his Assistance;
and if the Eye alone cannot, the Touch must set him right.

But to this Charron replies, and not only He, but Lucretius, That no One Sense
can possibly correct another: An poterunt Oculos Aures reprehendere, an Aures
Tactus? etc.
What? Can the Ears convince the Eyes? Can Those
Confute the Hand, the Palate, or the Nose?
Tell them wherein they err, when ever they miss,
And give false Notices? Fond Fancy this!
For Each a proper Use and Power enjoys,
A proper Object every Sense Employs.


But after all, What is the true Meaning of this Argument, and how much does it
amount to? No more than this. That All the Senses are not equally adapted to
receive and distinguish all manner of Objects: that Each of them is equally
Faithful in those peculiar to it: And consequently, the Eyes cannot correct
the Ear in Sounds; nor the Ear the Nose in Smells: But does it follow from
hence, that when two, or more of these Evidences are joined, they will not
corroborate the Testimony, and give a firmer Assurance? or that Reason, which
is the proper Judge may not sift out the Truth by confronting these Evidences
against one another? This is a Construction wholly foreign to the Place, and to
the Philosopher's Design. And therefore (says Empiricus) as Physicians
pronounce of a Disease not from One single Symptom, but from the Concurrence of
several; and a Fover is distinguished, not only by the quickness of the Pulse,
but by the Excess of Heat, the Redness of the Complexion, the Height of the
Water, the Excessive Thirst, and other Characters known to the Skilful in that
Art; So a doubting Philosopher makes a Judgment of Truth, by the Co-incidence
and good Agreement of several Ideas compared together. And to the same Purpose,
Macrobius has described the Process sit for such Cases. If (says he) a Man
sees the Figure of an Apple at a Distance, it does not presently follow that
this is a real Apple; because this Resemblance may be formed out of other
Materials. Saturn 7.14.
What then shall he do to satisfy himself? Let him put it to the Trial of
another Sense, and judge of it by the Smell: But possibly it may have lain
among Apples, and retain the Scent: Then consult the Touch, and examine the
Weight of it: But perhaps the Cunning Artificer has been very Nice in
adjusting this too; If so, let him have recourse to the Taste, and if he find
the true Relish of an Apple; these concurring Evidences leave no reasonable
Doubt of its being really the very Fruit it at first seemed to be. From hence
it does not only appear, what Care ought to be taken in judging the
Representations of Sense; but likewise, how it comes to pass, that Men so often
err upon this Occasion. That it is merely the Effect of Rashness, and
Negligence; and the determining more than we have Evidence for. For these
Ideas, and Impressions give us only the appearances, and external Accidents of
things; and so long as we affirm them to Appear so to us, we are safe, and
cannot Err. But if from these Accidents we shall undertake to determine of
their Substance and Nature: if we shall definitively say, They actually Are,
what they Appear, our own Mind misguides us; and the Fault lies not in the
Evidence, which told us true; but in the Judge, who decides the Cause, without
canvasing the Witnesses, and declares That for Right and Truth, which was never
posed before him.

My Reader will easily apply what has been said here (perhaps too tediously)
to what our Author insinuates of the mutual Cheat, in his sixth Paragraph of
this Chapter. For hence it is that our Pannick Fears, and other groundless and
violent Passions of the Mind, grow to such Excesses, that they run away with
the First Impressions, and never call in Reason, to calm and moderate the
Disorder of the Spirits; but are perfectly transported in the present Heat and
Agitation, and instead of examining, magnify the tormenting Ideas to
themselves. All which is in no Degree owing to the natural Defect, either of
Sense or Reason; but to strength of Passion, and Neglect of such timely
Remedies, as Nature has provided us with, if not wholly to prevent, yet at
least to abate, and soften, and reduce it to a convenient Temper.

III. I proceed now to the last Enquiry, Whether all our Knowledge depend upon
the Senses, so as that we can know nothing but by Their Means. Here Gassendus
forsakes me, and fiercely vindicates that received Opinion of some old
Philosophers, That nothing can come at the Understanding, except it pass
through some of the Senses in its Way thither.

It is not asserted by those who undertake to maintain that Opinion, that
nothing more can be known by us, than what the Impressions of Sense give us an
immediate Perception of; but that we are instructed from Reflection as well as
Sensation; so that, by abstracting, enlarging, or otherwise modifying our
Ideas, we come to understand the Nature of things; yet so as that we can
understand nothing, except the Ideas of it are entertained clearly and
distinctly; either so as to represent to us the thing it self; or so as to give
us sufficient Matter for Reflection to work upon, in raising fresh Ideas from
it.

I. Thus it is, that they pretend to answer the Argument commonly urged against
them, from that very Power we find in our selves, and the common Exercise of
it, to correct the Errors of Imagination. For if all Perceptions of the Mind
were Corporeal Images of the Brain, we must necessarily judge according to the
Report of our Sensitive Organs; and so the Sun must be concluded no Bigger than
he appears. No (say they) for the Mind knows very well, that Distance lessens
the Object to the Eye; and therefore reflecting agreeably to the Rules given in
the former Particular, it pronounces the Sun vastly bigger than it seems. But
still, All this will not amount to those Reasons, which adjust its Magnitude,
to be 160 times Bigger than the Earth. Or, if they would, yet Proportions and
Distances are mere Respects, and such as we can have no Corporeal Images of.
These then are the Effect of another Principle; and so is the Determinate
Magnitude of this Body; for though Enlarging the Idea, and allowing for
Distance, would create an Image vastly Bulky perhaps; yet this could not state
the Exact Dimensions, nor form the Comparison in such Odds, between that Globe
of Fire, and this of Earth. II. Another Argument against all Knowledge
proceeding from the Senses, is taken from Those, which are commonly called the
Reflex Acts of the Mind, such as we perceive our Own Operations and Thoughts
by: For all Ideas, which are intromitted by the Senses, come from Material
Objects, and such Impressions are subject to the common Laws of Matter; one of
which is, To act by Impulse, and upon something else, but not upon it self. So
that it is impossible for the Mind to have its own Image conveyed through the
Organs of Sense; and consequently these sorts of Operations, by which it
retires inward, and recollects, and views it self; As they are undeniable in
Fact, so are they in all Reason to be ascribed to some other Power than
Imagination; and such as the Senses and External Impressions have nothing to do
in. III. But though we should allow, that the Mind (as some have contended,
though they have not been able to prove it) can by Similitude, Abstraction, and
such other Methods, form Ideas even of these things; yet what shall we say to
the Case of Immaterial Substances? And that such there are, a Reflection upon
our own Souls, the Objects about which they are conversant, their several
Operations, and the Manner of them, very incompatible with Matter and the Laws
of Motion, will not suffer reasoning People to Doubt. Now if all Knowledge be
derived from our Senses, it must proceed from such Ideas as are drawn upon the
Imagination, by Impressions upon the outward Organ, conveyed thither in the
usual Course and Method of Sensation; but these Impressions cannot be made
otherwise, than by Matter and Motion; and consequently, either we can have no
distinct Notion, no assurance of any Immaterial Substances; or else we may have
some Knowledge which does not depend upon, nor accrue to us from our Senses.
IV. At this Rate, neither can we have any Idea at all, of the First and most
perfect Being, God himself: For what Representations can Sense give us? what
Reflections can it help us to, of a Being Infinite and Eternal, Independent and
produced from no other Cause; such as has the Properties of Self, and
Necessary Existence inseparable from the Notion of it? It is not the Image of
an old Man, nor the multiplying of Years into a vast Duration, that will do the
Business here; for still the main Difficulty, of never Beginning, never Ending;
Self-Origination, or (...) remains; and will for ever remain, not only
incapable of any sensible Representation, but a Contradiction to them all. And
yet Reason assures us, That such a Being, there certainly is; nay, that there
needs must be; for without it, nothing could ever have been at all; but We must
lose our selves and all our Ideas in a Maze and infinite Circle of Causes; and
shall never be able to account for the Existence of any thing, which our Senses
are confessed to represent to us, unless we admit of One thing, which it must be
confessed, they never can give us any sort of Representation of. V. Once more. To
come lower, and observe even Corporeal Substances themselves. Such as we see,
and feel, and converse with every Moment. From such as these it is that our
Senses are moved. But let us consider, What it is that moves them; or how far
we can be informed by such Impressions. Now it is granted on all Hands, that
Sense can only instruct us in the Modes and Accidents of Things; and yet All
thinking Men must allow, that those Accidents are not capable of subsisting
alone. So that we can learn this Way the Powers and Properties of things, but
not the Things themselves. Thus, while we are forced to make a Difference,
between the Nature and Real Essence, and the Properties or Accidents inherent
in that Nature; we must yield plainly, that all our Knowledge is so far from
depending upon Sense, that we cannot know any one thing by it. Since every
Man's Reason undeniably assures him, that there is something more intimate and
deep, which no Ideas can reach to; and without which those Superficial
Qualities, of which he has any Idea, could not possibly subsist.
Upon the whole Matter it is certain, that there must be some common Notices
and Principles, such as evidence themselves to every considering Mind, which do
not only assist, but carry us beyond any sensible Ideas, or any Reflections
they can be improved into: Concerning which, if my Reader desire more full
satisfaction, and would see this Argument illustrated at large, he will do well
to consult the incomparably Learned and Judicious Bishop Stillingfleet, in his
late Vindication of the Doctrine of the Trinity. Chap. X.

I add only upon this Occasion, that the foregoing Reasons are of good Force to
prove, that the Humane Soul is of a more Noble Principle than Matter. For
indeed, not only Reason, but Sensation is not to be solved upon other Terms. Of
which the Modern Philosophers were well aware; who, when they asserted the
Souls of Brutes to be mere Matter, soon found an absolute Necessity of
affirming, that they were altogether void of Sense too: For though the outward
Impression be made upon the Organ, yet it is a Reflex Act, which makes the
Sensation, and informs the Patient of it. And such Acts they have not been able
to conceive, how Matter should be capable of. Since it is the Property of one
Body to Act upon another, but no Body can act upon it self.

CHAP. XI. Of Sight, Hearing, and Speech.
THese are the Three Jewels, These Three (...) together.
the most Excellent and Valuable Endowments, that belong to the Body of Man:
None that appear to outward View, are comparable to them; but it will bear some
Dispute, which of the Three ought to be preferred. As to the Organ, by which
they are performed, it must be confessed, that That of the Sight is admirable for
its charming Form, and nice Composition; it is Beautiful, Lively, and
Sparkling, made up of great Variety; its Parts Subtle, and Small; and their
Humors mixed to Astonishment, both for Use and Comeliness. From whence that
common Observation has obtained, that the Eye is one of those Parts, which
Nature first begins to form, and finishes one of the last. Upon the same
Account This is one of the tenderest, and most delicate Parts about us: Subject
to a vast Number of Diseases and Infirmities. Physicians and Anatomists have
reckoned no less than a Hundred and Twenty Indispositions incident to it.
Speech is esteemed the next in Dignity, but Hearing makes some amends for the
last and lowest Place, by the many great Advantages belonging to it. Sight
seems to be the most Necessary, and most Serviceable to the Body. And this
seems to be the Reason, why it is of greater Consequence to Brutes, whose
Advantages are chiefly Corporeal, than Hearing can be: But Hearing seems to
challenge the Preference, with Regard to the Advantages and Improvement of the
Mind. Sight is principally Useful for Invention, for most things are discovered
by the help of this Sense; but though it lays the first Foundations, and gives
the Hints, yet it brings nothing to Perfection. It is farther to be considered,
that Sight is capable of Perception in nothing but what is Corporeal, and it
gives no Knowledge of Universals. Individuals and Bodies are its proper Object,
and it cannot penetrate into these any deeper than the Shell or Surface. It is
the proper Instrument of Ignorant and Unlearned Men, who look no farther, than
that which is just before them, and makes an Impression upon the outward Senses.

Hearing may be termed an Inward and Spiritual Sense: Hearing (...).
It is the Agent and Conveyer of Intelligence to the Understanding; the
Instrument of Learning and Thought; and receives not only Individuals, as Sight
does, but dives into their most secret and abstruse Parts; nay it has a
Capacity so large as to comprehend General, Spiritual, Abstracted, and Divine
Truths; such as Sight is so far from giving us any assistance in, that it
rather disturbs and confounds us in the Disquisisition of them. Accordingly,
there have been many Instances of Great Men who have been blind, and yet
singularly eminent for Wisdom and Knowledge; and some of Persons who have
deprived themselves of Sight, in order to the becoming more exquisite
Philosophers; but no one Example of either of these Kinds can be produced in
Deaf Persons. This is the Gate by which we enter, and storm the Castle; By This
we bend the Mind to Good or Evil. So Profane Story tells us of Agamemnon's
Queen, whose Chastity was preserved by Music: And so Sacred Story relates,
that Readiness Evil-Spirit was charmed by David's Harp: and so the Roman History
observes, that Graechus the famous Orator sweetened his Voice by the help of one
that played to him upon the Flute, and taught him such Tones, as were most
moving, and for his purpose. In short, This is the Only Passage that Learning,
and Truth, and Virtue have found to our Souls; and the Gospel it self enters by
it: Romans x. 17
For the Apostle has told us, That Faith comes by Hearing, and Hearing by the
Word of God. And that they who obstinately stick to the Report of their Sight,
will find it rather an Obstruction than an Informer in the highest Mysteries of
Religion. Heb. xi. 1.
That Faith is the Evidence of things not seen, and the Belief of Testimonies
that are heard: And accordingly the Primitive Christians had a Class of
Believers to whom they gave the Title of Audientes, Hearers. To all This I may
add, that This Sense is of great Use in the Dark, and when Men are asleep, by
giving them seasonable Alarms, and awakening them to provide for their Defense
and Preservation. Upon all these Accounts the Philosophers are so profuse in
their Praises of Hearing, recommending the diligent use of it, advising us to
purge our Ears, and keep them clean from Prejudice and Corruption; This being
the best Security, the surest Guard of our Souls, as a Commander in Garrison
would make it his first and chief Care, to keep strict Centry, and line the
Gates and Walls well, for fear an Enemy should rush in and surprise him.

Speech is a particular Favor of Nature to Mankind, The Power of Speech.
and a very useful, necessary, and excellent Gift it is. Consider it with
respect to the Speaker, and it is the Image and Interpreter of the Soul; the
Messenger of the Heart, the Door by which all that lies within, comes out, and
shows it self abroad. Whatsoever is born in Darkness, is thus brought forth
into the Light; the Mind discovers and displays it self most clearly this way;
which gave occasion to that Saying of one of the Ancients, Eloquere, ut videam.
Speak, that I may know what you are. Thus Men are like Vessels, which by the
Sound are quickly distinguished, whether they be broken or whole, full or
empty; and Speech to Them is like the Touchstone to Metals; the Counterfeit and
the true Standard are immediately known by it.

But if we consider it with regard to the Persons to whom it is directed, thus
it is a powerful and an imperious Master; enters the Castle, seizes the
Governor; it moves and stirs him, it animates and encourages, it provokes and
appeases, it raises and dejects him; it overwhelms him with Grief, and
transports him with Joy; makes what Impressions, inspires what Passions it
pleases; manages and moulds the Soul into any Form, and bends it all manner of
ways: Nay, it extends its Dominion over the Body too; makes that Red with
Blushes, and Pale with Fear; provokes Laughter and Tears; forces it to start
and shiver; to tremble with Anger, leap for Joy, swoon and faint away with
Violence of Passion.

Consider it with regard to the World in general, and Speech is as it were the
Hand of the Soul, which This uses as the Body does the Natural one, for taking
and receiving, for asking and for giving Assistance. This is the great
Goer-between, the Carrier of Intelligence, the Factor for Trade Merx a Mercurio.
, as the Latin Etymologists tell us, that the Word which signifies Traffic and
Commerce, derives it self from Mercury the God of Eloquence. By It Treaties of
Peace are made, War proclaimed, all manner of Business public and private
negotiated and dispatched; Learning, and all the hidden Treasures of the Mind
uttered and distributed: For This in Truth is the Original and the Instrument
of all Communication; the Band and Cement of Humane Society, (provided the
Language be perfectly understood; for as one of the Ancients said, A Man had
better be in the Company of a Dog that he knows, and is acquainted with, than
in that of another Man, who cannot make himself understood by us. So that one
Foreigner to another does by no means answer the Ut externus alieno non sit
hominis vice.
Character of his Nature, and is in effect as no Man.)

In short, The Tongue is a Tool converted to all manner of Uses; an Instrument
of Good and Evil, Prove. xviii. 21.
as Wisdom it self has taught us; Life and Death are in the Power of the
Tongue. The Advantages and the Inconveniences that proceed from it are never to
be expressed; a prudent or an incautious, a wicked, or a conscientious use of it,
disposes our own, and sometimes other Peoples Fortunes; or draws down infinite
Dangers; preserves or destroys Reputation: Of a good and ill Tougue. Prove. x.
20. xii. 18. xv. 4.
So that nothing is of better or worse Consequence than the Tongue. The Tongue
of the Wise and Just (says the same Divine Wisdom) is as choice Silver, it is
Health, it is a Tree of Life, enriching, healing, reconciling; a Preservative
and a Happiness. It is as the Door to a Royal Cabinet, upon the opening whereof
we immediately see a Thousand precious Rarities, more beautiful, more valuable
than all the Wealth of both the Indies; more fragrant and refreshing than all
the Gums and Spices of Arabia. The Wise draws out his Artillery in Order, sets
his Philosophical Aphorisms and profitable Sentences in array, applies his
Similitudes and Examples pertinently and seasonably, improves others by his
Reading, and renders the Histories of former Ages of present and public Use,
enriches all he converses with out of his own inexhaustible Mine; offers
nothing but what issolid, and substantial, and tried; and is ready upon all
occasions, (like the Wealthy and Prudent Householder alluded to in the Gospel)
to bring forth out of his Treasures things new and old. Mat. xiii.
Such beneficial Instructions as may be of use to regulate the Manners of
private Persons, and direct the Government and Administration of the Public;
such as may be serviceable to all Circumstances, all the Parts and Duties of
Men, and teach them both how to Live, and how to Die well. And when These are
introduced at seasonable Times, and managed with Discretion, the Beauty and the
Pleasure of them is exceeding great, as well as the Benefit and Advantage; A
Word fitly spoken is like Apples of Gold in Pictures of Silver. Prove. xxv. 11.
So the Wisest of Men has expressed the Counsels, or Reproofs, or Comforts
handsomely delivered; and what can possibly be more grateful, more valuable,
more ornamental?

The Mouth of a wicked Man, quite contrary, is a noisome stinking Pit; his
Breath is contagious, and kills like a Pestilence; Murders his Neighbor
secretly, Stabs and wounds his Reputation to Death; and then insults over his
mangled Honor with a barbarous Triumph. It is Sword, and Fire, and Poison, and
Death, and Hell, and Every thing that is mischievous and destructive. The Holy
Spirit it self has allowed it no better a Character; Jam. iii. 6.
for St. James has called it a Fire, a World of Iniquity, a Defiler of the
whole Body, an Incendiary to the Course of Nature; and this Firebrand it self
kindled in Hell. And the Son of Syrach has enlarged upon the Subject so well,
Ecclus. xxviii. 13-21.
that the whole Passage ought to be inserted. Curse the Whisperer and
Double-Tongued, for such have destroyed many that were at Peace. A Backbiting
Tongue has disquieted many, and driven them from Nation to Nation; strong
Cities has it pulled down, and overthrown the Houses of great Men. Whosoever
hearkeneth unto it shall never find rest, nor dwell quietly. The Stroke of the
Whip makes Marks in the Flesh, but the Stroke of the Tongue breaks the
Bones. Many have fallen by the Edge of the Sword, but not so many as have
fallen by the Tongue. Well is He that is defended from it, and has not passed
through the Venom thereof; who has not drawn the Yoke thereof, nor has been
bound in her Bands. For the Yoke thereof is a Yoke of Iron; and the Bands
thereof are Bands of Brass. The Death thereof is an evil Death, the Grave is
better than it.

Correspondence of Hearing and Speech.
Hearing and Speech, answer, and have a near and intimate Relation to one
another; Each of them single is of no Significance at all; and therefore
Nature, to make Either of them useful, found it necessary to supply us with
Both. They are the Two Doors of the Soul, whereby she sends in and out, and
holds a Correspondence all the World over; nay, she does not only send, but go;
for by these two, like Vessels with their Orifices joined, the Soul
communicates and pours out her Thoughts, and transfuses her very Self into
another's Breast. Where these Passages are shut and closed, as they are in the
Deaf and Dumb, the Mind is in perpetual Misery and Solitude; For Hearing is the
Door for Entrance, and Speech for going Abroad: By the former of these, the
Soul receives the Conceptions of others; by the latter she imparts and enriches
them with her own. The mutual Operation of these Two may be resembled to the
Flint and the Steel, from the Concussion and Strokes whereof, Truth, like a
Sacred Fire, is kindled; For They agitating and polishing each other, scour off
the Rust of the Mind, brighten and beautify it, and bring all Knowledge to
Perfection. Only we must observe, that these Noble Effects have their first
Beginning from the Hearing; for Wisdom must needs have been put into the Mind
before it can be drawn out from thence. And accordingly we see that Persons
born Deaf, are constantly Dumb too. The first thing to be done is to furnish
this House within, which is ordinarily done by Hearing; and then follows the
distributing our Stores by Conversation and Speech: So that the Good and Evil
of what we speak, will depend upon the Good and Evil of what we hear: For such
as we are accustomed to receive, such of necessity we must give back again: And
therefore a Man should above all things keep his Ears chaste and unpolluted,
and stop them against Vice and Indecency; for this sort of Communication is
exceeding infectious, Book III. Chap. 43.
and taints the Mind presently. The Advices that are proper for the Use and
Government of our Speech, will be insisted upon hereafter.

CHAP. XII. Of the other Faculties, viz. Imagination, Memory, and Appetite.
THE Fancy or Imaginative Faculty, first collects the several Images received
by the Senses, forms Idea's out of them, and lays them up for use. This is done
in so accurate and faithful a manner, that though the Objects themselves be far
distant, nay, though the Man be asleep, and all his Senses locked up, yet this
Faculty represents them to the Mind and Thoughts, in Images so strong, so
lively, that the Imagination does the very same to the Understanding now, which
the Object it self did, by the first and freshest Impressions heretofore.

The Memorative Faculty is the Register and Storehouse of all the Idea's and
Images first perceived by the Senses, and then collected and sealed up by the
Imagination.

The Appetite seeks, and pursues, and culls out of all these things so
apprehended, such of them as appear to be Good and most Agreeable.

CHAP. XIII. Of the Intellectual Faculty; which is peculiar to the Humane Soul.


Now the Seat, The Seat and Instrument of the Soul.
or rather the Throne of the Reasonable Soul, where it sits and reigns Supreme,
is not the Heart, (as was generally supposed before Plato and Hippocrates) but
the Brain: For the Heart is not capable of Wisdom, but is properly the Seat and
Source of Vegetation. Now the Brain, which in Man much exceeds the Quantity
assigned to any other Creature, must be so contrived and disposed, that the
Reasonable Soul may act freely; and in order hereunto, the Figure of it must be
almost like that of a Ship; it must not be a perfect Round, it must not be too
Great, nor too Little; though of the Two Extremes the Excess is much less to be
found fault with, than the Defect: It must be composed of a delicate fluid
Substance, of fine and subtle Parts, and these well joined together, and all
united without any Separation, or void Spaces throughout the whole. It has
Four small Cavities or Ventricles, Three of which lie forward in the middle,
and are placed in a Collateral Line to one another: The Fourth lies behind
these, toward the hinder part of the Head, and is single by it self. This is
the Shop in which the Vital Spirits are first formed and united, in order to
the being afterward converted into Animal Spirits, and then conveyed into the
Three Cavities that lie forward: And these Animal Spirits are the Instruments
made use of by the Soul, for discharging her several Functions, and exercising
all her Faculties. Those Faculties are likewise Three; the Understanding, the
Memory, and the Imagination: And these are not exercised distinctly and apart,
nor has each of them a different Ventricle of the Brain appropriated to it;
(which is all an old and vulgar Error concerning them) but their Operations
are altogether, and in common. All the Three Faculties exert themselves in all
and every of the Three Cavities; somewhat like our Bodily Senses, which are
double, and have Two Organs, in each of which the same Sense performs all its
Operations entire. From hence it comes to pass, that a Man who is hurt or
disabled in Two of these Three Ventricles, (as one in a Palsy, for Instance)
does yet continue to have the use of all his Three Faculties: That is, He
understands, and remembers, and forms Idea's still, by virtue of that One
Cavity, which the Disease has not yet seized upon. It is true, he does this
more weakly, and every Operation of every kind is more imperfect than it was
formerly, because the Strength and Vigor of One is not equal to the united
Force of Three: But yet it evidently follows from hence, that each Faculty has
not its Workhouse in a distinct Apartment, and entire to it self alone; for
then, as soon as any of these Ventricles begins to be disabled, that Faculty to
which it belongs, must immediately cease, and could never more be exerted in
any Degree at all.

How far the Reasonable Soul is Organical.
that the Reasonable Soul is not Organical; that is, that it can act separately
and independently, and has no need of any Corporeal Instrument to assist it in
the Discharge of its Functions. And this Notion they have been more fond of,
because they imagine it of consequence for proving the Immortality of the Soul.
Now without engaging in a vast and dark Labyrinth of Dispute, about a Matter
which we are incapable of knowing perfectly, this Question may be brought to a
short Issue: For if we will but credit our own Eyes, and our own Experience,
every Day gives us Demonstrations, which overthrow this Opinion, and establish
the Contrary. It is certain that all Men have not equal Capacities, nor do they
apprehend things, or argue upon them alike, but the Disparity is very great and
visible between one Man and another. It is no less evident, that the same
Person changes, and differs from himself; that his Reason is more clear, and
perfect, and strong at one Time, and at one Age, in one Disposition of Body,
and in one Circumstance of Fortune and Life, than it is in another. One Man can
do nothing except he have Ease and Leisure; another requires Dangers and
Difficulties to rouse him, and never thinks to purpose, till he be pressed hard,
and driven to Extremities: A Third finds himself much more capable in Health
than in Sickness: And a Fourth feels his Mind most vigorous and active, then
when his Diseases and Weakness have reduced his Body lowest. The same Man at
one Season excels in Judgment, and flags in his Fancy; so that One Faculty
decays in proportion as Another improves. Now the most probable Account that
can be given for all these Differences and Alterations, seems to be a
difference in the State and Disposition of the Organs, which are to the Soul as
Tools to the Artificer. Which way but this shall we answer for the strange
Effects we see produced by Drunkenness, by the Bite of a Mad Dog, by a high
Fever, by a Blow upon the Head, by the Vapors that rise from the Stomach and
annoy the Brain; and by several other Accidents which affect any of the Parts
thereabouts? What Confusions do they make, how perfectly stupid, and childish,
and frantic do Men grow upon them, lose their Memory quite, and feel their
Heads turned upside down, their former Idea's eraced, their Judgment destroyed?
All the Wisdom of Greece is not able to maintain it self against them; and if
the Shock be very violent indeed, then it does not only disturb and enfeeble,
but quite drive away the Soul, and constrain her to remove out of the Body. Now
it is plain, that these Accidents are purely Corporeal, and consequently they
cannot affect what is not so; they can never fly so high as the exalted and
Spiritual Faculties of the Reasonable Soul; all that they can do is to vitiate
the Organs, to put Them out of their Course, and intercept the usual
Communications; and when This is once effected, the Soul can no longer act
regularly; She may command, but They cannot obey; and if these Organs are sore
bruised, and distorted very grievously, then She and They can no longer subsist
together: The Lodging is no longer sit to entertain her, and she must be gone.

Now I do by no means see, how this Opinion can be guilty of any Prejudice to
that of the Immortality of the Soul; For first, We are not here enquiring what
the Soul is, but how she operates, and what Laws of Action she is bound up to,
while in Conjunction with a Mortal Body. And Secondly, The making Use of
Corporeal Instruments, does by no Means prove the User to be Corporeal or
Mortal. God, without all Question, is Immortal, and yet God himself does not
think it below him to use such; and to proportion the Effects and Operations of
his Providence to them. He produces Men of different Understandings and Parts,
according to the Constitution of their Parents, and the Concurrence of other
Natural Causes; nay, even according to the different Climate, and Country, and
Air they are born in. For Greece and Italy have ever been observed to produce
Men of quicker, and clearer Wit, than Muscovy and Tartary. And as God does in
this Case, so does the Mind in others. It reasons better or worse, remembers
more or less Faithfully, has a more fruitful, or more barren Imagination,
according as the Organs (which are the Corporeal Instruments appointed to serve
it upon these Occasions) are better or worse disposed to do their Duty. Now the
Brain is properly the Instrument of the Reasonable Soul, and therefore upon the
due Temperament of This, a great deal must needs, indeed the Whole in a manner,
will depend: That therefore shall be the next Thing we attempt to give an
Account of.

Temperament is to be understood the Mixture and Proportion of the Four Prime
Qualities, Of the Temperament of the Brain.
Hot and Cold, Moist and Dry; or rather a Fifth Quality, which is, as it were,
a Harmony resulting from a due Conjunction of all these together, like that
Concord in Sounds, which arises from a Friendly Complication of different
Notes. Now upon that Mixture of the Brain it is, that the State and the
Operations of the Reasonable Soul depend. Only This is Man's great Unhappiness,
that the Three Faculties, Understanding, Memory, and Imagination, do each of
them require different, nay, contrary Temperaments, for their Exercise and
Perfection. The Temperament proper for the Understanding is a Predominance of
Dry; and this gives us some Account, how it comes to pass, that Persons far
gone in Years, are more Intelligent and Judicious, than those that are Younger.
For, besides the Advantages which Art, and Study, and Experience may give them;
they have a Disposition to it from Nature; The Brain, as Men grow older,
purifying it self from Excrementitious Humors, and growing dryer every Day:
For the same Reason, in all likelihood, Melancholy Persons, and those under
Affliction, and Want, and Persons that are fasting (it being an Effect of Grief
and Fasting to keep the Brain dry) may be better disposed to think; and
qualified to do it to good Purpose, as well as some of them are necessitated by
their Circumstances, to apply themselves to it. This is farther observable in
Brutes; Ants, and Bees, and Elephants, as they are the Dryest, so they are the
most capable, and ingenious of any; and those of a moist Constitution, (the
Swine for Instance) are Stupid and Senseless. Thus again in Men; Those of
Southerly Countries, excel in Wisdom, from the Drought of their Brain, and
their inward Heat being moderated, by that of a Violent Sun without, which
exhales it.

The Temperament best accommodated to the Memory is Moist; and hence it is,
that Children are more ready and perfect in it, than old People; hence it is
most apt and faithful in a Morning, when the Brain has been well refreshed,
and thoroughly moistened by a good Nights Sleep; hence also the Inhabitants of
the Northern Climates, have the strongest Memories, for These are under a
moister Air, by Means of their great Distance from the Sun. But this Moisture
must not be so mistaken as if I meant, that the Temper of the Memory is fluid,
like Water; but rather such a Moisture as we may observe in Air, Glue, Grease,
or Oil; something of such a Substance and Continuity of Parts, as may both take
the Impression easily, and keep it a great while; as we see Pictures do, that
are laid in Oil Colors.

The Temperament sit for the Imagination, is Hot, which makes Distracted,
Hair-brained, and Feverish People, excel all others in bold and lofty Flights
of Fancy. Thus Poetry, Divination, and all that depends upon Imagination, were
always thought to proceed from a sort of Fury and Inspiration. This Faculty is
for the same Reason most Vigorous in Youth and the Flower of our Age: The Poets
accordingly flourished at these Years, and Almighty God, (who even in
Supernatural Influences and Effects, made great use of Natural Causes, and did
as little Violence as was possible, to a Course of his own Instituting) ordered
the Matter so, that most of the Prophets should do so too. The same Reason
holds likewise for those Middle Regions, and more Moderate Climates, between
the North and the South, where Men are observed to excel in those Arts and
Sciences, which are derived from the Strength and Sprightliness of Fancy.

Now, from this great inequality of these Mixtures and Proportions, it
frequently happens, that a Man may be tolerably well to pass in all these Three
Faculties, and not arrive at an Excellence in any one of them; as also, That a
Man may be conspicuous, and exceeding well Accomplished in one of these
Respects, and yet very Wanting and Despicable in the other Two. It is manifest,
the Temperaments adapted for the Memory, and the Understanding, are the most
Distant and Contrary in the World; for what can be more so than, Moist and Dry?
That of the Imagination does not seem so remote from the Rest, for Hot will
agree well enough with Moist or Dry, and is far from being Incompatible with
either; and yet, though these seem so consistent in Nature, we see them very
seldom reconciled in Fact; For those who are esteemed most Excellent in
Imagination, are generally found very Weak both in Point of Memory and
Understanding; and thought near a Kin to Fools or Madmen. The Reason whereof
may possibly be This. That the Heat, which feeds and exalts their Imagination,
wastes and exhausts that Moisture, with which the Memory is assisted; and also
the finest and most volatile of Those Spirits, of which that Dryness Partakes,
which is serviceable to the Understanding; and the Faculty, when destitute of
these, grows flat and heavy. So that in Effect This is an Enemy to both the
other Temperaments, and Experience shows it to be Destructive of them.

Temperaments, which serve, But Three of them.
assist, and set the reasonable Soul on working, and which distinguish the
Excellencies of the Mind, according to its Faculties, are Three, and cannot
exceed that Number. For Cold which is the Fourth, is of no significance at all;
Hot, and Moist, and Dry only, can contribute to Men's Ingenuity. The Other is a
sluggish, unactive Principle, and, instead of quickening, does only benumb and
stupifie the Soul, and put a Stop to all its Motions. Therefore, when in
reading some Authors, we find them recommending Cold, as of use to the
Understanding, and saying, that Men of a Cold Brain, such as those of
Melancholy Complexions, or under the Southern Climes, are Prudent, Wise,
Ingenious and the like; we must not there understand the Word Cold in its
Natural and most received Sense, but interpret it of a large Abatement and more
moderate Degree of Heat only. For nothing can be more opposite to Wisdom, and a
good Understanding, than that Excess of Heat, which yet to the bettering of the
Imagination, and refining the Fancy would be of great Importance. And according
to the three Temperaments, of the Brain, there are three corresponding
Faculties of the Reasonable Soul. But both the One, and the Other of these
admit of several Degrees; and may be variously subdivided, and distinguished.

Understanding, and the different Qualifications of Men, The Faculties
Subdivided.
with regard to it, are Three; To conclude truly, To distinguish nicely, and To
choose wisely. The Sciences that fall properly under this Faculty, are
School Divinity; The Speculative Part of Physic, Logic, Natural and Moral
Philosophy.

The Memory has likewise Three Qualities to be distinguished by. For there is
One sort of Memory, which easily receives Impressions, and easily loses them
again. A Second, which quickly remembers, and seldom or never forgets; and a
Third, where the Impression is hard to be made, and yet is presently worn out
again. The Sciences proper to this Faculty are Grammar, and the Theory of the
Civil Law, Dogmatical Divinity, Cosmography, and Arithmetic.

The Imagination abounds in Distinctions, and Differences are occasioned by it,
much more than either the Memory or the Understanding is capable of. To this
belong, after a more peculiar manner, Fanciful Inventions, Pleasant Conceits,
Witty Jests, Sharp Reflections, Ingenious Repartees; Fictions and Fables,
Figures and Comparisons, Propriety and Purity of Expression; and in a Word, All
that Quaintness, and Elegance, and Easiness, which adorns Conversation, and
becomes the Character of a Man of Sense, and Good Breeding. And therefore we
may range under this Division, Poetry, Eloquence, Music, Correspondence,
Harmony, and Proportion.

The Properties of the several Faculties.
Subtilty, Readiness of Parts, and all that which commonly goes by the Name of
Wit, is to be imputed to the Warmth of Imagination. Solidity, Mature Judgment,
and Truth to the Dryness of the Understanding. The Imagination is Active, and
Blustering, and Busy; keeps all about it awake, and sets the other Faculties on
work. The Understanding is a grave, sedate, and severe Action; The Memory acts
not at all, but is purely Passive; and the manner of these Operations, seems to
be thus. In the First Place, the Imagination collects together the Idea's and
Figures of Things, not only such as are present by the conveyance and ministry
of the five Senses; but those that are absent too, by the Assistance of that
Inward and Common Receptacle, called the Sensorium commune, where the Forms of
them lie deposited. The Next thing in Order is to represent these to the
Understanding (if that be thought fit) and then this Faculty takes them into
Consideration; examines, digests, and makes a Judgment of them. When That is
over, the Imagination lays them up carefully to be preserved in the Memory; (as
a Man takes down a Memorandum in his Table Book) that so they may be consulted,
and made use of again, when any future Occasion shall call for them. Or if the
Imagination be not so disposed, then she commits these things into the Memory's
Custody, without referring them to the Understanding at all, and so the Second
Branch of this Operation is wholly Superseded. Now this Account informs us,
that the Acts of Recollection, Representing to the Intellectual Faculty, laying
up in the Memory, and drawing out those Stores again for Use, are all of them
Operations of the Imaginative Faculty. So that That Common Repository, the
Internal Sense, ( Reminiscence, as it is called) and Fancy, come within the
Compass of This, and are not (as some pretend) Powers of the Mind, distinct and
separate from it. And consequently there is nothing in those Operations, that
should oblige us to quit the former Division, or allow more Faculties of the
Reasonable Soul, than the Three already insisted upon.

The Faculties compared together.
and make a mavelous to do with Memory, extolling This insinitely above the
other Two; The only Reason whereof seems to be, that this has more of Show, is
more pretending and forward, and makes a greater Noise in Conversation. Hence
it is, that a Man whose Memory is well stored, is usually reputed a great
Scholar; and that to pronounce one a Person of good Parts, you look no farther
than his having a good Memory; as if Learning were to be preferred before
Wisdom, which indeed comes infinitely short of it; and this Faculty from whence
it is furnished, is the least valuable of all the Three; For it is consistent
with great Folly, and insufferable Impertinence; and very rarely to be met with
in any great Degree, where the Person excels in Understanding and Wisdom; for
the Temperaments indeed from whence they result, are contrary to one another.
From this vulgar Error, I suppose the improper Methods of teaching Children,
to have taken their Rise; it being the Custom of Country-Schools almost every
where, to follow them close with Tasks to be got by Heart (as they call it)
that so they may be able to repeat, and quote things readily out of Books. Thus
they stuff their Memories full, and load them with the Riches of other Men,
without taking any care to awaken and whet the Understanding; to form or to
refine the Judgment: Which, after all, is the most necessary part of
Instruction, to show them the true worth of their Natural Faculties, to draw
out the Stores and Abilities of their own Mind, and by the Exercise and
Improvement of their Home-Growth, to render them considerate, and wise, and
qualified for all manner of Business. Accordingly we see, that many of your
Scholars, which carry all Aristotle and Cicero in their Heads, are mere Prigs
and Puts, and incapable of any management at all; and, that, (generally
speaking) the World is led by the Nose, and all the weightiest Affairs of
Governments entrusted with Men of little or no Learning. Which yet no doubt is
of infinite Advantage, and would render even the prudentest and cunningest
Politicians, yet more capable than they are, if wisely instilled, and well
used. But then they must not (as the way of the World is) value themselves upon
Other Men's Wisdom; nor think it their Own, because they remember it; but make
it so, by digesting what they read, incorporating it with their own Thoughts,
refining and improving upon it, and knowing how to convert it to the Use and
Benefit of themselves and others. But to return; All Wise Men have given the
Preference to the Understanding; and admit it to be the most excellent and
choicest Piece of Furniture belonging to the Mind. If this moves right, all the
rest goes true, and the Man is wise; and if this be false, the whole Movement
is out of Course. Imagination is the Second in Dignity; and Memory is the Last
and Lowest.

An Image of the Three Faculties.
The Reasonable Soul then cannot be more painted to the Life, than by forming
an Idea of it to our selves, as a Court of Judicature. Now in every such Court
there are Three Degrees and Orders of Persons concerned: The Uppermost and most
Honorable Order is the Bench of Judges; and here there is little or no Noise,
but a World of Business and Dispatch: For they proceed calmly and quietly; and
without any Hurry or Passion, try Causes, decide Controversies and Claims, make
Decrees, and give the Final Determination to all Matters brought before them:
This carries a very lively resemblance to the Understanding, which is the
highest, the most honorable, and the judging Faculty of the Soul. The Second
is the Bar, where the Council and the Attorneys are placed; and here is a world
of Clutter, and Bawling, and Noise, but nothing done; for they can bring
nothing to an Issue; They make no Orders nor Awards, pronounce no Sentences:
All Their Business is only to discuss Matters, to plead the Cause, and to lay
it before the Judge. This is a lively Picture of the Imagination, which is a
loud, a blustering, and a restless Faculty; never lies still, not even then,
when the Soul seems perfectly bound up in the profoundest Sleep; but is
eternally buzzing about the Brain, like a boiling Pot; and this can never six,
or come to a peremptory Resolution in any thing. The Third and last Degree is
that of the Notaries, and Registers, and Clerks; where there is neither Noise
nor Action: It is no part of their Concern which way things go; they are purely
Passive; and all they have to do, is to make Entries of what passes in Court,
and to take Care that the Records be faithfully kept, and ready to be produced
upon occasion. This gives us no ill Idea of the Memory, and its Office.

Action or Employment of the Soul is Knowledge or Understanding; Its Operations.
and this is of Universal extent: For the Mind is a House open to every Guest;
a Subject ready to receive any Impression. As the Philosophers say the
Primitive Matter is disposed to be molded into any Forms; or as a
Looking-Glass receives and reflects all Faces; so this Soul is capable of
considering all things indifferently, be they Visible or Invisible, Universals
or Particulars; Objects of Sense or not, the Understanding is in at All. But
(if we may be allowed to argue from the vast, and almost infinite Diversity of
Opinions, and the still growing Doubts upon this Matter) it is acquainted with
it self the least of any thing. This Knowledge is but dim and indirect: It is
attained by Reflection only, and the Knowledge of other things brought home,
and applied to it self: By which it feels, that it does understand, and thence
infers a Power and Capacity of this kind. This seems to be the Method, by which
our Minds attain to the Knowledge of Themselves. Almighty God, who is the
Sovereign Mind, knows Himself first, and all things else in Himself: But Man,
who is the last and lowest of all the Intellectual World, inverts that Order
quite, and discerns other things before he can come to any Knowledge of
Himself; for His Mind is in Contemplation of Other Objects, (like the Eye in a
Looking-Glass) which cannot work upon it self without the help of a Medium, and
sees nothing at Home, while the Vision is continued in a straight Line, but can
do it by Reflection only.

The manner of it.
concerns the Manner of Operation, and by what Method the Soul attains to the
Knowledge of Things. The most received Opinion is that derived from Aristotle,
importing, That the Mind understands and is instructed by the Senses: That it
is naturally and of it self, a perfect Blank, a clean White Paper; and that
whatever is written in it afterward, must be dictated by the Senses, and
cannot be conveyed thither any other way.

But first of all, This is far from being Universally true; for, (as was hinted
before, and the Point referred hither for a farther Disquisition) there have
been great Authorities of Philosophers, that the first Seeds of all Sciences,
and Virtues, and necessary Knowledge, are originally sown in our Minds, and
grafted there by Nature; so that Men may if they please, live very comfortably,
and grow Rich out of their own Stock; and, provided they take but a little care
to cultivate and cherish the kindly Beginnings, the Harvest will not fail to be
plentiful, and abundantly to reward their Pains.

Again; That Opinion seems highly injurious to God and Nature, and taxes them
with unreasonable Partiality: For upon these Terms the Rational Soul is more
sparingly dealt with, and left in a much worse Condition, than either the
Vegetative, or Sensitive, or any other Creature whatsoever: For all These, as
has already been observed, exercise their Functions readily, and are
sufficiently instructed by their own Native Endowments, in all things necessary
for their Purpose. Thus Beasts apprehend several Things without Experience, and
the Discipline of Sense: They make Inferences, so far as their Case requires,
and conclude Universals from Particulars: From the sight of One Man they know
the Humane Shape wheresoever they see it again; See Adv. upon Chap. XXIV.
they are forewarned to avoid Dangers, even while invisible; and to follow
after That which is agreeable and beneficial to Themselves, and their Young:
And would it not be a Reproach, or scandalous Blunder and Absurdity in Nature,
if this Noble, this Divine Faculty, should have no Provision at all of its own,
but sent about a begging, and depend for mere Necessaries upon so mean, so
frail Relief, as what the Senses are able to give?

Once more; How can we perceive that the Understanding should go to School to
the Senses, and be taught by Them, who are not able to teach themselves? What
precious Masters are these, whose utmost Knowledge goes no deeper than barely
the Accidents and Outsides of Things? For, as to the Natures, Forms, and real
Essences of them, they know nothing at all of the Matter. And if This be the
Case of Individual Substances, much less are they capable of penetrating into
Universals, the dark and profound Mysteries of Nature, and all those things
which do not affect the Sense at all.

Besides; If all Knowledge were derived from the Senses, the Consequence of
this (one would think) should be, That They, whose Senses are the quickest,
strongest, and most discerning, would always be the Persons most conspicuous
for Ingenuity, and Learning, and Skill in Reasoning. But we frequently see it
happen just contrary; that such People are the dullest, most stupid, and most
incapable of all others. Nay, some Persons have thought their Bodily Senses
rather an Obstruction than any Advantage to their Improvement: And upon that
Account have wilfully deprived themselves of them, that so the Soul might be
more expedite and free, and do her Business without Distraction, when the
Avocations and Disturbance of Sensible Objects were taken out of the way.

Now if this Matter be as I have represented it; you will ask perhaps, Why
these things are not always performed by the Soul, and why not by every Man
alike? What hinders that all should not be equally Wise and Knowing; but
especially, why it should lie dormant, without being reduced into act; Or, if
it do act, how comes it to pass that its Operations are not always equal, that
it goes about its Duty feebly, and performs its Functions much more lamely and
imperfectly at one Season than at another? This is the Case even of the Wisest
and most Capable Persons; and some are so miserably stupid, that the
Intellectual Soul seems never to exert it self at all. Where it does, the
Vegetative Soul is vigorous and active in Youth, and very weak in Old Age: It
is then decayed, and spent, and cannot repair the Losses of Nature, (those of
Teeth especially.) Which yet it does with the greatest Ease imaginable, in
Children and Young People. The Reasonable Soul, quite contrary, is evidently
weaker in Infancy, and Youth, and cannot exert it self then, as it does
afterward in riper Years, and old Age: This also performs some sort of Actions
in some sorts of Distempers, which it has not power to do in time of perfect
Health: and Others again there are performed in time of Health, which it is
utterly incapacitated for, when the Body labors under a Distemper.

Now all these Objections are insufficient: For, First of all, They who hold
the Opinion I am now contending for, never pretend, that the Faculty and Power
of Understanding is communicated to every Man in equal Proportions. They admit
a very great Inequality; from whence that Ancient and Noble Aphorism became so
usual in the Mouth of Philosophers, That the acting Intellect is given to very
few; and this very Inequality they make use of, as an Argument to prove that
Science does not proceed from Sense; since it is very manifest, according to
what has been urged already, that They who are most advantageously provided
for in point of Sense, are oftentimes least so in point of Learning and Wisdom.

As to the Second part of the Objection, That these Functions are not always
performed alike; The true Reason of this is certainly, The different Condition
of those Instruments, which the Soul has absolute occasion for, and constantly
works by; for These neither are, nor can be at all times in the same Order and
Disposition. Sometimes they are disturbed so as to be fit for no Business at
all: And when they are not put out of their Course, by any accidental
Interruption, yet, even in their Natural State, they are not qualified for all
Business alike; nay they act in perfect Contrariety, and cross, and interfere
with one another. To express this now in as few Words, and as clearly as the
thing will bear:

That Temperament of the Brain, which you have heard so much of already, is the
next and immediate Instrument, by which the Soul is assisted and determined in
her Actings. Now This is exceeding various and mutable; and at those Seasons
when it serves well for one Function of the Soul, it obstructs and runs counter
to another. In Youth it is Hot and Moist; and this Complication is extremely
proper for strengthening the Vegetative Faculty; but it keeps the Rational one
Weak and Low. On the other hand it is Cold and Dry in Aged People; and This is
a convenient Temper for the Reasonable Soul, but highly prejudicial, and
improper for the Vegetative. When this Temperament of the Brain is soundly
heated and refined by a high Fever, it is then accommodated to the Imaginative
Faculty, and does Wonders in Invention and Fancy; but this very Condition
disables the Intellectual Faculty, and is the most opposite that can be, to
Mature Deliberation, and sound Wisdom and Judgment.

It is no part of my Intention, by all this Discourse, to defraud the Senses of
any part of the Commendation, which is their just due; but only to prevent
their engrossing All, and assuming more than their due. It Is confessed, that
the Mind reaps great Advantage, and is very conveniently served by the Senses;
especially in the beginning of its Contemplations, the first Hints and
Occasions, the Invention and new Discoveries of Things. But still we affirm, in
vindication of the Mind's just Rights, that it does not depend upon the Senses
entirely; that it is capable of Knowledge and Understanding; can reason and
discuss Matters, infer and conclude, without the Senses: Whereas, on the
contrary, all Knowledge proceeds from the Mind; and the Senses, when left to
themselves, cannot make the least Progress, nor have one single Perception
without it.

Mind proceeds in different Methods, and makes regular and gradual Advances in
the Consideration of Things. Sometimes it proceeds by the Addition and
Conjunction of Idea's: As first it conceives a Lion simply and directly,
without attending to any of his Qualities: Then it adds the Idea of Strength to
the former; and so having from some Effects had reason to believe that these
will agree well together, and be true of each other, it concludes, that the
Lion is Strong. This is what they call the Affirmative way of Arguing.
Sometimes it proceeds by the Division of Idea's, which is what they term the
Negative way. Thus it understands the Hare to be Fearful; for observing her to
run away and hide her self, it concludes from this Timorous Behavior, that a
Hare is not Stout. Sometimes again we come to the Knowledge of things by
Similitude, and the help of Comparison; and of Others by a Collection of
several Idea's, Exaggerating and Amplifying these as we see fit. Other Methods
there are, which need not be instanced in particularly, because any Man, from
his own Observation, and what has been already delivered here, may easily
represent the manner of them to himself.

CHAP. XIV. Of the Parts of the Humane Soul: And first, of the Understanding,
which is its noblest Function; Imagination, Reason, Wit, Judgment, etc.
THis Mind of Man is a dark and deep Abyss, an Intricate Labyrinth, full of
Corners and Creeks, and secret lurking Places: Such is the Disposition and
State of this exalted part of the Soul, distinguished by the Term of
Intellectual, which consists of vastly many Parts, and Faculties, and
Operations, and different Movements; each of which have their proper Names, and
each of them infinite Doubts and Difficulties peculiar to them.

Apprehension or Imagination; and this consists in barely receiving and
apprehending Images and simple Idea's; which is indeed in the Nature of a
Passion and Impression, occasioned by the Presence of things that strike upon,
or are represented to it.

Reason, or (...).

Discourse or Ratiocination ((...), because (...)) And the Exercise of this
Power consists in collecting or separating; joining together, or taking asunder
the Idea's thus received; and, according as those are found to agree or
disagree, adding some fresh to them, which is the Nature of Inferences, and
Conclusions.

Penetration, or Sagacity; ( Ingenium) and the Persons happy in it, are
distinguished, by the Titles of Ingenious, shrewd, sharp Men, Persons of good
Parts, good Sense, and the like.

Judgment; and its Business is to go upon sure Grounds, and come to no
Resolutions, but such as one may abide by.

Understanding, thus exercised is, as you perceive, Knowledge, Speculative
Wisdom, and Resolution.

Will, or Volition; by which the Mind reaches forward, and makes some Advances,
toward the Object so known.

Essence of all these Things is the same; and the Operations of them only are
different. That is, Understanding and Imagination, and Reason, and Discourse,
and Penetration, and Judgment, and Wisdom, and Resolution, are only so many
several Methods, by which the same Mind moves, and exerts it self. And
accordingly we find some Persons better disposed to one of these Ways, than
they are to others; a Man for Instance, shall be Excellent for Quickness and
readiness of Wit, and yet very Weak and Childish with Respect to his Judgment.
Every Man has all these Powers inherent in his Mind; but every Man has them
not alike, nor is alike qualified for the Exercise of them all.

Description of the Mind. Its Advantage.
and take great Delight in the Account of its Comprehension, and Sprightliness,
and vast Abilities. I allow it to be called, the Image of the Living God; a
Drop of the Fountain of Immortality, an Efflux of the Divinity, a Beam of
Heavenly Light; That the Great Creator has furnished it with Reason, by which,
as by a living Rudder, this Vessel may steer its Course Regularly; That it is
an Instrument most exquisitely Harmonious; That by it we contract a great
Resemblance, and have the Honor of being near of Kin to God; and that
therefore he has so disposed the Seat and Situation of this Mind, that it
should be in a perpetual Disposition of looking upward, to the Place of its
Birth. In a Word, I agree, that there is nothing in this lower World truly
Great, but only Man; and nothing truly Noble in Man, but his Mind; that if you
come up to the utmost Height of this, you have climbed Higher than the very
Heavens Themselves: These Characters I consent to very heartily, and they are
such as the Schools, and Chairs of Philosophers and Divines have commonly
abounded in; with a Design to render Men duly Sensible of the Dignity of their
Nature, and to teach them not to debase or undervalue themselves.

Its Disadvantages.
that Men would apply themselves withal, to examine, and come to a more
distinct Knowledge of This Soul of ours. For upon a more intimate Acquaintance,
we shall find, that it is capable of being made, and (as the Matter is commonly
ordered) does actually prove an Instrument of much Danger and Mischief to ones
self and others; a Terrible Disturber of the public Peace; which like a Common
Juggler, with his Legerdemain, amuses you with Slight of Hand; and waits all
Opportunities of putting the Cheat upon you. For in Truth all the Falsehood,
and Forgery, and Mischief, that the World labors under, are owing purely to
This, and have no other Original.

Bodies of Men, as infinitely various as we see them, Disterent sorts of Souls.
are yet less different from one another than their Souls are: In general, They
may properly enough be reduced into Three Classes; each of which is capable of
being subdivided again, and has several Distinctions and Degrees comprehended
under it. The Lowest of these are poor, and weak Souls, not much removed from
that of Brutes. And this Defect may be caused, sometimes from the Faults and
Imperfections of the Natural Constitution; Too great a Predominance of Cold and
Moisture in the Temperament of the Brain; as Fishes, whose Composition is of
this kind, are reckoned the Lowest and most wanting of all other Animals: This
Infirmity is born with us, and derived from our Parents. Sometimes it is
Chargeable upon accidental Failings afterward: Want of due Care to awaken, and
exert the Natural Powers, and letting them rust upon our Hands, till they
Degenerate into Senselessness and Stupidity; Of these we can make no certain
Account, nor can they be esteemed a certain Species; For in Truth they are not
in a Condition to govern themselves as Men, but are Minors and Ignorants all
their Days, and ought to be constantly kept under the Tuition and Care of
others, Wiser than themselves. Qui vigilans stertit.
Mortua cui vita est prope jam vivo atque videnti.

They snore and nod with their Eyes open; and while they seem to live and act,
are dead in the very midst of Life; Moving Carcasses, and Men that walk in
their Sleep. Such are the Boors and Common People, without Sense, without
Apprehension, without Judgment. The Uppermost Class are those Elevated, and
Singularly Excellent Souls, that seem rather to be Angels and Demigods, than
Common and Mortal Men; Strong and Vigorous, and every way Accomplished; These
are conspicuous, and admirable indeed, but so rare and few withal, that if we
could bring all of them together that ever the World knew, this long and
numerous Succession could not furnish enough to compose one Commonwealth. The
Middle Sort, is Infinite in Partitions and Degrees, Men of moderate Endowments,
refined from the Dregs, but still beneath the Cream and Flower of Humane
Nature. And These take in much the greatest Part of Mankind. Of those
Distinctions, there will come a more proper Time to treat more largly
hereafter. In the mean while, we must try to give a more particular Description
of this Soul, with Regard to its Nature, and Qualities, which yet are so
intricate, and manifold, that it is as hard to represent them truly, as it
would be to draw^a Picture like, from a Face that is always in Motion.

Soul indeed cannot live Idle, Its Description. A perpetual Agent.
for to be doing somewhat is its very Essence; and hence it is, that for fear
of lying quite Unactive, it employs it self in false and fantastical
Imaginations, forms a Thousand wild Idea's, will study to cheat and deceive it
self, and go directly contrary to its own Knowledge and Persuasion, rather than
be out of Business. Like Fallow and neglected Grounds, which must always be
kept sown with some Grain or other, if the Soil be Rich and Fruitful; otherwise
they will provide themselves a Harvest, and put forth vast Crops of wild and
noxious Weeds. Thus the Mind, if it be not set on Work, and kept close to some
particular Subject, turns Vagabond, wanders and floats among a Thousand
Whimsies; there is nothing so Foolish, or so Extravagant, but it will produce
it. And if it be not fixed down, it is lost; for to be every where, is in Truth
to be no where. Agitation is indeed the very Life and Beauty of the Soul, but
then this Agitation ought to be directed and prescribed; found for it by
another Hand, but by no means left to its own providing. Suffer it to go all
alone, and on its own Head, it santers about and tires its self to no Purpose;
languishes and grows Feeble. And yet the other Extreme is every whit as
Dangerous; for if you hold it too high, and lay too much upon it, This is
keeping the Bow always bent. Constant intense Thought, is what cannot be born;
it strains and puts the Mind upon the Stretch, till at last it cracks, and
breaks it.

Agent is also Universal, and in at every thing. An Universal Agent.
No Subject whatsoever, No Topic is out of its Compass; let the Farce be what
it will, the Soul will have a Part in it, though it be never so low, or so
extravagant. The vainest and most trifling Matter will serve its Turn to work
upon, as well as that of the greatest Consequence and Weight; Things, which it
knows not, nor has any Comprehension of, as well as those, with which it is
never so well acquainted. For even the being made Sensible, that it is out of a
Man's Power to enter deep, and search things to the Bottom, and that in many,
(in most Cases indeed) all the Knowledge we can have, is merely Superficial,
and goes no farther than just the Shell, and Outside of Things; The very
Coming to this Sense, I say, is a very brave and bold Stroke, and argues a
Masterly Judgment. Learning, nay, Truth it self may be found in a Man that
wants Judgment, and many may have a good Judgment too, who are unskilled in
Learning and Books, and under some Mistakes, as to particular Opinions. But for
a Man to see, and to acknowledge his own Ignorance and personal Defects; to
pretend to no more than he really has, and is; this single Quality argues so
much Judgment, that there are few better Testimonies to be given of it.

Nimbleness of its Motions; whereby it traverses the whole World, and runs from
the one End of it to the other, in a Moment of Time; Ready and quick in its
Motions.
never standing still, never at rest; but fluttering about, and peeping and
meddling every where. Mobilis and inquieta men's homini data est; nunquam
setenet; Spargitur vaga, quietis impatiens, novitate rerum laetissima; Non
mirum ex illo coelesti spiritu descendit. Coelestium autem natura semper in
motu est.
Man is endued with a busy, active, Mind; that never keeps at home; but expands
and dilates it self; wanders every where, cannot bear any Rest, and is never so
agreeably entertained as with Novelties, and fresh Objects. Nor is it strange;
For this Mind of ours is descended from that Celestial Spirit above; and
Motion, we know, is so natural there, that the Heavenly Beings, are never out
of it. This mighty Quickness and Agility must be confessed in one respect
Prodigious, and one of the most Miraculous Qualifications belonging to the
Soul. But on the other there hand, it is very dangerous too; For Spirits so
exceeding subtle and refined, are liable to great Inconveniences; and an
Excellence of this kind is observed to be a mighty Disposition to Folly, and
borders hard upon Madness, as you will hear by and by.

Upon the Consideration of these Three Qualities it is that the Arguments for
the Immortality of the Soul are usually grounded. Since Matter (which is
corruptible by Nature) has none of these; and what is not Material, no reason
in Philosophy can evince to be Mortal. Now an Agent in perpetual Motion is very
distant from Matter, to which Rest seems natural, since it neither does, nor
ever can move it self. An unlimited and Universal Agent differs extremely from
Matter, which is cramped and confined in all its Operations, and proper only
for one, or a few; but always the same Matter can serve only some and the same
determinate uses: And That again which is sudden and instantaneous, which is
bounded by no Time, no Place, but carries its Thoughts to the most dist^nt
Objects with equal Swiftness as to those that are nearest: This sure is most
contrary to Matter, whose Motions are local and gradual, bound up by necessary
Laws, and proportioned by the respective Distances of the several Objects.
Consequently This Mind is something above Matter and Mortality, a Spark of
Divine Fire, and the express Image of that Active and Omnipresent Spirit, which
we call GOD.

Its Employment.
is to be perpetually upon the seek, ferretting, and doubling, and hot in the
pursuit of Knowledge, as of its proper Food. This Appetite and Hunger for the
Truth, makes Men eternally prying, and curious, and inquisitive; which made the
Greek Poets call Men (...), a sort of Creature whose Thoughts and Inventions
are always at work. Nor is there any End of our Enquiries; for they are
circumscribed within no Bounds, nor regulated by any Forms and Measures. Doubts
and Difficulties are the Sustenance we live upon; and the Principle within us
is a perpetual Motion. The whole World is our School, and our Theme, and, which
is particular to the Case now before us, We labor for labor's sake; The Chase
and Pursuit is not so much our Toil, or our Diversion, as it is our Game, and
our Prey: For the succeeding, or not succeeding in our Disquisition, is a thing
of another and very different Consideration.

Its manner of working.
observes no certain Rules and Measures, but is eternally roving, and variable,
and inconsistent with it self: It Is a perfect Nose of Wax, that bends every
way, stretches it self to any length, is accommodated to all Forms, more supple
and yielding than Water or Air. Flexibili omni humore obsequentior, and ut
Spiritus, qui omni Materia facilior, ut tenuior.
Thus justifying the Character given of it, that as a Spirit is more refined
and subtle, so it is likewise more flexible and yielding than any the thinnest
Matter whatsoever. Of this Theramenes his Shoe was the true Emblem, which
fitted Feet of all Sizes. All it is at a loss for is, only for some Contrivance
how to turn and change with some Appearance of Probability; for when This is
once found, it moves every way, takes all sides, crosses and contradicts it
self, and argues for Truth or Falsehood indifferently.

Reason sports wantonly, and invents or entertains Arguments for the widest and
most distant Contrarieties. Nothing so extravagant, nothing so absurd, but has
found its Assertors and Abettors: And this not only in the fanciful Conceits of
private Persons, but in the more general Sense, and Agreement of large
Societies and Communities. Thus History tells us, that what is detested as
Impious, Unjust, and Unnatural in one Country, has been received with
Veneration, and practiced as highly Decent, and a Duty, nay even esteemed an
Act of Religion in another. And there are not many Laws, or Customs, or
Opinions, which we can say have universally obtained, or have been every where
rejected. The Marriages of near Relations Some condemn as Incestuous; but
Others have not only allowed, but recommended, nay in some Cases even enjoined
them. The Murdering of Infants, and of Parents, when old and decrepid, and the
having Wives in common, are now, and in our parts of the World, looked upon as
barbarous and execrable; but the Worshippers of Moloch, we know, thought their
Children the most acceptable Sacrifice; and if Herodotus, and some other
Historians, say true, the Scythians thought the other not only innocent, but a
Mark of Tenderness and Respect; and never pretended to any Propriety in a
Marriage Bed. When Dionysius offered Plato a rich Embroidered Robe, he refused
it, with this Reason for his denial, That it was not fit for a Man to be so
effeminately clothed; And yet Aristippus, another Philosopher, accepted it; and
he had his Reason for That too, which was, That no External Habit could corrupt
the Mind; and that the Soul might still be Masculine and Chaste, though the
Body were attired in Clothes never so Soft and Effeminate. The Dialogue between
this last Philosopher and Diogenes, each vindicating his own manner of Living,
and reflecting upon the others that differed from him, is thus represented by
Horace Si pranderet olus patienter, Regibus uti
Nollet Aristippus. Si sciret Regibus uti,
Fastidiret olus, qui me notat --

Diog. If Aristippus patiently could dine
On Herbs, he would the Courts of Kings decline.

Arist. If He that censures me, knew how to use
The Courts of Kings, He would his Herbs refuse.

Creech, Epist. XVII
When Solon was mourning, and full of lamentation for the Death of his Son, a
Friend advised him to moderate his Passion, since Tears upon that occasion are
unprofitable, and to no purpose; That very Consideration, says Solon, excuses
my Excess of Grief; for what can justify a Man's Concern, what can provoke
Tears so much as the Thought that all our Sorrow is Fruitless and Vain?
Socrates his Wife pretended this Aggravation of her Grief, that the Judges had
condemned him unjustly: Nay sure, (replied he) if a Man must suffer, it is
infinitely more eligible to die innocent, than to deserve Condemnation. One
Philosopher tells you, That a Man is truly possessed of nothing which he is not
prepared to lose. In aequo enim est Dolor amissae rei, and Timor amittendae
For the Fear that a thing may be lost, is a Passion every whit as tormenting
as the Concern for it when actually lost. Another, who passes for as Wise a Man
as He, comes and tells you quite contrary; That the Uncertainty of what we
have, and the Apprehension of its being taken away from us, heightens and gives
a Relish to our Enjoyments, by disposing us to hold the Blessings faster and
closer to our Hearts, and rendering us more affectionate and tender of them. A
Cynick begged of Antigonus, that he would bestow a Dram of Silver upon him;
No, says the King, So small a thing is not a Present fit for a Prince to give:
Then, Sir, be pleased to give me a Talent: Nor that neither, says Antigonus;
For a Talent is a Sum as much too great for a Philosopher to receive. A
certain Person was extolling a King of Sparta for his exceeding great Goodness
and Clemency; and the Instance he gave of it, was, That he was kind even to the
Wicked and Unworthy: And this argued a great Degree of Goodness in him. So far
from that, says another, that according to this Account he is no Good Man, for
no Prince can be so, who is not severe to the Wicked. Thus you may observe, how
many different Faces Reason puts on, and what a Two-edged Sword it is, which
with dextrous Management will cut both ways. Ogni Medaglia ha il suo riverso.
Every Medal has its Reverse, says the Proverb. There is nothing said, but
has somewhat to be said against it, says the soundest Philosophy; and a Man
might demonstrate the Truth of it upon any Subject in the World.

Tales sunt hominum mentes, quali pater ipse
Jupiter auctifera lustravit lampade terras.

In each Man's Breast that Weathercock, the Mind,
Moves with the Rack, and shifts with every Wind.
And a Thousand other external Causes may contribute to it. But if we come
nearer home, and look within, much may be laid upon the several sorts of
Motion, which the Mind is put into, both by its own natural and constant
Agitation, and by the different Impressions, which the Passions make upon it.
Much also may be argued from the different manner of the Object's being
represented to it, according to the different Prospects taken of them: For in
this respect it happens to the Eye of the Mind, as it does to that of the Body,
that no two Persons see the same thing exactly, and in all respects alike.
Their Situation, their Organs, and infinite other little unobserved Accidents
there are, that make some, though perhaps not so great a Diversity as to be
discerned in the Act of Vision. Besides; every thing we know has different
Glosses and Faces, and is capable of being considered under different respects;
which was Epictetus's meaning, when he said, That every thing has two (he
might very truly have said a great many) Handles. But after all, nothing adds
more to this Ambiguity, and variety of Opinions, than that Spirit of
Contradiction and Dispute, and a vain Affectation of Wit, generally predominant
in the World, which lets nothing pass quietly in Conversation; and accounts it
a Reflection upon one's Parts, not to have somewhat to say by way of Repartee
and Objection, though never so contrary to Truth, and sometimes even to the
Person's own Judgment too. And hence it is frequent for such People to take
contrary Sides; for their Business is not so much to advance an Opinion, or to
urge what is really Argument and Good Sense, as to show their Talent in
opposing what any Body else shall say.



Truth, its End, but not attainable.
and more natural indeed, is Truth: For of all the Desires that we feel our
selves moved with, there is not any of them more closely interwoven with our
Nature, than the Desire of Truth: It is with great Eagerness and Diligence that
we try all the Means capable of leading us to the Knowledge of it; but alas!
our utmost Attempts are short and insufficient; for Absolute Certainty is not a
Prize allotted to us; nor does it condescend to be taken, and possessed by any
the most assiduous Humane Soul. Truth lodges in the Bosom of God; there is its
Retreat and proper Apartment; Men understand not any thing in its utmost
Perfection; We know in part, and here we see through a Glass darkly, says the
Fountain of all Truth. We turn and tumble Objects about, and grope like Men in
the Dark for probable Reasons; but these are to be found every where; and
Falsehood as well as Truth has somewhat to be alleged in its behalf. We are
born indeed to search and seek for Truth, but the Enjoyment of it seems to be a
Blessing reserved for some greater and more exalted Powers than any that
Mortals are endu'd with. That is the Happiness of Beings above us at present,
and is reserved for Mankind in a future State, till he be purified from the
Dross of Matter, and Flesh, and Infirmity; and the Clouds that now hang before
us, and dim our Sight, be scattered by Clear and Everlasting Day. At present
the Difference between one Man and another, is not who reaches the Goal, and
gains the Prize, and who not; but who is distanced, and who not; who runs best,
and makes the nearest Approaches to that which none of us All can come up to.
If at any time it happens that a Man in the study of Nature fixes upon Truth,
This is more by a lucky Hit than otherwise; and his good Fortune is to be
extolled as much as his Industry; and when he has it, it is odds if he can keep
it; for many times a Man suffers it to be wrested out of his Hands again by
Sophisms, and Delusions, and contrary Appearances, for want of being Master of
his Point, and able to distinguish Truth from Falsehood, and Reality from the
Counterfeit. Errors are entertained by the same way that Truth is; the Passage
by which both enter our Souls, is one and the same; The Methods made use of for
discovering it, are Reason and Experience: And both These are extremely weak
and defective, floating and uncertain, hard to fix, and changeable upon every
slight occasion, when we think they are sixed. The great Argument of Truth is
That of Universal Consent. But what will all this amount to, when a Man has
considered, what a vast Majority of Fools there are, and how very few Wise Men
in the World? And again, To any one that observes how Opinions spread, and
become general: Men take them from one another, as they do Diseases, by
Infection: And Applause is that Breath that corrupts the Air, and bears about
the Venom: This Applause again is given commonly blindly and inconsiderately,
by them who never examine into the true Merits of the Cause; and by them too,
who if they do pretend to examine, are not capable of judging in the Case. And
thus, when some few have begun the Dance, the rest have nothing to do but to
fall in with the Tune, and follow them that lead it up of Course.

Invention; Invention.
which if it have less of Nature, yet has more of Ambition and bold Pretension
in it: This is aspired to, as its highest Point of Honor, that which makes
most Show to the World, and contributes most to its Reputation; That which it
looks big with, and thinks the liveliest Image of the Divine Nature: It is this
particular Accomplishment, to which all those noble Works have owed their
Original, which have filled the World with Transport and Wonder. And those that
have been of Public Use among them, have even Deify'd their Authors, and
immortalized their Names. What Renown have some gained, that were mere
Curiosities, only for being eminent in their Kind, though no Benesit at all
accrued to Mankind by their means? Such as Zeuxis's Vine, Apelles's Venus,
Memnon's Statue, the Colosse at Rhodes, Archytas's Wooden Pigeon, the Sphere of
Sapores King of Persia, and infinite others. Now the Excellence of Art and
Invention seems to consist not only in a good Imitation of Nature, but in
outdoing it. This often happens in particular Instances; for no Man nor Beast
seems ever to have been so exquisitely formed in all its Parts, nor the
Proportions of any one and the same Body, to have met together of Nature's
Composition, so exact as these Artists have delineated, and represented them in
Their Pieces. There are likewise several Improvements and Exaltations of
Nature, in producing and compounding those things by Art, which Nature alone
never produces. This is plain from the Mixtures of Simples and Ingredients,
which is the proper Business for Art to exercise it self in; the Extraction of
Spirits and Oils, and Distillation of Waters, and compounding of Medicines more
refined, more powerful and efficacious, than any Nature furnishes us with. And
yet after all, These things are not so wonderful, nor do they commend Humane
Wisdom and Industry so highly, as the generality of the World are apt to
imagine: For, if we will pass that Judgment in this Matter, which is agreeable
to Truth and Duty, and pay a just Deference and Acknowledgment to the First
Author, These are but Imitations, and not properly Inventions; They are
Improvements, but they only promote and perfect what God has first revealed.
And what we commonly value and extol as our own Original Contrivance, is
nothing more than observing the Works of Nature, arguing and concluding from
what we find there, and then reducing those Observations into Practice. Thus
Painting and Optiques were first rude and imperfect Hints, taken from Shades;
and the Perfection they are now in, consists only in a due, and proper, and
beautiful Mixture of Colors, which makes those Shades. The Art of Dyalling
comes from the Shadows cast by Trees; and what they do in our Fields, we do
upon our Planes; They are Nature's Measure of the Sun's Motion, and the Gnomon
is Ours. Sculpture, and Engraving of Seals, and Characters, and Ciphers, seems
to be derived from the particular Marks, and Figures, and Embossings found in
Precious Stones. And if This be allowed, the result of all our Boasts is very
poor; for it all terminates here, That Man (in truth, and strictly speaking)
has invented nothing, but God and Nature give the Hints and first Draughts of
all, and We improve, and by degrees refine upon them.

The Dangers it exposes us to.
we easily perceive to what Rashness and Error the Mind of Man is subject, and
how great the Dangers are which it exposes every one of us to; but those Men
above all the rest, in whom it is more sprightly and vigorous than ordinary:
For, since the Nature of it is perpetual Agitation, since its Motions are so
free and unconstrained, and since all kind of Objects sall within its
Contemplation; since it refuses to be bound up, or directed by any certain
Forms and Measures; and upon all Occasions is so bold in the Use of its Native
Liberty, without submitting to be captivated and controuled by any thing: The
common and natural Essect of this is, to shake and dissettle Opinions generally
received, and already established, and to complain of all those Rules by which
Men endeavor to regulate and restrain it, and check those Extravagancies which
some Men call Free-Thinking, as an unjust Tyranny and Usurpation upon Nature,
and a Yoke which every Man has a right to break. Hence it pretends a Privilege
of taking nothing for granted, but assumes a Power of examining every thing;
and pronounces the greatest part of these Notions which are entertained and
approved by the generality of the World, to be no better than Vulgar Errors,
ridiculous and absurd Prepossessions. It sinds some appearance of Reason on
every side; and because nothing above a bare Probability is to be found, it
believes nothing certain. Some Notions may have more, and some less; but all
have some Allegations in their Favor: And by indulging these sort of
Ambiguities, it is to be feared, that at last Men are lost in a Labyrinth, give
All up, and sit down in Doubt and Skepticism. That thus it often has happened
is too manifest; and as evident, that this is commonly the Disease of warm and
witty Men, who trust to their own Sufficiency, and have brisker Parts than
their Neighbors; (such as, Par. II.
according to our former Scheme, may deserve a place toward the upper part of
the middle Class of Souls.) For such as these, we commonly find by experience,
are more loose in their Principles, more particular in their Opinions, more
extravagant and disorderly in their Manners, than any other sort of Men
whatsoever. There are but very few of this Constitution, sit to be left to
their own Conduct; or who know how to manage their Abilities to their own
Safety and Advantage, and how to let their Judgments run beyond the common
established Opinions, without plunging out of their Depth, and paying dear for
their Rashness. A great and sprightly Wit, well tempered with Solidity and
Discretion, is now so hard to be found, that it is almost a Miracle among Men.
For This is an Edged-Tool, and apt to do great Mischief, if it be not in a very
Wise Man's Hand: It Is like a nimble Sayler without Balast, whose Swiftness does
but hasten its Ruin, and drive it so much the sooner upon Rocks and Shelves.
And if History be enquired into, all the Disorders in the State, Heresies in
the Church, Revolts in Armies, Parties and Factions of every kind, will be
generally found to have taken their Rise from such Authors as These. Magni
errores non nisi ex magnis ingeniis; nihil Sapientiae odiosius acumine nimio.
Great Errors (says one) have never sprung from any but great Wits; Nothing is
more prejudicial, more detestable to true Wisdom, than too much Smartness of
Parts. No doubt That Man has a better time on it, lives longer, enjoys more
Ease and Happiness, and is better qualified for Government, (says Thucydides)
who is but moderately, or not so much as moderately, provided in point of
Natural Parts, than He, who has a very Noble and Transcendent Elevation of
Soul: For This Temper commonly is good for nothing, but to create Trouble and
Torment, and never let one's self, nor others, live in quiet. It is observable,
that the dearest Friends, when they fall out, make the Bitterest and most
Irreconcilable Enemies: And, that the soundest Health, and most vigorous
Constitutions, are subject to the acutest and most mortal Diseases; and our
Minds do so far sympathize with our Bodies, that Those of them, whose
Operations are more quick and subtle than ordinary, are of all others most
exquisite in their Follies, and have the strongest propension to Madness and
Extravagance. Wisdom and Folly may be said to dwell pretty near one another;
There is but a short Turn between them; The Behavior of distracted People
plainly shows it. Philosophy tells us, the same predominance of Humors
disposes to both; for each abounds in Melancholy. And sure there is no Folly
comparable to That, which we find is the effect of Nice and Subtle Wisdom. This
moved Aristotle to affirm, That Nature never made a great Soul without an Alloy
of Folly; and Plato upon the same Account declared, That it was a vain Attempt
for a Man of good Judgment, and sound Sense, to knock at the Door of Poetry;
That was not a Place for such as him to be admitted into; The Solidity of his
Judgment would hinder the Soaring of his Fancy. And upon this Consideration it
is, that the most skilful and celebrated Poets have not always thought it
necessary to submit to Rules, but approve of extravagant Flights, and the
giving one's self a Loose now and then. Thus we may understand those known
Sayings, Insanire jucundum est. Dulce est desipere in loco. Non potest grande
and sublime quicquam nisi mota men's, and quamdiu apud se est.
It is pleasant to fly out. Creech, Hor. Ode XII. Lib. IV.
It Is decent sometimes to be vain. While the Mind continues it self, its
Performances are mean: Great and Noble Thoughts require a vehement Agitation to
give them Birth.

The necessity of restraining it
They were certainly in the right, who have set strong Barriers and Boundaries
about the Soul. The necessity of curbing and fettering it with all manner of
Restraints, with the Articles and Precepts of Religion, with the Authority of
Laws and Customs, the Rules and Sciences of Learning, the Promises of Reward,
and Threatenings both in This and a Future State; This Necessity, I say, has
been well considered both by God and Man; And great indeed it is; for
notwithstanding all these Checks, the Soul has its Frolicks and Flyings-out
still; and in these Humors it leaps over, and bursts through all; so exceeding
fierce and intractable, so headstrong and self-conceited is it naturally: And
therefore Art must manage, and make it tame, for Force is to no purpose at all.
Natura contumax est Animus humanus, in contrarium atque arduum nitens;
sequiturque facilius quam ducitur, ut generosi and nobiles equi melius facili
fraeno reguntur.
The Mind of Man (says Seneca) is naturally stiff and rebellious, continually
bending the wrong way, and bearing hard upon the Bit; and is easier led than
driven, as high-mettled Horses are better ridden with a Snassle than with a
Curb. It is a much safer Course to keep it under the Custody of a Guardian, to
sooth and gently lay this indiscreet Minor asleep, than to let him have his
Head, and ramble abroad at his own Pleasure, and go his own Pace. For, if the
Mind be not very regular and prudent, as well as very lively and strong, (the
Conjunction of which Qualities make that happy Disposition of Souls, of the
first and highest Order) or if it be not weak, and tender, and somewhat dull of
Apprehension, (which were said to be the Characters of the last and lowest Set)
there is great hazard of its losing and ruining it self by the Freedom it takes
of Examining and judging Things, and submitting to no Prescription or
Authority. And therefore very expedient it is, that it should be put under some
Consinement; and if it go abroad, that it be duly and conveniently equipped:
For there is greater need of a Clog, than of Wings; and of a straight Rein,
than of a Spur: The Advice of Phoebus to his Son; Parce puer Stimulis, and
fortius utere Loris. --
Ovid.
Son, spare the Whip, and strongly use the Rein;
They of their own accord will run too fast,
It Is hard to moderate their flying haste.
That Advice is necessary here too; otherwise This, like another Phaeton, and
his Steeds ungoverned, would set the World on Fire. The Prevention of that
Inconvenience, is what has been chiefly aimed at by all those Great Men, who
have either modeled Mankind into particular Societies at first, or devised
Laws for them ever since. And this sort of Men are the very Persons, with whom
both the Founders and the Governors of States have been most of all perplexed.
For the common People, and those of meaner Capacities, are generally more
Peaceably disposed, than those whom Wit and Parts make Thoughtful and Busy, and
consequently Factious and Troublesome. The general Genius of a People is very
Remarkable to this Purpose; for in the single City of Florence, who are a
Sharp-Witted People, there have been more Seditions, and Civil Confusions,
within the Compass of Ten Years, than have been known among all the honest dull
Suisses and Grisons for above Five Hundred Years together. And just so it is
with particular Persons in the same Community: They that have but a bare
Competency of Understanding, are generally the honestest Men, the best
Subjects; more flexible, and tractable, more contented to submit to the Laws,
to be commanded by their Superiors, to hearken to Reason, and be governed by
it, than these brisk and discerning Sparks, whose Parts and Penetration are
above being controuled by Power or Persuasion, and put them upon new Hazards
and Projects, and will not let them content themselves with their own Business,
and sleep in a whole Skin. So very wide a Difference there is between Wit and
Wisdom.

Mind has likewise its Defects, Decays and Diseases, as well as the Body, and
indeed the Number of these is greater, The Def^ct, of the Mind.
the Consequence of them more Dangerous, and the Cure of them more Difficult
and Impracticable, than that of Bodily Distempers. For the better understanding
of these, it is Necessary to distinguish them into their several Sorts. Now
some of these are purely Accidental, and fall upon it from outward Causes.
Among which we may take Notice of Three more especially.

The First is, The State and Disposition of the Body. Accidental.
For Diseases, which make any Alteration in the Temperament of the Body, do
manifestly carry their Influence farther, and produce a mighty Alteration in
the Mind, and impair the Judgment at the same time. Sometimes the Substance of
the Brain is not of a good Composition, From the Body.
and so the Organs of the Soul are not in a Condition to do their Duty. And
this again happens either from a Fault in the First Formation, as in Them who
have an Ill-shap'd Head, too little, or too round; or else from some accidental
Hurts, afterward, as many have suffered extremely in their Reason and Memory,
by Falls, and Blows, and Wounds upon their Head.

For The Second Cause of these Defects, Prejudicate Opinions.
we may assign that Universal Infection of common and popular Opinions,
entertained in the World; With which the M^nd is tinctured early, and these
take Possession, and usually keep it obstinately. Or which is yet worse,
sometimes wild and fantastical Delusions have been drunk in, and with these the
Mind is so strongly seasoned, so grossly cheated, that They are not only not
dismissed, but made the Rule of our Judgments, and the Measure of Truth in
other Cases. All is brought to this Standard; and received or rejected, as it
agrees or disagrees with it. Here the Man sixes his Foot, and will not be got
one Step backward or forward. The Instances of this kind among the Vulgar are
Infinite; most of whom are guided by some fantastical Notion, some erroneous
Conceit, that has grown up, and is like to live and die with them. And indeed
when these Fancies or Opinions are common, they are like a strong Torrent;
Every Body has not Force and Vigor of Mind enough to stem it, and keep
himself from being carried down the Stream with his Neighbors.

The Third, Passions.
and That which sticks much the closest to it of all the rest, is the Sickness
and Corruption of the Will, and the Inordinacy and Strength of the Passions.
And in this Case, the Soul is a World turned upside-down. The Will is made by
Nature to follow the Directions of the Understanding; This is its Guide to
Instruct; Its Candle to give it Light; but when once the Strength of Passion
has corrupted, and as it were laid violent Hands upon the Will, then the Will,
in like manner, corrupts, and commits a Violence upon the Understanding. And
from this disorderly Procedure it is, that the greatest Part of our false
Judgments grow. Envy and Malice, and Love, and Hatred, and Fear, make us see
things with other Eyes; and take them for what they really are not; and draw
such Conclusions, and Inferences from them, as they minister no Just Ground
for. From whence it is, that we so often are admonished, and do admonish
others, to Judge without Passion. This puts us upon all those base and black
Interpretations, by which we labor to eclipse the virtuous Behavior, and
generous Actions of other Men; Hence we study and invent Causes, and
Intentions, for them, and, of our own Malice, assign vain and wicked Motives
and Occasions for what they do. This is a most abominable Vice, and an evident
Proof of great Malignity in our Nature, and of a diseased Mind; There is no
great Matter of Wit or Judgment shown in such Proceedings, but they betray a
World of Baseness and Ill Nature. For whence can all this Misconstruction
spring, but either from that Envy, which our Neighbors Honor and Reputation
provokes in us; or from a measuring of others by our selves, and so taking that
for granted in Them, which we are Conscious of in our selves; or from a
Weakness and Distemper in the Mind, which like some Sicknesses in the Body,
alters and vitiates the Palate, confounds and blinds the Sight, that we neither
see nor taste Things as they are; and that Virtue, in its native Purity and
Luster, is too Strong for us to bear or conceive? From the same Cause it is,
that we are so officiously Spightful, in publishing other Men's Vices and
Failings; that we aggravate these beyond what they deserve, but take good Care
to extenuate their Virtues as much; hence from single Actions, and particular
Circumstances, we draw general Inferences, and fix standing Characters upon
Men; Hence comes our Partiality in judging, and our Regards, not to the Thing,
but the Person. If he be a Friend, or of Our Opinion, or in Our Interest; then
all he does is justified or applauded, and every Thing becomes him; and his
very Vices are Virtues; But if he be an Enemy, if he have disobliged us
Personally, or be engaged in a Contrary Faction; he is stark naught, and
nothing is as it should be. Thus we are content to wrong and disgrace our
Judgment, provided we may but gratify our Passions. But alas! we are not come
to the End, nor to the worst Part of it yet; For most of the Impieties, and
Heresies, the Errors in point of Belief, and Controversies of all Sorts in
Religion, if we examine them strictly, and trace them up to their first Head,
will appear to be so many noisome Streams of this bitter Fountain; a polluted
and wicked Will, inordinate Passion, and senfual Pleasure; which by Degrees
bribes and debauches the Understanding, and wins it over to its own Side. The
People sat down to eat and to drink, and rose up to play; As the Scripture
observes of the Israelites Idolatry; and St. Augustine very well to this
purpose; Quod vult, non quod est, credit, qui cupit errare.

Lib. 2. de Civ. Dei.
That when a Man feels an Error agreeable to him, he does not believe what is
True, but what he would gladly have to be True. Thus by Degrees it has come to
pass, that the Wickednesses which at first were committed with many Doubts, and
Misgivings, and great Reluctancies, have not only out-worn all Scruple in time,
but been asserted and maintained for Divine Truth, and Express Revelation. What
was at first in the Sensual Appetite only, has made its Way higher, and got
the upper Hand of the Understanding; What was merely Passion and Pleasure, has
been advanced into a Principle of Religion, and an Article of Faith. So
dangerous a thing is it for any part of the Soul to be diseased; So Strong the
Infection, and so quickly does it spread from one Faculty to another. And thus
you have had an Account, what those Three Causes of Our Mental Defects, and the
Errors in our Judgment are, which were said to be external and foreign to the
Mind it self. For it appears, that the Understanding may be wanting or
impaired, by Means of Sickness or Bodily Indisposition, more especially any
Disease or Hurt in the Head, or any inconvenient Shape of the Skull. From the
prejudicate Opinions of the World, and taking up groundless Whimsies for
measured and certain Truths. And Lastly, from any Disorder in the other
Faculties of the Rational Soul; which are placed below, and ought by Nature to
be under the Governance of the Mind. Those whose Failings proceed from the
first of these Causes, deserve our Pity, not our Censure or Blame; and of them
some are curable, and others incurable. The Second are not wholly Innocent, but
yet Faulty in such a Degree, that we may pardon, and excuse them. But the Third
sort are altogether Guilty. They deserve both Censure and Punishment, for
suffering the Order of their Creation to be so inverted, that those which were
born Subjects, and ought to submit, should usurp the Throne, and presume to
give Laws to their Natural Sovereign.

Its Natural Defects.
Natural and Internal, such as take their first rise from, and are born and
cherished in the Mind it self. The greatest of All, and indeed the Source and
Root of all the Rest, is Pride and Presumption. (The First, and the Original
Sin of Mankind, the Bane of every Soul, and the Cause of all manner of Evil)
It Is This that puffs Men up with Sufficiency and Self-Satisfaction; This will
not suffer us to yield to any body, or think others Wiser or Better than our
selves. This makes us despise the good Counsel of our Friends; and place an
entire Confidence in our own Opinions. This calls the Judgments of other People
into Question; arraigns and condemns them; nay, sometimes, such as we
understand nothing of, nor are capable of examining or comprehending the
Reasons of them. It Is most truly observed, that Judgment and Wisdom is not only
the Best, but the Happiest Portion God Almighty has distributed among Men. For
though this Distribution be made with a very uneven Hand, yet no body thinks
himself stinted or Ill dealt with; but he that has never so little is
contented in this Respect however, and thinks he has a Child's Share at least.
Now This Distemper is owing to no Cause so much, as the want of being more
intimately acquainted with our selves; for by this means we are Strangers to
our Wants and Weaknesses, and not at all sensible of our greatest Misfortunes,
So that the Root of all our Diseases is Ignorance, not That which is opposed to
Skill in Arts and Sciences, and conversing with the Writings of Learned Men;
but Ignorance of our own Affairs and Condition, the Removal and Cure whereof
was proposed in the Beginning, as the Design of this whole First Book.

CHAP. XV. Of the Memory.
MEmory is very often mistaken by the Vulgar for Understanding and Good Sense;
but in truth they are very different Things. For both Reason and Experience
tell us (as has been observed formerly) that it is very possible and usual,
for a Man, who is Excellent in one of these respects, to be wretchedly weak and
wanting in the other. This indeed is a Faculty very Serviceable and Useful to
Mankind; but it comes far short of the Understanding; and is much the
Tenderest, and most Feeble of all those Parts, whereof the Rational Soul is
composed. To excel in it is not very necessary; except for Three Sorts of
People. 1. Men of Trade, and much Business. 2. Those that are extremely
Talkative, for this is the Storehouse, from whence they must be furnished with
Matter for Discourse; and it is naturally more full and fruitful than
Invention; but he that cannot be supplied from hence, must make it up by Stuff
of his own forging, and 3. Great Liars, for Mendacem oportet esse Memorem.
These, indeed, ought to have good Memories. The Want of Memory has its
Conveniences too. For this will dispose Men to speak Truth, to be Modest, and
talk no more than their Share, and to forget the Faults and Injuries of other
People. A moderate Proportion of this Faculty, will serve ones Turn, and answer
all the Ends of it very well.

CHAP. XVI. Of Imagination and Opinion.
Imagination is exceeding great; This is in Effect the very Thing, The Effects
of imagination.
that makes all the Noise in the World: Almost all the Clutter and Disturbances
we feel, or make, are owing to it. (Accordingly it was observed before, that
This is, if not the Only, yet at least the most active and bustling Faculty of
the Soul.) And, in good Truth, the Effects of it are Wonderful, Unaccountable,
and almost Incredible. For the Influences of Imagination are not confined to
the Body or the Mind of that Person alone, where it is born and cherished; but
extend and transfuse themselves far and wide, and act very Strongly upon other
People. It is fitted for all manner of Operations, and the most distant and
contrary Passions are raised by it; It puts the Man into all manner of Forms,
and the Face into all Colors and Complections: Makes Men blush with Shame,
look Pale with Fear, tremble and quake, casts them into Fits of Raving and
Confusion; These, though strange, are yet some of its least Effects, and gentle
in Comparison of others. It checks and enfeebles Men in their hottest Career;
balks their Pleasures, and chills all their Spirits. It Marks and deforms, nay,
sometimes kills Embryo's in the Womb; hastens Births, or causes Abortions;
Takes away the Speech, and ties the Tongue; and sometimes enables the Dumb to
speak, as the Story of Croesus his Son assures us. Makes Men Stiff and
Motionless, benumbs and binds up the Senses, stops the Breath; These are its
Effects upon the Body. Then for the Mind, It robs Men of their Knowledge and
Judgment, turns them into Fools and stupid Sots; as Gallus Vibius for Instance,
who having strained his Imagination too far in the study and practice of Polly,
and its Motions, is said to have disturbed his Understanding to that Degree,
that he turned a mere Natural, and could never return to sound Judgment and
good Sense again. It inspires Men with strange Presages of things hidden and
future, fills them with Enthusiasms and Fancies, out of the common Road of
Thinking; throws them into Ecstasies and Raptures; nay possesses them with the
Thoughts and Expectations of Death, till at last they die indeed; as it did
that Malefactor, who, when his Cap had been pulled over his Eyes in order to
Execution, was found stark dead upon the Scassold, when they came to uncover
him again, and read his Pardon. In a word, A great part of those unusual
Operations, which create such Amazement in the Vulgar, Apparitions, and
Visions, and Witchcrafts, are to be attributed to the force of Imagination; and
what They think done by the power of the Devil, or some familiar Spirits, (for
I meddle not here with the Supernatural Operations of God's own Spirit) is
commonly no more than a strong Fancy, either in the Person that does these
strange things, or of the Spectators that are deluded with them, and think they
see those Objects, which really they do not. And the great Care in these Cases
is, to distinguish wisely between Truth and Falsehood, and not suffer our
Judgments to be captivated with vulgar Errors.

Opinion keeps its Residence, which is nothing else but a vain and easy, a
crude and imperfect Judgment of things, taken up upon slight and insufficient
grounds; too credulous an Assent to the Representations of our outward Senses,
or common Report, which rests in the first Appearances of Things, and fixes in
the Imaginative Faculty, without ever going farther, or referring the Matter to
the Understanding, to be thoroughly examined, and digested there, and so wrought
up, and finished into solid Reason. Till This be done, no true Judgment can be
made, and such as a Man may venture to abide by. And accordingly we see the
other is mutable and inconstant, fleeting and deceitful. A very dangerous
Guide, that makes Head against Reason; of which it is only the Image and
Shadow, and that but an empty and false one neither. This is the Source of all
our Evils, our Confusions and Disorders, our Passions and Troubles; the most,
and the worst of them rise out of a prepossest Fancy, and heated Imagination:
So that in truth Madmen and Fools, the Ignorant and the Mobb, are blindly led
by the Nose by it, and follow this Leader; and betray their Folly in doing so;
as Wise and Judicious Men distinguish themselves, and approve their Prudence in
suffering nothing but Reason to guide and govern them.

The World is governed by Opinion.
we see plainly; for, as has been observed long ago by one of the Ancients, It
is not the Reality, nor the true Nature of Things, but the Notion and Opinion
Men entertain of them, that disquiets, and so violently Torments their Souls
Opinione saepius quam Re laboramus: plura sunt quae nos terrent, quam quae nos
premunt.
. Thus we turn our own Executioners, form Evils to our selves which are not,
and strangely aggravate those that are, by frightful Idea's, which belong not
to them. The Truth and Essence of Things never enters our Minds in its true
Proportions, nor works upon us by its natural Force and Authority; for were it
thus with us, all things that are alike in Themselves would be alike to Us; and
the same Object would produce the same Affections and Resentments in all Men,
allowing only some small matter of difference in the Degree of them. At this
rate all Mankind would be of the same Opinion: What is false would be
universally rejected, and what is true as universally embraced; for Truth can
be but One and the Same; and is always equal and consistent with it self. But
quite contrary, We find that the Difference of Opinions is infinite; Men do not
only vary from, but directly contradict one another. And there are but very few
Instances, in which even Men of the best Natural Abilities, and most eminent
for their Improvements and acquired Learning, are all of a Mind. This shows
sufficiently, that the Idea's of things are compounded and mixed before we
entertain them, that we have them at our Mercy, and put what Forms we please
upon them; And, that the Condition they come to us in, is not what Nature gave,
but what the Temper and Disposition of our own Minds have molded and modeled
them into. That which I firmly believe my self, I cannot prevail with my Friend
to believe; Those are Arguments to Me, which to Him are none at all. Nay, which
is more; Let one be never so confidently assured of a thing to Day, I cannot
engage that I shall continue in the same Opinion of it to Morrow: And it is
odds I may, (and plain that I often do) entertain very different Notions of it,
and be quite otherwise affected with it another time. So sure it is, that
Things have just that place in our Opinion and Esteem, which we think fit to
assign them; that they are relished just as our Palate stands at that time; and
show to us according to those Colors which we our selves have tinctured them
with. Like the Eyes of Men in the Jaundice, or the Prismes, that refract and
vary the Rays that fall upon the Organs of our outward Senses, so does the Soul
alter its Objects too; and the present Constitution of it is the Medium,
through which they must pass to us. St. Paul's observation with regard to
Morals, may be applied to Speculation too, Tit. I. 15.
Unto the pure all things are pure, but unto the defiled is nothing pure. Thus
our Thoughts are like our Clothes, that keep us warm, with a Heat which is none
of their own, but such as we first gave them, and they keep it; and at the same
time that they receive our Warmth from within, they receive and keep the Cold
of Frost and Snow without. But still the Warmth we feel is all our own; we
first impart it to Them, and they in requital preserve it for our Benefit, and
pay what they received, back again to Us.

Fashions, and not Judgment, govern Mankind; and perhaps indeed, for the
greatest part of Mankind, this is not much amiss; for most People have not Wit
enough to choose for themselves, and therefore ought to resign the Government
of their Actions to others: But Wise Men are above these mean and servile
Compliances; they have a better Rule to walk by than Authority and Example;
Book II.
As I hope to show at large in the following Parts of this Treatise.

CHAP. XVII. The Will.
Will is a most exquisite Piece, Its Preeminence.
a magnificent Accomplishment of Humane Nature indeed; of wonderful Importance,
and such as deserves and requires our utmost Care and Study, to regulate and
manage it well: For this has the most commanding Influence upon a Man's
Condition; and his whole Happiness in a manner depends upon it alone. This is
the only Faculty which Nature has put in our own Power. All the rest, such as
Memory, Understanding, Imagination, are at the Mercy and Disposal of a Thousand
Accidents, which oftentimes disturb, and change, and impair, nay sometimes
destroy, and take them quite away from us. Again: This draws the whole Man
after it, and carries him whithersoever it self is determined; for he that
conquers the Will, has subdued the Person. When the Understanding is
convinced, the Conquest is by no means entire; for the Will frequently holds
out afterward, and makes an obstinate Defense against Reason and Sober
Judgment. But when once This yields, All is surrendered, and the Man is not now
any longer his own Master, he has from thenceforth nothing left that he can
call his own. Once more; This is the very Thing that fixes our Character; It
makes and it denominates Good or Ill Men: This gives our Temper and Complexion,
and we appear to the World under its Colors and Dispositions. As of all
Virtues and Qualifications of the Soul, Probity is the first and chief, and
infinitely more desirable than Learning, or Parts: All that Nature, or Art, or
Industry can give, are not comparable to it; so it must be confessed, that the
Will, which is the Seat and proper Residence of Virtue and Goodness, is
infinitely the most excellent Faculty that Humane Nature can boast of. A Man is
neither Virtuous nor Vicious, Honest nor Dishonest, for knowing what Virtue and
Vice, Honesty and Dishonesty are; though this Knowledge be never so nice and
exact in the Speculation; but by his Inclination, and Love, and Practice of
these things, by the Disposition of his Mind, the Choice of his Heart, the Bent
of his Affections, and the general Tendency of his Manners and Behavior. There
are indeed some other Preeminences peculiar to the Understanding; it is as the
Husband in the Family, and this as the Wife, which ought to be under its
Governance and Direction: That is the Guide, or as the Light, This as the
Traveller, which should follow its Instructions, and walk by them: But still
the last Result of all depends upon the Will; This finishes the Action, and
determines the whole Matter; and in that respect the Will is superior even to
the Understanding it self.

Understanding, Objects come into the Soul, and are there received and
entertained, as the several Terms by which the Offices proper to this Part, are
usually expressed, (such as Apprehending, Conceiving, Comprehending, and the
like) do plainly import. And here they make their Entrance, not according to
what they really are in their true Nature and full Proportions; but according
to the present Disposition and Capacity of the Person, and in such Measures
only as he is able to receive them in. Those Objects which are great and
sublime, are for this reason under a necessity of condescending and contracting
themselves, and come to us with considerable Abatements and Defalcations;
because the Passage at which they enter is not large enough for their true
Height and Bulk: Just as the Ocean flows into the Mediterranean, not in such
Quantities as are agreeable to its own Fullness, but such only as the Streight's
Mouth can give admission to. Now in the Operations of the Will, the Method is
quite contrary; Here the Soul goes as it were out of it self, it stretches and
moves forward toward the Object; it seeks and runs after it with open Arms, and
is eager to take up its Residence, and dwell with the Thing desired and
beloved: Nay, it even transforms it self into That, assumes its Name and its
Nature, wears its Livery, and is distinguished by the Things it serves, and
retains to. Hence we give it the Title of a Virtuous or Vicious, a Spiritual or
a Carnal Mind; according as it pursues commendable and exalted Objects, or is
sunk into Sensuality and Vice. Thus the true and only way by which the Will can
ennoble it self, is by loving and choosing worthy and noble Things; and the
abandoning it self to little and low, base and unworthy ones, is the debasing
and disparagement of it. So that our former Comparison is in this regard
justified again; for thus the Will is, as a Wife, who gets or loses Quality,
according to the Person she marries; and in strictness can claim no Honor, nor
Place, but that which belongs to her Husband.

Three Things which whet and stimulate the Will; The Difficulty of Obtaining;
The Rarity or Excellence of the Thing we seek; and The Absence, or Fear of
Losing it. And the Three Considerations opposite to These, which are, Its being
Easy, and in our own Power; The Abundance or Commonness of it; and The
Constant Presence, and Secure Enjoyment, do as much blunt and pall our Will.
The Three former raise our Esteem of any thing; the Three latter render it
cheap, and beget Neglect and Contempt. We are also sharpened, and made more
eager by Opposition and Refusal; and entertain some sort of Indignation, which
makes us more resolute against any thing that pretends to stand in our way, and
disappoint our Desires. And thus, in the other Extreme, we disdain and overlook
the Blessings we have in hand, though never so valuable; and lose what we are
already possessed of, for things distant and in Reversion; and in proportion,
what we lawfully do or may enjoy, for such as we cannot or ought not. Quod
licet, ingratum est, quod non licet, acrius urit.
Ovid. Eleg. Amor. Lib. II.
What comes with Ease we nauseously receive;
Restraint inflames, and Hardships Pleasure give.


Thus the Case stands with us in our Pleasures of all sorts. Omnium rerum
Voluptas ipso quo debet fugari periculo (...).
The Danger, which in reason should absolutely destroy Delight, is the very
thing which heightens it, and the strongest incentive to our Appetites in the
pursuit of it. So that both Extremes have at last the same Effect, and either
of them serves to make us miserable: Want and Plenty, Security and Fear, Desire
and Enjoyment, all give us the same Disquiet, and put us to perpetual Pain. And
this unhappy Disposition is the true account, why Men so seldom make a right
estimate of Things; from whence grew that Proverb of the Prophet in his own
Country, to intimate, how very different Intrinsic Worth and Common Opinion
are; and that the highest Endowments, and most Divine Excellencies, when Custom
and Acquaintance has rendered them familiar to us, can no longer preserve the
Value and Veneration most justly due to them.

What Course is to be taken for the managing and regulating our Will, See B.
II. Chapter 2. B. III. Chapter 6
will be shown hereaster.

The Passions and Affections.
ADVERTISEMENT.
THE Passions of the Mind are a very large and copious Subject, furnish great
variety of Matter for Reflection, and are one of the most considerable Topics
in all this Treatise of Wisdom: And, upon this occasion, we are to observe,
that the first Step to be made in this Branch of it, is to learn the true
Nature of the Passions, and how to distinguish them from each other, which
shall be taught you here in the First Book: And then, for the Remedies of Cure,
by which they are to be curbed, controlled, and brought within due Bounds, such
of them as are general, will be laid down in the Second; And those that are
proper for each Passion in particular, will be directed and specified
accordingly in the Third Book. This Method being most agreeable to that Scheme
of the whole Work, drawn out in the Preface.

Now in order to attaining to a clear and distinct Knowledge of them at
present, I design to employ one Chapter in treating of the Passions in general,
and then to speak of each Passion singly in the Chapters that follow. But
before I enter upon That, I think my self obliged in Justice to declare, that
of all the Authors I have seen, none has represented this Matter more
copiously, and to the Life, than the Sicur de Vaux in his Moral Tracts; to whom
I have been much beholding, and have borrowed a great deal from thence, of what
I shall say upon this Subject of the Passions.

CHAP. XVIII. Of the Passions in general.
PAssion is a violent Motion of the Soul, in that which is distinguished by the
Name of Its Sensitive part: An Account of Passion; what and whence it is
And the Cause and Tendency of this Motion is, either to pursue somewhat which
the Soul apprehends to be Good; or to decline, and run away from something,
which it apprehends to be Evil.

and the Instruments she makes use of in discharging her Functions, and the
Objects propounded to her Contemplation, are differently disposed. Now when the
Parts, where the Soul takes up her Lodging, are not crowded or over-burdened,
but filled in such Proportions as suit well with their ordinary Custom and
Capacity, and such as are convenient for a due discharge of their respective
Duties, then all the Operations of the Soul are gentle and mild, sedate and
regular. But, on the other side, when any of these Parts are either put into a
swifter and more violent Motion, or are heated above their ordinary and proper
Temper, then they immediately feel a considerable Change, to the great
Prejudice and Disorder of the Soul. The like we see in the Beams of the Sun,
which, when scattered loosely with all that Freedom they naturally take in
diffusing themselves, impart a moderate and gentle, a cherishing and kindly
Warmth; but when contracted within the Concave of a Burning-Glass, they burn
up, and quite consume the very things to which they gave Life and Nourishment
before. It must be farther observed too, that These Parts are not always
distributed alike; And from hence arises another Distinction, not only with
regard to the Kind and Quality, but to the Degree of their Emotion; and so they
differ in the same sort, as their Violence is greater or less. Those Motions
that are moderate, are capable of being relished and digested; a Man knows what
he feels, and is in a Condition of expressing his Resentment in Words, or
giving it Vent by Tears. But those that are excessive and extreme, are too big,
and too mighty. They stun and take away our Senses quite, fill the Soul with
Confusion and Amazement, bind up, and quite overbear her Powers, and disable
her from acting. Curae leves loquuntur, ingen^es stupent.

Senec. Hippolyt.
Slight Passions find a Vent, and Words command;
The Fierce swell inward, Dumb and Stupid stand.


Passions, Of the Vi^iaus Irregularity in them.
the manner of their Operation, and their Degrees in general. But if we now
look upon them, in the Second Place, with Regard to the Viciousness, and
Irregularity, and Extravagance; the Injustice and Unreasonableness these
Passions are frequently guilty of; thus Man may not unfitly be resembled to a
State or Commonwealth, and the Condition of the Soul, to that of a Monarch,
presiding over that State, constituting several Officers and Magistrates under
him, to assist in the good Government of such vast Multitudes of People; giving
particular Laws and Directions for their Behavior, and for the due Exercise of
their particular Charges and Commissions; but still reserving to himself and
his own Supreme Jurisdiction, the Cognizance and Determination of all Matters
of great Weight and general Importance; and for the giving fresh and necessary
Orders, commanding that all extraordinary Accidents and Emergencies, should
immediately and faithfully be reported to himself in Person. Now upon such a
Constitution, and such Orders duly observed, the Peace and Prosperity of the
whole Kingdom will depend. But if these be neglected and broken, and put out of
their proper Course; If the Magistrates, which go between, and are a sort of
Balance between King and People, shall suffer themselves, either to be imposed
upon through Easiness, or Credulity; or corrupted by Favor or Assection; or if
they shall employ their Authority in acting contrary to the Established Laws,
and Duties of their Places; or if they shall go beyond their Commissions, and
come to a sinal Resolution in Causes, which they ought not to determine,
without ever laying them before their Sovereign, who has reserved the Hearing
and Decision of all such Matters to himself in Person: In all these Cases, I
say, the public Peace is violated, the Establishment infringed, the
Prerogative incroach'd upon, and nothing but Mischief, and Misery, and
Confusion can be the End of it. Now thus it is likewise in our Little World.
The Understanding is King in Man; and under him is employed a Faculty, whose
Business it is to receive Idea's, and to make an Estimate of them; This is the
Subordinate Magistrate, whose Office obliges him to examine, and to judge; The
Evidence he goes upon, is that Report the Senses make of all things represented
to them; and according to this Testimony, and the Judgment in consequence of
it, the Affections are by the same Faculty put forward, in order to execute
this Sentence. For his Direction, and Governance in the Execution of this
Office, our Judge in Commission has the Law, the Light of Nature, and Dictates
of Reason to go by; and this, in ordinary Cases, is sufficient without any
farther Formality: But if it happen, that the Affair be of great Moment, or if
any Difficulty arise, then he must have recourse to, and know the Pleasure of
his Superior; and in this Case the Understanding, which sits Supreme, answers
all Doubts and Points of Law, and expects to be consulted and applied to for
Orders and Advice. This is the Scheme of our Government and Constitution; and
so long as Matters are thus managed, all is quiet and well. But it is our Great
Unhappiness, that this Imaginative Faculty, (which is under the Intellectual,
but over the Sensitive, and to whose Jurisdiction the first Examination and
Judgment of things belong,) often suffers it self to be bribed, corrupted,
imposed upon; And the Effect of this is, First to pass wrong and rash Judgment;
then to set the Affections at work to very ill Purpose; and at last to disturb,
and confound, and ruin All. Now several things there are, which may contribute
toward the depraving, and disordering this Power, in its Judgments and
Operations: As first of all; The Senses themselves, which cannot penetrate into
the Bottom, nor comprehend the Real Substance, and hidden Nature of Things, but
the bare Surface, and next Appearance of them only: And These make a Report to
the Soul, according to their present Apprehension; set before it the outward
Images only, and that, so as may gain them Favor and Recommendation, and
pre-possessing it with a Character of their Qualities, founded upon the
Satisfactions and Delights they are capable of administering to these Senses in
particular, and not upon the Considerations, how Necessary, or how Advantageous
they may prove to the whole Man in general. A Second Corruption, which often
confirms, and strikes in upon the Neck of This, is the False Notions, and
Unthinking Cry of the Vulgar; when we look upon our seives obliged to Approve
and Disapprove, as Others do; and when nothing is reputed needful to establish
an Opinion, more than its being Popular. From these two false Offices of
Intelligence, The Report of our own Senses, and the Voice of the People,
proceeds a Rash Inconsiderate Opinion, which the Soul takes up of Things; and
without fair Trial, or sufficient Deliberation, pronounces them, Good or Evil;
Advantageous or Hurtful; fit to be courted, or fit to be detested and avoided.
And this is without all Dispute a very dangerous Guide; a very hot and hasty
Mistress; for as soon as ever we entertain it, without more ado it seizes upon
the Imagination; and there standing upon its Defense, strengthens it self as in
a Castle, Man's all the Works, and holds it out against Reason; then it comes
down to the Heart, and there stirs and agitates the Affections, with the
violent Resentments of Hope and Fear, and Joy and Grief. In a Word, it is a
perfect Incendiary in the State, looks out all the Fools, and Disaffected in
the Soul, and blows them up into Sedition; raises the Mobb, that is, the
Passions, and sets all in an Uproar and Confusion. And all this by taking wrong
Methods, going Headlong to work, and not submitting the Matter to the
Understanding, as by the Nature of this Establishment, and the Duty of its
Station, that Faculty was obliged to do.

Permit me to set before you another Illustration of this Matter by a
Comparison taken from Military (as the former was an Allusion to Civil)
Government. The Senses answer here both to the Sentinels, whose Post it is to
watch, and be constantly upon the Guard, for the safety of the Soul; and also
to Scouts, who are to look out, and scour the Country, and bring in
Intelligence to the Understanding, which is the Supreme Commander of the Soul.
To qualify them for this Duty, They are endued with a Power, of perceiving
things; discerning and taking the Faces and Forms of them; and embracing or
rejecting them, according as they appear Agreeable or Disagreable, Delightful or
Odious to them. But now in the Execution of their Office, their Business is
only to spy out, and to report; to take Care, that their Intelligence be True,
and to bring it Faithfully, and relate it Plainly and Calmly. And they ought to
satisfy themselves with delivering their Message, without taking upon them to
disturb the higher Powers, or to sound to Arms immediately, and so put all into
Consternation and universal Disorder. And thus it often happens; that as the
Sentinels in an Army, may lie under Mistakes, because they are not acquainted
with the secret Designs of the General; and so receive Them for Friends, which
are Enemies in Disguise; and suspect those for Enemies, which are Allies, and
marching to their Assistance; The Senses, in like manner, not being privy to
all that passes above, and for want of consulting Reason in the Case, are
frequently imposed upon by counterfeit Appearances, and apt to take That for a
Friend, which is, in truth, our deadly Enemy. And when they go giddily to work
upon this Imagination, and without ever expecting Orders from the
Understanding, fall on immediately, and alarm the Concupiscible, and Irascible
Faculties; then they raise Tumults, and Mutinies in the Soul; and while these
last, there is nothing but Clamor and Violence; the Voice of Reason cannot be
heard, nor the Commands of the Understanding be at all obeyed.

Their Distinctions.
the General, and the Subordinate Kinds and Divisions of them. Now we must
know, According to the Object and Subject. Six in the Concupiscible Part. Three
for Good, and Three for Evil.
That all Passion whatsoever, is moved by the Appearance, either Real or
Imaginary, of Good or Evil; what actually is, or what is by the Person
apprehended so to be. If the Object be Good, and the Soul considers it as such,
simply, and without any other Circumstances, this is that Motion of the Soul,
which goes by the Name of Love. If to that Good, so considered as before, be
added the Circumstance of its being present, and the Man reflect upon himself,
as in full Possession and actual Enjoyment of it, This is called Joy, or
Pleasure; but if it be future and distant, then it is Desire. On the other
Hand, consider an Evil Object, abstractedly, and merely as such, and the
Passion it stirs in us, is Hatred: If it be present, and affect us sensibly, it
is Grief and Pain; if some other Person labor under it, it is Pity and
Compassion; if it be future and approaching only, then it is Fear. And This is
remarkable, concerning the Passions already named; that Those of them, which
proceed from the Apprehension, or the Appearance of Evil, such as we run away
from, and are possessed with an Abhorrence of, do of all others sink deepest into
the Heart, take fastest Hold of us, and are most difficult to be dispossessed
again. This now is the first Regiment of Mutineers, which disturb the Content,
and break the Peace of our Souls, and these are quartered in that which is
termed the Concupiscible Part. The Effects and Disorderly Carriage of These
are, it must be confessed, of very dangerous Consequence; but yet they are not
near so Outrageous and Mischievous, as those that we are going to mention. For
these first Motions, formed here by the Representation of the Object, Five in
the Irascible; Two for Good, and Three for Evil
are afterward continued, and communicated to the Irascible Part of the Soul,
that is, The Place, where the Soul is active, and contriving Means to obtain
what she apprehends to be Good; and to deliver her self from that which she
apprehends to be Evil. And then, as a Wheel already in Motion, when a fresh
Force pushes it, receives that Addition easily, and whirls about with wonderful
Strength and Swiftness; so the Soul, which is already stirred and warmed with
the first Apprehension, when a Second Attempt is made upon it, and the Coals
are blown, flames out, and is transported with Rage and Violence, much greater
than before. The Passions Then raised, ride higher; are much more furious and
ungovernable; for now indeed they are double: The first have come in and joined
them, and thus they back and sustain one another, by this Union, and mutual
Consent. For the former Passions, which were the Result of Good or Evil in
Appearance, considered in Speculation only, now fall in with the Practical
Consideration of Means proper for the acquiring or avoiding them, and so excite
in us Hope or Despair. And here, those that arise from the Prospect of a future
Evil, produce in us, either Fearfulness or Courage; the Apprehension of a
present Evil, kindles Anger and Indignation; which are Passions extremely
Furious and Violent, and such, as when they find the Reason once disturbed,
confound and absolutely overturn it. These are the Principal Winds, that raise
all the Storms in our Souls; and the Cavern (like that of Aeolus) where they
are engendered, and from whence they break loose, is nothing else but Opinion,
(And Opinion is most commonly a false, fleeting, and uncertain Thing; contrary
to Nature, and Truth, to Reason and Certainty) that is, A Notion we have, that
the Things which are then represented to our Imaginations, are Good or Evil.
Nor matters it much, how wild, and extravagant, this Notion is in it self,
provided We do but give it Entertainment. For Men proceed not upon Realities,
but upon their own Fancies; and when once we have taken a Conceit that a Thing
is Good or Evil, we run after, or we run away from it, with as much Eagerness
and Impatience, as if it were actually such; and yet it often, very often
happens, that the Nature of the Object is directly contrary to our
Apprehensions, and ought to move Resentments, just opposite to those we feel
upon its Account. And such in general are our Passions.

ADVERTISEMENT.
THE Nature of these Passions comes next to be considered; and my Design in it
is, See Book III. In the Virtue of Fortitude and Temperance
to expose the Folly, the Vanity, the Misery, the Unreasonableness and
Injustice, the Horror and Deformity that is in them; that so Men may be taught
to know them as they are, and to hate them as they deserve. The Advices proper
for preserving our selves from the ill Effects of them, will be delivered at
large in the following Books. For the two Parts of a Physicians Business, you
know, are first to show the Disease, and then to apply sit Remedies. My present
Care then shall be, to tell Men what they all, and where their Distemper lies;
and for the Prescriptions they must wait a little longer.

Now of the several Passions here to be described, those shall first be spoken
to, which have a respect to the Appearance of Good, such are Love, and the
several sorts of it; Desire, Hope, Despair, Joy, and the like. And after these
we will enter upon those that are excited in us by the Apprehension of Evil,
which indeed are very numerous, as Anger, Hatred, Envy, Jealousy, Revenge,
Cruelty, Fear, Grief, and Compassion.

CHAP. XIX. Of Love in general, and at large.
LOVE is the First, Love compared with and distinguished from the rest.
the Chief, the Reigning Passion; the rest are all derived from, and reduced at
last into This; But it is of vast extent, employed upon different Subjects,
distinguished into different sorts and degrees. Of These the Three principal
that fall within our present purpose, and to which all the rest may very well
be referred, are Ambition or ^ride, which is the Love of Honor and Greatness;
Avarice, which is the Love of Riches; and Sensuality or Carnal Desire, which is
the Love of Pleasure. (These I call such as come within our present Design,
which is to treat of Love, as it is vicious, and the effect of Passion; for
Virtuous Love, which may be distinguished into Friendship, Charity, and Natural
Affection or Tenderness, is out of the compass of this place, and will be
spoken to under the Virtue of Justice.) (...) III


The Three forementioned Passions are those Three Gulphs and Precipices, that
drown so great a part of the World in Destruction and Perdition; the Plagues of
Mankind; from the Infection whereof, how sew, exceeding few escape untouched?
the Corruptions that taint every part of us, even All we are, and All we have,
and All we take in hand; our Souls, and Bodies, and Possessions: These are the
Magazines, from whence those Three mortal Enemies of the Peace and Salvation of
Mankind, the Devil, the World, and the ^^^sh, furnish themselves with Arms to
assault and destroy us. They may in truth be called Three Powers or Potentates,
the commonest and most universal Passions, whose Territories are so large, that
the Apostle has divided the whole Universe between them. 1 John ii. 16.
All that is in the World (says he) the Lust of the Flesh, and the Lust of the
Eyes, and the Pride of Life.

Of these, Ambition is the most resin'd and Spiritualized, and has therefore
been esteemed more noble, or less Mean, than the Two others. Sensuality, or
Love of Pleasure, in regard of its being more Natural and Universal, (for even
Beasts, which are wholly unacquainted with the other sorts, have a share in
this) is more violent, and less vicious. When I speak of Violence, I mean,
considering it simply, and according to the Nature of the thing. For though it
may, and sometimes does happen, that Ambition prevails over it, yet this is a
particular Distemper, a Case excepted from the common Course, and general
Rules. But of all the Rest, Avarice is the most stupid and senseless Passion,
the surest Symptom of a sordid and sickly Mind.

CHAP. XX. Of Ambition.
AMbition is a Thirst of Honor and Glory, Definition of it.
a greedy, and gluttonous, and inordinate Desire of Greatness. It is naturally
a gentle and pleasing Passion, which with much Ease insinuates it self into
Great and Generous Spirits, and is not driven out again without great
Difficulty. We all think it our Duty and Commendation, to pursue and embrace
that which is Good; and of all Things that pretend to this Character, Honor is
most in request and esteem with us. And therefore all of us run full speed, and
put our selves upon the utmost Stretch, where This is the Prize. The Ambitious
Man strives to be first, keeps his Eye forward upon the Goal, and upon those
that have the Start of him; but forgets and takes no notice of the many he has
outstript himself. He feels more Discontent, for One Man that has got before
him, than he enjoys Satisfaction for a Thousand that he has left lagging
after. Seneca observes very well, Habet he vitium omnis Ambitio, non respicit.
This is the constant Fault, and inseparable ill Quality of Ambition, never to
look behind it. Now Ambition is of two sorts; The one aspires after Glory and
Honor, a Good Reputation, a Great and Immortal Name; and this is of great Use,
and public Benefit; It is not only allowable, but in some Sense, and under
certain Qualifications and Restraints, highly commendable: The other sort
affects Greatness and Power; and this is generally not only vicious, but
destructive, and of most fatal Consequence to the World.

Ambition has this peculiar Advantage, It Is (...) to us.
that the Seeds of it are sown, and the Root of it fast sixed in the Heart of
every one of us. We have a Proverb indeed, which tells us Nature is contented
with a very little; but then we have another too, that says with as great Truth
the direct contrary; That Nature is never satisfied, nor capable of being
contented at all. A Man never comes to the End of his Desires, so as to set up
his Rest, but is always for climbing a little higher, and growing a little
richer. No Man goes a moderate pace, or chooses to advance leisurely, toward
Greatness and Glory; but lays the Reins in the Neck, and rides Whip and Spur.
Natura nostra Imperii est avida, and ad implendam Cupiditatem praeceps.
Humane Nature is greedy of Preference and Power, and drives furiously on
toward the gratifying those Desires. And indeed their Speed is oftentimes so
great, that the Riders are thrown, and break their Neck; as History and
Experience show a world of Aspiring Men to have done, who have paid dear for
all their Hopes, and lost both Them and Themselves, just when they were in
view, and upon the Point of enjoying their promised Happiness. This, in short,
is a Passion riveted into, and interwoven with our Constitution; it seizes us
early, it is violent while it lasts, and leaves us very late; from whence some
of the Philosophers have wittily called it the Shirt of the Soul, the Vice next
our Skin, and that which is last pulled off. Etiam Sapientibus Cupido Gloriae
novissima^ exuitur.
For even Wise Men are observed to strip off all other Vices, before they quit
this Desire of Glory and Reputation.

Ambition is the most violent and powerful in its Influences and Effects, (...)
Str^^gth and Superiority.
so is it likewise the loftiest and most noble in its own Nature, of any
Passion whatsoever. The Power and Force of it is manifest in that absolute
Mastery it gains over all other things, even those which the World is most
subdued by, even all other Passions and Desires. Nay even Love it self, which
sometimes pretends to dispute the Point of Power and Precedence, is yet
miserably vanquished and tyrannized over by it. Alexander, Scipio, and Pompey,
are so many Instances of this Observation; and so are abundance of great
Generals besides, who have refused to gratify their Inclinations, upon
extraordinary fine Women, when they had them at their Mercy: And all this from
no other Principle than a Point of Honor; Conquers all other
and a Soul enflamed with Ambition; to which the Fires of Love were so far from
being equal, that they were made subservient to it; and the Conquest of these
Desires became a Triumph and a Sacrifice to their Glory. Thus it happened very
remarkably in Caesar; For no Man alive was ever more siercely addicted to
Amors of all sorts, than He, (as the many Extravagances he had been guilty of
both at Rome, and abroad in Foreign Parts, abundantly testify) no Man was ever
more choice of his Person, more nice in Dress, more careful to preserve and
render it agreeable to the Ladies; and yet Ambition was evermore his reigning
Passion. The Pleasures of Love, though they had him in perfect Subjection, when
This came not into Competition with them, were then so feeble, and so
over-match'd, that they never could prevail for the throwing away upon them so
much as one Hour, which was capable of being employed, or made in any degree
serviceable to the promoting his Honor. So that, notwithstanding the Mixture
of any other Passions, which had their Seasons too; yet Ambition sat Supreme in
his Soul, and was, to all Intents and Purposes, as if It had had the sole and
ontire Possession of him. It Is true, we meet with an Example, the very Reverse
of this, in Mark Anthony, and some Others, who have been so enslaved by Love,
as to give up All, banish their most necessary and weighty Cares, and lose
themselves, and their Crowns, through mere Esseminacy and Neglect. But then
these have been Persons of quite different Tempers; For where both meet
together, and are fairly weighed one against the other, Ambition will cast the
Scale. Some indeed, who argue for the force of Love above it, tell you, that in
Reason it must needs be so, because This extends to the Body as well as the
Mind, keeps the whole Man in Captivity, and is not only agreeable, but
necessary and convenient too. But I should think, the Reason holds on the
contrary side, and that Ambition is therefore the stronger, because the more
Spiritual Passion: What they pretend of the Body being also concerned in Love,
proves the Passion to be so much the Feebler; for from hence it must by
necessary consequence, be capable of being satiated and cloyed. Again; What is
Corporeal it self, admits of Corporeal Remedies and Cures, some which Nature
provides, and others which Art invents; and accordingly Experience has
approved these, and showed Instances of many who have beaten down the hottest
Flames of Love; and of some who have overcome and quenched these quite, by
artificial Means, and good Management. But now Ambition is so far from being
glutted, that its Appetite is never satisfied. Enjoyment does but whet it more;
and being seated wholly in the Soul, and the Reason, renders the Disease
obstinate and incurable, incapable of outward Application, and too deep and
subtle for Medicines to reach and fasten upon.

The Gare of Life.
(for indeed Honor and Ease can never dwell together) and make Men content to
sacrifice all their Quiet, and Comforts, and Enjoyment of the World; but even
the natural Care and Tenderness for our very Lives is not able to stand before
it. Agrippina, the Mother of Nero, was an eminent Example of this Nature, who,
being extremely desirous that her Son should be Emperor, and informed that he
should be Emperor indeed, but it should be at the Expense of Her Life, made an
Answer sit for the Mouth of Ambition her self, could that be personated:
Provided he may have the Power, (says she) I am content it should be upon the
Condition of using it to my destruction. Occidat m^do imperer.
Let my Son kill me, so my Son may but reign.

The La^^
Ambition makes its way through all Laws, and tramples Conscience it self under
Foot: The great Professors of Morality, who tell you, that a Man must make it
his Business to be entirely Virtuous, and pay an universal Obedience to Laws;
yet when they speak of Ambition, begin to mince the matter, and are content to
make an excepted Case of it. A Crown it seems is so sweet, so delicious a
Morsel, that the Temptation is invincible, and deserves a Dispensation. The
most abstemious Man may strain a Point, and break his Fast upon this Feast. Si
violandum est Jus, regnandi cau^ violandum est, in caeteris pietatem colas.
If ever Breach of Law and Equity be allowable, (says one) it is in the Case of
gaining a Kingdom; but in every thing else, be sure to be strictly Virtuous.
Not that even in this, or any Case, such Liberties are to be indulged; but They
who thus express themselves, signify the strong Propensity of Humane Nature to
this Passion; how strong it is in all, and how difficult to be subdued by any,
who are tempted with very great Advantages.

R^^g ^.
eraces all Reverence of God, and treads Religion under Foot: For what greater
Contempt of these can be shown, than the World have seen in Jeroboam, who
established an Idolatrous Worship for the securing his Throne; and A^^^^net,
who gave general Encouragement to all Persuasions, and valued not which was
uppermost, so he might reign: And the old Broachers of Heresies, who rather
chose to forsake the right Way, and so become Heads of Parties, and Ringleaders
in Falsehood and Lies, though a Thousand Disorders and Impieties were the visible
and unavoidable Consequences of that wicked Choice, than to continue in a lower
and less conspicuous Station, by being Disciples and Followers of the Truth?
With regard to such as these it is, that the Apostle has admirably foretold
the Doom of Ambitious Men, That they who suffer themselves to be entangled in
these Snares, make Shipwreck of a good Conscience, 1 Timothy i 6.
err from the Faith, and pierce themselves through with many Sorrows.

Natural Affection.
hardens their Hearts, and makes them brutish; defaces all those tender
Impressions and Resentments, which are most customary, and most due to our
nearest Relations. The infamous Accounts, which Sacred or Profane History has
recorded, the Barbarities and Murders committed upon the Persons of Parents, or
Children, or Brethren, are most of them insligated by this Passion. Witness
Absalom, and Abimelech, and Athaliah. Romulus, Sei King of Persia, who slew his
Father and his Brother; Soliman the Turk, that dispatched his two Brothers. So
unable is any thing to stand against the Force of this impetuous Passion, which
is for removing every thing out of its way; and wherever it takes its Course,
overturns, and lays all level with the Ground.

Est autem in hoc genere molestum, quod in maximis Animis, splendidissimisque
ingeniis plerunque existunt honoris, imperii, potentiae and gloriae
Cupiditates. Cic. Lib. 1. de Offic.
That which renders the Case yet more deplorable, It is a lofty Passion.
is, that the Noblest and most Generous Spirits, such as Nature seems to have
designed for Masterpieces and Patterns, are most liable to this Passion. It is
in it self a tall and stately Quality, and none but great Souls are capable of
giving it Reception. This was the Temptation which seduced the Angels
themselves; a Temptation of all others best accommodated to Their
Circumstances, and perhaps the Only one the Perfection of their Nature could be
corrupted by: For Ambition is a Vice not suited to mean and little Souls. Your
pitiful scoundrelly Fellows cannot come up to it; nor can common and
indifferent Performances pretend to any Reward or Desert, such as it thirsts
after. Glory and Renown always imply somewhat Brave and Great, and of a larger
Size than ordinary; they are never to be bought at cheap and easy Rates; but
are the Recompense and Effects of Good and Beneficial, shall I say? nay rather
of Great and Noble, and very Difficult Actions; of Uncommon and Wonderful
Excellencies; such as excite Admiration and Astonishment, at the same time that
they command Honor and Applause.

That ignoble greediness of Respect, that base and beggarly way of gaining
Reputation, which submits to cringing and fawning upon all sorts of People, and
declines the use of none, no not the most scandalous Methods of acquiring it;
is sordid and shameful. Such Honors are a Scandal and Disgrace. A Man must
take care not to express such an Eagerness after these things, as is
inconsistent with the things themselves; not to be exalted and puffed up with
vain Opinions of one's self, every time he does well; For he that does thus,
procures his own Dishonor; and while he strives with great Pains to lift his
Head above the Crowd, discovers his Nakedness and Shame at the same time.

Ambition is intricate and various; It operates different Ways.
it takes several Roads, and exerts it self by very Different Methods.
Sometimes it goes to work openly, and marches strait up to the Mark; And thus
Alexander, and Caesar, and Themistocles, and other truly generous Spirits have
proceeded. Sometimes it works in Secret, and goes in crooked Paths; and thus
some Philosophers, and great Pretenders to Piety and Virtue, have indulged
themselves in the Exercise of it. They fetch a Compass, and come in at the
Backdoor; like Watermen, that row one way, and look another; they have
labored to get Honor, by a seeming Neglect, and contempt of Honor: And no
Doubt, as Plato told Diogenes, there is more Glory, and greater Vanity, in
refusing, and trampling upon Honors and Preferments, than in seeking and
enjoying them. And Ambition never manages it self with greater Cunning and
Success, than when it goes out of the beaten Road, and comes up to the Prize
some unusual, and unseen Way.

Ambition is without Question a very vain and foolish Passion; For after all,
The Folly of it.
what does it so Zealously pursue, or what can be the Gains of it, when rightly
computed? It is giving Chase to a Vapor, catching at Smoke, instead of Fire
and Light; Embracing a Shadow, in steadof Body and Substance; It is making a
Man's whole Happiness precarious, suspending all the Satisfaction and Content
of his Mind, upon Popular Opinion, the Humor, and the Breath of an ignorant
and changing Multitude. It is a voluntary, and consequently the very worst, and
most despicable Slavery; the parting with our own Native Rights and Liberties,
and depending upon the Arbitrary Passions of other People: It Is the putting
one's self under perpetual Constraint; and engaging to act contrary to ones own
Sense, in Hopes, by displeasing and disapproving our selves, to please and gain
the Approbation of Standers-by; It Is a sacrificing our Affections and Reason to
the Capriciousness of Spectators; It Is the prostituting of Conscience to common
Opinion; renouncing all Love of Virtue, any farther than the World shall please
to like, and keep it in Countenance; and it is the doing of Good, not for the
Sake of Goodness, but merely in Consideration of the Credit and Advantage to be
got by it. In a Word, such Men are like full Vessels, that must be pierced for
the Liquour they contain; not one Drop can be drawn from them, unless you give
them Vent; nor any Benefit to be had of these Qualities, but such as takes Air.

Ambition has no Bounds; It Is Insatiable.
it is a deep Gulf without Bank or Bottom; This is that true Vacuum, or vast
empty Space, which the Philosophers after all their Study, have never been able
to discover in Nature; a Fire that feeds, and grows upon the Fuel we heap upon
it. And in this Respect indeed it is just to its Master, and pays him for his
Pains. For Ambition is only just in this, that it is sufficient for its own
Punishment, and never fails to teaze and torment it self abundantly. What the
Poets have couched under the Fable of Ixion, is the Restless Motion of the
Ambitious Man's Desires; These are the Wheel that rolls to all Eternity within
its own Circle, and, by its constant and wearisome Returns, gives no quiet, no
relaxation to the Mind of the Vain Man that is condemned to turn it.

The Excuses for it, vain.
who have undertaken to flatter Ambition, pretend in its Vindication, that it
is of great Use to Virtue, a Whet and Spur to brave and noble Enterprises. For
Men are content to abandon many other Vices, for the Sake of This; and by
Degrees come at last to resign this too, for the Sake of Virtue. But alas! the
Matter, when critically examined, will be sound far otherwise. It Is true,
Ambition covers over, and conceals many Vices; but it takes away, and thoroughly
reforms never a one. And even that Industrious Concealment, is but for a
Season. It rakes them up, like Fire in the Embers, under the Dust and Rubbish
of Hypocrisy, and Mischievous Dissimulation; but it is only to keep the Fire
from going out, that it may be blown up, and flame out again more fiercely than
ever, as soon as this Cheat has carried its Point, and Men have gained
Authority sufficient to bear them out in Barefaced Wickedness. When the Man is
in Power, and too Big for Punishment, or Control; then, and not before, you
see what he truly is. Before that, trust him not; for if you do, you will be
apt to mistake him. When Serpents are numbed with Cold, they have still the
same Venom in their Nature, though the Effects of it be suspended for the
present: And the Ambitious Man has still the same Vices, the same Heat and
Fury; he carries it about him; how Gentle, and Tame, and Cool soever his
Disguise may be. The Fish is not yet caught; but when it is, then he will come
abroad, in his true Colors, and Natural Complexion; and though Ambition should
make so good Progress toward Virtue, as to quit all other Vices; yet there is
but very little Hope or Appearance of its ever renouncing it self. It pushes
Men to Brave and Illustrious Actions, I confess it; and the Benefit of these
Actions to the Public is unspeakable; but though Others may reap the Fruit,
and be the better for such Actions, yet it will not follow, that the Person who
does them is one whit the Better for them. These may be the Effect of Passion,
and not of Virtue or Principles; and if they be so, this Excuse is vain. For at
present it is not the Profit, but the Intrinsic Goodness of such Exploits,
that we are inquiring into. I know indeed this Passion shelters it self under
that very excellent Maxim, That We are not born for our selves alone, but for
the General Good of Mankind; But how good a Sanctuary this is, the Methods made
Use of for rising in the World, and Men's Behavior after their Promotions and
Successes, must show. And These, if they be nicely observed, will give us Cause
to suspect, that the Men, who talk at this Rate, speak against their own
Consciences; and that private Interest is at least an equal, if not a stronger
Motive to the Generality of Mankind, than the Good of others. Men look nearer
Home in all they do, and That, how large soever the Pretensions to it may be,
(for we cannot wonder, that Men should pretend at least to One of the best and
most valuable Qualities in the World,) yet a truly Public Spirit is very
rarely to be found.

See Advice and Remedies against this Passion in particular. Book III. Chap. 42.

CHAP. XXI. Of Avarice, and the Passions opposite to it.
Avarice is to be understood an inordinate Love, What it is.
and vehement Desire of Riches. Though, indeed, it is not only, the Love and
Fondness for them, that deserve this Name, but all Sort of overcurious
Niceness, and sollicitous Concern about Riches will bear it very justly; even
the Care of distributing them; and Liberality it self, if it take up too much
of our Time and Pains, in ordering and making it exact. In short, All manner of
Anxious Thought, with Relation to Riches, savours strongly of this Passion; for
they ought to be entertained and used with a becoming Negligence, and to be
looked upon, as they really are, not worth any earnest Attention of the Mind,
nor a sit Object of our Care and Trouble.

We sell the Horse to get the Provender.

Avarice is a mean sordid Passion; the Temper, The Folly and Misery of it.
or rather the Disease, of Fools and Earthworms, who esteem Riches, as the
Supreme Good, and most exquisite Attainment Humane Nature is capable of; and
dread Poverty as the Last of Evils; who cannot content themselves with a bare
Competency, or such Provisions as are necessary for their Subsistence, which
indeed are so small, that very few want them. They measure their Riches by the
Bags and Weights of Bankers, and Goldsmiths; whereas Nature teaches us to make
a different Judgment, and directs us to the Standard of our own just Occasions.
Now, is not this the very Extremity of Folly, to fall down and worship That,
which Nature has taught us to despise, by casting it under our Feet, and
hiding it in the Bowels and dark Caverns of the Earth; as a thing not fit for
public view; but to be trampled and trod upon, as a just Object of our
Neglect, and an Intimation of its own Worthlessness? There it was Originally,
and there it had remained to all Eternity, had not the Vices of Mankind
ransacked those dark Cells, and with great Difficulty and Violence drawn it up:
And great their Reward of such Industry has been: For what have they gained by
it, but the Ground of Insinite Controversies, and Quarrels, and Bloodshed, and
Rapine, a Fatal Instrument of devouring and destroying one another? In lucem
propter quae pugnaremus excutimus; non erubescim us summa apud nos haberi, quae
fuerunt ima Terrarum.
We take unspeakable Pains to fetch up that above Ground (says one) which, when
we have it, serves us only to fight for. Nay, we are not out of Countenance to
have those very Things in highest Esteem, which God and Nature had made lowest,
and thought the deepest Mines of the Earth, a Place Good enough for. Nature
indeed seems in some Measure to have given sure Presages, how Miserable those
Men should be, who are in Love with Gold, by the manner of its Growth, and the
Quality of the Soil that produces it. For, as That Ground where the Veins of
this Metal are found, is Unprofitable for other Uses; and neither Grass, nor
Plants, nor any other Thing, of Value and Service to Mankind, will grow there;
it is in this Respect a most lively Emblem of the Minds of Men, which are
enamored with it; They being, in like manner, the most sordid, and abject, and
abandoned Wretches, cursed and condemned to Barrenness; void of all Honor,
lost to all Virue; and no kind of thing that is Good in it self, or Beneficial
to the World, is to be obtained, or expected from them. What a horrible
Degradation is this? and how do we lessen and disparage our selves, when we
give up that Dominion and Liberty to which we were born, by becoming Servants
and Slaves to the very meanest of our Subjects? Apud Sapientem Divitiae sunt in
Servitute, apud Stultum in Imperio.
For Riches (as is most truly observed) are the Wise Man's Servants, and the
Fool's Masters. And in Truth, the Covetous Man cannot be so properly said to
possess Wealth, as That may be said to possess Him. He has it indeed, but he
has it in such a Sense only, as he has a Fever, or some violent Disease,
which has got an absolute Mastery over him, and preys upon his Vitals, and all
his Faculties. How extravagant is it to dote upon That, which neither has any
Goodness of its own, nor was ever able to make any one Man Good since the
beginning of the World? A thing that Providence distributes Promiscuously, and
with a negligent Hand; scattered in common to all the World, and the greatest
Share, very often, permitted to the worst and most scandalous Part of Mankind?
Nor is this all. For, though the Thing be indifferent in its own Nature, and
that single Consideration is sufficient to wean, or at least to moderate our
Affections; yet the Effects and Consequences of it are by no means indifferent,
but in the Issue and Event, incline strongly to the Worse. The debasement of
Men's Minds, and the depravation of their Manners, being the manifest and
frequent Effect of it. And, though it cannot be proved, that Riches ever
reformed one ill Disposition, and made it Virtuous; yet there are innumerable
Instances of Persons otherwise well-disposed, who have been corrupted, and made
Vicious by their Means. And when we have computed all the Conveniences that
attend them, and represented these in their best Light, and to all possible
Advantage; it must be acknowledged after all, that a great many wise Men have
lived very Easy and Happy without them; and a great many more foolish and
naughty Men have died Scandalously for them. So then They are no necessary
Ingredient of Life, and they expose us to Danger, and Disgrace, and Death. In a
Word, This is to act upon our selves the Barbarity and Tyranny, for which the
cruel Mezentius was Infamous; to tie the living Body to the dead Carcass, that
so it may languish, and expire with greater Torment; to mix a Noble and Refined
Spirit, with the Dross and Excrement of the Earth; to perplex and involve the
Soul with innumerable Difficulties, and Tortures, which this Passion will be
sure to bring upon it; to entangle one's self in the Snares of the Wicked one,
and voluntarily to be taken Captive by the Adversary of Souls, as the Scripture
admirably expresses it. And, indeed, there is scarce any Vice more
pathetically, and more frequently decried in those Holy Books. Where we find
these very significant Characters given of It; Luke xvi. 9. Matt. xiii. 22. 1 Timothy vi. 9. Coloss. iii. 5. 1 Timothy vi. 10.
The Unrighteous Mammon; The Thorns which choke the Good Seed, of Piety and
Virtue; The Robber, that steals away Men's Hearts and Affections; The Nets and
Snares of the Devil; The Idolatry, that draws Men off from the Regard and
Worship of the True God; and The Love of Money, which is the Root of all Evil.
And sure, if Men would but turn their Eyes inward, and observe that Rust and
fretting Canker of Sins and Discontents, and desperate Anxieties, which Riches
breed in their Hearts, with the same Attention and Diligence, that they gaze
upon their glittering Metals with, the Consequence of This must be, that They
would then be as much, and as generally hated and despised, as now, we see,
they are beloved and admired. Defunt Inopiae multa, Avaritiae omnia.
Necessity wants many things; Covetousness wants every thing. Avarus in nullum
bonus est, in se pessimus.
The Covetous Man is good to no body, but worst of all to himself.

The contrary Passion.
which is by no means free from Vice neither; and that is, a downright
Detestation, and obstinate Refusal of Riches: For this is Refusing the Means
and the Opportunities of doing good, and putting it out of a Man's own power to
practice many excellent and very beneficial Virtues. There needs but little
Consideration to convince us, that the using Riches as one ought, and getting
an absolute Dominion over them, is a Task much more laborious and difficult,
than the being content under the Want of them; and a Prudent and Virtuous
Behavior in Poverty, is more attainable than a steady Goodness in the midst of
Plenty. In the former of these Circumstances, a Man has but One Attack to
guard, and may bend all his Forces against That without Distraction; If he can
but keep his Courage up from sinking under the Affliction, and maintain his
Ground with Constancy and Resolution, he has done his Business effectually.
But the Temptations of Wealth and Prosperity are Various, I had almost said
Insinite; and the Duties which are expected from Persons in that Condition, are
proportionably so too. There must be Temperance in the Use of them; Mederation
in our Desires; Liberality to those that want the Comforts we enjoy; Prudence
in the Choice of sit Objects to exercise that Liberality upon; Humility, and
Meekness, and Condescension, and several others, too numerous to be specified
particularly. The Indigent Man has only his own Virtue to take care of; the
Rich must preserve That, and has another Task of Action and Distribution to
take Care of afterward. He that devests himself of large Possessions, is at
leisure for greater and better things, which moved some Philosophers and
Christians to do so. He does at the same time disburden himself of a world of
Cares and Sorrows, of Duties and Dissiculties unavoidable, which attend the
Management of himself, first in the Pursuit and Acquisition, then in the
Keeping, then in the Using and Dispensing of Wealth. So that upon the whole
Matter, (except when done upon a Principle of Charity and Religion) This is
only the declining of Solicitude, and Business, and Trouble; and when such Men
pretend to Resignation, and Magnanimity, and Contempt of the World, I should
make no scruple to tell them very freely, Gentlemen, You renounce these things,
not because They are Advantageous, and You are get above them, but because You
know not how to make a right use of them, and are afraid of the Trouble and
Hazard, which those who make it their Business to possess and manage them as
they ought, are of necessity exposed to. For when all is done, though Riches do
not deserve our Hearts, and are an Object too low for our Affections, yet they
are as much too high for our Disdain. And though no Wise Man will suffer himself
to be brought into Bondage to them, nor desire them Immoderately, nor get them
Indirectly, nor place his Happiness in them; yet when the Bounty of Providence
has dealt them to us fairly, and made them our Lot; in such a Case what Seneca
has observed is undoubtedly true, That for a Man not to be able to bear a
plentiful Fortune, is not an Argument of his Wisdom, but a Symptom of his
Weakness and Littleness of Soul.

CHAP. XXII. Of Sensuality; and Carnal Love in particular.
It Is stren naturally, and common.
and the Consequences of it are insinitely dangerous, when a Man suffers
himself to be vanquished and overborn by it. Such a one is no longer at his own
Disposal; His Body shall endure a Thousand Tortures in pursuit of Pleasure; His
Mind a Thousand Reproachings and Self-Condemnations: In short, he feels a
perpetual Hell, for the Service and Gratification of his filthy Desire; That
Desire, if allowed, and let alone, will turn to Rage and Madness; and yet a
great part of this is unavoidable: For Nature has given us the Inclination;
and That is the Reason why it is common to All, and very strong in the greatest
part of Mankind. The Care incumbent upon Us must be, to keep a strait Hand, and
a constant Watch over this Passion; To check and divert its first
Irregularities, and cool those Fires which we cannot absolutely quench: For, if
indulged, it levels Men with Brutes, stupisies all our Wisdom, baffles our
Resolution, confounds our Prudence and Conduct, breaks in upon our
Contemplation, hardens the Conscience, blinds the Eyes of the Mind, and
disturbs all the Operations of our most noble Faculties. This convinced
Alexander that he was Mortal; and is such another Argument of our Frailty, as
Sleep is; for both of them agree in suspending, suppressing, and binding up the
Powers of the Reasonable Soul.

Philesophy takes upon it to treat of all manner of Subjects, The Chams C^^li,
whence.
and uses great Freedom of Expression in doing so; that so the true Causes of
Things may he discovered, a right Judgment made of them, and proper Rules and
Directions given for the governing our selves with regard to them. The same
thing Divinity does likewise, which is a Science insmitely more sublime and
resin'd, of nicer Honor, and greater Modesly and Reserve. And this Liberty may
sometimes be very Convenient, nay very Innocent and Chaste; for the Sun shines
upon Dunghils without contracting any of the Pollution, or ill Scents, by his
Rays that fall there. But this is a Case that requires great Tenderness and
Caution, and usually Silence is the most becoming, and the most profitable: For
one had better altogether conceal and suppress those things, which, when
intended for Cood, are yet liable and likely to be made an ill use of, by most
of Those, into whose hands they sall. And highly probable it is, that many
Persons have learnt to be more exquisite in their Vices of this kind, by those
very Precepts and particular Instructions, designed to teach them how to
prevent or conquer those Exorbitances. It Is true indeed, Nature by strong
Impulses persuades to these Gratifications; but yet it is as true, that she
teaches us to blush, and be out of Countenance at the very Mention of what she
is so importunate for. Some indeed pretend, that we ought to be ashahed of
nothing that is Natural; and that this A^^elation of Modesty serves only to
sharpen Men's Appetites the more; That we may as well be ashamed for the
Infirmities of our Bodies, the spontaneous Motions of our Lungs, and Heart, and
Veins, and Arteries; our Eating, and Drinking, and Weariness, and Pain, and
Sickness, and Dying; all which, like This before us, have their Motions and
Intervals, without our Consent or Knowledge; return by certain necessary
Causes, and act upon us by unseen Springs; and All, like This too, betray the
great Weakness, and Indigent State of Humane Nature. Our Brain discharges it
self by Defluxions, our Eyes by Tears, our Body by proper Evacuations; our
Faces grow red or pale; our Bodies fat and lean; our Hair black, or white, or
gray; and we are not concerned in, or for these things; which yet are no more
Natural than This; yet They, or any Discourse of Them, is by no means
ignominious or unbecoming, and in the present Case it is. To all which
Objections it were sufficient to oppose the general Sense and Practice of all
civilized Persons and Countries, who, in proportion to their being polished and
resin'd above others, have ever expressed a greater Reserve in educating their
Children, in their own Behavior and Conversation, and in looking upon all such
as Impudent and Profligate, who indulge loose and wanton Discourse; and even
They, who are but too much Friends and Slaves to this Passion, choose rather to
provoke it by distant My^^^rious Expressions, and nauseate the Roug^ (...)
Rudeness of blunt uncomely Language. (...) you will ask, whence this Shame
proceeds (...) how that Custom became so general. The C^^tification of these
Appetites, I grant you, is (...) shameful in it self in the least: It is truly
and properly Natural, and no Shame is due to it sim ply considered; for Beasts
it is plain have no Sense of any. But why do I speak of Beasts? The Sacred
Oracles of God themselves, have told us expressly, that This is no Appendage of
our Nature; that while Man preserved his primitive Purity, and was in that
Condition which was Originally and truly Humane, he had no Sense of Shame, Gone.
ii. 25.
nor ever blushed at his own Nakedness. Every Work of God is Sacred and Good,
and nothing but the Abuse can cast a Blemish upon it. So that in truth, Shame
is only the Essect of Weakness, and that Weakness the Essect of Sin. Shame came
into the World afterward, and by Accident; it was no part of the Creation,
has no Eeing in Nature, but is the Creature of our own Wickedness, and what we
have brought upon our own selves, by making the Workmanship of God, Instruments
of Vice and Pollution.

Hew it is Vibra.
is not from any real Vice, or Shame in it, when considered abstractedly, and
in its own Nature; but from the general Corruption and Inordinacy Men are
betrayed into by it. For how very few are there, that have any regard to
Moderation, or Discretion, or Decency? What infinite indirect Methods do they
use for the gratifying of these Appetites? What Quarrels and Disturbances, what
Wars and public Consusions, what Desolation and Ruin have been owing to this
accursed Cause, this common, but most fatal Incendiary of Mankind? Insomuch
that the Wickedness of the Means that introduce these Pleasures, and the long
black Train of Consequences they draw after them, are worse a Thousand times
than the Thing it self: The Expense and Damages are infinitely more than the
Purchase is worth. And all these ill Essects are peculiar to Mankind, for other
Creatures know nothing of all this Clutter. But Men have used great Industry to
Trapan themselves: On one side they make Laws to keep them off, urge Religion,
and Modesty, and Decency, to restrain their Desires; and yet, on the other
hand, they sharpen and inflame them, set all their Wits at work to contrive, to
confound, to get over every thing for the compassing their Desires: Witness
Comedy and Poetry particularly, whose pretended Beauties, even when most
Chaste, were chiefly seen in amorous Subjects; but now they have perfectly
prostituted themselves to Lewdness, and seem to design nothing so much, as the
laughing Virtue and Reserve out of Doors, as if These were the things we ought
most to be ashamed of. But of all others, the most mischievous Corruption of
Nature seems to be the setting an extravagant value upon stolen and unlawful
Pleasures; representing Injuries of this kind as a piece of Gallantry and
Accomplishment; and suffering those Methods to be despised and ridiculed, which
both Divine and Humane Constitutions have assigned for satisfying Men's Natural
Desires, by Honest and Honorable Marriage.

For Directions and Remedies against this Vice, consult Book III. Chap. 41.

CHAP. XXIII. Desires.
Desires infinite.
more inconstant nor more furious in their Tossings and Rollings, than the
Heart of Man has Desires. This is a vast and boundless Ocean too, governed by
Winds and Tides, various and uncertain; it is confused and irresolute;
sometimes wicked and detestable, but very frequently vain and ridiculous in its
Desires.

Their Distinctions.
ought to be a due Care to distinguish them rightly; for this is what they are
very capable of. And here you may observe, That Some of these are Natural; and
they that be so, are just and lawful, and common to Us with Beasts: They are
likewise short, and bounded in a narrow Compass; a Man may easily see to the
End of them. For These there is abundant Provision, and no Man is poor in this
respect. An Occasion of enlarging upon these will present it seif more
conveniently hereafter; for in truth they do not properly belong to the Subject
we are now upon, since, strictly speaking, they are not Passions.

The Others are either beside, or beyond Nature; they have no Foundation in our
Frame and Temper, but exist only in our Opinions, and are the Offspring of
Fancy and Imagination; these are Artificially formed by Industry and strong
Impression; they are superfluous too; serve only to gratify our Humors, not
to supply any real Necessities. And if you would have them distinguished from
the former by a different Name, call them if you please, the Covetings of the
Soul. These are entirely our own; The Portion or the Scandal of our Species.
Beasts are altogether unacquainted with them; Man is the only Creature
irregular in his Appetites. These have no certain Mark to aim at, no End where
to stop; but are eternally in Motion, run wild and at random, and know not what
they would have. Desideria naturalia sinita sunt. Ex falsa op ni^ne nascentia
ubi desinant non habent Nullus enim Terminus falso est. Via eunti aliquid
extremum est, Error immensus est. Senec.
The Desires which Nature suggests, are determined and finite; but those which
arise from Opinion and Whimsie, are infinite; For Error knows no Bounds. A Man
that goes in the Road must come to his Journey's End at last; but he that
wanders out of the Way, may wander for ever. With regard to These, no Man ever
was, none ever can be Rich or Contented. Somewhat constantly falls short, or
some fresh thing is wanting. Of these it is that the Poet speaks, Scilicet
improbae
Creseunt Divitiae; tamen
Curtae nescio quid semper abest rei.

Creech, Horat. Od. XXIV Lib. III.
Their Stores increase, and yet I know not what,
Still they do something want,
Which neither Pains can get, nor Heaven cangrant,
To swell their narrow, to a full Estate.
To such wanton Longings of the Soul, the Characters set down at the beginning
of this Chapter agree; and They are what we mean, and are now treating of under
this Head of Passions. These are the things we sweat and toil so vehemently
for, the gaining what we might very well be without, and the satisfying Desires
which we ought not to entertain. It Is upon the Account, and for the Sake of
These, That we compass Sea and Land; that we take up Arms, and kill one
another; nay, that Men kill and drown themselves, betray and ruin themselves;
which gave just grounds for saying, that Covetousness is the Root of all Evil.
The Matter indeed is sometimes so ordered by Providence, that this inordinate
Passion of the Mind should be made its own Punishment; and while Men are greedy
to gratisie their fantastical Wants, and glut themselves with the Riches and
Pleasures of Fortune, they lose a real Good, and cut themselves off from the
Advantages of Nature. Which are so much more valuable than the other, that
Diogenes, who refused the large Present of Money offered by Alexander, desired
as a greater Favor, that he would please to stand aside, and not hinder him
from the Comfort and Brightness of the warm Sunshine.

CHAP. XXIV. Hope and Despair.
THOSE Desires which are Natural, and these Covetings last mentioned, which are
Accidental, and Diseases to the Soul, are cherished by Hope. This inspires them
with Warmth and Strength; this blows up our extravagant Imaginations with a
gentle and pleasing Breath; kindles a Fire in our Minds, but raises so thick a
Smoke withal, that it quite blinds the Understanding; our Thoughts are lost and
bewildered, and violently carried away with it; it keeps us in perpetual
Suspense, and makes us dream with our Eyes waking. As long as ever our Hopes
last, we never let go our Desires. But on the other hand, when once Despair
takes possession of us, the Soul is perfectly put upon the Rack; and the
Thought that we shall never be able to obtain what we aim at, is so torturing
and violent, that it bears down all before it; and we lose what we stand
actually possessed of, for the sake of somewhat which we apprehend impossible to
be possessed. This Passion is like froward Children, who, when you take away one
of their Playthings, throw the rest into the Fire for Madness. It grows angry
with it self, turns its own Executioner, and revenges its Misfortunes upon its
own Head. It refuses to live under Disappointments and Crosses, and chooses
rather not to be at all, than to be without the Thing which it has once
imagined necessary to its Happiness. And thus you have had a short account of
those Passions, which have some apparent Good for their Object; we will proceed
in the next place to consider those others, which arise from the Apprehension
of Evil.

CHAP. XXV. Of Anger.
ANger is a foolish and a frantic Passion, which puts us quite besides our
selves; Description
and by seeking some means of beating back the Evil, that either approaches and
threatens, or has already reached and fallen upon us, makes the Blood boil in
our Hearts, and raises wild and furious Vapors in our Mind; such as blind and
pervert our Reason, and thrust us headlong upon any, though never so desperate
Attempts, that may contribute to the satisfying those Desires we have of taking
Revenge, and doing Mischief upon the Person that gave the Provocation. It is a
short Madness, and dangerous, not only for the time it continues, but as it
prepares and opens the way for a lasting Frenzy and Distraction. The Motions
of it are so sudden, the Violence so strong, that it overpowers all our other
Passions, swallows them up quite, or carries them along with it by the force of
its own Torrent.

Causes from whence it arises are various. Weakness of Judgment, Its Causes.
which is most remarkable in Women and Children, I.
Aged and Sick People; whom Experience shows to be of all others most fretful
and peevish, and easy to be provoked. Invalidum omne natura querulum est.
Every thing that is infirm, is naturally disposed to be querulous and froward.
It is a Mistake as great as it is common, to imagine that Fierceness and Rage
is an Argument of Courage: For all violent Motions are like the Essorts of Old
Men and Children, who run when they would walk, and go faster, because they
have not Strength enough to go how. There is not in the World any thing so
feeble as an irregular and unsteady Motion; and therefore Anger, which is such
in the Mind, is rather a Mark of Infirmity and Cowardice. It is a Distemper in
the Soul, which makes it tender and sore, not able to endure Offenses; as Hurts
and Wounds in the Body render the Smart of every little Blow intolerable. Were
it in a State of perfect Health and Soundness, every Trifle could not create so
great a Disorder. Nusquam sine querel^ aegra tanguntur.
But when all is full of Aches and Diseases, the gentlest Touch is treublesome,
and it is always complaining, because always ailing. A Miser will fume and
storm for the loss of a Penny, for the missing of some Advantage which he might
have gained; A jealous Husband will fall into a Rage for the most innocent
Smile of his Wise, or the least Glance of her Eye. II.
Luxury and Niceness, or any particular Fancy, that renders a Man Singular and
Humorsom, and Uneasy, is apt upon the least Accident which crosses that
Humor, to put him into Passion; and Nulla res magis Iracundiam alit, quam
Luxuria.
No one thing (says a great Philosopher) cherishes Anger more than this vain
Temper. III.
So again does the being fond of any little trifling things, not worth our
Affection and Concern: A Glass, a Dog, a Bird; This is a Folly that gives us a
great deal of Trouble, and often exposes us to most unreasonable Passions; the
least of which is more than they can possibly deserve. Another Cause is
Curiosity, IV.
and a busy inquisitive Temper. Qui nimis inquirit, seipsum inquietar.
He that asks too many Questions, is sollicitous to disquiet himself: This is
so far from avoiding, and conniving at, that it is seeking Occasions, hunting
about, and following the Scent, and with great Eagerness and Pleasure running
abroad after Provocations, without having the Patience to stay till They come
home to Us. Sometimes indeed (says Seneca) Anger comes to Us, but not near so
often as We go to It. V.
Another is Credulity and Easiness, the suffering our selves to be possessed with
the first Account, and the first Chance-comer, and not reserving an Ear free
for the other side of the Cause, nor suspending our Belief, till more perfect
Information. But the Principal, VI.
and indeed the very formal Cause of Anger, is an Opinion that we have been
undervalu'd, and ill used; That some Word, some Look, (for any thing will
serve) carried an Air of Contempt, and was less respectful than it ought to
have been. This is always the Argument angry Men lay hold of in their own
Justification. And no wonder then, that Proud Men are most Choleric, and
fuller of Resentment than any others, since no other Disposition makes Men
think so much their Due, and consequently inclines them to be so jealous of
Affronts, and Omissions in point of Respect. For which Reason the Scripture
tells us, Prove. xiii. 10. xxi. 24.
that Only by Pride comes Contention, in one Place, and Styles it most
Emphatically Proud Wrath in another.

Signs of it.
more and more visible than those of any other; and so Strange and Strong, that
they make a mighty Difference in the Person, alter the whole Temper and Frame
both of Body and Mind, transform and turn him into quite another Man. Insomuch,
that Ut sit difficile, utrum magis detestabile vitium, aut deforme.
it is not easy to say, whether this Vice be more detestable, or more deformed
and disfiguring; Some of these Changes and Symptoms, are outward and apparent:
Redness and Distortions of the Face, Fieryness of the Eyes, a wild and enraged
Look, Deasness and Insensibility in the Ears, Foaming at the Mouth, Palpitation
of the Heart; Quickness and Unevenness of the Pulse, Swelling and Bursting
Fullness of the Veins, Stammering in the Tongue, Gnashing and Setting of the
Teeth, Loudness and Hoarsness in the Voice, The Speech thick and indistinct;
and in short, The whole Body is set on Fire, and in a perfect Fever. Some have
been transported to such a Degree, upon these Occasions, that their very Veins
have broke, their Urine stopped, and they have dropped down Dead, being stifled and
strangled with excess of Passion. And what Condition can we suppose their Mind
must be in in the mean while, when the Disorders of the Body are so Violent and
Dismal? Anger at the first Brush, quite banishes Reason and confounds the
Judgment; clears all before it, and takes possession for it self alone; and
when it has got it, then it sills all with Fire and Smoke, with Darkness and
Confusion, with Noise and Clamor; It is like a Robber, or an Enemy, that first
drives the Master out of Doors, and then sets Fire to his House, and that, with
such Fury and Madness, as to destroy and burn it self alive in het Flames. It
is like a Ship that has neither Rudder, nor Pilot; neither Sails, nor Oars,
nor Ballast; but floats about at Random, and commits it self to the Mercy of
Winds, and Waves, and that, when the Sea rides Highest, and the Storms are
Loudest and most Raging. And what can be expected in such a Case, but
Strandings and Shipwracks, when there are so many Rocks on every Side, to break
her to Pieces, so many Quicksands to swallow her up, when she thus lets her
self drive upon them?

Effects; which are indeed, very great, and for the most Part, Its Effects.
exceedingly Wretched, and Deplorable.

I. For First; Anger urges and exposes us to Injustice; it takes Fire afresh,
and is rendered more Violent and Fierce, by any Opposition, though never so
Reasonable and Fair; and that too, not only by Dispute from others, but even
from a Man's own Senses and Reflection, and the being Conscious to himself,
that he is Angry, either without any just Cause, or to a greater Degree than
the Provocation deserved. When a Man has thus fusser'd his Reason to be shaken
and disturbed, let one with all the Calmness imaginable, offer the clearest
Vindication, the justest Excuse, any thing to remove or mitigate this Passion,
all is to no Purpose, or to worse than none; for Truth and Innocence are still
but more enraging, as Seneca observes: In such Cases Pertinaciores nos facit
iniquitas irae, quasi argumentum sit just irascendi, graviter irasci.
the Unreasonableness of our Passion makes us so much more obstinate and
unpersuadable, as if the being very Angry, and Implacable, were the best
Argument that the Ground of our Anger is Just. The Example of Piso upon this
Occasion is well worth our Observation, and the Story is generally known. He,
who was in other Respects Eminent for Virtue and Goodness, yet once in Heat of
Passion pat Three Persons to Death Unjustly; and strained the Law to bring them
in Guilty, only because there had been one proved not Guilty, whom he by a
former Sentence had adjudged Guilty. Anger is likewise exasperated by Silence
and Coldness, because such Indisserence speaks Scorn and Neglect; and when Men
see their Resentments make no Impression, they look upon themselves to be
slighted and affronted. This is very usual with Women, who oftentimes put
themselves into a Passion, purely for the Sake of putting other People into one
too; And when they see, that a Man does not condescend to be Angry, and refuse
to heap on more Fuel, they take all imaginable Pains to cherish and blow up
their own Fire, and grow perfectly Outrageous. So Wild and Savage a Beast is
Anger, so Fierce and Intractable, that neither Vindications nor Submissions;
neither Excusing nor Acknowledging; neither Speaking nor holding one's Peace,
can do any Goood upon it. No soul Means can tame, no fair ones win it over, or
make it Gentle. The Injustice of this Passion is farther Evident, in that it
always takes upon it self to be both Party and Judge in the same Cause; in that
it expects all manner of People that hear or know any thing of the Matter,
should take its Part, and justify its Proceedings; and takes it mortally Ill,
nay, flies in the very Faces of all that either stand Neuter, or in any Degree
seem to think it in the Wrong.

II. A Second Effect of this Passion is Headiness and Obstinacy, Rashness and
Inconsideration. It drives us forward, and thrusts us down Headlong, into
unspeakable Mischiefs; and very often draws upon our own Heads the very
Calamities we are endeavoring to avoid by being Angry; the very same
Sufferings, or many times worse than those, which We in the bitterness of our
Malice and Revenge, are so eager to inflict upon others; and thas, while it
punishes an Enemy, it tortures and execates it self. This Passion is no ill
Resemblance of Great Rains, which crush indeed, and batter what ever they fall
upon, but in the same Fall, break themselves to Pieces. Anger is so eagerly
bent upon the Hurt and Destruction of others, that it sights out of all Guard,
and takes no manner of Care to avoid or ward off its own Death. It draws us in,
and hampers us in a Thousand Inconveniences; puts us upon speaking and doing
many things, that are Base and Unworthy, such as by no means become us, and
what we cannot but be, at least we ought to be, most heartily Ashamed of. To be
short; it transports Men to those Excesses of Extravagance and Rage, that they
know not what they do; ensnares them in the most Injurious, the most Scandalous
Actions; hurries them into Mischief incapable of any Reparation, Murders and
Bloodshed; Treachery and Villainy, Poisonings, and secret Assassinations. Things
that leave long and lasting Remorse behind, and such as they cannot but have
very afflicting Remembrance of ever after. Alexander the Great was a remarkable
Instance of this Kind; and ^ythageras used to say, that where Anger ended,
there Repentance always began.

Passion is never to be convinced of Folly; it is Big, and always well
Satisfied with its own Discretion and Justice; flatters and pleases it self
with a Notion, that the Man does well, and wisely, to be Angry; clears it self
from all manner of Blame, and lays the whole Fault upon some ill or indiscreet
Thing done, that gave the Provocation. But, supposing another guilty of
Injustice, it will not therefore follow, that my Anger is guilty of none.
Suppose I receive Injury from another Hand, will my paying back the same, or a
greater Wrong, take off what I suffer? Will it make me any real Amends, or
bring any true Profit to me, that another Suffers as well as I? The Truth is,
Anger has too much of Obstinacy, and Hair-brained Giddiness, ever to do any
Good. It pretends to cure one Evil, with another; and when we turn over an
Offense to be corrected by this Passion, it is no better than setting Vice to
chastise and punish it self. Reason, which ought always to bear the Sword, and
exercise the Supreme Authority in our Breasts, does not desire any such
Hotheaded Officers to Execute her Commands, as do things upon their own Head,
without waiting for Orders. Reason, like Nature, works easily and gradually, is
sedate and slow; and whatever is Violent, is equally Foreign, and contrary to
both.

But you will say, What? must Virtue then be so Tame and soft, as to see the
Insolences of Vice Triumphant, without any Degree of Indignation and Concern?
Must she be so bound up, as not to take the Liberty of being Angry, nor dare to
make any Opposition against unreasonable and wicked Men? To this I answer.
Virtue has its Freedoms, but they are such as are Just; it takes, it desires
none, that are unsit, or unbecoming. It has Courage too, but this Courage must
not be employed against it self. Nor must another Man's Ill be converted to its
Prejudice and Disturbance. A wise Man is as much obliged to bear the Vices of
Naughty People without Passion, as he is to see their Prosperity without Envy.
The Indiscretion of rash and heady Men, must be endured with the same Patience
and Pity, that a Good Physician exercises toward his Patients, when they are
under the Ravings of a Fever. There is not any one Instance of Wisdom more
Commendable in it self, nor more useful to the General Good of the World, than
that of being able to bear with the Follies and Extravagances of other People.
For if we do not so, the Consequence will be, that we shall fall into the same
Extravagances; and by not supporting Their Follies, we make them our Own.

What has been spoken here at large, of Anger in particular, is in great
Measure Applicable to the Passions that follow; such as Hatred, and Envy, and
Revenge; for these are the same in Substance, and at the Bottom; They are Anger
too, but they are somewhat otherwise modified, appearing in different Forms,
and clothed with different Circumstances.

Proper Advice, and Remedies, against this Pastion, will be treated of, Book
III. Chap. 31.

CHAP. XXVI. Hatred.
HAtred is a very odd Passion. It gives us a great deal of unaccountable
Vexation, contrary to all the Reason in the World. And yet, What is there more
Torturing and Insupportable, than this Resentment? By It we put our selves
perfectly under the Dominion of the Thing we hate; and give it a Power to
afflict and torment us. The Sight of it disturbs our Senses, ruffles our
Spirits, and makes the whole Body Sick, and Disordered: The Remembrance of it
raises a Storm in our Minds; and sleeping or waking, sills us with Disquiet and
Impatience. The Ideas of such Objects, are always hideous and shocking; and we
never entertain them without Indignation and Horror, Spite or Grief; some
Resentment not easy to be expressed, which puts us beside our selves, and rends
our very Heart asunder. Thus we feel in our own Persons, all that Torment we
wish another, and undergo the Punishment we think due to Him. He that hates,
is at this Rate the Patient, and he that is hated, the Agent. Thus it certainly
is to all Intents and Purposes; excepting only, that we think sit to express it
otherwise, and deceive our selves with Words, and Names of Things; For it is
evident to common Sense, that the Haler is in Pain, and the Person beted, in
perfect Ease; perhaps too, in perfect Ignorance of the Matter. But after all,
let us consider, and examine this Point a little. What is it that we hate? Men?
or Things? Be it the one, or the other, it is plain we do not pitch upon the
right Object. For if any thing in the World deserves to be Hated heartily, it
is Hatred it self, and such other Passions, which, like this, breed Discords,
and raise Tumults in our Minds, and rebel against that Power, which of Right
ought to Command, and bear an absolute Sway in us. For when our Enemies have
done all they can, still neither They, nor any Thing else, but such exorhitant
Passions as these, can do us any real, and essectual Injury.

For Particular Directions against this Evil. See Bock III. Chap. 32.

CHAP. XXVII. Envy.
Envy is own Sister to Hatred; as like as Two Twins, in their Fierceness and
Miserable Effects. This is a wild outrageous Beast indeed, more exquisite in
Torture, than Ten Thousand Racks; and of All, that wretched Mankind feels, best
deserves the Title of a Hell upon Earth. This lies perpetually corroding, and
tearing the Heart Strings, and converts other Men's Happiness into an occasion
of Our Misery. And how Dreadful, how Incessant must that Vexation be, which
both Good and Evil conspire to aggravate? Of the many ill Effects this Passion
has, That is a very considerable one; That, while Envious Men look awry upon
the Prosperity of others, and grudge them Their Comforts; they unavoidably
suffer their Own to perish, and flip through their Fingers; and have no
Pleasure or true Enjoyment in all that the most bountiful Providence does, or
can beslow upon Themselves.

Directions and Remedies, Proper for this Evil, will be prescrib'de in Book
III. Chap. 33.

CHAP. XXVIII. Jealousy.
Jealousy have a mighty resemblance to that Passion of Envy last described,
excepting only that they differ in this One Circumstance: The Good of other Men
is the Object of our Envy; but our own Happiness is the Object of Jealonsie.
Some Good, which we are desirous to ingross to our selves, and which we
apprehend belongs to Us alone; for which Reason we dread and detest the
Communication to any Person beside.

Jealousy is a Disease of the Soul; an Argument of great Weakness; an evil and
a foolish Disease, but withal a furious and terrible one: It rages and
tyrannizes over the Mind; insinuates it self under the pretense of
extraordinary Friendship and Tenderness: But when it has gotten Head, and
taken Possession, it builds a mortal Hatred upon the Foundation of Kindness.
Virtue, and Health, and Beauty, and Desert, and Reputation, which are the
Attractives of our Love and Assection, are likewise the Motives and
Incendiaries of this Passion; they kindle and minister fresh Fuel to both
these Fires.

Wormwood and Gall to us: It depraves and embitters all the Sweets of Life; and
commonly mingles it self with our most delightful Enjoyments; and these it
renders so sower and unpleasant, that nothing can be more uneasy to us. It
tures Love into Hatred, Respect into Disdain, Assurance into Distrust: It
breeds a most unhappy Curiosity; makes us busy and inquisitive to our own
Ruin; desirous and impatient to know what nothing but the Ignorance of, can
keep us tolerably easy under; and what, when we do know, there is no Cure for,
but such as makes the Misfortune worse, and more painful. For Whither does all
this Information tend, but only to bring the Matter out of Darkness and Doubt,
into clear and open Day; To have Demonstration of our own Unhappiness, and to
proclaim it to all the World; To make our selves a public Jest, and to entail
Shame and Dishonor upon our Families?

Advice and Remedies against this Passion are to be met with in Book III. Chap.
35.

CHAP. XXIX. Revenge.
Revenge is, in the first place, a cowardly and esseminate Passion; an Argument
of a weak and sordid, a narrow and abject Soul; and accordingly Experience
teaches us, that Women and Children, and such others as have manifestly the
feeblest Minds, are ever the most malicious, and disposed to Revenge. Brave and
Generous Minds feel little of these Resentments: They despise and scorn it;
either because an Injury, when done to them, does not make any great
Impression; or that the Person who does it, is not thought considerable enough
to give them any Disturbance; but so it is, that they feel themselves above any
Commotions of this kind, as the Poet says, Indignus Caesaris Ira.
A Wretch beneath the mighty Caesar's notice. Hail, and Thunder, Hurricanes and
Tempests, and Earthquakes, all these disorderly Agitations, and loud Ratlings,
which we see, and feel, and hear, are formed in these lower Regions of the Air;
They never discompose, or in any Degree affect the Heavenly Bodies and higher
Orbs; All there is quiet, and constant, and serene; These frail, and
corruptible, and grosser Bodies only are they that suffer by them. And thus it
is with the Rage and Folly, the Noise and Brawlings, the Impudence and Impotent
Malice of Fools: They never shake great Souls, nor carry so far as lofty and
generous Minds: An Alexander or a Caesar, an Epaminondas or a Scipio, cannot be
moved by all that such mean Wretches could do or say: For all truly Brave Men,
and these in particular, have been so far from meditating Revenge, that, on the
contrary, they were remarkable for doing good to their Enomies.

restless Passion, full of Heat, full of Smart and Sting; it boyls and bubbles
in the Breast, and gnaws the Heart like a Viper; distracts the Men infected,
disturbs their Enjoyments, takes off the Peace and Comfort of their Days, and
breaks the Sleep of their Nights.

Passion full of Injustice; for it tortures an innocent Person, and adds Grief
and Pain to Him, that was wounded and afflicted before. It is properly the
Party's Business who committed the Offense, to labor under the Remorse and the
Punishment; and all those other ill Consequences, which the Desire of Revenge
unavoidably draws after it. And yet by this, the Sufforing and Guiltless Party
makes it his Care to load himself with these heavy Burdens, as if the receiving
of the Injury were not of it self Affliction sufficient, without such voluntary
and studied Aggravations. Thus it happens frequently, (generally indeed) that,
while the Innocent and Injured is racking himself with the impatient Desires,
and the Contrivance of proper Methods for Revenge, the guilty Aggressour enjoys
himself in Ease and Pleasure, and perhaps makes the Other's Uneasiness a Jest
and a Diversion. But This is only the Beginning of Mischiefs and Injustice; for
the Means of putting such Desires in execution are yet insinitely more so;
which indeed are of all, of any kinds; Baseness and Treachery, Perjury and
Subornation, a secret Stab, or an Ambuscade of Russians; in short, the foulest,
blackest, and most Villainous Designs: For one peculiar ill Effect of this Vice
is, that it extinguishes all Natural Justice, breaks through all the Restraints
of Honor and Duty, and sticks at no Practice, though never so foul and
detestable, to accomplish its Bloody Intentions.

the World, and to his own Quiet; fore'd to hide and flee from Place to Place,
and is every where dogged close at the Heels by his own guilty Fears.

Cruelty; but it is not properly Revenge: For a Man does then only take
Satisfaction and Revenge, when he Humbles his Enemy, and forces him to
Suffering and Submission; not when he puts him past all Suffering, and out of
the reach of his Anger; the rendering of which Sensible and Painful, is the only
End Revenge can propose to it self. Accordingly we see, no Man is so vain and
absurd, to fall foul upon a Stone, or a Brute; because he knows these cannot
feel, or cannot consider the Effects of his Rage. In all true Revenge, it is
necessary, that the Person who executes it, should receive some Satisfaction in
the Pains he inflicts; and that the Person, on whom it is inflicted, should
feel the Smart, and be humbled by the Sorrow, and pay so dear for the Injury he
has done, that he may be made to repent it. But a Man that is killed, is out
of any condition of Grief or Repentance; he is indeed from thenceforth
essectually secured from all manner of Sussering: Whereas, on the contrary, the
Revenger himself continues in a Capacity of both, and oftentimes feels the
Weight of his own Displeasure, by a State of fixed Sorrow and Fear ever after.
Killing then is only a Betraying of our Cowardice. It is the Consequence of our
being afraid, that the Person we intend to punish, should Resent to our
Prejudice, and take an opportunity of paying us again in our own Coin. We are
willing from these Apprehensions to make an End of him at once, and rid our
selves from any future Hazard; which is indeed to quit our Point, to lose the
End of Revenge, and cast a Blemish upon our own Reputation. It is an Artifice,
and an act of Caution, rather than of Courage; It is an Intention to make sure
Work, and consults our Safety much more than our Quioccidit long, non
ulciscitur, nee gloriam assequitur.
Honor.

CHAP. XXX. Cruelty.
CRuelty is a most horrid and detestable Vice, a Quality peculiar to Villains
and Brutes; so contrary to Nature, that it is distinguished by that scandalous
Name of Inhumanity.

It proceeds from, and indeed is the natural Effect of Baseness and Cowardice:
For Valor and Generosity never exert their Power, except where they meet with
Opposition. They have done their Business, and hold their hand, as soon as they
find an Enemy subdued, and at their Mercy. This was the true Courage of brave
old Romans, Romana Virtus -- Parcere Subjectis, and debellare Superbos.
to humble the Obstinate, and spare the Vanquished.

But Cowardice, which affects a false Greatness, and pretends to Triumphs,
which belong not to it, gluts it self with Blood and Massacres, instead of
Generous Conquering: And accordingly, we always find, that Carnage and
Slaughter, have only Common Soldiers, and the Plundering part of the Army, for
its Executioners. And no surer Sign in the World can be given of Men's being
timorous Poultrons, than their being fierce and bloody, and void of Pity and
Remorse. This is the very Thing that disposes Tyrants and Usurpers to Cruelty;
They live always in fear, and never think themselves tolerably safe, till
those, that are in any condition of giving them Disturbance, are utterly
extirpated; and therefore they lay about them, and fall foul upon every Body,
without distinction; neither Age nor Sex can move Compassion, or seem
inconsiderable enough to be spared. Cuncta serit, dum cuncta timet.
Lavish of Blood the Coward kills; The Brave
Holds his relenting band, and dares to save.
Sneaking and timorous Dogs bite and tear to Pieces the Skins and Carcasses of
wild Beasts, which they run away from, when alive and in the Fields. And what
account can be given, why Civil Wars, and Popular Insurrections should spill
more Blood than foreign Engagements? What more probable than This, that the
great Ringleaders and Actors in Seditions and Domestic Differences, are the
Mobb and Refuse of the People; whereas the Other are begun and fought upon
Principles of Honor and Jusstice, by fair and generous Enemies? When the
Emperor Mauritins had received Information, that one Phecas, a Soldier in his
Army, designed to Kill him, he inquired into the Temper and Character of the
Man: And upon his Son-in-Law Philip's acquainting him, that he was a Cowardly
Fellow, the Emperor presently concluded, there was Danger indeed, and that
such a one was cut out for Barbarity and Murder. Sometimes, it is true, Another
Cause may be given for this Quality, which is an inward Malignity and Spite; a
Soul that rejoices in Mischief, and Feasts upon Blood; such as Caligula seems
to have been particularly. But it is to be hoped, few such Instances of
Depravity are to be found; for indeed they are not Men, but Monsters in Humane
Shape.

CHAP. XXXI. Grief.
GRief is a Sinking and Despondency of the Mind, Definition of it.
when dejected by an Opinion of some very great Evils lying heavy upon us. It
is a very dangerous Enemy, destructive to our Quiet and Comfort; and, if good
Care be not taken of it in time, wastes and weakens the Soul, deprives us of
the Use of our Reason, disables us from discharging our Duties, and looking
after her Business; and in time spreads a Rust upon the Soul, adulterates and
deposes the whole Man, binds up his Senses, and lays his Virtues to sleep, when
there is most occasion for rowzing and arming them against the Calamity, that
subdues and oppresses him. In order to beget in us a becoming Aversion to this
Passion, and employing our utmost Strength and Abilities to resist and repel
it, we shall do well to consider seriously the pernicious Effects of it, and
discover how foolish, how unbecoming and deformed it is; how extremely
inconsistent with the Character of Wise Men, as the Philosophy of the Stoics
most truly represents it. But This, as Matters are commonly ordered, is no such
easy Undertaking; for it has learnt to excuse, and vindicate, and set it self
off under the specious Colors of Nature, and Affection, and Tenderness, and
Goodness; nay the Generality of the World are so far misled, that they keep it
in Countenance, pay it Honor and Respect, and think it a Duty and a Virtue; as
if Wisdom and Conscience never appeared more beautiful than in a Mourning-Dress.

It Is Unnatural.
we may observe first of all, that This is so far from being agreeable to
Nature, as it would fain be thought, that, on the Contrary, it is rather a
Matter of Formality, and directly contrary to Nature: Which it is very easy to
demonstrate, if Men will lay aside the Prejudices of Custom, and consider it
impartially. As for those public and solemn Mournings, (I mean not this to the
prejudice of a real, decent, and affectionate Concern) but for the Mournings
which are practiced with so much Ceremony and Affectation, and were so by the
Ancients heretofore, as well as by the Generality of Mankind at this Day;
Where, I say, can we find a greater Cheat, a grosser Sham and Banter upon the
World? How many industrious Impostures and Hypocrisies? What artificial
Constraints in our Behavior are sought, and counterfeited, both by the Persons
themselves, who are interested in the Occasion of them; and of all the rest
that are taken in, and bear a Part in this melancholy Pomp? And, as if all this
were not enough, we refine and improve the Deceit, we even Hire Men on purpose
to put on this Folly, to stand as Mutes, or to make dreadful Lamentations; to
move and heighten a Passion which ought to be suppressed; to give Groans and
Sighs for a Price, such as we all know are feigned and extorted; to shed Tears
for the Entertainment of the Spectatours, such as fall, only when they are seen
to do so, and are immediately dried up, as soon as the Company retires: And,
pray, Where does Nature teach us any thing like This? What can there be indeed
more absurd and vain; what does Nature condemn, what does it detest more than
such Insincerity? This is nothing but Opinion and Fashion, the Cause and
Cherisher of almost all our Passions; the Tyranny of Custom, and Vulgar Error,
that instructs Men to indulge their Grief in such a formal manner. From hence
it is, that, if a Man be not deeply enough affected in his own Person, and
cannot furnish a sufficient proportion of Tears and hanging Looks out of his
own Stock, he is thought obliged to hire and purchase a Supply from others who
make a Trade of it. So that for the satisfying what the World calls Decency, we
put our selves to vast Expense; which Nature, if we would take Her Judgment, is
so far from prescribing, that She most freely acquits us of, nay condemns us
for it. Is not this, in truth, a public and studied Assront upon Reason and
Common Sense, a Constraint and a Corrupting of Nature, a Prostituting and
Debauching of the Manhood in us, a Mocking the World, and making a Jest of our
selves; and that for no other purpose, but merely to comply with the Notions of
the absurd Vulgar, which abound in nothing so much as Falsehood and Mistake, and
admire nothing so much as Counterfeit and Disguise?

Nor are our Private Sorrows much better: Private.
For These, whatever they may seem, are no more Natural than the former. Did
Nature inspire or dictate them, they would be common to all Mankind; they would
affect all Mankind almost equally; since All partake of the same Nature, and
differ only in some few, some small Circumstances. But here we find very
different Resentments: The same Objects, which afflict and grieve some, are
Matter of Joy and Satisfaction to others; and what draws Tears and bitter Cries
from one Person, and one Country, is received with great Cheerfulness by
another. What One does, Another disapproves; and the Friends of Mourners think
it their Duty to exhort, to comfort, to chide them, to beg that they would
recollect themselves, call in Reason and Religion to their Assistance, be Men
again, and dry up their Tears. Observe the greatest part of Them who take pains
to afflict themselves; hear what they say when you have given them this good
Counsel; They will make no difficulty to acknowledge, that it is a Folly and a
Weakness, to be guilty of excessive Passions; they will commend and call those
happy, who can stand the Shock of Adversity, and have so much Government of
Temper, and such Presence of Mind, as to meet an Affliction bravely, and bear
it steadily, and set a gallant and Masculine Spirit in array against it. Thus
they excuse, but they dare not justify their own Concern; They say, they
cannot help it, and by that Apology, lament, if not condemn themselves; for
this implies they Wish, and think it were better, if they could overcome their
Grief. And, in truth, the thing is very plain in these private Mournings too,
that Men do not so much suit their Sorrows to their Sufferings, as to the
received Notions of those, among whom they dwell and converse. And if we take a
close and nicer View, this will discover to us, that Opinion is at the bottom
of all our immoderate Melancholy; That our Torment and Vexation proceeds from
the false Representations of Things; and that we grieve, either sooner than we
ought, by Anticipation, and Fear, and sollicitous Apprehensions of what will
come hereafter; Which, like so many false Perspectives, set the Object nearer
our Sight, or else magnify the Bulk of it to our Eye, and so make us grieve
more than we ought, upon a Supposal of the Calamity being much greater, than
really it is.

Unnatural.
For Grief defarms and defoces all those Excellencies, which are most Beautiful
and Lovely in us. These all are blunted and melted down by this corroding
Passion, like the Luster of a Pearl, dissolved in Vinegar. And really we are
then a miserable Sight, our Head hanging down, our Eyes fixed upon the Ground,
our Tongue Speechless, our Limbs stiff and Motionless, our Looks Wild and
Confused, our Ears Deaf and Insensible, our Minds void of all Attention and
composed Thought. How distant is this from the Beauty, the Dignity, the Majesty
of our Original Form and Temper? Are these Men? You may better call them
walking Statues, which only sweat forth Moisture at their Eyes; like Niobe,
whom the Poets, to represent the Miseries of Excessive Grief, have feigned to
be transformed into a weeping Marble.

Impious and Unjust.
being Unnatural, were the worst of it; I have a yet much more heinous
Accusation to charge it with; For it flies in the Face of God himself, and
Arraigns his Justice, and Wisdom, and Providence. What better Construction can
any Man in Reason put upon our Rash Complaints, and Outrageous Passions, than a
Mind discontented with the Great Governor of the Universe, and his Disposals
of Us, and our Affairs? To murmur and repine at what is done by Him, is to find
Fault with him who does it; and in an oblique, and little more respectful Way,
to charge him with Folly or Hard-dealing. The Law and Condition, which he has
fixed to himself for the Government of the World, is, that all things in these
Sublunary Regions shall be Changeable and Inconstant, ever in Motion, and
subject to Decays and Death. If then we know this to be their Condition, why do
we afflict our selves for that, which is the common Fate of all here below; for
that which could not be New, and should not be a Surprise to us; what if we did
not, yet we might, and ought to have expected? And if we did not know this, the
truest and only reasonable Matter for grieving, is our own most wretched
Ignorance, Of a Truth, so Evident, so Useful, so Necessary to be known; a
Truth, that Nature has Graven every where, in Characters so Large and Legible,
that it is impossible for us to go abroad and not meet it, or to turn our Eyes
any way at home, and not read it. Others, our Selves, and Every Thing carry
this Inscription. Alas! we mistake our Post, and Quality. Man's Business here
is not to give Laws, but to receive and submit to them. The Administration of
Affairs, is lodged in higher and better Hands. The Order of the Universe is
established; and We, who are but a very small Part of this vast Body, must
follow the Motions of the Whole, and take contentedly what falls to our Share.
To fret and vex our selves, is to be concerned, that Eternal Ordinances, are
not reversed and dissetled for our Sakes; that We are not made an Exception to
all Created Nature; which, besides the Intolerable Arrogance, and Impiety it is
guilty of against God, is no less insupportable Folly with Respect to our
selves; for it mends not the Matter one whit, but adds Weight to what
Providence has laid upon us already, and makes all our Sufferings double.

Destru^^ve.
that it is exceeding destru^^ve, and of extreme ill Consequence to Men; The
Danger whereof is but the more increased, by its hurting us, under a Pretense
of doing us Good. It flatters with false Hopes, and a fair show of Relief; but
in Reality aggravates the Misfortune; and while it professes to draw the Weapon
out of our Side, makes the Wound wider and deeper, and thrusts a Dagger into
our Hearts. Besides, these Thrusts are infinitely the more Difficult to defend
our selves against; because it is a Domestic Enemy that gives them; One that
we cannot run away from, One that is fed and cherished within our own Bosoms,
and which we our selves have bred up and given Birth to, merely to be a
Vexation and a Punishment to us

Grief, Outwardly.
are Universally Mischievous; they spread themselves quite over the whole Man;
and while they infect, do very much impair every Part of him. As to the
external Appearance: It Dishonours, and is a Reproach to the Man, by that
Deformity, and Change of Countenance, brought upon him by this Means. Do but
observe, when once Grief enters, how it fills Men with Shame and Confusion, so
that they dare no more show themselves in Public, nay, so as to shun the Sight
and Conversation even of their most intimate Friends, and particular
Acquaintance. When once we are under the Dominion of this Passion, the Light it
self is offensive, and our Great Care is, to seek out some dark Corner, some
close Retreat, to crouch, and hide our selves in, far from the Eyes and
Observation of every Body. Now what can be the Meaning of all This, but a plain
unnatural Confession of its own Indecency, and how much Men ought to be ashamed
of what they do at that time? Is not this evidently to condemn it self? and
would you not be apt to think, This was some Woman caught in Adultery, that
runs away, and hides her Face, and takes such Pains not to be seen or known?

Next to the Person; observe the Habit, what strange, uncouth, effeminate
Things, the Mourning Weeds are, as if our very Clothes were intended to publish
to the World, that Grief utterly destroys, and takes away all that is Manly and
Brave about us; and in its Room, gives us all the Softnesses, and Infirmities
of Women. Accordingly the Thracians always dressed Men, when they were in
Mourning, in direct Women's Habit; and a certain Author observes, that Grief
enervates Men, and wastes their Strength. The old Roman Laws, which were the
most Noble and Masculine (like the Spirits of those that made and lived under
them) strictly prohibited all such Effeminate Lamentations, and long indulged
Sorrow. They thought very truly, that it was a horrible Absurdity for Men to
act in Contradiction to Nature and Reason, and thus Unman themselves. And all
the Allowance they were content to make, was only for the First Gush of
Passion, while it was fresh, and tender, or surprising; For there are Tears,
that may be permitted to fall from the Eyes of Philosophers themselves. A Man
may keep up the Dignity of his Nature, and yet not abandon the Humanity of it:
This we are bound to preserve, as well as not to debase the other; and
therefore all, that those Roman Laws, and these Reflections aim at, is, so to
Temper and get the Mastery over our Passion, that while the Tears fall from our
Eyes, Virtue and Wisdom may not fall from our Hearts, at the same time.

Inwardly.
and changing his Mein and Air, and Behavior, so infinitely to Disadvantage;
no, nor yet that corroding Venom, which eats into our very Joints, and Marrow,
and as the Wise Man expresses it, dries up the Bones; these miserable Effects,
I say, upon the Body, are not All; It goes deeper yet; decays the Soul, breaks
all its Rest, confounds and disturbs its Operations, disables and draws off the
Man from any Virtuous or Honorable Designs; palls, and flats his Relish of
Goodness, extinguishes the Desire of Reputation, and takes away the Disposition
of doing Worthily, either for himself, or for any body else: Nay, it does not
only unqualify him for the doing, but for the receiving Good from any other
Hand. For even the most Prosperous Occurrences, are grown insipid, or
unpleasant to him; and every Thing turns Sour upon his Mind, as all kinds of
Meat do upon distempered Stomachs. In short, Grief embitters a Man's whole
Life, and poisons all his Actions.

Distinguished.
and a Difference ought to be made between the Greatness, and the Extremity of
it; as there should also, between That, which runs into Excess, and grows
ungovernable altogether from it self; and That which is pushed on, and
aggravated by the Suddenness of an Accident. In such a Case, Surprise and
Consternation alarms, seises, transports the Man; takes away all Motion and
Sense, stupifies and turns him into a Stone, like that wretched Mother Niobe,
Diriguit visu in medio, calor ossa reliquit,
Labitur, and longo vix tandem tempore fatur.

Her curdled Blood, ran backward at the Sight,
And pale numbed Limbs, a shivering Horror took;
She stiffens into Statue with the Fright,
At last her faltering Tongue, long Silence broke.
And in these Cases, great Allowance is to be made for Natural Affection; upon
which account that Painter is admitted to have understood his Business well,
who when he was to draw Iphigenia going to be Sacrificed, represented the
several Postures and Countenances of her Mourning Friends, and more distant
Relations, with great Curiosity, and Artifice; but when he came at last to her
Father, he cast a Veil over His Face. Thus wisely covering that Sorrow, which
no Pencil could sufficiently express. But Grief, as it often exceeds the Power
of Art and Representation in the Copy, so sometimes it is too strong for the
Original; too grievous to be born, and kills the Man outright. This finds no
Vent; But that which is Moderate, or indeed, that which is very Great, wears
off by Tract of Time, by Diversion, and Business, and other Avocations of the
Mind; And that which helps This forward, is, that it expresses and cases it
self, by Tears, and Sobs, and Sighs, and sad Complaints; all which are some
Mitigation to the suffering Party, and much more Comfortable than Insensibility
and Silence. Curae leves lequuntur, ingentes stupent.
Slight Sorrows find a Vent, and Words command;
The Fierce boil inward, Dumb, and Stupid, stand.


Directions, and Helps, against this Evil, are given Book III. Chap. 29.

CHAP. XXXII. Compassion.
WE mingle Sighs and Tears with those that are in Affliction; we feel, in some
Degree, their Misfortunes, and take Part in their Pains. Whether it be, from
some secret Sympathies in Nature, whereby the Sentiments of one Man are
conveyed to, and produce the like in another; or whether it be from sad
Presages, by which we are apt to fear, that, whatever our Neighbors suffer
now, may happen to be our own Case another Day.

Now, This (so far as it is Vicious) is the Passion of a Weak Mind; A Foolish
Pity, that proceeds from too much Tenderness, and from an Indisposition in the
Soul, whereby it is apt to be vehemently disordered, and fall into great
Troubles upon slight Occasions. Hence Women and Children are most affected with
it; and so are the Cruel and Spightful too (who, as was said before, are always
Cowardly and fearful:) For these, though they know nothing of that Noble and
Generous Compassion, which is a Virtue; yet of this Vicious One, they have
their Share. Such (for Instance) as express mighty Concern for Villains and
Malefactors, when they endure the Punishment of the Law, and smart for their
Faults. Now, the Effects of such a Pity are very Unjust, and so are the Causes
of it too; for, to spare the Guilty, is to injure, and endanger the Innocent;
and all that Tenderness, proceeds only from superficial Appearances, and want
of Thought, which looks no farther than just the present Circumstances of the
Suffering Party, without any Regard at all had to the Merits of the Cause, and
how Reasonable it is, that such Punishment should be inflicted upon him.

Concerning This, See more Book III. Chap. 30. Where you have likewise the just
Distinction, between the Virtuous, and Vicious Compassion; omitted here, to
avoid Repetitions.

CHAP. XXXIII. Fear.
FEAR is the Apprehension of some Evil to come, Description of it
which stands over us, and keeps us perpetually in Awe; it fills us full of
Anxious Thought, and very Officiously runs before, to give Notice of the
Calamities, which Fortune threatens us with.

We are not speaking at present, concerning that Fear of God, so highly
recommended in Holy Scripture; so exceeding Useful and Necessary a Check upon
Men's Minds, in Order to a Good Life: Nor is this Chapter to be understood, as
if it related at all to that anxious and tender Concern, which proceeds from
Affection and Duty; or such as makes a Part of that Obedience and Respect, due
from Inferiors, of all Sorts, to their Superiors; But only of that
troublesome, and tormenting Passion, which is the Spawn of Sin, and Shame, and
a disordered Mind. For these Terrors, entered the World, at the same Instant
with Guilt, and Reproach; and are the wretched Offspring, of the Corruption of
our Souls, and a secret Familiarity with the Devil. It was upon yielding to his
wicked Suggestions, that our General Ancestor first discovered these misgiving
Horrors upon his Conscience. I was afraid, because I was naked, and I hid my
self. Genesis iii. 10.

The Malice and Tyranny of it.
indeed, can never hurt, or gain Advantage over us, except when we are cheated,
and seduced by it. It makes use of the Time to come, which we can have no
manner of Insight into; so throwing us into a Place of Darkness; and making the
same Use of Futurity, which Thieves do of the Night; (which is, to compass
their Designs undiscovered, and to scare and terrify us much more, than the
Occasion requires.) When it has got us there, it puts on a Thousand several
Vizors, and represents our Misfortunes under the most frightful and ghastly
Forms imaginable: Thus we are cheated again, as Children are with Fancies, and
Bugbears; and dread those Evils in variety of Shapes, which can have in reality
but one Face; Evils which have nothing in their own Nature, capable of doing us
any Hurt; and such as would not be Evils to us, if we did not call and believe
them so. It is nothing else, but merely the Apprehension we have of things,
which renders those Accidents Evils, that in themselves are no such Matter. And
This is so Powerful, and so Pernicious, that it turns our very Good into Evil,
and from our Prosperity takes Occasion to afflict, and make us Miserable. How
many Wretches, do we see every Day; Wretches of their own making? who actually
become Unhappy for the very Dread of being so, and have improved their Empty
Fears, into Solid and Substantial Miseries? How many People have lost their
Friends, merely through Distrust, and not daring to make Use of them? and how
many have made themselves sick, with the very Terrors and Apprehensions of
Sickness? Here is a jealous Coxcomb, that fancies his Wife has played him
Foul, and teazes himself into a Consumption, 'till he pines and droops into his
Grave, with this tormenting Suspicion. Another anxious Fool is afraid of
falling into Poverty, and he racks himself into a Disease; and dies, for Fear
of not having enough to live upon. Nay, there are several, who have been killed
with the very Fear of Death; and that you may not think this so very odd, let
me observe to you, that something like it happens every Day in most, if not in
all the Objects of this Passion. Our Fear, generally serving to very little
Purpose, otherwise than the drawing down upon our Heads, the very thing we
Pretend to run away from. Undoubtedly no Calamity whatsoever, is near so great,
or grievous to be born, as the Fear of it. For Other Evils can hurt us only
while they have a Real Existence, and are actually upon us; when the Cause is
removed, the Effect and the Pain immediately cease. But Fear is not so
confined; It extends to Things that have no Being, as well as to such as have;
nay, to things which neither are, nor perhaps ever will be; and, that we may be
assured, there is no End of its Extravagances, it fixes sometimes upon things
which we may be very confident never can be. So very ingenious is this Passion
to torment us, so malicious and spightful, so merciless a Tyrant; It extracts
real and cutting Pains out of Shadows; and refines upon Imaginary Evils, till
it consolidates, and makes them weighty ones: And for those which minister some
Ground for Fear, it is wonderful busy, and troublesomely officious; it takes
Post, and brings us News, which it were better not to hear; for it creates
imaginary, and anticipates all our actual Sufferings, by Opinion and
Expectation.

Fear does not only fill us with dreadful Impressions, and oftentimes disturb
our Repose with false Alarms; but, which is worse, it taints and destroys all
our Happiness, breaks in upon our Quiet, and checks all our Delights. No Man
can be easy, or take pleasure in the Enjoyment of a Blessing, which he is in
perpetual fear of Losing. Life it self cannot be a Satisfaction to a Man that
lives in dread of Dying: And One of the Ancients has observed very truly, That
no Advantage can minister true Joy to us, which we have not such a Mastery of,
as to be prepared to part with it, whenever Providence shall demand it back
again.

apprehend Destruction from them which advance to our Relief. Adeo etiam
auxilia pavor formidat.
Our very Succors strike new Terror into us. Some have been transported with
this Passion, even to the degree of perfect Stupidity; the Senses are put
besides themselves, and lose the power of discharging their Duty; our Eyes are
broad open, and yet we see not; Men discourse to us, and we hear not a Word
they say; we attempt to run, and make our Escape, but stand fixed like Statues,
and cannot move a Step.

Fear supplants our Natural Powers, depraves and disables the whole Man,
enfeebles Body and Mind, baffles our wisest Designs, and banishes Thought.
Obstupui, steteruntque comae, vox faucibus haesit.
Amazement bore up my erected Hair;
Nor could my stammering Tongue express my Fear.
Sometimes it makes Men desperate; and so, that the giving all for lost is for
their great Advantage; for it inspires them with Resolutions of selling their
Lives as dear as they can, and puts them upon doing Wonders. An Instance
whereof we have in that Roman Legion commanded by Sempronius, in their
Engagement against Hannibal.

Una salus victis nullam sperare salutenr. Virg. En. 2.
Despair and Rage broke through the extreme Distress;
Could they have hoped, their Safety had been less.
There are also some Fears and Terrors, with which Men have been strangely
possessed without any visible ground; as if they were Thunderstruck from above;
or God by a particular Providence had determined to infatuate and dispirit
them, in order to their Destruction. These sudden Amazements are what we
commonly call Panick Fears; and we read, that the City of Carthage was once
thus seized with Confusion; for such are not always confined to single Persons,
or small Numbers; but whole Nations and vast Armies have been universally
seized, and unaccountably struck with them. And our Blessed Savior instances
in This, as one of the Judgments sent from Heaven upon the wicked Jews. Luke
xxi.
Men's Hearts failing them for Fear.

Particular Directions and Remedies against this Passion, will be given in Book
III. Chap. 28.

CHAP. XXXIV. The Second Way of considering Man; which is, by stating the
Comparison between Him, and other Animals.
Man entire, and with regard to Himself alone: A useful but difficult
Comparison, such as Man is partial in.
The next Step, by which we propose to advance in the Knowledge of him, is by
stating a Comparison between Him and other Animals; and This is a very
excellent help toward making a right Judgment in the Case. Now this Comparison
is of large extent; it consists of many Branches, requires great Skill, and
would prove of mighty Benefit and Consequence, if well and truly made: But the
Question is, Who must make it? Shall Man? He is a Party in the Cause, and
liable to very just Exception; for it is much to be feared, when the Issue is
his own Concern, the Verdict will not be honest. And accordingly we see, how
partial and unfair he is in all he says of Himself; for he knows no Mean, he
proceeds with no Moderation, but is eternally in Extremes. Sometimes he is big,
and pleased with Himself; looks down upon the lower World with Disdain; and
calls himself the Lord of all the Creatures; divides their Morsels among them,
and cuts out for each Species, such a Proportion of Faculties, and natural
Power, as His Lordship, vouchsafes to allow them: At Other times, instead of
all this Gayety and Pride, you find him full of black Discontent, and then he
debases himself as much, murmurs and frets, grumbles and complains, gives
Providence hard Words, and calls Nature a cruel Stepmother, that has made him
the Refuse of the World, the most wretched of all her Productions; and dealt to
Him the least and lowest Portion of all her Children. Now in truth, both the
One and the Other of these Opinions are equally false, unreasonable, and
extravagant. But what can we expect better from him? or how is it to be
thought, he should carry himself evenly and fairly, and act justly with other
Creatures, when he is, as we shall shortly see, so infinitely out of all
measure, in his Notions toward God, his Superior; and Man, who is his Equal?
But, besides this Bias upon his Judgment, there is another Difficulty upon his
Understanding: For which way shall he get a competent Knowledge of the inward
Powers, and unseen Motions of other Animals? So that if he were inclined to be
Just, and to hear the Evidence impartially, yet he must needs be an improper
Judge, to whom the most material part upon which the Sentence ought to be
grounded, cannot be given in Evidence. And such are those inward Operations of
Brutes, which we can have no certain or competent perception of. However, we
will try at present to state this Comparison, as evenly, and calmly, as we can
possibly.

some have more, and some have less of it. And thus we may observe a near
Neighborhood, and close Affinity between Mankind and other Animals. They are
akin in many things, and several Properties are alike, and common to both.
Several things indeed there are, wherein they differ; but these are not so
vastly disproportionate and distant, but that they still are next adjoining
Links, twisted within one another, in the great Chain of the Universe. So that
Man is neither in all respects superior, nor inferior in all. For that which
befalls the Sons of Men, befalls Beasts; even one thing befalls them
both; says the Wisdom of God himself. ( Eccles. iii. 19.)

Generation, Nutrition, Motion, Action, Life and Death. For (says the same
Divine Wisdom) As the one dies, so does the other; so that a Man (in this
respect) has no Pre-eminence above a Beast. And This is a Confutation of those
foolish repining People, and all their melancholy Complaints, that represent
Man, as the only Creature, whom Nature has discountenanced and disgraced,
abandoned and forsaken; turned naked into the wide World, and cast upon the
bare Ground; without any Covering, without any Natural Weapons to shelter or
defend him; bound up, and swaddel^d; and utterly ignorant and unfurnished of
what is fit for him: Whereas to all Others she has been much more bountiful;
Clothed them with Shells, or Hair, or Wool, or Shag, or Feathers, or Scales;
Armed them with Tusks, or Horns, with Bills, or Claws, or Talons, to act
offensively or defensively, as occasion requires; qualified them, without any
help of Art or Industry, for Swimming, Running, Flying, Singing, Looking out
for Food, and Sustaining themselves. But Man, poor neglected Man, (they tell
you) is Taught to Go, Taught to Speak; nay, requires Help and Teaching for the
very Feeding and Supporting himself, and attains to nothing without Time and
Trouble, and serving an Apprenticeship. In short; He is perfect in no other
Instance of Nature's teaching, except that of Crying: This is all we bring into
the World along with us; and a very fit Emblem it is of our Fortune and
Condition. Now all these melancholy Complaints, which make disadvantageous
Reflections upon the Original Composition of Mankind, and that which is truly
the State of Nature; are altogether unjust and false. For first, Our Skin is
sufficiently fortified against all the Injuries of Weather; 1. Nakedness. Chap.
XIV
and so Nakedness is no Argument of our being less Nature's Care, than any
other Creature. Several Nations, (as I have observed heretofore) never yet so
much as knew what Clothes are; and even We that do, can go bare in any Parts,
even the tenderest and most sensible; when Inclination, or Custom, or some
particular Fashion, dispose us to it. For where of all our Body is the Sense
quicker, than in the Face, the Hands, the Stomach? And yet what Lady, even the
nicest and tenderest of her Sex, scruples to expose her Neck and Breasts, (when
the Mode requires that Dress) even in the Extremity of Winter? 2. Swalling
Clothes.
Swathes and Rollers may be convenient, but it is plain they are not necessary in
Children; for the Lucedaemonians heretofore made no use of them; nor do the
Swisses and Germans that dwell in cold Countries; nor Biscans, nor those
Vagabonds and Common Cheats, that go by the Name of Gypsies, use them at this
Day. 3. Weeping.
Weeping is by no means peculiar to Mankind; Beasts have likewise their Share
in it: Some of them shed Tears; and much the greatest part of them Cry, and
Complain, and Bemoan themselves continually, for some time after their coming
into the World. 4. Weapons.
As for Weapons, Nature has not been wanting in her Provision for Us too; and
she has given us besides, greater Opportunities of using them; For the Muscles
and Motions of our Limbs are more in Number, and of a more useful Variety; and
These too we are capable of receiving greater Service from, without any
Instruction at all, than any other Animal whatsoever: Or if some few are better
provided in this respect, we have the Advantage of many others. Nor do we need
any Teaching in point of Eating; 5. Eating
We and They are equally fitted, equally dextrous and ready at it by Nature:
Who makes any Question, but a Child would look out sharp for Meat, as soon as he
is strong enough to feed himself? And Meat the Earth produces for our purpose;
there wants neither Quantity, nor Variety, to supply our Necessities, whether
we improve it by Art and Labor, or not: Of which several Nations are a Proof,
who live in great Plenty, without contributing any Tillage, or Care, or
Industry of their own, toward their Subsistence. 6. Sp^t^.
As for Speaking, allowing That to be the effect of Art, and not of Nature; yet
it is certain too, that if it be not Natural, it is not necessary neither. But
yet This may be reckoned among those things that are given in common to Men and
Bests both: For what other Name but Speaking can we give to that Faculty of
expressing themselves, which we see they have upon all occasions; those
Significations of Pain, and Grief, and Joy; the Methods of Summoning one
another together, and asking mutual Succors; their Arts of Courtship and
Flattery, and making Love? And as We sometimes speak by some particular
Gestures, the Motions of our Eyes, or Head, or Hands, or Shoulders; (Arts in
which Dumb People are exquisitely perfect, and practice even to Astonishment)
so do Beasts likewise converse with one another; And even Those of them that
have no Voice at all, maintain an intercourse of Good Offices, and ask and
return them, as occasion serves. As Beasts understand Us in some degree, so do
We in part understand Them: They flatter and sooth us; they threaten and give
us warning; they call, entreat, and express their want of our Help: We speak to
Them, and They to Us after Their manner; and if we understand but imperfectly,
whose fault is it? Theirs or Ours? This is what none of us can certainly tell,
and somewhat may be said for either Side. They, for ought we know, may think as
meanly of Us upon this Account, as We commonly do of them. Here we have just
Occasion to make a Distinction which I shall show to be necessary, Chap.
XXXVII. between Defects Natural and Accidental: For of the Latter sort is That
of Men's being unintelligible to each other; This Confusion of Languages having
been no part of our Original Condition: For we have infallible Assurance, that
the whole Earth was once of one Speech. So that what was inflicted as a
Punishment for a Crime, (as This is expressly affirmed to be, Genesis XI.) cannot
in any fair Reasoning, make a Branch of the Comparison, between the Nature of
Man, and That of Brutes. Nor indeed even in this Condition, (thus debased and
punished as we stand) will the exquisite Easiness of expressing Our Thoughts,
and the wonderful Powers of Humane Voice, S^ Chapter of Weakness.
endure to be compared with the wild and inarticulate Sounds of any Brutes
whatsoever, though most excellent in their kind.
But in This however they are a Reproach to us, that in the present Condition
of Humane Nature, we do not understand one another. Our almost next Neighbors,
remoter Provinces in the very same Country, have Dialects so different, that
they do not comprehend each other at all; Whereas They are all perfectly well
acquainted with the Idioms, not only of their own Kind all the World over; but
(which is a great deal more) with those of Kinds different from their own. The
Horse knows how to distinguish the Barkings of a Dog; That One sort of Tone
imports Mischief, and Danger, and a malicious Design; and that Another is
innocent, and safe, and intends him no hurt at all. 7. Mutual Correspondence.
Nay, I add, that they do not only maintain a Correspondence among Themselves,
but with Us also. In Wars and Engagements, Elephants, Dogs, Horses, understand,
as well as We: They conform all their Motions to the Word of Command; They Run,
or they Stand still; they March, or they Halt; they Pursue, or they Flee; they
Charge, or they Retreat, as we would have them; They receive Pay and
Subsistence; they have a part in the Victory, and a Share in the Rooty; as we
see particularly they had in the late Conquests of the Indies. And thus much
may suffice to be observed concerning those things which Nature has
distributed both to Men and Beasts in common; and that with so even a Hand,
that there is no Great Disparity on either side.

(...)
come next under our Observation. Now Some there are, in which Man does
manifestly excel, and no Animals whatsoever can pretend to equal, or to be like
them; and Others again there are, in which Beasts have the upper hand of Us.
The Divine Wisdom so ordering the Matter, that the several Parts of the
Creation should be so nicely interwoven, so closely connected, that Each should
have some Pre-eminence peculiar to it self; and from All together, should
result the perfect Harmony, and uninterrupted Order, of One most compact and
beautiful Whole. (...)
The plain and indisputable Privileges of Man, are the noble Faculties of his
Soul; The Penetration, Sprightliness, and Comprehension of his Mind, exerted in
the Fruitfulness of his Invention; the Subtilty and Solidity of his Judgment;
the Deliberate Determination of his Choice; Speech to communicate his Thoughts
freely, to make known his Wants, to ask and to offer Assistance; The Hand, a
ready Instrument to execute whatever his own Invention shall suggest, or the
Instructions of others shall dictate, or their Performances prescribe for his
Imitation; The Majestic Form of his Body; the great Variety of Movements he is
qualified for; from whence it comes to pass, that his Body, and the several
Parts of it, are much more serviceable to Him, than those of any Creatures else
can be to Them.

Advantages of Beasts. General.
and of Those some are General, and others Particular: The General are these;
Health, which in Them is much more confirmed, and less interrupted, than it
ever is in Men; their Constitutions more robust; their Natural Defects and
Imperfections very rarely to be observed. Whereas Men are weak and tender,
easily diseased; Blind, and Lame, and Deaf oftentimes from the Birth. The Open
Air never does Them injury; They are subject to no Rheums, or dangerous Colds,
with which most of our acutest Distempers begin, and many of them have no other
Cause: Moderation in their Desires and Actions, which are bounded by
Convenience, Innocence, and Security; perfect Ease and Tranquillity; for this
must needs attend a Life void of all Fear and Guilt; Full Liberty and
Confidence in Matters that are Natural and Lawful, without any Restraints of
Shame, or Fear of Discovery; A total Exemption from infinite Vices and
Exorbitances; no Superstition to enslave them; no Ambition, or Avarice, or
Envy, to disturb, to torment them; no uneasy Fancies, and affrighting Dreams
to afflict and confound them: These are the Portion of all Animals in common.

Of Those that are Particular to some sorts only, Particular.
we may reckon the pure, Swallows, and some other Birds, in Building; or with
the Spider in Spinning and Weaving; or with the Nightingale in Music; Remora,
because, though small it self in Comparison, yet it stops the largest Ships in
their Course: Instances of which History gives us, in the Vessel that rode
Admiral of Mark Anthony's and Caligula's Fleet: That of the Cramp-Fish, which
benumbs People's Limbs at some distance, and though they never touch him: That of
the Hedg-Hog, which has a Foreknowledge of the Winds: And That of the
Cameleon and Polypus, in changing Colors, and taking a fresh Tincture,
according to the Things they rest upon. and in some he is so far from being
Equal, or near, that he is in no Degree like them. To all which might be added,
That other Advantage, which consists in the Length of their Lives; The Term of
some Animals, in the ordinary Course of Nature, extending to a Number of Years,
Seven or Bight Times as much as that of Man.

The Advantages, Advantages that may be disputed.
and perhaps, upon a stricter Examination, would tempt an Impartial Judge, to
give it on the other side, are several. First, Reasonable and Intellectual
Faculties of his Mind; the Power of comparing, Reasoning. Qu. Whether Brutes
partake of it.
considering, arguing, collecting; Learning, and Improvement; Judgment and
Conduct. Now Two Objections may be offered in Bar to this Claim; the One
Relating to the Thing it self; the Other to the real Worth, and Benefits of it.
First, It is not out of all Dispute, whether the Matter of Fact, set forth in
this Claim, be True; that is, whether Men have these Excellencies peculiar to
themselves. It has ever been, and ever will be, a Point in Controversy,
whether Brutes have none of these Spiritual Powers; and that Opinion, which
holds the Affirmative, and maintains they have, is supported with greatest
Authorities, and seems to carry a greater Appearance of Truth. The most
Celebrated and Learned Philosophers have declared for it; No less than
Aristotle, and Galen, and Porphyry, and Plutarch, Democritus and Anaxagoras.
The Reason, upon which they ground that Assertion, is this; That, the Brain is
the Particular Organ, the part of the Body, employed by the Soul, in the Acts
of Ratiocination; and that The Composition of the Brain, is exactly the same in
Brutes, as it is in Men; and from hence they conclude, that the Instrument of
Reason, is as apt and capable in one of these Creatures, as it is in the other.
The Difficulty then will be, whether the Souls be equally Capable, of using
this Instrument to such Purposes; and for This, they offer Experience; That
Brutes conclude Universals from Singulars; as, from the Sight and Form of One
Man, to know the same Humane Form in All Men; That they are able to compound,
and to divide Idea's, by assenting and refusing; and that they exercise a Power
of Choice, and make very Subtle Distinctions between Good and Evil, in such
Cases as concern the Life, the Liberty, and Preservation of Themselves, and
their Young. Nay, they pretend, that any Man, who observes with Attention, may
read and discover several Strokes and Footsteps of Reason, more Bold, more
Judicious, more Nice, more Ingenious and Cunning, than the common Sort of Men
are used to give us Proof of. Some of the most memorable Actions, from whence
this Conclusion has been made, I will briefly recite. The Fox designing to
pass over a River, when it is frozen, lays his Ear close to the Ice, to hearken
if there be any Noise, and whether the Water run underneath; that from thence
he may form a Judgment, whether it be Safe to proceed, or Necessary to retire.
And this Expedient the Thracians are said to make use of, when they have any
Frozen Rivers to pass. The Hound, in Doubt which Way his Master, or the Game he
is in chase of, went, at a Place where Three Paths meet, takes this Course of
making out his Loss; He scents the several Paths, one after another, and when
he finds that in Two of these Ways, no Scent has lain; he never troubles
himself to lay his Nose to the Third; but springs forward, and takes That
without farther Enquiry. Thales the Philosopher's Mule, when heavy laden with
a Sack of Salt, and being to go over a Brook, stooped down to dissolve his
Salt, and so make his Burden lighter; because he had found once before, that
the Salt was lighter, when it fell into the Water by chance: But when laden
with Wool, he did the direct contrary, and strove to keep it dry; because the
like Experiment had taught him, that Wool grows heavier by being wetted.
Plutarch says, That once on board a Ship, he saw a Dog casting Stones into a
Great Jar, that so he might make the Oil in it rise higher; which before was
too low, and out of his reach: And the like is reported of the Crows in
Barbary, when the Water is too low for them, to drink at. Thus Elephants, when
one of them is set fast in a Bog, are said to bring great Stones, and pieces of
Timber, to help their Fellows out. The Oxen in the King's Gardens at Suza,
which have been long practiced to turn a Wheel a Hundred Times Round, (the
Depth of the Well requiring just so much, from whence Water is drawn, for the
Use of the Gardens) cannot be made to exceed that Number of Rounds; and when
left to themselves, never come One turn Short. Now what Way are all these
things possible to be done, without Reasoning and Discourse; Composition and
Division, which are the Operations proper to a Rational Soul? Must not a Man be
thought to want Reason himself, who thinks it has nothing to do in such
Actions? So again. The Mavelous dexterity of drawing Darts and Spears out of
wounded Bodies, with very little Pain to the Patient, for which Elephants are
Famous. The Dog mentioned by Plutarch, that at a Public Entertainment, lay
upon a Scaffold, and countefeited himself dead; fainting away by degrees,
breathing short, trembling, stretching himself out, and letting them drag him
about as quite dead; then by Degrees coming to himself again, lifting up his
Head, as if he had just been brought to Life; and in a Word, the many Strange,
Apish Tricks that Jugglers and Strowlers teach their Dogs, and Dancing-Horses.
The many Doubles, and cunning Contrivances, that Beasts of several kinds have,
to secure themselves from the Attempts we make upon them; The great Forecast,
and wise Management of the Ants, in drawing out their Grains of Corn to sweeten
in the Air, and dry by the Sun, which would otherwise corrupt, and grow Musty:
The nibbling off the End of every Grain, which would else be grown, and run to
Seed: The Order of the Bees, in their Republic; the Method of their Combs; the
vast variety of Offices and Duties appropriated to such and such respectively;
and the constant Regularity and Uniformity of all their Proceedings, will not
suffer us to think, that these are no more than animated Clock-Work; but seem
in many Things to equal, and in some even to reproach the Conduct of Mankind.

Natural Instinct, rejected.
and take Sanctuary in Natural Instinct, as a sufficient Solution, and Cause of
all these wondrous Effects; And This they describe by an Inclination in Nature,
which is under as perpetual Necessity, Slavery, and Constraint; as That by
which the Stone falls, or the Flame ascends. Now First, This is so far from
Truth, that one would wonder, how it could ever enter into any Man's Head: For
the forementioned Acts, plainly infer reckoning and summing up Particulars,
comparing of Things together, and reasoning by Composition and Division of
Ideas, and by Consequences drawn from thence. But these are such Operations as
can never be performed by such a Natural Inclination, and Necessary Instinct,
which are only the Refuge of Men, who want something to say. But then it must
be observed withal, that this Objection returns back again, upon them that make
it. For it is, without doubt, more Noble, more for the Honor of any Creature,
and a nearer Resemblance to God himself, See the Advertisement.
to do Well by a Happy and Unalterable Determination of one's Nature; than to
do so by Art and Industry, long Time, and much Learning; To be led by the
Unerring Hand of God, than left to our own imprudent Conduct; and to act
Regularly, by an Habitual, and Constant, and Necessary Impulse; than by such a
Choice and Liberty, as is Subject to Hazard and Rashness. Besides, by this
Notion of Natural Instinct, they take away from Brutes all manner of
Instruction, and Improvement, as well that which they receive from others, as
that which they impart to others; but This is abundantly contradicted and
confuted by Experience. For it is plain, They learn what they knew not before,
and grow more Perfect by Degrees, and Imitation, and Custom; as Magpyes, for
Instance, Parrots, Jack-Daws, and Dogs; and it is as plain, that they teach one
another too, from the Examples of Nightingales and especially of Elephants, who
of all Animals are the aptest to learn, and seem to exceed the rest by far,
both in Largeness of Capacity, and Quickness of Apprehension.

Intellectum est in Intelligente, ad modum Intelligentis.
the Object understood, is in the Subject understanding, according to the
manner in which the Understander represents it to himself,) there is some
Appearance, that Beasts do all this too. A Horse, that has been used to Charge,
when he lies asleep, in his Litter, shall shiver, and snort, as if he were in
an Action; and plainly forms to himself, the Sounds of Drums and Trumpets, and
the Images of an Army, and a Battle. The Greyhound, in his Dream, pants and
blows, sets up his Stern, shakes his Legs, and conceives a Spiritual Hare
before him. Mastiffs, and House-Dogs, growl in their Sleep, and sometimes open,
and bark outright, imagining that some Stranger is coming in. The fairest
Conclusion of this first Point seems to me then, to be thus; That the Brutes
have Reason; That They compare, discourse, and judge, but in a much lower
Degree, and nothing comparable, to that Perfection, in which Man does. They
have a much less Share, but they are not Totally excluded. We excel Them
vastly, and so we do one another; and, indeed, the several Kinds of Beasts,
excel each other too. Nay, I know not, whether it may not be said, That the
difference among Men, is Greatest; and that some Men, excel some other Men in
Reasoning, more than some Men excel Beasts.

Aristotle, it is true, pronounces of some Men, that they are so extremely
Ignorant and Stupid, that they differ in nothing, but Shape, from Brutes. But
all this notwithstanding, to argue, that they have equal Share, and stand upon
the Level with Mankind; that their Souls are equally Immortal with Ours, or
Ours equally Mortal with theirs, are very Malicious and unfair Inferences. For,
besides that Man excells most Conspicuously, in the Operations of Reason, there
are several other more Noble Faculties and Prerogatives, such as are entirely
Spiritual, which justify the Character, of his being the Likeness and Image of
God; and render him capable of Immortal Bliss; all which the Brutes partake not
of, in any the least Degree. And these are all employed in the Notion of
Intellect, which denotes something more Sublime, than mere Ratiocination.

Pyrrho's Hog, that eat contentedly on Shipboard, in a Storm, at a time when
the Passengers and Seamen, were almost dead with Fear. I confess, as we manage
the Matter, the generality of People have but a very indifferent Bargain of
This. And some who consider Things Superficially, and look at what the World
is, not what it might be, are tempted to think that these more exalted and
larger Endowments of the Soul, have been wholly denied, or at least much
diminished, and impaired to Beasts, for their mighty Ease and Benefit; and
given to Man in their full Strength, for his mighty torment: Since it is by the
Interposition and Assistance of these, that he teazes and perplexes himself;
resents and sadly keeps alive the Past; is distracted with Anxiety and
Amazement for the Future; nay, forms to his own Mind, and then is scared out of
his Wits with, the ghastly Images of Evils, that are not yet, nor are ever like
to be. Now in other Animals, the Sense and the Apprehension of Evil have both
the same Date; Till it comes, they know nothing of it; and when it has done,
they have done with it; and from the Moment of its Cessation, are in perfect
Ease, and Tranquillity. And thus you see, how Man is rendered (rather indeed,
how by his Mismanagement, he renders Himself) the worse for his Advantages;
that the Happiness and Privilege of his Nature, is become the Instrument and
Occasion of all his Misery. And were it not better to have been born naked,
than to be provided with Did Nature, which furnished us with these Rich and
Heavenly Accomplishments, bring us under a Necessity of converting them to our
own Sorrow and Ruin; the Gift, indeed, had been Treacherous, and Providence
cruelly kind. But since they are not the Appetites, and Passions, and Facuties
themselves, but the Excesses and Indulgings of the One, and the Neglect or
Abuse of the other, to which these Miseries are owing, Let us not complain of
our Condition, nor charge God foolishly; but put all that we suffer of this
kind, to the Account of our own Follies and Vices. For from hence it is, that
Brutes can pretend to enter into the Comparison with us, even in the Esteem of
those, whose Wish and Interest it is, to bring us down to their Level. And were
not we by cherishing our restless Passions, so industrious to torment our
selves, we should not see, as now we daily do, that the Dull and Insensible
live most at their Ease, and come off Cheaper with the Sufferings of Humane
Life, than Men ^eqof Wit, and Parts, and more refined Understanding.
Weapons, and to sheath them thus,

Another Advantage over Brutes, Dominion and Command.
which Man makes Pretensions to, is that of Dominion, and Power to Command
them, which he imagines to be vested in him. But, (not to take notice at
present, that This is but an improper Plea, since Men also mutually Command,
and are Commanded by one another) the Thing in Fact is not true: For where does
our Practice and Experience show this universal Command in Man, and as
universal Subjection and Obedience in other Creatures? It Is plain in the
present State of Things, that this is a mere Fancy; and that Men are much more
in fear of Beasts, than stood in fear of by them. It is not to be doubted, but
this was once the Case; and an ample Commission That was, which the Great Lord
of the Universe issued at the Creation, Gen 1.26.
Let him have Dominion over the Fowls of the Air, and over the Fish of the Sea,
and over the Cattle, and over all the Earth. And admirably sitted he is to
execute this Commission, by reason of the Majesty of his Person, an erect and
beautiful Form, and the Greatness and Wisdom of his Mind. But alas! the Face of
Affairs is changed; the actual Exercise of this Prerogative lost. And all that
remains, is only what these Advantages of his Body and Mind give him; and it
may much more properly be said, That Man is made sit to Command, and Brutes to
Obey, than that He does actually Command, and They Obey.

Liberty. This Man pretends to, Liberty and Servitude.
and upbraids Brutes with Captivity, Slavery, and Drudgery; but This I think is
full as unreasonable and foreign as the other. Men themselves lie infinitely
more open to Reproaches of that kind: To This let the Inhabitants of Guinea
speak; else what mean the Slaves that are made by Kidnapping and Force, and not
only their Persons enslavd, but all their Posterity too? Nay, what mean those
Willing Slaves, who sell their Liberty for Sums of Money, or who part with it
gladly and freely, or that Truck it away for some Convenience? For was not all
this done by the Ancient Gladiators? And is it not now done daily, by Women to
their Ladies, and Soldiers to their Commanders? But Beasts know nothing like
this; they serve not one another; they neither enslave, nor are enslaved by one
another; but are in all respects more free, and at their own disposal, than Men
are.

Man, it is confessed, makes these his Diversion and his Entertainment; they
furnish his Sports and his Table: But if He Hunt, and take, and kill, and eat
Them; They do the same by Him, as Opportunities offer: And That, in a manner
more brave and great than His; not by Toils, and Nets, and Cunning; but by
honest downright Force. Nay, He is not murdered and devoured thus by Beasts
only, but (which is infinitely more) by another Man, his Equal, his Companion,
his Brother. No Beasts ever assemble themselves in Troops, to destroy, and
ravage, and lead Captive another Troop of the same Kind; but Men, to their
Eternal Reproach, not only do the thing, but glory in it, and triumph in the
destruction of their own Species.

(...)
consists in their Virtue; but if by this, Moral Virtue be meant, and if we may
be allowed to judge of Virtue by the commendable Actions, and outward
Appearances of it; (This Claim will admit of some Dispute too: Though Moral
Virtue taken formally, and with regard to the Will, Beasts cannot have:) For
Gratitude, and Friendship, and Readiness to be Serviceable, Fidelity,
Magnanimity, and several other good Qualities useful in Society and
Conversation, have been observed to express themselves after a more lively,
more surprising manner, and with more Constancy, in Brutes, than is usually
seen in the generality of Mankind. Lysimachus had a Dog called Hireanus, which
lay perpetually upon the Bed with his dead Master, and would not be got from
thence to eat or drink, but continued thus watching and fasting, till the
Corpse came to be burnt, and then leaped eagerly into the Fire, and burnt
himself with it. The same is related of another Dog, that beionged to one
Pyrrhus. That of the wise Hesiod detected the Russians that murdered his
Master: And another did the like before King Pyrrhus, and his whole Army.
Plutarch tells us of another, that hunted about from City to City, and never
relied (...) he had brought the Robber of the Temple at A^^ens, to Justice for
his Sacrilege. See Gell. Li^. ^. Cap. 14.
The Story of A^^rodus is very well known, who had lived and eat with a Lion
for some Years, after curing him of a painful Wound; and afterward, when
condemned at Rome to the Wild Beasts, this Lion would not touch the Slave that
had been his Guest, and his Surgeon, but approached him with all the
Demonstrations of Thankfulness and Love; all which, Appian declares himself to
have been an Eyewitness of at Rome. An Elephant, that in heat of Passion had
killed his Keeper. would neither eat nor drink, but pined himself to Death, by
way of Penance. But now on the other hand, Is there in the World any Creature
that can compare with Man, for Injustice and Ingratitude, Churlishness and
Ill Nature, Treachery and Baseness, Lying and Dissimulation? Besides, allowing
Virtue to consist in moderating the Appetite, and curbing one's Pleasures,
Beasts are then a great deal more regular than We, and keep themselves more
duly within the Bounds of Nature and Convenience. As for those Desires that are
superfluous, extravagant, and unnatural, they never have any Inclination of
that Kind: And consequently are exempted from one great and common Species of
Humane Vice, which is, The enlarging our Desires beyond Measure, and
multiplying, nay inventing fresh Objects to our selves; and employing Artifice,
and Industry to heighten and create new Inclinations. In those which Nature
prompts them to, as Eating, and Drinking, and other Bodily Satisfactions, they
outdo us much, in Temperance and Reservedness. But if we would in good earnest
be satisfied, whether Man or Brutes be the more Vicious or Virtuous; that is
indeed, if we would put Man out of Countenance effectually, and silence all the
Pretensions to this Excellency quite; Let us put the Issue upon that single
Virtue, which is therefore called Humanity, because looked upon to be the most
proper and inseparable Quality of our Nature; as on the Contrary, That of
Cruelty is esteemed the most foreign, most disagreeable, and that which we
abandon, as sit for wild Beasts only, by giving it the Denomination of Ferity.
But alas! in this very Instance they reproach, and put us to the Blush;
particularly upon the following Accounts. Major Serpentum Ferarumque concordia
quam Hominum.
Dragons and Beasts of Prey, agree better together than Men do. of vast Herds
and Troops on each side: Reverse of all This;

The Cenclusion of this Second Consideration.
amounts to thus much; That Man has no such mighty reason to magnify Himself
in the Advantages of his Nature, above That of Brutes: For, allowing Him some
Endowments and Accomplishments, which They have not; as the Sprightliness and
Force of his Mind, and Intellectual Faculties, and all the other nobler Powers
of the Soul; yet the Encumbrances upon these is very great and grievous; the
Evils he is involved in upon their account, infinite and insupportable: The
Inconstancy and Irresolution, Superstition and Solicitude, sad Remembrances of
the Past, and Anxious Concern for the Future; Ambition, and Avarice, and Envy,
restless Curiosity, busy Detraction, Lying and Deceit, a world of unruly
Appetites and Passions, Troubles and Discontents. Thus this Mind, with the
Thoughts and value whereof Man is so much exalted, is the Occasion of infinite
Misfortunes; and of most of all then, when it exerts it self most: For in all
vehement Agitations, it does not only hurt and disturb the Body, and render its
Forces and Functions disordered, and broken, and quite tired down; but it
hinders and confounds its own self: For what is it that throws Men into Folly
and Madness, so much as the Acuteness, and Activity, and Strength of the Mind
it self? The subtilest Follies, and most exquisite Phrensies proceed from the
quickest, and sinest, and most vigorous Agitations of the Mind; as we may
observe, that the bitterest Aversions, and most irreconcilable Immities grow
from the tenderest Passions, and most intimate Friendships; and the most
virulent and mortal Diseses, from a strong Complexion, and healthful Body.
Melancholy Persons are observed by Plato, to be best disposed for Learning and
Wisdom; but they are equally disposed for Folly too; much more than Persons of
a different Temper. And to a Man of nice and just Observation, it will appear,
that when the Soul acts freely, and gives her self a Loose, there is none of
her Altitudes and Sallies without a Mixture of Folly; and in good truth, these
things dwell very close together; -- Wit to Madness nearly is allied,
And thin Partitiens do their Beunds divide.


Once more; If we regard the living in agreement with Nature, and in conformity
with what she dictates and requires from us, Beasts seem to excel us in this
respect, very much; for they lead a Life of more Freedom, more Ease and
Security, more Moderation and Contentedness, than Men do. And That Man is
deservedly reputed Wise, who makes them his Pattern, and his Lesson, and reaps
Profit by their Example; by reforming and reducing himself to that Innocence,
Simplicity, Liberty, Meekness, and Gentleness of Temper, which Nature had
originally implante both in Us and Them: And, which in Brutes is still very
conspicuous, but in Us is decayed, changed, and utterly corrupted by our
Industrious Wickedness, and Artisicial Depravations; thus debauching and
abusing the particular Prerogative we pretend to, and rendering our selves more
vile than the Beasts, by means of that very Understanding and Judgment, which
sets us so far above them. Hence sure it is, that God intending to shame us
into Virtue, sends us to School in Scripture, and bids us grow wiser by the
Example of these Creatures. The Crane, the Stork, and the Swallow; the Serpent,
Jer. viii. 7. Mat. x. 16. Prove vi. 6. Isa. i. 3.
and the Dove, the Ant, and the Ox, and the Ass, and sundry others, are
recommended as Teachers to us. And after all, To take down our Vanity upon this
Occasion, we ought to remember, that there is some sort of Correspondence, some
mutual Relations and Duties arising from thence; if upon no other account, yet
by reason of their being made by the same Hand, belonging to the same Master,
and making a part of the same Family, with our selves. And this single
Reflection ought to prevail with us, to use our Advantages over them modestly,
tenderly. and conscientiously; and not to treat them with Cruelty and Contempt.
For as Justice is a Debt from us to all Men; so Kindness, and Beneficence, and
Mercy must needs be due to all Creatures whatsoever, that are in any Condition
of receiving benefit by us.

ADVERTISEMENT.
OUR Author in the midst of his great Care to slate this Comparison so, as
might be most mortifying to the Vanity of Mankind, has yet found himself
obliged to acknowledge, that the Reason of Men is so much brighte^, and more
noble in its Operations and Effects, than any thing discoverable in the Brute
part of the Creation, that I might have let this Chapter pass without any
Censure, had it not been for two or three Sentences, which seem obnoxious to
very ill Construction: Such as a sort of Men are (in Our Age) but too fond of
embracing, who at the same time, that they are vain enough to imagine, that
neither the Nature, nor the Revelations of God himself can have any thing in
them above their Reason; are yet so sordid and degenerate, as to be content
that Beasts should be thought endu'd with the same Souls, and to be moved with
the same Principles of Reason with themselves. An Opinion, which is the rather
entertained, for the sake of a certain Consequence that recommends it, with
regard to a Future State; for it seems they can be satisfied with the Portion
of Brutes now, provided they may but partake in it hereafter. And what Favor
this Notion might find from these Passages, That Brutes and Men both have the
same Reason, though not in the same Degree; and that some Men excel others much
more than some Men again excel Beasts; I was doubtful, and therefore looked
upon my self concerned, (in pursuance of my Proposals at the Beginning of this
Book,) to offer these following Considerations to my Reader.

First, That in the Operations of the Reasonable Soul, a great deal depends
upon the Organs, and Disposition of that Body to which it is joined; and (as
has been already explained at large) more especially upon the Brain: Now since
Anatomists have not been able to observe any very remarkable Differences
between the Contexture of the Humane Brain, and that of Brutes; we are not to
think it strange, if there appear some small Resemblances in some particular
Actions of Men and Beasts, though these do not proceed from the same Principle of
Motion; but owe their Similitude to that of the Body and Medium put into those
Motions.

Secondly, That the Impressions of external Objects have very strong Effects
upon the Imagination and Memory; and these, assisted by Custom, and Imitation,
and Example, will perform many wonderful things, which yet are not the
Operations of Reason, properly so called. Of this kind it is easy to observe
great Number of Instances, in Them, who either by means of their Infancy, have
not yet attained to the use of Reason; or Them, who by some Natural Defects
never have it at all; or Others, who by some accidental Disturbance have lost
it: In all which Cases, (not during the lucid Intervals only, or when the
Powers of the Mind seem a little to be awakened, but even in the most profound
Ignorance, or most raging Madness) Those which are frequently distinguished by
the Sensitive Faculties of the Soul, put forth sometimes a mavelous Efficacy
and Vigor. And that These are moved entirely by material and sensible Objects,
and act as necessarily as any other Parts of Matter whatsoever, has been the
Opinion of many new Philosophers; some of whom imagine, that all the Operations
of this kind, are as capable of being resolved by Principles of Mechanism,
(those Operations, I mean, of Imagination, and Memory, and Custom) as any other
Affections and Motions of common Matter. How just this Conclusion is, I do not
pretend to determine; for They themselves seem to confess it insufficient, when
they call in to their Assistance, another Principle, which is,

Thirdly, That of Instinct; By which is meant, a strong Tendency, and Natural
Impulse (discernible in these Creatures) to certain necessary and useful
Actions. Something of a Principle implanted in them by their wise Creator, to
qualisie them for their own Preservation, and the answering the Ends of his
good Providence in Making them. And this appears so early, as to be plainly
antecedent to either Memory or Fancy; and yet is so constant too, and always
the same, in the same Circumstances and Occasions; as neither to depend upon
Causes so mutable as the Impressions of outward Objects, nor a Principle so
capricious as the Choice of such a Mind perfectly free feels in its
Deliberations. And, as Instruments put together by a skilful Hand, perform many
Operations, so astonishing, that a Man unexperienced in the Art, could not
possibly imagine such Materials capable of them; so these Philosophers
conceive, that Almighty God, in his infinite Wisdom, has so disposed the
Sensitive Parts of the Soul, that They by their wonderful Structure shall be
adapted to most amazing Effects, and possessed with some Original Propensions
and Impulses, independent from, and antecedent to the Impressions of Matter, or
the power of Institution and Custom; which in the needful and most profitable
Actions of Life, serve these Animals for Fundamental Principles, and bear some
kind of Affinity to the first common Notions, in the Rational and Intelligent
Mind. And upon these Impulses joined to those other Advantages mentioned
before, the whole Economy of Brutes, and even those Actions, which seem most
exquisite and admirable in any of them, have by the Modern Mechanic
Philosophers, been generally thought to depend. Concerning which, though almost
every System treat in some measure, yet I believe my Reader (whether his
Opinion incline to that Account or not) would at least think himself well
entertained upon this Subject, by the perusal of our Learned and Ingeious Dr.
Willis, in the Sixth and Seventh Chapters of his Book De Anima Brutorum.

Two things are fit to be added upon this Occasion, with regard to what
Monsieur Charron has delivered concerning Instinct: The first is, That in
regard we observe these Animals constantly going on in the same beaten Track,
and keeping ever close to one Method; and even in those Instances, which have
the greatest Appearance of Comparison and Choice, of Ten Thousand that make the
same Experiment, or go about the same thing, not one varying from the common
and received Way; This seems to be some Governing Principle in Nature, which
gives a necessary Determination to them; and very different from that Liberty
and Consideration, which has scarce any more convincing, and demonstrative
Proof of the Will being absolutely unconstrained in Mankind, than that
Multiplicity of Opinions, and strange Variety of Proceedings, observable upon
Occasions and Junctures, in themselves extremely alike.

The Other Remark, Proper upon this Occasion, is, that what our Author suggests
here, is no Consequence at all: as if too much Honor were done to these
Creatures, and such a Happy and Unalterable Determination, to what is
Profitable and Proper for them, were a Privilege, more than Humane; a nearer
Approach to that unerring Wisdom, and unchangeable Goodness of the Divine
Nature, than We our selves can boast of. For there is so very wide a
Difference, between Liberty and Necessity of acting; the One is so Glorious, so
truly Noble; the Other so Mean, so Slavish a Principle, that no Comparison can
be made between them. The most Glorious, most Beautiful, most Useful Parts of
the Material Creation, are in this Respect, infinitely beneath the meanest of
the Sons of Men; and all their other Advantages put together, cannot deserve to
be laid into the Balance against this Single Dignity, of Free and Spontaneous
Action. And though the Excellency of the Divine Nature, be indefectible and
unalterable Goodness; yet would not even This be an Excellence, if it were not
the Effect of perfect Liberty. It is, indeed, Our Misfortune, that our
Understandings are imposed upon, our Affections perverted; and so the Choice we
have the use of, often determines us to the wrong Side, and entangles us in
Error and Vice. But These Defects and Temptations are so many Clogs and Bars
upon our Freedom; and therefore God, who is above any Possibility of such false
Determinations, is still so much the more Free. For Freedom, does not consist,
in a Power of choosing Evil as well as Good (which is a Power, indeed, that
never was, or can be, strictly speaking) but in being Self-moved, and
Self-acted; so as to be the Disposer of one's own Will, without any Compulsion
or necessary Determination, from a foreign or external Principle; and only
acting, as one is acted upon. If then this Instinct in Brutes, be a Matter of
Force, and Necessary Determination, they are in no Degree, the Better or more
Commendable for it; but under a fatal Constraint, which is so far from
resembling the Divine Perfection, that it admits of no Virtue, nor ought to be
esteemed any Excellence, but the direct Contrary.

Fourthly, Let us observe, what mighty Difference there is, between the
Perceptions of Brutes, and those of Men; so great, that in them we find no
Footsteps of any, but such as are Material, and Single Objects; and what this
Author advances, as Collections, and Inferences from thence, are not improbably
assigned by Others, to the Force of Imagination, or the Strength of Memory, or
to those Natural Impressions, which commonly go by the Name of Instinct. To the
latter of These we find very Learned Men, attributing that uniform Process of
Birds, and Bees, and Ants, in their Nutrition, Generation, Production, and the
like. To the Former, that which Charron terms deducing an Universal from a
Singular, and knowing by the having seen one Man, how to Distinguish the Humane
Form, in any, or all Individuals of the same Species. But, supposing we should
allow, that this proceeds from a distinguishing Faculty, and not merely from
the refreshing and awaking an Image, that lay dormant in the Memory, 'till
revived by this fresh Object; yet what Proportion can even thus much bear, to
all those Abstracted Idea's by which Men distinguish the Natures and Properties
of Things? If a Brute, from the Sight of a Man, could collect so much as should
serve to discriminate all other Men from Creatures of a Different Species; yet
what is This in Comparison of that Penetration, which examines into the
Abstruse Causes, and essential Differences of Things, and informs it self
distinctly, wherein that very Character of our Nature, which we call Humanity,
consists? And what account can there be given of any universal or abstracted
Idea's in Beasts? of any of those, which we properly call Reasonable Actions?
For as to these seeming Demurrs, and little Comparisons, which we find
instanced in here, and in other Places, it is usual to observe as much, in
Children so little, and Naturals so wretchedly Stupid, as that there are but
very Faint, if any Glimpses at all, of Understanding in them. I know, indeed,
S. 1.
Monsieur Charron, has provided a Reply to this Argument, by saying, That we
cannot have any competent Knowledge of Their Internal Operations. But though we
do not see all the hidden Movements of their Souls, nor can distinctly say,
whether they are feeble Reasoners or Stupendous Machines; yet we may be very
confident, they cannot dive into the Causes, and abstracted Idea's of Things;
because there do not appear the least Footsteps, or any of those Noble
Effects, of such Knowledge, which Mankind have in all Ages been conspicuous
for. For to these abstracted Notions it is, that all the amazing Inventions and
Improvements of Arts and Sciences; but especially the Wonders of Mechanism and
Motion, by Numbers and Proportions Duly adjusted, owe their Birth and daily
Growth. And since in the Distinction and Perception of Concrete Bodies, where
Sensation is chiefly concerned, the Brutes are acknowledged to equal, if not
exceed Us, in Accuracy; it is not to be conceived, that They who excel in a
Faculty, which is commensurate to a Sensitive Soul, should be able to give No
Marks at all of their being endued with a Capacity of entertaining and feeding
upon those Ideas, which are the Peculiar Prerogatives, and Glories, of a
Rational one.

Much more might be added upon this Occasion, with Regard both to the Objects
themselves; and the particular Manner of Conception; and the infinite
Disparities of the Humane Intellect, and that Faculty, which is affected in
Brutes. But it is Prejudice sufficient against them, that so many very Wise and
Inquisitive Persons have found Cause, to do even something more than doubt,
whether Brutes be better than a sort of Divine Clock-Work; and have any manner
of Sense or Perception at all. This, at least, was never asserted of Man; nor
the Powers and Operations of his Reasoning Soul disputed, (as to the Reality of
them,) except by such as set up for Universal Skepticism, and are for reducing
all to a State of Confusion and Uncertainty. And therefore if, because Brutes
seem to act by a Faculty, which we cannot perfectly account for, we should
allow, to these Brutes, some few dusky Glimmerings of Reason (which yet there
is no absolute Necessity for, because they have something like it) yet no
Impartial Considerer, can ever admit, that it will bear a Question, whether
They, or We, have the Better of this Point; or that Some Men, excel others,
more than some again excel Beasts; for there is no Man, how mean and untaught
soever, if provided with what we call Common Sense, but sinds an Ability in
himself, nay, exercises that Ability every Day, (even when he does not know, or
think of it) of considering, comparing, and determining in such a manner, as no
good Arguments have ever yet been offered to show that Beasts either do, or can
do. They are justly thought to do somewhat very extraordinary, when by long
Custom, and severe Discipline, and daily Example and Instruction, brought to
imitate some very common Actions of Men; But what Divine Heights do Men
themselves ascend to, when they have proportionable Pains taken with Them? And
here in Justice the Comparison ought to lie; between the Best of each Kind; not
the Best of One, and the Lowest of the Other; the most unapt and neglected of
Men, and the most teachable and improved of Brutes: For the Advantages, or the
Want of Art, cannot at all affect the Dispute, where the Gifts of Nature are
the Matter in Question: And these are distributed with so very uneven a Hand,
in the Case before us; that He must be either very Stupid, or very Perverse,
who does not see the mighty Disproportion.

As to the other Part of this Discourse, whether Reason be any Real Benefit,
and we might not have been as well, or better without it; I shall only need to
add, that the several Instances, produced here, are only such as are Sad and
very Reproachful Truths, in Regard of those Abuses of Reason, Men are Guilty
of; and the wicked, or the mischievous Purposes they pervert it to: But as to
the Thing it self, they are no more a Reflection upon it, than the Surfeits and
Bestiality of Gluttons, and Sots, are upon the common Refreshments of Life.
What is said upon this Occasion, will do well indeed to be considered, by those
vicious and indiscreet Men, who apply That as a Spur to their Wickedness, and
Passion, which was intended for a Curb to both; And the World ought to be
humbled and reformed by a serious Reflection, how Accessory Men become to their
own Miseries, and how obstinately fond they are of them, when their very
Remedies are industriously turned into the worst of Diseases: But, All this
Notwithstanding, Monsieur Charron's Argument here, is abundantly refuted by
himself, in the last Words of this whole Treatise, where he vindicates the
Honor of Eloquence, from the mischievous Effects, which some ill-designing
Men, apply it to, by this Parallel: For (says he) even That Reason and
Understanding, which is the Peculiar Prerogative of Humane Nature, and sets us
above Brutes, is most miserably abused; turned against God, and our selves; and
made the Occasion of our more inexcusable Ruin. But, This is only an
Accidental Misfortune; far from the Natural Tendency of so Noble a Privilege.
And He, who would argue from hence, that Mankind had better want these
Faculties, may justly seem to have degenerated into Brute; and to be quite
forsaken of all that Reason, which he so Wildly and so rashly condemns. So just
Ground is there for reading this Treatise, with those Cautions to be laid down
upon the XXXVIIth Chapter; and so truly does our Author, keep up his Character,
of an Academick Philosopher.

CHAP. XXXV. The Third Respect, under which we proposed to consider Man, is by
taking a short View, and summary Account of his Life.
The True Value, the Continuance, and Description of Humane Life, and the
several Parts, or Stages of it.
Of the Worth, or just Estimate of Life.
and most Necessary Points of Wisdom, is rightly to understand the True Value
of Life; and to make so just an Estimate of it, as to keep, or to lose it; to
cherish and preserve, or to neglect and lay it down; and so to manage our
selves in the whole Conduct of it, as Duty and Decency require. There is not
any One Case, in which Men are more apt to be wanting, nor where their Failings
are of more Dangerous Consequence, for the involving them in new and infinite
Difficulties. The Mean, and the Ignorant, the Worldling, and the Man of
Pleasure; and, in general, all that do not, or cannot consider, prize Life
extravagantly: They look upon it, as the Supreme Good, and prefer it so much
before all other Things, as not to admit a Comparison between them. If Life
were to be sold at a Price; nay, if a short Reprieve only, and Lengthening out
their Term a little, can be had, they can think nothing too Dear, no Conditions
too hard, to be submitted to; but are satisfied the purchase ought to be made
at any Rate. For This, they tell you, is their Happiness, and when That is
gone, All is gone; their very Motto is, Nothing more precious than Life. (Vita
nihil charius) They value and love it, not only as the Scene of Action and
Enjoyment, and upon the account of the Conveniences and Opportunities it
affords, but upon its own supposed intrinsic worth; and live merely for the
sake of Living. And how can we think it strange, that such Persons should be so
very defective in the rest of their Duty, so misled with Errors, and
extravagant Notions, when they make the very first Step wrong, and set out in
so gross a Mistake, concerning this great Fundamental Article of Wisdom and
Virtue?

There is also a Contempt of Life, that declines as much to Vice in the other
Extreme, and represents it as a Burden, or a Trifle; Worth Nothing, or Worse
than Nothing: But this Undervaluing is the effect of Weakness and Ignorance, of
Pride and Ingratitude. For we know very well, that when it falls into Wise and
Good Hands, it is capable of becoming an Instrument of great and general use,
both to our selves, and to others. Now I can by no means be of Their Opinion,
taken literally and plainly, who give it out for their Princple, That Optimum
non nasci; aut quam citissime aboleri.
the greatest Happiness is, Not to live at all; and the next most desirable
thing is to live but a very little while. Nor is that Argument they use in
vindication of this Opinion, at all sufficient or Satisfactory: What Hurt (say
they) could there be in Nonexistence? and what Matter had it been, if I were
never created? To This one may reply with Reason enough, What do you make of
all the Happiness you have enjoyed? What would become of This, if you had had
no Being? And would it not have been some Matter, some Hurt never to have
enjoyed it? For certainly, though the loss of the Good which we have, and know
the worth of, be a more sensible Evil; yet the mere privation of Good, and
never having it at all, is One sort of Evil too; even though that Good be such as
we should never have missed, nor such as was necessary to us. These Extremes
are too wide; they overstrain the Point on both sides, and degenerate into
Vice; though they are not equally vicious and erroneous neither.

I confess, speaking in the Quality of a Philosopher, and with regard to the
present State of Assairs only; I do not think That Wise Ancient much out of the
way, who acknowledged Vitam nemo acciperet, si daretur scientibus.
Life to be Good; but such a Good, as no Man would accept of, if it were left
to his own free Choice, and he were fairly informed beforehand, what
Encumbrances lay upon it. It is not at all amiss, that we are engaged in it,
before we know what it is: We come into the World blindfold; but That is no
reason why Men should afterward put out their own Eyes, or hoodwink
themselves. For the Mischief is, that, when we are got hither, we run into
different Ways: Some cheat themselves into so extravagant a Fondness for Life,
that they would not part with it again at any rate. Others fret themselves into
so ill an Opinion of it, that they grumble eternally, are discontented at every
thing, and pretend to be weary, and sick of Living. But Wise Men have juster
Notions of the Matter; They consider that this was a Bargain made without their
Knowledge or Consent; (for no Man lives, or dies, as soon, or as late, or in
such Manner and Circumstances, as he pleases himself) But still it is a Bargain
we are bound to stand to; and if it be a hard one, we must try to make the best
of it. Sometimes we shall meet with Rough Ways; but the whole Passage is not
so: And therefore Philosophers agree, that the best Course is to create no
Disturbance, nor struggle and flounder unprofitably, but for Men to suit their
Tempers, and comply with their Circumstances as well as they can; to carry it
off with Evenness and Moderation, and make a Virtue of Necessity; for That is
the Character of Wisdom and Good Management: And when they have fixed
themselves in this Method, then to live as long as is Fit for them, consistent
with their Duty, and Decency: Not as long as is Possible for them, which is the
Principle of foolish and profligate People. For there is a Season proper for
Dying, as well as one for Living; and a Virtuous Honorable Death is a Thousand
time; rather to be chosen, than a Wicked and Infamous Life. Now a Wise and Good
Man makes it his Business to live just so long as Life is better than Death,
and no longer: For, as we observed before, that They are in the Wrong, who
esteem the shortest Life best; so is that common Opinion a Mistake too, which
raises the Value by Computation of Years, and accounts that Life best which
lasts longest.

Of the (...) of Life.
We meet it in every Mouth; not from the Ignorant and Vulgar only, where we
cannot expect better, than that They should be willing to live always; but
(which may be allowed a little to surprise us) even Great Souls, and Wise Men,
reckon it among their very greatest Unhappinesses. Now to say the very Truth,
as Men usually manage the Matter, and indeed as Nature has in some measure
contrived it, Life is very short; For the greatest part of it is employed and
diverted otherwise; and a very small Proportion left for the true Uses and Ends
of Living. The Time of our Infancy and Ignorance, the Decays and Infirmities of
Old Age, the necessary Intervals of Sleep, the Diseases of our Bodies and our
Minds, and the infinite other void Spaces of it, wherein we are incapable of
doing Good, run away with a great deal of our Time: And when the Whole is
summed up, and these Abatements made, the Remainder is not much. But yet,
without troubling our selves with the Contrary Opinion, which asserts the
Shortness of Life to be greatly for our Advantage, we shall find Reason enough
to accuse this Complaint of Injustice; and to think it more the effect of
Inconsideration and Ill Nature, than of good Arguing, and Virtuous Disposition.
For what Advantage would a longer Life be to us? Shall we wish for it to no
other purpose, but merely to Live in; to take our Ease, to Eat, and Drink, and
Sleep, to Look about us, and see more of the World? What need is there of so
much Time for this? We have already seen, and known, and tasted what we are
capable of, in a very little time; and when we are got to the End of our
Curiosity, This is sufficient. What Good will it do us, or wherefore should we
wish to act the same things over and over again, and be always beginning
afresh? Who would not be cloyed with eating upon the same Dish every Day? If
this be not nauseous and troublesome, yet to be sure it is superfluous and
unnecessary. This is but One Circle, which is perpetually rolling, and brings
the same things uppermost again; sometimes they remove to a little distance,
and then they quickly return back upon us: It Is but a spinning the same Web; and
That which may serve a Child to play with, but can never be a sit Entertainment
for grown Men. Shall we then wish it for nobler Ends; that we may grow Wiser
and Better, and aspire to higher degrees of Virtue and Perfection; that we may
do more Good, and be more useful in our Generations? This indeed carries the
Appearance of an excellent Disposition; but They that know us, will not be
imposed upon by it: For Who shall teach, Who shall improve us? Alas! That
Little which is committed to our Trust, is so ill used, that we cannot have the
Confidence to ask for more. We neglect what we have already, and suffer the
greatest part of it to slip through our Fingers. We squander it away profusely
upon Vanity and Trifles; nay, we abuse and misemploy it upon Wickedness and
Vice. And yet after all this Unfaithfulness and Folly, we cry and complain for
more, and think our selves ill dealt with, that we have not enough. Enough for
What? For the same insignificant and ill purposes to be sure; for That would be
the Consequence of a more liberal Allowance too. But, supposing Men serious in
this Matter; and that they would really do as they pretend; yet of what Use
would this vast Treasure of Knowledge and Experience prove? For the Soul must
change its Dwelling at one time or other; and whenever That dislodges, all our
Wisdom goes with it. Since therefore This cannot stay always, why should we
take it ill that it stays so little a time? For if it sink into a state of
Oblivion, and all must be lost, What mighty difference is there, whether this
be done sooner or later? But if it removes into a better Condition, and be (as
it really will be) put into a state of clearer Vision, and more perfect
Knowledge, why should we desire to have that Happiness delayed, and kept back
from us?

But you will say, perhaps, This Gift of Life is very unequally distributed;
for there are some Creatures, that live Three, Four times as long, as the usual
Age of Man. I might answer, That the Accounts we have of this kind are many, if
not most of them, fabulous. But waving That, and allowing the Objection; yet it
must be confessed withal, that Some, nay the much greater part of Animals live
not near so long; some never arrive at a Fourth part of our Years, and very few
ever come to an equal length with us. Now pray, what Right, what Privilege,
what Reason has Man to challenge a longer Duration here, than the rest of his
Fellow Creatures have a Title to? Where did God ever grant him such a Charter,
or how will he be able to make good the Claim? Is it reasonable He should be
indulged more than They, because he puts out his Time to better Interest, and
employs it upon Business more noble and sublime in it self, more worthy and
deserving of this Favor, than They are capable of? I greatly fear, This
Argument may be thrown back in our Faces, and prove the strongest Plea against
us: For sure He ought rather to be cut shorter than the Rest, as a Punishment
for his Abuse and Mismanagement. And in This he is singular, and stands alone.
The whole Creation cannot furnish a Parallel; not any one Instance of this
Blessing so grievously perverted, not such another Monster of Wickedness and
Unfaithfulness, of Ingratitude and Baseness, of Intemperance and Debauchery,
and all manner of Disorderly Living. This Charge has been sufficiently proved
upon him already, when we stated the Comparison betwixt Him and the Beasts; and
therefore I urge my Point, and ask that Question once more, What Benefit would
a longer Life be to him? Nay, I back that with a Second, and add, What an
Inconvenience would it be to Himself, and how mischievous to the World? It
would make his own Account the heavier, his Crimes and Arrears the greater, and
it would encourage him to yet more Extravagancies than he is guilty of already:
For this very Consideration would put him upon bolder and more desperate
Attempts. The shortness of his Continuance in the World, as Matters now stand,
is some Check to his wild Career, and breaks all his Measures; and the
Uncertainty of it abates and damps his Fury: But if these Restraints were
removed, and Assurances given of a larger Term, Nothing would be able to stop
him; his Projects would be always New, without Number, without End; and he
would live as if he were to live for ever. You see how strong these
Inclinations are now. He cannot but feel and fear his own Mortality; and yet
these Reflections are so over-balanc'd by a corrupt Principle within, that he
cannot forbear holding fast what he has, and eager Desires and Pursuits of
what he has not, and forming vast and very distant Designs, as if he were
really Immortal. Tanquam semper victuri vivitis. Nunquam vobis fragilitas
vestra succurrit; omnia tanquam Mortales timetis, tanquam Immortales
concupiscitis. Seneca.
It Is a just Reproof which Seneca gives, Ye live, as if Life were never to have
an End. The Frailty of your Nature is never thought of; or if it be, it is
remembered to no purpose; for at the same time that your Fears are infinite, and
this proves you Mortal; your Desires are infinite too, as if you looked upon
your selves to be Immortal.

Again; What necessity is there for all those great and goodly Designs, and
that mighty Business, which is pretended to merit a longer Life for Mankind,
than any other Animal? Does Nature require more back than is given us? No sure.
Men have no just ground of Complaint; but abundant Cause for Indignation and
Remorse, for treating themselves no better. The Life allowed us is enough to
answer All the Purposes of it; but the Misery is, that we turn Negligent and
Prodigals, and do not husband it so well as we might and ought to do: It is not
short of it self, but we make it so, by wasting it unprositably. We labor
under no Wants of this kind, but what our own Prodigality brings upon us; and
are scandalously lavish of the Thing we pretend to need most. Non inopes vitae,
sed prodigi.
We lose it, we sell it, we throw it away; we vilify it, and complain that it
hangs upon our Hands; we are at some pains to pass it away, as if it were a
Matter of no Worth at all; as if our Stomachs were over-loaded, and we sick and
cloyed with too great Abundance. There is not any of us, but is guilty of one
or other of these Three Faults; either employing it Ill, or not employing it at
All, or employing it Insignificantly, and to no purpose. Magna vitae pars
elabitur male agentibus, maxima nihil agentibus, tota aliud agentibus.
A great part of our Life (says Seneca) is run off in doing what we should not;
much the greatest in doing nothing at all; and almost the whole of it in doing
things by the by, and such as are not our proper Business. No body takes pains
in learning how to Live; but All lay out their Studies and their Time upon any
other Subject, rather than This. And yet This, like all other Arts, is not to
be attained slightly and easily; a Man cannot be expert in it without long
Practice, much Diligence, and very sollicitous Application of the Mind. Some
put off all Thought of living well, till they can live no longer. They spend
the Vigor and Flower of their Years in Toil, and Trouble, and Folly; and
propose great Enjoyments to themselves hereafter, and wondrous Comforts in
their declining Age. How are they sure they shall live to that Age? But if they
were, what a wretched Madness is This? It Is directly as if a Man should set his
Cask to running, and let out all the best and sprightly Liquor, that he may
reserve the Dregs for his own Drinking. Age is the Lee and Sediment of Life;
All we can do then, is to try if we can sustain and sweeten it a little; but to
defer our Satisfactions till then, is to give them quite away, and lose them
for altogether. Nay, many never go thus far, but finish their Day without ever
beginning their Work; and go off the Stage without considering why they were
brought on, or what Part they were to act. Quidam vivere incipiunt cum
desinendum: Quidam ante desiverunt quam inciperent: Inter caetera mala, hoc
quoque habet stultitia, semper incipit vivere.
Some (says the Philosopher) begin to live when they should make an End; others
cease to live before ever they begun: Among the many Mischiefs that Folly
brings upon us, This is not the least, That it is always beginning to live. We
think of Business, and intend to set about it; but make no Progress at all, nor
bring any thing to perfection.

Description of it.
our Birth draws the Curtain, and our Death shuts it up again: It Is a Comedy of
Errors; a constant Succession of Accidents and Adventures, a Contexture and
Chain of several Miseries linked closely, and interwoven within one another;
nothing but Evil on every side; That which passes off, and that which
approaches, and comes into its place; and these drive out, and push forward
each other, as the Waves of the Sea do in their Ebbings and Flowings; Trouble
and Disquiet are always at hand; but for Happiness, we are cheated with the
empty Shadow of it. Blindness and Insensibility take up the Beginning of our
Lives; Labor and Anxious Care, the Middle; Weakness and Pain, the Latter End;
But Ignorance and Error reach from the Beginning to the End; These are
inseparable, and keep us Company quite through.

Life of Man has its Inconveniences and Miseries of several sorts. Some of
them are in Common; extending to all Persons, and all Times; Others are
Peculiar and Successive, and distinguished by the different Parts, and Age, and
particular Seasons and Accidents of Life: As Childhood, Youth, Maturity, Man's
Estate, and Old Age; for Each of these has its distinct Calamities; some
Embasements and Encumbrances, which may be properly called its own.

Youth and Old Age come to be weighed one against the other, Youth and Age
compared.
it has been usual to give the Advantage to the Latter: And most Authors speak
of Age with Honor and Respect, as having attained to greater degrees of
Wisdom, more maturity of Judgment, more Moderation and Temper: All which good
Qualities are marvellously cried up, with a Design to put Youth out of
Countenance, and to charge upon it the contrary Characters of Vice and Folly,
Licentiousness and Extravagance. But with the leave of those, who have thus
decided the Controversy, I must take Liberty to declare, that this Verdict is
in my Opinion very unjust: For, in good truth, the Defects and the Vices of Age
are More in Number, Worse in Quality, and less to be resisted or recovered,
than those that are peculiar to Youth. Years deform our Minds as much as our
Bodies; bring Wrinkles there as well as in our Faces, and turn our Tempers sour
and moldy with long keeping. The Soul keeps pace with the Body; Both are
spent, and Both decay, till at last we grow so weak, so perfectly helpless, as
in respect of both, to verify that Proverb, of Old Men being twice Children.
Age is a necessary, but a strong Disease; it loads us insensibly with grievous
Imperfections, and then contrives to cover the Shame of them with creditable
Names. What is in effect no other than Moroseness of Humor, a peevish dislike
of the present Enjoyments, and Disability to do as the Man did heretofore,
passes for Wisdom and Gravity, Experience, and an Insight into the Vanity of
the World. But Wisdom is somewhat much more noble than all this comes to, and
far above making use of such mean Instruments. There is a vast difference
between growing older and growing wiser; between forsaking all Vice, and the
changing one for another; and, as it often happens in this Case, changing for
the Worse. Old Age condemns the Pleasures and Gayeties of Youth; but how much
of this must be allowed to its not being now able to relish them any longer? It
is like Esop's Dog, hates and despises what it cannot enjoy. But This is not to
disdain and give over Pleasure; it is rather to be disdained and given over by
it. Pleasure is always Airy and Entertaining; and these are Persons no longer
for its Turn. But why should they cast a Reflection upon That, which is due to
themselves? Why should Impotence corrupt their Judgment? For this, if
impartially consulted, would tell Young Men, that there is Vice in their
Pleasures; and Old Men, that there is Pleasure in Vice. And if this were
rightly understood, and frankly confessed, Youth would be a great deal the
better, and Old Age not one whit the worse.

The Vices more peculiar to Youth are, Rashness and Heat; Forwardness, and an
unguarded Conversation; Debauchery, and all manner of Sensual Excess. And these
are in some Degree natural to that State; the Effects of Warmth and Vigor, and
the Boylings of a Florid Blood: All which, as they need and ought to be
corrected, so they have something to say in their own Excuse. But what Apology
shall we make for the Ill Qualities that attend Old Age? The lightest and least
of which are vain Arrogance and Pride; a troublesome, and peremptory way of
Conversing, and an engrossing all the Talk to themselves; froward and
unsociable Humors, Superstition and Whimsie; Love of Riches when past the use
of them; sordid Avarice, and Fear of Death; which generally is not (as some
have favorably interpreted the Case) the effect of a cold Blood, and low
Spirits, and of Courage damped by these Natural Causes; but it proceeds from
long Custom, and Acquaintance, and a foolish Fondness for the World; by which
the Old Gentleman has corrupted his Judgment, and has a greater Tenderness
for it, than young Men, who enjoy more, and know less of it. Besides these,
there are Envy, and Ill Nature, and Injustice; but the most exquisite and
ridiculous Folly of all, is, that Affectation of a severe, and grave, and wise
Character; and hoping to gain Respect and Deference, by an Austere Look, and
Scornful Behavior; which indeed does but provoke Laughter, and become it self
a Jest, while it pretends to extort Observance and Fear: For the Young Fellows
combine together against this formal Austerity, which they see put on only for
a Disguise; and with a design to amuse and affright them into Reverence, where
real Merit, which would engage it, is wanting. In short, The Vices of Old Age
are so numerous on the One Hand, and the Infirmities of it on the Other, and
Both together conspire to render it so despicable, that the best and most
saving Game it can play, is to secure Men's Affections, and to win them by
Methods of Kindness, and Affability, and Goodnature. For Churlishness, and an
Imperious Humor, and whatever aims at Fear and Dominion, are not by any means
Weapons fit for These Persons to manage. The Affecting so very much Awe, does
by no means become them; and if the thing could really be compassed (which it
rarely, or never is) yet they should much rather choose to render themselves
Agreeable; and think the Love, and Respect, and Honor of young Persons, more to
be desired, than the keeping them in Constraint and Fear, and Tyrannizing over
all that converse with them.

THE Fourth Consideration CONCERNS Man, with regard to his Manners, Humor, and
Condition, etc.
A general Draught of Man.
THE Ancient Sages, and as many as have applied themselves to the study of
Humane Nature, when they represent Man to us, have this remarkable Agreement
among them, That in all their Draughts and Descriptions, the principal Lines
are the same. For they All conspire to paint him, as a Creature made up of
these Four Things; Vanity, Weakness, Inconstancy, and Misery. They style him
The Prey of Time; The Sport and Geugaw of Fortune; The Image of Inconstancy;
The Pattern, nay rather the Prodigy of Weakness; The Balance of Envy and
Misery; a Dream; a Phantome; Dust and Ashes; a Vapor; a Morning-Dow; a Flower
that presently fades; in the Morning Green and growing up, in the Evening cut
down, dried up, and withered; a Wind; Grass; a Bubble; a Shadow; a Leaf born
away by the Wind; a Sponge full of Excrements in his Beginning; a Bundle of
Infirmities and Miseries in the Middle State; Rottenness and a Nuisance, and
Food for Worms, in his Latter End. In a Word, The most Despicable, The most
Calamitous part of the whole Creation. Job, who was as well skilled, and as
much experienced in this Subject, as any Man ever was, has drawn him at full
Length, in his true Colors and Proportions: And Solomon after Him has done
the same in His Books. Pliny's Piece of him is in Little, but extremely like
the Original, when he calls him Solum ut certum sit nihil esse certi, nec
miserius quicquam homine aut superbius.
The most wretched, and yet the proudest and most insolent Creature in the
whole World. Under the Former of these Attributes, (That of Wretched) he
comprehends all the Characters already mentioned, and the Descriptions other
Writers have given of him. The Second (That of Proudest) concerns another Head
of very great Consideration; and in these Two Words he seems to have comprised
all that can be said upon the Matter. These Two Qualities, I confess, seem
utterly inconsistent and destructive of each other. For what in Appearance more
distant, what more Contradictious, than Emptiness and Presumption, than Misery
and Pride? So strange, so monstrous a Composition is Man, in which these wide
Extremes are Ingredients.

Now the very different parts, whereof Man consists, Body and Spirit, make it
exceeding hard to give a tolerable Description of him entire, and altogether.
Some charge all that can be spoken in disparagement of Man, upon the Body, and
represent him a most excellent Creature, complete and superior to any other,
in regard of his Mind. But this Method is so far from Just, that on the
contrary, All that is truly Ill, not in Man only, but in the whole World, is
the Product and Contrivance of the Mind. And much the greatest part of the
Vanity, Inconstancy, Misery, and Presumption, with which Humane Nature is
debased, resides in this part of us; which gave Democritus occasion to call the
Mind An unknown World of Miseries; and Plutarch proves it by a Tract written on
purpose, and upon this very Subject. This General Consideration then, which
regards Man in his own Nature, and in the Gross, shall consist of these Five
Particulars: Vanity, Weakness, Inconstancy, Misery, and Presumption; Which are
indeed the most Natural, the most inseparable, and universal Qualities, of any
that belong to him; though the Two last seem more intimately to concern, and
touch him most to the quick. I add too, that there are some things reducible to
several of these Five Heads; and it is not easy to determine, which of them
they most properly belong to, particularly the Topics of Weakness and Misery,
between which there is great Assinity and Resemblance. Utium graviores morbi
animi quam corperis. Plut. Lib.


CHAP. XXXVI. I. Vanity.
Vanity is the most Essential. The very Peculiar of Man, and Predominate over
the rest. For, whether we regard Moral Evil, or Misfortune, or Inconstancy, or
Irresolution, or any other ill Property, (of which, God knows, this Soil always
bears a plentiful Crop) yet it abounds in nothing so much, as in Worthlessness,
and Emptiness; Senseless Folly, and Ridiculous Vanity. Upon this Account
Democritus, was certainly more in the Right, when he laughed at all Mankind,
and treated them with Scorn, and Contempt, than Heraclitus was, who wept and
afflicted himself; and so expressed some sort of Esteem for Men, as if he thought
them worth his Trouble and Concern. And Diogenes took a better Course in
reproaching and disdaining them, than Timon did, who professed to hate Mankind,
and fled away from all Conversation. Pindar has given a livelier Image of
This, than any Author besides, in that bold Stroke, where he has joined the
Two Vainest Things in the World together, to finish his Idea, calling Man the
Dream of a Shadow. This Consideration has driven some wise Men to so very
great a Contempt of Humane Nature, that when a Difficult, Bold and Noble
Undertaking was mentioned to them, they would frequently reply; That all the
World was not worth a Man's giving himself any Trouble for it, (so said
Statilius to Brutus, when they discoursed the Conspiracy against Caesar) That a
wise Man ought not to do any Thing upon any Account, but his own. And that it
was by no means sit, that Wise Men and Wisdom should suffer any Disquiet, or be
exposed to any Hazard, for the Sake of Fools and Sots.

Vanity of the Thoughts.
First of all, In our Thoughts, and secret Conferences with our Selves, which
are very often, even Worse than Vain, Frivolous, and Ridiculous. And yet in
these trifling Imaginations we spend a great deal of Time, and are not sensible
of it. We enter upon them, continue in them, and come out of them again,
without ever being conscious of our Motions: Which makes the Vanity double, and
argues great Inadvertency, and Disregard of our selves. Here is one walking in
his Dining Room full of Care to manage his Feet so, that each Turn may be
compassed with such a Number of Steps, and that such Parts of the Boards only
may be trod upon: A Second forms with great seriousness long Harangues to
himself, composes a Scene of Action, what he would say, and how he would
maintain his Port, if he were a King, or a Pope, or some other Thing, which he
is so far from, that he knows it is impossible he ever should be such. And thus
he feeds upon Wind, nay, upon somewhat yet less substantial, upon a Thing that
never had, nor ever will have, any sort of Existence. Another is taken up in
contrivance for the Management of his Person, the Affecting a particular Motion
of his Body, an Air of his Face, a Singularity of Address, odd Sentences, and
uncommon Pronunciations; and This he is insinitely delighted with, as a Thing
extremely graceful and engaging, and what other People must needs admire, and
be taken with too. Then how prodigiously vain and foolish are we in our Wishes
and Desires; from whence spring our ridiculous Opinions, and our yet more
ridiculous Hopes and Expectations? And This again, not only at such times as we
surfeit with Leisure, and have no other Business to employ our Thoughts; but it
very often interrupts our serious and most important Affairs, and breaks our
Thread in the very heat of Action. So Natural is Vanity to us, and so prevalent
over us, that it Spirits us away, and pluck^ us forcibly from Truth and
Solidity, and real Substance; to lose us in Air, and Emptiness, and Nothing.

Concern for Futurity.
when we are gone, and cannot feel it. We stretch our Desires and Affections,
beyond our Persons and Subsistence; and are much concerned for things to be
done to us, when we shall be in no capacity of receiving them. How
importunately do we covet Praise, and Applause after Death? and how egregious a
Folly is This? What can be vainer? This is not Ambition, as Men may be apt to
imagine; for That desires a Sensible Honor, such as a Man can enjoy, and reap
some Benefit from. So far as our good Name indeed is capable of doing Service
to our Children, or Relations, or Friends, that stay behind, I own there is use
of it; and am content Men should desire it in proportion to this Convenience.
But to propose That, as Our Own Happiness, which can never reach, or in any
Degree affect our selves, is mere Vanity. Such another Folly is Theirs, who
perplex their Lives with Fears of their Wives marrying second Husbands; and
passionately desire they would continue single; nay, are content to purchase
the Gratification of this Whimsie, at a dear Rate, by leaving in their Wills
great part of their Estates to their Widows, upon this Condition. What an
insupportable Folly? and, as it sometimes falls out, what horrible Injustice is
This? How directly the Reverse of those Heroic Spirits in former Ages, who
upon their Deathbeds advised their Wives to Marry again, as soon as Decency
and Prudence would permit; and to render Themselves useful by bringing Children
to the Public? Some again, Conjure their Friends to wear such a Ring, or a
Lock of Hair, or some other Relick, as a constant Remembrance of them, when
they are dead; or leave Directions for some Particular thing to be done about
their own Bodies; What can we make of all This? has it not a very untoward
Aspect? Methinks it looks, as if Men could be content to part with Life; but
could not even then submit to part with Vanity, at any Rate.

Vanity is This, That the Generality of Mankind live for Other People only, and
not for Themselves. We are not half so much concerned what we really and truly
are in our own Persons and Dispositions, as what the World takes us for, and
how we stand in Character and Reputation abroad. And thus we frequently Cheat
our selves, and cast away the true Happiness, and Advantages of Life, and do a
Thousand inconvenient Things; Though at the same time we Torture our selves to be
agreeable to the Standers-by, and to put on what we know is most in Vogue. And
this is plainly so, not only in our Estates^, and our Bodies; The Table, the
Equipage, the Furniture, the Dress, the Figure, all adapted to the present
Mode, and what the World expects from Persons in our Circumstances; But, which
is a great deal worse, and more deplorable; in the Advantages of the Mind the
Observation holds too. For even These are thought of no Use or Worth, unless
they draw the Eyes and Approbation of other People. And Virtue it self is
neglected and disesteem'd, if it be not publicly acknowledged and commended:
As if the Testimonies of ones own Breast were no Satisfaction; As if those
Things, which were given for our proper Use and Benefit, had lost all their
Efficacy, and changed their Nature, when Others do not see, and share in them,
as well as our Selves.

Vanity consigned to simple Thoughts, and Desires, and calm Discourse;
Commotions of the Mind.
but it often rises higher, puts both Body and Mind into violent Agitations,
and Pains. Men often teaze and torment themselves more, for Matters of little
or no Consequence, than for Those which are of nearest Concern, and upon which
their All depends. Our Soul is frequently thrown into violent Disorders, by
little Whimsies, a mere Fancy, a Dream, a Shadow and empty Amusement, without
Substance, without Ground; and works it self up to all the Excesses of Anger
and Revenge, Joy and Grief, and Confusion; and all This with building Castles
in the Air. The Ceremony of taking leave, the Idea of some particular Gesture
in a parting Friend, strikes us deeper, and gives us more real Trouble, than
all the Reasoning in the World, upon Matters of greatest Moment, is able to do.
The Sound of a Name repeated, some certain Words and melancholy Accents
pronounced Pathetically; nay, dumb Sighs, and vehement Exclamations, go to our
very Hearts. Tricks which all your formal Haranguers, Enthusiasts, Buffoons,
and Others, whose Trade it is to move the Passions, know, and practice in great
perfection. And this airy Blast sometimes surprises the most cautious, and
transports the most resolved, unless they set a more than common Guard upon
themselves. So strong an Influence has Vanity, and We so mighty a Tendency to
it. Nay, as if it were not Reproach sufficient to be agitated and tossed about
with Toys and Trifles, even Falsehood and Cheat has the same Effect, and (which
is strange) even when we know it is nothing but Falsehood and Cheat. Such
Delight do we take, such Industry do we use, to Bubble our selves with our Eyes
open, and to feed upon Fable and Nothing. Ad fallendum nosmet ipsos
ingeniosissimi sumus.
How dextrous we are to deceive our selves, We need no other Instances than
Those that cry heartily, and fall into violent Passions upon hearing dismal
Stories, and seeing deep Tragedies, at the same time that they know the moving
Parts of These to have been invented and composed for Entertainment and
Diversion, at the Discretion of the Romancer, or the Poet: Nay, some of them
mere Fables; so far from Truth now, that they never were true in any
Circumstance at all. Shall I mention one Vanity more? That of a Wretch
possessed, fond and dying for Love of an ugly old Hag; One, whose Age and
Deformity he knows, and knows that she Hates and Despises him too; and
notwithstanding all this, is bewitched with a painted Face, and Colors well
laid; the Affectation of a Coquette, or some other Imposture, which he sees and
confesses to be an Imposture; and all the while runs mad and owns no other
Charm, but what he perfectly sees through the Fallacy of.

Vanity has got, and how close it sticks to Humane Nature; Visits and Matters
of Civility.
we will now pass from private Deportment and Dispositions, to public
Conversation; by which This will plainly appear, to be no particular and
personal Defect, but the Vice of the whole Species in common. And here, what
Vanity, what loss of Time may we observe in the Impertinencies of Visits,
Howd'you's, Forms of Address, mutual Entertainments; In the Offices of
Civility, set Speeches, and Ceremonious Behavior; in Prossers of Service, in
Promises, and Praises? How many fulsome Strains of Complement, what Infinite
Hypocrisy, Falsehood and Deceit? How open and barefaced, so that the Person that
utters it, and he to whom it is directed, and every one that stands by, sees
and knows, and is satisfied it is False? Thus Conversation is now become little
else, than a Trial of Skill for Dissimulation; and looks like a common
Confederacy, where Men have combined together to lie, and bubble, and abuse,
and make a Jest of one another. Nay, good Manners require, that at the same
time a Man tells you an impudent Lie, you should return him your Thanks, for
what you know he intends not a word of; and He again, who is satisfied you
believe not a Syllable of what he says, receives those Acknowledgments of yours
with a set Face, and an Air of Confidence; and thus you stand cringing, and
fawning, and dodging for the last Word; each striving to begin, and fearing to
leave off, and shrugging, when both are heartily weary, and would fain be well
quit of one another. What Inconveniences are we content to endure for these
Formalities? We expose our Selves to the Air, to Heat, to Cold; disturb the
Peace of our Lives, and are in perpetual Pain for these courtly Follies; We
neglect our Business of Weight and Consequence, and attend upon Wind and Smoke.
We are vain at the Expense of our Ease, nay, of our Health, of our very Life.
And what can prove Mankind more enslaved to Vanity than This, That Levity and
Accident tramples Substance under Foot, and Air carries away solid Body,
whither it will? especially, when a Man that behaves himself otherwise, must be
looked upon as a Sot, and a Fool; one that knows nothing of the World, nor what
becomes him to do in it: Thus to play this Farce dexterously, is the greatest
Mark of Wit; and the most affected Harlequin in it, is the finest Gentleman;
but not to be Vain is contemptible Stupidity, and he that declines playing the
Fool, betrays his own want of Sense and good Breeding. Nay, when there is no
need of all this Form and Complaisance, Vanity hangs about us still: Witness
the freer Discourses of the most familiar Acquaintance, and intimate Friends.
How many trifling Impertinences, Falsehoods, Banters, (I omit the wicked and
mischievous Part, because that falls not under this Head) How many arrogant and
vain Boastings go to the making up this sort of Conversation too? Men are so
industrious to take, to seek, to make occasions of Talking of themselves, or of
somewhat that belongs to them; They do it with so sensible, and yet so nauseous
a Pleasure; if they think they have said or done a good thing, or that somewhat
they are possessed of is better than ordinary, They are so uneasy till they have
published and enlarged upon it; as if all their Wit and Worth were lost, unless
other People were made sensible of it too: They catch at the very first
Convenience, cry it up to the greatest Degree imaginable; nay, they perfectly
bring it in by Head and Shoulders, and interrupt all other Discourse to start
This: And when any body else is Talking, we presently thrust our selves in, and
take an Advantage of showing our Parts; so eager are we that People should
understand what we are, and have a regard for us; and not for Us only, but for
every thing that we have a regard for.

Vanity has obtained over Humane Nature, Public Commotions.
we need but recollect the most considerable Revolutions that ever happened in
the World, and the Occasions of them: For thus it will soon appear, that the
most general and most formidable Convulsions of Cities and Kingdoms, and whole
Empires; the Seditions, and Revolts, and Fates of Armies; the bloodiest
Battles, the barbarousest Murders, the sharpest Disputes, and most implacable
Quarrels, have proceeded from very trifling, ridiculous, and insignificant
Causes. Witness the long War between Troy and Greece, the Piques of Sylla and
Marius, and all the Confusions that followed from thence, in the Civil Wars of
Caesar and Pompey, and Augustus and Anthony. The Poets have represented this
well enough, by pretending an Apple to have been the Boutefeu; the Original of
all that Blood and Devastation in Asia and Greece. And indeed the first
Springs, upon which these vast Events move, are commonly Things of no
consideration; but That which begins very small; swells to a vast Bulk
afterward; and the blowing it up thus, is an irrefragable Proof of the Vanity
and Folly of Mankind. Nay, many times an occasional thing goes further with us
than the principal Cause; and some paltry little Circumstances make more
sensible Impressions, and gall us more than the main Matter to which they
retain; as Caesar's Robe put Rome into greater Passion and Concern, than his
Death it self, and the Two and twenty Stabs in his Body had done before.

Vanity, is our seeking with so much Industry and Passion, Notions of Happiness
and Content.
and pleasing our selves so highly, nay, placing our very Happiness in
Advantages, which have neither real Worth, nor Necessity to recommend Them: But
as they are trifling and frivolous in themselves, so they are such as we may be
very happy, and live very comfortably and conveniently without. Whereas on the
other hand, those that are necessary, and essential to our true Happiness, find
little or no part of the Regard due to them; and every Body is indifferent
whether he has Them or not. Thus the Condition of Man is all Air and
Speculation; His whole Happiness imaginary; Opinion and Dream is all he
pursues; and in this he stands Alone, and cannot match himself in the whole
Word. God has all Good in Essence and Reality, and Evil in Notion and
Understanding only. Man, on the contrary, has only fantastical Good, but his
Evils are weighty and substantial. Beasts are not satisfied with Opinion, nor
do They feed upon Fancy, but require somewhat that is present, and sensible,
and real, to content them. Vanity is reserved to Man for his Portion, the
Inheritance and peculiar Right of his Nature. He runs, he bustles, he fights,
he dies, he flies, he persues; he grasps at a Shadow, he Worships the Wind; he
sweats and toils all Day, and in the Evening, when his Gains come to be
computed, a Mote is all the Wages he receives for his Work.

CHAP. XXXVII. II. Weakness.
Strength, and a less Mixture of Weakness; such as Desire; The Use and
Enjoyment of what a Man is possessed of; In his Good and his Evil; in short, such
as Man takes a Pride in, and values himself upon. And yet, even These supposed
Glories and Excellencies of his Nature, are undeniable Arguments of his
Weakness. This may possibly seem a Paradox at first Sight; but a few particular
Reflections, will give us a clearer and more distinct View of the Thing.

First, As for Desires; It is manifest a Man cannot fix upon any Thing, In
desiring and choosing.
not even in Wish and Imagination, so as to sit down with That, and rest
himself contented. We have it not in our Power, to Choose what is necessary, and
sit for us; nor to say, in Particular, what This would be. And if Providence in
Wisdom and Kindness, bestow what we desire, and what really is fit, upon us,
yet it does not satisfy. We are Eternally gaping at somewhat what Future and
Unknown; and find, that what is present never fills, never contents; but what
we have not, is ever esteemed above it. Could we suppose a Man so far indulged,
that a Blank should be put into his Hands, to write his own Terms; yet even
That Fortune of his own Carving, would not be so to his Palate, but that in a
short Time he would retract it; some Alterations and Amendments, something to
be added or taken away: In short, he desires he knows not what. How well soever
the Particulars may please, yet when the Account comes to be summed up, nothing
contents him; for, to say the Truth, he is Uneasy, and discontented with his
own self.

Weakness is still Greater, and more conspicuous, in the Use and Enjoyment of
what he has, In Using and Enjoying.
than in the Desire of what he has not; and that in several Respects. First,
in that he cannot manage, nor reap the Benefit of Things as they really are,
and in their Native Purity; but there is a Necessity of disguising, and
adulterating them, that they may be accommodated to our Purpose. Elements,
Metals, and other Things in their Primitive Simplicity are perfectly useless to
us; Pleasures and Delights, and never to be enjoyed without a Mixture of Pain
and Inconvenience. -- Medio de font leporum.
Surgit amari aliquid, quod in ipsis floribus angat.
Lucret. L. 4.
-- For still some bitter Thought destroys
Our fancied Mirth, and Poisons all our Joys.
Creech. Extremity of Pleasure, carries with it an Air of Melancholy and
Complaint; and the highest Gratifications of Sense, are Weakness, and
Faintings: And that which gives True and Perfect Contentment has much more
Solidity, and a severe Satisfaction, than of Gayety and Transport in it.

Ipsa felicitas se nisi temperat, premit.
Even Happiness, it self, if it do not moderate it self, oppresses and destroys
it self. Which gave occasion to one of the Ancients to say, That God sold us
all the good Things we receive from him; meaning, that none of them are Pure
and Unmingled; and we cannot be said to have That gratis, for which we pay the
Price of that Evil and Uneasiness which attends it. The Case is directly the
same with Grief too, for This is never without some sort of Pleasure annexed to
it. Labor voluptasque dissimillima natura, societate quadam naturali inter se
sunt juncta; est quaedam flere voluptas.
Pleasure and Pain, though in their Natures the most unlike that can be, are yet
so contrived, by Nature, as to be constant Companions, and go Hand in Hand --
Even Tears are shed for Pleasure and Relief,
And Humorous Man turns Epicure in Grief.


Thus all Things in this World are mingled and tempered with their Contraries;
and it is not amiss to Observe, what Masters in Painting teach us, That the
very same Motions and Muscles of the Face, are employed both in Laughing and
Crying. And common Experience shows us, that excessive Laughter brings Tears.
There is no good Quality in us, without some Tincture of Vice, as shall be
shown in its proper Place hereafter; nor is there any Evil, without some
abatement of Good. Nullum sine authoramento malum est.
Every Misfortune is capable of being turned to Advantage; there is no Good
without Evil, no Evil without Good in Man; every Thing is a Mixture, and
nothing comes to our Hands sincere and unmingled. Secondly, All that happens to
us, is mismanaged, and taken by the wrong Handle; Our Palats are humorsom and
uncertain, and know not how to relish Things as they ought; and from This
variety of Tastes, it is, That the endless Disputes, and Inreconcileable
Opinions, concerning the Chief Good, have proceeded. The very best Things,
oftentimes, decay and die upon our Hands; are corrupted by our Weakness, or our
Wickedness; or are lost and come to nothing, for want of Ability to make the
Best of them; nay, sometimes they do not only turn to No Account, but to a very
Ill One; and what is Good in it self, proves to Us, a mighty Evil, and manifest
Disadvantage.

But the Weakness of Humane Nature is most copiously displayed, In Good and
Evil.
with regard to Good and Evil, to Virtue and Vice. My Meaning is, That a Man
with all his Industry and Endeavors, cannot be entirely Good, Virtue and Vice.
in short. Upon this occasion we will consider Three Points. The first is, That
it is not possible to exercise every kind of Virtue; The Reason is, See
Advertisements at the End of the Chapter.
that some of them are incompatible, and can never dwell together; the same
Persons, and the same Circumstances, are not capable of them. As for Instance,
The Chastity of a Virgin, and that of a Widow; the Virtues of a Single, and
those of a Married Life; These Latter in each Kind, Widowhood and Marriage,
being Conditions of much more Encumbrance, and Trouble, more Difficulty, and
therefore more Virtue, than the quiet, and undisturbed State of Celibacy and
Virginity; though Those on the other Hand, have the Advantage in Purity, and
Grace, and Freedom from Business and Care. The Constancy and Greatness of Mind,
which exerts it self in Poverty and Want, in Affliction and Pain, is very
Different from that, which preserves a Man's Temper in Prosperity and Plenty;
and the Patience and Thankfulness of the Receiving Beggar, from the Liberality
of the Giver. And as This holds in Virtues, so does it much more in Vices,
several of which are not only very far Distant, but Diametrically opposite to
each other.

Robbing Peter, to pay Paul, and yet thus it is; not from any Deficiency in
Virtue it self, but from the Impotence and Insufficiency of Humane Nature,
which is too short, too narrow, to give or receive any certain, constant,
universal Rule of acting Virtuously; and Man cannot so contrive his Methods,
and provide himself with Helps, and Occasions of doing Good, but that they will
frequently cross and interrupt one another. Thus Charity and Justice are
sometimes impracticable at once. If I engage against my Relation, or my Friend,
in a Battle; Justice requires me to take his Life, and Treat him as an
Adversary; Charity and Affection bid me spare and preserve him as a Friend.
Suppose a Man mortally wounded, and that he has nothing to expect, but the
languishing out the miserable Remains of Life, in extreme Torture; it were
certainly an Act of Charity, to put this wretched Creature out of his Pain, by
killing him outright, as the Person who killed Saul alleged for himself; and
yet this is such a Mercy, as Justice would call one to an Account for; and
David punished it accordingly. Nay, the being found near such a Person in a
lonely Place, when Search is made for the Murderer, though one be there with
Intentions of Kindness, is exceeding Dangerous; and the least, that can come of
it, is the being made to undergo the Course of the Law; and brought upon Trial
for a Misfortune which one had no Hand in. And this last Instance shows, how
Justice does not only offend against Charity, but also how it intangles and
obstructs it self, according to that most true Observation, Summum Jus summa
Injuria.
The Extremity of Right is the Extremity of Wrong.



Politics, How many indirect Practices are allowed, II Politics
and daily made use of? And this not merely upon Permission and Connivence, but
even by express Direction and Approbation of the Laws. Ex Senatus consultis and
plebiscitis scelera exercentur.
Crimes are Established by Public Edicts, as we shall have Occasion to observe
more at large in another Place. Book III. Chap. 2.
When a State is full and overgrown, like a replete Body, whose Humors are
either too Noxious, or too many to be endured; the Method of discharging this
Oppression, is, to send off its Superfluities of Men, or those among them, who
are of the hottest and warlike Dispositions, to be knocked on the Head abroad.
Thus a Vein is breathed; but the Ease it gives, is at the infinite Expense and
Trouble of some other Country. And this we know has been the Practice of
Franks and Lombards, Goths and Vandales, Turks and Tartars. So again, a Foreign
War is often begun, and maintained abroad, on purpose to keep busy Spirits
employed, and to prevent Insurrections, and Civil Dissentions at Home.
Lycurgus, as a Lesson of Temperance, used to make Slaves Drunk; that Men of
Quality, from Their Extravagances, might learn to detest this Vice. The Romans,
to harden their People, and make Dangers and Death familiar and contemptible,
instituted those Inhumane Sights of their Gladiators, and entertained them with
Blood and Slaughter every Day. This at first, indeed, was consigned to condemned
Malefactors only; then it came to Innocent Slaves; and at last Freemen, and
People of Condition practiced, and valued themselves upon it. The Stews in some
great Cities, are of the same Kind; and so are the Usury, the Divorces of the
Law of Moses, and among other People and Persuasions; Whose only Recommendation
is This, That they are allowed for a present Necessity, and to put a Stop to
greater Mischiefs.

Justice, which cannot subsist nor be put in practice, III. Justice.
without some mixture of Injustice. Nor is this the Case of Communtative
Justice only, This were no strange Matter; for here it is in some sort
necessary; Men could not live by their Trades, nor maintain Commerce with one
another without some reciprocal Injuries and Ossences; every Man must sell a
thing for more than it is strictly worth; and therefore some Laws have allowed
Men to Cheat, provided it be not above half the Price of the Goods: But
Distributive Justice, which consists in dealing Rewards and Punishments, does
the like; so she her self confesses, Sammum Jus summa Injuria Et Omne magnum
Exemplum habet aliquid ex iniquo, quod contra singulos Utilitate public^
rependitur.
Extreme Right is extreme Wrong. And All eminent exemplary Cases have some
Allay of Injustice in them; wherein however, the Hardships which private Men
suffer, are well paid with the Advantages that accrue to the Public from them.
Plato allows in several places, that Public Ministers should draw Criminals to
a full Discovery, by false Hopes and Promises of Pardon and Favor, which they
never intend to make good. Which is to make a way to Justice through Impudence,
and Cozenage, and Falsehood. And what shall we say of that cursed Invention of
Racks, which are a Trial of Patience indeed, but none at all of Truth? For you
shall never be able to get the Truth out of Them that can, nor out of Them that
cannot endure them. Why should we think extremity of Pain can more dispose a
Man to tell what is, than to tell what is not? If an Innocent Man be supposed
endu'd with Patience enough to bear the Torture, why should the Concern for
saving his Life inspire a guilty Person with the same degree of Resolution? I
know it is commonly replied in excuse of this Barbarity, That the Pain
astonishes and enfeebles the Guilty, and extorts a Confession of his Treachery
from him; whereas it has the quite contrary effects of confirming and
fortifying the Innocent. But the Contrary of this happens so often, that to
speak the Truth, This is an ensnaring and a pitiful Method; a poor and base way
of Dealing, full of Doubt and Uncertainty. For what would not a Man say or do
to get quit of such Misery? Etenim Innocents mentiri cogit Dolor.
Pain extorts Lies from the most Innocent; so that a Judge, which examines upon
the Rack, to prevent the Death of Innocent Persons, first Racks the Innocent,
and then Murders him. Many a Thousand People have loaded themselves with false
Accusations. But were it not so, what intolerable Injustice and Cruelty is it
to torture and break a Man to pieces, for a Fault which as yet there is no
Proof of? To avoid killing him without Cause, they do ten times worse than kill
him. If he be innocent, and bear it out, What Justice can there be in putting
him to any Pain at all? You Will say, By bearing the Rack he is absolved; I thank
you very kindly. But This, however, though an Evil, is the least, Humane
Infirmity could contrive; and yet this is not practiced every where neither. I
confess, to Me the Custom of determining Controversies, and clearing Men's
Innocence by Combat, seems to have less of Injustice and Barbarity in it. And
yet This, though formerly much in request, is long since very justly condemned
and exploded. For Christianity allows no such bloody Methods, nor warrants any
dependence upon them, for a discovery of the Truth.

Man be so weak (as we have seen) in regard of Virtue, and in his practical
Capacity; V. Truth.
he is much more so in his Intellectual, and in relation to Truth. It Is
prodigious, that Man should be so formed by Nature, as to desire Truth eagerly,
and grudge no Pains to attain it; and yet so at the same time, as not to bear
it when it offers it self to his View. The Flashes of it blind him, the Thunder
of it stuns him; it is too bright, and too loud to be born. This is not Truth's
Fault however, which is exceeding beautiful, exceeding lovely, exceeding good
and beneficial to Mankind; and what was said of Virtue and Wisdom, is at least
as properly applicable to Truth; Quae si oculis cerneretur, mirabiles sui
amores excitaret. Ci^. of. l. 1.
That could we behold all its Charms, the whole World would be infinitely in
love with it. But the Defect is on Man's side; his Faculties cannot bear so
strong a Light; its Beams dazzle, nay hurt his Senses. In Affairs merely
Humane, he that sets it before us, is esteemed our Enemy. Truth and
Plain-dealing are disobliging things. And what Perverseness is this? that what
we love and seek so passionately, we should be so loath, so angry to find?
Truth is not only amiable, but knowable too, yet not perfectly so by Us; for at
present it seems Man is only strong in Desire, but weak in his Enjoyment of it;
and not able to receive what he desires. The Two chief Means made use of to
bring him to the Knowledge of the Truth, are Reason and Experience. But both
these are insufficient, and so very weak (though of the Two, Experience seems the
more so) that no certain Conclusions can be drawn from them. Reason has so
many Tricks and Turnings, is so flexible in its Arguments, and so disguis d in
its Forms, that any thing may be made plausible from it; (as will be observed
in another place) Experience is no less fallible, because Events are constantly
unlike one another. Nothing in Nature is so Universal as Disparity; nothing so
rare, so difficult, so impossible indeed as Likeness: And nothing argues
greater Weakness, and want of Judgment, than the not being able to discern and
distinguish the Difference. This, however, is to be understood of such a
Likeness, and such a Diversity as is perfect, and holds in every Circumstance:
For indeed both Similitude and Dissimilitude are everywhere in some respect and
degree. No Two things are in every regard Like; none in all respects Unlike one
another. So exceedingly ingenious has Nature approved herself in the Mixture
and Composition of the World.

But after all, What can make more full Discoveries of Humane Infirmity, than
Religion it self has done? Its main Intention and End is to lower Man in his
own Esteem; to show, and make him duly sensible, how wicked, how weak, how mere
a Nothing he is; and in this humble Sense, to drive him to God for Succor and
Support, who is, indeed, his Happiness, his Resuge and Strength; nay, his All.
The first Method taken to inculcate these mean Notions of our Selves, is by
Instructing, Reminding, Upbraiding us; setting before us the Reproachful Titles
of Dust and Ashes, Earth, Flesh and Blood, Grass, and the like.

After that, it insinuates this Truth after a most noble, and excellent, and
stupendous manner; introducing God, humbling, debasing himself, and becoming
weak for the sake of Man; speaking, expostulating, entreating, promising,
swearing, growing angry, threatening; and, in a Word, entering into Treaty and
Terms, and managing him by all the endearing Arts of Persuasion, in the same
tender, kind, condescending Methods, with which a fond Father wins and gains
upon his Children, by stooping to their little Follies, and imitating their
Infant-Imperfections. So very great it seems, so insuperable was the Weakness
of Humane Nature, that no Access could be attained, no Correspondence held with
the Divinity, till God himself was pleased to make the first Approaches; and by
descending to our Capacities, and our Level, to draw us nearer to himself.
While He continued in his Native Majesty, the Distance was too vast; and
therefore the only way to bring Us up to Heaven, was for God to come down upon
Earth.

A Third Instance is in the Ordinary Exercise of Religion; for what more lively
Emblems, more expressive Symbols, more unanswerable Proofs of our Impotence and
Insirmity, than the Principal and most Solemn Acts of Worship have ever been?

What shall we say to Sacrifices, which in former Ages seem to have been in use
all the World over? I mention not the horrible unnatural Cruelties, into which,
through the Corruption of Mankind, and the Wicked Artifice of the Devil, this
Custom degenerated in Idolatrous Countries; those barbarous Oblations, or
rather Murders and Massacres of Men and Children, of the best and most innocent
Persons among them: But, confining our selves to that of Beasts only, we shall
be clearly convinced, that These were so many Marks and Remembrancers of Men's
own Vileness and Infirmity.

For, first of all; In the very Nature of the Thing, they were so many
Testimonies of the Curse and Condemnation we lay under; a sort of public,
authentic Acknowledgment, that the Offerer himself had justly deserved that
Death, inflicted by Him upon the Beast; and a beseeching God to accept that
devoted Life, in the stead of his own forfeited Life: For without all Dispute,
had there been no Curse, no Condemnation to which Men were liable; neither
would there have been any Place, or possible Occasion for Bloody Offerings,
Expiations, or Propitiatory Sacrifices.

This is a farther Evidence, Secondly, of our Weakness, if we look at the
Meanness of the Intention, upon which that Usage grew and was encouraged; and
That could be no other than the Hope of Appeasing and Gratifying Almighty God,
by such Bloody Oblations. I speak not now of the Reasons why God instituted
Sacrifices; but of that Notion which plainly appears to have been predominant
in the Minds of Men, who did not see into the Mysterious End of them; which the
Generality of the Jews themselves never did; and much less could it be expected
that the Pagan World should penetrate into it.

It is true, indeed, Almighty God, in great Grace and Compassion to those more
early and ignorant Ages of the World, which knew no better; did very favorably
accept Good Men, when they approached him with this sort of Devotion; and the
Apostle takes particular Notice of his having Respect to Abel and his Offering;
Heb. xi.
as the History of the Old Testament does, of his testifying that Acceptance by
visible Signs, in the Case of Noah, Abraham, and Others. There being this
Motive to his Mercy, that what was done of that kind proceeded from an
Intention to serve and honor him; and that the Understandings of Men were
gross and heavy; they were in their Minority, and under a Schoolmaster, (as St.
Paul expresses it of the Jewish People) but at the same time honest and
well-meaning: And it is not improbable, that this Opinion, so universal at That
time, might represent Sacrifices to them, as a Dictate of the Law of Nature,
and the only proper Method of Divine Worship.

There was, it is confessed, another Consideration, which rendered Sacrifices
very valuable and well-pleasing to God; whereby they were made use of, as
Figures and Representations of that One truly meritorious Sacrifice, to be
offered upon the Altar of the Cross afterward. But this is a Mystery peculiar
to the Jewish and Christian Religion. And as it is a Common, so is it an
Excellent and Adorable Instance of the Divine Wisdom, to convert what is of
Human Institution, Natural Usage, or of a Corporeal Nature, to High and Holy
Purposes, and make such things as the Ceremonial Law consisted of, turn to a
Spiritual Account.

But still This does not by any means infer, that God took pleasure in these
things, as of any real Intrinsic Worth and Good in themselves; For even before
Grace and Truth set this Matter in its clearest Light by the Gospel, the
Prophets were not sparing to declare the Contrary; and Those among the Jews of
more enlightened Understandings, saw this perfectly well, and acknowledged it,
even while the Practice of offering them continued. Psalm. li.
Thus David; Thou desire no Sacrifice, else would I give it thee, but thou
delightest not in Burnt-Offerings. Psalm. xl.
Burnt-Offering and Sacrifice for Sin have thou not required. And again,
speaking in the Person of God himself, Psalm. l.
I will take no Bullock out of thy House, nor He-Goat out of thy Folds. They
called upon Men for Oblations of another kind, more Noble and Spiritual; more
becoming Them to bring, and more worthy and fit for a Holy Deity to receive.
The Sacrifice of God is a Contrite Spirit, and the Offering of a pure Heart:
Mine Ears have thou opened, that I should do thy Will; yea thy Law is within my
Heart. Offer unto God the Sacrifice of Praise and Thanksgiving; I will have
Mercy and not Sacrifice. And many other Passages to the same Purpose. And at
last, to clear this Matter, and put it beyond a Doubt, the Son of God himself,
who was Truth, and the Teacher of it, and who condescended to come into the
World, that he might disabuse Mankind, and rescue them from their Ignorance and
Errors, has utterly abolished this way of serving God: Which he would never
have done, had there been any Essential Goodness in it, which could have
recommended it for its own sake to God his Father. But when He was come to be
the End of the Law, and the Universal Propitiation, the use of Sacrifices was
at an End too; John iv. 23, 24.
and then it is, They that worship God must worship him in Spirit and in Truth;
for the Father seeks such to worship him. And without Question, next to the
Extirpating Idolatry, This of abolishing Sacrifices, is One of the most
Glorious, Public Effects; One of the best Reformations, which Christianity
has wrought in the World. And hence it was, that Julian, the Emperor, its
most professed, most inveterate Enemy, in Despite to it, offered more
Sacrifices, than perhaps any other Man ever did; and endeavored to introduce
This Way of Worship, and Idolatry again, as being both directly in
Contradiction to the Christian Religion. But of This we have spoken
sufficiently; and therefore let us now take a short View of some of the other
considerable Branches of Religion.

The Blessed Sacraments, when Adminished to us in Elements so common, and of
such mean Esteem, as Bread and Wine, and Water; and not only so, but in the
very Act of Administration bearing. Resemblance to the most Vulgar and
Despicable Actions of Life, as Wishing, Eating and Drinking, are plain
Memento's of our continual Weaknesses, and Wants, our Miseries and Pollutions.
And as the mavelous Efficacy magnifies the Almighty Power and Goodness of
God, so the Need we have of them, should humble us, with mortifying Reflections
upon our own feeble Condition.

Thus again, Repentance is prescribed, as the Necessary, the only Remedy for
our Spiritual Diseases; and it is plain, This, Considered in it self, is an Act
full of Shame and Reproach; it upbraids us with our Faults and Follies;
afflicts our Souls with Grief and sad Remorse; and shows us to our Selves in
the Worst, and most Deformed Figures, that can be: But, however Evil and
Uncomely this may seem in it self, yet it is Necessary for reconciling us to
God, and That is enough to reconcile Us to it. Another Instance may be taken
from Oaths, which are, indeed, Religious Acts, when lawfully practiced, by
Reason of the Name of God, solemnly invoked in them: But yet, it is evident,
that the Common Use and Administration of these, is a Scurvy Symptom, a most
shameful Argument, how little Mankind are to be trusted; What Monsters of
Falsehood, and Treachery, of Error and Ignorance, we are! How vilely suspicious
and distrustful the Person requiring them is, and how liable to Jealousy, the
Person from whom they are demanded; and what a mean Opinion those Lawgivers,
who ordered them, had, of Men's Honesty and Truth; when one's bare Word will not
give Satisfaction, nd (as our Savior says) whatsoever is more than this, Matt.
V. 37.
cometb of Evil. Thus you see, not only how Weak and Sickly our Condition is;
but likewise what sort of Remedies, Religion has found it Necessary to apply
for our Cure. Since it may be said, in some Sense, with Regard to these
Matters, That God has chosen the weak things of this World. 1 Cor. I.
He did not appoint such as were Noblest and most Excellent in their own
Nature, but condescended to consider the Circumstances of the Patients, and
has accommodated his Applications to Our Capacities. So that the Goodness
these Things have, is not so much inherent in their own Nature, as it is
Relative, and derived from the Uses they serve, and the Ends to which they are
directed. They are Good, as Medicines are, because they check Evil, and prevent
that which is Worse. They kill the Cause and Occasion of themselves; for, they
sprung from Sin, and their Business is to extirpate, and restrain Sin. They are
Good, as public Executions are in Commonwealths; as Sneezing, and Vomiting,
and other such violent Exacuations, in our Bodies, whereby the noxious Humors,
which oppress Nature, are discharged; such as are at once the Sign and the
Remedy of a Distemper. In short, It is well for us that we have them; but it
had been abundantly better for us, if we had never had any Occasion to make use
of them; and That Occasion we never should have had, if Man had continued as
God made him, and preserved his Original Wisdom and Integrity. And accordingly
we may take Notice, that These are Things fitted to this frail and mortal State
only; and not any of Those more Noble Parts of Religion, which shall be the
Eternal Exercise of our Souls hereafter, when we are released from this Bondage
of Flesh and Corruption. When our Imperfections and our Sins cease, These cease
with them; whereas our Praises, our Love of God, and other Duties of Intrinsic
Goodness, and of Eternal Use and Obligation; so far from dying with our Sins
and Bodies, that they will be the more Constant, the more Delightful
Employment, of our Sinless and Exalted State; and make a considerable Part of
the Heavenly, and Divine Life.

The former Remarks have shown Man's Imbecility in Goodness and Truth; what
follows may perhaps surprise you more, because it undertakes to represent him
no less impotent in Evil too. For They who do their utmost Endeavor to be
Wicked, cannot be entirely so, but are always forced to leave somewhat
unfinished. There is constantly some Secret Remorse, some Consideration of
Honor, or Fear, that checks, and pulls them back; slackens and enervates the
Will, and keeps them from part of the Villainy they intended. And this Restraint
has been the Ruin of many a One, who has proposed to save himself, by
venturing no farther. Which sort of Folly, and the Miscarriages that have been
owing to it, gave Occasion to that Proverb, That a Man must never play the Fool
by halves.

This Rule is Judicious enough, but deserves a little Illustration, because, as
it has a Good, so is it likewise capable of a very Bad Sense. To understand
it, as if a Man ought to abandon all Conscience, and might in any Circumstances
do Well and Wisely to be Wicked without Reserve, is a very perverse
Interpretation, and would render it a most pernicious Maxim. In this Respect,
that Contrary Proverb is most True, that The shortest Follies are the Best. But
it is True too, that in some Cases Mildness and Moderation are of Dangerous
Consequence; as particularly, when we have a desperate and formidable Enemy to
deal with, and (as we commonly say) Hold a Wolf by the Ears. A Man then has no
safe Middle-Way left; no Course to take, but either the winning him over
entirely by Courtesy, or absolutely to subdue, and put him out of a Capacity,
to do us farther Mischief. This was the constant Method of the Romans, and a
very prudent One no doubt it is. Thus Camillus remonstrated to the Senate in
the Case of the Latins, after several Revolts, suing for Terms of
Reconciliation; That they must either be admitted into Friendship, or not
suffered to be a People any longer; and Dii immortales ita vos potentes hujus
consilii fecerunt, ut sit Latium deinde, aut non sit, in vestra manu posuerint.
Itaque pacem vobis, quod ad Latinos Attinet, parare in perpetuum, vel
saeviendo, vel ignoscendo potestis. T. Live. Lib. VIII. Cap. 13.
That there was no other Way left to secure a lasting Peace, but either
Extremity of Rigor, or a Generous Pardon. In such an Exigence of Affairs, to
do Things by Halves, is to ruin All; Herennius.
as the Samnites found by woeful Experience, who for want of following the
Advice of a Vide Tit. Live. Lib. IX. Cap. 3.
Wise Old Senator, who when they had hemmed in the Romans, and had them at
their Mercy, gave his Opinion, either for obliging them by Honorable
Treatment, or for cutting them all off; paid very dear. That of Courtesy, is
the Nobler Conquest, and ought to be a Man's First Choice; The Second is only
for Cases of Extremity, and such Enemies as Kindness will do no Good upon. Now,
from all these Instances, the Infirmity of Humane Nature appears very
evidently, both with Regard to Good and Evil. A Man can neither perform, nor
avoid either entirely, and without reserve; and what he does, or so much as he
declines of it, is neither the One nor the Other, absolutely and without
mixture. There is some Allay, some Abatement in both Extremes, and thus Man
has it not in his Power to be exquisitely Good, or exquisitely Wicked, but
finds himself checked and confined, on either Hand.

In Reproofs and Denyals.
It is a Littleness of Soul, which makes Men, that they neither dare, nor can
reprove others, when they have done amiss, nor can bear being reproved
Themselves, when they deserve it. And this farther Remark is likewise True,
That Men, as they have, or want Courage, for One of These, so do they
constantly, for the Other of them too. Now, This is a very Foolish Niceness, to
deprive our Selves, or our Friend, of so Beneficial and Necessary a Kindness,
merely for a slight Scratch, which at the most does but pinch our Ears, and
make them tingle a little. And near of Kin to This, is that other Folly, of not
daring to deny what we are sensible is not fit for us to grant, and not being
able to receive a Repulse, with any manner of Temper.

falsely suspected, and wrongfully accused, they are liable to a Twofold
Nicety, False Susp^ons, and Accusations.
and each of These is chargeable with Weakness. (In such Accusations, I mean,
as common Report lays, and not Those which fall upon them in the Methods of Law
and Justice) One of these Extremes, is the Being too easily moved, and
over-industrious to excuse, or to justify Themselves, and this sometimes most
Impertinently, and Officiously. -- Mendax infamia terret
Quem nisi mendosum and mendacem?
Hor. Ep. XVI. Lib. ^1.
-- False Reports disgrace
And trouble, Whom? The Vicious and the Base.
Creech. A Man cannot wrong his Innocence more, than thus, to stake his
Conscience upon every slight Provocation, and refer his Honesty to the
Arbitration of all Companies he comes into. Perspicuitas argumentatione
elevatur.
When Things are plain of themselves, a set Argument does but perplex and
confound them. Socrates, upon his Trial, would not submit to be vindicated,
either by Himself or by any Other; and rather chose to die Silently, than
accept the Assistance of that Eminent Pleader Lysias, in his Defense.

But the Other Weakness is just opposite to This; when a Man of Courage gives
himself no Trouble, nor takes the least Pains about his own Justification; though
the Charge upon him have gained Ground, and prepossest many; when he despises
the Accusation, and the Persons that lay it, as not worth his Answer or Notice;
and thinks it would be a Disparagement and a Reflection to engage with them.
This indeed has been the Practice of some great and generous Spirits; of
scipio especially, who several times weathered his Point thus, with mavelous
Constancy and Firmness of Soul. But a great many Persons disapprove this
Method, and take offense at it; for they think it proceeds from Haughtiness and
Disdain, too great a Value of Themselves, and want of due Regard for other
People. That the depending too much upon one's Own Innocence, and not
submitting to remove Jealousies, is ill Treatment: Or else, this obstinate
Silence and Contempt, they interpret Consciousness of Guilt, Distrust of
Justice, and want of Ability to justify one's self effectually. Miserable
Condition of Mankind in the mean while! that when they are suspected and
accused, have no possible way of giving entire Satisfaction; but whether they
speak, or whether they sit still and hold their Peace; whether they do, or do
not take care to defend their Names from Reproach, and sure to incur the
Imputation of Weakness and Cowardice. We think it a Mark of Courage, and advise
Men not to be Sollicitous in making Excuses; and when they take our Advice, we
are such Fools to Resent it, and complain that they do not think Us worth
excusing Themselves to.

Weakness is the enslaving our selves to any particular Manner, and affecting
to be distinguished by some uncommon way of Living. This is a vile Effeminacy,
Niceness and Affectation.
a Niceness most unbecoming a Man of Honor; it renders us ridiculous and
disagreeable in Conversation; and is highly injurious to our Selves; by
softening our Minds, and making us tender and delicate, and unfit to struggle
with any Accident, which may constrain us to change our Course of Life.
Besides, it is a Reproach, not to dare to do, or endure, what the rest of the
Company do. Such People are fit for no Place but an Alcove, or a Dressing Room.
The best Fashion, when all is done, is to be Negligent, and Complying, and
Hardy, if need be; to dare, and be able to do any thing; but to use this Power
in such things only, as are innocent and good. A Man does well to know and
observe Rules; but not to Enslave himself to them.

Consulting of Books.
which comes under this Head of Weakness. It Is the running after foreign
Examples in Authors; being fond of Quotations, allowing no Testimony to have
Weight or Credit, except it be in Print; nor any thing to be True, but what is
Old, and in Books. According to this Rule, the Press may give Reputation to the
greatest Follies; Whereas in truth, every Day presents us with fresh Instances
of Things in no degree inferior to those more celebrated ones of Antiquity.
And if we had but the Wit and the Judgment to make good Reflections upon These;
to cull and collect carefully such as are for our Purpose; to examine them
curiously, and discover all their Beauties, the Improvement would be wonderful;
And every Age would be equal to any of the past, the Transactions whereof we so
zealously study and admire; and, to be plain, we study and admire them for no
other Reason so much, as that they have Antiquity and Authors to recommend them.

Weakness, That Men are capable of nothing, Extremes
except in moderate Proportions; Extremes of any kind are what they cannot
bear. If they are very small, and make a despicable Figure, we despise and
disdain them, as not worth our Consideration: If they be exceeding great and
glorious, we are afraid of them, admire, and take offense at them. The Former
of these Remarks concerns Men of great Quality, and great Judgment: The Second
is more generally true of meaner Seize and Circumstances in the World.

Sudden Accident.
when we are struck all on the sudden with some unexpected and surprising
Accident, which seizes our Spirits before we know where we are. The Amazements
of this kind are sometimes so great, as to deprive us of our Speech, of our
Senses; so Virgil describes the thing, Diriguit visu in medio, calor ossa
reliquit,
Labitur, and longo vix tandem tempore fatur.
Virg. Aen. III.
Her curdled Blood runs backward at the sight,
And pale numbed Limbs a sudden Trembling shook;
She stiffens into Statue with the Fright,
Swoons, and at last long Silence hardly broke.


nay, sometimes Life it self has gone too. And This, whether the Event were
prosperous, as that Roman Lady, who died for Joy to see her Son safe returned
out of a beaten Army; and the Examples of Sophocles, and Dionysius the Tyrant,
Tessifie; or whether it be unhappy, as Diodorus, died upon the Spot for Shame,
that he was baffled in a Dispute.

One Instance more I will add, which discovers it self Two ways, in direct
opposition to one another. Some Persons are vanquished into Mercy by Tears, and
Submissions, and earnest Entreaties; and are offended at Firmness and Courage,
as if this were Sullenness, and Obstinacy, and Pride. Others Acknowledgments,
and Prayers, and Complaints make no manner of Impression upon; but Constancy
and Resolution wins them. The Former of these proceeds no doubt from Weakness;
and accordingly, we find it more incident and common to Mean, and Effeminate,
and Vulgar Souls. But the Second it is not so easy to give an account of; and
yet this Temper is incident to Men of all Conditions. One would think it an
Argument of a brave and generous Spirit, to be wrought upon by Virtue, and a
generous Manly Behavior; and so no doubt it is, if This be done out of a due
Veneration for Virtue, as Scanderbeg received a Soldier into Favor, for the
gallant and obstinate Defense he made against him; and as Pompey, the whole
City of the Mammertines, out of the regard he had to Zeno, who was one of their
Body: And as the Emperor Conrade forgave the Duke of Bavaria, and the rest of
them that were besieged with him, for the Bravery of the Women, who conveyed
them away upon their Heads. But if this Yielding proceed from the Surprise and
Confusion, occasioned by the over-bearing Power of some Superior Virtue, (as
the People of Thebes, who were quite dispirited when they heard Epaminondas in
his Defense, reckon up his good Services, and noble Exploits, and Reproach
their base Ingratitude with a becoming Indignation; and Alexander, when he
despised the noble Resolution of Betis, who was taken with the City of Gaza, of
which he was Commander) then there is another Account to be given of it. The
Former of these was Weakness; the Second, neither the effect of Courage nor
Weakness, but of Anger and Rage; which in Alexander was never subject to any
Check, nor ever knew any Moderation.

ADVERTISEMENT.
THis Author had said in the Preface to his Book, that his Design was to write
after the manner of the Academick Philosophers; who made it their Business, o
represent each side of the Question in its utmost beauty and Strength, without
delivering any decisive Opinion in the Case, or being bound to stand by either
branch of the Controversy. An Attentive Reader will easily observe, that
Monsieur Charron has thus far maintained the Character he proposed for his
Pattern, as to make the most of the Arguments that offered for his present
purpose, without precluding himself from putting quite another Face upon the
Matter, when his Subject required, that it should be taken by another Handle.
Thus you will find him varying concerning the Attaining of Knowledge by Sense,
and whether This be the Only possible way of Information; by comparing Chapter
X. and Chapter XIII. Sect. 10.11,
And in the very Subject of this Chapter and Section; how distant is the
Reflection he makes here, from those others which He and other Philosophers
propose to us elsewhere; upon the Noble Excellence of Virtue, the Largeness of
its Scope and Extent; its Independence upon Fortune and Casualties; and the
mighty Convenience of furnishing something commendable and proper for our
Exercise, and so making us Happy in every possible Condition of Humane Life?

This Variety then of Thought is a good warning to avoid what our Author so
frequently condemns; Too easy a Credulity, and taking his Notions upon Trust:
For we find even those Notions not always the same, but accommodated to his
present Subject and Design: And That Design well attended to, and taken along
with us, will be a very good Guide to our Understanding him aright. For
Instance; He had laid it down in the beginning of this Treatise, as a
Fundamental Principle, That the Ignorance of a Man's Self is the great and most
governing Error of his Life; of an Influence so universally pernicious, that
all his Vices and Misfortunes are owing to it. But then This was such an
Ignorance as disposed Men to overvalue and neglect themselves, by covering,
and quite overlooking the Defects and Disadvantages of Humane Nature; and so
kept the Patient incurable, because insensible of his Disease. In order to
remedy this Evil it is, that Monsieur Charron undertakes to show Men to
Themselves; and it is evident his Design requires that he should show the worst
of them; and paint only Those Features and Lines strong, which may discover
their Deformity, and tend to humble and to mortify them first; and then to
awaken that Care, which can never be vigorously employed, till they are first
con'^inc'd of the Weakness and Danger of those Circumstances that want it.

A Philosopher now under these Circumstances, is thus far like a Lawgiver,
that it will be Prudence in him to suppose, and provide against the Worst; and
therefore, as I would not extenuate the Art or Wisdom of my Author, nor do
Injury to his Argument; so neither can I be just to the Dignity of our Nature,
and grateful to the Wise and Good Creator of it, unless I give my Reader these
short, and (as I conceive) necessary Directions in perusing this First Part of
the Book. First, That What is here truly said of some, or most Men, (and was
sit to be said in general Terms, because the worst Men have most need of such
Treatises, and so are most concerned in them) must not be so universally
applied, or understood, as to be taken for a common Standard, and universal
Representation of all Mankind without Exception. Secondly, That in those Vices
and Defects, which are general, we should make a Distinction between such as
are essential to Humane Nature, and inseparable from its Original Constitution;
and such as are the effects of Custom and Corruption, of either Adam's, or our
own Sin. Thirdly; That what we Charge as a Defect be really so, and owing to
the Cause we ascribe it to. These are necessary Cautions for the sake of doing
common Justice, as well as preventing Mistakes in our Selves. It were
unreasonable to take our Measures of all Mankind in respect of their Bodies,
from the Sick or Lame; and from the Fools or the Sots, every whit as
extravagant for their Souls. It were a charging God foolishly, to ascribe those
Impotencies and Evils to Him, which have been the Consequences of our
Disobedience against Him. And it is a most unthankful Aspersion upon the Beauty
and Wisdom of his Providence, to charge That upon a Defect in Nature, Which is
really no other than a natural Result of the different Fortunes and Conditions
of Men: Which is exactly the Case here before us: For wherein is the Excellent
Wisdom of that Providence more clearly seen, than in that useful Variety of
Circumstances, which Men are placed in? And what can more Vindicate the Justice
and Goodness of God from any reasonable Exception, than This, That there are
particular Virtues appropriated to every sort of Persons and Accidents; and
that no Circumstance of Life is possible, or supposable, but it may be adorned
and recommended by Virtues, which are seasonable and distinguishing for that
very Condition? This Variety of Virtues then is far from a Natural Weakness; it
is not owing to Nature, but to Fortune and Providence; and is so far from a
Disparagement, that it is rather an Ornament and Advantage to the World. Indeed
if Nature have any thing to do in it, it is the Nature of Virtue it self; for
even Almighty God, who is Goodness in Perfection, yet does not exercise both
Justice and Mercy (for Instance) at once, to the same Person, and in the same
respects: And how is Man the worse for not doing things inconsistent and
incompatible, and what even Almighty God himself does not do? The same may be
said of the Defects of Justice, taken Notice of afterward; at least in some
degree: Those being the unavoidable Consequences of Multitudes incorporated
into Civil Societies, and so many Interests nicely interwoven with one another:
All which I thought it my Duty to hint at, thereby to prevent any mean,
repining, or ungrateful Thoughts, which such Reflections as These, when
lavishly spoken, or unwarily received, might be apt to raise in Men's Minds, to
the Disquiet of their own Hearts, and the Dishonor of the Maker and Governor,
not only of the Humane, but of Universal Nature.


CHAP. XXXVIII. III. Inconstancy.
MAN is a Creature wonderfully Various and Mutable; and the great Difficulty of
coming to any Judgment concerning Him, which should be certain, fixed, and
universal, proceeds from hence, That our Lives are not all of a Piece, but made
up of disagreeing and different Parcels. Most part of our Actions do not arise
from steady Thought, but are sudden Starts and Sallies, the Effects of Accident
and Impulse, and look like Shreds of several Stuffs patched up, and sewed
together. First Irresolution, and then Fickleness and Change of Measures when
we have resolved, are the commonest and most apparent Vices of Humane Nature.
And our Actions, it is plain, do so strangely cross and contradict one another,
that it is not easy to believe so many Contrarieties should all be derived
from the same Original. We change and are not sensible of it: We run eagerly
after every Whimsie of our own Appetites, and are born away by the Stream of
Accidents and Passions; It Is no more Reason, but Inclination that governs us: At
nil potet esse aequabile, quod non a certa ratione proficiscitur.
But sure it is, nothing can ever be regular and steady, which is not directed
and ordered by Reason and Method. Thus our very Minds and Tempers vary too; the
Climate, the Weather, and the Motions of Time and Seasons, make considerable
Alterations and Differences in us.

Tales sunt hominum mentes, quali pater ipse
Jupiter auctifera lustravit lampade terras.

In each Man's Breast This Weathercock, the Mind,
Moves with the Sun, and shifts with every Wind.
Our whole Life is nothing else, but one unequal, irregular, and many-figur'd
Motion; nothing strait, nothing steady; We are perpetually moving and turning;
and the very change of our Posture is so frequent, as to be an Uneasiness and
Trouble to us. Nemo non quotidie consilium mutat and votum, modo uxorem vult,
modo amicam; modo regnare vult, modo non est eo officiosior servus; nunc
pecuniam spargit, nunc rapit; modo frugi videtur and gravis, modo prodigus and
vanus; mutamus subinde personam.
No Man continues to wish and design the same thing two Days together. Now the
Man is for Marrying; by and by a Mistress is preferred before a Wife: Now he is
Ambitious and Aspiring, and looks Big; presently the meanest Servant is not
more humble, more condescending than He. This Hour he squanders his Money away;
the next he turns Miser, and scrapes all he can. Sometimes he is frugal and
serious; sometimes profuse, airy, and gay. Thus we shift our Characters each
Moment, and act a Thousand several Parts. The Mind is with it self at strife,
And disagrees in all the Course of Life;
For what it hated now, it straight desires,
What now it threw away, it most admires.
Creech.

So little is any of us the same; and so much harder is it to Sound and Know
Man perfectly, than any other Creature whatsoever: For he is full of Doubles
and Trickings; the closest, cunningest, and most Counterfeit part of the
Creation. He has a Thousand little Closets and false Doors, where he hides,
and comes out again; Sometimes a Man, sometimes a Monster; a Thousand
Breathing-holes, at which he blows sometimes Hot, sometimes Cold, and almost
blinds you with Cloud and Smoke. Every Agitation is but a fresh Folly; and the
Course of his Life One continued Error. He is born in the Morning, and dies at
Night; is sometimes in Chains, and sometimes at large; sometimes God, and
sometimes an Insect: He Langhs and Cries for the same thing; is satisfied and
dissatisfied; ever wishing, and never knowing what he would be at. Sometimes
transported, and ready to leap out of his Skin for Joy; and presently again so
melancholy and dejected, that nothing can content, nothing quiet him, or make
him think Life tolerable. Quod petiit spernit, repetit quod nuper omisit,
Aestuat, and vitae disconvenit ordine toto.
Horat. 1. Ep. L. 1.

CHAP. XXXIX. Misery.
Misery proper to Man.
Man has been, already, described Vain and Feeble, Frail and Inconstant, with
Regard to Goodness and Happiness, and Ease; But he is strong and lusty,
constant and hardened, and tough in Misery. He is in a manner Misery alive, and
in Humane Shape; and no one Word is equally expressive of his Condition. For
all Misery centers in him, and dwells in no other part of the World besides. To
be Miserable is the Property of our Nature; Man alone is so, and every Man is
so, as will appear by and by. For a true Representation of this Matter, it were
convenient to run over all the parts of his Life; to describe his Essence, his
Coming into the World, his Stay in it, and his Departure out of it. This were
an endless Undertaking, and I pretend not to it; nor need I indeed, because so
many have handled the Subject before me. When I intend at present, is only to
instance in some Particulars, not commonly taken Notice of, nor reputed
Unhappinesses; at least, such as Men do not thoroughly consider, nor are
sufficiently sensible of, though they be in reality very grievous, if we make a
true Judgment of them.

In his Beginning and End.
That his First Appearances in the World are Mean and Despicable; but his Going
out of it, his Death and Destruction, are esteemed Glorious and full of Honor.
By which One would be tempted to think this a monstrous Creature, in the
Production whereof there is so much Shame, and so much Reputation in the
Unmaking him again. What relates to the former of These, Modesty draws a Veil
over; But the latter is proclaimed and received with Triumph; The Instruments
are prepared with great Expense; We wear them constantly about us, and look
upon Them as Ornaments to our Persons. We are born in Chambers privately, but
die before many Spectators, in Fields and Camps, in the Sight of the Sun, and
with Sound of Trumpet, and are proud of Butchering one another. Nature has
provided but One Way of coming into the World, but a great many Passages out;
and, as if even thus Nature had done too little, Invention and Industry have
added their Assistance, and make Men every Day more Ingenious in new Arts of
Killing. Laws and Customs have not assigned any Recompense for Men's Skill in
multiplying, or in preserving Mankind; But all our Ensigns of Honor, and for
the destroying it. Arms of Families, Advancements, Riches Commands, Triumphs,
and Trophies are decreed to Them that are mighty to oppress, to grieve, to
murder Mankind. The Two great Heroes of all Story, Alexander and Caesar, were
each of them (according to Pliny's Computation) the Death of more than a
million of Men, and yet neither of these added One to the Number. And
heretofroe, Men were slaughtered in Public Theaters, merely for Pleasure and
Pastime. Homo res sacra per jocum and lusum occiditur; satis spectaculi in
homine mors est innocents. In Iudum Veniunt ut public voluptatis hostiae,
fiant. Sense. Tertul.
Man, a Creature Venerable and Sacred, is slain for Sport and Diversion; Death
in Man is Entertainment sufficient. Innocent Persons are brought upon the
Stage, to be Sacrificed for the Peoples Pleasure. In some Nations it is Usual
to curse the Day of their Birth, and bless That of their Death. And the Wisest
Man That ever lived, has taught us, that the Latter of These is much Better of
the Two. Now, no Other Creature is so discontented with it self; nor are the
Particulars here mentioned, True of Beasts, or any Part of the Creation besides.

Destroying his Pieasure.
Those poor and low Pleasures of which he is capable (for the Head of Weakness
may have satisfied us, that the Pure and Exquisite are too resin'd for him) the
Care taken to abate of the Number, and to check the relish of them. If this be
not done upon a Religious Account, how monstrous a Folly is it? Thus far Man is
obliged to become his own Enemy; to rob and betray Himself; so that even his
Pleasures are Burdens, and he contributes to his own Uneasiness. And this some
are so superstitiously severe in, that they avoid Health, and Good Humor, and
Mirth, as Evils. O miseri, quorum gaudia crimen habent. Gallus, Eleg. 1.
Oh wretched Men! whose Pleasures are their Crime.

We are exceedingly ingenious to our Disadvantage; and the Force of our Wit
feeds upon nothing more, than the contriving new Arts of Uneasiness to our
Selves.

Creating Misfortunes to our selves.
For the Mind of Man does not only spoil Good, and deny its own Appetites, and
check even lawful Delights; but it is eternally busy in framing and forging
Pains and Evils. Thus Things which have in reality nothing of Evil in Them, and
such as Beasts stand in no Fear at all of, our Minds draw in the blackest
Colors, and most hideous Shapes; and then tremble, and start, and run away,
from Monsters of their own making. Thus we esteem it a mighty Unhappiness, not
to be Honorable, and Rich, and Great; and look upon Cuckoldom, want of
Children, and Death, as insupportable Evils. Whereas, to speak freely, I know
no Temporal Affliction which is really Evil, and felt to be so, but Pain only.
And the Reason, why some Wise Men have been known to fear those other things,
was not upon the account of the Things themselves, but of the Pain which may
happen to be an inseparable Attendant upon them. For This sometimes is a
Forerunner of Death; and sometimes it follows upon Poverty and Disgrace. But if
you consider these Matters, (abstracting the Pain) all the rest is mere
Imagination; a Thing that has no Being, but in our own Brains; which are
eternally cutting themselves out new work, and forming Evils that are not, to
add to Those that are; thus enlarging our Misery, and finding it fresh
Employment, instead of quieting and cutting it short. For the Beasts feel
nothing of all this; and therefore it is plain they are Evils, not of Nature's,
but of Fancy's making.

Pain, Born to Pain.
which seems the only real Evil, Man is perfectly fitted for That, and born to
it. The Mexicans welcome their Children into the World, with this Salutation;
Child, thou art come into this World to suffer; take it patiently, and hold thy
Peace. And Three Arguments there are, which may convince us, that Pain is in a
manner Natural to Man; and a State of Indolence or Pleasure, foreign to his
Constitution. The First is, that every Part about a Man is susceptible of Pain,
and but very few capable of Pleasure. The Second, That Those which are capable
of Pleasure, can receive but one or two sorts of it; but all the Parts receive
great variety of Pains, and Those of the most different kinds too; Extremity of
Heat and Cold, Pricking, Bursting, Bruising, Scratching, Flaying, Beating,
Scalding, Fainting, Swooning, Extension, Oppression, Relaxation of the Parts;
and others without Number, that want a Name, besides Those of the Soul; so that
a Man is much more able to suffer, than to express his Sufferings. To this must
be added, that a Man cannot continue long in Pleasures: All his Delights are a
short Blaze; should they last long, they would destroy Themselves, and become
painful and insupportable. But his Pains are of a great length, and not
confined to certain Seasons, as Pleasures are. Thus Pain has a more absolute
Dominion over us; its Territories are larger; its Reign more lasting, more
general, more uncontrolled, and, in a Word, more Natural, than that of Pleasure
is, or can possibly be.

To these Three Remarks may be added as many more; as First, Pain and Sorrow is
much more common, and comes oftener upon us; Pleasure is hard to be met with,
and seldom Returns. Then, Pain comes of its own accord, without any seeking or
Endeavor of ours to procure it; but Pleasure never approaches voluntarily; we
are fain to court it, to buy it dear, and oftentimes pay more for it than it is
worth. Pleasure is never Entire, but has always some Abatement, some Alloy of
Uneasiness, somewhat attending it that we cannot like, and had much rather were
otherwise; but Pain and Dissatisfaction are often without any manner of Mixture
or Mitigation. And after all this, the worst part of the Bargain, and that
which most clearly proves our Misery, is, That Extremity of Pleasure does not
affect us so sensibly as a very small Degree of Pain or Sickness. Segnius
homines bona quam mala sentiunt.
Humane Nature is more accommodated to the Sense of Evil, than of Good. Perfect
Health and Ease makes no manner of Impression; but the least Indisposition
makes a very great one. Pungit -- In cute vix summa violatum plagula Corpus,
Quando valere nihil quenquam movet --

The Prick of a Pin, though the Skin be searce razed, put the whole Body into
Disorder; and yet That whole Body, when in a state of perfect Ease, has no
particular Sensation, or Motion of Joy resulting from it.

Remembrance and Anticipation of Evils.
nor False, and of our own forming, could complete our Misery; we stretch, and
lengthen both the One and the Other of these; give them new Life, and sustain
them longer than they could possibly subsist without our cherishing; as if we
were perfectly in love with Uneasiness. This we do several ways; as First, by
calling to remembrance that which is passed, and forestalling that which is to
come. This Method can never fail, because the Two great Privileges our Nature
boasts of, are Memory and Foresight; and these Advantages and Prerogatives of
our Species, we so pervert, as to render them the Instruments of our
Unhappiness. Futuro torquemur and praeterito, multa bona nostra nobis nocent;
timoris tormentum memoria reducit, providentia anticipat; nemo praesentibus
tantum miser est.
The Past and the Future both put us upon the Rack; many of our Advantages do
us an Injury; Memory calls back our Terrors; and Forethought antedates them:
No Man bears the present Burden, and no more. Now what can express a more
importunate desire of Misery, than the not staying till the Calamity comes, but
going out to meet, and find, to seek, and to invite it, to hasten its
Approaches toward us? This is like the Men that kill themselves for fear of
Dying, which is, out of Curiosity, or Weakness, to pull down upon us what we
most apprehend. And thus we do not only wait for our greatest Evils, and real
Inconveniences with a foolish Impatience, but oftentimes terrisie and torment
our selves with the Expectation of Those, which perhaps would never reach us at
all. These Persons take great pains to be miserable before their Time; nay, to
be doubly so, by the sense of the Calamity when upon them, and by long
Premeditation at a distance, which is a Thousand times worse than the Calamity
it self. Minus afficit sensus fatigatio quam cogitatio.
The Fatigue of Sense is much less in enduring, than the Torture of the Mind in
expecting. The real Existence of Misery is, it seems, too short and transitory,
and therefore the Mind must give it Birth, and lengthen out its Life, and
entertain it self with it before hand. Plus dolet quam necesse est, qui ante
dolet quam necesse est.
He that afflicts himself before he needs, is sure to be afflicted more than he
needs. Beasts are secure from such Wretchedness and Folly, and are in this
respect much beholding to Nature, for not having given them the tormenting
Faculties of Wit, and Memory, and Foresight, like ours. Caesar used to say,
that the best Death was that which was least thought on. And there is no doubt,
but the Pomp and Expectation of Death is frequently more painful and terrible
than the Thing it self. It is not here any part of my Design to discourage or
reflect upon that Premeditation, which Philosophy and Religion require of us:
For This is the very Tempering that hardens the Soul, and makes it Proof
against all Accidents and Assaults; and a Place shall be reserved for
recommending this particularly. But what I would explode, Book II Chapter 7. 11.
is that Apprehension of Evils to come, which is always Poor-spirited, and
sometimes Groundless, and ever Fruitless; which troubles, and sullies the Soul
with Black Thoughts, deforms its Beauty, disturbs its Quiet, and embitters all
its Joy. And sure it is much better to be absolutely surpised, than thus
fore-warned: Rather than think thus of Future Evils, never think at all. But
setting aside this Antedating of Evil; the very Anxiety, and Care, and
perpetual Hankering after Future Contingences of any kind, the Solicitude of
our Hopes, the Eagerness of our Desires, the Misgivings of our Fears, are a
very great Misery. For besides, that What is future, is equally out of our
power with What is past, (and so these Thoughts are vain) we are certain to
receive Detriment by that which can do us no service. ( For Calamitosus est
animus futuri anxius.
the State of a Mind always in pain for what will happen hereafter, is
certainly m^st deplorable) It robs us of all sedate Thought; destroys all that
comfortable Sense, and quiet Enjoyment we might have of present Advantages; and
makes it impossible for Men to sit down easy and satisfied under any
Dispensations of the kindest and most bountiful Providence to them.

Uncasie Enquiries.
which comes up but too thick of its own accord; he cultivates and increases
it, by a restless Curiosity, and studious Pursuit of fresh Objects, which may
create, or cherish his Unhappiness. With what Eagerness and Pleasure does he
thrust himself into Business; and how inquisitive and impatient is he to
discover That, which, if it would present it self to his View without any
Trouble of his, he ought rather to turn away, and hide his Eyes from? And this
busy Temper is owing either to a Natural Restlesness, disposing us to be
miserable; or from a vain Affectation to be Judicious, and Wise, and always
employed; that is, in plain English, to make our selves Fools and Wretches: As
we needs must be, when our Industry to perplex our selves is so great, that
when we have no Business of our own to disquiet us, we go abroad in quest of
Troubles, and officiously concern our selves with the Affairs of other People.
In a Word, Man is under exceeding great and perpetual Agitation of Mind, not
only from such Thoughts and Cares as are unnecessary, and turn to no account;
but such as are thorny, troublesome, and injurious to him: The Present gives
him Pain; the Past, Regret; the Future, Perplexity; and, by his Behavior under
all this, one would think him afraid of nothing so much, as the not being
sufficiently Miserable, after all his Endeavors to render himself so. And may
we not justly use this Exclamation; O wretched Mertals! how many Evils do you
continually endure, which might with great ease have been avoided! how many
more indeed are Those of your own, and how few in Comparison, Those of God's
and Nature's making! But Thus alas it is! Man delights himself in Misery, and
is obstinate in seeking and cleaving to it. He chews the Cud upon each
Misfortune, and takes great Pains that none should be forgotten, but renews
their Images daily and hourly. Nothing is so frequent, so familiar, as
Complaints; and where Occasions are but light and trivial, he cherishes and
heightens the Resentment; calls himself the most unhappy Man in the World, and
takes it ill not to be thought so; Est quaedam dolendi voluptas.
Such Pleasure does he find in indulging his Grief. And sure the being so very
ambitious to enhance our Misery, and to get the Character of Those who excel
all others in it, is a much greater Misery, than never feeling or knowing our
Unhappiness at all. Homo animal querulum, cupide suis incumbens miseriis.
And yet this is that querulous Creature Man, that sits with great Eagerness
brooding upon his own Miseries.

In the Remedies of Misery.
in Reality and in Imagination; by Constraint, and with Industry and Pleasure.
He has too much of it in despite of all Endeavors to the contrary; and yet
his great Fear is, that he should not have Misery enough. He is always in Chase
of some fresh Unhappiness, and in pain till he has overtaken it. But now we
will take him in another Prospect, affected with a Sense, and weary of some
particular Evil; (for even This does not happen always; and many Miseries are
endured without any uneasy Resentments at all) And when his Mind is thus far
awakened, let us next observe, how he endeavors to disengage himself, and what
Remedies are to be applied in order to a Cure. And These are such in truth, as
rather fret and anger the Sore, than heal it; for by quitting one Evil, he only
exchanges it for another, and oftentimes for a worse. But still the very Change
is pleasing, or at least, it sooths and allays the Pain a little. He fancies
one Evil may be cured by another; and this Imagination is owing to a vulgar
Error, that seems to have bewitched Mankind; which makes them always suspect
things that are easy and cheap; and esteem nothing truly valuable and
advantageous, but what costs us dear, and is attended with much Labor and
Dissiculty. And This again rises higher, (for it is not more strange than true,
and nothing can more fully prove, that Man is exceeding miserable) That, let
the Evils we lie under, be what they will, some other Evil is necessary, for
the expelling and subduing them; and whether the Body or the Mind be the part
affected, the Case in this respect is much the same. For the Diseases both of
the one and the other, are never to be healed and taken off, but by Torture,
and Pain, and great Trouble: Those of the Mind by Penance, Watchings, and
Fastings; hard Usage, and course Fare; Confinements and Mortifications; which,
notwithstanding the Voluntariness and Devotion of them, must of necessity be
afflicting and pungent; because the whole effect of them would be lost, if we
could suppose them in any degree subservient to Ease and Pleasure. Those of the
Body require nauseous Medicines, Incisions, Causticks, and severe Dietings; as
They whose Unhappiness it is to be obliged to a Course of Physic, know by
woeful Experience. They are got between the Millstones, (as they say) ground and
bruised on one side by the Disease, and on the other by a Regimen as bad as the
Disease. Thus Ignorance is cured by long laborious Study; Poverty by Sweat and
Toil; and Care and Trouble are as Natural in all the Provisions for Body and
Mind both, as it is for Birds to fly.

Miseries of the Mind.
are such as the Body suffers in; or, if not peculiar to that alone, yet at
least such, as it bears a part in with the Mind; and the highest they go, is
only to the meanest of our Faculties, Imagination and Fancy. But Those, which
next fall under our Consideration, are of the most refined and Spiritual
Nature, such as are more truly deserving of that Name; full of Error, full of
Malignity; their Activity greater, their Influence more general, more
pernicious, and more properly our own; and yet at the same time less
acknowledged, less perceived by us. And This enhances, nay doubles Man's
Misery; that of moderate Evils he has a quick and tender Sense, but those
which are greatest, he knows not, feels at not all. Nor can he bear to be
informed of them. No Body dares mention them to him; none will do the
ungrateful good Office of touching this Sore Place; so hardened, so obstinate,
so lost is he in his Misery. All therefore that can be allowed us in the Case,
is to handle them with all imaginable Gentleness, and just Glance upon them by
the by; or rather indeed, to point them out at a distance, and give him some
little Hints to exercise his own Thoughts upon, since of his own accord he is
by no means disposed to take any notice of them. And First, In respect of the
Understanding; The Understanding.
Is it not a most prodigions, and most lamentable Consideration, that Humane
Nature should be so universally tainted with Error and ^^indness? Most Vulgar
Opinions (and commonly the more general, in a more eminent manner) are
erroneous and false; not exempting even those that are received with the
greatest Reverence and Applause. Nor are these so Sacred ^^otion-False only;
but, which is worse, very many of them Mischievous to Humane Society, and the
Public Good. And though some Wise Men (and they alas! but very few) think more
correctly of these Matters, than the generality of the World, and have a truer
Notion of them; yet even These Men sometimes suffer themselves to be carried
down with the Stream; if not always, and in every Point, yet now and then, and
upon some Occasions. A Man must be very firm and well fixed, to stem the Tide;
very hardy, and of a sound Constitution, whom an Infection so epidemical cannot
falsten upon. For indeed, Opinions that have got Footing everywhere, and are
entertained with general Applause, such as searce any Body dares to contradict,
are like a sweeping Flood, that bears down all before it. Proh superi! quantum
mortalia pectora caecae
Noctis habent?

Good Heaven! what Errors darken Human Sight!
And wrap our Souls in gross substantial Night!
O miseras hominum mentes and pectora caeca,
Qualibus in tenebris vitae, quantisque periclis
Degitur hoe aevi quodcunque est?
Lucret. Lib. 2.
Blind wretched Man! in what dark Paths of Strife,
We walk this little Journey of our Life!
Creech.

To instance in all the foolish Opinions, with which the generality of Mankind
are intoxicated, were much too tedious an Undertaking. But some few shall be
just mentioned here, and reserved to their proper places, for a more full
Enlargement upon them; and such are These that follow.

1. The forming a Judgment of Counsels and Designs, and pronouncing them
Prudent, See Book III. Chap. 1.
and Seasonable, and Good; or the direct Contrary; according as they succeed
Well or III. Whereas the Issues of all these things are in no degree at our own
disposal, but depend entirely upon a Higher Hand; One, who, as his own Infinite
Wisdom sees fit, prospers the most unlikely Methods, and defeats the Wisest
Measures, and most promising Attempts.

2. The Condemning, and utterly exploding all foreign and strange Things,
Manners, Opinions, Laws, See Book II. Chap. 8.
Customs, Observances, and looking upon them as barbarous and Wicked, without
ever examining into the Matter, or knowing of what Nature and Consequence they
are: And all this, for no other reason, but that they are New to Us, and
practiced only in remote Countries, and different from the Vogue and Usage of
our own. As if We were the common Standard for all the World to take Measures
by; and nothing could possibly be commendable or convenient, but what has been
received, and is in request, in that little Spot of Ground, where our
particular Lot has fallen.

3. Somewhat distant from This, See Book II. Chap. 10.
is the esteeming and extolling Things, because they are New, or Scarce, or
Strange, or Difficult; which are the Four powerful Charms, that attract, and
get so absolute Ascendent over Vulgar Souls: And very often it happens, that
the Things prized highly upon these Accounts, are mere Vanities and Trifles,
and have neither intrinsic Goodness, nor Usefulness, nor any other
Consideration to recommend them. For what can be more justly despicable, than
That Prince, who is said to value himself extremely, upon an Art he had, of
standing at a distance, and throwing Grains of Millet through the Eye of a
Needle?

4. All those superstitious Opinions, and unaccountable Whimsies, which debase
and enslave the Minds of Children, and Women, and all the weak and ignorant
part of Mankind.

5. The esteeming Men more or less, Ibid.
according to their worldly Advantages; and proportioning not our Respects
only, but our Opinions too, to their Riches, Honors, and Preferments; as if
the Value of a Horse were to be taken from his Trappings; and the Buyer, to
know his good Qualities, and adjust his Price, should look no farther than the
guittering ^^idle and embroidered Saddle.

6. The rating Things not according to their Real, Natural, and Intrinsic
Worth, which oftentimes is concealed; but according to the Outward Face and
Show; the Pomp and Figure, the Noise they make, and the Reputation they have in
the World.

7. The thinking, that a Man is sufficiently revenged of his Enemy, when he
kills him; whereas This is to put him under Shelter, and out of the Reach of
all manner of Evil, and to expose one's own self to it. It Is to take away from
him all power of Feeling, or being hurt by the Revenge we intend; and that very
Act, which designs him the greatest Mischief, sets him at perfect Ease. This is
a Folly that may be reduced to the former Head of Weakness, and is a Branch of
That, as well as of Misery.

8. The reckoning it a most insupportable Injury and Unhappiness, and that a
Man becomes an Object of Contempt, for being a Cuckold. For how can we possibly
wrong our Judgment more, than by thinking meanly of a Man, and that he is
justly ridiculous and despicable, for the Fault of another; which he is so far
from having any hand in, that it is plain he never approved it? The Case is much
the same in our having a worse Opinion of any Man, for being a Bastard.

9. The disesteeming what is present, and our own, and such as we are in secure
and peaceable possession of; and being infinitely fond of the very same Things
when we have them not, and merely because they belong to some Body else. As if
Presence and Possession abated the real Worth of a Thing; and the not having it
were a Recommendation sufficient to raise the Price of it in our Accounts.
Virtutem incolumem odimus.
Sublatam ex oculis quaerimus invidi.
Horat. Ode 24. Lib. 3.
Poor Envious We, despise
Virtue when present; when it flies,
Stand and gaze after it with longing Eyes.
Creech. Hence came the Proverb of No Prophet being received with Honor in his
own Country. Thus to lower the Value of any thing, there needs no more than to
be the Owner and Enjoyer of it: Thus Husbands look upon their own Wives, and
Fathers upon their Children, with Indifference and Disdain. If you would put an
End to your Love, (say the Men of the Town) Marry your Mistress, and the
Business is done effectually. Thus every Other Man's Servant is better, His
Horse fleeter, His House more convenient than our Own. It Is pretty odd, I
confess, to prefer things purely imaginary, before Those that are real and
substantial; and yet this is the Case of that unreasonable Valuation we put
upon things that are absent, and at a distance, and other Peoples; upon things
Before we have them, and After we have lost them. The Reason of so unequal a
Proceeding in these two Cases last mentioned, seems to be This; That the Value
we set upon things Before we have them, is not proportioned to their real
intrinsic Worth, but to the false Idea's our own Imaginations form, or the
vain Boasts other People make of them; Both which are always bigger and more
beautiful than the Life: But Possession and Experience discover the Truth, and
then we learn to rate them after the Excellence they actually have, and the
Benefit that can be made out of them. Again; The things we have lost are looked
upon with Melancholy, and much Regret, because then we consider them entire,
and in the Gross, whereas the Use and Enjoyment we had of them was not so, but
by Piece-meals, and by little at a time. In which Men are commonly much more
unkind to Themselves, than they need to be: For they defer their own Happiness,
reserve it for a farther Day, and always promise themselves Time and
Opportunities enough for enjoying it hereafter; so that even what they have,
they are so stingy in the use of, that they are scarce sensible of what they
possess; and it is in a manner all one as if they had it not. And This seems to
be the true account, why the Passion and Concern for our Losses and our Wants,
is more vehement and visible, than the Pleasures and Satisfactions taken in
what we possess. And in this no doubt we must allow a great Mixture of Weakness
as well as Misery. We are not sufficient for full and perfect Enjoyment, and
only capable of Desiring intensely and in perfection. There is indeed a vicious
Temper of the Mind, directly opposite to That I have been speaking of; which
is, That Degree of Self-sufficiency and Satisfaction, that whatever We are, or
have, appears to us incomparably better than all the World besides. We can be
pleased, nay, we can be in common Charity with nothing but our Own; and
whatever is so, nothing can be superior, nothing equal, nothing like or
comparable to it. I dare not say this Quality argues Men any Wiser than the
other; but all the World, I believe, will admit, that it makes them Easier, and
contributes much more to their Happiness and Content.

10. The showing one's self forward and zealous upon all occasions, to resent
things warmly, and engage in Disputes with Peremptoriness and Passion, as often
as there is any fair and plausible Pretense given, of appearing to be a Man
affectionately concerned for Justice, or Religion; for promoting the Public
Good, or gaining the Love of the People. For as these are Things which ought to
be very precious, and no good Man must neglect them in their Seasons; so it
requires Discretion to choose those Seasons, and to manage and temper an honest
Zeal. Every Man that is well-disposed, is not qualified for the Undertaking;
and every Time and Company is not fit for Him that is qualified, to undertake
it in.

11. The putting on excessive Melancholy, Chap XXXIII
or suffering our selves to be really afflicted, and mourn to a great degree,
upon the Death of a Friend, or any other Calamity that befalls him: And to
imagine, that a Moderate degree of Passion upon such Occasions, argues want of
Affection and sincere Friendship. This is not only Misery, but an exceeding
Vanity too, and as common as it is vain.

12. The bearing a very great regard to those Actions, which require a great
deal of bustle and stir in the doing, and make a Noise in the World; and to
slight and undervalue all that are done in a still, sedate, and obscure manner:
As if no Effects could ever follow upon such a dull, heavy way of proceeding;
but all Men were asleep, and did nothing, that do it not with Hurry and
Clutter. In short; All those vain Preferences, which Men give to Art above
Nature, are likewise of this kind; for One of These, works with Labor and
Observation; the Other easily, quiet, and unseen. And thus whatever is swelled,
and blown up by Industry and Invention; that which cracks about our Ears, and
strikes strongly upon our Senses, (and all this is Artificial) we respect and
value highly; infinitely above That which is mild, and gentle, and simple, and
uniform, and common; for such are the Products of Nature. The former of These
awakens us into Attention; the latter advances silently, and leaves, or lays us
asleep.

13. The putting unfair and perverse Interpretations upon the good Actions of
Others; and when the Thing is well in it self, attributing it to base, or
trifling, or wicked Causes or Occasions. So did They, whom Plutarch is angry
with, for pretending, that the Death of Cato the Younger proceeded from no
other Principle, than his Fear of Caesar; And some Others yet more senselesly,
charged it upon Ambition. This is a most infallible Symptom of a sick Judgment;
a Disease that proceeds, either from Wickedness at home, and a general
Corruption of the Will and Manners, disposing Men to pervert every Thing to the
worst Sense; or else from Uneasiness and Envy against Persons that are better
than Themselves; or else from a Mis-giving Quality within, which reduces all
their Belief to the Compass and Size of their own Abilities; so measuring
others by their own Standard; believing Every one as bad as they know
Themselves to be; and absolutely incapable of doing things better, or proposing
nobler Ends in their Actions, than their own usually are. Or perhaps, as
probable an Account of this as any of the former, may be a Natural Weakness and
Littleness of Soul, which, like tender Eyes, cannot bear to look at so strong
and clear a Light, as that which Virtue sheds, when Pure, and in its native
Beauties. Nor is it amiss here to take notice of a Practice exceeding common;
which is, Men's affecting to show the Nicety of their Judgment, and the
Smartness of their Wit, in finding Faults, suppressing, extenuating, disguising
Circumstances, setting Things in their worst Light, and eclipsing the Glory of
the bravest Actions. In all which, one would wonder they should suppose any
thing worth valuing themselves upon; since it is manifest, all Dexterity of
this kind is a much greater Demonstration of their Ill Nature, than it can be
of their Parts; and as it is the Vilest and most Disingenuous, so is it the
Easiest and most Vulgar way of Wit, in the World.

14. Another, which seems to be a very convincing Testimony of the Misery of
Humane Minds, (though somewhat more nice, and out of the way of common
Observation) is, That the Soul in its calm, and sound, and composed Estate, can
rise no higher than the perception of those Objects, and the performance of
such Operations, as are Common, and Natural, and of a moderate Size: But in
order to the raising it up to such as are Divine and Supernatural, such as
admit Men into the Secrets of Heaven, it is distempered, and violently
agitated; either by vehement Impulses, Ecstasies, and Enthusiasms; or by Trances
and deep Sleeps. This I gather, not only from the Tripods and Oracles of the
Heathen Pythia, but from the authentic Accounts given us of Revelations, and
the extraordinary Manifestations God was pleased to make of Himself to
Prophets, and Holy Men in Scripture: Such as Abraham, and Ezekiel, and Daniel,
and others in the Old Testament; and St. Peter, and St. Paul in the New. All
which Instances seem to argue, that the only Natural ways of attaining to these
extraordinary Communications, are by Transport and Sleep, by Visions and
Dreams. So that our Mind, it seems, is never so Wise, as when it is out of its
Senses; nor ever so truly Awake, as in Sleep. It arrives best at its Journey's
End, by leaving the Common Road; and takes the Noblest and most successful
Flights, when its own Faculties appear most depressed; as if it were necessary
to Lose it self for the Finding somewhat better and more lofty; and to be
Miserable in order to its being Happy. This seems most Natural, Advert.
because we are assured it was most usual; not that there was an impossibility
of other Methods, but that these were best adapted to Humane Infirmities. And
therefore it is worth observing upon this Occasion, what Truth Himself
mentions, as a Prerogative, by which Moses was distinguished from other
Prophets: In that God talked with him Face to Face, as a Man talks to his
Friend; Deuteronomy. xii.
that is, Easily and Familiarly, without any of those vehement Commotions of
Body, or extatick Raptures of Soul, which the rest of Mankind used to feel upon
such Occasions. And this proves, both that the Other Method was so ordinary as
to justify our Author's Observation; and yet that there was no utter
Incapacity for this freer way, in Humane Nature, (which deserved this
additional Remark upon it); for God, who is absolute Master of Nature, can
reveal himself in what manner he sees sit.

15. Lastly, Can any greater Desect or Misery be imagined incident to the Minds
of Men, than the Neglect and Disesteem of their best and most useful Faculty?
And yet This is almost every one's Case, while we extol Memory and Imagination,
and are fond of excelling in These, but let the Judgment lie idle and
unimprov'd; no Care taken to employ it, nor any account at all made of it. Do
but look abroad a little, and you will soon be convinced of what I say. For
what are all the neat Harangues, the learned Treatises, the quaint Discourses,
the celebrated Sermons and Books, with which the World is so mightily taken;
What, in a Word, are all the Productions of this fruitful Age, (the Works of
some few Great Men only excepted) but common Places and Quotations, tacked and
sil'd up together; a Collection of other Men's Labors put into a new Method,
with some few Strokes and Illustrations, and so naturalized, and made all our
Own? And what can we make of this, but a work of Memory; the Excellency of a
Schoolboy, and That which requires very little Brains or Trouble, as to all
that part which we pick up from Authors, and find ready cut to our Hands; And
the Work of Imagination, for those little Graces and Garnitures, which make up
the much less part, added by our Selves? This oftentimes is mere Vanity; no one
Stroke of a Judicious Man, no one eminently Good Quality discernible in it; and
accordingly the Authors themselves, under whose Names good Things are
published, are often known to be Persons of weak Parts, and very indifferent
Judgment; loose in their Principles, and debauched in their Morals. And how
much better than all this is it, to hear a good honest Farmer, or a common
Shopkeeper, talking in their own Gibberish, plain downright Truths, in a dry
rough way, without Trick or Dress to adorn and set them off; and giving good
useful Advice, which is the Natural Product of sound Sense, and an
unsophisticated Judgment?

Understanding. The Will.
The Will is in no degree inferior in Misery, but has at least as many
Sources; and the Instances of it are more deplorable, than any under the former
Head. These are indeed innumerable; some few of them are such as follow. 1. The
being more desirous to be thought Virtuous and Good, than really to be so; and
when one does good Actions, doing them more for the sake of Others, than our
Own; making Reputation a more powerful Motive and Principle of Virtue, than
Conscience; coveting and taking greater Satisfaction in the Commendation and
Applause of the World, than in the secret Consciousness and Comfort of having
done our Duty. 2. The being much more forward and eager to revenge an Injury or
Affront, than to acknowledge a Favor, and return a Kindness. Insomuch that to
own an Obligation is a perfect Trouble, and Mortification, a lessening one's
self; but the taking Satisfaction reputed a Pleasure, a Pride, an Advantage.
And what can be a greater Reproach to our Nature, what more betray the Baseness
and Malignity of it, than the verifying that Observation; Gratia oneri est,
Ultio in quaestu habetur
Thanks are a Toil and a Burden; but a Retaliation of Injuries is esteemed an
Addition and a Gain? 3. The being more violent and fierce in the Passion of
Hatred, than in That of ^^ve; more disposed to, more vehement in Detraction and
Calumnies, than in our Commendations and good Characters of Men and Actions; to
seed upon Evil rather than Good; and entertain ill Reports, and an odious
Representation of our Neighbor, with more sensible Relish than his Praises; To
enlarge more willingly upon These, allow them a greater Share in our
Conversation, to employ one's Wit, and Arts of Expression upon this Subject
rather than the Contrary. As the generality of Historians, Orators, and Poets
do, who are cold and flat in relating Men's Virtues, but sharp and poignant,
eloquent and moving in the Description of their Vices: And thus we find, that
the Expressions, and Figures of Rhetoric, which serve to expose and blacken
Men and Things, are mighty different, much more full and copious, more
emphatical and significative, than Those which are employed in Recommendation
and Praise. 4. The declining Evil, Book II. Chap. 3.
and addicting one's Self to Good, upon false and improper Ends; when This is
not the result of Virtuous Motions and Inclinations from within, nor the
Dictate of Natural Reason, nor the Love of Virtue, nor the Sense of Duty; but
some Consideration altogether foreign, and wide of the Matter. Some mean and
sordid Prospect of Gain and Interest; the Itch of Vainglory, the Hope of
Advancement, the Fear of Reproach, Compliance with Custom, Obsequiousness to
the Company; and, in a Word, the not doing Good for the sake of doing it, and
because it becomes us, and binds our Conscience; but upon some occasional
Motive, and external Circumstance, that happened to fall in with us at that
time. And at this rate, the greatest part of Mankind are only good by Chance.
Which gives the true Reason of their being so extremely various, and unequal,
and sickle, and inconsistent with Themselves; for so must all things needs be,
that are governed by Impulse and Accident; and nothing but true and
well-weigh'd Principles, grounded upon Duty and Reason, can produce a steady,
constand, and uniform Virtue. 5. The lessening our Affection for the Persons we
have wronged, and that for no other Reason, but merely because we have done
them an Injury. Is not this very odd? What account can be given of it? We
cannot pretend that this Coldness always proceeds from Apprehensions of
Revenge; for perhaps the injured Party has no such Thought, and is as kindly
disposed to Us, as ever: But the Reason seems to be, that the very Sight and
Remembrance of him accuses Us to our Selves, and our Conscience takes these
Occasions to fly in our Faces, and reproach our Baseness and Indiscretion. So
that if the Person offending does not abate of his Kindness, this is a good
Argument that he did not offend wilfully, and is not conscious to himself of
any thing that can give him a just Dissatisfaction at his own Proceedings. For,
commonly speakking, Every one that offends knowingly, and with a malicious
Design, changes in his Affection afterward, and either turns an Enemy, or at
least very cold and indifferent; according to that usual Proverb, Chi offend
may non pardonna.
He that does the Wrong, never forgives. 6. And Observation not much unlike the
former, may be made, concerning Persons who have highly obliged us: The Sight
of such is often an Uneasiness; it upbraids us with a Debt, and awakens
ungrateful Remembrances of our Want, either of Disposition, or of Power to
require Then. Nay, sometimes Men are so abominably wicked, as even to rejoice
at the Death of a Benefactor, because it eases them of this sort of Pain,
according to the Remark of an Old Author; Some the more they have been obliged,
the worse they hate: A small Debt makes a Man your Friend, but a great one will
be sure to make him your Enemy. 7. The taking Delight in Mischief; being glad
at the Pains, and Dangers, and Difficulties of other People; and conceiving a
secret Indignation and Displeasure at their Prosperity and Promotion. Nor do I
mean here any such Envy or Uneasiness as proceeds from Passion and particular
Resentment; for this is chargeable upon the Vices of single Persons only. But
the Thing I aim at is the common Temper, and natural Condition of Mankind in
general, which, without any Pique, or Spleen, or Provocation, disposes even
Good Men Suave Mari magno, etc. Lib. 2.
to receive a sort of Satisfaction from the Risques of Men in Seas and Storms;
to be angry at any Preference of our Friends before Us, either in point of
Merit or Fortune; to laugh at any little Misfortune that happens to them *; All
this argues the Seeds of Ill Nature to be thick sown, and to have taken deep
Root in us.


The First of these Instances, which of all the rest seems most hard-hearted,
Lucretius gives a much more innocent account of, and acquits it of the severe
Imputation laid upon it here, in the beginning of this Second Book. And indeed,
what is said There upon that one Instance, is applicable to all Here mentioned,
which are owing to the Love of our Selves, and comparing our own Case with that
of other People. It Is pleasant when the Seas are rough, to stand,
And view another's Danger, safe at Land;
Not 'cause he is troubled; but it is sweet to see
Those Cares and Fears, from which our Selves are free
Mr. Creech. And sure there is a great difference between Malignity and
Self-Love; between Tenderness for our own Safety, and a Malicious Joy in
Calamities and Dangers.

Misery, (...) of Spiritual Miscries.
I only add, That the World abounds with Three sorts of Men, which outdo all
the rest, both in Number and Reputation; and those are The Superstitious, The
Formal, and The Pedantick; These, though they are concerned in different Matters,
move by different Springs, and act upon different Stages, (for the Three
principal Topics are Religion, Common Conversation, and Learning; and each of
These is the Field appropriated to each of these Persons; Religion to the
Superstitious; Common Conversation, and the Dealings of Humane Life, to the
Formal; and Learning to the Pedants) But These, I say, though engaged in Matters
so distant, are yet all cast in the same Mould, and agree in their general
Qualities and Characters; That they are all weak and mean Souls, extremely
defective either in Natural or Acquired Abilities, incapable or ignorant; Men
of dangerous Opinions, sick Judgments, nay sick of a Disease that scarce ever
admits of a Recovery. For all the Pains and Trouble you give your self to
instruct these Men better, is but so much Time and Labor lost upon them: They
are so much in the Wrong, and so highly conceited that none who differ from
them can be in the Right, that no good is ever to be done. If you will take
Their Judgments, none are comparable to themselves for Virtue or for Wisdom.
Obstinacy and Self-sufficiency, which every where has too great an Ascendent,
reigns Absolute here, and is in its proper Kingdom. Whoever has once drunk in
the Infection of these Evils, there are little or no Hopes left of ever making
him a sound Man again. For what is there more exquisitely foolish, what more
stiff and inflexible than these Fellows? They are secured by a double Barrier
from the Conquests of Reason and Persuasion; First, by their Weakness, and
Natural Incapacity, which disables them from seeing the Strength of Arguments
and Reproofs; and then, by a false Confidence in their own Excellencies above
the rest of the World, which makes them despise all Others, as their
Inferiors, unable to advise, and unfit to reform Those, who are already so
much wiser and better than They.

As for the Superstitious, The Superstitious. See Book II. Chap. 5.
they are highly Injurious to God, and dangerous Enemies to True Religion. They
disguise themselves with a Mask of Piety, and Zeal, and Reverence, and Love for
God; and this Jest they carry so far, as to teaze and torment themselves with
Austerities and Sufferings, that were never required at their Hands. And what
is to be done with such infatuated Wretches as These, who imagine that those
voluntary Afflictions are highly meritorious; that the Almighty is indebated to
them, and much obliged by Works which he never commanded; and that all the rest
ought to be released in consideration of These? Tell them, they take things by
the wrong Handle; that they stretch, and pervert, and misunderstand the
Scriptures, and lay Burdens upon themselves, more and heavier than God ever
laid. Their Answer is, that They intend well; (and that Intention they doubt
not will Save them) that what they do is from a Principle of Piety and
Devotion, and cannot want Merit and Acceptance upon that Account. Besides,
there is something of Interest in all this, which you can never prevail with
them to part with; for what Gain is to be proposed in Prospect, what
Satisfaction to be received in Present, which can make them amends for the
mighty Expectations and Raptures of that fond Notion, that by this means God
becomes Their Debtor, and they merit at His Hands?

The Formalists are a sort of People entirely devoted of Form, Formalists.
and Show, and Outside; and These think themselves at liberty to indulge their
Passions, and gratify any, though never so unlawful, Desires, without Check
and Control, provided they do not offend against the Letter of the Law, nor
omit any of those external Observances, which are required in their Behavior,
and looked upon as the Rules of Living. Here you shall see an old griping Jew,
that has brought God knows how many Families to Beggary and Ruin; but he has
done no hurt in all this: For he never asked for more than his Own, at least
what he thought so; and if upon these Demands, Arrests, and Suits, and Prisons
have ensued, yet he only suffered the Law to take its Course; and who can blame
this honest Man for coming by his Right in the way of Justice? But O Good God!
how many good things are neglected, and how many wicked and barbarous things
done, under the pretense of Forms, and the Protection of the Laws! Nothing can
be truer, than that Extremity of Right is Extremity of Wrong. He that makes
This the Rule of all his Proceedings, and allows himself to take the Advantage
of the Law upon every occasion, is so far from an honest Man, that he is one of
the most dangerous Knaves. Such Reason was there for that Saying used to this
purpose, God deliver us from the Formalists.

By Pedants, I mean a sort of prating Fellows, who first tumble over Books with
great Pains and Study, and afterward let fly in all Companies, and vend all
they have picked up in their Reading, with as much Impertinence and
Ostentation; and all this too, to turn a Penny, and promote their Interest, or
their Credit by it. There are not in the World a Pack of more little Mercenary
Wretches, more unfit for Business, and yet at the same time more forward, and
presuming, and conceited of Themselves. Hence perhaps it is, that in all
Countries, and all Languages, Pedant and Scholar are Terms of Ridicule and
Reproach. To do a thing aukwardly, is to do it like a Scholar. To behave one's
self like a Clown, and be ignorant of the World, is to be a mere Scholar. Such
Scholars I mean as These I am now treating of; for these Reflections do not
concern Learned Men in general, but such superficial Pretenders to it, as are
only walking and living Nomenclatures; that have a Memory stuffed full of Other
Men's Knowledge, but none at all of their Own. Their Judgment, their Will, and
their Consciences are not one whit improved by it; They are never the wiser,
nor more prudent; never the more dextrous in Business, nor the more honest and
virtuous, for all the Schemes and Institutions they have run through. They can
repeat These, but they have not digested them; are Masiers of the Speculative
part, but know nothing of the Application and Practice. So that all the fruit
of their study is but to make them the more acquired, more egregious Fools;
more full of Themselves, and more noisie and insupportable in all Companies.
They swell their Memory, but sink their Wit, and adulterate their
Understandings. And in such Persons as These, That Misery is most conspicuous,
(...) Parag. 9. (...).
which we lately placed the last of that sort, with which the Intellectual
Faculty of the Mind seems principally affected.

CHAP. XL. V. Presumption.
Pliny's Description; For this is indeed the Deformity of our Nature, the Bane
of our Minds, the Source of the worst and most erroneous Opinions, both Public
and Private; and yet, as bad as it is, it is a Vice natural to, and born with
every Man. Now we shall do well to consider this Presumption in its several
Respects, above, below, upon the level, within, and without us. As the Object
is God, and the Celestial Bodies, Terrestrial Bodies, and Beasts; Man our
Equal, and our own Selves: And the whole Matter will turn at last upon these
Two Points, The setting too high an Estimate upon our Own, and too low upon
Other Things; Every Man in this Sense deserving the Character given by our
Blessed Savior, of the Pharisees, They trusted in Themselves, and despised
Others. A Word or two now upon each of the forementioned Particulars.

Presumption in respect of God.
but true it is, that) all Superstition and false Worship, the affected
Excesses, and the Wilful Defects in our Religious Services, are entirely owing
to the want of a sufficient Esteem and Reverence for God; the not being
sensible what sort of Being He is, and entertaining such Opinions and Idea's of
the Divine Nature, as are not sufficiently lofty, and pure, and refined. Now by
saying sufficiently so, I would not be understood, that our Apprehensions
should bear any proportion to the Essential Greatness of his Majesty; for God
is Infinite, and admits of no proportion at all. Consequently there is no
possibility in Nature, that our Conceptions should ever soar up to such a
height and sufficiency as This; And therefore I mean that sufficiency only to
be wanting, which Nature has made us capable of, and Duty requires from us. We
do not raise nor direct our Minds, nor dart our Thoughts strong, or high
enough, when we form Notions of the Divinity: Alas! why do I say, not high and
strong enough? when it is but too evident, and our Actions speak it out, that
we entertain very feeble, and mean, and low Apprehensions of him. And we serve
him indeed accordingly; we offer him Things most unworthy of him, and deal with
him more basely and disrespectfully, than we pretend, or dare, to do, with
several of his Creatures. We discourse, not of his Works only, (which yet
command some Regard because they are His) but we talk of his Essence and
Majesty, determine his Will, interpret his Judgments, pass Sentence upon the
Dispensations of his Providence, and all this more peremptorily, more sawcily,
than any Man of good Manners would take upon him to do, with the Counsels and
Proceedings of his Prince. And yet every one thinks he may make bold with his
God in Cases, where to use the same Freedoms with any Person of Honor, would
be condemned for insufferable Rudeness and Contempt. A great many Men would
reject such Service and Homage, and think themselves highly injured and
affronted, if we should talk so manly of them, and make use of their Name upon
such trifling Occasions, and in so contemptuous a manner as we do that of God.
We undertake to manage him, go about to flatter and caress, to bend and bring
him over, to bribe and to compound with him; nay, I might tremble to say it,
some think even to brave and dare him, to snarle and grumble, to take things
ill, and be exceeding angry at him. Caesar had his Pilot hoist Sails boldly,
and fear nothing though Winds and Seas, and Stars and Fate were against him, but
buoy himself up with this Confidence, in opposition to all Difficulties, That
He who had Caesar aboard, could not miscarry. Augustus, after having been
Tempest-beaten at Sea, took upon him, to set Neptune at Definance, and by way
of Revenge, ordered his Image to be taken away from among the rest of the Gods,
and excluded the solemn Procession at the Ludi Circenses. Xerxes scourged the
Seas, and sent a Challenge to Mount Athos. The Thracians, when it Thunders and
Lightens, shoot Arrows up against Heaven, with all their Might, that by this
means they may bring the Gods to Reason. And there goes a Story of a certain
Christian King, in a neighboring Country, whom when God had severely
chastized, he swore he would be revenged on him; and to make his Words good,
commanded, That for Ten Years next ensuing, no Person within his Dominions
should dare to put up any Prayers to God, or make mention of his Name any other
way. Audax Iapeti genus -- mdash;
Nil mortalibus arduum.
Coelum ipsum petimus stultitia, neque
Per nostrum patimur seelus
Iracunda Jovem ponere sulmina.
HOrat. Lib. 1. Od. 3.
Naught is too hard for Man.
Grown Gians in Impiety,
Our Impious Folly dares the Sky.
We dare assault Jove's glorious Throne,
Nor (still averse to his Command)
Will we permit his lifted Hand
To lay his Thunder down.
Creech. But not to insist longer upon such prodigious Extravagances, Does not
the general Temper and Practice of Mankind justify that Character given by
Pliny; That no Creature is more miserable, and yet none more proud than Man?
For, on the one hand, he forms to himself vast Conceits of the particular Love,
and Regard, and tender Care God has for him; thinks himself the chief, the
only Favorite of Heaven; and yet this Darling serves him after a most
unbecoming manner, and worse than the poorest and most despicable of all his
Creatures. How then shall we reconcile these Extremes? How can a Life so
wretched, a Homage so poor and base, meet and dwell together in same Person,
with such glorious Notions of Himself, and a Preference so vastly great above
all the Creation besides? Is not This to be an Angel and a Swine at once? And
indeed Men, who entertain these Opinions, and dishonor God, by living in a
Disagreement with them (as the generality of Mankind do) must be content to
bear the Reproach of a great Philosopher to some Vicious and Hypocritical
Christians; That they were the bravest Fellows in the World at talking, but the
pitifullest and most contemptible Wretches in their Lives and Actions.

God, Nature.
to the World, and to Nature in general. That all These are in great Pain and
Anxiety upon our Account; That They only watch for our Safety and Preservation;
and This makes us look upon Calamitous Accidents with Surprise; but especially,
to be perfectly astonished at Death, as if it were a most strange Thing how
That should break in upon us, notwithstanding so many Guards that keep Centry
about our Persons, and are all (as we imagine) concerned to secure us from it.
For this, among other Reasons, few People ever persuade themselves, that any
Hour is their last; but almost every Body, suffers himself to be cheated with
false Hopes, at the very Instant of expiring. And what is all This but
Presumption? We think our selves too significant; and fondly fancy, that this
whole Universe must bear a part in our Death; that some great and general
Revolution will happen upon it; that all things decay in proportion with our
own Bodies, and fail one another in the same Degrees They fail Us; That there
is no avoiding it, but They must all undergo the same fatal Shock, the same
Dissolution that We do. And in this Universal Delusion, Mankind live, like
People upon the Water, who, when their own Vessel moves, seem to draw Houses,
and Towns, and Heaven, and Earth along with them. No Body considers that he is
single, and but One; a very small and inconsiderable Part of the Creation: One
out of many Millions, whom few have any Interest in, and perhaps fewer yet are
the worse for losing; and the Matter is so far from every Body's going along
with him, that scarce any Body will so much as miss him when he is gone; no
more than a Grain of Sand diminishes the Seashore, or the falling of a Star,
changes the Face of the Sky.

Man pleases himself, that the Heaven, the Stars, and all that Glorious
Movement over our Heads, and indeed the whole Frame and Order of this Material
World, was thus created and constituted merely for his Sake: As if that
Description of the Heathen were his due, That Tot circa unum caput tumultuantes
Deos.
so many Gods were perpetually Ambitious, and contending about his single
Person. And this is a very extravagant Imagination indeed. He is lodged here in
the last and lowest Story of the World, at a great distance from the Aetherial
Roof; a place, that in comparison of the purer Regions above us, may be called
the Sink of the World, where all the Lees and Dregs settle, with Creatures of
the meanest Condition, and liable to receive all those Evacuations of Rain and
Vapors, which fall down upon his Head; nay, from These he receives his very
Subsistence; he lies open to Accidents, that beset and oppress him on every
Side; and yet this poor Wretch looks upon himself as the Master and Commander
in Chief of the Universe. It Is true indeed, Almighty God has given him a
Dominion over some of his Fellow Creatures; and it is likewise true, that the
rest over which he has not the same Dominion, are contrived for his Mighty
Benefit and Covenience; but it will not follow from hence, that the whole
Creation had no other End than his Service; nor that those vast Globes of
Light, and so many Pure Incorruptible Bodies, whose least Virtue is not
distinctly known, and which he must be content to gaze at with Wonder and
Astonishment, were framed and are continued in this Regularity and Perpetuity
of Motion, for Man only. From hence, it is confessed, this Indigent Wretch
derives his Food, his Maintenance, and unspeakable Conveniences; The Rays, the
Beauty, the Heat of the Sun, The Rain, and Dew, and other Distillations from
Heaven cherish and sustain him; and This, no doubt, was one Intent of the
bountiful God that made them. But shall we presume to determine from hence,
that this was the Sole Intent and Use of them? Shall we call the Heavens and
the Elements our Own, and pretend that Their Motions are only so many Tasks for
Our Profit? This were, as if the Beggar should call himself Proprietor of the
Wealth out of which he is relieved; and the Benefits in this Case are so
general, so far from being confined to Man alone, that the meanest Fowl of the
Air may as well make the same Pretensions; Nay, in some Sense, these Creatures
may make them better; For Man, who receives Conveniences, has some
Inconveniences too from the Bodies above him; he has none of them at his own
Disposal, he cannot understand how far their Efficacy will extend; nor make any
certain Conclusions, what will be hereafter; and this puts him into perpetual
Uneasinesses, and Fears and Amazements, lest these Bodies should not keep their
Course, nor shed propitous Influences, but occasion Barren and sickly Seasons,
and so every thing should prove Unkindly and in Confusion; and under the Weight
of these Apprehensions he lies and trembles, for what shall fall upon him from
Those very Bodies, of which he vainly thinks himself Lord and Master; Whereas
Beasts, as they receive the same Advantages of Life and Substance with our
Selves, so they receive it without any Disturbance of Mind, or disquieting
Presages of the Future; yea, and without any of those discontented Murmurs and
Complaints at what is Past too, which restless and ungrateful Man is ever
bewailing himself in. I conclude this Observation with that Passage of Seneca;
Non nos causa mundo sumus, hypemem aestatemque referendi, suas ista leges
habent quibus divina exercentur; nimis nos suspicimus, si digni nobis videmur,
propter quos tanta moveantur. Non tanta coelo nobiscum societas est, ut nostro
fato sit ille quoque siderum fulgor.
We are not the Proper Cause of the World's enjoying the several Seasons, and
their Vici ssitudes; Those Things are ordered by Laws peculiar to themselves,
in the observance whereof the Will and Purposes of God are executed. We think
too highly of our selves, if we suppose we are of such Worth and Consequence,
that such and so many Glorious Motions should be contrived, merely for our
sakes; nor is our Correspondence with Heaven so intimate, that all the use of
the Stars should be to direct, or to declare our Fortunes.

Note. Some Persons, since the Improvement of Astronomy, have given us juster
Notions of the Magnitude of these Heavenly Bodies; That several of them equal,
and some very much exceed the Proportion of this Earthly Globe; have
entertained Notions of a Plurality of Worlds, furnished with Inhabitants, as
different from Those we know, as the Regions they inhabit are. A Notion, which
I only mention upon this Occasion, to hint, that there may be many Uses unknown
to us, served by the Heavenly Bodies; And because the Opinion seems to carry no
Impiety at all in it, but pretends to consult the Glory of God, by exciting Men
to a greater Admiration of his Infinite Power, and Wisdom, and Goodness,
exerted in so much a greater Variety of Creatures, than what we are or can be
acquainted with, I thought it not amiss to insert it here; though, as I said,
it is a Notion only; and what, as we cannot have an absolute Certainty for, so
we have none against it. If Reason give any Countenance to this Speculation,
Revelation no where forbids it. For Moses, who made it his Business to describe
the World we inhabit, had no Reason to mention Others, in which we have no
Concern; and his not mentioning Them, was agreeable to the Design of his
History; but does not exclude the Reality or Possibility of any such other
Systems, as were foreign to his Purpose, and so in no Degree necessary to be
taken Notice of. The Reader, if he be desirous of farther Satisfaction in this
Point, may please to consult the Eighth of Dr. Bentley's Excellent Sermons
against Atheism. p. 4, etc.

Animalt.
Beasts and all Living Creatures, Man looks upon them with Scorn and Contempt,
as if they were of no Consideration at all. Forgetting, that they are formed by
the Hands of the same Almighty Artificer, and are reckoned among the Riches and
Possessions of the same Lord; That the same Earth is our Common Mother, and
that They and He, are of the same Family; and consequently ought not to be
slighted and disdained, as if they were worthy no part of his Concern, nor bore
any Relation at all to Him. Hence it is, that these Poor Creatures are so much
abused; and treated with an Insolence and Cruelty, that flies back upon Their
and Our Common Master; for it is an Affront, and an Impiety, to deal thus by
any Thing of His making, such as he does not only Own, but expresss a
Tenderness for; thinks them worthy his own Care, and has appointed certain
Laws for their Benefit and Preservation; such as, though inferior to Us in the
most valuable Parts, yet he seems in some Things to have given the Advantage
to; nay, such, as in several Instances, shame and reproach our Follies, and are
therefore recommended in Scripture, as Masters for Man to be sent to School to.
But This has been already mentioned in another Chapter.

It is indeed a Doctrine commonly received, that the World was made for Man,
and Man for God; which in some Sense is certainly true, and what I have said is
no derogation from it. For, besides that Instruction, which all the Creatures
in general contribute to, whether those, Above or Below us; Those useful Hints
and Reflections they minister concerning Almighty God, Our Selves, and Our
Duty: Some sort of Use, with regard to Profit, or Serviceableness, or Delight,
may be drawn from every one of them in particular. From that Part Above us,
which we have a less distinct Knowledge of, and which is not at all in our
Disposal; This Firmament so nobly Vaulted, so richly decked with Light, and all
those rolling Fires above us; The Advantage Man receives from Them is That of
Contemplation only. His Soul by These is raised and transported to admire and
to love, to fear and to honor, and to pay most profound Reverence to the
Almighty Master and Maker of so Glorious a Frame. In this respect it was no ill
Remark of Anaxagoras, that Man was created to contemplate Heaven; and some of
the old Philosophers accordingly gave him the Title of (...). From the
Creatures in this lower World, he reaps Advantage and Assistance, receives
great Supplies, and Service properly so called. But for Men to persuade
themselves, that God in making all these Things, had no other End in his
Thoughts and Designs, but purely to consult the Convenience of Mankind; This is
too great a Stretch upon the Doctrine mentioned just now, and an Arrogance
which I think may very deservedly be charged with all that Folly and
Presumption I have laid upon it.

Man himself.
has Man for its Object; and this must be considered with regard to Himself,
or to his Fellows; Within, as to the forming of his Judgment and private
Opinions; or Without, as those Sentiments are imparted by conversing with other
People. And upon this Occasion we will insist upon Three Things, as so many
Topics in close connection and consequence upon one another; There Degrees of
Humane Presumption.
by which Mankind betray at once their great Weakness and great Presumption;
and in both, great Folly. The First of these consists in Believing and
Disbelieving. (I meddle not here with Religion, or Divine Faith, but desire my
Reader to recollect what was said in the Preface,) Where Two contrary Vices are
observable, which are exceeding common in Humane Life. 1. Believing and
Misbelieving.
One of These, and the more general of the Two, is Levity and Credulity; that
is, a Disposition to receive Things, and be persuaded too easily, upon the
slightest Inducements; so that to gain our Assent, any the least Circumstance
of Probability, or Pretense of Authority is sufficient. This is the effect of
Easiness and Simplicity in the worst Sense of the Word; a Softness and Weakness
of Mind, such as we observe in mean Parts and Education, the Ignorant and
Effeminate, the Superstitious and Fanciful, Men of great Zeal, and little
Judgment, which are all like Wax, always in a readiness to receive any new
Impression, and suffer Themselves to be led about by the Ears with every idle
Story. Hence it is, that we see the greatest part of the World carried about
with every blast of Opinion; and possessed with Notions, before either Age or
Maturity of Judgment render them capable of choosing; and accordingly These
Opinions are not the result of Consideration and Choice, but the Prepossessions
of Time and Custom; the Rudiments of their Infancy, the Mode of their Country,
or it may be, mere Chance, have taken fast hold of them; so fast, that they are
inseparably wedded to, absolutely subdued and enslaved by them; and no
Arguments are able to loosen these Prejudices, and set their Minds at liberty
from them. Veluti tempestate delati ad quamcunque disciplinam, tanquam ad saxum
adhaerescunt.
Some violent Gush of Wind drives them upon an Opinion, and there they cling,
as if they were to save themselves from a Sterm, by keeping close to that Rock.
Thus indeed the World is managed; We take Things upon Trust, and depend upon
other People. Unusquisque mavult credere quam judicare, versat nos and
praecipitat traditus per manus error; Ipsa consuotudo assentiendi periculosa
and lubrica.
Each Man is willing to save himself the trouble of Examining; and had rather
believe than judge: A Mistake that has passed through many Hands successively,
turns and tumbles us about at pleasure: And all this from a Custom of assenting
too easily, which is exceeding dangerous and unfaithful. Now this Credulity, so
common in the World, though it be really a very great Instance of Weakness, yet
is it not without a large Mixture of Presumption too: For, to receive and stick
by Opinions, and maintain them for certain Truths, without knowing any thing at
all of the Matter, this is too much in all Conscience; and therefore some
little Enquiry is made into the Causes, and Reasons, and Consequences, though
none at all is made concerning the Truth of the Thing. We commonly ask, What
account can be given of This? or What can be the manner of bringing That about?
all along taking the Mattr of Fact for granted, and that Things really are as
they are represented; when there is nothing at all in it. We write Tracts,
manage Arguments, engage in Disputes, enquire curiously after Causes and
Effects of a Thousand Things, which never had any Foundation in Nature; and the
whole Argument on both sides is false. One contends it is This way, another
That way, and in truth it neither is, nor ever was Any way at all. How many
Jests and Banters, pretended Miracles, sham Visions, and counterfeit
Revelations, have crafty People imposed upon Ours, and some late Ages of the
World? And why should a Man believe such Pretensions to Events, neither Humane
nor Natural, when they may be confounded and disproved by Natural and Humane
Methods; when Reason can say nothing for them, and Revelation is so far from
giving them Countenance, that it says a great deal against them? Truth and
Falsehood have Faces and Teatures alike; Their Mien, their Relish, their Motions
resemble one another, and the same Eye judges of them both. Ita sunt sinitima
salfa veris, ut in praecipitem locum non debeat se sapiens committere.
Truth and Falsehood (says one) border so close upon (...) another, that (...)
wise Man should not trust himself upon the Brink of them, but move warily, for
fear of sliding into the Wrong. No Man ought to be believed concerning Matters
above the Power and Understanding of a Man; except he come with Authority from
above, and bring such Credentials along with him, as are supernatural, and
exceed the Operations of Humane Strength; and such no Testimony can be, but the
Divine. But it is to God alone that this Prerogative of right belongs, To be
believed in whatever he says, for this single Reason, because He says it.

The other Vice opposite to This, is a Stupid and Obstinate Raslmess, which
condemns at all adventures, and rejects every thing for false, which Men either
do not understand, or are loath to believe; and therefroe will by no means have
That true, which Interest or Inclination makes them wish may not be so. This is
a Property more especially visible in such as abound in their own Sense, and
think Themselves more capable and more judicious than their Neighbors; such as
Pedantick Pretenders to Learning, Men addicted to Dispute, and Those that are
violent in any Party, whether of Church or State. They fancy some little
sharpness in their Wit, and that They see farther into Things than the
generality of People do; and This, with a Bias of their own within, makes them
forward and sierce; They take upon them to determine every thing with an Air of
Authority, and expect, that their Sentence should be received for Law. This
Vice is yet worse and greater than the former; for it is the Extremity of Folly
and Madness, to think we know the utmost Bounds of Possibilities; the secret
Springs and full Extent of Nature; that We can comprehend the Operations of
God, and pronounce that He is able, and what He will please to do; To measure
all Truth and Falsehood by our own Capacities and Understanding; and yet This
ought to be the Measure of True and False, to justify the Confidence and the
Fierceness, which these sorts of Men express in all their Disputes and
Definitions of Things: For this is the Eternal Jargon they run you down with,
That Is Nonsense, That Is False, That Is Impossible and Absurd. And yet how many
Things are there, which for a time have been thought extremely ridiculous, and
rejected as impossible, and afterward have brought such Evidence of their
Truth, that we have been forced to acknowledge and yield to them; nay, and
after These have been established, we have by Them been led to the entertaining
of Others yet more surprising and odd than the former? and on the other hand,
How many that have been received for Gospel, have in time lost all their
Veneration and Credit, and been discovered to be mere Errors and Impostures,
and idle Fancies?

2. Ass^ming and Cond^mning.
is the being positive and stiff in asserting or denying, approving or
condemning, according as we have been led to entertain or reject Opinions,
without sufficient Grounds for our Belief or Mistrust. This differs from the
former only in degree, excepting that it adds Peremptoriness and Obstinacy to
it, and so the Presumption is worse and more apparent. That Easiness and
Credulity hardens in time, and by degrees degenerates into a Self-Conceit, and
Positiveness, which no Arguments can conquer, no Persuasions move or correct.
Nay, sometimes the Humor is carried on so far, that Men are more eager in
asserting what they do not know, than what they do. Majorem fidem homines
adhibent iis quae non intelligunt; cupiditate humani ingenii lubentius obscura
cre^untur.
Men persuade themselves more firmly of the things they least understand, and
assent with greater readiness to Points dark and mysterious, that they may be
thought to comprehend what really they do not, and from a natural eagerness of
the Mind, that catches at every thing greedily. It is counted a Reflection to
be out at any Point that is started; or to yield a Dispute, in which a Man is
once engaged; and therefore Men discourse with Resolution and Obstinacy, and
great Assurance, and come ready fixed and determined to maintain their Ground
at any rate, how little soever they have to offer in defense of it. Now this
exceeding Positiveness, and abounding in one's Own Sense, are commonly Signs of
Brutality and Ignorance, attended with Arrogance and Folly.

Presumption, 3. Persuading.
is, The persuading others, recommending and propagating our own Opinion; and
This, not in a mild and gentle Method of fair Reasoning; but with Authority,
and in a Dogmatical way; to impose it, as if they were obliged in Duty to
believe us, and ought not to ask Questions, or doubt of any thing we say. Now
what insupportable Tyranny and Usurpation is This? He that has received an
Opinion, reckons it a work of Charity to win others over, and convince as many
as he can of it too; and for the better effecting this Charitable Design, he
gives it all the Strength and Advantage he can; represents every thing in its
best Light, and adds from his own Invention, as much more, as he thinks may be
for his Purpose, to make amends for any Defect or Opposition, which he suspects
may be met with, from the Apprehension of the Person he proposes the Matter to.
And, generally speaking, there is not any thing for which Men are more tenderly
concerned, than for the putting about their Opinions, and gaining as many
Proselytes as they can. Nemo sibi tantum errat, sed aliis erroris causa and
author est.
No Man is content to be mistaken alone, but every one draws in others into the
same Error with himself. Nay, so zealous are Men in this Particular, that
where ordinary means of Persuasion are found insufficient, the Defect is
supplied by Violence and Terror, Sword, and Fire, and Faggot. This is properly
the Vice of Dogmatical and Ambitious People; such as aim at absolute Dominion,
and would sain be governing and prescribing to all the World. And, for the
facilitating this Design, and to captivate Men's Understandings, they make use
of Two Artifices. The First is, to lay down some general Propositions, which
are termed Fundamental Principles; and such as must be presupposed and granted
on all hands; and from These they tell you, you must be so far from departing,
that you are not allowed so much as to Dispute, or admit the least Doubt,
whether they be true or not. Upon These they raise what Superstructure they
please, and so bring the World over to their side; which has been a very
successful Cheat, in propagating many gross Errors, and giving Authority to
Things absolutely false. And indeed the Fraud lies chiefly in Those Principles,
which ought to be Truths Self-evident, and clear to every considering Man; but
Some have been advanced for such, which upon strict examination will be found,
not only as disputable, but as weak, as false, as any of the Conclusions
endeavored to be drawn from them; and the Propositions contrary to These,
carry at least the same Face of Probability, and have as much to say for
themselves.

Some eminent Persons we know of late have taken upon them quite to alter and
overthrow the established, (...)
and so long uncontested Principles and Rules of the Ancients, in Astrology,
Physic, Geometry, and concerning the Nature and Motion of the Winds. Now all
the Propositions and Notions of Men are equal to be sure, and ought to have the
same Authority with us, excepting only so far as Reason gives one the Advantage
above another. Truth does not depend upon the Credit or Testimony of Man; nor
are there any Propositions that command an absolute Assent, and whose Authority
is uncontestable, but what God has been pleased to reveal; the rest are mere
Vanity and Pretense, that challenge Assent so imperiously from us. Now these
Gentlemen require us to take their Word, and swallow All they set before us,
without chewing; not any Trial or Examination is allowed you, which is the
greatest Injustice and Tyranny in the World. God (as was observed before) has
this Right incommunicable to any beside Himself, to command our Assent in all
he says, upon this score merely, because he says it. Where, by God's saying it,
is included the Message of all those that are sent, and attested by him, and
not any immediate Revelation intended, and nothing else; for in opposition to
such Messengers, so commissioned and approved it is, that our Lord says, He
that speaks of himself is a Liar.

The Other Method, by which many have been drawn into Errors, is by
counterfeiting this Seal from Heaven, pretending some new Miracle, or
particular Inspiration, or strange Apparition, or the like; a Trick, which
History tells us, has been often played with great Dexterity and Success, by
Princes, and Lawgivers, and Generals of Armies. The first Persuasion taken
from the Party concerned, soon gets possession of the weaker sort; but this is
so nice, so feeble, and so frail, that the least Mistake, or Mismanagement
would spoil and break all to pieces again: And wonderful it is to reflect, what
famous Impressions have been owing to poor and frivolous Beginnings. But when
this Impression comes abroad into the World, it grows to a prodigious Bulk, and
stretches it self so, by the help of Time and Numbers, as to take in Men of
better Sense, and more discerning Judgments. For it is to no purpose then to
kick against a general Belief; a Man has nothing left to do, but to come in,
and make One. The strongest Evidence, and most distinguishing Test of Truth, is
the number of Believers, and the number of Years that have maintained it: And
yet it is certain, that Fools are more than half the World in every Age. But,
notwithstanding this disparity, it is a hard matter to fix in an Opinion,
contrary to the general Sense of Mankind. The Fallacy however last-mention'd
has been abundantly seen in the many Juggles and Cheats which have astonished
the Multitude, and been palmed upon them for new Miracles; but by some Accident
or other, or by a nicer Observation of some more jealous and acute than the
rest, the whole Cheat has been detected and exposed within a very little
while; and yet These very Cheats, if they had gathered Strength, and not been
stifled in their Infancy, had done their Business, and met with Wonder and
Adoration every where. These Discoveries however of false Miracles, and such as
are taken upon Trust, are a greater Confirmation of the True, such as the Faith
of Christians is built upon; which have neither wanted Time to ripen them, nor
Curiosity of Enquirers to detect them, nor the Malice of Enemies to pervert and
overthrow them, nor the Bias of Wicked Inclinations to render Men averse from
surrendering themselves up to the Doctrines confirmed by them. And yet in
despite of all These, They did, and do, and will continue to prevail and
triumph in the Minds of Men. And well it were, if better Care were taken to
examine all Pretensions of this kind very nicely, that so the True might not
suffer in their Reputation and Effect, for want of being distinguished from the
False; and That poor Shift of profane Wretches might be exposed and beaten
down, who take shelter in some such Discoveries as have been here mentioned,
and, from a Few acknowledged Impostures, and some Others which look
suspiciously, and perhaps, if carefully traced up to their first Head, might
have been found no better, endeavor to insinuate, that None ever were
otherwise. It must be confessed, in the mean while, that the Things these Tricks
are contrived to support, and lead Men into, are a mortifying Consideration;
the great Variety of contending Sects and Religions, and the infinite
Superstitions still in use among some parts of Christendom, the Ceremonies, and
corrupt Customs which are Relics of Pagan Idolatry, and which there is no
bringing the People off from. And now, by this whole Discourse, we see what
precious Creatures we are, and what we are like to come to at last, when we
blindly follow such blind Leaders.

The Fifth and Last Respect under which Man was to be considered; consisting of
the Differences between Some and Others; and of the Comparisons arising from
hence.
CHAP. XLI. Of the Differnce and Inequality of Men in general.
THere is not any One thing in all this lower World, wherein so great Variety
is observable, as in Mankind; not any general Head or Species of Beings, whose
Individuals differ in so many, and so distant Particulars from one another. If
Pliny, and Herodotus, and Plutarch may be credited; There are Men in some
places, whose Form and Figure bears but very little Resemblance to this of
Ours; and several Mongrels and Medleys between the Man and the Beast. Some
Countries are inhabited by Men without any Head, whose Eyes and Mouth are
placed in their Breasts; some by Hermaphrodites; some, where they go upon all
Four; some, where they have but One Eye, and That in the middle of their
Forehead; and a Head shaped more like a Dog, than such as we see Men usually
have. Some Places, where the lower part is all Fish, and they live in the
Water; where their Women bring Children at Five Years old, and live no longer
than Eight; where their Skull and Forehead is so hard, that no Iron can break
or enter it, but rebounds back again; where they are transformed into Wolves,
and Sheep, and Oxen, and at last return to the Humane Form again; where they
have no Mouth, and all the Nourishment they are sustained by, is from the Smell
of certain Scents. And, to go no farther, This very last Age has discovered,
and many now living have seen and felt Men, that have no Beards at all; that
live without the use of Fire, or Corn, or Wine; and Countries, where what We
abominate as the most odious Deformity, is looked upon and valued as the most
exquisite Beauty; (as has been hinted before) As for the Diversity of Customs
and Manners, That will be the Business of another Head. What has been related
here may possibly seem incredible; but if it do, our Point will be proved
without it. For go no farther than our own Knowledge, and what infinite
Disserences are there in Faces? insomuch that Two are no where to be found,
exactly and in all Particulars alike. It Is true, sometimes there happen
Mistakes of one Person for another, because of a very great Likeness between
them; but then These always happen, when One of the Parties is not by. For when
we meet them Both together, the Error vanishes; and we easily discern a
Difference, which serves for a sufficient Mark of Distinction to us, though
perhaps it is such a one, as we cannot readily tell what to call it.

The Souls of Men are yet more various, and full of distinguishing Characters,
than their Bodies; For there is in this respect, not only a greater Difference
between Man and Man, than any that can be discovered between Beast and Beast:
But (which is but a bad Business, and not much for our Honor) the distance is
more between Some Men and Others, than it seems to be between some Men and
Beasts. For one of the most excellent and apprehensive Animals, seems to make
much nearer approaches to the Understanding and Sagacity of Men of the lowest
Form; than Those Men to some of the most capable and accomplished Persons. Now
this mighty Difference between Men proceeds from inward and unseen Causes; from
the Mind, which consists of such variety of Parts; and it is brought about by
such intricate Springs and Principles of Motion, that the Contemplation of them
would be infinite, and the Degrees depending upon them without Number.

Now the Last part of our Undertaking for attaining to a right Knowledge of
Man, must consist of the Distinctions and Differences observable in Him: And
These are of several sorts, according to the different Parts of which Humane
Nature is compounded, and the different Methods and Capacities in which Men may
be considered, and compared with one another. At present we will instance in
Five, which seem to be the Principal; and of so large Extent, that all the rest
may be reduced to them. For, generally speaking, all that is in Man is either
Body or Spirit, Natural or Acquired, Public or Private, Apparent or Secret;
and accordingly this Fifth and Last Consideration shall branch it self into
Five Particulars, which shall be so many Capital Distinctions between Man and
Man.

The First of these is Natural, Essential, and Universal; in which the whole
Man, both Body and Mind, are concerned.

The Second is principally Natural and Essential; but in some measure
Artificial and acquired too; and this concerns the Strength and Capacity of the
Mind.

The Third is Accidental, and depends upon Men's Conditions and their Duties
respectively; the Ground of all which is taken from the Circumstance of
Superior or Inferior.

The Fourth is likewise Accidental, and relates to Men's particular
Professions, and different ways of Living.

The Fifth and Last considers them with regard to the Advantages and
Disadvantages, by which either Nature or Fortune has distinguished them.

CHAP. XLII. The First Difference whereby Men are distinguished, which is
Natural, and Essential, and derived from the several Climates of the World.
THE First, most remarkable, and universal Distinction between Some Men and
Others, is That which regards the whole Person, the Mind and Body both, and all
the Parts whereof Man consists. And This is derived from the different
Situation of Countries, and Divisions of the World; In proportion to which
there necessarily follows a Difference in the Aspects and Influences of the
Heavens, the Distance of the Sun, the Temperament of the Air, and the Nature of
the Soil: And from hence Men receive different Complexions, and Statures, and
Countenances; nay, different Manners and Dispositions; and differnt Faculties
of the Soul too. Plaga Coeli non solum ad robur Corporum, sed and animorum
faeit. Athenis tenue coelum, ex quo etiam acutiores Attici: crassum Thebis,
ideo pingues Thebani and valentes.
The Climate does not only contribute very much to the Strength of the Body,
but also to the Vigor of the Mind. At Athens the Air is thin and fine, from
whence the Athenians are generally sharp, and of quick Parts: At Thebes it is
thick and foggy, and this makes the Inhabitants and Natives of that Country,
stupid and dull, gross and robust. This Consideration moved Plato to thank God,
that he was a Native of Athens and not of Thebes. Tales sunt hominum mentes,
quali pater ipse
Jupiter auctifera lustravit lampade terras.

Prolifick Rays shed by the Partial Sun,
Are not confined to Seeds and Plants alone;
Souls too the differing Genial Influence know,
And relish of the Soil in which they grow.
As the Nature of the Fruits, and of other Animals is very different, according
to the Regions where they spring, and are bred; so Men likewise owe their
Temper to their Country; and upon this account bring into the World with them
Dispositions Greater or Less, to War, Courage, Justice, Temperance, Docility,
Religion, Chastity, Wit, Goodness, Obedience, Beauty, Health, and Strength.
Upon this account Cyrus would not permit the Persians to quit their own
Country, which was rough and rocky, for another that was champaign and smooth;
and the Reason he gave was, That soft and pleasant Soils produce Effeminate
People; and Fruitfulness in the Ground causes Barrenness in the Minds of the
Inhabitants.

According to this Groundwork we may erect general Schemes of the World, by
parcelling out the Countries of it into Three large Divisions, and the Natives
into as many Dispositions. The Three general Divisions to be made on this
Occasion, shall comprehend the Two Extremities of North and South, and the
Middle Region between them both. Each Part or Division shall consist of Sixty
Degrees. The First shall be placed under the Line, and take in Thirty Degrees
on each side of it; that is, All that part of the Globe contained within the
Two Tropicks, and some small matter more. In which part lie Those that are
commonly called the Hot and Southern Countries, and That which Astronomers and
Geographers distinguish by the Title of the Torrid Z^^ Africa and Aethiopia in
the middle between East and West; Arabia, Calieut, the Moluques, and Java
Eastward; Peru, and the great Seas Westward. The Second or Middle Division goes
Thirty Degrees beyond the former on each side, reckoning from the Tropicks
toward the Poles; and These are the Moderate Climates, or Temperate Zones.
This includes all Europe and the Mediterranean Sea, between East and West; the
greater and lesser Asia Eastward; and China, Japan, and America to the
Westward. The Third extends it self Thirty Degrees farther yet, which lie
nearest to each Pole; These are the Frigid Zones, the Frozen Regions, and they
that are called the Northern Nations, as Tartary, Moscovy, Estotilan, Magellan,
and all that Tract which, because not hitherto fully discovered, goes by the
name of Terra Incognita.

According to this general Partition of the World, the Qualities and
Dispositions of the People are proportionably different: And that, whether we
regard the Body, the Mind, Religion, or Manners; as this little Table here
subjoined will more distinctly represent the Matter.

I. As to their Bodies. The Northerly People are Tall and Big, Phlegmatic,
Sanguine, White or light Tawny, their Voices strong, their Skin soft and Hairy,
great Eaters and Drinkers, strong and robust. The Temperate and middle Regions
are in a Mean, and of a Nature between these two Extremes, Moderate and in a
State of Neutrality, (as it were) in all these respects. Partaking in some
measure of both Qualities, but most inclining to the Dispositions of that
Division upon which they border nearest. Southern People are Low of Stature,
Small built, inclining to Melancholy, of cold and dry Constitutions, Black and
Tawny, disposed to Solitude, their Voices small and weak, their Skin hard,
little Hair, frizled and shaggy, abstemious and weak. II. Their Minds. Heavy,
Dull, Stupid, Foolish, Credulous, easy to be imposed upon, inconstant in their
Humors and Opinions. Ingenious, Apt, Wife, Prudent, Subtle, Positive in their
Opinions, Obstinate, Unpersuadable. III. Their Religion Not much addicted to
Religion, cold and negligent in Devotion. Given to Superstition, Studious, and
Contemplative. IV. Their Manners. Warlike, Valiant, Hardy, Laborious, Chaste,
not apt to be Jealous, Cruel, Inhumane. Averse to War, Cowardly, Lascivious,
Jealous, Cruel and Inhumane.

These Differences proved.
why the Persons here mentioned should thus differ from each other. As to those
Differences, which relate to the Body; we have Evidence of Sense for them, and
our Eyes supply the Place of a Thousand Arguments. If there be some excepted
Cases from the general Rules, they may very easily be accounted for, (though
indeed these Exceptions are but very few.) The mingling and promiscuous
Marriages of several Nations; the Winds, the Waters, and particular Situation
of the Places where they dwell, may each of them contribute to it, and all
together may make a considerable Alteration. Thus a very high and mountainous
Country may vary remarkably, from a flat under the same Latitude; nay, this
different Site may cause some Variation in the very same Country or City.
Plutarch observes, that the Humors of Those who were born and dwelt in the
upper Town at Athens, were very distant from Those of the lower Town, and by
the Seaside about the Piraeean Port. A high Mountain on the North-Side of a
Valley, will render the Plain to the Southward of it, to all Intents and
Purposes a Southern Climate; and by the same Reason a Mountain to the
Southward, which intercepts the Sun, will give the Valley beyond it the Effects
of a Northern Climate.

Their Mind
We know very well, that Mechanical Improvements, and most Laborious and
Handicraft Arts come out of the North, where the People are remarkable for
indefatigable Industry, and Toil. But Learning and Speculative Sciences, move
with the Sun, and come from the South to Us. Caesar and the Ancients give the
Egyptians the Character of a most Ingenious, and exceeding Subtle People; and
the Scripture takes Notice, as one Commendation and great Accomplishment of
Moses, that he had been instructed, Acts vii. 26.
and was well skilled in all the Wisdom of the Egyptians. From thence first
Philosophy set forward into Europe; for the Greeks were beholding to Egypt for
the Fundamentals and Elements of Wisdom. Greatness and State seems to have
begun There, by reason of the Vigor and Subtilty of their Parts. The Guards of
Princes, even of Them whose Dwellings and Dominions are in the South, are
usually composed of Northerly Men; as being look d upon to have more Strength
of Body, and less of Mind; fit for Fight and Defense, but not qualified for
subtle Plots and secret Designs, nor disposed to Treachery and Malice. What was
said of Hanibal, is true of these Southern Nations, They are of a Disposition
that will serve for Great Vices, and Great Virtues, and may be eminent in
Either: That which is Chiefly Commendable in the Northern, is Goodnature, and
Plainness, and Undesigning Honesty. The intermediate Sciences, such as are
mixed, partly Speculative, and partly Practical; Politics (for Instance) and
Laws, and Eloquence, and the like, are owing to the Middle Regions between
those Extremes, and most conspicuous and improved there. For it is observable,
that the Greatest and most Flourishing Empires, and States, have been seated in
this Part of the World.

Religions Practiced in the World, Religion.
came from the South; and what Mankind generally observe at this Day, is either
what begun there, or Additions and Improvements upon it. Agypt, and Arabia, and
Chaldaea, have been their Teachers and Patterns; and Africa is observed to have
more Superstition in it, than all the World besides. Witness the Frequency of
their Vows, and the Incredible Magnisicence of their Temples. As for the
Northern Nations, Caesar takes Notice, That they have but very little Regard to
Religion, but employ and delight themselves chiefly in War and Hunting.

Manners and Dispositions of Men in general; look upon the First in Regard to
War, and it is most evident, that Numerous Armies, Military Arts and
Discipline, Engines, and Instruments, and Inventions of this Kind, are
Originaly derived from the North. The Nations which set out from thence,
Scythians, and Goths, and Vandals, and Hunns, and Tartars, and Turks, and
Germans; These have fought, and subdued all other Nations, and ravaged the
whole World. The Devastations they made, and the Barbarities they exercised,
gave Occasion to that Proverb, That all Evil came out of the North. Duels, and
set Combats, are derived from Them. Solinus says, the Northern Nations Worship
the Blade of a Sword, stuck down into the Earth. Other People have not been
able to Conquer them; Not even the Romans, who vanquished the rest of the
World, but were Themselves overcome and destroyed by Them. It is remarkable,
that the South Wind makes them Weak and Faint, and that in Proportion as they
advance nearer the South, they Degenerate and grow Feeble; and so just
contrary, The Southern Nations, when they move Northward, improve their
Constitutions, and feel themselves grow much more Hardy and Strong. Upon the
Account of this Courage and Warlike Spirit it is, that the Northern People
cannot endure to be Insulted and Tyrannized over; They are Enemies to Arbitrary
Power, and Absolute Dominion; are great Lovers of Liberty; and submit most
willingly where the Governments are Elective. As for Chastity and Jealousy; In
the North One Man has but One Wife, (as Tacitus observes) and he thinks One
Wife sufficient too; They are by no Means inclined to Jealousy, (says Munster)
as one may guess by Men and their Wives Bathing together in the Company of
Strangers. Polygamy is practiced all over the whole Southern Tract. All Africa,
(says Solinus) is devoted to the Worship of Venus. Southern Men have a strange
Propension to Jealousy, and even die with the Rage of it; and therefore they
get Eunuchs for their Security, and set Them as a Guard upon their Women. Thus
the Grand Seignior does in his Seraglio, where he keeps vast Numbers of Ladies,
(like a Stable of Mares) to breed upon.

In Cruelty both Extremes resemble one another; but though the Effect be the
same, the Cause is not so; as will be explained presently, when we come to
consider the Causes of these Differences. The most Barbarous Methods of
Punishment, such as Breaking upon the Wheel, and Impaling Men alive, came from
the North. The Merciless Cruelties of the Muscovites and Tartars, are
abundantly Notorious; The Germans ( Tacitus tells us) never punish Malefactors
by Legal Process, but fall upon them, and cut them to Pieces like Enemies. The
Southern Nations too flay their Criminals alive; and their Desire of Revenge is
so Eager and Impatient, that sometimes they run Stark-Mad, if they cannot find
Means to satisfy it. Between these Most Distant Regions, the Nations are full
of Kindness, and Goodnature. The Romans usually inflicted no greater
Punishment, than that of Banishing their most grievous Offenders. The Greeks
mingled a Stupifying Draught of Hemlock, and other Poisonous Drugs, yet so that
it should be Sweet upon the Palate; and This they gave their condemned Persons
to drink, and die with. And Cicero says, That Humanity, and Courtesy, seem to
be the Portion and peculiar Qualities of the Lesser Asia, and to have been from
thence diffused over the rest of the World.

The Cause of these Differences.
both in the Persons and the Dispositions of Men, proceed; is no other than the
inward Natural Heat, being distributed among the People of these several
Climates, so very unequally as it is: For each Country differs from the other,
according as these Proportions differ. The Northern Nations have it in a very
great Degree, by Reason of the great Coldness of their Air, which keeps this
Heat, and shuts it up close; as we find Cellars in Rocks and deep Wells,
Hottest in Winter; and, to go no farther from Home, so are our own Breast and
Stomach, because of the Strength and Abundance of inward Heat at that Time.
Now, This must needs be much Weaker in Southern People, because the exceeding
Vehemence of the Scorching Heat without, and the Force of the Sunbeams
scatters, and draws it outward. As our Stomachs and Places under Ground are
coolest in Summer, and we feel our inward Burnings abated by Sweating. From
this Difference, I say, and unequal Degrees of Natural Heat, arise the several
Differences already mentioned; not such only as the Body is concerned in, for
These are Visible and Obvious; but Those that make a Change in the Minds of Men
too: For the Southerly People, being Colder in their Constitutions, are from
hence disposed to Melancholy; and this makes them Staid and Solid, Constant,
Contemplative, Ingenious, Wise, Religious, and Devout. For Wisdom and Docility
is most eminently Visible in Beasts of a Cold Temperament; as Elephants
particularly, which are more Melancholic than any other Animals, and are
manifestly the most Apprehensive and apt of any, all which I impute to the
Coldness of their Blood. From the same Superfluity and Predominance of
Melancholy in their Temper, the Southern People seem to be more Lascivious, and
Lustful than others, this being a sharp, and fretting Humor, and apt to
provoke such Inclinations; as we see it in Hares particularly. From the same
sharp, fretting Melancholy, they are Barbarous and Cruel; for That Whets the
Passions, and urges them to Blood and Revenge. Now The Northern People, in
whose Constitution Phlegm is most predominant, and who abound in Blood and
Spirits; are just opposite to the Former, and have the direct contrary
Qualities; excepting that they agree in that single Point of Cruelty. But This
in these Parts of the World proceeds chiefly from a very different Reason; and
that seems to be Want of Judgment; so that, like Beasts, They are Strong in
their Passions, and Weak in those Faculties, that should control, and keep
them in. The Countries of the Middle Division, abound in Blood and Choler, and
so are delivered from the Ill Effects of both Extremes, Phlegm, and Melancholy;
and accordingly These are Moderate in their Passions, Good-humored, Cheerful,
Nimble, and Apt, and Active.

It were Possible to represent the different Temper and Spirit of these Three
Sorts of People, after a yet more Nice and perfect Manner, by making the
Application and Comparison to extend to all kind of Things whatsoever; A short
Scheme whereof this little Table will present you with; and by That you will
perceive, what are the particular Qualities, Influences, Improvements, and
Actions of each of them. For according to what has been already observed upon
this Head, we must assign to the Northern. Middle Climate. Southern. Qualities
of the Soul. Common Sense. Discourse and Ratiocination. Intellect. Force and
Courage, like that of Bears and Beasts. The Reason and Justice of Men. The
Subtilty of Foxes, and Religion of Divines. Planets. Mars. War. Luna. Hunting.
Jupiter. Emperors. Mercury. Orators. Satur. Contemplation. Venus. Love. Arts
and Manufactures. Prudence, and Knowledge of Good and Evil. Speculative Wisdow,
and Knowledge of True and False. Parts and Offices in the Commonwealth
Laborers and Artisans, and Soldiers. Magistrates, discreet and provident
Persons. Prelates, Divines and Philosphers. Qualities of different Ages. Young
Men, Awkward and Unapt. Grown Men, good Managers, and Men of Business. Old Men,
Grave, Wise and Thoghtful. These are the peculiar Excellencies, and most
remarkable Distinctions, which may be attributed to this general Division of
North and South. The Nations that lie Westward, and the People that dwell upon
the Mountains, approach, and have a great Affinity to the Northern Climates;
because of the Cold, to which those Situations are more exposed; which is also
the Case of Them who live at a great distance from the Sea. They are Warlike
and Fierce, Lovers of Liberty, and have more Honesty and Simplicity in their
Tempers. And so again, the Eastern Countries resemble the Southern, as do also
Those that dwell in the Champaign and great Valleys, and the Borderers upon the
Sea. They are more Tender and Effeminate, by reason of the Fruitfulness of
their Soil; for Fertility inclines Men to Softness and Pleasure. And your
Islanders are commonly Subtle, and Cunning, and Deceitful, by reason of that
Commerce and Correspondence they hold with Men and Nations of different Tempers
abroad.

From this whole Discourse we may conclude in general, that the Privilege of
the Northern Climates lies chiefly in the Qualifications of the Body; Strength,
and a Robust Constitution is their peculiar Excellence and Portion. The
Southern have the Advantage in the Mind; Subtilty, and Penetration, and
Quickness of Parts, is Their Talent. The Middle Regions have somewhat of Both,
and partake of all These Excellencies; but of Each in less Degrees and moderate
Proportions. From hence likewise we may understand, that the Manners and
Original Dispositions of Men, simply considered, are not Vices or Virtnes in
their own Nature, but Necessary and Natural Effects. And the absolute
renouncing or devesting our selves of These; nay, the perfect Reformation of
them, is something more than difficult; it is in some Cases out of our Power.
But the sweetning, and moderating, and reducing these Natural Extremes to
Temper, and a due Medium; the watching over them carefully, and restraining
their Motions, This is properly our Duty, and the Business of Wisdom and Virtue.

CHAP. XLIII. The Second Distinction, and nicer Difference, which regards the
Souls of Men, or the Internal Qualifications and Capacities of their Minds.
Three Sorts and Degrees of Men in the World.
and their inward Accomplishments, is by no means so manifest as the former: It
is not obvious to Sense at all, nor does it fall within the compass of every
one's Notice and Observation. The Causes of it are likewise compounded; for it
depends partly upon Nature, and partly upon Industry and Art; and so extends to
our Acquired Excellencies, as well as to Those that are born and bred with us.
According to this Distinction, there are (as was observed before) Three sorts
of Men, which divide them into Three Classes or Degrees of Souls.

In the First and lowest of these Ranks we may place those weak and mean Souls,
which are almost of a Level with Body and Matter; of slender and narrow
Capacities; almost perfectly passive, and such as Nature seems to have made on
purpose to Endure and Obey; to live under Subjection and Management, and tamely
to follow their Leaders; In a Word, such as are but just Men, and no more.

In the Second and middle Row, are Those of a tolerable Judgment and
Understanding, and such as make some Pretensions to Wit and Learning,
Management and Address: These Men know Something, but they are not sufficiently
acquainted with Themselves; They are content to take up with Opinions commonly
received, and stick fast to their first Impressions, without troubling
Themselves, or indeed being judicious enough, to enquire into the Truth, and
Bottom of Things; nay, were they capable of finding their deep and most
abstruse Causes, they think this an unlawful Curiosity, and so make the
Submission of their Judgments a Principle of Duty and Conscience. They look no
farther than that little Spot of Ground where they stand Themselves, and take
it for granted, that Matters are, or ought to be, all the World over, exactly
the same with what they see them at home; and all that differ from them in
Customs or Opinion, they look upon with Pity or Disdain; and allow no better
Names to, than Ignorant and Unciviliz'd, Wild and Barbarons. They live in
perfect Slavery to local Laws, and the Vogue of that Village or City where they
have dwelt ever since they were hatched; and this they do, not only in a quiet
Compliance, and orderly Obedience to them, (which it is the Duty of every Man,
even the ablest and most judicious, to do) but they conform their Sense, and
their Soul to them; and are verily persuaded, that what is believed and
practiced in their own Town, is the infallible Standard of Truth; the Only, or
the Best Rule of Virtue; and that all Men's Notions of Right and Wrong, ought
to be measured by Theirs. These sorts of Men belong to the School and District
of Aristotle; They are Positive and Peremptory, abounding in their own Sense,
and impatient of Contradiction: They look more at Convenience than Truth; and
consider what will make most for the Benefit of the World, and turn to best
Account, rather than make it their Business to find Things as they really are,
and recommend what is Best in it self. This Class consists of infinite
Subdivisions, great Variety of Seize and Degrees; the Uppermost and most
capable among them are such as sit at Helm, and govern the World; Those that
hold Empires and Kingdoms in their Hand, and either give Commands, or counsel
those that do.

In the Third and Highest Order, are the Men blessed with a lively, clear, and
penetrating Wit; a sound, solid, and stable Judgment; that do not content
Themselves with bare Hearsay, nor set up their Rest in general and received
Opinions; that suffer not their Minds to be prepossest and won over by the
public Vogue, nor are at all kept in Awe, or afraid to oppose and diffent from
the common Cry, as being very well satisfied, how many Cheats there are abroad
in the World; and that some Things, no better than Falsehood and Jest at the
bottom, have been entertained, approved, extolled, nay even reverenced and
adored. For such were the greatest part of the old Philosophy and Physic, such
the Divinations, and Oracles, and all the Idolatry and Trumpery of the Pagan
Worship; which prevailed, even in the most refined Countries, for many
Generations together, and kept Mankind in slavery to most wicked and miserable
Delusions. These Men therefore are for bringing every Thing to the Light,
fathoming it to the Bottom, entering into mature and impartial Deliberation,
without Passion or Prejudice; searching into its abstruseft Causes, its most
secret Motives and Springs, and tracing them up to their first Head. They had
much rather continue under the Uneasiness of Doubt and Dissatisfaction, and
suspend an Error, and take up false Confidences, and strong Persuasions of
Things, which they have no sufficient Ground to believe or affirm: For That is
the effect of Laziness or Littleness of Soul; grudging the Pains, or wanting
the Courage to examine fairly; of Easiness and Credulity, of an unsettled
Judgment, or a rash and hasty Determination. These, alas! are but very Few; and
may be reckoned Retainers to Socrates and Plato: They are grave and sober,
modest and reserved; They have a greater respect to Truth, and the Reality of
Things, than the Usefulness and Convenience of them; and had much rather inform
Themselves and Others rightly, than entertain or propagate a Mistake, which
might tend to their Service and Advantage. Now if These have good Moral
Dispositions withal; if all the Accomplishments already mentioned, be crowned
with Integrity, and Probity, and Virtuous Living, They are then Wise indeed,
The very Persons whose Character we are now enquiring after, and such as this
whole Treatise is intended to make Men. But we must not expect the World should
pay them all that Deference which is their due. For they disoblige Mankind by
forsaking the common Road, diffenting from their received Notions and Rules;
making new and troublesome Discoveries, and not swallowing all that is brought
to them without Chewing. This makes the Vulgar look upon them with a very
jealous Eye, as dangerous Persons; and to distinguish them by the Titles of
Fanciful Men, Virtuosi, and Philosophers, in a particular and Abusive Sense of
the Word.

Now the First of these Classes is abundantly more numerous than the Second;
and so likewise the Second proportionably than the Third. Those of the First,
and those of the Last Order, the lowest and the sublimest Souls, never trouble
the World at all, nor make any Clutter or Disturbance. The One are unqualify'd
and unable, they are beneath, and want Strength to do it: The Other are as much
above it, too wise, and too great, to descend to any Troubles of that kind.
They have a sufficiency and firmness in their own Mind, and are not concerned
for Things not worth their Care. Those of the Middle Rank make all the Bustle
and Noise; The Disputes, and Distractions, and Public Commotions are all owing
to Them. Their Condition and Temper disposes them to it, which is positive and
conceited, full of Vanity and Presumption; always in action, and never
suffering any thing else to be at rest. Those of the Lowest Degree, are the
very Dregs and Settling of Mankind, the Sink and Refuse of the World; which,
like the Lees, falls to the Bottom of its own accord; and may be compared to
the Element of Earth, which has nothing to do, but to receive all that comes,
and bear all that is cast upon it from Above. The Second Stage is like the
Region of the Air, where all those Meteors are formed, which crack about our
Ears, and produce the Changes of Seasons and Weather, and all the Alterations
that affect this lower World; and when they have terrified us with dreadful
Noises and Expectations, at last dissolve, and fall down upon the Earth. Those
of the Highest Quality are like the Firmament, those Ethereal and Higher
Regions, not far distant from Heaven it self, which are always clear and
serene, peaceable and pure.

This Difference between Some Men and Others, is in some degree owing to
Nature, and the Original Disposition; the first Composition and Temperament of
the Brain; which makes a mighty difference according to the predominance of
Moist and Hot, and the several Proportions, in which each of these Qualities
are mixed: For the Minds of Men, and their Understandings, will vary
wonderfully, and they will be Judicious, Smart, Valiant; or Weak, Dull, and
Cowards, according to the laying of these Foundations at first. But then the
Building upon that Groundwork is the Business of Instruction and Discipline;
Experience, and getting acquainted with the World. So that these Distinctions
are partly Artificial and Acquired too, and a Man's own Industry and
Observation is of great Use, to disabuse his Mind, and bring it to a Manly
Sense of Things. I add upon this Occasion, that we shall deceive our selves
extremely, if we suppose any of these Classes consigned to particular
Professions or Denominations of Men; for there are some of all sorts in all
Circumstances and Characters; High and Low, Learned and Ignorant, Good and Bad;
some of the Meanest Souls in the Gown, and some of the last and most exalted
Spirits in High Shoes; some of slender Capacities, but entirely Virtuous; and
some of wonderful Natural Endowments, who are Monsters of Vice. So that indeed,
as the Differences themselves admit of great Variety, That of the several
Degrees under each Division, and the Dispositions of the Persons so
distinguished, is insinite and unconceivable.

Another Distinction
with regard to the Abilities and Internal Accomplishments of the Mind: For
some are able to make their own Way, beat out a Passage where there was no
Path, no Light before; and are so become their own Masters in Virtue and
Wisdom. These are happy Men indeed; Men of the largest Size; and there are but
few to whom Nature has been so partially bountiful. Others have need of
Assistance; and of These again there are Two sorts. Some only want Information;
if you do but light them, and show them, it is sufficient; They will follow
readily of themselves. But Others require more help; a Torch and a Guide is not
enough for Them; They have need to be supported, and taken by the Hand: A kind
Friend to draw and pull them forward, and a Spur sometimes, to quicken them in
their Pace. As for Those, whom Nature has furnished so ill, that they are
incapable of Instruction and Amendment, (which is the Case of some in the
Lowest Class;) or Them who have corrupted Nature, and are grown restiff and
intractable; (which is but too visible in many of the Second Class,) I mention
them not; for They (like Beasts that will neither lead nor drive) can only be
left to their own Ruin; desperate, foolhardy Wretches, of whom no Account at
all is to be made, nor any Good to be expected.

CHAP. XLIV. The Third Distinction and Difference between Men, which is
Accidental, and relates to their Degrees, Conditions, Offices, and Relations.
THis Accidental Distinction, which regards the State of Life wherein Men are
placed, the Offices they execute, and the Relations they mutually bear to one
another, is grounded upon the Two great Principles, and Fundamental Supports of
all Humane Society, which are, Commanding and Obeying, Power and Subjection, a
Superior and an Inferior Station. Imperio and Obsequio emnia constant.
For were it not for Government and Obedience, all this goodly Fabric would
fall to pieces. This Distinction I shall first endeavor to represent to you in
the gross, by the following Table. The First and general Division All Power and
Subjection is either 1 Private, which extends to 1. Families and Household
Government, and here the mutual Relations are contracted Four Ways; and the
Authority is of Four Sorts. 1. Conjugal, between the Husband and Wife; This
Relation is the Source and Root of all Humane Society. 2. Paternal, between
Parents and Children; This is truly and properly Natural. 3. Herile, and that
of two Sorts. 1. Of Lords and their Slaves. 2. Of Masters over their Servants.
4. That of Patrons and their Dependants, which is now out of Date, and searce
any where in use.
2. Corporations and Colleges and Civil Communities, such as are called the
Lesser Communities, which relates to the several Members of that particular
Body.
2. Public, and this again is either 1. Supreme, which is of Three Sorts,
according to the Three known Constitutions. 1. Monarchy, or a Government vested
in One single Person. 2. Aristo^^^cy, or that which is administered by a few of
the best Quality. 3. Democracy, where the whole Body of the^ cople have some
Share in it.
2. Subordinate, which lieshetween Persons that are both Suporiours and
Inferiors, when considered in Different Respects, and as Places and Persons
may alter the Case; and this is a Power of 1. Particular Lords in their ^^^eral
Jurisdictions, and admitting of many Degrees. 2. O^^cers and Magistrates
dep^ted by the Supreme Power, of which there is likewise great Variety.





Public Power, whether the Supreme, or the Subordinate, Supreme Power
Subdivided.
admits of several Subdivisions, very necessary to be attended to. The Supreme,
which as I observed, is of Three Sorts, according to the different
Constitutions, and Methods of Government, executes and exerts it self in as
many different ways, and each of These according to the different Temper and
Management, has been distinguished by the Titles of Kingly, Arbitrary, and
Tyrannical. Kingly is when the Supreme Power (be it lodged in one, or in more
Hands) is it self strictly Obedient to the Laws of Nature, and preserves and
protects its Subjects, in their Natural Liberties, and Civil Rights. All Power,
in general, belongs to Kings, particular Properties to private Men. The King is
Universal Lord, and has a Right Paramoum; Others have the Right of Lordship
and Possession. Arbitrary Government is, when the Sovereign is Lord of Men's
Persons and Estates by Right of Conquest; and the Subjects are Governed without
any Regard to Claims, or Laws, or Rights, but in an absolate Way, as Lords use
their Slaves. This is rather Bondage and Captivity; Subjection is too gentle a
Name for it; where Lives are cut off, and Estates seized, and racked and taken
away, at Pleasure. Tyrannical Government is where the Sovereign despises and
disregards all the Laws of Nature, and Original Rights of Mankind; and so does
not only make use of, but abuses the Persons and Possessions of the Subjects;
and this differs from the former Arbitrary way, much after the same manner,
that a Robber differs from a Fair Enemy in the Field.

Now, of these Three Different Constitutions, the Monarchical; but of the Three
Tempers or Ways of Governing, the Arbitrary, has been observed to be the most
Ancient, and best Calenlated of any, for Grandeur, Continuance and Splendour.
Thus it was with the Assyrian, Persian, Egyptian, and at present that of
Aethiopia, (the most Ancient of any) Moscovy, Tartary, Turkey, and Pern. But
the Best and most Natural Estate is, that manner of Government which we call
Kingly, according to our late Distinction of it. The Famous Aristocracies were
That of the Locademonians heretofore, and That of the Venetians and States of
Holland at this Day. The Democracies were Rome, Athens, Carthage; but the
Government of all These, as to its Temper and Method of Administration, was
what we call Kingly.

Public Power, which is Subaltern, Of particular Lards.
or Subordinate, is lodged in particular Lords, and These are of several Sorts
and Degrees, according to their respective Tenures and Capacities. But the most
Considerable are Five. 1. Lords Tributary, who only owe Tribute, and nothing
else. 2. Feudatary Lords, who hold their Lands in Fee. 3. Simple Vaslals, who
owe Fealty and Homage for their Fee: These Three may be Sovereign Themselves
too. 4. Liege Vassals, that besides Fealty and Homage, owe Personal Suit and
Service, and so cannot be truly Sovereign. 5. Natural Subjects, whether Vassals
in Fee or in Cens, or in any other Tenure and Capacity; These owe Subjection
and Obedience, and cannot be exempted from the Power of their Sovereign Lord,
and yet are Lords Themselves.


Public Subordinate Power, which consists, in Offices under, and Proper
Officers employed by, O^f^^ers.
the Supreme Power, is of several Sorts; but may be reduced to Five Degrees,
with regard to the Distinctions of Honor, and Power, which belong to, or may
direct us in the Consideration of them. 1. The First and lowest Sort is that of
Public Executioners; such as give the last Stroke, and finish upon Criminals
what the Courts of Justice have awarded and begun. These, however necessary,
have yet somewhat so shocking in their Employment, that it has been generally
looked upon as Odious and Scandalous, and the Persons in that Office, not
suffered in many Places to dwell within the City. 2. The Second are Men, that
are neither Honorable nor Dishonorable upon the Account of their Post, such
as Sergeants, Trumpeters, and the like. 3. The Third Sort have Honor and
Respect indeed by Virtue of their Office, but no Authority by way of
Cognizance, or Power; such are Notaries, Receivers, Secretaries, and the like.
4. The Fourth have not an empty Honor only, but Power, and Cognizance, and yet
not any Jurisdiction, properly so called; such are The King's Counsel, for
Example; who may examine Publicly, but can determine, or give sinal Issue to
nothing. 5. The Last have Jurisdiction, properly so called, and by Virtue of
This, they have all the Rest. And These only, in Strictness of Speech, are
Magistrates; which may be dislinguish'd several Ways, particularly into these
live Sorts, each of which is Twofold. 1. Mayors, Senators, Judges. Colonels,
etc. Generals, Judges. 2. In Politics or Civil Government. In Military
Matters. 3. In Cuestions and Cases of Property and Right. In Criminal Cases, or
Trials of Offenders. 4. Offices Titular, fixed and Hereditary. Offices in
Particular Commission. 5. Officers Perpetual, of which Nature it is sit, that
there should be fewest, and Those only of the least Consequence. Officers
Temporal, or Removeable, such as all of the Highest Importance ought to be.



Of the Conditions and Degrees of Men particularly, according to the foregoing
Table.
ADVERTISEMENT.
IT is Necessary to observe upon this Occasion, that the several Divisions of
this Table, and the Distinction of those Powers, and their respective
Dependencies, upon, and under them, (beginning at Those, which are Private and
Domestic) are mentioned here with no other Design, than to give a distinct
View of the several States and Conditions of Men; It being the Intention of
this Present Book, only to Know Man in all his Capacities. And therefore a
great Part of what might be expected upon the Head of Power and Subjection, the
Reader must be content to wait for, till we come to the Third and last Part of
this Treatise: Where, under the Head of Justice, these several Chapters and
Capacities will come under our Consideration again; and the several Duties and
Virtues required upon their Account will be specisied and explained. But,
before we enter upon any of them in particular, it may not be amiss to premise
somewhat briefly, concerning Command and Obedience in general. These being the
Reciprocal Exercises of the Relations here mentioned. The Two Foundations and
principal Causes of all that Variety of Circumstances, in which Mankind have
been already described.

CHAP. XLV. Of Command and Obedience.
THese, as I said, are the Groundwork, upon which all Humane Society is built;
And the many different Conditions, Professions, and Relations, that go to
making it up, do all arise from, and depend upon Them. These Two are Relative
Terms; they mutually Regard, Produce, Preserve and Support each other; and are
equally necessary in all Companies and Communities of Men; but are
notwithslanding liable to Envy and Opposition, Misrepresentation and Complaint;
All which are the Natural and Constant Effects, even of That, without which we
are not able to Subsist. The discontented Populace would reduce their Sovereign
to the Condition of a Car-Man; The Ambition of Monarchs would represent him
greater than a God. In Command is implied Dignity, Dissiculty (These Two
commonly go together) Goodness, Ability, and all the Characters and Qualities
of Grandeur.

The Command it self, that is, The Sufficiency, the Courage, the Authority, and
other Qualifications of it, are derived from above, and the Gift of God.
Imperium non ^i^i divino fato datur. Romans xiii. 1.
Empire and Dominion are bestowed by the Divine Appointment, and There is no
Power but of God (says the Apostle to the same Purpose.) From whence it was
that Plato said, God did not place some Men over others, that is, not Mere Men,
and such as were of the Common Sort and Vulgar Qualisications; but the Persons
whom he set apart, and exalted for Government, were such as exceeded others;
were more sinished, eminent for some singular Virtue, and distinguishing Gift
of Heaven; in short, were somewhat more than Men, and such as former Ages gave
the Title of Heroes to.

Obedience is a Matter of Benesit and Advantage; of Ease and Necessity; The
Obeying well, is of the Two, more conducive to the Public Peace, and Safety,
than the Commanding wisely; and the Consequences of withstanding and refusing
the Commands of our Superiors, or the complying with them Imperfectly and
Negligently, are much more Dangerous and Destructive, than Ill and Improper
Commands Themselves are, or want of Skill to Govern. Just as in the Case of a
Married Life, the Husband and Wife are equally obliged to Constancy of
Affection and Fidelity to the Bed; and the Words in which they Solemnly engage
for This, are the very Same for both Parties; the same Ceremonies and
Formalities to signify and confirm it; but yet the Consequences are by no
means equal, but the Mischiefs of Disloyalty are incomparably More, and Greater
in an Adulterous Wife, than an Adulterous Husband: So likewise Commanding and
Obeying are equally Duties, and necessary in all manner of Societies which
unite Men to one another; but yet the Disobedience of the Subject draws much
greater Inconveniences after it, than the Unskillfulness or the real Faults of
the Governor. Several States and Kingdoms have held out a long Course, and
been reasonably Prosperous and Flourishing, under, not only Ignorant, but very
Wicked Princes and Magistrates, by the mere Force of the Unity, and Compliance,
and ready Obedience of the Subjects. Which agrees well with the Answer made by
a Wise Man to that Question, How it came to pass, that the Republic of Sparta
was so remarkably Flourishing? and Whether it proceeded from the Wisdom and
good Conduct of their Governors? Nay, (said he) I impute it not to their
Princes Commanding well, but to the Subjects Obeying well. But when the People
break their Yoke, or throw it off, and refuse Obedience, there is no Remedy but
such a State must be ruined, and fall to the Ground.

CHAP. XLVI. Of Marriage.
Marriage be antecedent to any other, of the greatest Antiquity, and the
highest Importance; The very Foundation and Fountain of all Humane Society,
(for Families first, and then Commonwealths spring out of it; according to that
Observation of Cicero, The First Union and nearest Relation is between Man and
Wife; This is the Beginning of Cities, the Nursery and first Plantation of all
Public Communities) yet it has had the Ill-Fortune to be disesteem'd and run
down by several Persons of considerable Wit and Character, who have traduced
it, as a Condition beneath Men of Understanding, and drawn up several formal
Objections against it, in particular These that follow. Prima Societas in
Conjugio est, quod principium Urbis, seminarium Reipublicae. Cic. de Offic.
Lib. 1.


Objections against Marriage.
are unreasonable and unjust; we may call it a Band of Union; but it is no
better than the Chains and Fetters of a Captive. For What Consinement can be
more insupportable, than That by which a Man stakes himself down; and becomes a
Slave as long as he lives, to Care and Trouble, and the Humors of another
Person? For this is the Consequence, if the Couple are unsuccessful, and
unsuitable in their Tempers; That there is no Remedy, but a Man must stand by
his Bargain, be it never so bad, and continue wretched without any other
possible Cure but Death. Now what can be more contrary to Equity and Justice,
than that the Folly of one half Hour should poison the whole Term of all his
Years to come? That a Mistake in one's Choice, or perhaps a Trick, by which he
was Trapann'd into this Condition, but, to be sure, an act of Obedience many
times to the Commands of a Parent, or Compliance with the Advice of a Friend; a
submitting one's Own Judgment and Inclination to the Pleasure and Disposal of
Others: What Reason (say They) is there that any of these Things should engage
a Man to perpetual Misery and Torment? Were not the other Noose about the Neck
the wiser Choice of the Two? and to end one's Days and Troubles immediately by
leaping headlong from some Rock into the Sea, than thus to launch out into an
Eternity of Pains; to have a Hell upon Earth; and always live and lie by a
Storm of Jealousy and Ill Nature, of Rage and Madness, of Obstinacy, and
Affectation, and intractable Perverseness, and other vile Qualities in which
the Sex abounds? Hence it was the Saying of one Author, That whoever first
invented the Marriage-Knot, had contrived a very fair and colorable, but
withal, a most effectual Expedient for taking a severe Revenge upon Mankind: A
Snare or Net to catch Fools and Brutes in, and then put them to a long and
lingering Death. And of another, That for a Wise Man to marry a Fool, or a Woman
of Sense a Coxcomb, was like tying the Living to the Dead; that so by the
Extremity of Cold from the Carcass, the Body might chill and languish, till at
last it expire; which is of all Capital Punishments the most barbarous, that
ever Tyrants have been able to invent.

The Second Accusation imports, That Marriage corrupts and adulterates Generous
and Great Minds, by softening and abating, nay utterly enfeebling and
dissolving their Life and Vigor, by the little Dalliances, and Flatterings,
and Wheedles of a Person, of whom one is fond; by Tenderness for one's
Children, Care and Management of Domestic Affairs, and Solicitude to provide
for, and raise one's Family in the World. What lamentable Instances of this
Effeminacy are Samson, and Solomon, and Mark Anthony? whose Falls stand in
Story, like so many noble Ruins, to put us in mind of that Enemy, with some
Indignation, that undermined and demolished what Nature had made so strong. If
then there must be Marrying, it is fit (say they) that This should be left to
Fellows that have more Body than Soul; let Them go on securely, being so well
qualisy'd, and having so little to hazard; and the Cares and Burden of the
World are indeed properest for Them; for such mean and low Considerations are
Employments just of a Size with Their Capacities. But as for Those, whom Nature
has been so liberal to in another kind, and given them good Sense, and noble
Souls, capable of greater and better Things, Is it not pity to shackle and bind
Them down to the World and the Flesh, as you do Beasts to the Manger? Nay, even
among Beasts, some Distinctions are made too; for Those among them that are
most esteemed for Service and Courage, (as among Dogs and Horses particularly)
are kept up at a distance, and forbidden all Approaches of the other Sex;
Others of less Value serving to breed upon very well. Accordingly among
Mankind, Those that are Devoted to the most Venerable and Holy Professions, the
Service of the Altar, and a Recluse Life, both Men and Women; such whose
Stations oblige them to be the most excellent part of the World, the Flower and
Ornament of Christian Religion, Clergy and Monasticks are forbidden by the
Church of Rome ever to Marry at all. And the Reason most certainly is This,
that Marriage obstructs Wisdom and Virtue, calls off the Mind, and gives it too
strong and too frequent a Diversion, clips its Wings, and checks its noblest
Flights. For the Contemplation of High, and Heavenly, and Divine Objects, is by
no means consistent with the Clutter, and Hurry, and sordid Cares of
Family-concerns: Upon which Account it is that the Apostle, who commands
Continency even in Marriage, has preferred absolute Celibacy before it.
Marriage perhaps may have the Advantage in Point of Prosit and Convenience, but
the Honor and the Virtue (they tell you) is confessedly on the other side.

Besides; It confounds Men's Measures, and defeats noble and pious Intentions
and Undertakings. St. Augustine gives an Account to this purpose, That He and
some other Friends of his, some whereof were married Men, having formed a
Design of retireing from the Town, and all Conversation with the World, into
some Solitude, that so they might have nothing to employ their Thou^^^s but the
study of Wisdom and Virtue; the (...) Scheme was immediately interrupted, and
(...)'d, by the Interposition of their Wives. And another Wise Man has given
us his Opinion, That if Men could prevail with Themselves to give over all
Conversation with Women, Angels would certainly visit and keep them Company.

Once more; Marriage is a great Hindrance to Men's Improvement; particularly it
keeps them at home, and cuts them off from the Opportunities of Traveling, and
conversing with Foreign Countries: Which is really a great Accomplishment, and
a mighty Convenience, to learn Wisdom one's self, and to teach it to others,
and to communicate what we have seen and known, to those who want the same
Opportunities. In short; Marriage does not only cramp up, and depress great
Parts, and great Souls, but it deprives the World of many noble Designs, Works
of Munisicence, and Charity, and Public Good; it renders a Man incapable of
serving his Country, and attempting such Things, as He can give no
entertainment to the Thoughts of, in the Embraces of a tender Wife, and his
Little ones round about him. For These need and require the Care and
Preservation of Himself; and serve for an Excuse, at least they cool his
Courage, to Actions that are Brave, if at the same time they seem Desperate, or
are manifestly Dangerous. And is it not a noble Sight now, to see a Man that is
sit to be at the Helm, trissing away his Time at home, playing and telling
Stories with his Wife and Children in the Chimney-Corner? Is it not Ten
Thousand Pities, that One who is capable of Governing and Directing a World,
should be entirely buried in Secrecy, lost to the Public, and taken up with
the Concerns of a single Family? Upon this Consideration it was, that a Great
Man, when his Friends moved a Match to him, made answer, That he was born to
Command Men, and not one pretty little Toy of a Woman; to Advise and give Rules
to Kings and Frinces, and not to Boys and Girls.

Answer to them.
(for a great deal of them is Raillery only) we may answer as follows; That
Humane Nature must be considered, as it really is; A State not capable of
Absolute Perfection; nor was such a Life here ever intended for us, as we
should have nothing in it to be found fault with, nothing that should cross, or
give us cause to wish it otherwise. Our very Remedies must make us a little
sick, even when they are promoting our Health and Recovery; and every
Convenience carries its Abatement, and is clogged and encumbered with some
Inconvenience inseparable from it. These are Evils, allow it, but they are
Necessary Evils. And if the Case be not well in all Points, yet this is the
best of it; for there is no other way possible to be devised for the preserving
and propagating Mankind, but what would make the Matter infinitely worse, and
be liable to More and Greater Evils. Some indeed, (as Plato in particular)
would fain have rooted out these Thorns, and resin'd upon the Point, by
inventing other Methods for the Continuance of the Species; but after all their
Hammering and Polishing, Those Conceits at last proved mere Castles in the Air;
Things perfectly impracticable, and such as if once received could never have
lasted; and besides, it appeared evidently, that though they had been practiced
and approved, yet even These were loaded too with a great many Inconveniences,
and sore Difficulties. The Truth is, Men create their Own Uneasiness, and make
all the Hardship to Themselves; Their Vices and Intemperances, the Violence and
the Contrariety of their Passions, are their Tormentors; and then they blame
the State in which they feel and suffer those Torments. But That is clear, and
free from Guilt, and so is every Thing but Man himself, who turns every Thing
against Himself, and knows not how to use any Condition as he ought, and to the
best Advantage. But Those that are Philosophers indeed, will go a great deal
farther; They will tell you, These very Difficulties recommend Marriage the
more, as rendering it a School of Virtue, an Apprenticeship to learn it, a daily
and Domestic Exercise to perfect and render it familiar to us. And Socrates,
that great Oracle of Wisdom, when People reproached him with the peevish and
imperious Humor of his Wife, declared that it was an Advantage to him; for by
that means he learnt at home to behave himself with Constancy and Patience in
all Accidents and Companies abroad; and to make all the Uneasinesses of Fortune
go down very glibly. But This, though it want not a great deal of good Sense at
the Bottom, and may be very useful to Men of good Dispositions, and Capacity
enough to serve themselves of it, is yet such an Argument as I do not expect
many Converts from. Admitting then, that They who continue single do best
consult their Own private Ease and Satisfaction: Admit it better and more
prudent thus to reserve one's self for Piety and Devotion, and eminent Degrees
of Virtue, by preventing all those Avocations and Interruptions, which the
Cares of a Married Life unavoidably expose us to. (And it is in this Sense, and
for these Purposes only, that St. Paul prefers a State of Celibacy, which those
that make use of, and pretend to be directed by his Authority, would do well to
consider) Yet after all, with what Face can any Christian speak in
disparagement of Marriage, who remembers at all, what the Faith he makes
profession of, has taught him to believe in Honor of it? For, when all is
done, these are unanswerable, and they ought to be esteemed very Sacred
Arguments, such as should command our highest Veneration and Respect, That it
is of God's own Institution, That it was his first Ordinance, That he appointed
it in Paradise, in a State of Innocence and Perfection, when Humane Nature was
in all its Glory. These are Four weighty Considerations, and ought to
recommend, at least to deliver it from diminishing Reflections, when they are
not capable of a sober Reply. After this we find, that the Son of God himself
was pleased to Honor and Approve it with his Presence, to work his first
Miracle in favor of it, and the Persons engaged in it; nay, that he has
condescended to make use of This, as a Figure of that most Sacred and
Inviolable Union betwixt Him and his Church; and upon that Account, Ephesians. v.
given it the Privilege of being styled a Mystery, a Great and Divine Mystery.

Marriage is by no means an Indifferent Thing: It is a Great God, or a Great
Evil
It admits of no Middle State, but is apt to run into Extremes, and is
generally the greatest Happiness, or the greatest Calamity of Humane Life; a
State of much Tranquillity, or of insupportable Trouble; a Paradise or a Hell.
If well and wisely undertaken, it is full of Sweetness and Pleasure; if ill and
unsuccessfully, it is a grievous Burden, a bitter, and fatal, and most painful
Yoke. For this Covenant and Coming together, does above any other Instance make
good the Truth of that Proverb, That Homo Homini aut Deus, aut Lupus.
Men are either Gods, or Brutes to one another.

Marriage is a Work composed of a great many Parts, When Good, it is
exceedingly so.
and a great many Qualities must meet together, to render it Beautiful and
Uniform. Abundance of Considerations are necessary in order to it, more than
respect merely the Persons of those to be concerned in it. For though it be
commonly said, Men Marry for Themselves alone, yet there ought to be great
regard had to Posterity; the Family we go into, the Alliances we make, the
Circumstances and Condition of the People, are of great weight. And These and
other Respects must be carefully attended to: But above all, the Temper and the
Virtues, which ought to be the principal Objects and Motives of our Affection.
The want of proceeding in this manner, is the very Reason why we see so few
happy Matches. And the extreme Scarcity of such, is a sign that Marriage is
highly valuable: For it is a Fate common to all great Posts, that they are
difficult, and very seldom discharged as they ought to be. Kingly Power and
Government is beset with Cares and Difficulties, and very few that aspire to
it, are strictly Virtuous and Successful in the Administration. But the true
Ground of Failing so frequently in this Point, is to be fetched from the
Licentiousness and Debauchery, the Unruly Passions and Exorbitant Humors of
Mankind, and not from any thing in the State and Institution it self. From
hence it is, that we sind experimentally, Such as are of good, and quiet, and
virtuous Dispositions, plain and mean Persons taste more of the Comforts, and
enjoy themselves more in it, than others of higher Quality and Seize.
Sensual Desires, and the Delights of the World have taken less hold of such;
they are less Nice and Curious, and have not so much leisure to teaze and
torment Themselves. Men that are debauched, and love to live at large, corrupt
in their Manners, troublesome in their Conversation, whimsical and particular
in their Humors, are not cut out for this Condition of Life, nor can ever
expect to be tolerably Easy under it.

Marriage is a Wise and Prudent Bargain, a Holy and Inviolable League, an
Honorable Agreement. A general Description of it.
If this Knot be well tied, there is not in the whole World any thing more
beautiful, more lovely, more desirable: It is a sweet and noble Society, full
of Constancy and mutual Trust; full of infinite good Offices and reciprocal
Obligations; most excellent in their own Nature, most useful to the Parties
Themselves, and of general Service and Benefit to Mankind. This is a
Conversation, Amorous not of Love and Sensual Delight, but of chaste Affection
and entire Friendship. For Love in these Two Senses is a very different Thing,
and the One as distant from the Other, as the feverish and diseased Heat of a
sick Man is from the natural Warmth of a good Temper and healthful
Constitution. Marriage challenges to it self Affection and Advantage, Justice
and Honor, Constancy and Pleasure. Call its Fruitions slat and insipid if you
please, but yet they are solid and substantial, agreeable and universal: They
must needs be so indeed, because they are Lawful and Innocent; free from the
Censure of Others, and the Reproaches of one's Own Mind. What the World calls
Love, aims at nothing but Delight; it has perhaps somewhat of Sprightliness,
and is of a quicker and more poignant Relish; but this cannot hold long; and we
plainly see it cannot, by so few Matches succeeding well, where Beauty and
Amorous Desires were at the bottom of them: There must be something more solid
to make us happy. A Building that is to stand for our whole Lives, ought to be
set upon sirmer Foundations; and these Engagements are serious Matters, such as
deserve, and it is Pity but they should have our utmost Discretion employed
upon them. That Hot Love bubbles and boils in our Breasts for a While, but it
is worth Nothing, and cannot continue; and therefore it very often happens,
that these Affairs are very fortunately managed by a Third Hand.

Another more particular one.
But, that the Case may be more perfectly and particularly understood, it is
sit we take Notice, that there are Two Things Essential and absolutely
Necessary to this State of Life, which, however contrary and inconsistent they
may at First Sight appear, are yet in reality no such Matter. These are
Equality, and Inequality; the Former concerns them as Friends, and Companions,
and upon the Level; the Other, as a Superior and an Inferior. The Equality
consists in that Entire Freedom, and unreserved Communication, whereby they
ought to have all Things in Common; their Souls, Inclinations, Wills, Bodies,
Goods, are mutually from thenceforward made over; and neither of them has any
longer a peculiar and distinct Propriety exclusive of the other. This in some
Places is carried a great deal farther, and extends to Life and Death too;
insomuch, that as soon as the Husband is dead, the Wife is obliged to follow him
without delay. There are some Countries, where the Public and National Laws
require them to do so; and they are oftentimes so Zealous in their Obedience,
that where Polygamy is indulged, if a Man leave several Wives behind him, they
Try for it Publicly, and enter up their Claims, which of them shall obtain the
Honor and Privilege of sleeping with their Spouse (that is the Expression they
soften it by) and upon this Occasion, each urges in her own behalf, that she
was the best beloved Wife, or had the last Kiss of him, or brought him
Children, or the like, so to gain the Preference to themselves. The Ambitious
Rivals eagerly pursue
Death, as their Crown to Love and Virtue due;
Prefer their Claims, and glory in Success,
Their Lords first Nuptials are courted less:
Approach his Pile with Pomp, in Triumph burn,
And mingle Ashes in one Common Urn.


In other Places, where no Laws enjoined any such Thing, it has been resolved
and practiced, by mutual Stipulation and voluntary Agreement, made privately
between the Parties Themselves, which was the Case of Mark Antony and
Cleopatra. But omitting This, which in truth is a Wicked, Barbarous and
Unreasonable Custom, The Equality, which is, and ought to be, between Man and
Wife, extends it self to the Administration of Affairs, and Inspection over the
Family in common; from whence the Wife has very justly the Title of Lady or
Mistress of the House, and Servants; as well as the Husband that of Master and
Lord over them. And this joint Authority of Theirs over their own private
Family is a Picture in Little of that Form of Public Government, which is
termed an Aristocracy.

Inequality, consists in This. Inequality.
That the Husband has a Power and Authority over his Wife, and the Wife is
placed in Subjection to her Husband. The Laws and Governments of all Nations
throughout the World agree in this Preeminence; Et certamen habent lethi, quae
viva sequatur
Conjugium, pudor est non licuisse mori:
Ardent Victrices, and flammae pectora praebent,
Imponuntque suis Ora perusta viris.
but the Nature and the Degrees of it are not every where the same: For These
differ in Proportion, as the Laws and Customs of the Place differ. Thus far the
Consent is Universal; That the Woman, how Noble soever her Birth and Family,
how great soever her Fortunes, or any other personal Advantages, is not upon
any Consideration exempted from Subjection to her Husband. This Superiority and
Inferiority may well be general, and be the Opinion of All, when it is so
plainly the Condition of All. For in truth it is the Work of Nature, and
founded upon that Strength, and Sufficiency, and Majesty of the One Sex, and
the Weakness, and Softness, and Incapacities of the Other, which prove it not
equally qualified, nor ever designed for Government. But there are many other
Arguments besides, which Divines fetch from Scripture upon this Occasion, and
prove the Point indeed substantially by Them. For Revelation here has backed
and enforced the Dictates of Reason, by telling us expressly, that Man was made
first; that he was made by God alone, and entirely by Him, without any Creature
of a like Form contributing any thing toward his Being. That he was Created on
purpose for the Pleasure and Glory of God, his Head; That he was made after the
Divine Image and Likeness; a Copy of the Great Original above, and Perfect in
his Kind: For Nature always begins with something in its just Perfection:
Whereas Woman was created in the Second Place; and not so properly Created as
Formed; made after Man; taken out of his Substance; See 1 Corinthians. xi. 7.8. The
Man is the Image, and Similitude of God, but the Woman is the Similitude of the
Man. So (...) ought to be rendered in the Sense of (...) similis sum, not Glory,
as we read it, which is foreign to the rest of the Words, and the whole Scope
of that Argument.
Fashioned according to that Pattern, and so His Image, and only the Copy of a
Copy; made Occasionally, and for particular Uses, to be a Help, and a Second to
the Man; who is himself the Principal and Head, and therefore She is upon all
these Accounts Imperfect. Thus we may argue from the Order of Nature; But the
thing is confirmed yet more by the Relation given us of the Corruption and Fall
of Man. For the Woman was first in the Transgression; and sinned of her own
Head; Man came in afterward, and by her Instigation. The Woman therefore, who
was last in Good, in order of Nature, and Occasional only; but foremost in
Evil, and the occasion of That to Man, is most justly put in Subjection to Him,
who was before Her in the Good, and after Her in the Evil.

Conjugal Superiority and Power has been very differently restrained or
enlarged. The Power of the Husband.
In some Places, where the Paternal Authority has been so, This has likewise
Extended to Capital Punishment, and made the Husband Judge and Disposer of Life
and Death. Dionys. Halic. l. 2.
Thus it was with the Romans particularly: For the Laws of Romulus gave a Man
Power to kill his Wife in Four Cases, (viz.) Adultery, Putting False Children
upon him, False Keys, and Drinking of Wine. Thus Polybius tells us, that the
Greeks; and Caesar says that the old Gauls gave Husbands a Power of Life and
Death. In Other Parts, and in these already mentioned, since those Times, their
Power has been brought into a narrower Compass. But almost every where it is
taken for granted, that the Authority of the Husband, and the Subjection of the
Wife, implies thus much: A Right to direct and control the Actions, to confirm
or disannul the Resolutions and Vows of the Wife; to Correct her, when she does
amiss, by Reproofs and Confinement; (for Blows are below a Man of Honor to
give, and not sit for a Woman to receive) and the Wife is obliged to conform to
the Condition, to follow the Quality, the Country, the Family, the Dwelling,
and the Degree of her Husband; to bear him Company wheresoever he goes, in
Journeys, and Voyages, in Banishment, and in Prison, in Flight and Necessity;
and, if he be reduced to that hard Fortune, to wander about, and to Beg with
him. Some celebrated Examples of this kind in Story are, Sulpitia, who attended
her Husband Lontulus, when he was proscribed, and an Exile in Sicily. Erithrea,
who went along with her Husband Fhalaris into Banishment. Ipsicrate, The Wife
of Mithridates King of Pentus, who kept her Husband Company, when he turned
Vagabond, Tacit.
after his Defeat by Pompey. Some add, that they are bound to follow them into
the Wars, and Foreign Countries, when they are sent abroad upon Expeditions, or
go under any Public Character. The Wise cannot sue, or be sued in Matters of
Right and Property; all Actions lie against the Husband, and are to be
commenced in His Name; and if any thing of this Kind be any where done, it must
be with the Leave and Authority of her Husband, or by particular Appointment of
the Judge, if the Husband shall decline, or refuse it; neither can she, without
express Permission from the Magistrate. Appeal from, or be a Party in any Cause
against her Husband.

Marriage is not every where alike, nor under the same Limitations; Different
(...) a^^^^ it.
the Laws and Rules concerning it are very different. In Some Countries there
is a greater Latitude, and more Liberties Indulged, in Others less. The
Christian Religion, which is by much the strictest of any, has made it very
close and strait. It leaves Nothing at large and in our own Choice, but the
first Entrance into this Engagement. When once That is over, a Man's Will is
made over too, and conveyed away; for the Covenant is subject to no
Dissolution, and we must abide by it, whether we are contented with our Terms,
or not. Other Nations and Religions, have contrived to make it more Easy, and
Free, and Fruitful, Of Polygamy and Divorce.
by allowing and practicing Polygamy and Divorce; a Liberty of taking Wives and
dismissing them again; and they speak hardly of Christianity for abridging Men
in these Two particulars, as if it did great Prejudice to Affection and
Multiplication by these Restraints, which are the Two great Ends of Marriage:
For Friendship, they pretend, is an Enemy to all manner of Compulsion and
Necessity; and cannot consist with it; but is much more improved, and better
maintained, by leaving Men free, and at large to dispose of Themselves. And
Multiplication is promoted by the Female Sex, as Nature shows us abundantly in
that one Instance of Wolves, who are so extremely Fruitful in the Production of
their Whelps, even to the Number of Twelve, or Thirteen at a Time; and in this
exceed other Animals of Service and common Use very much, so many of which are
killed every Day; and so few Wolves; And yet there are notwithstanding fewer of
the Breed, Breeders, because fewer She-Wolves, than of any other Species. For,
as I said, the true Reason is, because in all those Numerous Litters, there is
commonly but one Bitch-Wolf, which for the most Part signifies little, and
bears very rarely; the Generation being hindered by the vast Numbers and
promiscuous Mixtures of the Males; and so, the much greater part of them die,
without ever propagating their Kind at all, for want of a sufficient Proportion
of Females, to do it by successfully. It is also manifest, what Advantages of
this Nature Polygamy produces, by the vast Increase of those Countries where it
is allowed; The Jews, Mahometans, and other Barbarous Nations, (as all their
Histories inform us) very usually bringing Armies into the Field, of Three or
Four Hundred Thousand fighting Men. Now the Christian Religion, on the
contrary, allows but One to One, and obliges the Parties to continue thus
together; though Either, nay sometimes Both, of them be Barren; which yet
perhaps, if allowed to change, might leave a numerous Posterity behind them.
But, supposing the very best of the Case, all their Increase must depend upon
the Production of One single Woman. And lastly, they reflect upon Christianity,
as the occasion of insinite Excesses, Debaucheries, and Adulteries, by this too
severe Constraint.

But the true and sufficient Answer to all these Objections is, That the
Christian Religion does not consider Marriage upon such Respects as are purely
Humane, and tend to the Gratification of Natural Appetites, or promote the
Temporal Good of Men: It takes quite another Prospect of the Thing, and has
Reasons peculiar to it self, sublime, and noble, and insinitely greater, (as
has been hinted already.) Besides, common Experience demonstrates, that in
much the greatest part of Married Persons, what they complain of as Confinement
and Constraint, does by no means cool and destroy, but promote and heighten the
Affection, and render it more dear and strong, by keeping it more entire and
unbroken. Especially in Men of honest Principles, and good Dispositions, which
easily accommodate their Humors, and make it their Care and Study to comply
with the Tempers of the Person to whom they are thus inseparably united. And as
for the Debaucheries and Flyings out alleged against us, the only Cause of
Them is the Dissoluteness of Men's Manners; which a greater Liberty, though
never so great, will never be able to correct, or put a Stop to. And
accordingly we find, that Adulteries were every whit as rife in the midst of
Polygamy and Divorce; Witness the whole Nation of the Jews in general, and the
Example of David in particular, who became guilty of this Crime,
notwithstanding the Multitude he had of Wives and Concubines of his own. On the
contrary, These Vices were not known for a long while together in other
Countries, where neither Polygamy nor Divorce were ever permitted; as in
Sparta, for Instance, and at Rome, for a considerable time after the Founding
of that City. It is therefore most foolish and unjust, to asperse Religion, and
charge That with the Vices of Men, which allows and teaches nothing, but
exquisite Purity and strict Continence.

Polygamy, Polygamy differently practiced.
(which has so great an Appearance of Nature to allege in its behalf) has
yet been very differently managed, according to the several Nations, and the
Laws of those Communities, where it was allowed and practiced. In Some Places,
All that are Wives to the same Man, live alike, and in common. Their Degree and
Quality, the Respect and Authority is equal, and so is the Condition and Title
of their Children too. In Other Places there is one particular Wife, who is the
Principal, and a sort of Mistress above the rest; the Right of Inheritance is
limited to the Children by Her; They engross all the Honors, and Possessions,
and Pre-eminences of the Husband after his Death: As for the Others, they are
lodged and maintained apart, treated very differently from the former: In some
Places they are reputed Lawful Wives; in some they are only styled Concubines;
and their Children have no Pretension to Titles or Estates; but are provided
for by such annual Pensions, or other precarious ways of Subsisting, as the
Master of the Family thinks fit to allow them.

Divorce: Divorce differently practiced.
For with some, as particularly the Hebrews, and Greeks, and Armenians, they
never oblige Themselves to allege the particular Cause of Separation; nor are
they allowed to take a Wife to them a Second time, which they have once
divorced; So far from it, that they are permitted to Marry again to others. But
now in the Mohammedan Law, Separation must be appointed by a Judge, and after
Legal Process, (except it be done by the free Consent of both Parties) and the
Crimes alleged against the Woman must be some of so high a Nature, as strike
directly at the Root of this Institution, and are destructive and inconsistent
with the State of Marriage, or some of the principal Ends of it; such as
Adultery, Barrenness, Incongruity of Humors, Attempts upon the Life of the
other Party; and, after such Separation made, it is lawful for them to be
reconciled, and cohabit again, as often as they think sit. The Former of these
Methods seems much more prudent and convenient, that so there may be a closer
Restraint both upon the Pride and Insolence of Wives, when they lie at Mercy,
and may be cast off at Pleasure; and also upon the Humoursome and Peevish
Husbands, who will be more apt to check and moderate their Resentments, when
there is no Return, nothing to be got by repenting, after once Matters have
flown so high, as to provoke and effect a Separation. The Second, which
proceeds in a Method of Justice, brings the Parties upon the Public Stage,
exposes their Faults and Follies to the World, cuts them out from Second
Marriages; and discovers a great many things, which were much better kept
concealed. And, in case the Allegation be not fully proved; and so they
continue obliged to cohabit still, after all this mutual Complaining and
Disgrace, What a Temptation is here to Poisoning or Murder, to get rid that way
of a Partner of the Bed, which in Course of Law cannot be removed? And many of
these Villainies, no doubt, have been committed, of which the World never had
the least Knowledge or Suspicion. As at Rome particularly, before Divorce came
in use, a Woman who was apprehended for Poisoning her Husband, impeached other
Wives, whom she knew to have been guilty of the same Fact; and They again
others, till at last Threescore and Ten were all Attainted and Executed for the
same Fault, of whom People had not the least Jealousy, till this Discovery was
made. But that which seems the worst of all in the Laws relating to a Married
Life, is, that Adultery is scarce any where punished with Death; and all that
can be done in that Case, is only Divorce, and ceasing to cohabit; Which was an
Ordinance introduced by Justinian, One whom his Wife had in perfect Subjection:
And no wonder if She made use of that Dominion, (as she really did) to get such
Laws enacted, as made most for the Advantage of her own Sex. Now this leaves
Men in perpetual danger of Adultery, tempts them to malicious Desires of one
another's Death; the Offender that does the Injury is not made a sufficient
Example, and the Innocent Person that receives the Wrong, has no Reparation
made for it.

Of the Duty of Married Persons, See Book III. Chap. 12.

CHAP. XLVII. Of Parents and Children.
Paternal Authority.
Some Public, and others Private; but not any of them more agreeable to
Nature, not Any more absolute and extensive, than that of a Father over his
Children, (I choose to instance in the Father rather than the Mother, because
she being herself in a State of Subjection to her Husband, cannot so properly
be said to have her Children under her Jurisdiction.) But even this Paternal
Authority has not been at all Times, and in all Parts of the World equal and
alike. In some Ages and Places, and indeed of Old almost every where, it was
universal, Dion. Halicar. lib. 2. Antiq.
and without restraint: The Life and Death, Estates and Goods, the Liberty and
Honor, the Actions and Behavior of Children was entirely at Their Will; They
sued and were sued for them; They disposed of them in Marriage; the Labors of
the Children redounded to the Parents Profit; nay, They themselves were a kind
of Commodity; for among the Romans we sind this Article, Romans 1. in Suis. ff.
de lib. and posth.
in that which was called Romulus his Law; Parentum in Liberos omne Jus esto,
relegandi, vendendi, occidendi.
The Right of Parents over Children shall be entire and unlimited; they shall
have Power to abdicate and banish, to sell, and to put them to death. Only it
is to be observed, That all Children under Three Years old, were excepted out
of this Condition, because they could not be capable of offending in Word or
Deed, Aul. Gel. lib. 20. Aristot. Ethic. lib. 8. Caesar, lib. 6. de Bell. Gall.
Prosper Aquit. in Epist. Sigism.
nor to give any just Provocation for such hard Usage. This Law was afterward
confirmed and renewed, by the Law of the Twelve Tables; which allowed Parents
to sell their Children Three times: And the Persians, as Aristotle tells us,
the Ancient Gauls, as Caesar and Prosper agree; the Muscovites and Tartars,
might do it Four times. There want not some probable Reasons to persuade us,
that this Power had some Foundation, or Countenance at least, in the Law of
Nature; and that Instance of Abraham undertaking to slay his Son, has been
made use of, as an Argument to this purpose: For had This been a Thing against
his Duty, and such as the Authority of a Father could in no case extend to, he
would not (they tell you) ever have consented to it; nor have believed, that
this Command had proceeded from God, but rather have imputed it to some
Delusion upon his own Mind, if it had been no way reconcilable with Nature, the
Laws of which, God had established in the Beginning, and could not be thought
so to contradict Himself, as by any particular Order, to appoint a thing
altogether inconsistent with his own General Institution before. And
accordingly it is observable, that Isaac never went about to make any
Resistance, nor pleaded his own Innocence in Bar to what his Father went about
to do; as knowing that he only exerted the rightful Power he had over him. What
Force there is in this Argument, I shall not take upon me to determine. It is
sufficient for my present Purpose to observe, That allowing all this, yet it
does not in any degree take off from the Commendation due to Abraham's Faith;
for he does not pretend to Sacrifice his Son by Virtue of any such Inherent
Right over him, nor upon any Provocation, or Misdemeanour, which Isaac had
given him occasion to resent or punish; but purely in obedience to the Command
of Almighty God. The Case does not seem to differ much under the Law of Moses;
allowing only for some Circumstances, as to the manner of exercising this
Authority, which will be taken notice of by and by. Of This, and no less Extent
the Paternal Power seems to have been formerly in the greatest part of the
World, and so to have continued till the Time of the Roman Emperors. Among the
Greeks indeed, and the Egyptians, Diodor.
it does not seem to have been altogether so absolute; but even There, if a
Father happened to kill his Son unjustly, and without Provocation, the
Punishment inflicted for such Barbarity was no other than being shut up with
the Dead Body for Three Days together.

The Reasons and Effects of it.
and the Effects of so great and unlimited a Power being allowed to Fathers
over their Children, (which no doubt was a great advantage for the Advancement
of Virtue, the Improvement of Manners and Education, the restraining,
preventing, and chastising Extravagance and Vice, and of great good Consequence
to the Public too) seem to have been such as These.

First, likely to be so Officious; the Nearness of the Relation would render it
odious, and the Interest of their own Family would restrain them from
publishing their own Shame. Or, if they could be supposed to bring all they
knew of this kind upon the Open Stage, yet we know there are many Vices, and
Insolences, and Disorders, which the Laws and Justice of Nations are not
provided with Punishments for. To all which we may add, that there are many
Family-Quarrels, between Fathers and Children, Brothers and Sisters, upon the
account of dividing Estates and Goods, or several other Things, which, though sit
to be canvass'd and corrected within a Man's own Walls, would by no means do
well to be ripped up, and exposed to the World; and for These, as the Paternal
Authority is necessary, so it is sufficient to compose and quiet all Parties,
and put an End to Differences, that concern single Families only. And it was
reasonable for the Law to suppose, that no Father would make ill use of this
Power; that Men might very safely be entrusted with it, because of that very
tender Affection, which Nature inspires all Parents with, such as seems
altogether inconsistent with Cruelty toward their own Offspring: And this we
see the effect of Daily, in the frequent Intercessions made by Fathers, for the
Releasing or Mitigating those public Punishments, which they cannot but be
sensible are most justly inflicted; there being no greater Torment to any
Parent, than to see his Children under Pain or Disgrace. And where These
absolute Prerogatives were allowed, we meet with very few Instances of the
exerting their Power, and going to the Extremity of it, without Offenses very
heinous indeed; so that, in truth, if we regard the Practice, and compare That
with the Power it self, we shall have reason to look upon it as a useful
Terror, a Bugbear to keep Children in Awe, and fright them into Obedience,
rather than any Stretch of Rigor, that was actual, and in good earnest.

Its Decay.
(for the Decay of it is in truth to be attributed to Disuse, more than to any
Law expressly Repealing it, or Enacting the contrary) and it began most
remarkably to decline, when the Roman Emperors came to the Government: For
from the time of Augustus, or quickly after, it sunk apace, and lost all its
Vigor. And upon this Decay Children grew so stubborn and insolent against
their Parents, that Seneca in his Address to Nero, Lib. 1. de Clem.
says, their Own Eyes had seen more Parricides punished in Five Years then last
past, than there had been for the space of Seven Hundred Years before; that is,
from the first Foundation of Rome till That time. Till then, if a Father at any
time killed his Children, he was called to no Account, nor had any Punishment
inflicted upon him for the Fact; as we may gather evidently by the Examples of
Febvins the Senator, Salust. in Bell. Catalin. Valor. Maxim.
who slew his Son for being engaged in Catiline's Conspiracy; and several other
Senators, who proceeded against their Sons, and condemned them to Death by
virtue of their own Domestic Power, such as Cassius Tratius; or sentenced them
to perpetual Banishment, as Manlins Torquatus did his Son Syllanus. There were
indeed some Laws afterward, which appointed, that the Father should bring
Informations against the Children that offended, L. inauditum ad leg. Corn. F.
I. in suis de I. and posth. I. 3. Cod. de pa. potest.
and deliver them over to public Justice: And the Judge in such Cases was
obliged to pronounce Sentence as the Father should direct; in which there are
some Footsteeps of Antiquity. And these Laws, in abridging the Power of the
Fathers, proceeded very tenderly, and did not take it away entirely and openly,
but with great Moderation, and by halves only. These later Ordinances have some
Affinity to the Law of Moses, Deuteronomy. xxi.
which ordered the stubborn and Rebellious Son to be stoned, upon the Complaint
of the Parents, without requiring any farther Proof of the Charge than their
single Deposition; and provided the Presence and Concurrence of the Magistrate,
not so much for Examination and Trial of the Cause, as to prevent the Privacy
and Passion, which might attend Domestic Punishments, and so to render the
thing more public, and the Vengeance more exemplary, and full of Terror to
others. And thus, even according to the Mosaic Institution, the Paternal
Authority was more arbitrary and extensive, than it came to be since the Time
of the Roman Emperors. But if we descend a little Lower, and observe its
Decrease under Constantine the Great, then under Theodosius, and at last under
Justinian, we shall find it almost totally extinct. Hence it came to pass, that
Children took upon them to decline, and peremptorily deny Obedience to their
Parents; to refuse them a Part in their Possessions; nay, not to allow them so
much as convenient Maintenance and Relief in their Necessities. Hence they had
considence to enter Actions against them, and implead them in Courts of
Judicature; and an indecent, a most scandalous Thing in truth it is, to observe
how frequent such Suits have been. Some have been so wicked, or so mistaken, as
to excuse Themselves from Duty upon pretense of Religion; and dedicate That to
God, which their Parents had a Right to; as we find Our Blessed Savior
reproaches the Jews for doing; Matt. xv.
and the manner he mentions it in, shows plainly, that this impious kind of
Devotion was a Practice customary among them before his Time. Since that some
have acted after their Examples, even in the Profession of Christianity; and
many have held it lawful to kill a Father in one's own Defense, or in case he
became a Public Enemy to the State. But sure, if such Relations deserve Death,
it ought to be inflicted by some other Hand; and heretofore it was received as
a general Maxim, and admits of scarce any Exception. Nullum tantum scelus
admitti potest a patre, quod parricidio sit vindicandum; and nullum scelus
rationem habet.
That no Wickedness could be committed by a Father, the Heinousness whereof
would justify Parricide; to kill a Father is wicked, and no Wickedness can be
reasonable.

Now the Generality of the World do not seem duly sensible of how mischievous
Consequence to Mankind, this Abatement and Abolition of the Paternal Authority
has proved. The Governments, under which it was kept up, and vigorously
exerted, have flourished, and contained their Subjects in strict Duty. If upon
any Occasion it had been found by Experience too sharp and exorbitant, prudent
Care might have been taken to regulate and bring it under convenient
Restraints. But utterly to disannul and destroy it, is by no means agreeable to
Decency or Virtue, and least of all to the Advantage of the Public. For when
once the Reins are let loose, and Countenance is given to Disobedience in
private Families, it quickly grows to a general Spirit of Faction, and
Disorder, and Ungovernable Insolence; and the casting off the Yoke of the
Natural Parents, is a bold and dangerous Step toward Rebellion against the
Civil. The Effect whereof has been abundantly seen in the many Inconveniences,
which Governments have suffered upon the Relaxation or utter Rescinding of this
Authority; whereby in the Event they only clipped their own Wings, and encouraged
Enemies and Insurrections against Themselves, as was said just now.

The Reciprocal Duties of Parents and Children will be treated of Book III.
Chap. 14.

CHAP. XLVIII. Of Lords and their Slaves; Masters and Servants.
Slaves, and the Power of Lords or Masters over them, The use of Slaves
universal, but unnatural.
though it has been a thing received and practiced in all Places and all Ages of
the World, (excepting that it was considerably abated for about Four Hundred
Years, but now it has since revived and obtained again:) Yet I cannot forbear
looking upon it as a Monstrous Custom, and highly reproachful to Humane Nature.
Since Brutes have nothing of this Kind among Them; nor do They either compel
their Fellows by Violence and Fraud, or voluntarily submit themselves to
Captivity. This seems rather then to have been dispensed with, than approved by
the Law of Moses. But even this Indulgence, accommodated to the Necessities of
that People, and the Hardness of their Hearts, was not so rigorous as the
Practice of other Places; for neither was the Power so absolute, nor the
Slavery perpetual; but the One confined to Rules, and the Other terminated with
the Seventh or Sabbatical Year. Christianity finding the Usage Universal, did
not see fit to break in upon this Constitution, but left its Proselytes at
liberty in this Particular, as it did in a Permission of serving and dwelling
under Heathen and Idolatrous Princes and Masters. For This and many other
Things could not be abolished and set aside at once; but by giving some little
Discountenance to them, Time has worn them off gently, and by degrees.

Slaves may be distinguished into Four several Kinds. Several sorts of Slavery.
1. Such as are Natural, or born of Parents in that Condition. 2. Such as are
Slaves upon Force, made so by Conquest, and the Rights of War. 3. Adjudged
Slaves, such as are made and awarded to be such, either by way of Punishment
for some Crime, or for the Satisfaction of some Debt, which gives the Creditors
a Right to their Persons, and of employing them to their own Benefit and
Service. This Slavery was limited among the Jews only to a certain Season,
Seven Years at the most; the Sabbatical Year put an End to it all; but in other
Countries it continued till the Debt was discharged. 4. Voluntary Slaves, or
such as are of their own making, as Those who throw Dice for it, or who sell
their Liberty for a Sum of Money, as it has been the Custom to do in Germany;
Tacit. de mor. Ger.
and is still in some Parts even of the Christian World; or else such as freely
surrender up Themselves to the Service of another, and devote their Persons to
perpetual Slavery: And thus we read in the Law the Ancient Jews did, Exodus xxi.
Deuteronomy. xv.
whose Ears were appointed to be bored with an Awl, to the Door of the House,
in token of perpetual Servitude; and that they rather chose this Condition of
Life, than to go free, when it was in their Power. This last sort of voluntary
and chosen Captivity is, I confess, to Me, the most asTonishing of all the
rest; and though all manner of Slavery seems to be an Incroachment and Violence
upon Nature, yet sure no Kind of it can be so unnatural, as that which a Man
covets, and brings upon Himself. That Thing which makes Men Slaves upon
Constraint, is Avarice; The Cause of it.
and that which makes Men choose to be Slaves, is Cowardice, and base
Degeneracy of Spirit; for Lords made Men Slaves, because, when they had them in
their Power and Possession, there was more Profit to be got by keeping, than
there could be by killing them. And it is observable, that heretofore one of
the most valuable sorts of Wealth, and that which the Owners took greatest
Pride in, consisted in the Multitude, and the Quality of Slaves. In this
respect it was that Crassus grew rich above all other Romans; for besides Those
that continually waited upon him, he had Five Hundred Slaves kept constantly at
hard Work, and all the Gain of their several Arts and Labors, was daily
brought, and converted to his Advantage. And this, though very great, was not all
the Profit neither; for after that they had made a vast Account of their
Drudgery, and kept them a great while thus in Work and Service, their very
Persons were a Marketable Commodity, and some farther Gain was made in the Sale
of Them to other Masters.

Cruelties that have been exercised upon Slaves; The Cruel Usage of Slaves.
and Those not only such as the Tyranny of an inhumane Lord might put him upon,
but such as even the Public Laws have permitted and approved. They used to
Chain and Yoke them together, and so make them Till the Ground like Oxen; and
they do so to this Day in Barbary; lodge them in Ditches, or Bogs, or Pits, and
deep Caves; and when they were worn and wasted with Age and Toil, and so could
bring in no more Gain by their Service, the poor impotent Wretches were either
sold at a low Price, or drowned, and thrown into Ponds to feed their Lord's
Fish. They killed them, not only for the slightest and most insignificant
Offense, as the Breaking of a Glass, or the like; but upon the least
Suspicions, and most unaccountable Jealousies: Nay, sometimes merely to give
Themselves Diversion; as Flaminius did, who yet was a Person of more than
ordinary Character, and reputed a very Good Man in his Time. It is notorious,
that they were forced to enter the Lists, and combat and kill one another upon
the Public Theaters, for the Entertainment of the People. If the Master of the
House were Murdered under his own Roof, let who would be the Doer of it, yet
all the Slaves, though perfectly innocent of the Thing, were sure to go to Pot.
And accordingly we find, that when Pedanius, a Roman, was killed,
notwithstanding they had certain Intelligence of the Murderer, yet by express
Decree of the Senate, Four Hundred poor Wretches, that were his Slaves, were
put to Death, for no other reason, but their being so.

Rebellions, Insurrections, and Barbarities of Slaves, when they have made Head
against their Lords, and gotten them into their Power. And That, not only in
Cases of Treachery and Surprise; as we read of one Tragical Night in the City
of Tire; but sometimes in open Field, in regular Forces, and formed Battles, by
Sea and Land; all which gave Occasion for the use of that Proverb, That a Man
has as many Enemies as he has Slaves.

Christian Religion first, How they came to lesson.
and afterward the Mohammedan got ground and increased, the Number of Slaves
decreased, and the Terms of Servitude grew more easy and gentle. For the
Christians first, and afterward the Mahometans, who affected to follow the
Christians Examples, made it a constant Practice and Rule, to give all those
Persons their Freedom, who became Proselytes to their Religion. And this proved
a very great Invitation, and powerful Inducement, to convert and win Men over.
Insomuch that about the Year Twelve Hundred, there was scarce any such thing as
a Slave left in the World; except in such places only where neither of these
Two Persuasions had gained any Footing or Credit.

And the Poor to increase.
as the Number of Slaves fell away and abated, that of Poor People, and
Beggars, and Vagabonds multiplied upon us. And the Reason is very obvious; for
Those Persons, who during the State of Slavery, wrought for their Patrons, and
were maintained at Their Expense, when they were dismissed Their Families, lost
their Table, at the same time they received their Liberty; and when they were
thus turned loose into the World, to shift for Themselves, it was not easy for
them to find Means of supporting their Families, which, by reason of the great
Fruitfulness of People in low Condition generally, were very numerous in
Children; and thus they grew overstockt themselves, and filled the World with
Poor.

Return to Servitude.
and compelled them to return back again to Servitude in their own Defense.
Thus they were content to enslave Themselves, to truck and barter away their
Liberty, to set their Labors to Sale, and let out their Persons for Hire;
merely that they might secure to Themselves convenient Sustenance, and a quiet
Retreat; and lighten the Burden which the Increase of Children brought upon
them. Besides this pressing Occasion, and the Servitude chosen upon it, the
World has pretty much relapsed into the Using of Slaves again, by means of
those continual Wars which both Christians and Mahometans are eternally engaged
in; both against each other, and against the Pagans in the East and Western
Countries particularly. And though the Example of the Jews be so far allowed,
as a good Precedent, that they have no Slaves of their own Brethren and
Countrymen, yet of Strangers and Foreigners they have; and These are still kept
in Slavery, and under Constraint, notwithstanding they do come over to the
Profession of their Master's Religion.



The Duty of Masters and Servants is treated of Book III. Chap. 15.

CHAP. XLIX. Of Public Government, Sovereign Power, and Princes.
Private Power, The Nature and Necessity of Pub-blick Government.
the next thing that falls under our Consideration, is the Public, or that of
the State. Now, the State, that is to say, Government, or a Determinate Order,
and Establishment, for Commanding and Obeying, is the very Pillar and Support
of Humane Affairs, the Cement that knits and keeps them Fast and Strong; the
Soul that gives them Life and Motion, the Band of all Society which can never
subsist without it; the vital Spirit of this Body Politic, that enables Men,
so many Thousands of Men, to breath as One, and compacts all Nature together.

Arduum and subjectum fortunae cuncta regendi onus.
The Governing of Men, and their Affairs, is a very hard Undertaking, a heavy
Burden, and exposed to great variety of Chances. It often declines and
languishes; nay, sometimes falls to the Ground, by secret Misfortunes, and
unseen Causes. And though its rising to a just Height, is Gradual and Slow, a
Work of much Time, and great Pains and Prudence; yet the Ruins and Decays of it
are frequently sudden and surprising; and the Constitutions, which took up Ages
to finish and build up, are broken and thrown down in a Moment. It is likewise
exposed to the Hatred and Envy of all Degrees and Conditions. The High and the
Low watch it curiously, and are Jealous of all its Proceedings, and set
Themselves at Work perpetually, to endanger and undermine it. This Uneasiness,
and Suspicion, and general Enmity, proceeds partly from the Corrupt Manners and
Dispositions of the Persons in whom the Supreme Power is vested, and partly
from the Nature of the Power it self, of which you may take this following
Description.

Sovereignty, is properly a Perpetual and Absolute Power, What Sovereign Power
is.
Subject to no Limitation, either of Time, or of Terms and Conditions. It
consists in a Right of constituting and giving Laws to all in General, and to
each Person under its Dominion in Particular; and that, without consulting or
asking the Consent of such as are to be governed by them; and likewise in being
above all Restraints, or having Laws imposed upon it self from any other Person
whatsoever. For to Impose, and Command a Duty, argues Superiority, and That
which is Sovereign, can have no Superior. And, as another expresses it, It
infers a Right Paramount of making Reservations and Exceptions from the usual
Forms, (as the King in Courts of Equity corrects the Common Law:) For
Sovereignty, in its highest and strictest Importance, implies the Contrary to
Subjection, or the being bound by Humane Laws, either of others, or its own
Appointment, so as not to repeal or alter them, as there shall be Occasion. For
it is contrary to Nature, for all Men to give Law to Themselves, and to be
absolutely commnded by Themselves, in Things that depend upon their own Will.
Nulla Obligatio consistere potest, quae a voluntate promittentis statum capit.
No Obligation can continue firm, none can lie there, where the Person that
engages, has nothing but his own Will to bind him: And therefore Sovereign
Power, Properly so called, cannot have its Hands tied up by any other, whether
Living or Dead; neither its Own, nor its Predecessor's Decrees, nor the
Received Laws of the Country can be Unalterable or Irreversible. This Power
has been compared by some to Fire, to the Sea, to a Wild Beast, which it is
very hard to tame, or make treatable; it will not endure Contradiction, it will
not be molested, or if it be, it is a Dangerous Enemy, a just and severe
Avenger of them that have the Hardiness to provoke it. Potestas res est, quae
moneri doecrique non vult, and cistrigationem aegre fert.
Power (says one) is a Thing that seldom bears to be admonished or instructed,
and is generally very impatient of Contradiction or Reproof.

Its Properties.
and by which it is distinguished from other Sorts of Power, are, the Giving
Judgment, and pronouncing Definitive Sentences, whereby all contending Parties
shall be concluded, and from whence there lies no Appeal. A full Authority to
make Peace and War, Creating, and Depriving Magistrates, and Officers; granting
Indulgences, and dispensing with the Rigor of the Laws upon particular
Hardships, and extraordinary Emergencies; levying of Taxes; coining and
adjusting the Value of Money, ordering what shall be current in its Dominions,
and at what Prices; Receiving of Homage and Acknowledgments from its Subjects,
and Embassies from Foreigners; Requiring Oaths of Fidelity from the Persons
under its Protection, and administering them in Controversies and Trials of
Right and Wrong. But all is reduced at last, and comprehended under the
Legislative Power, the enacting such Laws as it shall think fit, and by Them
binding the Consciences of Those who live within its Dominions. Some indeed
have added Others, which are so small and trivial in Comparison, that they are
scarce worth naming after the Former; such as the Admiralty, Rights of the Sea,
Title to Wracks upon the Coast, Confiscation of Goods in Cases of Treason,
Power to change the Language, the Ensigns of Government, and Title of Majesty.

Greatness and Sovereignty is infinitely coveted by almost All. But wherefore
is it? Surely for no other Reason so much, as that the Outside is Gay and
Glorious, Beautiful and Glittering; but the Inside is hid from common
Observation. Every body sees the Plenty, the Pomp, and the Advantages of a
Crown, but few or none at a distance are acquainted with the Weight, the Cares,
the Troubles, and the Dangers of it. It is True indeed, To Command is a Noble
and a Divine Post; but it is as True, that it is an Anxious, a Cumbersome, and
a Difficult One. Upon the same Account it is, that the Persons in that Dignity
and Elevation, are esteemed and reverenced much above the Rate of Common Men.
And very Just it is they should be so, for this Opinion is of great Use to
extort that Respect and Obedience from the People, upon the due Payment
whereof, all the Peace and Quiet of Societies depend. But if we take these
great Persons apart from their Public Character, and consider them as Men, we
shall find them just of the same Size, and cast in the same Mould, with other
common Men; nay, too often, of worse Dispositions, and not so liberally dealt
with by Nature, as many of their Inferiors. We are apt to think that every
Thing a Prince does, must needs proceed upon great and weighty Reasons, because
all they do is in the Event of great and general Importance to Mankind; but in
truth the Matter is much otherwise, and They think, and resolve, and act, just
like One of Us; For Nature has given Them the same Faculties, and moves them
by the same Springs. The Provocation, which would set Two private Neighbors to
Scolding and Quarrelling, makes a Public War between Two States; and what One
of Us would whip his Child or his Page for, incenses a Monarch to chastise a
Province, that has offended him. Their Wills are as liable to Levity as Ours,
but their Power and the Effect of what they will, is incomparably greater. But
still Nature is the same in the Fly, as in the Elephant, and both are actuated
by the same Appetites and Passions. Nay, let me take leave to add, that,
besides those Passions, and Defects, and Natural Qualifications, and
Abatements, which they share in common with the least and meanest of their
Servants and Adorers; there are some Vices and Inconveniences in a manner
peculiar to Them alone; such as the Eminence of their Condition, and the vast
Extent of their Power inspires them with a more than ordinary Tendency, with
vehement and almost unavoidable propensions to.

Invincible Pride, The Manners and Dispositions of Great Persons.
and Self-conceit. Du^^^s and very insolens: Ad recta flecti regius non vult
tumor.
An abounding in their own Sense, which is Stiff, and Inflexible, incapable of
Truth, and disdaining better advice. Licentiousness and Violence; Id esse regni
maximum pignus putant, si quicquid aliis non licet, solis licet.
which looks upon a Liberty of doing what no body else may do, as the
particular Distinction, and most Glorious Privilege of their Character. So that
their Favorite Motto is, Quicquid libet, licet.
My Will is a Law. Suspicion and Jealousy, for they are Suapte Natura
Potentiae anxii.
Naturally tender and fearful of their Power; nay, fearful sometimes even of
their own Children and nearest Relations; Suspectus semper invisusque
dominantibus quisquis proximus destinatur, adeo ut displiceant etiam civilia
Filiorum ingenia.
The next in Succession is always looked upon with an Evil and Jealous Eye, by
the Person in present Possession of the Throne; so that any the least Genius of
Government, or interesting themselves in Public Affairs, is very unacceptable
in the Sons of Princes; And hence it is that they are so often in Fears and
mighty Consternations, for Ingenia Regum prona ad formidinem.
it is usual and natural to Kings, to live under continual Apprehensions.

Kings and Sovereign Princes have above Those of meaner Condition, seem indeed
to be Mavelous Great, and Glorious; but when nicely considered, they are in
Truth but very Thin and Slight, and little more than mere Imagination. But,
were they much above, what really they are, it is certain they are dearly
bought at the Expense of the many Weighty, Solid and Substantial Troubles and
Inconveniences that constantly attend them. The Name and the Title of
Sovereign, the Splendour and Formalities of a Court, and all the Pomp and Parade
that draws our Eyes and Observation, carry a Beautiful, and Desirable
Appearance, such as raises our Wonder, and kindles our Wishes and Desires; but
the Burden and the Inside of all this Shining Pageantry, is Hard and Knotty,
Laborious and Painful. There is Honor in Abundance, but very little Joy or
Ease; It is a Public and an Honorable Servitude, an Illustrious Misery, a
Wealthy Captivity. The Chains are of Gold, but still they are Chains. And it is
worth our While to observe the Behavior and the Reflections of Augustus,
Marcus Aurelius, Pertinax, Dioclesian, upon this Occasion; and the wretched End
of most of the Twelve Caesar's, and many Others of their Successors in the
Empire. But, now in Regard these seem Words of Course only, such as very few
will give any Credit to, because they suffer Themselves to be imposed upon by a
gay and deceitful Face of Power, I shall think it worth while to clear this
Matter, by giving a distinct and particular Account of some Inconveniences and
Miseries, with which the Condition of Sovereign Princes is constantly encumbered.

In the Discharge of their Office.
and acquitting Themselves of so weighty a Charge. For if it be so very Hard a
Thing, as we find by sad Experience it is, to govern ones self well, what
infinite Hardship must we in reason suppose there is, in governing a Multitude
of People? It is certainly much more Easy and Pleasant to follow, than to
lead; to have no more to do, than only to keep a plain beaten Road, than to
beat out a Path for Others; to obey, than to direct and command; to answer for
one's single self, than to be responsible for one's Self and a great many More
besides. Ut satius multo jam sit parere quietum
Quam regere imperio res velle --
Lucret. lib. V.
And thus it is better than proud Scepters sway,
To live a quiet Subject, and obey.
Creech. To all This we may add, that it is highly Necessary for the Person,
whose Duty it is to Command, to be more excellent and exemplary, than Them who
are commanded by him; as that Great Commander Cyrus, very truly observed. And
this Difficulty we cannot be better made sensible of, by any Argument, than
Matter of Fact; which proves to us Experimentally, how very few Persons,
History makes mention of in this Character, who have in all Points been, what
they ought to be. Tacitus says, that of all the Roman Emperors till that Time,
Vespasian was the only true good Man; and another ancient Author has taken the
Confidence to affirm, that the Names of all the good Princes that ever were,
might be engraven within the Compass of a Ring.

In their Pleasures and Actions of their Lise.
of which Men usually think, (but they think very much amiss) that They have a
greater Share, and more perfect Enjoyment, than the rest of Mankind. For in
truth their Condition, in this Respect, is insinitely Worse than that of
Private Men. The Luster and Eminence of great Persons gives them great
Inconvenience in the Fruition, of what it furnishes them with Power and
Opportunities for. They are too much exposed to Public View, move openly and
in check, and are perpetually watched, controlled, and censured, even to their
very Thoughts, which the World will always take a Liberty of guessing at, and
censuring, though. they are no competent Judges, nor can possibly have any
Knowledge of the Matter. Besides this Restraint, there is likewise some
Disadvantage in the very Easiness they feel of doing whatever their Inclination
leads them to, and every Thing bending, and yielding to their Pleasure; for
This takes away all that Relish and pleasing Sharpness, which is necessary to
render a Thing Delightful; and Nothing is, or can be so to us, which has no
Mixture or Dissiculty to recommend and heighten it. A Man that never gives
himself time to be Dry, will never be sensible what Pleasure there is in
quenching one's Thirst; and all Drinking will be flat and insipid to him.
Fullness and Plenty is one of the most troublesome Things in the World, and,
instead of helping forward, does but provoke us to nauseate our Happiness.
Pinguis amor nimiumque potens in taedia nobis
Vertitur, and Stomacho dulcis ut esca nocet.
Ovid. Amor. L. 2. Eleg. 19.
Gross easy Love does like gross Diet, pall;
In squeasie Stomachs Honey turns to Gall.
Dryden. The greatest Interruption to our Enjoyments, and the most distasteful
Thing that can happen to us, is Abundance: To be cloyed is to lose All. And
therefore we may say, that Princes are not capable of such a thing as Action;
for this cannot be lively and vigorous without some Degree of Difficulty and
Resistance: Other Men may be said to live, and move, and act, who meet with
Obstruction and Opposition; but They who meet with none, may more truly be said
to dream, or walk in their Sleep, or to glide along insensibly through the whole
Course of their Lives.

Marriage. In their Marriage.
The Matches made by Persons of inferior Quality are infinitely more free and
easy; the effect of Choice, the result of Affection, more void of Constraint,
and full of Satisfaction. One great Reason, no doubt, of this Difference is,
that Common Men have greater Choice, and may find great Variety and Numbers
equal with Themselves, to take a Wife out of; But Kings and Princes are but
few; and therefore if They resolve to marry suitably to Themselves, there can
be no great picking and choosing in the Case. But the other Reason is, and
indeed the more considerable of the Two, That Private Persons have nothing
farther to aim at beyond their own particular Concerns; They consult their own
Comfort and Convenience; but Princes are often confined and tied up by public
Considerations. Their Marriages are vast Intrigues of State, and designed to be
instrumental in securing the Happiness and Peace of the World in general. Great
Persons do not Marry for Themselves, but for the common Good of Nations and
Kingdoms. And this is what they ought to be more in love with, and tender of,
than of their Wife and Children. Upon this Account they are frequently obliged
to hearken to Proposals where there is neither Affection nor Delight to invite
them; they often engage themselves to Persons, whom they are so far from being
taken with, that sometimes they never know nor see them, till it is out of
their Power to retreat. There is no such thing as Love or Liking between the
Parties; but the short of the Matter is, Such a great Prince marries such a
great Princess, which, if he had been in another Capacity, he would never have
chosen or consented to. But the Public was concerned, and is served by it; and
he is content to enslave Himself for his whole Life, because that Alliance was
necessary to be contracted, for the strengthening his Interest, and the
security of his Kingdoms; and the mutual Benefit and Ease which Nations may
receive by such a convenient Union.

enjoy in Conversation with one another. The Reason is obvious; because every
Man thinks himself bound in good Manners to yield to Them, to save a Decency,
and not suffer them to be outdone; and had rather balk their Own Honor, and
abate of what they could do upon these Occasions, than give Offense to a
Prince, whom they know Ambitious of being thought the Conqueror of all that
contend with him. Now the Bottom and Truth of all this Matter is, that upon
pretense of Deference and Respect, such Great Men are abused, and treated with
great Scorn, and secret Contempt; which gave occasion to a wise Man to say,
that the Children of Princes were in a very ill way of Education, for they
learnt nothing as they should do, except the Art of Riding a Managed Horse;
because in all other Cases Men yield, and adjudge the Prize to them; but this
Beast, who is not capable of Flattery, nor has learnt the Arts of Courtship
and Complaisance, makes no difference between the Prince and his Groom, and
throws either of them without distinction. Several great Men have therefore
refused the Applauses of Spectators, and scorned their formal Commendations,
saying, I should take this kindly, and be proud of it, if it came from Persons
that durst say otherwise, and who would take that generous Freedom of finding
Fault with Me, when I gave them a just occasion of doing so.

Incapacity of Traveling.
and the mighty Advantages of seeing the World. For they are perfectly
Imprisoned within their own Country, and generally cooped up within the
Precincts of their Court and there they are hedged in, as it were, with their
own Creatures; exposed to the View of Spectators, and the Censure of
Impertinent Tattlers and Busybodies, that watch and dog them every where,
even in their most secret Actions. Which made King Alphonso say, that in this
Respect the very Asses had more Liberty, and were in a better Condition, than
Kings.

As also of mutual and cordial Friendship.
the being shut out from all sincere Friendship, and mutual Society, which is
the very sweetest and most valuable Advantage of Humane Life; but such a one as
can never be enjoyed, except among Equals, or such at least between whom there
is no very great Inequality. Now the Elevation of a Prince is so high, and the
Distance at which his Subjects stand below him so very great, that it makes any
intimate, and free Correspondence impracticable. All the Services, and
Compliments, and humble Formalities paid them, come from such Hands as must do
what they do, and dare not do otherwise. They are by no means the effect of
Friendship, but of servile Submission, and Interest, and Design. All their
zealous Professions are not for His sake, but their Own; to ingratiate and to
raise Themselves; or else they are a Matter of Custom and Show only. Which we
see plainly they often are, from the vilest and most wicked Kings being served,
and reverenced, and addressed to, in the very same manner with the best, and most
truly deserving those Honors; and even Them whom the People hate and curse,
with Those whom they cordially love and adore. But still, whether a Prince be
the One or the Other of these, no body can make any Conjecture at all from
outward Forms and Appearances; The Pomp, the Ceremony, the Complement, and the
whole Face and Behavior of a Court, is always alike: Which Julian the Emperor
was so sensible of, that when some of his Courtiers commended his Justice, he
made Answer, That he indeed should have some Temptation to grow proud upon
their Praises, but that he considered whom they came from; and they who gave
him good Words then, durst not take upon them to Chide him when he happened to
deserve it.

Being kept in Ignorance.
in which they exceed the Miseries of common Men; and That which perhaps is of
all others the worst in it self, and most destructive to the public Safety,
is, That they are not at liberty to use their own Discretion in the choice of
Servants and Officers of Honor and Trust; nor have Opportunities of attaining
to a true and perfect Knowledge of Things. They are never suffered to know All;
nor are they ever thoroughly acquainted what condition their Affairs are really
in; some better Face put upon the good part, and some part concealed or
colored over, which is unfortunate or ill-manag'd, and would be unacceptable,
if rightly represented. As little are they let in to the true Characters of
Men, and consequently, who are fit to be employed and trusted. And what can be
more miserable than such a State of Ignorance as This; when They, whose concern
it is to know best, are far from understanding truly, either what is to be
done, or who are most proper to do it? Alas! they are encompassed, and
blockaded up, as it were, by People of the first Quality, whom there is no
getting loose from: Either such as are their own Relations, or who, upon the
Account of their Families, and Honors, and Places, or by long Custom and
Prescription, are so fixed in Authority, and have so great a Concern in the
Management of Affairs, that it is not advisable or safe to give them Disgust.
They must be caressed, and preferred, and have no ground of Jealousy or
Discontent given them: If Offices of the highest Consequence are to be disposed
of, These Persons must not be overlooked; if, when they are thus employed, they
prove incapable or unfit, the Retreat is difficult; All the Nobility of their
Alliance resent their Slight, or their Disgrace; and the mending an Improper
Choice, or the making a Proper One, is sometimes in hazard of bringing All into
Confusion. Now these Persons, who make it their Business to keep their Prince
constantly muffled up, and never let him see the World, take good care that
nothing shall appear to him as it really is; and that all such as are truly
better and more useful Men than Themselves, shall never gain free Access to
him, nor have their Abilities known. O! it is a wretched thing to see nothing
but with other Peoples Eyes; and to hear nothing but with other Men's Ears; as
Princes, whose Eminence will not admit of Freedom, and Plain-dealing, and
promiscuous Conversation, are under a necessity of doing. But that which makes
the Misery complete, and the very worst that can be, is, that, commonly
speaking, Princes and Great Persons are by a strange sort of Fatality, destined
to, and in the possession of Three sorts of Men, who are the very Bane and Pest
of Mankind, (viz.) Flatterers, Projectors for raising Money, and Informers. And
these under a specious, but counterfeit Pretense, either of Zeal and Affection
for their Prince, (as the Two former do) or of Integrity, and Virtue, and
Reformation, (as the last) instead of improving or amending either, utterly
deprave and ruin both Prince and People.

Masters of their own Wills, than any other Persons. For in all their
Proceedings, there are infinite Considerations and Respects, which they are
bound to observe, and these captivate and constrain their Designs, and
Inclinations, and Desires. In maxima fortuna minima licentia.
The greater any Man's Station and Capacity is, the less he is at his own
Disposal. This one would think should prevail for fair Quarter at least, and
favorable Allowances for what they do; but instead of being pitied or lamented
for this Hardship, they are the most barbarously treated, the most severely
censured, and traduced, of any Men living. For every bold Fellow sets up for a
Politician, and undertakes to guess at their Meanings, to penetrate into their
very Hearts and Thoughts. Abditos Principis sensus, and si quid occultius parat
exquirere, illicitum, anceps, nec ideo assequare.
To pry too curiously into the secret Intentions of a Prince, is unlawful; or
if it were not, yet it is but doubtful, and a Guess at best, what we cannot
compass, and therefore ought not to attempt. The Cabinets of Princes are
Sacred, and their Breasts ought to be much more so. These busy Men cannot
discern them, and yet they are eternal^y arraigning and sentencing; They have a
quite different Prospect of Things; and see them under another Face, from what
they appear to Those at the Helm; or if they saw them both alike, yet both are
not equally capable of understanding the Intricacies of them. Intrigues of
State are Things above a Vulgar Capacity; but notwithstanding, every Man
expects his Prince should do what He thinks most convenient, and blames his
Conduct if he do otherwise; there is no Favor, no Patience to be obtained for
any thing contrary to each Man's Private Sentiments, though it be in it self
never so fit, never so necessary, never so impossible to have been managed
otherwise. In a Word, every Shop, every Coffee-house sits in Judgment upon
their Governors; and without hearing or knowing the Merits of the Cause,
proceed to severe and saucy Condemnations of Them.

Their miserable End.
that Princes come to a very untimely and unfortunate End; not only such of
Them as by Usurpation and Tyranny provoke Men to bring it upon them, for this
is not much to be wondered at, and such have no more than their Due; but,
(which is a miserable Case indeed) Those who are most Rightful in their Title,
and most regular, and just, and gentle in the Administration of their
Government. How frequent Instances of this kind does the Roman History present
us with, in those Emperors that followed after the Civil Wars of Pompey and
Caesar? And not to go so far back, we know that Henry III. of France, was
Assassinated by a little insignificant Friar in the midst of an Army of Forty
Thousand Men; and infinite other Examples of Poysonings, Murders, and villainous
Conspiracies are to be found in all Ages. Ad generum Cereris sine caede and
sangu^ne pauci
Descendunt Reges, and sicca morte Tyranni.

Kings post down to the Shades in Blood; few stay
For Common Deaths, and Nature's slow decay.
A Man would be almost tempted to imagine, that as Storms and Tempests, seem to
wreek their Spite most upon the towering Pride of the loftyest Buildings, so
there are some malicious Spirits, that envy, and make it their Business to
humble and ruin, and trample down the Majesty and Greatness of Those, who
stand most exalted here below. Usque adeo res humanas vis abdita quaedam
Obterit, and pulchros fasces, saevasque secures
Proculcare, ac ludibrio sibi haberi videtur.
Lucret. Lib. 5.
And hence we fancy unseen Powers in Things
Whose Force and Will such strange Confusion brings,
And spurns and overthrows our greatest Kings.
Creech

Sovereign Princes is above all Others encumbered with Difficulties, and exposed
to Dangers. Their Life, provided it be Innocent and Virtuous, is infinitely
laborious, and full of Cares; If it be Wicked, it is then the Plague and
Scourge of the World; hated and cursed by all Mankind; and whether it be the
One or the Other, it is beset with inexpressible Hazards; For the greater any
Governor is, the less he can be secure; the less he can trust to Himself; and
yet the more need he has to be secure, and not to trust Others, but Himself.
And this may satisfy us, how it comes to pass, that the being betrayed and
abused, is a thing very natural and easy to happen, a common, and almost
inseparable Consequence of Government and Sovereign Power.

Of the Duty of Princes, see Book III. Chap. 16.

CHAP. L. Of Magistrates.
Degrees of Magistrates, with regard both to the Honor, and the Power that
belongs to them: For These are the two considerable Points to be observed in
distinguishing them, and they are entirely independent upon one another; They
may be, and often are each of them single and alone. Sometimes Those Persons
who are in the most honorable Posts, have yet no great Matter of Authority or
Power lodged in their Hands; as the King's Council, Privy-Counsellors in some
Governments, and Secretaries of State: Some have but One of these two
Qualifications; others have Both; and all have them in different Degrees; but
those are properly, and in strict speaking, Magistrates, in whom both Honor
and Power meet together.

Magistrates are in a middle Station, and stand between the Prince and Private
Men; subordinate to the One, but superior to the Other; They carry Justice
home, and hand it down from above; but of this they being only the Ministers
and Instruments, can have no manner of Power inherent in Themselves, when the
Prince Himself, who is the Fountain of Law and Justice, is present. As Rivers
lose their Name and their Force, when they have emptied and incorporated their
Waters into the Sea, and as Stars disappear at the Approach of the Sun; so all
the Authority of Magistrates in the Presence of the Sovereign, whose Deputies
and Vicegerents They are, is either totally suspended, or upon sufferance only.
And the Case is the same if we descend a little lower, and compare the
Commissions of Subalterns, and inferior Officers, with Those in a higher and
more general Jurisdiction. Those that are in the same Commission are all upon
the Level; there is no Power or Superiority There over one another; all that
they can do, is to consult together, and be assisting to each other by
concurrence; or else to obstruct and restrain each other, by opposing what is
doing, and preventing its being done.

Magistrates judge, condemn, and command, either according to the Form and
express Letter of the Law; (and then the Decisions they give, and the Sentences
they pronounce, are nothing else but a putting the Law in execution) or else
they proceed upon Rules of Equity, and reasonable Consideration, (and then this
is called the Duty of the Magistrate.)

Magistrates cannot alter their own Decrees, nor correct the Judgment they have
given, without express Permission of the Sovereign, upon Penalty of being
adjudged Falsifiers of the Public Records. They may indeed revoke their own
Orders, or they may suspend the Execution of them for some time, as they shall
see Occasion. But when once a Cause is brought to an Issue, and Sentence given
upon a full and fair Hearing, they have no Power to retract that Judgment, nor
to mend or try it over again, without fresh Matter require it.

Of the Duty of Magistrates. See Book III. Chap. 17.

CHAP. LI. Lawgivers and Teachers.
IT is a Practice very usual with some Philosophers and Teachers, to prescribe
such Laws and Rules, as are above the Proportions of Virtue, and what the
Condition of Humane Nature will suffer very few, if any at all to come up to.
They draw the Images much bigger and more beautiful than the Life; or else set
us such Patterns of Difficult and Austere Virtue, as are impossible for us to
equal, and so discourage many; and render the Attempt it self Dangeous, and of
ill Consequence to some. These are merely the Painter's Fancy, like Plato's
Republic, Sir Thomas More's Utopia, Cicero's Orator, or Horace his Poet. Noble
Characters indeed, and a Collection of acknowledged Excellencies in
Speculation; but such as the World wants living Instances of. The Best and most
perfect Lawgiver, who in marvelous Condescension was pleased himself to be
sensible of our Infirmities, has showed great Tenderness and Compassion for
them, and wisely considered what Humane Nature would bear. He has suited all
Things so well to the Capacities of Mankind, that those Words of His are True,
even in this Respect also, My Yoke is easy, and my Burden is light.

Now, where these Powers are not duly consulted, the Laws are first of all
Unjust; for some Proportion ought to be observed between the Command, and the
Obedience; the Duty imposed, and the Ability to discharge it. I do not say,
These Commands should not exceed what is usually done, but what is possible to
be done; for what Vanity and Folly is it to oblige People to be always in a
Fault, and to cut out more Work, than can ever be finished? Accordingly we may
frequently observe, that these rigid Stretchers of Laws, are the First that
expose them to public Scorn, by their own Neglect; and, like the Pharisees of
old, lay heavy Burdens upon others, which they themselves will not so much as
touch with one of their Fingers. These Examples are but too obvious in all
Professions; This is the Way of the World. Men direct one Thing, and practice
another; and That, not always through Defect or Corruption of Manners, but
sometimes even out of Judgment and Principle too.

Another Fault too frequent is, That many Persons are exceeding Scrupulous and
Nice in Matters which are merely Circumstantial, or free and indifferent in
their own Nature; even above what they express themselves in some of the most
necessary and substantial Branches of their Duty, such as the Laws of God, or
the Light of Nature have bound upon them. This is much such another
Extravagance, as lending to other People, while we neglect to pay our own
Debts. A Pharisaical Ostentation, which our Heavenly Master so severely exposes
the Jewish Elders for, and is at the Bottom no better than Hypocrise; a mocking
of God, and Miserable deluding of their own Souls.

Seneca indeed has said something concerning the Impracticableness of some
Duties, which, if rightly observed, is of good Use; but then it must not be
over-strain'd, nor applied to all Occasions indifferently. Quoties parum
fiduciae est, in his, in quibus imperas, amplius exigendum est quam satis est,
ut praestetur quantum satis est. In hoc omnis Hyperbole excedit, ut ad Verum
Mendacio veniat.
When ever (says he) you have Reason to distrust the due performance of the
Precepts or Laws you establish, it is necessary to require something more than
will just serve the Turn, to the intent, That which is sufficient may be sure
not to be neglected. For all Hyperboles and Excesses of this kind are useful to
this purpose, that Men, by having something expressed which is not true, may be
brought to just Ideas of that which is true.

With this Quotation our Author ends his Chapter in the older Edition, which I
thought convenient to add here; and not only so, but in regard I am sensible,
what perverse Use Licentious Men may make of the former Objection to the
Prejudice of Religion, and in particular Vindication of their own Neglects and
Vicious Lives; and also what Occasions of Scruple and Disquiet it may minister
to some well meaning Persons, when they compare their own Defects with the
Perfection of the Divine Laws; I beg the Reader's Leave to insert at large what
a Learned and Excellent Writer of our own has delivered to this purpose. And
this I hope, if well considered, may both confute the Licentious, and quiet the
Doubting and Dissatisfied in the Point before us.

Laws (says he) must not be depressed to our Imperfection, Dr. Barrow Vol. I.
Sermon. xxvi.
nor Rules bent to our Obliquity; but we must ascend toward the Perfection of
Them, and strive to conform our Practice to Their Exactness. If what is
prescribed, be according to the Reason of Things, Just and Fit, it is enough,
although our Practice will not reach it. For what remains may be supplied by
Repentance, and Humility, in him that should obey; by Mercy and Pardon in him
that does command.

In the Prescription of Duty it is just, that what may be required (even in
Rigor) should be precisely determined; though in Execution of Justice, or
Dispensation of Recompense, Consideration may be had of our Weakness: Whereby
both the Authority of our Governor, may be maintained, and his Clemency
glorified.

It is of great Use, that by comparing the Law with our Practice, and in the
Perfection of the One, discerning the Defect of the Other; we may be humbled,
may be sensible of our Impotency, may thence be forced to seek the Helps of
Grace, and the Benefit of Mercy.

Were the Rule never so low, our Practice would come below it; it is therefore
expedient that it should be high; that at least we may rise higher in
Performance than otherwise we should do. For the higher we aim, the nearer we
shall go to the due Pitch; as He that aims at Heaven, although he cannot
reach it, will yet shoot higher, than He that aims only at the House Top.

The Height of Duty does prevent Sloth and Decay in Virtue, keeping us in
wholesome Exercise, and in continual Improvement, while we are always climbing
toward the Top, and straining unto farther Attaintment. The sincere
Prosecution of which Course, as it will be more Profitable to Us, so it will be
no less Acceptable to God, than if we could thoroughly fulfill the Law; For in
Judgment God will only reckon upon the Sincerity and Earnestness of our
Endeavor; so that if we have done our Best, it will be taken, as if we had
done All. Our Labor will not be lost in the Lord; for the Degrees of
performance will be considered, and he that has done his Duty in part, shall
be proportionably recompensed; according to that of St. Paul, Every Man shall
receive his own reward according to his own Work. Hence sometimes we are
enjoined to be perfect as our Heavenly Father is perfect; and to be Holy as God
is Holy; otherwhile to go on to Perfection, and to press toward the Mark; which
Precepts, in Effect do import the same Thing; but the latter implies the
former, although in Attainment impossible, yet in Attempt very profitable. And
surely he is likely to write best, who proposes to himself the fairest Copy
for his Imitation.

In fine, if we do act what is possible, or as we can, do conform to the Rule
of Duty, we may be sure, that no Impossibility of any Sublime Law can prejudice
us.

I say of any Law, for -- many, perhaps every one Evangelical Law are alike
repugnant to corrupt Nature, and seem to surmount our Ability.

Thus far that Reverend Person, whose Argument I know not whether I ought to
ask pardon for representing so largely; but I was willing to give it entire,
for the greater Satisfaction of Them who think themselves concerned to consider
it: And likewise, that it might be of more Use, when applied, (as very
appliable it is) to other Laws and Precepts, wherein Religion is not
immediately concerned. In short, a Lawgiver and a Judge are two very different
Characters, and such as require very different Methods, and Principles; for it
is one Thing to Establish, and Another to Execute the Law. And the want of
observing this Distinction occasions all the Complaints and Declamatory Strains
we hear, against Moral and Revealed Religion, as if they imposed Things merely
Romantic, and Imaginary. To all which I add too, that though we none of us can
attain to Perfection, yet most of us might go much greater Lengths toward it,
than we do. And that This is often made an unnecessary Pretense, a Cloak to our
Folly, or Sloth, or indulged Vices; which, when they have all of them been
wilful and affected, we palliate and excuse, by taking Sanctuary very
improperly, in the Infirmities of Humane Nature, the Imperfections and Failings
of the best Men, and the Impossibility and Impracticableness of the Duties
imposed upon us.

CHAP. LII. Of the Common People.
BY the Common People, here, we are not to understand all that have no Part in
the Government, and whose only Business is to Obey; but I mean the Rout and
vulgar Crowd, the Dregs and Rubbish of the Commonwealth; Men of a Mean,
Slavish, and Mechanical Spirit and Condition, let them cover, or call, or set
Themselves off how they will. Now, This is a many-headed Monster; such as
cannot be described in a little Compass; Inconstant and Changeable, Restless
and Rolling, like the Waves of the Sea; They are ruffled and calmed, They
approve and disapprove the self-same Thing, in a Moment of Time: Nothing in the
World can be more casie, than to manage and turn this Bawble which Way and into
what Form you please; they Laugh or Cry, are Angry or Pleased, or in any other
Passion, just as one would have them; They love not War for the Sake of its
End, nor Peace for the Sake of the Quiet it brings, but they are fond both of
the One and the Other; because each is New, and always makes some Change.
Confusion puts them upon desiring Order; and when they are composed, they hate
Order and Regularity then, as much as they did Confusion before. They are
perpetually running from one Extreme to another; fond of Contraries; all
Seasons and Times are lost to them, except what is not; for they feed only upon
the Future. Hi vulgi mores odisse, praesentia, ventura cupere, praeterita
celebrare.
These (says one) are the Qualities, This the constant Custom and Practice of
the Common People, to hate and decry the Present, to be eager and desirous of
the Future; extravagantly to commend and extol Things and Times that are past.

News, but especially such as is ill and disasterous; and whatever they hear
reported, they take it for granted must needs be true; Let a Man but come
provided with some fresh Story, and give it out that it is so, and he shall
whistle them together as thick as Swarms of Bees at the tinkling of a Brass-Pan.

Tacit.
Plebi non Judicium, non Veritas. Ex Opinione multa, ex Veritate pauca judicat.
There is no such thing as Judgment or Truth to be met with among the Vulgar;
for they discern nothing. Cie
They are persuaded frequently by common Opinion, but very seldom by the Truth
of the Thing.

the Wealth and Prosperity, the Successes and Advancements of others, with a
jealous and an evil Eye. They always take the weakest and the worst Side; give
countenance to Knaves, and hate Persons of Honor and Quality, without knowing
any manner of Reason for it, except that One, that they are higher and better
than Themselves, more esteemed, and well spoken of.



Ingenio mobili, seditiosum, discordiosum, cupidum rerum novarum, quieti and
otio adversum.
disposed to Mutiny and Faction, Troublesome, and fond of Change; Salust.
mortal Enemies to Peace, and Order, and Concord; but especially, when they get
any Body to Head or Lead them on, for then they are insolent and insupportable.
Like the Sea, which is smooth and calm by Nature, but when put into Agitation
by the Winds, it swells, and curls, and foams, and roars; just so the Madness
of the People is blown up, and bears down all with the impetuous Torrent. And
again, Take off their Ringleaders, and they fall flat before you, are all in
Disorder and Confusion, and quite dead with Fear, and Terror, and
Astonishment; Sine rect^re ^^^^eps, pavidus, socors; nil ausura Plebs Princip^^
(...).
Inconsiderate and Fearful, Tacit.
Cowardly and Dispirited.



Tacit.
Privata cuique ^in^ulatio, vile^decus publicum.
Every Man has a private Spur within, and the Honor or Benefit of the Public
is of no Regard or Concern with them.

way: It is almost the only Pleasure they find to speak ill of the Rich, and
the Great; and This, not because they have any just Provocation, or reason so
to do, but purely out of Envy and Illnature, which never suffers them to rest
satisfied with their Governors, and the present Posture of Affairs.

Salust. Tacit.
Procacia plebis Ingenia, Impigrae Linguae, Ignavi ^Animi.
The Temper of the Mobile, (say the Roman Historians very truly) is Saw^iness
and Insol^nce; their Tongues are fierce and talkative, their Courage when it
comes to trial, Tameness and mere Nothing; and all the Bravery they put on,
ends in empty Boasts and Bullying.

all Measure, beyond all Patience. They cannot endure the Rein when gently
managed; nor be content to enjoy a reasonable Liberty, and such Indulgences and
Terms as are fit for them; but are eternally either flying out, or falling
under their Rider: Too confident, or too distrustful of their own Strength; too
bold, or too tame; transported with Hope, or quite dispirited with Fear. They
always bring Matters to this Issue, that if you do not make Them stand in awe
of You, they will make You stand in awe of Them. When once you have humbled and
terrified Them soundly, you may give them a Bit and a Knock, put out their
Eyes, trample upon their Necks; nothing is so reproachful, but they will bear
it. But if you do not show them the Rod, and make them sensible who is their
Driver, they grow proud, and daring, and turbulent. There is no such thing as
Ingenuity, or a Sense of good Usage to be expected from them; and hence comes
that Proverb, commonly applied to those churlish Wretches, that grow upon Them,
who treat them gently, and would win them by Favor and Kindness. Stroke Him
and he will spurn You; spurn Him and he will stroke You. Tacit.
Nil in vulgo modicum, terrere nisi paveant, ubi pertimuerint impune contemni.
The Vulgar know no Mean; they affright unless they fear; and when they are in
fear, they may be safely despised. Livy.
Audacia turbidum nisi vim metuat; aut servit humiliter, aut superbe dominatur;
libertatem, quae media, nec spernere, nec habere.
They are troublesomly bold, when out of Apprehension of a stronger Hand; the
humblest Servants, or the haughtiest Masters: But for Liberty and Moderation,
they pretend to value them most, but know how to practice and enjoy them least.

Moses, and all the Prophets; Socrates, Aristides, Phocion, Lycurgus,
Demosthenes, Themistocles, and many other venerable Names in Antiquity, are
lasting indelible Monuments of this base Disposition. Nay, Truth it self told
the Jews, Matt. xxiii
that not any of Them who made it their Business to promote the Happiness and
Salvation of that People, had escaped the Malice and Violence of Them or their
Forefathers. But quite contrary, those that oppress, and keep them under, they
cherish and make much of; fear and admire all they do; when the loss of Power
and Freedom has depressed their Minds, and made them slavish too.

Seneca has told us long since, that Non tam been cum rebus humanis geritur,
ut meliora pluribus placeant; Argumentum pessimi turba est.
Matters are not so well with Mankind, as that most Voices should be on the
best side. For the common Crowd is a shrewd Argument that what is so liked is
very bad. In short, the Rabble is the Mother of Ignorance, Injustice,
Inconstancy, an Adorer of Vanity; and the studying to please them can never
turn to true Account. They give indeed for their Motto, The Voice of the People
is the Voice of God: But we may say very truly, The Voice of the People is the
Voice of Foolish and Mistaken Men. And one of the first Principles of Wisdom,
is to wash one's Hands, and get quite dispossessed of all popular and general
Opinions, and to proceed clearly, and without any manner of Bias or Prejudice,
in our Enquiries after Truth and Virtue. This will be quickly illustrated in
our Second Book; toward which we are now drawing on apace.

The Fourth Distinction of Men, taken from their different Professions,
Circumstances, and Manner of Living.
PREFACE.
WE are now about to take another Difference between Some Men and Others, into
Consideration; which depends upon their different Professions, Conditions, and
Ways of Life. Some follow a Life of Business and Company; Others avoid This,
and make their Escape out of the World, by running into Solitude. Some are fond
of Arms and a Camp; Others hate and abhor them: Some have their Substance in
Common; Others have their own distinct Properties. Some are fond of Offices and
Employments, and would fain live in public, and be conspicu^us in the World;
Others decline These when they might have them, and affect to live privately
and unobserved. Some are absolute Courtiers to every Body, and upon all
Occasions; Others regard and make court to nothing but Themselves. Some prefer
the Diversions of the Town, and Others the Pleasures of the Country. It is not
easy, nor is it indeed at all necessary and pertinent to our present Purpose,
that I should take upon me to determine which of all these Men is most to be
commended for the Wi^dom of his Choice; for every one of these ways of Living
has its Advantages and Disadvantages; some particular Good, and some Evil,
that attends, and is not to be separated from it: That which would be much more
worth our Consideration and Pains, is to inform each of These in his Duty; for
the main Point of all is, that this Choice be wisely made, and so as may suit
best with every one's Temper and Abilities; and then after he has chosen, that
the Man be instructed how to make himself the most easy under it, and to make
the best Improvement of it that the Case will bear. This must be our Business
hereafter; but at present we will say just one single Word of each of these
Conditions, and compare them a little with one another. Only permit in the
first place, that I make some short Observations upon That Life which is common
to Men in all Capacities, and which may be distinguished into Three Sorts or
Degrees.

CHAP. LIII. The Three Sorts or Degrees of Life, as it is common to the
Generality of Men, distinguished and compared together.
IT is easy to observe Three distinct Sorts, and as it were Degrees of Life,
common to Men in general. One Private, in which every Man is unavoidably
concerned; for by this I mean only what passes with each Man's Self, within,
and in regard to his Own Breast. The Second is Domestic, in one's Own House
and Family, with regard to what passes at Home, and in our ordinary Course of
Affairs. The Third is Public, and respects what is exposed to the common View
of the World. In the First of these there is no manner of Restraint; in the
Second no Pains or Study to recommend one's Behavior, as being not accountable
for our Own Management to Them that live under our Own Roof and Government; but
all the Reserve, and Artifice, and Dissimulation is in a manner appropriated to
the last of These. Now it is much more difficult to be regular and exact in the
first of these Degrees, than in either of the other; and the Examples of
Persons that are, or have been so, have been infinitely fewer; and so in
proportion the Case stands with the Second too, in comparison of the Third
sort. The Reason is obvious and evident. For where there is no body to judge,
or control, or countermand; nay, where there is not so much as a Spectator to
observe our Actions; where we have no apprehension of Punishment for doing
amiss, no expectation of Reward for doing well, we are much more remiss and
careless in our Behavior. Reason and Conscience are here the only Guides we
have to follow; and although These may be some Check, yet that is not
comparable to the Restraints we feel, when placed in open View, and made the
common Mark of All, who must needs see, and will take a Freedom of censuring
our Actions. Applause and Glory, fear of Scandal and Reproach, or some other
Passion of the like Nature, are much more powerful Motives; these carry and
manage us after a very different manner. (And indeed the greatest part of
Mankind are more governed by Passions of this Nature, than by any strict Sense
of Duty, and regard to Virtue) These put us upon our Guard, and teach us
Prudence upon force. And from the Influence of These it is, that many People
have the Reputation of Holy and Excellent Persons; and behave Themselves as
such in the Eye of the World; who yet in reality, and at the bottom, are mere
Hypocrites, stark naught, and rotten at the Core, and have not one commendable
Quality belonging to them. What passes before Men is all Farce and Counterfeit;
we put it on for Convenience, and are concerned to appear thus to the
Spectators; but the Truth of us is concealed, and the Man can have no true
Judgment made of him, but from what he does in private and alone. We must see
him in his constant and every-day's Dress, and strip him of those Ornaments
that set him off when he comes abroad: We must know his Temper and his usual
Deportment, for all the rest is Fiction and Constraint. Universus mundus
exercet histrioniam.
All the World are Actors, and play their Parts to please the Audience. And it
was well observed by a Wise Man, That none are good, except such as are so
inwardly, and by Themselves: And that Virtue is always the same; as cautious,
as prudent upon the account of Conscience, as it is in Obedience to the public
Laws and Customs of the World; as fearful of offending one's own Self, and as
careful to avoid the Condemnation of one's own Breast, when no Eye sees us, as
it is of the Observation and Reproaches of all Mankind. Public Actions, such
as Exploits in War, delivering an Opinion in Senate or Council, discharging an
Embassy, governing a Nation, or the like, are bright and loud; every body sees,
every body hears of them; and therefore These are performed with all possible
Diligence and Circumspection; but such Private and Domestic ones, as Chiding,
Laughing, Selling and Buying, Borrowing and Paying, and Conversing with our own
Families, and most intimate Acquaintance, are silent and dark; they make no
Noise, fear no Discovery, and are therefore thought worthy very little, or not
any Attention or Consideration at all. Nay, we are sometimes scarce so much as
sensible of them when we do them. And if in These, Men be so unthinking, a
little Reflection will soon convince us, that they are infinitely more so, in
Those yet more secret and merely internal; such as Loving, Hating, Desiring, of
which none is or can be conscious, but their own Minds.

There is one Thing more, fit to be observed upon this Occasion, and a very sad
and wicked Thing it is (viz.) That Men, being depraved by a kind of Hypocrisy,
natural to them, have taught Themselves and Others to make a greater
Conscience, and be infinitely more Scrupulous and concerned, for their outward
Behavior; (which consists in Show, and Form, and is perfectly free and at
their own Disposal, of no Consequence in the World, but all over
Set-Countenance and Ceremony, Things of no real Difficulty, and as little
Substance and Effect) than they are for inward Miscarriages, or private
Actions; (such as are buried in Secrecy, and make no Figure, but yet are highly
Expedient and Necessary, very Valuable in Themselves, and therefore very
Difficult) For upon these Last, the Reforming of our Souls, the Moderating of
our Passions, and the Regulating our whole Life and Conversation depends. And
yet the Former are not only preferred before them in our Care and Concern, but
the Matter is so ordered, that even They who find themselves well disposed,
will by constant Study and Solicitude to discharge those outward Actions
punctually, degenerate into Formality of course, and by insensible Degrees grow
Cold, and Negligent, in their Regard for the others.

Now, of all these Sorts, it is plain, that the Men (as Hermits for Instance)
who live in perfect Solitude, and have but One of these Three, That of the
Internal and most private Life only to take Care of, are upon better Terms, and
have an easier Task to discharge, than Those that have Two; and so likewise he
that has the Domestic Care added to the former, and so lies under a Duty in
Two Capacities, is exposed to less Difficulty than the Persons of a Public
Life and Character, upon whom the Care of all the Three Degrees is incumbent.

CHAP. LIVE. A Life of Company and Business, compared with one of Retirement and
Solitude.
THey that upon all Occasions recommend and cry up a Solitary Life, are so far
certainly in the Right, that it is an Excellent Means of Ease and Quiet; a sure
Retreat from the Hurry and Troubles of the World; a very proper and effectual
Defense against the Vices and Extravagances of a profligate Age; which are
commonly propagated by Infection and Example; and are very likely to Spread and
Reign, where much the greater Part of those we converse with, are already
tainted with the Disease. For not One in a Thousand is Virtuous and Good; the
Number of Fools is Infinite, and the thicker the Crowd, the greater the Danger.
Thus far, I say, they have Reason on their Side; for ill Company is certainly
one of the most fatal and ensnaring Things in the World; and that, not only in
Regard of the Corruption, but of the Punishment and Vengeance it exposes Men
to. Accordingly we may observe how very careful Men that went to Sea, used to
be, that no Blasphemer or profane Person should embark in the same Vessels, no
profligate, wicked Wretch to endanger their Safety, or render their Vo^age
Disastrous or Unsuccesful. One single Jonas you see, whom God was Angry with,
had like to have lost all the Ship's Crew: And Bias, when some wicked Wretches
called upon their Gods in a Storm, made them this ingenious Reproof by way of
Raillery, Hold your Peace, that they may not discover such vile Wretches as you
are on board. Albuquerque, who was Viceroy of the Indies under Emanuel, King of
Portugal, when in extreme Danger, laid hold on a young Boy, and clung fast to
him, that so his Innocence might be a Shelter and Sanctuary to him, against the
Wrath of God. So beneficial has Virtue been esteemed, and so destructive Vice,
not only to the Guilty, or the Vicious Persons themselves, but to all that are
concerned with them, or come within the Reach of their Influence.

But yet to esteem a Life thus retired and at a Distance from Evil, absolutely
the Best, and most Excellent; to think it better qualified than any other, for
the Exercise and Perfection of Virtue; to call it more Difficult and
Unpleasant, more Laborious and Painful than any other, as some who extol a
voluntary renouncing the World, would fain persuade us to believe, is a mighty
Error in themselves, or a gross Cheat upon other People. For, quite contrary,
it is the most effectual Expedient of throwing off the Cares and troublesome
Encumbrances of Life, and rendering it light and easy; and to say the very Best
of it, is but a very mean and moderate Attainment, an imperfect Beginning, or
rather a mere Disposition to be Virtuous. It is, not to meddle with Business,
to abandon Difficulties and Troubles; But how is this done? It is not by
engaging with, and bravely overcoming them, but by cowardly running away,
declining the Combat, and hiding ones self from them. It is to play least in
Sight, and be buried alive, for fear we should not live well when we are seen.
No Doubt is to be made, but a Prince, a Magistrate, or Parochial Priest, are
more perfect, more valuable, when Good in their kind, than Monks and Hermits:
For in truth, such Societies and Seminaries were only designed to prepare Men
for Dignities and Business; to qualify them for Society and the World. And
Colleges and Cloisters do not give, but only lead Men to Usefulness and
Perfection. He that maintains his Post in the World, and satisfies the Duty
which the several Relations and Capacities he stands in require from him; that
converses with Wife, and Children, and Servants, and Neighbors, and Friends;
that manages his own Estate, and engages in Business fit for his Condition; He,
I say, that undertakes to act so many different Parts, and to answer the
several Characters as becomes him, has incomparably more Work upon his Hands,
and is infinitely more Valuable, if he perform it, than the Recluse, who is
determined to one single thing, and has only the Duty to himself to take care
of. For Company and Variety of Conversation is infinitely more hazardous, than
Solitude; and Plenty much harder to manage than Want. In a State of Abstinence,
and Freedom from Business, a Man has but one Pass to guard; in the Use and
Management of several Things, many Considerations must be attended to, many
Duties discharged, and he lies open to Attacks from several Quarters at once.
And there is no Doubt in the World to be made, but a Man may much more easily
conquer Himself to disclaim and refuse Riches, and Honors, great Offices and
gainful Preferments, than he can govern himself in the Use, or come off with
Virtue and just Commendation in the Discharge of them. It is no very difficult
Matter to live without a Wife, but to live with a Wise, and behave ones self in
all Respects, as a Husband ought to do; to order and educate Children, and bear
due Regard, and make fit Provisions for a Family, and all its Dependencies; is
a Task Men seldom give themselves the trouble to consider. But They that do,
and make a right Judgment of it, will be very far from extolling Caelibacy, as
some do, or think it an Argument of higher Virtue, or a State of greater
Difficulty than Marriage.

2. Nor are Men less mistaken, when they suppose that Solitude is a safe
Shelter from all manner of Vice; and that He, who takes Sanctuary in it, and
sequesters himself from the World, rides in Harbor, and is out of the Reach of
Tempests and Temptations; for These find a way to pursue, and overtake us even
There. This is indeed a Convenient Retreat from the Corruptions of ill Company;
from the Clutter and Crowd of Cares and Business, and the Mischiefs that
threaten and come upon us from Without; but there are other Enemies and Dangers
from Within, which we always carry about us, and cannot run away from,
Spiritual and Internal Difficulties, Domestic and peculiar Evils; and the
Scripture takes express Notice, that the Wilderness was the Place, where our
Savior was Assaulted, and Tempted by the Devil. Retirement is a dangerous
Weapon in the Hands of Young Men; such as are Hot and Imprudent, Rash and
Unskilful; and there is great Reason to fear, that, what Crates said to a Young
Man whom he found walking all alone, is generally true of such Persons; and
that such, when they are by Themselves, are in very bad Company. This is the
Place where Fools lay their wicked Projects; here they find Leisure and
Opportunities for contriving their own Ruin; here they cherish and indulge
unlawful Desires; file, and polish, and refine upon their own Passions, without
Observation, without Control. A Man had need be very Wise, to know how to make
the best Use of Privacy; watchful and well fortified, before he is fit to be
trusted with Himself; For many times ones Own Hands, are the very Worst he can
be put into. It is an excellent Petition, which the Spaniards use, even to a
Proverb, Guarda mi, Dios de mi. Nemo est ex imprudentibus, qui sibi relinqui
debeat. Solitudo omnia persuadet.
O Lord, I beseech thee, preserve me from My Self. Very few indeed, have
discretion enough to be left to Themselves, and nothing is so bad, but Secrecy
and Solitude, are powerful Temptations to comply with it. But for Men to take
up their Heels, and skulk in a Corner, upon any Private and Personal
Consideration, though it be a lawful and commendable one in it self, which yet
is the best, and not always the Truth of the Case (for very often Cowardice,
and Weakness of Spirit, Peevishness and Pets, or some other discontented or
vicious Passion is at the Bottom of all this pompous and pretended Contempt of
the World) is to turn Deserter, and not dare to stand to our Arms. There is a
mighty Difference between forsaking the World, and falling out with it; between
conquering, and not hazarding our Persons in the Engagement. And when Men are
in a Capacity of becoming beneficial to Others, and may be Instruments of Great
and General Good, to excuse Themselves from serving the Public, and abandon
all Society when they might adorn and be useful in it, is to betray their
Trust, to bury their Talent in a Napkin; to hide the Candle, which God has
lighted, under a Bushel, when the setting it on a Candle-Stick, might enlighten
others, and do great Service to all that are in the House. It requires then
much Deliberation, and many uncommon Circumstances, to give Men a Right thus to
dispose of Themselves. And they who presume to do it merely out of private
Considerations, and make the Public no part of their Concern, are so far from
deserving to be applauded for their Virtue and Resignation, that they are
guilty of a great Fault, and liable to very just and severe Censure.

CHAP. LV. A Life in Common, compared with That of distinct Properties.
SOme Persons have been of Opinion, that a Life, where all Things are in
Common, and there is no such Distinction as Mine or Thine, has the greatest
Tendency to Perfection, and is best accommodated for the cherishing and
maintaining of Charity and Concord, and Union among Men. But Experience shows
us daily, that whatever Conveniences it may really have of this kind, yet are
they not so great, nor so effectual to the Purposes beforementioned, as those
Persons have imagined. For in the first Place, whatever Appearance there may be
outwardly of Kindness and good Agreemeent, yet there is no such Thing as an
entire and hearty Affection, nor the same tender Regards for That which is in
Common, as a Man finds where he alone is concerned. To this purpose it is, that
we have two Proverbs, The College Horse is always ill saddled, and Every Body's
Business, is No Body's Business. Men consider, that Others are equally
concerned in the Care, and in the Damage; that the Loss is not immediately
their own, and that each Member of the Society stands in that respect equally
related to them, and that begets a Coldness and Indifferency among them. But,
which is a great deal worse, this State does naturally produce Quarrels and
Discontents, Murmuring and mutual Hatred; every Community is but too full a
Demonstration of it, and the very Holiest and Best that ever was, the Primitive
Church it self, could not, you see, be exempted from the Misfortune. For,
though the Institution design all Things should be equal, yet unless you could
make the Desires of the Persons so too, they will always be full of Complaints,
and Jealous, that some are preferred, and others neglected; Acts vi.
like the Grecians and their Widows in the Daily Distributions. The Nature of
Love, is like that of Great Rivers; which, while they continue united in one
Stream are Navigable, and carry Vessels of Vast Burden; but if you cut them
into fresh Channels, and divide the Water, they are no longer Serviceable in
that kind; and thus, when Men's Affections are divided, and parted, as it were
among a great many Objects, not any one of those Persons or Things is of very
tender Concern; for all the Force and Vigor of the Passion is scattered and
broke to Pieces. Now, in a Life of Community, there are several Degrees; To
live, that is, to eat and drink together at a common Table, is very decent and
well, (Thus we find it practiced in some of the best and most ancient
Commonwealths, as Lacedemon and Crete particularly) such public Meals are very
useful for the teaching Men to be Modest and reserved, and keeping up
Dicipline, Society, and Good Order; and they do also minister occasion for
great variety of very useful and improving Discourse. But to think of pulling
up the Fences and Enclosures, and lay all in Common, is a wild Imagination.
Plato was once of this Opinion, but he thought better of it afterward. And
indeed the Project would be so far from reconciling and uniting All, that the
certain Consequence of it would be to overturn and confound All.

CHAP. LVI. A Town and a Country Life compared together.
THis is a Comparison very easy for any Man who is a true Lover of Wisdom, to
make; for almost all the Advantages lie on one side. The Pleasures and
Conveniences both of Body and Mind, Liberty, Contemplation, Innocence, Health,
and Delight. In the Country a Man's Mind is free and easy; discharged, and at
his own Disposal: But in the City the Persons of Friends and Acquaintance,
one's own and other People's Business, foolish Quarrels, ceremonious Visits,
impertinent Discourse, and a Thousand other Fopperies and Diversions steal away
the greatest part of our Time, and leave no Leisure for better and more
necessary Employment. What infinite Perplexities, Avocations, Distractions of
the Mind, and, which is worst of all, what abominable Debaucheries, and
Depravation of Manners does such a Life expose Men to? Great Towns are but a
larger sort of Prisons to the Soul, like Cages to Birds, or Pounds to Beasts.
This Celestial Fire within us will not endure to be shut up, it requires Air to
brighten and make it burn clear; which made Columella say, that a Country Life
is Cousin-German to Wisdom: For a Man's Thoughts cannot be idle; and when they
are set loose from the World, they will range and expatiate freely in noble and
profitable Meditations. But how shall a Man hope to command his Thoughts, or
pretend to call them his Own, in the midst of all the Clutter, and Business,
the Amusements, nay the Confusions of the Town? A Country Life is infinitely
more plain, and innocent, and disposed to Purity and Virtue. In Cities Vice
assembles in Troops; the very Commonness of it makes it unobserved; it hardens
and reconciles us to the Practice, Example, and Custom; and the meeting with it
at every Turn, makes the thing familiar; and thus the Disease seizes us
strongly and presently, and we are gone all on the sudden, by living in the
midst of the Insection. Whereas in the Country, those things are seen or heard
with Abhorrence and Amazement, which the Town sees and does every Day without
Remorse or Concern. As for Pleasure and Health, the clear Air, the Warmth and
Brightness of the Sun, not polluted with the Sultry Gleams, and loathsome
Stenches of the Town; the Springs and Waters, the Flowers and Groves, and, in
short, All Nature is free, and easy, and gay; The Earth unlocks her Treasures,
refreshes us with her Fruits, feasts every Sense, and gives us such
Entertainment, as Cities know nothing of, in the stifling press of Houses; so
that to live there, is to shut one's self up, and be banished from the World.
Besides all this, a Country Retirement is more active, and sit for Exercise;
and this creates an Appetite, preserves and restores Health and Vigor, hardens
the Body, and makes it lusty and strong. The greatest Commendation of the Town
is, Convenience for Business and Profit. It is indeed the Seat of Trade and
private Gain, and therefore fit to be the Darling of Merchants and Artificers:
And it is the Place accommodated to Public Administrations; but this latter
but a very small part of Mankind are called to, or capable of. And History
tells us, that heretofore excellent Persons were fetched out of the Country, to
undertake Affairs of the greatest Importance; and as soon as they had finished
these, they retired again with wonderful Delight, and made the Town not a
Matter of Choice, but Necessity and Constraint: This was the short Scene of
Labor and Business to them; but the Country was the Seat of their Pleasure,
and more constant Residence.

CHAP. LVII. Of a Military Life.
THE Profession and Employment of a Soldier, if we respect the Cause and
Original Design of it, is very worthy and honorable; for it pretends to
protect the Safety, and promote the Grandeur of one's native Country; to
preserve it in Peace, and guard it from the Insults of Enemies abroad, and
turbulent Spirits at home; than which nothing can be more just, nothing more
universally beneficial. It is also noble and great in the Execution of this
Design: For Courage, which is its proper Quality and Character, is the bravest,
most generous, most Heroic of all Virtues; And of all Humane Actions and
Exploits, Those of War are the most celebrated and pompous; insomuch that the
Titles and Ensigns of Honor, borrow their Names from, and are assigned as
Rewards to Them. It has also many Pleasures peculiar to it; the Conversation
of Men of the first Quality, in heat of Youth, and full of Fire and Activity;
the being familiarly acquainted with strange Accidents, and wonderful
entertaining Sights; freedom of Behavior, and Converse without Trick or Art; a
Masculine and hardy way of living, above Ceremony or Form; Variety of Attempts
and Successes: The moving Harmony of warlike Music, which entertains the Ears,
charms all the Senses, warms the Soul, and inspires it with Valor; the
Gracefulness of Motion and Discipline, that transport and delight us with a
pleasing Horror; that Storm of Shouts and Alarms, which the louder it grows,
the more ravishing and animating it is; and the roaring Ordinance of so many
Thousand Men that fall on with incredible fury and eagerness.

But when all These, and as many more Excellencies as its most zealous Patrons
can attribute to this Calling, have been allowed, every reasonable Man must
acknowledge on the other hand, that the Plundering, Undoing, Murdering one
another, and especially the making These a Matter of Art, and Study; a Science
and a Commendation, seems highly unnatural, and the effect of Barbarity and
Madness. Nothing is a stronger Evidence against Mankind, of their Weakness, and
Imperfection, and foul Degeneracy; for it sets us below the very Brutes
themselves, in the most savage of which the Original Impressions of Nature are
not defaced to this scandalous Degree. What an infinite Folly, what an
execrable Rage is it, to create all this Disturbance, and turn the World
upside-down, to encounter and run through so many Hazards by Sea and Land, for a
Prize so very doubtful and full of Chance, as the event of a Battle? Why should
we make Campaigns abroad, and turn Volunteers to foreign Princes, to run with
so much eagerness and appetite after Death, (which may be found, nay which of
its own accord meets us at home, and offers it self every where) and that
without proposing to our selves so much as decent Burial? To fall on, and kill
Men that we have no Spite, no Resentment against; nay, Men that are absolute
Strangers, and whom we never saw in all our Lives? Why this mighty Heat and
Fury, to one that has done thee no hurt, given thee no provocation? What a
Madness is it to venture Loss of Limbs and Blood, Wounds and Bruises, which
when they do not take Life quite away, make it subject to Remedies and Pains a
Thousand times more grievous and insupportable than Death? Had you Obligations
of Duty and Conscience, it were another Matter; but to do this for Breeding and
Fame; to sacrifice and destroy one's self for a Man that you never saw, who
has no manner of Tenderness or Concern for you; and only strive^ to mount upon
the dead or maimed Body, that he may stand a little higher, and enlarge his own
Prospect; Nothing but very weighty Reasons, and the necessary Defense of all
that is dear to us, can make such an Undertaking prudent and commendable: And
in such Cases all personal Considerations ought to be despised as much as
otherwise they are fit to be valued. And I hope too, the Reader takes notice
all along, that I speak of those who choose the Trade for Mercenary Ends, or
out of false Notions of Gallantry; and not with any intention to discourage the
Duty of Subjects to their Prince, whose just Quarrels they ought always to
account their Own.

The Fifth and Last Difference between Some Men and Others; taken from the
Advantages and Disadvantages, by which Nature or Fortune has distinguished
them.
PREFACE.
THis Last Distinction is abundantly notorious, and visible to every Eye; It
has indeed several Branches and Considerations included under it; but all I
think may be conveniently enough reduced to Two General Heads; which, according
to the vulgar way of Expression, may be termed, Happiness and Unhappiness;
being High or Low in the World. To that of Happiness or Greatness, belong
Health, Beauty, and other Qualifications and Advantages of Body and Person,
Liberty, Nobility, Honor, Authority, Learning, Riches, Reputation, Friends. In
Unhappiness or Meanness of Condition are comprehended the Contraries of all
These, which, without naming particularly, we easily understand to be the
privation or want of the forementioned Advantages. Now these Particulars are
the occasion of infinite variety in Men's Circumstances and Conditions of Life;
for a Man may be happy in the Enjoyment of One, or Two, or Three of these
Qualities, and yet not so in the rest; and even in Those he has, he may be
happy in a greater or less Degree; and those Degrees are capable of being so
many, that it is not easy, if at all possible, to express or conceive them.
But upon the whole Matter, in the Distribution and Disposal of our Fortunes and
Affairs, Providence has so ordered it, that Few or None should be either happy
or unhappy in every one of these Respects. He then that partakes of most, and
particularly those Three Advantages, of Nobility, Dignity or Authority, and
Riches, is esteemed Great; and he that has none of those Three is reckoned
among the mean Men. But several Persons have only One or Two of the Three; and
so they stand in a sort of middle Capacity, between the two Extremes, and are
neither High nor Low. We will speak very briefly to each of them.

As for Health and Beauty, Chap. VI Chap. X
and other Advantages that relate to the Body and Persons of Men, enough has
been said of them already; and so likewise of Sickness and Pain, which are
Disadvantages contrary to them.

CHAP. LVIII. Of Liberty and Servitude.
LIberty passes in the Esteem of many for a most eminent Advantage, and
Servitude for a very grievous Evil; so exceeding great, that some have rather
chosen to Die, and that after a very barbarous and painful manner, than to be
made Slaves or Captives; nay, rather than come into any danger of seeing their
own, or their Countrey's Freedom and Properties infringed, or usurped upon. But
as in all Other Cases of the like Nature, so in This also, there may be a very
Criminal Excess of Partiality, and a fanciful Fondness of what we deservedly
have a high esteem for. There is in truth a Twofold Liberty: The true and
proper sort is That of the Mind; for This is in every Man's own Keeping and
Disposal, no body can wrest it out of our Hands, nothing can impair or encroach
upon it, not even the Tyranny of Fortune it self. On the other side, The
Bondage of the Mind is the heaviest, and most wretched of all others; to live a
Slave to one's Appetites and Lusts; to lie down in our Chains, and let our
Passions prey upon us; to be led by the Nose by Prejudice, and Error, and
Superstition: Oh This! This is a miserable Captivity indeed. The Liberty of
one's Person is really valuable, but still that lies at the Mercy of Fortune.
And as valuable as it is, yet (unless it be attended with some very uncommon
Circumstance to enhance its Worth) there can never be Justice or Reason in
giving it the Preference above Life it self; as some of the Ancients have done,
who chose to suffer, nay, to inflict Death, and make it the Work of their Own
Hands upon Themselves, rather than not die free: And even of this (to me
seeming) Extravagance we find large Commendations, as if it were a more exalted
Virtue than ordinary, so very dreadful Notions had they then of Slavery.
Servitus obedientia est fracti and abjecti Animi, arbitrio carentis suo.
It is (says One of them) the Obedience of an enfeebl'd and despicable Soul,
that has parted with its own Will. And yet as vile as they represent this
State, very great and very Wise Men have lived in it; as Regulus, Valerian,
Plato, Epictetus; and have had the Misfortune too of very wicked, unjust, and
barbarous Masters; and yet they have never brought any dishonorable
Reflections upon their Virtues, or thought Themselves one whit the worse for
it, because in truth and very deed, they still continued Free, and at their own
Disposal; much more so than the Masters, who pretended to Dominion over them.

CHAP. LIX. Of Nobility.
NObility is a Quality or Distinction received and valued in all parts of the
World: It is a Mark and an Attractive of Honor and Respect, instituted and
brought into Use for very good Reasons, and much to the Benefit of the Public.

Description of it.
according to the different Judgments of Men, and the Customs of the Countries
where they live. From hence we find several Sorts or Species of it pretended
to; but according to the common and most general Notion of the thing, it is the
Quality of a Man's Family. Aristotle calls it, the Antiquity of the Family, and
the long Continuance of an Estate in it. Plutarch terms it the Virtue of the
Family; meaning by this, some certain Character, and particular good Quality,
for which our Ancestors were eminent, and which has been propagated in
Succession, and is continued in the several Descendents of that House. Now what
this Quality is in particular, which should merit such a Distinction, has not
been agreed on all hands. Some, and indeed the greater part, will have it to be
Achievements in War; others add, or equal to this, Politic and Civil
Prudence; whereby Men become necessary to the State by their Counsels, as the
former do in the Field: To These have likewise been added Eminence in Learning,
and particular Offices in the Courts of Princes, as Accomplishments thought fit
and sufficient to distinguish a Man's Family, and deriv^ Honor down upon Those
that descend from him. But I think it must be acknowledged by all considering
Persons, that the Military Honors have the Advantage, and deserve a Preference
above all the rest, both because the Qualities of this kind are most
serviceable to the State in its greatest Exigencies and Distresses; and because
it is the most painful and laborious, and exposes Men's Persons to the greatest
and most apparent Dangers. From whence it is, that a particular Veneration and
Respect, a louder Applause and Commendation is allowed universally to Them; and
that These by way of Eminence and Privilege, have attained to that
distinguishing Character of Valor or Worth. Now according to this Opinion, Two
things are necessary, and must both contribute as Ingredients to the
Composition of that which is the True and Perfect Nobility. First, There must
be the Profession and Appearance of this Virtue or good Quality serviceable to
the Public, and this is as it were the Form; and then there must be the
Family, in which, as in the Matter or proper Subject, this Quality is inherent;
that is, there is required a long uninterrupted Continuation of it, through
several Descents, and Time out of mind. Hence, according to the vulgar Jargon,
they are styled Gentlemen, that is, Persons who are Branches and Descendents of
the same Blood, and House; Bearing the same Name, and the same Profession of
this distinguishing Quality, for several Generations. That Person then is
truly, properly, and entirely Noble, who makes singular Profession of some
Public Virtue; that renders himself useful and remarkable in the Service of
his Prince and his Country; and is sprung from Relations and Ancestors, who
have done the same before him, in the respective Ages when they lived.

(...) guished.
as being of Opinion, that One of these singly, that is, Personal Virtue and
Worth, without any Advantages of Birth, is sufficient to entitle a Man to this
Honor. They think it hard that Men should be excluded, merely upon
consideration of their Ancestors wanting the Excellencies, which they have
rendered Themselves conspi^uous for. Now This is a Personal and Acquired
Nobility; and very valuable it is; but yet the Vogue and Custom of the World
has so far obtained, that They think it very hard too, for the Son of a
Cobbler, a Butcher, or a Plough Man, to start up Noble, and be ranked among the
most Ancient Honors, let his Service to the Public have been never so great
and valuable. But yet this Opinion has got good booting in several Nations,
and particularly among the ^urks. For they have no regard at all to a Man's
blood, the Nobility of his Ancestors, or the Antiquity of his Descent; They
look upon These Considerations to be full of unreasonable Partiality, Ch^cks
and Discouragements to Men's bravery; and therefore, to cherish the
In^^^nations of doing ^^^^ously, they lay the whole Stress upon Personal
Performances and Accomplishments; and particularly upon Actual Courage, and
those Excellencies that are purely Military. The other pare of this
Distinction, is That which consists in the (...) of a Man's Family only, where
the Pre^^en^^^^s to Nobility are merely upon the account of his (...) without
any Profession of such a Quality as w^^ before mentioned and explained; and
this is a Nobility which runs in the Blood, and is purely Natural.

Of Natural Nobility.
when single and by it self, That which is purely Natural cannot but appear to
any Man of sound Judgment, the less worth and more defective of the Two, though a
great many People think, or at least express themselves, otherwise upon the
Matter: But it is the effect of most egregious Folly, or insufferable Vanity so
to do. The Natural is an Accomplishment entirely another, and not in any
Degree one's own. Genus and Proavos, and quae non fecimus ipsi,
Vix ea nostra voco.
Ovid. Nemo vixit in gloriam nostram; nec quod ante nos fuit, nostrum est.

For Ancestors Divine Original,
And Deed not done by Us, we Ours miscall.
Sandys. No other Person has lived for our Honor; nor ought that to be
reputed Ours, which was, long before we had a Being; And what can be more
senseless, than for a Man to look big, and to value Himself upon a thing which
is none of His? This is what may happen to the most vicious and profligate, the
most trisling and insignificant Wretch alive; it may be the Portion of Fools,
and Knaves, and Villains. Nor is it of any manner of Use or Advantage to
Others; It is not capable of being communicated to the profit of those with
whom we have any Dealings or Conversation; It contributes nothing of Pleasure
or Satisfaction in Society, as Learning, and Justice, and Goodness, and Beauty,
and Riches do, but is perfectly idle and fruitless. Those who have nothing else
to recommend Them to the Respect of Others, but only This Nobility of Flesh and
Blood, cry it up at a great rate, and have their Mouths perpetually full of it.
They swell, and vapor, and you are sure to hear of their Families and great
Relations every third Word. And indeed they do wisely, and as becomes them; for
This is making the best of their last and only Stake. And by this Mark they
commonly distinguish Themselves; for you may depend upon it, there is no good
Bottom, nothing of true Worth of their own, when they insist so much, and rest
their Credit upon that of other Men. But alas! this is all Vanity and Shadow,
and their Glory will be as fleeting and frail, as that which the Prophet
reproaches Ephraim with, when it arises from such mean and wretched
Instruments, as from the Earth, Hosea ix. 11.
and from the Womb, and from the Conception; and lies all buried in Dust and
Rubbish, underneath the Monuments of their Ancestors. These Men are like
Criminals when they are hard pursued, that take sanctuary at the Altars and
Sepulchers of the Dead; and in some former Ages, laid hold on the Statues of
the Emperors for Refuge; so when they are beaten out from all Pretensions to
true Merit and Honor, from any Qualifications properly their Own, they retreat
behind the Banners and Achievements of their Forefathers, and make their last
Recourse to Monuments, and Pedigrees, and Coats of Arms. But what Advantage can
it be to a Blind-Man, that his Parents had good Eyes? Or how does it help the
Infirmities of a Stammerer, that his Grandfather had a smooth and voluble
Tongue? Does the former of These see one whit the better? or is the latter ever
the more eloquent or intelligible for This? And yet they are the Men of
Infirmities and great Defects, that are commonly your vain Boasters, haughty in
their Deportment, insolent in Conversation, and treating with Contempt Men
better than Themselves, because some body who is long since rotten in their
Grave, was good in his Generation: So extremely absurd, and contrary to all the
Rules of Equity and Common Sense, is this extravagant Notion of Nobility by
Descent only. A Father by his Frugality and Prudence raised the Family; and
therefore the Prodigal Son, who squanders all away, and beggars the Family,
values himself upon the Prudence of his Father. A brave General deserved the
first and best Promotion, and therefore his Great-Grandson, though a rank
Coward, shall not only inherit his Titles and Estate, (in which there may be
reason, because Men esteem Themselves rewarded by the Continuance of those
external Forms and Honors to their Posterity) but this Coward, shall really
think himself a better Man than another brave Fellow with whom he converses,
because his Great-Grandfather was brave. And yet, as extravagant as this Folly
is in it self, it will be, and always has been Epidemical. For Salust observed
even in his Time, Contemptor animus and superbia commune nobilitatis malum.
That Pride and a Disdainful Temper, was an Evil that usually went along with
Quality and good Birth.

Nobility, which is Personal and Acquired, Acquired and Personal
the Condition of it is the very Reverse of the Former. It has very excellent
Qualities and Effects; It is peculiar to the Possessor; he has a full and
indisputable Title, and Merit has made it all his Own: It cannot be dispensed
promiseuously, nor fall upon a Man that will be a Dishonor to it; and it is of
infinite Benefit and Advantage to all who converse, or can any way come to be
concerned with it. Nay, if we examine the Matter, it will be found that This
has the Advantage, even in the darling and so much-boa^ied Point of Antiquity
too; and we are very fare, by sad Experience, that it is much more rare and
uncommon than the Natural. For from This it was, that the Natural first took
its beginning; the so much celebrated Ancestors got their Nobility this way;
and their degenerate Offspring are beholding to it in the Persons of Them, for
all the Subject of their Vanity ever since. In short; This is real and
substantial, it consists in Virtue, and Usefulness, and good Consequences to
all Mankind; not empty, and dry, and a gay Idea; a Dream, and Creature of a
deluded Imagination only: This proceeds from the Mind and the very Man, not
from the Blood and Body; and Minds are the same; every whit as generous and
great, and by Improvement and Industry frequently rendered more so in Others;
though the Blood may differ, and not be Noble. Quis generosus? Ad Virtutem a
Natura been compositus, Animus facit nobilem, cui ex quacunque condition supra
fortunam liceat surgere.
Who (says S^n^ca) is a Gentl^man? The Man, whom Nature has disposed, and as
it were out out sor Virtue; this Man is well born indeed: For the Man wants
nothing else to make him Noble, who has a Mind so generous, that be can rise
above, and triumph over Fortune, let his Condition of Life be what it will.

Both together.
(as indeed there seems a great Aptitude and Disposition for them to do) and
when they center thus in one Person, then the Nobility is perfect and complete.
The Natural is an Introduction, an Occation, a Spur to the Personal; for all
things have a strong tendency, and very easily revere to their first and
natural Principle. And as the Natural first took its Origin and Existence from
the Personal, so it inclines and leads the Persons so descended to imitate,
nay, to emulate the Glories of their Noble Progenitors. The Seeds of Virtue and
Honor are in them already. Fortes creantur Fortibus and Bonis, etc. Horat. Ode
4. Lib. 4.
In Sons Their Father's Virtues shine,
And Souls as well as Faces keep the Line.
This one Advantage is observable in being Nobly born, that it makes Men
sensible they are allied to Virtue, and lays strong Obligations upon them not
to degenerate from the Excellencies of their Ancestors. And sure there cannot
be a more forcible Motive to spur and quicken Men in the pursuit of Glory, and
the attempting Great and Noble Actions, than the being conscious to Themselves,
that they are come out of the Loins of those very Persons, who have behaved
themselves gallantly, served their King and Country, and been eminent and
useful in their Generations. Is it possible Men can please Themselves with
these Reflections to feed their Vanity, as it is manifest they do, and not
think at the same time how vile and reproachful it is in Them, to bastardize
and belly their Race, to serve only as a Foil to their Forefather's Virtues, and
cast back Darkness and Disgrace upon the Luster of their Memories?

Nobility granted by the particular Patent, and partial Favor of a Prince,
without any Merit to give a Title to it, and neither personal Accomplishments,
nor an Ancient Family to support and set it off, is rather a Blemish and Mark
of Shame, than of Honor. It is a poor, pitiful, Parchment-Nobility; bought to
supply a needy King, or to feed a hungry Courtier; the Price of Silver and
Gold, or the effect of Countenance and Access; not the purchase of Blood and
Sweat, as such Honors ought to be. But if it be granted for any singular
Desert, and signal good Services, then it falls not within the compass of this
Notion; but is to be reputed personal and acquired, and has a Right to all
those Privileges and Commendations, which were said to belong to that sort of
Nobility before.

CHAP. LX. Of Honor.
IT is the Notion of some, but a very mistaken Notion sure it is, That Honor
is the proper Price and Recompense of Virtue. Others have a little corrected
this Notion, by calling it, the Acknowledgment of Virtue in the Persons to whom
we pay it, or the Prerogative of a good Opinion first, and then of those
outward Respects, whereby we testisie that good Opinion; for it is most
certainly a Privilege that derives its Essence and Nature Principally from
Virtue. Others call it Virtue's Shadow, which follows, or goes before it; as
the Shadow does the Substance and Body from whence it is reflected. But, to
speak more properly, it is the Splendour or Fame of brave and virtuous Actions,
darted out from the Soul upon the Eyes of the World, and then rebounding back
again upon our selves, by that Demonstration it gives of what others think of
us, and the mighty Satisfaction of the Mind resulting from this Sense of their
Good Esteem.

Now, Honor is so very highly esteemed, so very eagerly sought, that we
generally balk no Difficulty to come at it. We endure any thing for its sake,
despise every thing in Comparison of it; even Life it self is not thought a
Purchase too Dear to compass it. And yet after All, This is but a thin, airy
Business, uncertain and sickle; foreign and at some distance from the Person
receiving it, and the things for which it is paid. It is not only not Essential
to him, not any part or Appurtenance of his Person, and Substance, but it
searce ever comes home to him. For generally speaking, this Deference is given
to Persons either Absent or Dead; and if Living, it is not accounted good
Manners to praise them to their Faces; so that it waits without, and belongs to
a Man's Name only; which bears all his Commendations and Disgraces, his
Scandal, and his Respects; from whence one is said to bear a Good or Wicked
Name.

Now, the Name is no part of the Nature of the Thing, but only the Image which
gives us a Representation of it. A Mark of Distinction, to know it from other
Things by: In a Word, somewhat that goes between the Essence of the Thing, and
the Honor or Dishonor belonging to it. For it is applied to the Substance,
and whatever is said of it, Good, or Fad, falls upon This; and is born by it.
Now Honor, before it rests upon the Name fetches a kind of Circular Flight;
and makes some stay upon the Action, the Heart and the Tongue. Whatever
gallant, commendable Action is Achieved, is, as it were, the Root, the Source,
the Parent which gives birth and Being to Honor; for i^ truth, Honor is
nothing else, but the Luster and Resplendence of (...) G^rious, or Benesicial,
or otherwise, Noble Expl^^t. Whatever Perfection a Thing has in it self, with
Regard to its own Intrinsic Worth; yet if it do not produce some Effect, which
is Excellent, it is not capable of Honor; but, to all Intents and Purposes of
this kind, as if it had never been at all. The next Advance is made into the
Mind, where it first begins to live, and is formed into good Opinions, and
Venerable Esteem. Then it comes abroad in the last Place, and rides Triumphant
upon Men's Tongues and Pens; and so reflects and returns back again, upon the
Name of the Person, who did that Celebrated Action, from whence it first set
out (As the Sun returns Daily to the Point from whence his Motion began,) and
when it has finished this Course, it from thenceforch carries the Name of
Honor, Praise, Glory, Renown, or the like.

But to what Sorts of Performances this Recompense is due, has been a Question
much disputed. Some Persons have delivered their Opinion, that Honor does not
only, nor properly consist in a Man's behaving himself well, where great and
difficult Posts are to be filled and managed by him (for every Man's
Circumstances will not furnish him with Opportunities of weighty
Administraions) but in the faithful Discharge of the Duties of each Person's
particular Profession, be the Capacity of the Man what it will. For all
Commendation is the Effect and Reward of a Man's performing commendably, that
which is his proper Business to do. Thus we find Reason and Common Sense,
determine us in public Theaters, which are but so many Images in little of
this Great Theater of the Universe. The Condition and Splendour of the Character
is not enquired into, nor weighs at all with our Judgments; but He, who upon
the Stage, plays the Part of a Servant or Bussoon, if he do it well, and to the
Life, meets with as much Applause, as if he had represented a General, or an
Emperor. And he that cannot work in Gold, if he show the Perfection of his
Art, and carve the Postures and Proportions well, in Copper, or in Plaster, is
reputed a good Statuary; because this Excellence depends not upon the Fineness
or Value of the Materials, but in the Skill showed upon them. But yet it seems
more reasonable to think, that Honor is an Advantage for something more Noble
and Sublime than Ordinary; and that no Actions, but such only, which have
Difficulty or Danger in them, can make just Pretensions to it. Those that are
but just what they ought to be, such as our respective Stations require, and
proceeding from a Sense of Obligation and Duty, cannot aspire to so great
Worth, nor put in for so ample a Reward; a Reward which is disparaged by being
made Common or Ordinary, and not suited to all Degrees of Persons and
Performances. Thus every virtuous and chaste Wife, and every Man of Integrity
and good Conduct, is not therefore a Person of Honor. For there must go more
than Probity to the denominating them so; there must be Pains, and Difficulty,
and Danger; nay, and, some will tell you, there must be somewhat of general
Good, and Advantage to the Public, to justify that Character in its full and
true Extent. Let a Man's Actions be never so Good, never so Useful, if they be
private and the Advantage redound to himself alone, another sort of Payment
belongs to them. They will have the Approbation of his own Conscience; they
will procure the Love, and Favor, and good Word of his Neighbors and
Acquaintance; they will ensure his Safety, and put him under the Protection of
the Law; but except the Influence and Advantage of them be large and diffusive,
they cannot come up to Honor; for Honor is a public Thing, and implies more
of Dignity; and comprehends Splendour and Noise, Admiration, and Common Fame in
the Nature and Notion of it. Others add farther, that an Honorable Action must
not be a part of our Duty, but perfectly free and supererogating; for if Men
were obliged to it, all ^retension to Honor is lost.

Chap. xxii.
But as Bad as it is in it self, it does great Service to the Public. For it
restrains Men's Extravangancies, and keeps them within the Bounds of Decency and
Duty; it awakens their sleeping Powers, shakes off Sloth, and kindles in them
generous Desires, inspires great Thoughts, and Glorious Actions. Not that it is
much for their Credit to be acted and invigorated by so corrupt a Principle;
but rather a Testimony and strong Evidence of the Weakness and Poverty of our
Nature and Condition; who are thus forced to use and accept clipped and
counterfeit Money in Payment, when Standard and true Sterling cannot be had.
But for the Determining precisely in what Cases, and how far this Passion is
excusable, and where it is to blame, and must be rejected and disallowed; and
for the making it manifest, Book III. In the Virtue of Temperance, Chapter XLII.
that Honor is not the proper Recompense of Virtue, I must refer you to those
Distinctions and Discourses upon it, which will occur hereafter.

Of the Marks of Honor there is great Variety; but the most desirable and
charming, are Those, where there are no Mixtures of private Gain and Interest;
such as nothing can be drawn out of, nor any Share lie in Common, for the
Advantage of a Vicious Man; or of such low and inferior People, as shall
pretend to serve the Public by mean and dishonorable Offices. The less of
Advantage they bring with them, the more Valuable they are. And accordingly we
find the Ancients infinitely fond of, and with all their Industry and Pains,
aspiring after those, which had nothing else to recommend them, but purely
their being Marks of Distinction, and Characteristical Notes of Honor and
Virtue. Of this Nature in the several Republics of old, were the Garlands of
Laurel and Oaken-Leaves, (and so are the particular Bearings in Coats of Arms
at this Day, added to the former Charges of the Field, upon some special piece
of Service) distinct Habits, and Robes; the Prerogative of some Surname, as
Africanus to Scipio, and the like: Precedence and Place in public Assemblies,
and Orders of Knighthood. It may also fall out, that, when a Man's Deserts are
Notorious and Celebrated, it shall be more for his Honor, not to have these
Ensigns and Marks, than to have them. And therefore Cato said well, that it
would make more for the Glory of his Name and Virtues, that People should ask
why the City had not erected a Statue to his Memory in the Forum, than that
they should enquire, why they had done it.

CHAP. LXI. Of Learning.
LEarning is, without all Dispute, a Noble and Beautiful Ornament; an
Instrument of exceeding use, when in the Hands of one, that has the Skill to
use it aright. But what Place and Proportion it deserves in our Esteem, is a
Matter not so generally agreed upon. And here, as in all Cases of the like
Nature, Men fall into Extremes, and are to blame in both; Some in overvaluing,
and Others in disparaging and undervaluing it. Some run it up to that
Extravagant Height, that they will not allow any other Advantage to come near,
or be thought comparable to it; They look upon it, as the Supreme Happiness; a
Ray and Efflux of the Divinity; they hunt after it with Eagerness and
insatiable Appetite; with vast expense, and indefatigable Labor and Pains; and
are content to part with Ease, and Health, and every Thing in exchange for it.
Others as much diminish and despise it; treat Those with Scorn who make it
their Business and Profession. And when we have observed this of either side, I
suppose my Reader will make no Difficulty to allow, that a Moderation between
both is best, most safe, most just and reasonable. I, for my own part, were I
to execute the Herald's Office in this Dispute, should think that Place is
without all question due to Integrity and Prudence, to Health and Wisdom, and
Virtue, nay, See Book III. chapter 14.
I should not scruple to give precedence to Skill and Dexterity in Business:
But then for Dignity, and Noble Descent, and Military Valor, I should think
they might go together Hand in Hand, or leave them to dispute the Priority out
among Themselves: But if I were pressed, and must deliver my Sense freely and
particularly, sure it is equal in Honor to These, or at least the very next
after them.

Now, as Sciences differ from each other according to the Subjects of which
they treat, and the Matters they are employed about; and also in the Manner of
acquiring, and attaining to a Mastery in them; so do they likewise in the
Usefulness, the Reputableness, the Necessity, the Decency, the Fame, and the
Gain of them. Some are purely Speculative, and aim at nothing farther, than
merely Contemplation, the entertaining, informing, improving, brightening our
Intellectual Faculties. Others are Practical, and lead us directly on to
Action. Some again are Real, and Conversant in Things; they bring us acquainted
with Matters that are without us, either Natural or Supernatural Objects;
Others are Nominal, They concern Discourse only, teach us Languages, explain
Terms of Arts, help us to express our selves properly, and to reason regularly
and closely. Now, from this short Account, we may boldly say, That upon a
Review of the foregoing Distinctions, Those Sciences, which are most Manly and
Reputable, most Useful, most Necessary, and have least of Glory, and Vanity,
and sordid mercenary Profit attending them, are infinitely Preferable to the
rest. By the same reason then it follows beyond all Contradiction, that the
Practical Sciences are of all others the most excellent; such as propose the
Good and Happiness of Man for their End, and direct all their Instructions
thither; that teach us to live, and to die well; to command and govern, to
submit and obey as becomes us; and therefore These are worthy our most Serious
Application: Who ever pretends to Wisdom, must lay out his Study and his Time
here; and of such, this Book is designed to be a Compendious Summary and
Abridgment: that is, of Morals, Oeconomicks, and Politics; the First for
governing our Selves well; the Second for mannaging our domestic Affairs, and
presiding over our Families well; and the Third for discharging our public
Offices well, if we be called to any part in the Administration of the
Government; or if we be private and subordinate only in both the last
Capacities, then to consider and make good the Duties incumbent upon any the
meanest and most inferior Character. Next to these Practical Sciences, the
Natural are to be regarded and esteemed, which let us into the Knowledge of
this System, and Fabric of the Universe, and the infinite Variety of Creatures
contained in it; and that, both for our own Use and Benefit, so far as they can
be serviceable to us, and also to excite our Wonder, and Praise, and most
Humble Adoration of His incomprehensible Majesty, and Goodness, and Wisdom, and
Power, who is the Great Master Builder, the constant Preserver and Governor of
All, and every Part of it. As for all the rest, they are empty and frothy
Things in Comparison; and though we may call in upon them by the by, and for a
little while, yet ought we not to set up our Rest there, nor make them the
Business of our Lives; because the Use and Effect of them is of no great
Consideration, and they contribute nothing at all toward the making us one
whit better Men. To what purpose then is all that Time, and Trouble, and
Expense, and how can we think it otherwise than lost, or misemploy'd, which we
see Studious Men sometimes lay out so liberally upon them? It is true, they may
serve to get Money, or to raise something of a Reputation among the People, but
it is where Men are Ignorant or ill-governed only: For otherwise they will seek
and encourage such Studies, as bring solid Comforts and Advantages, and are
built upon a firm Bottom.

CHAP. LXII. Of Riches and Poverty.
THese are the two Foundations and Beginnings, the Root and Source of all the
Troubles and Calamities, the Disorders and Disturbances, that confound, and put
the World out of Course: For excess of Plenty and Riches exalts and puffs up
the Possessors, renders them haughty and insolent, swells them with Pride and
Disdain, prompts them to, Luxury and Extravagance, to Sensuality and all manner
of unlawful Pleasures; encourages them to use their Inferiors contemptuously,
and to insult over their Wants and their Miseries; makes them bold and daring,
and in con^idence of their Power, puts them upon seditious and dangerous
Attempts. The extreme Poverty of Others subdues and dejects their Spirits,
poisons them with Envy and restless Jealousy, with Indignation and Spite,
Discontent and Despair; and, since Matters, they think, cannot be worse,
provokes them to try their Fortunes, and make a desperate Push, in hopes they
may be better. Plato calls the Poor the Bane and Fl^gne of a Commonwealth. So
that both these sorts of Men are very dangerous; but whether of the Two is more
so, Considering People have not agreed. Aristotle is of Opinion, that Abundance
is more formidable to the Public, than Want; for the State has not much to
fear from Them who desire no more than a bare Subsistence; but it has reason
to be jealous of Those, whose Wealth makes them Ambitious and Aspiring; and
whose Interest and Authority, upon the account of that Wealth, gives them Power
and Opportunities to be very troublesome. Plato thinks Poverty the worse; for
when Poor People are grown desperate, they are furious and terrible Creatures;
when they are irritated and enraged with want of Bread, and cannot live upon
their Work; when Trading is dead, and they are overburden'd with Tax; then
Necessity, (which is a great Mistress, and finds her Scholars very apt) teaches
them That, which they would never have ventured upon in better and more easy
Circumstances; and this makes them bold as Lions: For though each of them single
can do little or no hurt, yet their Numbers are always great, and these give
them Confidence. But whatever the Disease be, it is certain the Remedy is more
ready at hand, and the Cure easier, for the Poor than for the Rich; this
Mischief is quickly restrained, and may be timely prevented. For so long as
they have Necessaries, so long as they can carry on their Trades, and maintain
their Families by them, they are generally contented. And therefore it highly
concerns all Governors to preserve and encourage Trade, because in so doing
they are sure to keep good Order among the laborious, and hardy, and most
necessitous; which to be sure are generally the most numerous part of their
Subjects. In the mean while, we may observe this very remarkable Difference
between them, that the Rich have the Temptation within Themselves, and are
formidable upon the account of their own Personal Vices, and the Circumstances
they are in; but the Poor are not so from Themselves, nor their Condition, but
if ever They min^ster just cause of Fear, it is commonly through the Indiscretion
or the Cruelty of their Governors, who suffer them to be driven to the last
Extremities; and when these pinch hard, and are no longer supportable, they are
provoked to play a desperate Game in their own Defense.

or presided over, from the Inconveniences attending each of these Extremes;
and such as so vast a Disproportion of Estates and Fortunes will naturally
expose the Public to. They have been therefore desirous to bring all nearer to
a Level, to reduce the one, and raise the other; so that there should be a kind
of universal Mediocrity, and pretty near an equal Scantling: When Things stood
upon this Foot, they promised Themselves a sure Foundation of Peace and Amity,
and good Correspondence, by removing all the Grounds of Contempt on the one
hand, and of Envy and Jealousy on the other, quite out of the way. Others have
stretched this Project yet further; they are for introducing a common Stock,
and leaving no peculiar Rights or Properties at all. But this is impracticable,
and fantastical, and never can exist long any where, but in Men's own Brains
and Imaginations. Nor is that other Design of Equality any more practicable, or
indeed at all possible. For though Men's Income be alike, yet their Expenses and
Occasions will be far from being so. These may vary upon a Thousand Accidents;
but it is enough that every body is able to see and instance in one, which is
perfectly unanswerable; and that is the Number of Children, which we all know
neither do, nor ever can increase in every Family alike. And therefore it must
needs be insufficient, and the Design lost, where the Necessities are not, nor
ever can be equal. All the Attempts that have been at any time made toward the
putting in practice this Levelling Principle, have scarce ever been able to set
it on Foot: It costs more than the Thing is worth to come to it; and if Men
could arrive at it, yet it is highly inexpedient, and not at all to their
Purpose. The End they aim at is never thus to be compassed; for after all, this
is at last but to open another Door, and let the very Mischief in the back way,
which we take so much Pains to keep out. For if Hatred and Contention be the
Evils we are afraid of, where do we find These more frequent and fierce than
between Equals? How can we indeed reasonably expect it otherwise, where Men
think Themselves a Match for one another, where there is no Distance or Respect
to Temper, no Fear to curb and bind them to the Peace and their good Behavior?
If Envy and Jealousies arise against Superiors, so do they likewise among
Equals; and this latter sort is the Seed of Disturbances and Confusions,
Seditions and Civil Wars. Some Disproportion therefore is absolutely necessary,
but such as is moderate, and may keep the Balance even and steady. Order is
like Harmony; if all Sounds we the same, there could be no Music; but yet it
is necessary these different Notes should agree in general Cords, and retain
some Proportion to make the Composition regular and sweet. But a perfect Level
is like a continued Unison; and nothing is more flat, Nihil est aequalitate
inaequalius.
nothing more unequal than an exact Equality.

Psalmist not improperly be applied, Psalm. liii. 5
They eat up my People as they would eat Bread. The Other is by Disposals of
Estates, and that either by Men during their own Lifetime, in Alienations,
Dowries, and Portioning of Children when they Marry, or set up in the World; or
else by last Will, and Bequest at the time of their Death. By all which Means,
and by the Frugality and good Management of some, and the extravagant
Profuseness of Others, it comes to pass, that some Men's Fortunes are
prodigiously increased, and others sunk and crumbled into nothing. A Prodigal
Heir makes all fly, and his Posterity continue poor after him: A great Fortune
marries with a vast Estate; and here one Heap is pil'd upon another: A rich
Heiress carries off the Estate and Paternal Seat, incorporates it into another
House, and so the Wealth and Name of her own Family is either dreadfully maimed
and enfeebl'd, or cut off and quite extinct at once. These are plain and
obvious Reasons, why some Men gain such mighty Advantages over Others; and show
us how some Families are reduced to nothing, and others again flourish as much,
and are wonderfully strengthened and exalted. Now all these things should be
taken into Consideration, and other Measures taken to regulate and reform the
Mischiefs that grow from them. For though a perfect Equality be impracticable,
yet a convenient Moderation is not: And if all be not Even, yet there is no
necessity that all should be in Extremes; we may, and it is reasonable we
should bring Matters nearer together, and make some tolerable Approaches
toward such a Mediocrity as is reasonable. Such an one as is reasonable, I
say; for an entire and thorough one is neither reasonable, nor expedient, nor
honest. This may be effected in some good Degree by private Persons, in the
management and disposal of their Own Affairs: And it may be advanced higher by
the wholesome Constitutions and Counsels of Those in a public Capacity: And both
are concerned to have Regard to it. But of this we shall have some occasion to
speak more at large, when the Virtue of Justice comes to be treated of.

The End of the First Book.
OF WISDOM: THE Second and Third BOOKS.

Written Originally in French, BY THE Sieur de CHARRON

Made English By GEORGE STANHOPE, D. D. late Fellow of King's-College in
Cambridge, from the Best Edition, Corrected and enlarged by the Author a little
before his Death.

LONDON: Printed for M. Gillyflower, M. Bently, H. Bonwick, J. Tonson, W.
Freeman, T. Goodwin, M. Wotten, J. Walthoe, S. Manship, and R. Parker. 1697.

To the HONORABLE Sir WILLIAM ELSE, BARONET.
SIR,
WERE it merely for the Pomp, or the Protection of an Honorable Name, that I
take the Liberty of prefixing Yours before this Work, those purposes of doing
it had been abundantly answered. But I confess an Ambition higher than either
of These, and design this Address, as a means to know a Person more intimately,
whose Character creates Honor and Respect in all that are acquainted with it.
An Ambition excuseable at least, in One whose Happiness it is, to have some
sort of Pretension to be gratified in a Desire, which he cannot but entertain
and indulge.

Where Providence confers the External Advantages of Life only, the Greater and
most valuable part is still behind. Very few are more than half-blest; and of
Them who are, or call themselves unhappy, the Generality are miserable, not
from real Want of what they need, but from an Incapacity of enjoying what they
have. Hence it is still accounted a Moot-point in Philosophy, whether
Prosperity or Adversity, Plenty or Penury, require greater management and
address. Crates.
One of some Name, we know, among those Sages durst not so much as trust
himself with the Temptation of Riches. You, Sir, very justly reproach his
behavior with Rashness and Folly, by showing, that not the Sea, but a Soul
large and diffusive as the Sea rather, is necessary to deliver a man from the
danger of a plentiful Fortune. This does not only secure, but render Him and It
a public Blessing, by Acts of Goodness, Munificence, Hospitality; By
cultivating those Social Virtues whereby Mankind are sustained, cemented,
endeared to one another, and all those important and beneficial Ends
accomplished, to which the Giver of these Good Gifts designs they should be
serviceable.

The Difficulties, under which most Men miscarry, are not avoided by abandoning
the World, but by using it in so masterly a manner, as always to keep above it.
Ambition and Avarice sometimes inhabit the most retired Cloisters; and are (no
doubt) sometimes too absolute Strangers to Quality, and Business, and Fortune.
Every one is valuable in proportion as he is Useful; but Useful They can be but
very little, who industriously decline the occasions of being so. The Man of
Conversation and Civil Society is therefore that Pattern of Wisdom, designed
and drawn by this Author. And to the same purpose, all perfect Systems of
Morality enlarge upon the different Capacities of Men; because the Offices
resulting from thence make the chief part of Christian, as well as Human
Prudence. These are the Talents peculiar to each person, and his proper
Business distinct from the rest of the World.

Now, Sir, when Charron accordingly treats of The true and genuine Use of
Riches, of a Mind capable of Stemming a full tide of Plenty; of the Integrity
of Magistrates in Distribution of Justice, of the Fidelity and Vigilance of
Wise and Worthy Patriots in the Service of their Country, and Defense of its
just Rights; of the Tenderness and Prudence of Parents, and the affectionate
Deference and Duty of Children; when, I say, These and other Descriptions
passed through my hands, there needed but little reflection, to bring to a
Relation's remembrance, a very eminent Instance of these several Civil and
Domestic Virtues.

Be pleased therefore, Sir, to assert your own Excellencies: And what Your
Example already recommends to the World, proceed yet more to enforce, by
accepting a Treatise intended to draw Men to these Resemblances of Your self,
as an Argument of that respect, with which I am,

SIR, Your most Obedient, Humble Servant, George Stanhope.

THE PREFACE.
HAVING in the former Book explained and insisted upon the several Methods, by
which Man may be let into a competent knowledge of Himself, and the Condition
of Humane Nature; which is the first part of our Undertaking, and a very proper
Introduction to Wisdom: The next thing in order, is to enter upon the Doctrines
and Precepts of Wisdom it self. Now That shall be done in this Second Book, by
laying down some General Rules and Directions, reserving for the business of
our Third and Last, those that are more Particular, and appropriated to special
Persons and Circumstances, according to which their Duties vary in proportion
to their respective Conditions. It was a very necessary Preamble in the mean
while, to call Men's thoughts home, and fix them upon themselves; to exhort and
instruct them to handle, probe, and nicely to examine their Nature; that so
being thus brought to a tolerable knowledge and sense of their Infirmities and
Defects, and sadly convinced of the miserable Condition they are by nature in,
they may be put into a better Capacity of having those healing and wholesome
Remedies applied, which are necessary, in order to their Recovery and
Amendment. And these Remedies are no other than the Instructions and
Exhortations, proper for the attaining true Wisdom.

But alas! It is a prodigious, and a melancholy thing to consider, how stupid
and regardless Mankind are of their Happiness and Amendment. What a strange
Temper is it for a Man, not to be at all sollicitous, to have the very Errand
and Business he was sent into the World about, well done? Every body is
infinitely fond and covetous of Living, but scarce any body is concerned, or
takes any manner of Thought, for Living as becomes him. This is the very Art
which should be our Chief, our only Study; and yet it is that which we are
least Masters of, least disposed to learn. Our Inclinations, and Designs, our
Studies, and Endeavors are (as Experience daily shows) vastly different, even
from our very Cradles, or as soon as we began to be capable of any. They vary
according to the Temper and Constitution of our Bodies, the Company we keep,
the Education we are instituted by, the infinite Accidents and Occasions of our
Lives; but still none of us casts his Eyes that way, none makes it his
Endeavor to manage these to the best Advantage, none attempts heartily to
improve in Wisdom; nay, we do not at all lay this most necessary Matter to
heart, we scarce allow it so much as a single Thought. Or if at any time it
comes in our way, accidentally, and by the by; we hear and attend to it, just
as we would to a Tale that is told; or a piece of News, that in no degree
concerns us. The Discourse perhaps is pleasant and entertaining to some (and
but to some neither, for many will not endure, nor give it a patient hearing)
but even those who are contented, nay delighted to hear it, yet hear to very
little purpose. The words and sound tickle their Senses, and that is all they
do. For as to the thing it self, That makes no impression, gains no esteem,
kindles no desires, at least in this so universally Corrupt, and Degenerate Age
of ours. In order to the being made duly sensible of the true worth of Wisdom,
and how much it deserves from us, there seems to be some particular Turn in our
first Frame, some Original Aptitude and Air in our Nature and Complexion. If
Men must take pains, they will much more willingly employ their time, and exert
their Strength and Parts in the pursuit of Things, whose Effects are gay, and
glittering, external and sensible, such as Ambition, and Avarice, and Passion,
propose to them; But as for Wisdom, whose Fruits are silent and gentle,
internal, and unseen, it has no Attractives at all for them. O wretched Men!
what false Measures do we take, and how fatally are we deluded? We prefer Winds
and Storms for the sake of their Noise, where there is nothing but Air and
Emptiness, before Body and solid Substance, which is calm and still; Opinion
and Reputation, before Truth and Real Merit. Surely Man (as was said in the
First Book) is no better than Vanity and Misery, when so averse from, so
incapable of Wisdom. Every Man is tainted with the Air which he breathes and
dwells in, goes in the beaten Road, and lives like his Neighbors; and when
this is made a Rule, how can it be expected he should take another Course? We
follow the Track, and hunt by the Scent; nay we urge our own Vices upon other
People, we are eager and warm in propagating them; we dissemble our Passions,
dress and trick them up, and then put them upon our Companions. None calls
after us to stop our Career; we are not to expect it. We are all out of the
way, and likely never to correct our Error, without the special favor of
Heaven, and a great and generous strength and firmness of Nature at the same
time, discerning enough to observe the common Error in which all are entangled,
but scarce any are sensible of it; daring enough, to be singular in minding
that which no body else minds; and hardy and resolute enough to judge and to
live in a method quite different from the rest of the World.

There have been indeed, some, though very few such brave Men: I see them
still, their Memories and Names are sweet to this day; and I smell their Ashes
like a rich Perfume, with incredible Admiration and Delight. But what has been
the effect of this uncommon Judgment? and how have they behaved themselves with
it? Truly they are for the most Democritus, or Heraclitus revived. Some see the
Errors and Follies of Mankind, and when they have done, they only make a Jest
of them; They divert and entertain themselves and others, by a Comical
Representation of a very Tragical thing; as if no more were necessary to teach
Men Truth and Virtue, than merely to expose Falsehood and Vice. They laugh at
the World; and the World is but too ridiculous; but while they make themselves
merry and good Company, they quite forget to be good-natured and charitable.
Others are feeble and poor-spirited, they mince the matter, and dare not speak
out; they soften and disguise their Language, mingle and sweeten their
Propositions to render them palatable, and make men swallow them before they
are aware, and in a Mass of other things, where they shall not taste, or scarce
ever be sensible of them.

They do not speak home, distinctly and fully; but express themselves, like the
Oracles of old, in Terms ambiguous, and subject to Evasions. I, for my part,
come long after them both in Time, and Merit; but I am blunt and downright, and
deliver my sense plainly and clearly. I give an Idea of Wisdom, and
Instructions for attaining it, such as the World perhaps has not been used to;
and I shall not be surprised, if the newness of my Matter and Method expose
this little Tract to the Censures of such Persons, as have neither Temper, nor
Ability to judge calmly and maturely of the Matter, but accustom themselves to
condemn and run down every thing which does not hit their Humor, or agree with
the Notions they have imbibed already. But who can help that, or secure himself
from their Censures and Displeasure? Let Them take their course; I question not
in the mean while, but the meek and tractable, and honestly disposed, and
likewise the Sublime and Celestial Spirits will pass an equitable construction
upon my Writings. These two Extremes are the Seats of Quiet and Serenity; The
middle Region is the place where all the Disorders, and Storms, and Meteors are
formed, as was observed before; and therefore those angry Men act in agreement
with their Principles, and do nothing but what their Capacity and Condition
disposes them to.

Now in order to give a rough and general Draught of Wisdom, and particularly
of that part, which is the Subject of this present Book; we may divide the
Matter of it into four Points, or general Considerations.

The First consists of such things as are Preparatives or proper
Predispositions to Wisdom; and They are Two. 1. First a disentangling the Mind
from all those Obstructions that prevent, or retard its Improvement; and of
these some are External, such as the Errors and Vices of the World, which we
derive and suck in from abroad; and others Internal, which have their Birth and
Beginning from our Selves; of which Nature are our own Appetites and Passions;
2. The Other is a full, entire, and universal Liberty of the Mind; whereby it
thinks and judges freely.

The Second is concerned in laying the Foundations of Wisdom firm and durable;
and These are also Two; 1. True and Essential Integrity, and 2. The Fixing to
our selves some certain End first, and then chalking out a convenient Rule for
our Lives and Actions, by the keeping close to which, we may be conducted to,
and arrive at that End.

The Third contributes to the raising this Building upon those Foundations;
that is, laying on and finishing the several Functions and Duties of Wisdom,
which are Six. Three whereof principally regard our selves, and concern every
man considered singly, and as a Man; and these are 1. Piety; 2. an Inward and
due Mastery over his Thoughts and Desires; and 3. a decent deportment and equal
Temper of Mind, in all Accidents, whether of prosperous or adverse Fortune; The
other Three regard him as a Member of Society, and extend to others as well as
himself; which are, 1. A Due observance of Laws, and Customs, and Ceremonies;
2. A modest and obliging Conversation with others; and 3. Prudence in the
management of all kind of Business.

The Fourth is made up of the Fruits, and good Effects of Wisdom, which are
Two, 1. The being constantly fit, and in a readiness to die; and 2. The
maintaining a true and uninterrupted Tranquillity of Spirit; which is indeed the
Crown and Glory of Wisdom, and the very Supreme Good and Happiness, of which
Humane Nature is Capable. These taken all together make Twelve Points in the
whole, and each being allowed a distinct Consideration by it self, this Book
will accordingly contain just so many Chapters.

Of WISDOM.
The Second BOOK.
Containing General Rules and Instructions for the Study and Attainment of
Wisdom.
CHAP. I. The first Disposition to Wisdom, Exemption from the Errors and Vices
of the World, and from one's own Passions.
THE first step toward the Knowledge of any thing being a distinct and
adequate Idea and Comprehension of the Subject to be Treated of, I should,
according to this Rule, lay down for the first Rudiment of Wisdom, the
Knowledge of a Man's Self in particular, and of the Condition of Human Nature
in general. But This, having been the Subject of the entire First Book, I have
Reason to hope is sufficiently provided for already. All therefore which I
think necessary to repeat upon this occasion, is, That every Person who makes
Wisdom his Aim and End, ought in the first place to be thoroughly well
acquainted with Himself, and with Mankind. The true Knowledge whereof is a very
important and beneficial Study, of wonderful Efficacy and Advantage. For Man is
the Subject proper for the Philosophers Consideration; none but the Wise
understand it, and every man that does really understand it, is Wise. But at
the same time it is a matter of great Intricacy and Difficulty; for Man is
extremely addicted to fallacy and disguise; so full of it, as to impose very
often, not only upon other People, but upon Himself too. Every one takes a
pleasure in cheating himself, is industrious to flatter his own Conscience,
solicitous to hide and extenuate his own Failings, and diligent to magnify his
few commendable Actions and Qualities; shutting his Eyes, and fearful to see
the worst of himself; and therefore, since Sincerity, even at home, is so very
little regarded, we cannot reasonably think it strange, that Wisdom is so very
rarely to be met with. For how can we expect it should be otherwise, when so
very few are perfect, so few indeed give any attention to the very first Lesson
in this Science, and Men are so far from undertaking to Instruct others, that
they are wretchedly Ignorant and take no care of informing themselves! How many
professed Masters, how many zealous Learners do we see in other matters, which
are foreign, and of little or no moment, while every body neglects the business
which most nearly concerns him; and while he is taken up with other matters
abroad, is absolutely in the dark at home! What an Unhappiness! What an
exquisite Folly is this! How great a Reproach to the Generality of Mankind!

Now in order to the being competently skilled in this point, we should get
acquainted with all sorts of Men, Those of the most distant Countries and
Climats, the most differing Tempers and Ages, Conditions and Professions; (in
which History and Traveling are very considerable Helps) we should observe
their Motions, their Inclinations, and their several Dealings and Behavior,
not only in public, (for these are full of Artifice, and consequently less
improving) but their most secret and reserved Actions, the most natural and
freest from Constraint, such as may let us into the dark and mysterious part of
Human Nature, and discover some of the hidden Springs by which Men are moved.
And particularly, great regard should be had to those Passages wherein Men's
Interests, or particular Humors come to be nearly touched; because there the
Man will be sure to show himself in his own true Colors.

When these Remarks are made, a man must draw them together, and form some
general Notions and judicious Reflections from them. But particularly one must
be very careful to descend into Himself, to try and found his own Breast to the
bottom; that no lurking Deceit escape him there; but every Thought, and Word,
and Action, be justly and nicely weighed.

The Result of such Observations would certainly be, a sad but serious Sense,
how miserable and weak, how defective and poor a Creature Man is, on the one
hand; and yet how vain and arrogant, how proud and presumptuous, how bloated
and big with Air and Wind, what a mere Tumor, a Bladder, a Bubble he is, on
the other. The former of these Representations will move our Compassion; the
latter will raise our Horror and Indignation. Now the former Book has done
him right in all these respects, by taking him to pieces, and examining every
part and feature by it self; viewing him in all the different Lights, and
taking every Prospect the Picture was capable of being drawn in. So that I
shall trouble my Reader no further with any account of this nature at present:
But hope he make a good Proficiency in the business of this Second Book, by the
Assistances given him in the First. And in order to it, we will proceed to warn
him of the chief Obstructions in his way to Wisdom, as They, who build, must
first clear the Ground, and remove the Rubbish out of the way.

Wisdom, must be to get clear of that Evil, which obstructs our whole Design,
and will not admit Wisdom to dwell with, or grow near it. Now this is the
Benefit my Reader is expected to reap from the First Book, which, as I said,
may furnish him with sufficient Instructions for the getting thoroughly
acquainted with the World and Himself; and this Knowledge will possess him with
so just a Character of Both, as cannot but assist and lead him on, to
Consideration and Care, and teach him to stand upon his guard, and diligently
beware of both. Thus there is a strict and natural Connection between the two
parts of this Treatise; for the Beginning and First Step of the Second Book, is
the End and Fruit of the Former.

Popular Error.
Now we have heretofore given a large and lively Description of the Temper of
the Common People; the strange unaccountable Humors of That, Book I. Ch LII.
which is by much the most numerous part of Mankind; and it can be no hard
matter to make a Judgment from thence, what monstrous effects those humors
must in all reason be expected to produce. For since the Vulgar are so
bewitched with the love of Vanity, since they abound with Envy and Malice;
since they are so totally void of Justice, and Judgment, and Discretion; since
they are perfectly strangers to Moderation and good Temper; and what sort of
Deliberations, and Opinions, and Judgments, and Resolutions, can we suppose
them taken up with? How indeed is it possible that they should think, or speak,
or act, according to Truth, and good Sense? We have likewise before, Book I.
Chapter xxxix.
in that Chapter which undertook to represent the Misery of Human Nature, given
several remarkable, and but too notorious instances of the Faults and Failings,
which the generality of the World are guilty of, both in point of Judgment and
Choice; how miserably their Understandings are darkened, and their Wills
depraved; which may very easily convince us, how fixed, and deeply rooted they
are in Error and Vice. To this purpose are those Sayings common among Wise men,
That the Greater part is always the worse part of Mankind; There is not one of
a Thousand Good: That the Number of Fools is infinite. And that there is very
great Danger of Infection in the Crowd.

that are become General, and such as all the world run into with full Cry, and
wild Career?

Thou shall not follow a multitude to do evil, is a just, a prudent, a
necessary Precept; and a most vicious and mistaken Modesty That is, which
prevails with us to disobey it. When therefore any one would cut us short, and
thinks to knock all our Arguments on the head, by saying, All the world is of
this Opinion, or all the world does thus, a considerate Man will answer to
himself at least, I like it so much the worse for that; this is but a very
scurvy Caution, for their Approbation makes me suspect it the more. Thus the
Wise Phocion, when he saw the whole Auditory highly applaud something he had
spoken, turned about, and asked his Friends that stood by, What was the matter;
whether he had let fall somewhat which ought not to have been said, or been
guilty of some egregious Impertinence, that all the People were so mightily
pleased with him. The wisest method then, is to decline, as much as possibly we
can, any Familiarity or frequent Conversation with the People, who are
generally foolish, ignorant, and a very odd Medley of Men: But, if our affairs
will not permit that, yet at least it must be our constant Care to avoid their
received opinions, not to be born down with their Judgments, nor conform our
selves to their Temper and Complexion, nor be corrupted by their vicious
Dispositions and Practices: But at the same time we live in the world, we must
not be of the world. And This indeed is the Reason why Solitude is so much and
so earnestly recommended by Philosophers and Wise men; a Solitude, that
consists in setting the Soul free, and discarding all popular Opinions, and
reigning Vices; delivering the Mind from the Bondage and Confusion, which
Custom, and Example, and the Common Cry subject it to; that so itmay have
leisure to retire into it self, and take its full Range without Interruption or
Restraint.

Second Thing, Exemption from Passions;
is Internal; and as such threatens more imminent Danger, and requires a
greater portion of our Care. And This is that Slavery and Perplexity which our
own Passions and disorderly Affections put us into. And against These there
ought to be a strict and strong guard, to prevent their Tumults and
Insurrections; or rather indeed we ought, if that were possible, to dispossess
them quite, that so our Mind might be clean, and open, and unsullied, like a
Blank Paper, ready to receive any Inscription, any Tincture of Wisdom, against
which the Passions are formal and declared Enemies, by the Stains and
Prejudices they leave upon it. This gave occasion for that Saying of some Wise
Heathens, That it was not possible, even for Jupiter himself to be in Love, or
to be angry, or affected strongly with any other Passion, and yet to be Wise at
the same time. And accordingly both Reason and Revelation in the Ideas they
teach us to form of God, represent him void of all Passions, Body, or Bodily
Affections; as Infirmities by no means consistent with the Excellencies of an
Absolutely Good and Perfect Being. Wisdom is a regular conduct of the Soul; it
proceeds in number, and weight, and measure; it is an evenness and smoothness,
a sweet and pleasing Harmony of our Judgments and Wills, and well-proportioned
Dispositions. A constant health and soundness of the Mind; whereas the Passions
quite contrary, are the Ague-sits of a distempered Soul, the Boundings and
Reboundings of Folly; the wild Skips, and wanton Sallies, and impetuous
Emotions, and rash unguided Flights of the Man, without any Aim, or Order, or
Measure.

General Remedies against them.
that they cannot but show us their Deformity, and may create in us a just
horror and detestation of them. The Remedies and Means for subduing each of
these in particular, will come in more properly in the Third Book, under the
Topics of Fortitude and Temperance. But of those which are general, and our
present Business, there are several, and of different kinds, some Good, and
some Evil. I do not here reckon that Happiness of Constitution and Natural
Blessedness, which renders the Man so well tempered, as to preserve him calm
and serene; not subject to any strong Passions, or violent Emotions of Soul;
and keeps him in a constant, smooth, even, uniform composure of Spirit,
hardened and impenetrable, and proof against all Attacks. This indeed is an
uncommon Excellency; but it is not so properly a Remedy against Evil, as an
Exemption from it; it is not a Medicine or an Instrument of Recovery, but it is
an effectual Prevention of Sickness, and the State of Health it self. This
therefore falls not within the compass of our Subject and Design in this place,
which is to prescribe Remedies truly so called; and of Them I shall propose
Four to the Reader's Observation.

Stupidity.
is a sort of Stupidity or Insensibility of Mind, which does not feel, nor
apprehend at all. A Brutish Apathy, incident to mean Souls, such as are either
perfectly seared and dead, or have their Apprehensions in great measure blunted
and dulled; a sort of Callousness and Crust upon the Sensitive parts; a
Spiritual Lethargy, and constant Heaviness, which though it have some Air of
Health and Ease, yet what we think so is in effect its Disease. For there can
be no such thing as Wisdom and Constancy, where there is no Knowledge, no
Sense, no Activity at all. And therefore this does not cure the Distemper, but
only render the Patient insensible of his Illness. But yet This, as bad as it
is, is better, and much rather to be chosen, than the knowing, and feeling, and
suffering ones self to be vanquished and preyed upon by the painful Impression:
What Horace says of his Writings, is thus far applicable to the Affections and
Follies of Mankind; Praetulerim Scriptor delirus inersque videri,
Dum men delectent mala me, vel denique fallant,
Quam sapere and ringi.
Horat. Epist. 2. Lib. 2.
-- I had rather be a little Wit,
So my dull Verse my own dear Self delight,
Than know my Faults, be vexed, and dye with Spite.
Creech.

A Counter-Passion.
and oftener applied, than any other. This is, when a man vanquishes one
Passion, and stifles it by the more prevailing Force of another. For the
Passions are never equally poized, but one or other of them will always cast
the Scales. Now we are frequently guilty of a great Error, in attributing
things to Virtue and Wisdom, in which They never had the least hand or concern,
but they are purely the Effects of Passion. And it happens very well for
Persons under these Circumstances, when those which ride highest, and have got
the Dominion in their Souls, are not of the worst sort of Passions.

Prevention.
is a matter of Prudence and Artifice, by which a Man steals out of the way,
runs, hides himself, and keeps at a distance from the Occasions and Accidents,
which he knows, or has found by Experience, apt to provoke and put him out of
Temper; such as wake the sleeping Lion, and give Fire to his Passions. This is
a Study, and a Knack men have of putting themselves upon a posture of Defense;
or rather of keeping good Outguards: upon the alarming whereof they may have
leisure to retreat, or so to secure the Passes and Avenues, that the Approach
of Evils may be intercepted and prevented. Of this kind is that common Story of
a Prince, who immediately broke a Rich Cup that was presented to him, for fear
it should provoke his Anger, if by Chance or Negligence it should happen to be
broken by another hand. The proper and constant Prayer of these men is, Lead us
not into Temptation. Thus it is, that Men resolve against Gaming, who feel
themselves unable to command their Temper, and cannot play without Passion. And
thus Men of nice Honor, and prone to Anger, decline Disputes in Company, and
crush the very first motions to Strife in the birth. For when a man is once
engaged, it is difficult to make a good Retreat; and the After-Game of Wisdom
and Discretion is very hard and hazardous to play. In the Beginning we manage
things as we please, and have them at our mercy; but when once the fire is
kindled, and we are grown warm, they manage and carry Us how and whither they
will. It is certainly much easier wholly to decline a Passion, than to keep it
within just bounds and measures; and that which few can moderate, almost any
body may prevent. And the Reason is plainly this; Because all things in their
infancy and at first, are small and feeble, flexible and tender. But the
misfortune is, that while they are weak we are not sensible of the Danger; and
when they are grown stubborn and strong, we are not capable of a Remedy. This
any man may observe in common Conversation. How many instances could every one
of my Readers recollect of persons, who upon every slight occasion fall into
Quarrels, commence Lawsuits, engage in Disputes and Controversies, and are at
last forced to give out with Disgrace; come to shameful and dishonorable
Accommodations; take Sanctuary in mean and equivocating Interpretations; belie
and contradict themselves; betray their want of Honesty; go against their own
Sense; palliate, and disguise, and color over matters of Fact; which are all
of them miserable Refuges, and Remedies ten thousand times worse, than the
Disease they would cure? In all these cases it were much better not to begin at
all, than to bring matters to such a Conclusion. For, for want of timely
Prudence and good Conduct, they fall into want of Integrity and Good Sense. And
so in all their Proceedings they run directly counter to that wise Advice of
Bias, which is to set out and undertake things coolly and considerately; but,
when we are well satisfied of the Justice and Reasonableness of our Enterprise,
then to prosecute it warmly and vigorously. It is in this manner, that those
foolish Men expose themselves, who out of a vicious Easiness and Complaisance,
are ashamed to deny any request made to them; but after this mighty Liberality
in promising, are every whit as apt and easy to break their word again, and
prostitute that Honor vilely, which was engaged with so much Levity. And
therefore in all our Affairs, in all our dealings and Conversation with men,
nothing is more requisite, than to look before us, to make true steps at first,
and be well advised, before we begin.

Virtue.
a Resolution and Firmness of Mind, by which a man is qualified to look any
Accidents in the Face; to meet and come up close to them, without Starting, or
Disorder, or Confusion; to enter into the Lists, and encounter them gallantly.
This is a brave, a noble, a glorious Impassibility indeed; which sets the Mind
above Trouble, directly contrary to the first of these Remedies, which
consisted in an impenetrable Temper, a heavy, sottish, senseless Stupidity. And
there is nothing will Contribute more to the working us up into this generous
Gallantry of Spirit, than the furnishing and forming our Judgments with good
Instructions; digesting them thoroughly, and applying them Seasonably; but
especially the fortifying our selves with Thought and Deliberation, that so we
never fall under the Terrors of Surprise; but be prepared to defend our Post,
whenever they attack us. For Reasoning and Discourse masters the Passions, and
Premeditation is the thing, which hardens the Soul, and renders it proof,
against all the Evils that would soften and subdue it. And one great help
toward the preserving us impregnable, will be a serious Reflection upon what
has already been delivered in the foregoing parts of this Book; For the proper
method of calming and sweetning the Passions, is to get well acquainted with
the nature of them; to examine them nicely, and know exactly, what Influence
they have upon Us, and what Command we have over them. But especially we should
guard our selves against too easy a Credulity, and not suffer any rash Surmise
or Opinion, to foment or inflame our Passions; for Falsehood, and Folly, and
Uncertainty, transport Fools only; a Wise Man will weigh things calmly, and
coolly, and suffer himself to be carried no farther than mature Judgment, and
measured Truth lead him: For Reason is his only Guide, and every Impression is
brought to this Standard, and strictly examined by it. But of This, besides the
light given us already, we shall be more fully and particularly qualified to
make a Judgment, both from what follows in this Second Book, and from the
Instructions to be added in the Third, when we come to enlarge there upon the
Virtues of Fortitude and Temperance.

Wisdom; the very Corruption and Gangrene of the Soul, by which it mortifies,
and grows absolutely incurable. This swells us with vain Conceits, and false
Satisfactions and Confidences; we make undue estimates of our selves, and are
marvellously pleased with our own supposed Sufficiency; nay we perfectly
Idolize, fall down and worship our Selves, and neither believe, nor hear, any
body but our Selves. Now indeed we can never be in worse hands than our own,
and that Prayer of the Spaniards is a very significant and sensible one, O God
preserve me from my self. Such Presumption and foolish Self-Love proceeds from
mistake; and Ignorance, is not so truly the Mother of any Devotion, as of this.
Were men but duly sensible, how weak and wretched, how impotent and little, how
full of Infirmities and Errors, Human Nature is in general; and were each Man
duly so of his own personal Defects and Frailties in particular, Romans 12.16.
that Divine Counsel of not being wise in our own Conceits, would be much
better obeyed: And obeyed it is necessary it should be; for till we are free of
this Vanity, we can never arrive at true and sound Wisdom. It stops our Ears
against all Advice and Instruction, and suffers us not to see our own Wants,
nor the Abilities of others to direct and improve us. Honesty and Integrity,
Modesty and Diligence, a meek and teachable Temper, a serious, and hearty, and
humble acknowledgment of our Deficiency; These are not only the first and
surest Steps to Virtue, but the greatest Evidence of a solid Judgment, a clear
Understanding, a rightly-disposed Will, and unbiassed Affections; and
consequently, a most hopeful and promising, as well as it is an indispensably
Requisite Preparation, to the Study and Attainment of Wisdom and Goodness.

CHAP. II. An entire Liberty of the Mind; The Second Predisposition, requisite
in order to Wisdom.


The Former of these, which regards the Judgment, consists in considering,
judging, and examining all things; yet not Tying ones self up to any, but
remaining still free, and at ones own disposal; of a large universal Spirit,
open and ready to hear any thing that shall be offered. This is the highest
pitch of Soul, the most peculiar and distinguishing Privilege of a truly Great
and Wise Man; but such a one I confess it is, as all People are not capable of
understanding, and much less still of attaining to it. Upon which account I
think my self obliged to establish this Point, against the Objections of those
Vulgar Souls, which are not of Capacity large enough for true Wisdom.

And first of all, to prevent all Mistakes and unreasonable Cavils upon Words,
I will explain the Terms made use of here, and give the true meaning of them.
Now this Description consists of Three things, which mutually Produce, and
Support one another. And these are, Judging every thing, being Wedded or tied
up to Nothing, and preserving a Largeness of Soul, and being ready to hearken
to any thing that shall be offered.

By Judging in the first of these Particulars, it is plain I cannot mean
Resolving, Determining, or Positively Affirming; because this would imply a
direct Contradiction to the Second Branch of the Description. And therefore no
more can possibly be understood by it, than Examining and Weighing all matters
that come before us; putting the Arguments for either Side of the Question into
the Balance, to see which Scale Preponderates, and where the Merits of the
Cause lie; that by this means the Truth may, after long and diligent
Disquisition, at last be clearly made out.

Then again, By not espousing, or being bound up to any thing, I do not intend
stopping short of the Truth, affecting Uncertainty, and floating in the Air;
sometimes talking and acting one way, and sometimes the direct contrary; and so
never proceeding or resolving any thing after such Deliberations as are
requisite for a Man of Constancy and Prudence, nor venturing to Act, because he
cannot be positive, that his Judgment is right; For I would have my Philosopher
conform to the Customs of the World, and in all the external and common
Passages of Human Life, act like other Men. The Rules prescribed here have
nothing at all to do with any Man's Commerce or outward Behavior; their
Business is only to regulate the Mind; and to set the Thoughts and Judgment
right within. Nay, and even in this Inward Regulation too, I am content, that
Men should readily assent to probable Evidence; That they should stick to that
side, where they find the greatest Appearance, of Honesty and Justice, of
Convenience and Advantage. But still that This should be done with some sort of
Modesty and Reserve; avoiding all Positiveness, and Stiffness; all indecent
Censures and Contemptuous Usage of those who think otherwise: Treating the
Contrary Opinions, be they never so distant, be they New, or Old, with Candor
and Caution; disdaining nothing that can be offered, but ready and content to
hear the Arguments of those that oppose us. Nay, not only content, but
desirous, that they should oppose us, and allege whatever they have to say
against our Notions; Because This will put us upon a more Accurate Exercise of
the First of these Qualifications, and oblige us to consider and weigh things
more cautiously.

Now these Three Qualities I affirm to preserve, and mutually to support each
other; For He that examines things carefully and without Passion, will find
somewhat of Reason and Probability on every side; so much at least as will
preserve him, not only from Rashness and Precipitation, but from Peremptoriness
and Obstinacy; and this puts the Mind in that State of Ingenuity, and
Indifference, which I mean by Openness, and Universality of Soul. Whereas on
the contrary, the Man who fixes absolutely, has cut himself out from farther
Examination, he is fastened down to the Notions already entertained by him; and
makes himself of a Party, resolved to maintain his Opinion, in despite of all
Sense and Reason to the Contrary.

Simple and Credulous and Foolish Men are defective in the First of these
Qualifications; Opiniaters, and Dogmatical Arguers are faulty in the Second
Point; and both the one and the other Sort, when they turn factious, and
espouse a Party, offend against the Third. But a Philosopher indeed, whose only
aim is Truth, and whose Pursuits of it are regular and discreet, is Wise, and
Modest, and Moderate, and so an exact Observer of all these Rules.

It is farther necessary, for the giving a true State of the Matter I am now
upon, to add, that by the All things to be nicely examined, and the No one
thing to be resolutely espoused, I mean such Objects only, as are merely
humane, and Matters proper for a Philosophical Enquiry. So that This Direction
must by no means be thought to concern Revealed and Divine Truths. For These we
are obliged, not in Duty only, but by the strictest Reason too, to receive,
with an entire submission and most profound humility. These are not Matters for
Discussion and Controversy; we have nothing to do here, but to bow down the
Head and Worship; to restrain the Insolence of Reason, when it would sawcily
pry into the Ark; to check and captivate our Minds, and resign our
Understandings to the Obedience of Faith. But, these Religious and Sacred
Objects excepted, none of the rest need disdain to come within those
Conditions, and ought not to be received upon easier terms.

This short Exaplanation of the Terms might perhaps suffice for Men of Equity
and Good Sense, and save me the Trouble of any farther Enlargement; but because
I see plainly that there are a Party of Men in the world, of a positive, fierce
and domineering Spirit, who are for leading all Mankind after them in a very
Magisterial manner; and, having first inviolably engaged in some particular
Principles and Opinions themselves, take the Confidence to expect, that every
Body else should come in upon Their Authority; and for that reason will not
endure any thing that looks like asserting Liberty of Thinking; In opposition
to these stiff, assuming Gentlemen; and to prevent, or at least to defeat their
Outcries upon this Occasion, I think my self under some necessity to prove, and
confirm what has been here advanced; and will therefore consider each Branch
of this Proposition distinctly, as the parts lie before us.

Judging every thing; which is the peculiar Character of the Wisest and most
exalted Understandings, The proper Office of a Man; the most natural, most
becoming employment of a Rational Soul. To what purpose, I would fain know,
were those Noble Faculties of Discourse given us; why have we that penetrating
Wit, that Discerning and Acute Spirit? Is it to build Castles in the Air with,
and feed our selves with Extravagant Fancies, or to lavish it away upon useless
Vanities, and Trifles, as the greatest part of Mankind do? Eyes certainly were
made to take Advantage of the Light; and these Powers to exert themselves in
that Judicial Authority, which this Superintendant of the lower world, has
over the Works of Nature and Providence. To entrench upon this Prerogative,
were to maim his very Essence; to unman, and to degrade him into Beast. And to
exercise this Right is the Property of a Man, and to do it in an Eminent and
Uncommon Manner, is the very Mark and Distinction of a Wise Man. If then the
Neglect of this Power be so great a Violation of the Nature and Privileges of
Mankind in general, the giving up an Original Right, which ought not by any
means to be parted with; how much more inexcusable is it in a Wiseman, who is
so much better qualified for it, and has stronger pretensions to that
Authority, than those of meaner Abilities can have? It is therefore, in my
Apprehension, a most amazing thing, that so many persons, even among those, who
either have, or at least set up for Learning and Good Sense, should of their
own accord give up so just a Right, and tamely submit to what comes next; nay,
approve whatsoever has the least Color of a Probability; or perhaps nothing
but Custom and common Credit to keep it in Countenance; without ever going
about to call the Cause, and examine whether there be any Merits in it or no.
Nay, not only to submit, but to think themselves bound to do so; and that they
are not at liberty to satisfy their own Reason. What a Horrible Indignity, what
a Degradation of Humane Nature is This? In other Cases we find them bold and
assuming, extremely jealous of their Honor, and tenacious of their Privileges:
But here they are despicably tame, and poor-spirited, which is the justest, the
most indisputable, the most inherent Property of any that belongs to them.

It Is certain, that there can be but One Truth, but Falsehood is infinite: A
Thousand differing Judgments upon the same Thing, and but One of all these in
the right; and shall I in the midst of all this Doubt and Confusion, be
forbidden to use the Means God has put into my hands, for the finding out
which That is? Shall it be thought Taking more upon me than becomes me, if I
endeavor to discover the best Appearance of Truth, or Equity, or Profit, or
Convenience, for a Rule and Measure to my own Actions? Is it possible to
suppose, that among the many disagreeing, nay opposite Laws and Customs of the
World, none but Ours should be good for any thing? Are all Mankind out of their
Senses, and has every other Nation taken wrong Measures? Who can have the
Confidence to assert this? Or who makes any Question, but other Countries are
even with us, and think every whit as meanly of Our Constitutions, as we do of
Theirs Nay, there is no dispute, but this very Person, whoever he be, that is
so blindly fond of his Native Manners, would have had the same partial Liking
for those of any other place, where it had been his Fortune to have been born
and bred: He would have been as warm in preferring Those, above such as he now
thinks best, for no other reason it is plain, but because he has been used to
them.

If any Man shall venture to assert the Contrary, I must beg leave at least to
answer him; that This Liberty of Judging is a good Rule however for all
Foreigners to make Use of; that so They by the Practice of it may convince
themselves, how much Our methods of Living excel Theirs. This he must grant me
sure; and if he do, it will follow, that a Wise Man will think it advisable to
do this upon All Occasions; and pass Sentence upon nothing, till he have
allowed it a fair hearing, and weighed the Matter impartially. To be led thus
like Oxen, and follow the Herd, is fit for none but Brutes, or Men but one
Remove above them. I would by all means have a man behave and express himself,
and make his Figure in compliance with the rest of the World; but I would not
have him conform his Judgment to Theirs, nay I would have him even sit in
Judgment upon Theirs. What Privilege do you leave the greatest Philosopher
above the most ignorant Clown, if the noblest part of him, his Mind, shall be
enslaved to common Vogue? Methinks the World should be very well satisfied with
a Man's Compliance in outward Behavior: But all Within is my Own; And what
has the World to do with my Thoughts? They shall give Rules if they please to
my Tongue, and my Hand; but my Mind, by their good Leave, is out of their
Jurisdiction, and is accountable to another Master. The Liberty of the Mind is
what no body can actually take away; and if any Attempt it, they are of all
Tyrants and Usurpers, the most unreasonable, the most insupportable. Every Wise
Man will be sure to be tender of it, and offend in neither Extreme, for he will
neither endure to part with his own Freedom, nor offer to invade any other
Man's.

Cicero in his Expressions; who declared he referred the Usage of Words to the
People, but the proper meaning of them he reserved the right of judging in to
himself.

To instance now in a few particulars; and those some of them very frivolous,
and of little or no Consequence. I make no Scruple to pull off my Hat in
Civility and Deference to a Man of Quality, because this part of the World
express their Respect that way; but at the same time I am free to think, the
Eastern Custom better, who express their Reverence by laying their hand upon
their Breast; and never hazard their health, nor expose themselves to any of
the other Inconveniences incident to frequent Uncovering of the Head. So again,
were I an Inhabitant of the Oriental parts of the World, I would eat my Meals
upon the ground, or leaning, or lying along, as they do, and as great part of
the World did heretofore, particularly the Jews, as we find by the Description
of our Lord's last Supper; but still I could not forbear in my own private
judgment, preferring the sitting upright at Table, as our present manner is,
for the much more commodious way of Eating. Again, to mention a Matter of
somewhat greater Importance, I am satisfied, that the Dead Bodies of my Friends
should be interred, and given as a Prey to the Worms; but still I cannot but
think the old way of burning, and preserving their Ashes in Urns, much more
cleanly, and more noble; that Fire is more respectful than Putrefaction and
Stench; an Element, which even Religion has given some Countenance to, by
commanding the Remainders of the Paschal Lamb heretofore to be burnt: But what
can we do worse than to cast our Friends to rot in the ground, and be eaten by
Vermin and Insects; an Indignity, which to Me seems fit to be offered, only to
those Scandalous Wretches, who dye by the Hands of Common Executioners; but the
Remains of Persons of Honor and Virtue (in my poor Apprehension) should be
otherwise treated. For of the five several ways by which dead Bodies are
capable of being disposed of, (the committing them to the mercy of the four
several Elements, or suffering them to be devoured by Beasts;) that of Burning
seems to me much the most eligible.

Once more. I am well enough pleased to have the Wise Man of my forming look
out of Countenance, and take care to decline and conceal every thing that
passes for Immodest in the Esteem of the World; and must have a very ill
Opinion of him, should he do otherwise: But then I desire he should be
satisfied, that this is due from him in regard to the Customs and common
Sentiments of other people; not to any shame in the Nature of the Things
themselves. For Nature, that is, the God of Nature, never made any thing which
was reproachful, and these Ignominies are purely accidental; the product of
Sin, which is the Greatest Enemy and Corrupter of Nature. Even Religion it
self, which is much more Chaste and Reserved than Philosophy, assures us, that
while Man continued in his Original Innocence and Perfection, there was no such
thing as Shame; but That and Guilt entered the World at once.

I comply with the Mode of my own Country, in point of Clothes and Dress; and
so I would have gone Naked too, if my Lot had cast me in a Country where it is
usual to do so. But to Me both these Fashions appear so inconvenient, that,
were I left to my own Choice entirely, I should do neither. The manner of those
Nations, which use some One slight Garment, plain and light, without
Constraint, or Ceremony, or Great Expense, is much the best in my apprehension.
For the multitude of Clothes, and the different Sorts of them, but especially
the Vanity and abominable Extravagance the World is guilty of in them, is a
thousand times worse than going Naked. These Instances I content my self with
the mention of at present; my Reader may multiply them to himself at pleasure,
upon Occasion of the infinite Variety of Laws and Customs, and Modes, and
Matters of Fact; and the as great Variety in Opinions too, and contests in
Matter of Right, and what is fit to be done, as well as what is actually done.

accuracy. I only take up with my present Thoughts, till better Information
give me Cause to change them; and therefore they are only upon good liking;
ready to be dismissed, when more rational ones may succeed in their stead.

But, as to the more general part of the Objection, which regards the dangerous
Consequences and pernicious Effects of such a Liberty; besides what has been
urged already, and will be more at large hereafter, (That the Rule, by which
our Judgments are to be directed, is Nature and Universal Reason, which so long
as we keep close to, we are secure from Error:) the Second Branch of this
Judicious Liberty, will provide us with Remedies against this supposed
Mischief; and That is what I shall now apply my self to treat of particularly
and fully.

This is my present Opinion; and I have reason to embrace it above any other:
but still he can hear it contradicted without any Disorder, and satisfy himself
to know all that can be said against it; and if what is offered preponderates,
he makes no scruple to change his Mind; and constantly, even of That Opinion
which stuck last by him, he goes no farther in vindication, than that possibly
there may be some other better grounded, but this is the Best that he has met
with. Now this Suspension and Indifference I speak of, is built upon several
famous Maxims entertained and propagated by the Greatest Philosophers, and
likewise upon the Freedom they used in their Writings and Behavior. For this
Quality must be confessed to have been the concurrent Practice, and avowed
Principle of Wise Men in all Ages; the Most, and most conspicuous among them
have made no scruple openly to confess their Ignorance, and their Doubts;
saying, That all Nature was full of Difficulties and Dilemma's; That nothing
was more certain than Uncertainty; That there was scarce any thing so plain,
but an Ingenious Man might bring plausible and almost equal Arguments for
Either side of the Question; and a thousand other such Sayings; by which they
remarkably argued a distrust of their own Judgments. The rest of them, though
upon some occasions they have proceeded somewhat dogmatically, and delivered
their Minds boldly and positively; yet seem rather to have dissembled their
Doubts, than not to have had any; and to put the best face they could upon the
matter, that the World might see how far their Wit would carry them, in the
Search of Truth; a Thing Quam Docti fingunt, magis quam norunt.
which Learned Men seem rather to have framed an Idea of to themselves, than to
have known her as she is. For after all their boasts of attaining her, their
Courage fails them at last, and the Things uttered by them they dare not
venture to bestow any more honorable Titles upon, than that of Probabilities,
and Appearances of Truth; and while they represent them variously, sometimes in
one prospect, and form; and sometimes in another; by Questions, and Problems,
and Ambiguous Disputes; as if their design was rather to enquire, than to
teach; and that they sought Information themselves, while they pretend to give
it to others; from all this I say, and the whole current of their Style, we may
reasonably gather, that they wrote and spoke, not so much with a design to
establish a Notion, or render it unquestionable, as for Diversion, and to
Exercise their Wits; as one says, We cannot be sure what their opinions were,
or that they really believed their own Writings, for indeed No^^^^m id sensiffe
quod dicerent, quam exercere ingenia ma^^^^^ ^^^^cultate voluisse videntur.
they seem not to have designed we should gather their Sense of things, so much
as that we should observe and admire their Parts and Skill, by those Trials,
which the nicety and difficulty of their Subject put them upon. And who can
ever persuade himself, that Plato intended his Republic and fanciful Ideas
should ever pass for Current Doctrine; or that Pythagoras in advancing his
Numbers, and Epicurus his Atoms, spoke their own real Opinions, and such as
they thought were weighed and measured Truths? They pleased and entertained
their own Minds with these nice Speculations, but (...) singuntur, non ex
Scientiae vi.
the Notions were owing more to the Fruitfulness of their own Inventions, than
to any strength of Proof, or force of Knowledge. And indeed they may seem
sometimes to have gone out of the common road on purpose, and with great
Industry to have sought somewhat of Difficulty, the better to amuse the world,
by thus concealing the Vanity of the Subjects they were upon, and to furnish
matter for the gratifying their Reader's Curiosity. How wretchedly is Aristotle
the very Idol of these Dogmatists confounded and at a loss? How inconsistent
with himself, and forced sometimes to confess the Impotence of Human Nature,
and how short the most inquistive come of the Truth?

more positive and magisterial way of Writing, and from thence got the Title of
Dogmatists, were Men of a Pedantick, and presumptuous Temper. They, it is true,
condemn and detest this Rule of Wisdom; and were fonder of a Hotheaded
peremptory Fellow, though contrary to their own Party and Judgment; than of a
peaceable, sedate. and modest Man, who contents himself with Doubting, and
declines the pronouncing any thing definitively; that is, in plain English,
they esteem a rash Fool, more than a Cautious Wise Man. (Like Women, who take
it ill not to be contradicted, and had rather be answered rudely, than not at
all. Because they think the Coldness and Indifference of Silence argues greater
Contempt and Disdain, than it is possible for the most injurious Language to
express.) In which they betray great perverseness and injustice. For what
reason can be given, why a Man should not be allowed to suspend his Judgment,
and still to deliberate upon things as Doubtful, without venturing to affirm on
either side; when They at the same time take a privilege of determining as They
see fit? Is not there the same Equity at least, the same Right for the one, as
for the other? and what mighty Crime is it frankly to confess one's self
Ignorant, when he is really so; and to say nothing, when he cannot speak with
good Assurance, and full Satisfaction?

It is certain, that all Philosophers are agreed so much to our disadvantage,
as to pronounce, that we are Ignorant of a great deal more than we know; nay,
that our Knowledge is not comparable, not fit to be mentioned in competition
with our Ignorance. The Causes of which are infinite; for we may be mistaken in
the Objects of our Enquiry, by reason of their being too near or too distant;
too great or too small; of too long, or too short duration; and in perpetual
Flux and Uncertainty. These Causes of Error proceed from the Object, but then
there are infinite Others owing to our Selves, and our Manner of Perception;
which in truth is not yet universally agreed upon, nor perfectly well
understood. What we think our selves sure of we do not really know, nor can we
be secure of continuing in our present Opinion any time. For how often do we
see fresh Arguments extort it from us? or, if our Obstinacy will hold it fast,
in despite of all Reasons to the Contrary; yet at least they raise a dust, and
disturb us in the Possession of it. Now I would be glad to know, which way a
man shall ever be capable of improving his Judgment, if he fasten himself down
to some certain notions; resolving to look and examine no farther, nor enduring
to hear any thing offered in prejudice of an Opinion, which he fancieth himself
abundantly satisfied in already. The plain Truth is; Men are ashamed of this
Suspense I am treating of, because they have a wrong Notion of it. They look
upon it as a Sign of Want of Judgment; whereas in reality the Greatest and most
judicious Philosophers that ever lived, were the most frank in this Point. The
Idea of Positiveness and Presumption has taken such fast hold of them, and
they think Dogmaticalness and Learning so inseparable, that they are out of
Countenance in any case to own their Ignorance, lest This should be thought a
Reflection upon their Parts and Seize. There is no persuading them, that
there is a sort of Ignorance and Doubt, more Learned, more Generous; and
consistent with better Assurance, and more accurate Knowledge, than all Their
boasted Science and Certainty. This gave that great renown to Socrates, and
entitled him to the Character of the Wisest Man of his Age: This is the Fruit
of Study, and deep enquiry; it is a modest, candid, innocent, and hearty
acknowledgement, of the sublime mysterious Nature of Truth; and the Defects and
Poverty of our own Understanding; so weak within, so beset with Mists and
Darkness without, and from Both so uncertain, and unsteady in its Resolutions.
The Lord knows the Thoughts of Man, that they are but vain, says the
Psalmist: And another Author, that, Cogitationes mortalium timidae, incertae
adinventiones nostrae and Providentiae.
The thoughts of Mortal Men are full of Fears and Misgivings; their Inventions
uncertain, and all their Forecasts Dark and Confused. And I, for my own part am
so fully possessed of this Truth, that I have ordered this Motto, I know not:
Je ne scay; to be engraved over the Gate of my little House which I built at
Condom.

Now there are a sort of Persons, who take it ill, that Men should not submit
themselves absolutely, and fix on some certain Principles; which ought, they
tell you, never to be examined or controverted at all. Now I allow, that if
These be such as manifest themselves to a Man's Reason, they ought to be
received; but that merely upon the account of their Reasonableness, and not for
the pompous Name of Principles. To impose any thing unconditionally, is Tyranny
and Usurpation; and though upon due Consideration, and the Approbation of my
own Judgment, I allow them, yet if they will not admit me to try whether they
be Sterling or Counterfeit, before I take them for current Coin; this is a
Condition full of Hardship and such as I can never yield to. For who, I would
fain know, has power to give Law to our Thoughts, to enslave our Minds, and
set up Principles, which it shall not be lawful to enquire into; or admit any
manner of doubt concerning them? I can own no such Power in any but God; and He
has it upon the account of his being Truth it self; the Supreme Spirit, and
the only Principle and Source of all things: which makes it as reasonable to
believe Him upon his bare word, as it is, not to believe other people barely
upon Theirs. For this Foundation of our Belief being One of his Incommunicable
Perfections, it will unavoidably follow, that no other thing is injured or
disparaged, by out refusing the same entire Resignation to it, and challenging
our Right of Examining, before we yield our Assent.

If a Man requires my Belief to what are commonly styled by the Name of
Principles, my Answer shall be the same with that of a late Prince to the
several Sects in his Kingdom, Agree among your selves first, and then I will
give my Consent too. Now the Controversies are really as great about these
Principles, as they are concerning the Conclusions advanced upon them; as many
doubts upon the Generals as the Particulars; so that in the midst of so many
contending Parties, there is no coming in to any One, without giving offense,
and proclaiming War upon all the rest.

They tell us farther, that it is a horrid uneasy state of Mind, to be always
thus upon the Float; and never coming to any settled Resolution, to live in
Eternal Doubt and Perplexity of Thought; nay, that it is not only painful, but
very difficult, and almost impracticable, to continue long in such Uncertainty.
They speak this, I suppose, from their own Experience; and tell us what they
feel themselves: But this is an Uneasiness peculiar to foolish and weak people.
To the Former, because Fools are presumptuous, and passionate, and Violent
espousers of Parties and Opinions; full of Prejudices, and strong Possessions;
fierce Condemners of all that differ from them; never yielding the Cause, nor
giving out the Dispute, though they be really convinced; and supplying the want
of Reason by Heat and Anger, instead of ingenuous Acknowledgments of their
Error. If they find themselves obliged to change their Opinion, you have them
then as peremptory and furious in their new Choice, as ever they were in their
first Principles; in short, They know not what it is to maintain an Argument,
without Passion; and when they dispute, it is not for the sake of Truth or
Improvement, but purely for Contradiction, and the Last Word, and to assert
their own Notions. These Men I make no Scruple to call Fools; for in truth they
know nothing; not so much as what it is to know; so exceeding pert and
confident are they; and insult as if they carried Truth about in their Pockets,
and it was their own incommunicable Property.

As for Men of Weak Judgments, and such as are not able to stand upon their own
Legs; it is very necessary they should not be left alone, but seek a Support
from persons of better and more discerning Abilities: But These are not
concerned in my present Rule; it is their Misfortune to be born to Slavery, and
out of all Capacity to enjoy the Freedom I am treating of.

But as for Wise Men, who are qualified for it, Men of Modesty and Reserve, and
prudent Candor, It is the most composed State of Mind that can be; and puts us
into a Condition of Firmness, and Freedom, of Stable and Uninterrupted
Happiness. Hoe liberiores and solutiores sumus, quia integra nobis judicandi
potestas manet.
We are so much less under Constraint than other Men, by how much more our
Minds enlarge themselves, and the Liberty of judging is preserved entire. This
is a safe course to steer, and keeps us off from many dangerous Rocks and
Shelves; which Warmth, and Rashness, and a Positive conceited Humor Drives Men
upon. It delivers us from the vain prepossessions of Fancy, and Popular
Mistakes; from the Precipitation of thinking wrong at first, and the Shame of
retracting when we come to think better afterward; from Quarrels and Disputes,
and engaging in, or becoming offensive to Parties: For, take which side you
please, you are sure to have a great many against you; And a Zealous Espouser
of any Cause must unavoidably live in a constant State of Wrangling and War. In
a Word, This Suspension of the Judgment keeps us snug and under a Covert, where
the Inconveniences and Calamities which affect the Public will seldom sensibly
affect, and scarce can ever involve us; At a distance from those Vices and
vehement Agitations, which ruffle and discompose first Men's own Minds, and
then Human Society in general. For this Fierceness and Peremptoriness, is at
once the Spawn, and the Parent of Pride and Insolence; Ambition and Vainglory,
and Immoderate Desires; Presumption and Disdain; Love of Novelty and Change;
Rebellion and Disobedience in the State; Heresy and Schism in the Church;
Faction, and Hatred, and Contention in Both. These are all of the same lineage
and descent. These are begun, fomented, inflamed by your Hot, and Positive, and
Opinionative Men; not by the Modest and Doubting Men, who are cautious and
tender, never Over-confident of themselves, and content to believe, that others
are at least in a possibility of being in the right; all which are but so many
other Names for Wife, and well-tempered Men.

which is Mysterious and Revealed, tells us plainly, that the Mind must be
cleansed and purified, in order to receive those Heavenly Truths, and the
Impressions of the Holy Spirit. That God will not inhabit our Souls, till all
Corrupt Opinions as well as Affections are cast out; for, with regard to both,
we shall do well to understand those Commands of Purging away the old Leaven,
and putting off the Old Man. From whence we may collect, that the most
compendious and successful method of planting the Christian Religion among
Infidels, would be first to establish them in the Belief of these following
Propositions. That all the Knowledge of this World has a large embasement of
Vanity and Falsehood attending it: That the Generality of Mankind are deluded
with fantastical Notions, the Forgeries of their own Brain: That God created
Man to the End he might acquaint himself with the Divine Nature and
Dispensations, and employ his Soul, and sind his Happiness in these noble
Contemplations: But that, in this decayed and declining State, Man is not
capable of discovering Truth by his own Strength: That there is consequently a
Necessity of God (who is Truth) manifesting it to him: That God has in much
Mercy vouchsafed to do this by particular Revelations: That it is He who
inspires Men with a Desire of Truth, as well as he provides for the Gratifying
that Desire: That in order to dispose and qualify our selves for being
instructed in the Divine Revelations, we must abandon all worldly and carnal
Opinions, and as it were, bring our Minds, a pure blank for God to write his
Will in. When these Points are gained, and Men are in such preparation to
resign themselves to Truth, then it will be time to lay the foundations, and
instill some of the first and plainest Principles of Christianity: To show them,
That these Doctrines came down from Heaven: That the Person, who vouchsafed to
bring them was a faithful Ambassador, and entire Confident of God: One who knew
his whole Will exactly: That his Authority was abundantly confirmed, by
infinite Testimonies, such as were miraculous, supernatural, and so authentic
proofs, because capable of coming from no other Hand but God's only. Thus this
Innocent and candid Suspense and Unresolvedness of Mind, would prove a happy
Instrument toward the creating, and first begetting a Knowledge and Belief of
the Truth where it is not: Nor would the Essicacy of it be less in preserving
it, where it is planted, and has taken root already. For such a Modest Caution
and Deference would undoubtedly prevent all manner of Singularity, and Daring
Extravagance in Opinions; but to be sure, it would absolutely put a Stop to
Heresies and Public Divisions. You will answer me perhaps, that the Temper I
am describing, As it is too full of Indifference to make any Heretics, So is
it too, to make any good Catholics; and that the Danger of it is, At last
degenerating into Skepticism, and want of Zeal for all Religions. Were the
Condition of Religion the same in all points with That of other Notions, and
Philosophy in general, I allow there would be force in this Objection. But as
it is, this is not to argue from my Rules, but to pervert them. I have already
said, That Religion stands upon a firm undoubted bottom of its own. That God in
this differs from all his Creatures; that whatever He says is exempted from the
Common Rules of Enquiry; and there can but one Question lie before us, which
is, Whether he has said it or no: When once this appears to us, there is no
room for suspending our Judgments any longer; no pretense for Neutrality, or
Liberty of Thought, nor a questioning How these things can be? God cannot lie,
and we cannot err in believing Him; but for all things else, the more cautious
and curious, and the more loose and disengaged we keep our Mind with regard to
Them, the Safer and Easier we shall be. I have made a sort of Digression here,
in Honor of the Rule I am recommending, that those who profess themselves
Enemies to it may find their great Objection obviated. In which, if I have
trespassed upon my Reader's Patience, I ask his pardon: And now to our Business
again.

Socrates becomes a Citizen of the World, and takes in all Mankind for his
Neighbors and Contrymen. Looks down, like the Sun, with an equal, steady,
and indifferent Eye, upon the Changes and Vicissitudes here below, as things
that cannot reach, nor have the power to change Him. This is the Security, the
Privilege of a Wise Man, That which resembles him to the Powers above, and
renders him a sort of God upon Earth. Magna and generosa res animus humanus,
nullos Tibi poni, nisi communes and cum Deo terminos patitur: Non idem
sapientem qui caeteros terminus includit, omnia il^i saecula ut Deo serviunt.
Nulium Saeculum magnis ingeniis Cl^usum; nullum non cogitationi pervium tempus.
Quam natutale in immensum mentem suam extendere? and hoc a Natura formatus homo
ut paria Diis velit, ac se in spatium suum extend^t.
The Mind of Man (says Seneca) is a great and generous Being, and is bounded no
otherwise than the Divinity it self. The Wise Man is not confined to the same
narrow compass with the rest of the World. No Age, no Time, no Place limit his
thoughts, but he penetrates and passes beyond them all. How agreeable is it to
Nature for a Man to stretch his Mind infinitely? For Nature has formed him to
this very purpose, that he should emulate the Gods, and like Them fill his own
Infinite Space. This I confess is a sort of Stoical Rant: But thus much is
strictly true; That the Bravest, and most capacious Souls are always most of
this Universal Temper; as on the Contrary, the meanest and most incapable, are
most cramped, have the narrowest Notions; and are always particular in their
Judgments of Men and Things, aptest to be positive themselves, and to condemn
all that dissent from them. It is in Truth great Folly and Weakness, to imagine
that all Nations are bound to think and act just as we do; and, that none live
as they ought, who do not comply, and agree in every point with what obtains in
our own little Village or our Native Country: to think, that the Accidents
which happen to Us, are general and in common, and must needs affect and extend
to the whole World equally. This Senseless Wretch, when you tell him of
Opinions, and Customs, and Laws, directly opposite to those he has been bred
up in; without more ado, condemns and expresses the greatest Detestation of
them imaginable, and rails at the people, as Rude and Uncivilized; or else he
gives no credit to these accounts, but looks upon them, as the Romantic Tales
of Travelers, who take liberties of representing Foreigners very oddly to
those that cannot disprove them; so absolutely enslaved are his Judgment and
Assections to his own Municipal Constitutions; so impossible is it, as he
thinks, that any but These should be true, or agreeable to Nature; and
therefore he is verily persuaded they must needs, or at least should be
Universal too. It is exceeding common to traduce every thing with the
Reproachful name of Barbarism, that we do not fancy, or see frequently
practiced at home; and to depend upon the Example and the Ideas of the Persons,
with whom we converse, the Notions and the Usage of our own Country, for the
Test to distinguish Truth and Reason by. Now This is a mean and brutish
debasement of the Soul, which we ought to get above; and to enlarge it, by
looking no longer upon this Picture of Nature in Little; but take a view of
her, as she is drawn at length, and in all her full proportions. The just Idea
of Nature is to consider her, as the Common Mother of us all; an Universal
Queen, whose Authority and Dominion has the same limits with the World, (nay,
extends to more Worlds, if (as some eminent persons have thought) more Worlds
there be). This would inspire us with becoming and Great Apprehensions of her
Majesty, and Beauty; There we should behold, as in an exquisite painting, a
constant and endless variety of Things, and the longer we gazed, the more our
Entertainment and our wonder would be. Infinite Difference in Humors,
disagreeing Judgments, Opinions, Customs and Laws; Innumerable Disorders,
Commotions, and Alterations in States and Kingdoms; surprising turns of Fortune
in the Affairs of private Men; a World of Victories and Triumphs buried and
lost in the Rubbish of Time; many Noble Entries and Processions, Pomps, and
Grandeurs utterly vanished; and as if the Courts and Princes celebrated by them
had never been at all. And by taking such a prospect as this, and observing how
such different Things and Events, like Colors well mingled, conspire to make
up a general Portraicture of the World; we shall learn our own littleness, and
be surprised at nothing; nor esteem things at all new or incredible; nor be
overtenacious and positive in vindicating our own, and condemning the Practice
of others; since it is not necessary, or at all Essential to Beauty, that all
who pretend to it, should be of Our Complexion. And that the Darkness and
Difference of other Nations, like the Shades in drawing, make a more grateful
Variety; and are all agreeable and useful, for setting forth the Skill, of the
Great, the Divine Artificer, whose Workmanship the Orginal, and the Life is.

First, what you find already insisted upon in the foregoing part of this
Treatise, concerning the wonderful Variety, B. 1. Chapter 37, 38.
and vast difference observable in men; according to those qualities of Body
and Mind, which Nature has distributed so very unequally among them. Secondly,
Those Differences Men have made among themselves, by the disagreeing Laws, and
Customs, which obtain in several Nations, and Constitutions. To both which may
be added the Strange Variety of Opinions which we find the Ancients received,
and delivered down to Posterity, concerning the Age, the Condition, and the
Changes of the World; which yet to Us seem to be very Romantic and
Extravagant. Concerning those Egyptian and Assyrian Calculations, see Bishop
Pearson en the Creed, Art. 1. Page 58, 59. where he plainly refutes the
Account, according to the common computation of years, from their own Authers.
The Egyptian Priests told Herodotus, that since the Reign of their first King
(from which they reckoned down above Eleven thousand years, and showed the
Statues of Him, and all his Successors, in the draughts taken from the Life)
the Sun had changed his course four several times. The Chaldaeans in Diodorus
his time, as He and Cicero both say, kept a Register and Annals, comprehending
the Space of Four hundred thousand years. Plato tells us, that the Citizens of
Sais had Memorials in Manuscript of Eight thousand years standing; and yet they
owned, that the City of Athens was built a thousand years before that of Sais.
Aristotle, and Pliny, and others, pretend that Zoroaster lived Six thousand
years, before Plato was born: Some have advanced a Notion of the World's
Existing from all Eternity, that it has been destroyed and revived again
several times, and has, and will for ever hereafter, go through many such
Vicissitudes. Others and Those some of the most renowned Philosophers, have
held the World to be a God; but yet of so inferior a Quality, as to derive its
Form and present Being from another, and much greater God; or else, as Plato,
and some others have been induced by the Motions of it, to affirm, with some
degree of Confidence, that it is certainly an Animal, consisting of Body and
Spirit: That the Soul or Spirit is lodged in the Center of the Universe; but
though its chief Residence be there, yet it expands it self all over, to the
very utmost parts of the Circumference, and that its Influences are conveyed
and communicated in Musical Numbers: That the several parts of it too, thus
animated and directed, as the Heaven and the Stars for instance, are made up of
a Body and Soul; and these, though Mortal in respect of their compounded
Nature, are yet Immortal by the determination of their Almighty Creator. Plato
says, That the World puts on quite another face; that the whole Scene is
shifted; that the Heaven and Stars vary so much in their motions, as quite to
change sides; so that Before shall be Behind, and the Point which is East at
one time, comes to be the West at another. There has also been an Opinion of
great Authority, much countenanced and promoted by the most eminent
Philosophers, suitable to the Power and Majesty of God; and grounded upon fair
and probable Reasons, that there is a Plurality of Worlds; for we see no other
thing single or solitary but This, if This be so; All Species are multiplied in
numbers, and therefore it is not unlikely, that God has not left this part of
his Workmanship quite desolate and alone; nor exhausted his whole power and
skill in the forming of an Individual. Nay, even Divinity assures us, that God
can make as many Worlds as he pleases; for upon a Supposition of the Contrary,
we must affirm his Power to be but finite, because this World is so. And That
were a Notion contradictory to the absolute Perfection of his Nature. Let it
also be considered, how much we have learnt toward the Rectifying our Notions
of this kind, by the Improvement of Navigation, and the Discoveries lately made
of a New World in the East and West Indies. For by this we are plainly
convinced, that all the Ancients were in a gross Error, when they imagined that
they knew the utmost Extremities of the Habitable World; and had comprehended
and delineated the whole Extent of the Earth in their Maps and Books of
Cosmography, except only some few scattered remote Islands. And that they were
perfectly in the dark about the Antipodes; For here, all on a sudden, starts up
a New World just like our own Old one, placed upon a large Continent;
inhabited, peopled, governed by Laws, and Civil Constitutions; cantoned out
into Provinces, and Kingdoms, and Empires; adorned and beautified with noble
Cities and Towns; larger, more magnificent, more delightful, more wealthy, than
any that Asia, Africa, or Europe can show; and such they have been some
thousands of Years. And have we not reason from hence to presume, that Time
will hereafter make fresh discoveries of other Lands yet unknown? If P^olomy,
and the Ancient Writers were mistaken in their accounts heretofore, I would be
very glad to know, what better Security any Man can have of being in the right,
who pretends that all is found out, and fully discovered now? If any man shall
take the Confidence to be positive in this point, I shall take my liberty in
believing him. Secondly, We find the Zones, which were looked on as
uninhabitable, are very plentifully peopled. Thirdly, We find by experience,
that the things which we profess to value our selves most upon, and pretend to
have had the earliest Intelligence of, have been received and practiced in
these lately-discovered Countries for a long time, and perhaps as soon and as
long as we our selves have observed, or had notice of them. I do not pretend to
determine whence they had it. And that, whether we regard Religious Matters,
and such as come to us by Revelation from Heaven; as for Instance, the Belief
of One Single Man at first, the Universal Progenitor of all Mankind; the
Universal Deluge; of a God that lived in human flesh, and took the Substance of
a pure and holy Virgin; of a Day of General Judgment; of the Resurrection of
the Dead; the Observation of Solemn Fasts; the Ornaments of those that minister
in Holy things; the Surplice and the Mitre particularly; the Respect paid to
the Cross; Circumcision like that of the Jews and Mahometans; and
Counter-Circumcision, which makes it a point of Religion, to prevent all
appearance of any such thing upon their Bodies: Or, whether we regard Civil
Constitutions; as That of the Eldest Son inheriting his Father's Estate; Patent
Honors taking new Names, and Titles, and laying down that of their Families;
Subsidies to Princes; Armories, and Fortifications: Diversions of Players and
Mountebanks; Musical Instruments, and all kinds of Diversion, in use in these
parts of the World; Artillery, and Printing. From all which it is very natural
to deduce these following Inferences. That this huge Body, which we call the
World, is very different from the common Apprehensions of Men concerning it.
That it is not at all times, and in all places the same; but has its Tides,
its Ebbings and Flowings in perpetual Succession: That there is nothing so
confidently asserted and believed in one place, but is as generally received,
as peremptorily maintained, nay, as fiercely contradicted and condemned in
another. And that the Original of all this, whether Agreement, or Difference,
is to be resolve at last into the Nature of Man's Mind, which is susceptible of
Ideas of all sorts: And that the World being in perpetual Motion, is sometimes
at greater, and sometimes in less Agreement with it self, in the several parts
of it. That all things are comprehended within the general Course of Nature,
and subject to the Great Director of Universal Nature; and that they spring up,
are altered, decay, and are abolished, according as He in his Wisdom thinks fit
to vary them, by the Change put upon Seasons and Ages, Countries and Places,
the Air, the Climate, the Soil, in which Men are born, and bred, and dwell. And
lastly, That, as our Predecessors were but Men, so We are no more; and since
the Errors in Their Judgment of Things are manifest, this should teach Us to
distrust and suspect our own. And when These Inferences are justly made, the
Result of them must needs be, to be inseparably wedded to no Opinion, to
espouse none of our Arguments and Speculations too eagerly; to be astonished at
nothing, though never so unusual; not to lose our Temper upon any Accident; But
whatever happens, or how violent soever the Storm may be, to six upon this
Resolution, and satisfy our selves in it; That it is but according to the
Course of Nature; and that He who governs the World works as he pleases; and
proceeds by the Rules of his own Wisdom; and therefore all we have to do, is to
take a prudent Care, that nothing may hurt us through our own Weakness, or
Inconsideration, or Dejection of Spirit.

Thus much I thought sufficient and indeed necessary to be said upon this
perfect Liberty of Judgment, consisting of the Three Particulars so largely
insisted on. And indeed so largely, by reason I am sensible, it is not suited
to the Palate of the World; but denounces War against Pedants, and positive
Pretenders; which are all of them Enemies to true Wisdom, as well as to this
Principle of Mine. The Advantages whereof have been sufficiently represented
already, the Mischiefs it prevents, and the Tranquillity it brings. This was
the particular Character of Socrates, that Father and Chief of the
Philosophers, and universally acknowledged as such: By This, (as Plutarch
says,) though he had no Offspring of his own, yet he managed others so, as to
make Them fruitful, and Midwif'd their Productions into the World. This Temper
is in some sense like that Ataraxie, which Pyrrho's Skeptical Followers called
the Supreme Happiness of Man: But if that resemblance be a little
over-strained, yet it may very well bear being compared to the Neutrality and
Indifference, which the Sect of the Academicks professed. And the Natural
Effect of such a Temper is to be discomposed or astonished at nothing; which
Pythagoras thought the Sovereign Good, and Aristotle called the True Greatness
of Soul. So Horace; Nil admirari prope res est una Numici,
Solaque quae possit facere and servare beatum.
Horat. Epist. 6. L. 1.
Not to Admire, as most are wont to do,
It is the only Method that I know,
To make Men happy, and to keep them so.
Creech. And is it not a most amazing perverseness that Men cannot be prevailed
with to make the Experiment; nay, that they should not bear to have it so much
as recommended or mentioned; but prefer Slavery and Dependence, before living
upon their own Stock, getting above Fortune, and making themselves easy and
Masters at all times, and places, and upon all Accidents alike? May we not most
justly cry out with Tiberius, more justly indeed than He did, ( O Wretches,
born to be Slaves!) How absurd is it, that we, who are such Patrons, and
Sticklers for Liberty in the Case of our Bodies, Estates, and all other
Properties, should not bear to have our Mind free, which after all is the only
Freeborn thing, that belongs to any of us? We seek and employ conveniences
fetched from all parts of the World, count no expense too great, for the
Health, the Service, the Ornament of the Body; but grudge every thing for the
improvement and enriching of the Mind. In short, We are so partial, as to take
all possible pains, that the Body may be at large, while the Soul is fettered,
and cooped up in Prison.

Liberty of the Will.
and ought to be more endeavored after by a Wise Man, as indeed it is more
serviceable to him, than the former. Now here I think it necessary to admonish
my Reader, that the Matter under our present Consideration, is not that Faculty
and Privilege of Human Nature, which Philosophers and Divines commonly style
Free Will, nor shall we treat of it in the same Method with Them: But my
meaning is, That a Wise Man ought to preserve his own Ease and Quiet, to keep
his Will and Affections free and disengaged; and to lay them out upon very few
objects; and those such as may justify his Choice; (For indeed the things that
deserve our Choice and challenge our Affections, if nicely examined, will be
found but very few.) But this is not all; For even Those, that deserve them
best, will not justify our Vehemence, and Eagerness, and immoderate Fondness of
them. And here I find my self under some necessity of encountering two very
popular and plausible Opinions. The One is That which teaches us to be always
forward to serve other people; to lay aside all thoughts of one's self, for the
sake of our Neighbors; and especially, when the Public Good is concerned,
pretends that no private Interest ought to come in Competition with it; And the
Other prompts us to espouse such Matters with all possible Zeal, and to the
very utmost of our power. He that declines the Former, is accused of wanting
Good nature, and a public Spirit; and He that is remiss in the Latter, is
suspected of Coldness and Indifference; want of Generosity, and the Zeal that
is required of a Good Man, and in short, reputed incapable of making a Friend.
Now whatever there may really be at the bottom of these Opinions, yet it is
plain, the World have overloaded the Foundation, and built such Notions upon
it, as exceed all Reason and Measure; and nothing can be more Romantic and
Extravagant, than what we sind delivered upon these Occasions. For our
Governors, who feel the Advantage of them, oftentimes infuse Principles into
us, not according to the true merits of the Cause, but in proportion as they
perceive they may prove serviceable and beneficial: And it frequently falls
out, that those Opinions, which are in themselves most reasonable and true, are
not most convenient to be generally entertained. And besides this, Observing
how natural the Love of our Selves and our own private Advantage is, and what
Partialities and unreasonable Excesses it is apt to carry us into, they thought
it necessary to divert and draw us off as far from This as possibly; and so
took the Common Course of bending the Crooked Stick the Contrary way, that it
might at last stand strait by being forced toward the other Extreme.

1 These Opinions, when misunderstood, In Negotio sunt negotij causa.
they are busy purely because they love to be so. They cannot bear the having
nothing to do; nor can they confine their Thoughts to their own Affairs; but
either do not see, or carelessly overlook them: and so seek Employment abroad,
and meddle and turn undertakers in things that are foreign and distant, as if
they had nothing at all to do at home; no concerns that are essential and
necessary to be followed; no personal, no domestic Cares, that lie upon their
hands; such as ought to be first dispatched; and which, if duly attended to,
would leave no room for Sloth, nor leisure so great, as should prove a
Temptation to us, to turn Managers for other people, that we may keep our
selves in Action. Many of these persons are good husbands of their purse, and
careful not to part with a Penny of Money, but upon valuable considerations;
but they are unreasonably prodigal of their Soul, their Life; squander away
their Time and their Pains, their Affections and their Will, most profusely and
unaccountably; dedicate Themselves and all their Powers, to any occasions that
calls for their Assistance; And yet when all is done, These are the valuable
Treasures, of which we ought to be exceeding choice and sparing; and in such
Instances it is chiefly, that Frugality and good Management are commendable.
But alas! the Persons we speak of are so far from this, that they glory in
their Extravagance; act all with such Violence, and Passion, that they are lost
to Reason and common Sense; and never think they do enough, till they have
engaged as deep as is possible; and given up their Persons, and their Wits
both, to the Cause they espouse. Great Men make their Advantage of such Tempers
as these; Men that will be eager, and angry, and expose, nay lose their lives
upon pretenses of Friendship, and Punctilio's of Honor and Respect, are
special Tools for Their purpose. And they are not wanting to countenance and
caress them, throw out large Promises, and use a thousand little Stratagems to
draw them in, and six them to their Party; But though Fools believe and are
caught by them, yet Wise Men know this is all Trick and Design; that there is
Deceit in the Bait, and Death upon the Hook; and that all their fair Carriage
and large Promises are designed not at all to serve Us, but to serve themselves
of us.

he owes to himself, and what the Obligations are, and the Offices arising from
them, which are first and strictly due at home. All which these persons
violate; for while they are so mighty officious, and liberal in the service of
other people, they injure and defraud themselves; and spend that Stock of Ease
and Comfort, which is their own due, and ought to be preserved. Besides; if we
desire Business, Providence has cut us out enough of our own; let us but look
at home, and discharge the Duty of our respective Stations diligently; but
especially, let us but look within; and we shall be far from finding any
occasion to ask for work of our Neighbors: The difficulty will then be to
dispatch that which they ask of Us; and instead of laying our selves out upon
every bodies business besides, we shall then find our hands Full, and a
necessity of keeping close to our own. He that takes care to live as becomes
his Virtue and his Honor; so as may preserve his health, and give him a
contented and cheerful Enjoyment of the World, has enough to do; and He that
neglects or impairs any of these, merely to do another service, is ill advised;
and under color of Goodnature to his Friend, is guilty of great Injustice and
Ill Nature to himself. To oblige and assist others, so far as may be consistent
with the securing these things to our selves, is sufficient; but to go beyond
that, is to break our Duty in one particular, while we supererogate in another.
He is an unreasonable Man, that expects one should sacrifice his Virtue, or his
Happiness to him; and He is a very foolish Man, that will do it, if it be
expected. And therefore I repeat again a Direction given just now, That a Man
ought to espouse and devote himself to but very few things; and to take care
that these be such, as will justify the setting his heart upon them; and They,
to be sure, can be but very few.

Secondly, This Eagerness of Intention and vehement concern is not only unfit
and unjust in other respects, but it is also an Inconvenience to it self. For
it puts Men beside their measures, and proves the greatest hindrance and
perplexity that can be, to that very Undertaking, which we are so impatient to
accomplish, and have set our hearts so much upon. As, when we strive to go
exceeding fast, our legs sink under us, or step awry, or interfere, and stop
one another. Ipsa se velocitas implicat, unde Festinatio tarda est. Qui nimium
properat serius absolvit.
The very Swiftness of the Pace confounds it self, so that even Have breeds
delay. And he that begins too fast is slowest in finishing. Thus it is likewise
with the Mind of a Man, when Intoxicated with this forward and furious
vehemence of Intention; he confounds and hampers himself; betrays himself to
Indiscretion and Injustice in his proceedings; renders himself suspected, and
hardly thought of, gives offense and ground of Resentment to others; and puts
his own Mind upon a perpetual Fret and Ferment; as often as any thing happens,
that either defeats or delays the Success he is laboring after. Male cuncta
ministrat -- mdash; mdash;Impetus.
Heat and Violence never manage any thing well. We may observe it daily, what
Advantages men lose, and how great an Injury they do to themselves, their
Business, the Cause and Party they espouse, by this want of Temper; even to the
ruin of the fairest and most promising Expectations, in matters of the greatest
Importance. And the thing is no less evident too, in the most common and
insignificant cases. In a matter so frivolous as Play, for instance, where He
that is eagerest and most intent upon Winning, breaks the rules and proper
methods, overlooks the advantages of the Game, and contributes to his own Loss.
Whereas an Adversary that plays calmly and sedately, has always his Eyes and
his Wits about him; his Passion never transports his Reason; but he makes the
best of every Chance, and does not only enjoy the Diversion, but bid fairest
for the Success. He makes his Feints, and Doubles; and lays hold on every
favorable occasion; if he fail of his design, he bears it with Moderation, and
makes it up another time; is always ready to observe and to improve every
Change of Fortune; and by jogging on leisurely, and keeping the Reins in his
own hand, comes soonest and safest to his Journey's End.

vindicating or excusing, and not running into the same Excess of Partiality
and Prejudice, the same unreasonable Censures and Condemnations, with these
hotheaded Zealots. Whereas indeed nothing can be more extravagant, than to
imagine that a Man who is not one of Us cannot possibly be a Good Man; and that
he may not, for the main, or at least in some cases where the Point in
difference is no way concerned, be very honest and commendable, though it be
his unhappiness, to be under a wrong persuasion, and in some particulars
embarked in the Interest or Opinions of those who are very naughty Men. That
Passion should commit a violence upon the Will, is but too much; but that it
should debauch and blind the Judgment, and destroy Charity and common Sense, is
abominable, and not to be endured. And Men should by all means think themselves
obliged to proceed with Equity and Candor; to see and to acknowledge Goodness,
wherever it is to be found, though in the worst and most mistaken Enemies; and
not to palliate, or overlook, much less to defend and applaud the Vices and
Follies of our Friends and Followers; but to lay aside all private
Considerations, and frankly to express our Detestation of these things, let the
persons guilty of them be who, or what they will. The contrary wicked practice
(for a very wicked one it is) seems to proceed in great measure from want to
considering and distinguishing aright, what the Points in difference are, and
how far they extend. For it is most certain, that where the Controversy is no
way concerned, we ought to behave our selves with all manner of Indifference;
and pass fair and equitable Judgments, as we would do, supposing no Dispute or
Disagreement at all. And Resentments should never be carried beyond that
particular Subject which provokes them; nor Anger, of all Passions, suffered to
grow general and unlimited. And These are some of the many Evils, which too
great Eagerness and Intention of Mind naturally brings upon Men, let the Matter
we set our hearts so much upon, be what it will; for this Disposition is
capable of Excess, and liable to Inconveniences, when fixed upon the very best
Object; and a Man may suffer by being too vehement and hot, in the pursuit even
of Goodness and Wisdom it self.

may imagine. It does not condemn or exclude any of those Duties or good
Offices required from us; it does not prejudice to the Public, our Friends, or
our Neighbors; so far from That, that it is most certain We are bound by all
the Ties of Honor and Religion, to be courteous and kind, assisting and
serviceable to one another; to comply with the Customs and Occasions of the
World, and apply our selves to the observance of the one, and the Supply of the
other, as our Circumstances will permit; and in order hereunto, every man is
obliged to contribute to the Common Good; and conscientiously to perform all
those Duties and mutual Offices, which any way concern him, as a Member of the
Body Politic, and may conduce to the Benefit of Human Society. Qui sibi amious
est, hunc omnibus seito esse amicum.
He that is a Friend to himself, is a Friend to all Mankind; for the Love and
Care of one's self is so far from engrossing, and confining all we can do to
our own single persons; that it implies, and puts us upon the being as
universally beneficial, and dissusing our Powers, as far and wide as we can.
But still, I must insist upon it, that the most generous Inclinations and
Endeavors of this kind ought to be tempered with Moderation and Prudence; and
no Man is publick-spirited as he should be, unless he be discreet withal; and
That in these Two respects particularly. First, Not to apply, or lay himself
out upon every occasion that offers indifferently; but first to sit down, and
consider well the Justice, the Reasonableness, and the Necessity of the thing;
whether it will answer his design, and be worth his pains. And if this were
done, a world of trouble might be spared. Then Secondly, That even those
occasions, which have the best Title to his Application, may be followed
without Violence and Vexation of Mind. A Man should contract his Desires, and
bring them within as small a Compass as he can; The Little he does desire,
should be pursued with Temper, and be desired moderately; His application
should be free from Anxiety, and Distraction: And in any the most Important
Matters that we undertake, we may be allowed to employ our Hands, our Feet, our
Tongue, the Attention of our Thoughts, the Sweat of our Brows, all proper means
in order to the effecting them, nay, to spend our Blood, and hazard our Lives,
if the occasion require it; but still all this is to be done with a Reserve;
calmly and considerately, without Passion and Torment; without Fretfulness and
Impatience. A Man must always preserve the Government and Command of himself;
the Health of his Body, the Soundness of his Mind, the Tranquillity, and Ease of
both, so far as is possible. For Success does by no means depend upon Heat, and
Forwardness, and an Impetuous Eagerness of the Will; but is much oftener and
better attained without it; and the Cooler our proceedings are, the greater
Expectations we may entertain from them. It is a vulgar and a very gross
Mistake, that no Affair is undertaken heartily and to purpose, without a great
deal of Noise, and Hurry, and Bustle. For, as I have already showed, these only
disorder and perplex the Cause; put Men beside their Bias, and are so many
fresh Obstructions. How common a thing is it to observe vast numbers of Men,
who venture their persons in the Wars, and are in daily, hourly peril of their
Lives; without any anxious Concern at all; they march up to the Cannon's mouth
when their Post requires it, and push on to Action, and yet neither the Hazard,
nor the Loss of the Battles they fight, ever breaks them one Night's rest; They
consider, This is their Duty, and upon that Consideration they discharge it
cheerfully. And yet at the same time that you see the Camp and the Field so
easy, and void of Care; a Splenetick Politician, who never had the Courage to
look Danger in the Face, shall sit you at home, and teaze and afflict himself
with the Event of this Engagement; and be a thousand times more perplexed and
mortified with any ill Success, than those very Soldiers, who spend their
Blood, and stake down their Lives, in the Service.

not so embark in Business, as to be quite swallowed up in it: but manage
Matters so, that he may still enjoy himself; and be free and easy with a
particular Friend; or at least, within his own Breast; not so serve the World,
as to neglect, and be out of a Condition to serve himself; nor endeavor the
Benefit of others, at the Expense or Loss of a Good, that is truly and properly
his own.

CHAP. III. True and Substantial Integrity of Mind, the first and fundamental
part of Wisdom.
still in the nature of Prefaces to the Main Work; necessary to be laid in the
Quality of Foundations, upon which to raise this Glorious Superstructure. And
the Former and Principal of these two, designed for the Subject of This
Chapter, is Probity, and Sincerity.

That true Honesty and Integrity of Heart and Life is the First, the Chief, the
Fundamental Point of True Wisdom, is an Assertion, which it may perhaps be
thought needless for me to give my self any great trouble in proving. For in
truth, all Mankind agree in highly extolling, and zealously pretending to it;
(though it is but too manifest, that what some do in this kind seriously, and
out of Conscientious regard to their Duty, and the real Worth of this Virtue;
others put on only, to set the best face upon the matter; and are compelled to
dissemble from Shame, and Fear, and the Ill-consequences of avowing the
contrary.) Thus far then the whole World is agreed; that Honesty is
recommended, and respected, and at least complimented; every Man professes to
be passionately in love with it, and subscribes himself its most Faithful, most
Affectionate, and most Devoted Servant. So that I may spare my self the pains
of arguing in behalf of the Thing in general; but I am afraid notwithstanding,
it will prove no such easy matter to make Men agree with the Notions of that,
which in my esteem is the True and Essential Honesty, and to persuade the as
universal Love, but especially the universal practice of That, which I think
necessary upon this occasion. For as to That, which is in common vogue, and
usually reputed such; though the World I know are generally satisfied, and
trouble themselves so little about understanding or attaining to any thing
better, that (except a very few Wise Men,) they have no Ideas, no Wishes beyond
this; yet I make no difficulty to affirm, that it is all but a spurious and
counterfeit Virtue; Sham and Trick; and the product of Art and Study, Falsehood
and Disguise.

False Appcarances of it.
that Men are very often drawn on, and pusht forward to good Actions by several
sorts of Motives. Sometimes such as are by no means commendable; As Natural
Defects, and Infirmities, Passion and Fancy, nay sometimes by Vice, and Things
in their own Nature Sinful. Thus Chastity, and Sobriety, and Temperance of all
sorts, may be, and often are, owing to a weak Body, and tender Constitution,
which cannot support Excess. Contempt of Death, to Peevishness and Discontent;
Patience under Misfortunes, Resolution and Presence of Thought in Dangers, to
Want of Apprehension and Judgment, and a due sense, how great or imminent the
Danger is. Valor, and Liberality, and Justice, are often inspired and
practiced by Ambition and Vainglory; the Effects of good Conduct, discreet
Management, of Fear, and Shame, and Avarice. And what a World of renowned and
noble Exploits have been owing to Presumption and Foolhardiness; Rashness and
Inconsideration? Thus, what we commonly call Actions and Instances of Virtue,
are in reality no better than Masks, and counterfeit Appearances of it: They
have the Air and the Complexion, but by no means the Substance of it. So much
resemblance there is, that the Vulgar, who are no Critics in Faces, may easily
mistake the one for the other; and so much of good there is in the Effects and
Consequences of such Actions, that other people may be allowed to call them
Virtuous; but it is impossible the person himself who does them, should esteem
them such; or that any considering Man can either allow them this Character,
when nicely examined; or think one jot the better of the Man that does them.
For Interest, or Honor, or Reputation, or Custom and Compliance, or some other
Causes altogether foreign to Virtue, will be found at the bottom; and however
beautiful the Front may be, the Foundation is rotten and stark naught.
Sometimes very great and surprising things are the Result of nothing better,
than mere Stupidity and Brutishness; which gave occasion for that Reflection,
That Wisdom and Insensibility met together in the same Point, and both of them
felt and hardened themselves alike under Accidents and Misfortunes. From all
which, and a great deal more, that might be said, it appears, how exceeding
dangerous and uncertain a method those men take, who look no further than the
outward Face of things, and from the actions, as we see them, form a peremptory
Judgment of the Probity, or the Disingenuity of the Person. Whereas, for a
right understanding of this matter, we ought to take a distinct view of the
Inside; examine the whole Movement; and mark well what Springs they are, that
set it on going. For it often happens, that very ill men do very good, and
commendable, and beneficial Actions: And both Good and Bad men restrain
themselves, and avoid Evil; but though both abstain alike, yet they do it out
of very different Principles, as Horace has observed pertinently enough to
this purpose, Crutus enim metuit foveam Lupus Accipiterque
Suspectos laqueos, and opertum Milvins hamum,
Odernnt peccare Boni Virtuti^ amore,
Tu nihil admitres in Te formidine poemae;
Sit Spes failendi, miseobis Sacra profanis.
Hor. Epist. xvi L. 1.
So Crafty Foxes dread the secret snare;
The Kite and Hawk, although the Bait be fair,
Yet never Stoop, where they Suspect a Gin.
The Good for Virtue's Sake abhor a Sin;
It Is fear of Pumshment restrains Thy Will.
Give leave; How eagerly would Thou be ill?
Horace by Creech. To make a just discovery of the Man, and inform our selves,
what is Honesty and Sincerity indeed, the Actions are too weak an Evidence, and
he that goes no farther, can know nothing. These are only the gross Substance,
a Copy of his Countenance, and the Counterfeit Luster of a False Stone; The
Jewels cannot be distinguished with so superficial a view; it is not enough to
hear the Sound, we must judge the Harmony, and know what Hand it is, that moves
the Strings. For the Motive and Cause is the Life, and Soul of all, and gives
both Being and Denomination to the whole Action. This is the only Mark we have
to judge by; and every Man is chiefly concerned to take care that This be pure,
and good, and in every regard what it ought to be. All which depends upon the
Uprightness of the Intention, and Unblemished Honesty of the Heart; and that is
the very Quality we are now looking after.

What notiens the world have of it.
and is generally recommended and extolled,a nd which indeed is all, that those
who have the Character and Commendation of Just, and Honest, and Fair-dealing
men pretend to, is at the best but a mean, and formal, and pedantick Virtue:
Such as is a Slave to Laws, and takes its Measures from thence; is checked and
kept under by Hope and Fear; is acquired, learned, produced and practiced upon
the account of, and in submission to the Religion we profess, the Government we
live under, the Customs of our Country, the Commands of our Superiors, the
Examples of Them we converse with, bound up in Forms, and limited by the Letter
of the Law; an effeminate, poor-spirited Honesty, perplexed with Doubts, and
Scruples, and Terrors of Conscience. For some People never think themselves
innocent, and as they should be; when their Minds are quiet, and easy, and void
of Fear. Now such an Honesty as this, must not only be mutable and manifold in
several parts of the World, and vary as the Religion, and Laws, and Examples,
and Forms and Modes of the Countries, where men happen to converse, shall vary;
(For where the Springs of Action change, the whole Movement must needs change
proportionably). But, which is yet more to its disparagement, it must needs be
irregular, and unequal; inconsistent with it self; floating and unsettled; full
of Ebbings and Flowings, Intervals of Heat and Cold; inconstant and precarious;
depending on the Events and Successes of Affairs; the Offering of Occasions,
and Interposition of sudden Emergencies; the Difference of Persons and
Circumstances; and a thousand other unforeseen Accidents, which move this Man
and his Virtue, as a Boat is moved by Sails and Oars, by sudden strokes and
spurts; and gusts and pusss of Wind. In a word, These Men are good purely by
Chance, by fits and starts; by external and very distant motives; and not in
reality, and by virtue of a fixed and governing Principle. This Defect of
theirs is what not only standers by, but even themselves are insensible of;
they never observe, nor discover their own imperfections, but it were easy to
show them to themselves, and make the thing plain to them, by holding a stiff
Rein, observing them more nicely and distinctly; and quickening their attention
a little. And indeed nothing would be a more effectual Conviction of their
Deficiency, than the mighty inequality of their Actions and Tempers, and their
own Disagreement with themselves. For in one and the same case, you shall find
them coming to quite different resolutions and determinations; and acting in
direct contradiction, to what they have done before. Sometimes they are so
heavy and dull, that neither Whip nor Spur can get them forward; and presently
upon the full speed, that no Bit can stop them. Now this prodigious unevenness
and difference of Behavior is occasioned by the difference of those external
Motives, by which they are governed and managed; And as These sometimes agitate
and heat them violently, swell, and multiply; or grow lukewarm and cold, and
flag and droop again; so must Their Virtue and Zeal needs increase and abate
accordingly; and thus it distinguishes it self from Real and Substantial
Virtue, by that Property natural to all Accidents; which is, the being capable
of Augmentation and Diminution; and so of no better Extract, than all those
Qualities, whose dishonor it is, according to the Terms of the Schools,
Recipere magis and minus.

What it is in Truth.
in order to Wisdom, is free, and easy; void of Affectation and Constraint;
masculine and generous; pleasant and cheerful; equal and uniform; constant and
steady; magnanimous and brave; keeping on its own course, and never looking to
the right hand, or to the left; never standing still, or slackning, or
quickening its pace; upon the account of Wind or Weather; Accidents and
Occasions may change, but This continues always the same. It is not in the
power of any thing to alter or shake it; my meaning is, that the Man's Judgment
and Will are fixed and immutable; and the Soul, where this Integrity has taken
up its Residence, is never to be corrupted, or diverted to dishonest purposes.
For the Sincerity of the Heart is the Virtue we are treating of; There it is
lodged, by That we must judge; for External Actions, and those especially that
are of a public Capacity and Importance, are of a Nature and Consideration
very different from this; as I shall have occasion to show hereafter, when my
Method brings me to treat of them distinctly.



The true Spring and Source of this Probity is Nature; which obliges a man to
be such as he ought to be; that is, to conform, and govern himself according to
her Dictates and Directions. For Nature maintains a twofold Character, and is
at once a Mistress to Command, and a Law to teach, and set us out our Duty.
With regard to the former of these Capacities, there is an Internal, Universal,
that is, a natural Obligation incumbent upon every Man, to be an honest,
sincere Man, and so to answer the End of his Creation. And This is an
Obligation so strong, an Inducement so weighty, that no one need look for any
greater, any additional Motives; nor indeed is it possible, to find any that
deserve greater Deference and Regard; any antecedent to it, since its Validity
is of the same date with our Selves, and both It and We came into the World
together. Every Man ought to make it his business and care to be a good Man,
upon this very account, because he is a Man; for he who is regardless of this
point, is a Monster, renounces himself, reproaches his Nature, and in effect
ceases to be, what he appears, and usurps a Form, which of Right belongs not to
him. This Probity must also be of its own growth, without Cultivating or
Constraint; that is, It must proceed from an Internal Principle, which God has
wrought into our Nature and Constitution; and not be the effect of Accident, or
any foreign Inducement. No Man, whose Will is incorrupt, would choose a thing in
its declension, as debased and fallen from its natural Perfection; It is a
Contradiction to pretend a Man desires a thing, and that he is indifferent at
the same time, whether it be what it ought, and have all the Commendable
Qualities of right belonging to it. A Man is solicitous to have all his parts
in their true Perfection; his Head, his Eyes, his Judgment, his Memory, his
whole Body; nay, the very Conveniences and Accoutrements belonging to that
Body; and shall his Will and his Conscience be the only neglected things about
him? Shall it be no part of his Care whether These have their due Integrity or
not? I would have a Man resolute in Goodness, though it were but purely upon
his own account, and in regard to his Character as he is a Man; sensible, that
to Act otherwise, is, as much as in him lies, to abandon and destroy himself;
and thus Probity will be an Internal Principle, as essential to, and of a piece
with him, as He is with himself. No external Cause is capable of being a
sufficient Foundation for it, because all such are foreign and accidental; and
as such are liable to Changes and Decays; and whenever the Foundation sinks,
the Superstructure must of necessity tumble with it: If a Man be virtuous and
just for the sake of his Reputation, or any other Advantage, What Obligation
will this be to his Retirements, to his Solitary Actions? Take off the Hopes of
his Virtue being known, and you either take off the whole thing, or cool, and
check his vigor in the practice of it. If fear of Laws and Punishments
restrain him; put him but in a way to elude the Laws, and escape public
Discovery; and what shall secure his Honesty then? So poor, so precarious; so
uncertain a thing is this Occasional Virtue: And yet This is the Virtue in
vogue, and what very few rise beyond. As the World goes, it is very well if all
these Considerations will prevail upon Men to do what becomes them; nay if
their Actions be commendable or blameless, whatever their secret Dispositions
are. Now I expect, in the person whom this Treatise undertakes to form, a
Probity that will stand upon its own bottom; so firmly rooted, that you can no
more separate it from the Man, than you can his very human Nature it self. I
expect he should never yield to do an Ill thing, though he could be assured it
will never be known. For is it possible to conceal it from himself? And if his
own Conscience be privy to it, what need any farther Witnesses? This One is
more than all the World besides. By the same reason he must be as obstinately
good, notwithstanding any Recompense which would bribe him to be otherwise; for
it is impossible he should receive a valuable Consideration in this Case; and
nothing can be so near to him, as his own Essence, which Wickedness impairs and
corrupts. To yield upon such Temptations, is like the being content with a very
ill Horse, provided a Man have an embroidered Saddle. I must therefore insist
upon it, that being a Man, and taking care to live as becomes one, that is,
taking care to be a sincere good Man, should always go together, and be above
the power of all the World to separate them. This particular I think is
sufficiently urged, let us now proceed to the next.

flows from, and has a necessary Connection and Dependence upon that Eternal
and Immutable Law, which the Almighty prescribes to his own Actions. A Man that
proceeds upon this Principle, is his own Rule; for he acts in agreement with
the noblest and most valuable part of his Nature. This Man's Honesty is
Essential to, and Inseparable from him; not precarious and uncertain, and owing
merely to Chance and Occasion; For this Light and Law is born with, and bred in
us; a piece of our Frame, and Original. Constitution; and from thence obtains
the Name of Nature, and the Law of Nature. Such a Man by consequence will be a
good Man constantly, and at all times; his Virtue will be uniform and even;
every Place, every Emergency will find him the same. For this Law of Nature is
perpetual; the Obligation of it is lasting and inviolable; the Equity and
Reason of it are Eternal; written in large and indelible Characters; no
Accident can deface them, no length of time waste or wear them out; even
Wickedness it self, by the Customary Habits whereof the positive and additional
Improvements of this Law, are corrupted; yet cannot debauch, or exterminate
these first and Natural Notions; no Place, no Time can alter or disguise them;
but they continue every where the same. The Collections inferred from them
differ infinitely, but these first Principles themselves, which are the Ground
of all Moral Institutions, admit of no Change, no Increase, no Abatement; no
Fits and Starts, no Ebbings and Flowings; but, as they are a part of our
Substance, so do they agree with what the Schools say of all Substances in
general, Substantia non recipit magis and minus.
that it is contrary to their nature to be more or less than they are. Why
then, Vain Man, do thou trouble thy self, to seek abroad for some Law and
Rule to Mankind? What can Books or Masters tell thee, which thou might not
tell thy self? What can Study or Travel show, which at the expense of much less
pains thou might not see at home, by descending into thy own Conscience, and
harkening attentively to its Admonitions? When Ignorance of this kind is
pretended, the same Reply is fit for Thee, which would be given to a shuffling
Debtor; who, when Payment is demanded, professes not to know how the Money
became due, when all the while he has the Bill about him: For thou carriest
the Bond, and the particulars of thy Debt in thy own Bosom; and what thou
seek Information of from others, can not but know, if thou consult thy
Self.

To what purpose is all this Labor and Cost; the toilsome tumbling over of
Codes, and Institutes; of Precedents, and Reports; of Statutes and Records,
when all these are contained in one small portable Volume? The Two Tables of
Moses, the Twelve Tables of the Greeks, Romans 2.12.
the Law written in the hearts of Them who had no Law; and in short, all the
Rules of Equity, and Good Laws, that have any where been enacted, and obtained
in the World, are nothing else but Copies and Transcripts produced in open
Court, and published from that Original, which thou keep close within thee,
and yet all the while pretendest to know nothing of the matter; stifling and
suppressing, as much as in thee lies, the Brightness of that Light, which
shines within; and so falling under the Condemnation of those mentioned by the
Apostle, Romans 1.18.
who hold, or detain the Truth of God in Unrighteousness. If This have not been
sufficiently published, and promulged as loud, as clear, as intelligibly as
other humane Laws, the only Reason is, that that Light which is really
All-heavenly and Divine, has been put under a Bushel, that is, too much
neglected, and industriously forgotten. All other Institutions are but so many
Rivulets and Streams derived from this common Source: And although they be more
visible, and obvious, and express, yet is not the Water they carry so copious,
nor so lively and pure, as that of the unseen Spring within thy own Breast; if
thy own Negligence did not suffer it to waste and dry up. It is not, I say, so
Copious; for as one well observes, Quam multa Pietas, Humanitas, Liberalitas,
Fides exigunt, quae extra Tabulas sunt?
What a world of Good Offices are there, which Pretty, Humanity, Liberality, and
Fidelity require from a Man, and yet no written or positive Law ever
prescribed? Alas! how poor and scanty a thing is that Honesty of your Formal
and Hypocritical Pretenders, who stick to the Letter of the Law, and think,
when That is satisfied, they have fully discharged their Duty; whereas there
are infinite Obligations incumbent upon a Man, which no human Law ever binds
upon him. Quam angusta Innocentia ad Legem bonum esse; latius Officiorum quam
Juris patet Regula.
He that is honest only in the Eye of the Law, has but a very slender sort of
Innocence to boast; for the Measure of our Duty is of a much larger extent,
than the Law can pretend to. There are infinite Cases unforeseen; sudden
Emergencies, and extraordinary Conjunctures; the Occasions and Circumstances
whereof are too many and too intricate, for any human Wisdom to foresee; and
much more impossible for it to make any competent Provision for; so that a Man
must often be left to his own Judgment and Discretion; and, even where he is
not, a Good Man will sometimes think the Rule too narrow; and disdain to
consine or cramp up his Virtue within the Compass of that, which was thought
necessary to be imposed upon every Common Man. And as this invisible Fountain
within is more exuberant and plenteous; so is it more lively, and pure, and
strong, than any of those Streams derived from it. Of which we need but this
single Testimony; That, whenever any Disputes arise about the Interpretation
and right Execution of a positive Law, the constant and best Method of
Understanding the Equity and true Intent of it, is by running it back to its
first Head, and observing what is most agreeable to the Law of Nature in the
Case; This is the Test and Touch, This the Level and the Truth, by which all
the rest are to be judged. For, as we commonly say, Anima Legis Ratio.
Reason is the Soul and Life of the Law; here we find things clear and limpid
in their Source, which when drawn out into Rivulets, grow foul and sullied, by
all that Faction, and Interest, Ambition, and serving of Parties, which corrupt
all human Sanctions and Establishments.

And thus I have described to you a Real, Substantial, Radical, Fundamental
Honesty; born with us; rooted in us; springing from the Seed of Universal
Reason. This in the Soul, is like the Spring and Balance in a Clock, it
regulates all its motions; like the Natural Warmth in the Body, which sustains
and preserves it self, and is both its own Strength and Safety, and the
Person's to whom it belongs. The Man that proceeds according to This, acts in
conformity to the Will of God, in consistence and agreement with himself; in
compliance with Nature; and obedience to those Rules, upon which all Government
and Civil Constitutions are founded; he proceeds smoothly, gently, silently;
His Virtue draws little Observation perhaps, as it makes no Noise; but slides
on, and keeps its Course, like a Boat carried down by the Course of the Water
in a Calm day: Whereas all other sorts of Virtue are the Products of Art and
Accident, grafted into us by Discipline, and not of our own natural growth;
fickle and out of Temper, like the Intermitting Heat and Cold of a Fever; they
are acquired at first, and drawn out into exercise afterward, by Chance and
Occasion, practiced upon foreign and distant Considerations; acting by sudden
starts, and short spurts; with Clamor, and Noise, with Hurry and Clutter, with
Ostentation and Vainglory.

Naturam si sequaris Ducem, nusquam aberrabis. Bonum est quod secundum Naturam.
Omnia Vitia contra Naturam sunt.
That the way for a Man to live well, is to live agreeably to Nature; That a
perfect Conformity with Nature is the Supreme Good, the most exquisite
Happiness Mankind are capable of; That if we make Nature our Mistress, and
Guide, and constantly follow the Directions she gives, we shall never go amiss?
By all which it is plain, that Nature is set to signify that Universal Reason
and Equity, which is given for a Light to our Minds; and is both of that vast
comprehension, as to contain under it the Seeds of all kind of Virtue, Probity,
and Justice; The Common Parent, that gives Birth to all wholesome and good Laws,
all just and Equitable Judgments, that ever were or will be given; and also of
that Clearness and Perspicuity too, that Men of the meanest Capacity and
Seize, might determine themselves, and be conducted by it. Whatever
scandalous or disparaging Reflections some may asperse Nature with, or how
great a part of them soever this Corrupted State of it may deserve, yet there
is no doubt to be made, if we look back to their Original, and primitive
Constitution, but all things were created and disposed in the best Order and
Condition they were capable of; and had their first Motions toward Good infused
and interwoven with their Being, and strong Tendencies to the End they ought to
aspire after. This was the Work and Wisdom of Nature; and from hence it is,
that no Man who follows and obeys her Dictates, can ever fail of obtaining and
enjoying the End, and true Happiness proper to his Species. For after all; Men
are naturally and originally Good; and when they follow Evil, they forsake
Nature, and are seduced by the false Allurements of Profit, or of Pleasure: And
because These are the two governing Motives, and such as will be sure to bear a
powerful Sway in the World; therefore the Makers of Laws have always found it
necessary to propose two contrary Objects, that is, Reward and Punishment, to
the Persons whose Obedience they would engage. And the Design of These is by no
means to put a Violence upon their Wills, and so constrain them to act against
natural Inclination, as some weakly imagine; but it is in truth, to Sapientia
est in Naturam converti; and ea restitui unde publicus Error expulerit. Ab illa
non deerrare, ad illius Legem Exemplumque formari sapientia est.
reduce them to better sense, and bring them back to that, which is not only
the best, but was the first and most natural Inclination of their Minds, till
perverted by wicked and deceitful Appearances of Counterfeit Good.

Nature without all Controversy is a sufficient Guide, a gentle Mistress,
capable of instructing every one of us, in all the Branches of our Duty,
provided we would but be as careful to hearken to its Admonitions; to exert,
and keep it awake and active. There is no need for Us to beg or to borrow from
Art and Learning, those Means, and Remedies, and Rules, which are necessary for
the good Government of our selves; for each of us can subsist and live by
himself; his own proper Stock is sufficient to maintain him. A Happy, and a
Contented Life is indeed what every one does and should aim at; but these are
Blessings by no means entailed upon Learning, or Parts, or Greatness, or
Honor; a Man may attain them, and never see the face of a Court, or a City.
There is a Proportion common and natural to all, which is enough for this
purpose; and All beyond that, however valuable, as additional Advantages, are
yet by no means necessary; we can do very well without them; and which is
worse, we are so far from doing very well upon their account, that they do but
increase our Troubles and our Difficulties, and do us more Hurt than Good. How
many plain, and ignorant, and mean Men do we see, that live with more sensible
Pleasure and Satisfaction, more sedate and undisturbed both in their Minds and
Fortunes; and upon occasion can meet, and encounter Poverty or Pain, Danger or
Death, with a better Grace, and greater Composure, than the most Learned, and
celebrated Philosophers? And if one take the pains to observe it nicely, you
will find more frequent Instances, more eminent Patterns of Patience, and
Constancy, and Evenness of Temper, among plain Country People, and those of
mean Condition, than all the Schools can boast of. These are simple and
unaffected, they go on where Nature leads, are influenced by the Reasons she
suggests, and the Impressions she makes, without creating new and imaginary
Troubles. They feel no more than is to be felt, and use no Art and Industry to
torment themselves; Their Passions are low, and quiet, and smooth, in
comparison of Theirs who take pains to rufflle them; and esteem it a piece of
Bravery to indulge and blow them up; and so they go on in all their Affairs
more calmly and considerately, without Heat, or Disorder; whereas others look
big and bluster, do every thing with Pomp and Hurry; are in perpetual Agitation
and Alarm, and keep themselves and all Mankind awake. One of the greatest
Masters, and most exquisite Improvers of Nature was Socrates, as Aristotle was
proportionably Eminent for Art and Learning. Each of these in their respective
Province was wonderful; but it is observable, that Socrates took a plain, and
natural way, insinuated himself by vulgar Arguments, familiar Similitudes, an
easy Style; and, by talking as a downright Country Fellow, or a good discreet
Woman would have done, did not only suit himself better to the Capacities of
Men, but laid down such useful Precepts, and Rules of a Virtuous Life; such
powerful Antidotes against all manner of Sufferings, and Accidents, that the
Strength and Vigor of them was never yet improved, nor the Success, exceeded,
shall I say? No, not so much as matched; or any thing like it invented by all
the Study and Acquired Learning in the World.

the Generality of Mankind run away from it. We let it sleep, and rust upon our
hands; play Truant, while we may learn at home; and choose to beg our
Improvement abroad, to have recourse to Study and Art, which are comparatively
sordid and despicable ways of attaining Knowledge, rather than content our
selves with an Independent and noble Wisdom, which is generous, and of our own
Growth. We have all of us a busy turbulent Spirit, that affects to be ever
managing, and governing, and will have a hand in every thing; this is variable
and humorsome, perpetually bustling, and restless; fond of Novelty, and
Disguise; inventing, adding, altering; never pleased long with the same thing,
nor ever content with pure Nature, and unaffected Simplicity; but a Contemner
and Vilifier of Plainness, as if it were not possible for any thing to be Good,
which is void of Art, and Cunning, and nice Contrivance. Thus Simplex illa and
aperta Virtus in obscuram and solertem Scientiam versa est.
Virtue, which is genuine, instead of the Frankness and Openness peculiar to
it, is corrupted and changed into dark and crafty Speculation. And besides all
this, One Fault more we are tainted with; which is, The Disesteem of every
thing in general, which is the product of our own Soil; What we can have for
nothing is worth nothing; it must be far fetched and dear bought, to recommend
it: Foreign things only can please; and in agreement with this Whimsey it is,
that we prefer Art before Nature; which is in effect, To shut out the Sun when
shining in its Strength, and to light up Candles at Midday. All which Follies
and Extravagant humors are owing to One more; which is a Weakness in a manner
entailed upon the whole World; That, I mean, of estimating things, not
according to their real and intrinsic Value, but only according to the Show,
and Figure, and Noise they make; which is to renounce our own Judgment and
Experience, and in effect to give our selves up to be determined by the Common
Opinion, of those, who are least qualified to know or judge at all.

Nor does this Folly stop here; but we proceed to yet higher degrees of
Insolence; we even trample Nature under foot, disdain, despise, and are
perfectly ashamed of it; are nice in Positive and National Laws, and disregard
those that are Natural and Universal. Nay, for the sake of bringing Ceremony
and Form into Reputation, (which is a most horrible Indignity, and very
Contemptuous Treatment); We cancel and condemn a Law of God's making, to
advance Laws of Civility and Good Manners of our own forging. Thus Art carries
away Nature; the Shadow is of greater Consideration with us than the Body; and
the Air and Face of things, than the Solidity and Substance. We take great care
to cover and conceal some things that are natural, that we may not give
offense; we blush at the very sound of some words in modesty and good breeding;
and yet we are under no Fears, no restraint of doing things unlawful, and
unnatural. To keep us at as great a distance from some sorts of Sins as is
possible, we are not allowed so much as to name the parts employed in them; and
yet after all this scrupulous shyness, How many are there who never boggle in
the least at abandoning themselves to all manner of Debauchery and
Lasciviousness? It was an old Complaint of the Stoics, that though some very
natural and innocent Actions of Life were industriously concealed; yet Many
others were named without a blush, which yet were in their own nature wicked
and abominable; and what both Nature and Reason detest; such as Perjury,
Treachery, Cheating, Lying, Murder, and the like. We may improve the
Complaint, by adding, that in Our days Men pretend to more nicety in
Conversation; but these really wicked things, they do not only mention without
Shame, but act without Fear. Nay, even in Treasons and Assassinations, those
blackest of all Villains make pretensions to Ceremony, and think themselves
obliged to Murder in point of Honor and Duty; and when this is done, that it
be done with some sort of Decency. Prodigious Impudence and Folly! That
Injustice should complain of Incivility; and Malice think it self wronged by
Indiscretion. Does not the Art of Ceremony then plainly prevail over Nature,
and show, that its Influence is much stronger upon corrupt Mankind? Ceremony
forbids us to express some things which Nature allows and justifies, and we
submit contentedly; Nature and Reason would restrain us from wicked and
mischievous actions, and no body obeys, or at all regards them. This is
manifestly to Prostitute our Consciences, and abandon all distinctions, all
common sense of Good and Evil; and yet at the same time think our selves
obliged to put on a modest Face, and look grave and demure. As if it mattered
not, what we are within, so nothing appear amiss in our Countenance; and the
setting our looks in Form, were of more consequence, than the Innocence of our
Souls. This Hypothesis is most Monstrous and Absurd, and Nature cannot furnish
us with an Incongruity like it, in all the Creatures that ever God made. My
meaning is not here, what some may maliciously represent it, to find fault with
that Decency and Ceremony, which gives an Ornament and Beauty to our Actions,
and ought therefore to be strictly regarded. But my Complaint is like that of
our Savior to the Pharisees; Ye Hypocrites, ye make clean the outside of the
Cup and Platter, Mat. xxiii.
These ought ye to have done, and not to leave the other undone.



Now, if we come to examine matter of Fact in this Case, we shall scarce find
any one thing in the world, which is not somewhere or other disapproved and
contradicted; not by a few particular Persons only, nor by one single Nation,
but in several entire Countries; And on the other hand, there is not any thing
in Our Apprehension so prodigious and unnatural, but some Countries have
entertained it, and given it not only the Countenance of a favorable Opinion,
but the Authority of Custom and Common practice too. Neglect of increasing
their Families, and Indifference in point of Posterity; the Murdering of their
own Parents, of their own Children, nay of their own Selves; Marrying with the
nearest Relations; Pilfering and Stealing; Commerce and public Societies of
Robbers; public Bartering away one's Liberty, selling and letting out their
Bodies, and that in Persons of both Sexes; These are things in the opinion of
most People very monstrous and detestable; and yet there are several Nations,
which do not only connive at and allow, but use them so, as to make them the
Custom of the Country.



and Actions by the Rule; which Nature has set us; and keeping the Order of
our Creation. And that Order consists in this, That the meaner and more gross
Appetites should be kept in due Subjection, and that which is the most
excellent part of our Nature, should control and bear sway. That is, When
Reason governs Sense, and Truth is preferred before false and empty
Appearances. And as the Needle, when touched with the Lodestone, rests at no
Point but the North; And by sixing there becomes a Guide to Sailors in their
Course: So Man is never in his due Position, when his Eyes are not sixed upon
this Primitive, this Divine, this Universal Law of Human Nature. For That is
the proper Compass, to direct his Inclinations and Opinions by; and all the
other helps he enjoys, are but so many fresh Lamps kindled at this Original
Light.

to follow and comply with Nature and Reason, who bear a secret Reverence to
its Dictates, and find little or no difficulty in submitting, are the Persons
properly meant, when we speak of the Happiness of good-tempered Men; and such
as we say, Nature has been kind, or partial to. This natural and spontaneous
Honesty now, which comes as it were into the World with us, is properly called
Good Disposition, the Quality of a Soul and Body well put together, and of
Humors duly moderated; It is a Sweetness, Easiness, and Gentleness of Temper.
By which I would not be so mistaken, as to be thought to make no difference
between this, and a Softness, which is indeed an effeminate, sottish,
unconcerned, and vicious Easiness of Mind; which is managed and led by the
Nose; has no Courage, no Choice of it is own; strives to carry fair and become
agreeable to every body, and above all things declines giving offense to any;
that will not do an Act of Virtue and Justice, if it be likely to displease;
nor dares refuse the wickedest and most unbecoming Compliances, when the Favor
and Opinion of Men lie at stake: These Persons have no regard in the Earth for
Equity or Reason, the Merits of the Cause, or the Service of the Public; but
all their Considerations are fixed upon the Consequences, as to their own
private Interest, and they look no farther, than who is like to be obliged or
disobliged, by what they do. It is of such wretched, poorspirited, Complaisant
Persons, that you hear People frequently give that false and most unjust
Commendation; Oh he is a wonderful good Man! for he is kind even to the worst
and wickedest Men; whereas indeed This Charge is much more deserved and true of
them; that such a Man cannot be a Good Man, because he is not severe to ill
Men, but encourages their Villainy by his Mildness, and false show of Good
nature. Such a Goodness as this is, should rather be called Harmlessness, for
it is just like that Quality of little Children, and Sheep, and such other
Beasts, as we commonly call poor, innocent, simple Creatures. But the true
Sincerity and Honesty I am speaking of, has a very different Character; it is
a masculine, brave, vigorous, and active Goodness of Mind; a strong constant
Affection, an easy, ready Inclination, by which the Soul embraces, and stands
always bent to that which is consonant to Reason and Nature; and Nature in this
sense is but another word for Goodness, and Equity, and Justice.

Again: There are many Instances, on the other hand, of Persons so cross and
ill contrived, that one would be tempted to think them Monsters in Human Form.
They have a Disposition singular and by themselves, so very rough and
unmanageable, as if some evil Genius had shuffled them up together, in perfect
Contradiction, and despite of Nature. In such Circumstances there is great
difficulty; This vicious Disposition must be cured and corrected; the Harshness
of it sweetened; its wild and brutish Roughness tamed and made gentle; its
crooked, and stiff, and irregular Humors bended and bowed down, and made
flexible and complying with the straight Rule and Plan of Universal Nature;
which is the true Level and Standard, Men should bring themselves to. And the
properest Remedy for effecting this Cure is for such People to betake
themselves to the Study of Philosophy (as Socrates did) and to the serious and
resolute practice of severe Virtue; which is a constant Combat with
Perverseness of Temper; a painful and vigorous conflict with all manner of
Vice; a laborious Study and Exercise of the Mind, that requires a great deal of
Time and Toil, indefatigable Diligence, and strict Discipline. Virtue is
attended with Hardship, and employed upon a subject, that can never be easy;
Labor and Sweat wat^h perpetually at the Gate of Virtue, and no Entrance is to
be attained but by their means; say some of the Ancients to this purpose. And
again: The Gods have set a high price upon Virtue, and sold it dear to Mankind,
at the expense of great labor and trouble. Now the End of all this Severity
and Pains, which I propose to Men of this unkindly Composition, is not to graft
in a fresh Fruit upon the Crab-stock, not to introduce, I mean, a new, foreign,
or artificial Honesty, and consequently such a one, as (according to the
account already given of this matter,) would at the best be but occasional and
accidental only, and so, far short of that substantial and perfect Integrity I
am aiming at: But the Design and effect of this Study must be to clear the Rust
and Rubbish, to take away Obstructions, not to create, but to awaken the Powers
of Nature; to snuff and trim this Lamp within, which is foul, and burns dim;
and to quicken all those original Seeds of Goodness, that have been long kept
down, and almost quite choked and killed, either by any vicious Habit in
particular, or by some personal Indisposition, and natural Defect. For the Eyes
of the Mind are like those of the Body; the visive Faculty is formed with them,
and inherent from the Beginning; and therefore the way of helping the Sight, is
not to add any thing new, but to remove the Films that grow over the Pupil; as
a Man wipes away the Dust from a Looking-Glass, to make the Reflection clear and
strong.

Three Degrees of Perfection.
that True Integrity may be distinguished into two sorts; The One Natural,
easy, gentle, and even, which is properly called a Good Temper; The Other is
acquired, full of difficulty, attained by labor and much pain, and This is
termed Virtue; to both which we may add a Third, which is a kind of Compound of
the Two former, and so there will be Three Degrees of Perfection in the Case
before us. The First and Lowest is an Easiness of Temper, a Mind so well
disposed, as to have naturally and of its own accord, a disrelish and aversion
to all manner of Extravagance and Vice; and this we may call Goodness, or
Innocence. The Second and next Stage, which we call Virtue, consists in the Art
and Labor of Prevention, setting it self with all its Force and Vigor, to
guard the Avenues, to hinder the Advances of Vice, and check the very first
Motions of the Passions, when they grow mutinous; and if the Insurrection be
actually begun, to muster and arm all a Man's Forces to stop, and quell, and
reduce them. The Third and Highest degree of all is a Mixture of Noble
Resolution, and a Happy Temper; so that the Man from both these met together,
is so excellently well disposed, as not only to continue impregnable, but to be
free even from Attacks. Not so much as a Temptation rises to give him Trouble;
the very Seeds of Vice are quite rooted out. Virtue is the only, the Natural
Growth of this prosperous Soil; and becomes not the Habit, so much as the
Complexion and Constitution of the Man. This Last may justly be styled
Perfection; This and the First kind do thus far resemble one another, and are
both very differing from the Second; That they are silent and still, without
difficulty, and without struggle, the natural Air, and constant Course of the
Man, a cheap and easy Virtue, that costs him little or nothing; whereas the
Second is a perpetual Conflict, and dwells in the midst of Hurry and Alarms,
and Battles. The last and most perfect of these Degrees, is acquired by a long
and painful Study, a serious and constant Exercise of the Rules of Philosophy,
added to a Good, and Generous, and Noble Nature, largely and liberally
furnished; and a Mind enriched with all manner of good Dispositions. For in
this Case Both must concur; Nature and Industry must each do their part; and it
cannot be entirely the work of one of these, not all infused, nor all acquired.
This is the End, which all the old Philosophers proposed to their Studies; but
above all the rest, the Stoic and Epicurean Sect, (I make no scruple of saying
the latter did it as well as the former, though this I confess might seem
strange, had we not the Testimony of Seneca, and several other Ancient Writers
in confirmation of it.) These gallant Men looked upon Disgrace and Contempt,
Want and Sickness, Pains, and Tortures, nay even Death it self, to be Toys and
Trifles, fit for none but Fools and Children to be anxious or concerned about.
They did not only despise them, and endure them with Patience and Constancy,
and gain an absolute Conquest over all the Troubles and Difficulties of them,
whenever they made the Assault; but they went out into the Field, they sought
and provoked them, Rejoiced in, as well as Triumphed over them. They looked
upon these Encounters as necessary Breathings for their Virtue, to keep it in
Exercise and Vigor; and by the frequency of such Engagements, did not only
secure and establish that Virtue, and render it Firm, and Steady, and Severe,
(as Cato and some other renowned Stoics for instance did) but even Cheerful
and Gay; and if that be not an improper expression, wanton and full of play, by
the perfect Mastery they had got over all external Accidents and Things.

Metellus said, that the Doing Evil was a despicable thing, because it was the
Effect of Cowardice and Laziness; so the Doing Well, where it is without the
expense of Trouble and Hazard, is looked upon by these persons, as too vulgar
and cheap a thing; but the attempting and going through with it, in despite of
Hazards and Troublesome Oppositions, and where these attack us in great number,
and labor hard to obstruct, and deter us from our Duty; This is the
Commendation of a Good, and a Virtuous Person indeed. Difficilia quae pulchra
(...). Plato.
Whatever is excellent is Difficult, was, we know, the usual Saying of the
Noblest Philosopher. But to deal plainly, and speak the Truth of the matter,
the Difficulty of obtaining any thing does by no means alter the nature, or add
to the real and intrinsic value of the thing it self; nor is it, as I have
taken occasion formerly to observe, any just and warrantable Cause for raising
it in our Esteem. Nay it is beyond all Controversy certain on the other side,
that Natural Excellencies are much more desirable, and better than those that
are studied and acquired. That it is much more Brave, and Great, and Divine to
act by the motions and spontaneous Perfections of Nature, than with the most
exquisite Dexterity and nicest Improvements of Art; in an easy, free, equal,
and uniform manner, than with laborious Efforts, uncertainly, and with Doubt,
and Danger, and Perplexity of Thought. It is in the former of these two Senses,
that we term Almighty God Good, His Excellencies are his Nature, Essential to
him; and if They could cease, he must cease to Be. And therefore to call not
Him only, but even the Blessed Angels, and the Spirits of Just Men made
perfect, Virtuous; is a Diminution and Disparagement to them. Theirs is
properly Goodness too, but Virtue is a Title too low for the Happiness of
unsinning Perfection, a State of Indefectibility, and above the reach of all
Temptation. It Is true indeed, in the Condition we now live, where Dangers
surround, and threaten, and Frailties betray us perpetually; Virtue makes
somewhat of noise and clutter, and is forced to act with some Vehemence; and
this gives it the Preference before Smooth and Still Goodness. For the
generality of people always measure the Excellence of a Thing by the Show, and
the Difficulty; and admire that most, which costs dearest; but this is a false
method of judging; and we are not much to wonder, if They are wrong here, who
indeed are generally so in all their Estimations of Men and Things. For these
great Swelling Performances, that look so big, and seem to be all zeal and
fire, are not subsantial, nor to the purpose; They are no part of true Honesty,
nor the Products of that fixed Principle we are speaking of; but rather
intemperate Heats, and Feverish Fits, very different from that Wisdom we are
now in quest of, which is healthful and moderate, gentle and calm, equal and
uniform.

Thus much may suffice to be said of Honesty or Sincerity in general; For as to
the several parts of it, and the particular Duties resulting from thence, they
will come under our Consideration in the Third Book, and particularly, when we
shall treat of the Virtue of Justice.

Of Grace.
in the necessary Addition of what follows in this Paragraph. To silence (if it
be possible) the unjust Malice, and disadvantagious Character cast upon me by
some who find fault with my (as they think them) Extravagant Commendations of
Nature; as if This were able to do every thing, and no other Assistances were
required. To these persons it might suffice to reply, that by Nature I
understand (as was observed before) the God of Nature, and the Dictates of
Eternal Reason, written and engraved in every Heart by His Almighty Hand. I
might also allege, that the Subject of this Book is only Natural, and Human;
and that the Author is not obliged by his Design to concern himself with any
Virtues properly Divine, or the Advantages above the power of Nature to confer.
But waving all this, I readily acknowledge, that to render the Virtue and
Integrity I have been describing complete, and give it all the Perfections it
is capable of, one thing more is necessary: The Grace of God I mean; which must
animate and invigorate this Goodness and Probity; show it in all its luster;
give the finishing stroke, refine and exalt it from a mere Moral to a Christian
Virtue. This renders it accepted at the Throne of Heaven, approved of God,
capable of an Eternal Recompense; and so crowns it both with Perfection here,
and a Reward hereafter. It is not easy to find Apposite Resemblances for Things
which cannot present themselves to us by any sensible Ideas: But if you will
pardon the meanness of the Comparison, I should almost venture, to compare the
Probity here insisted on, to a Skilful Master, who touches the Keys of an
Organ, with absolute Accuracy and Art; but all to no purpose, the Instrument is
dumb, till the Wind express the Excellence of his Hand, by giving Sound to the
Instrument; and making that Melody, which all his Mastery in playing was not
able to do without it. Thus Moral Virtue is but a sort of Speculative
Perfection, till the Grace of God inspire, and enable us to put it in Practice,
and produce the Fruits of it.

Now This is a Blessing, which does not consist in refined Thought, nice
Notions, and long or learned Discourses; it is not to be acquired by Rule, or
the methods of Human Industry and Art, nor can we attain to it by our own
Labor and Toil; the utmost we can do is to prepare, and endeavor to qualify
our selves duly for the receiving it; for after All, Receive it we must; It is
a Gift that comes down from on high, and the very Name of Grace is designed to
represent to us the Good Will of the Donor, and that the Gift is entirely free.
Our part is to ask, to seek, to implore it, with all imaginable Humility, and
the most fervent Desires we are capable of. To prostrate our selves before the
Throne of Grace, and with the utmost Contention of Heart and Voice to say,
Vouchsafe, O my God, in thy Infinite Goodness to look down with an Eye of Mercy
and Pity upon thy poor Servant; Accept and grant my Desires, assist my weak
Endeavors, and crown those good Inclinations, which are originally derived
from Thee: The Law by which I stand obliged, the Light by which I am instructed
in my Duty, are of thy Ordering; thou have stamped our Nature with these
Impressions of Good and Evil, and shined in our hearts by thy Precepts; O give
Success to thy own Institution, and finish the work thou have begun; that so
the Glory and the Fruit may redound to the Planters use, and thou may be
first and last in all my Actions and Designs, my Thoughts and my Desires. Water
me abundantly with thy Grace, and take me for thy own, that I who am of my self
miserable, and poor, and naked, and blind, and weak, may be able to do even all
things, through Christ, who strengthens me.

These are proper Addresses upon such an occasion, but the properest and most
probable method to obtain them, that is, to incline the Compassion of God, and
dispose him to gratify such Desires, will be strict Moral Honesty, and a
Conscientious Observation of the Law of Nature to the best of our power. For
this, though it be not an absolutely Meritorious Cause, is yet a Conditional
one, and a good Preparation for the receiving Supernatural Assistances; as
Matter ready disposed is clothed with the Form, and the Vegetative and
Sensitive Soul derived from our Parents, lead the way, and put all things in
readiness, for the Accession of the Rational and Intellectual one, which
proceeds from God. Thus Human Wisdom is the Introduction to Divine, Philosophy
the Handmaid to Religion, the Natural and Moral Duties of a Man subservient and
Instrumental to the Liberty of a Christian, the Light, and Favor of the
Children of God. He who does his best in the matters of Reason, and Morality,
gives God an occasion of exercising his Bounty, and bestowing larger and nobler
Virtues upon him. It being an equitable Method, and such as our Blessed Savior
assures us, God himself proceeds by, to trust that Man with more and greater
Talents, who has approved himself diligent and faithful in the good management
of less. To this purpose are all those Holy Aphorisms. Thou have been faithful
in a very little, be thou ruler over much. God gives the Holy Spirit to all
them that ask him. To Him that has shall be given, and He shall have
abundance. God denies no man Grace, who does his utmost. God is wanting to no
Man in necessary Supplies; and the like.

On the other hand, To live in Contradiction and Defiance to Men's Natural
Light, is to put one's self out of all Capacity of God's Favor, and, as much
as in us lies, to make it impossible for Grace to be given us. Since He, who
gives it, has expressly declared upon what Conditions Men are allowed to expect
it; and if He exceeds those Measures, and bestows it upon persons wholly
unqualified, This is beside the Common Method, and an excepted Case from his
regular Dispensations. This obstinacy and perverseness is expressly mentioned,
as the Reason why our Savior refused to preach in some particular places; and,
since the Evangelists, St. Cyril, St. Chry oslem, St. Augustine, and other of
the Fathers have largely discoursed upon that matter to this purpose.

By all which it appears evidently, that Grace and Nature are not contrary
Principles; for (in the Sense I have all along used the Term in this Chapter)
Grace is so far from forcing or destroying Nature, that it is a gentle and
seasonable Relief to it; nay, it strengthens, and crowns, and perfects Nature.
We must not therefore set these two in opposition to each other, but join both
together, and put on the One as the Ornament, the Fullness, and just Finishing
of the Other. Both proceed from God, though after different manners; and
therefore we must neither put them at variance, nor confound them for want of
duly distinguishing them asunder; for each has its proper Springs, and
peculiar Motions. They neither set out together, nor operate alike; though both
came from the same place; and lead to the same End at last.

Nature may be without Grace, and when duly followed has its commendation even
then, in regard to those Circumstances which admitted of no more. Thus it was
with the Philosophers and Great Men heretofore, Persons whose Proficiency under
this First and General Law, and their Seize in all sorts of Moral Virtue,
may be allowed to excite our Wonder, as well as challenge our Praise. Such
likewise is the Case of all Infidels at this day; because the Grace we speak of
is a Gospel-Blessing, and They who are not under the Evangelical Covenant, have
no Title to it. But Grace cannot be without Nature; because This is the Matter
for it to work upon; for the business of Grace is to reform and perfect; and
therefore This as necessarily supposes Nature, as the raising of a Roof
supposes a Foundation to be laid, and Walls already carried up. The Organist
may exercise his Fingers, it is true, upon the dumb Keys, and make his Hand; but
the Harmony must come from the Breath; or if it could sound, yet would it be
but like St. Paul's tinkling Cymbal, of no worth or significancy at all: But
all the Air in the World will never make Music of the Instrument, without a
Hand to strike the Keys. In This I have been the more particular, and descended
to familiar Comparisons, because Some I find have suffered themselves to be led
into very gross Mistakes upon the matter. Persons, who have never conceived a
right and worthy Notion of that true Probity and entirely Honest Principle we
have been recommending; but are blown up with strange Romantic Conceits of
Grace; which they doubt not to attain, and practice eminently well, without any
regard to Morality; and by a Scheme of Pharisaical Accomplishments; some easy,
lazy, sormal Performances, which carry a great appearance of Sanctity to the
World; but as for the real Substance, and inward Power of Goodness and
Integrity, they give themselves no trouble at all about it. I see great store
of these Men in the World every day; but alas! I can find but very few such as
Aristides, Phocion, Cato, Regulus, Socrates; no Epaminonda's, no Scipio's, no
Strict and Conscientious Professors, I mean, of stanch and solid Virtue; and
Philosophical, or if you please, common Justice, and downright Moral Honesty.
The Reproaches and Complaints so liberally bestowed by our Savior upon the
Pharisees, and Hypocrites, will never be out of season; for the persons
obnoxious to these always abound; and even those who set up for the Great
Censors of Manners, the Zealous Railers at Vice, and Grave Reformers of the
World, are not all exempt from this Charge themselves. But enough of this. I
have spoken largely of the Virtue it self; now before I close this Chapter, I
must take leave to add one word, concerning the disposition of Mind contrary to
it.

Wickedness.
and offensive; all that can judge and discern must needs detest and loath it;
which gave occasion for some to say, That it is a monstrous Birth, the Product
of Brutality and Ignorance. It does not only provoke the Dislike and Aversion
of others, but raises the Indignation of a Man's own Mind, who is guilty of it;
Repentance and Self-condemnation are its certain Consequences. It gnaws, and
corrodes, and frets the Soul; like an Ulcer in the Flesh; makes one restless
and uneasy; out of Countenance and out of Conceit with himself; and is ever
busy in contriving and inflicting fresh Torments, as if it were ordained to be
its own Executioner. Hence those Observations; -- Prima est haec ultio, quod se
Judice, nemo nocens absolvitur.
Juv. Sat. xiii. Paena autem vehemens, ac multo saevior illis
Quas aut Caeditius gravis invenit, aut Rhadamanthus
Nocte dieque suum gestare in pectore testem.
Ibid.
None quits himself; his own impartial Thought
Will damn; and Conscience will record the Fault:


And again, Not sharp Revenge, nor Hell it self can find
A fiercer Torment, than a Guilty Mind.


Hence Malitia ipsa maximam partem veneni sui bibit: Malum consilium consultori
pessimum.
Wickedness is said to drink the greatest part of its own Poison; the
bitterness and the dregs fall to its own share. Evil Counsel turns most to the
prejudice of the person that gives it. As the Wasp, though she may hurt and
occasion some smart to the person stung by her, yet does it self the greatest
harm; and suffers more by the loss of its Sting, and being disabled for ever
after. It is true, Vice is attended with some Pleasure; for were there not this
to recommend it, Wickedness would never find any entertainment in the World. No
Man ever was, or can be vicious, merely for the sake, or satisfaction of being
so. But still, when we have allowed this Advantage of a short and sensible
Satisfaction; yet we must not forget what follows, and how poor a business this
is, in comparison of that lasting Displeasure, and Dissatisfaction, it begets
afterward. So that, as Plato says truly, The Punishment constantly follows the
Sin; or rather indeed, as Hesiod yet more nicely observes, They are
Twin-Children, and come into the World together. Now the Case of Virtue is just
the Reverse of This; It gratifies, and sooths us; leaves sweet and pleasing
Remembrances behind: Fills us with inward Complacencies, secret Congratulations
of our own Happiness, and inexpressible Satisfaction, in having done what
becomes us. This is the true Reward of a virtuous Mind, a Happiness inherent
and Essential to it. And the Applauses, and Joys, and Transports of a Good
Conscience, as they are sure to us, and cannot be withheld by any who envy our
Virtue, or our Fame; so are they likewise, so large, and full; so generous and
noble, and sufficient, as may very well encourage, and satisfy us, during our
continuance in this present World.

Whether it be ever allowable to do a fault.
abominated, and avoided, no body, that I know of, ever pretended to dispute.
But some Question may be made, whether we are obliged to be so general, and
irreconcilable in our Hatred, that it should be impossible for any Pleasure or
Advantage so desirable to offer it self, for the prospect of which the
committing of any Vice might not be allowable, at least excusable in us. Many
people indeed are but too apt to think, that there are several such reserved
Cases, wherein the common Rules of Morality may be very fairly dispensed with.
And, if we allow the Advantage to be public, the Writers of Politics make no
doubt of it, (provided the proceedings be so qualified, as I shall have
occasion to advise, when I come to treat of the Virtue of Prudence in point of
Government.) But some have not been content to restrain this Liberty to the
necessities of State; but have enlarged its bounds beyond their just extent;
and given the same Allowance to the Private Pleasure and Profit of single Men.
Now This is a thing not possible to be determined in favor of their Assertion,
without the Case were stated in all its Circumstances; and both the Person, the
Quality of the Fact, and the Nature of the Advantage proposed, particularly
specified. But otherwise, while we treat of the Matter simply, and
abstractedly, it is a general Rule, not only in Religion, but in mere Morality
too, That the prospect of no Advantage or Pleasure whatsoever, will justify a
Man in doing any thing Ill in it self, or which is contrary to his Duty and
Conscience.

Whether all Sin beget Repentance.
that Sin and Wickedness has it not in its power to furnish out Pleasures and
Satisfactions so solid and agreeable, as Virtue and the Consciousness of one's
own Sincerity, is able and wont to do; nay, it is most certain, that Vices are
their own Tormentors, and execute severe Vengeance upon the Authors. But yet
this is not universally, and in all Cases true; and therefore it is necessary
to make some distinction of Persons and Circumstances. Now Wickedness, and
Wicked Men may be distributed into three sorts. Some, first, are perfectly
incorporated with Evil, they Reason themselves into it; their Resolutions and
the whole Bent of their Wills are fixed entirely in its Interests; or else long
Custom has got such a perfect Mastery over them, that they cannot Disengage
themselves. These miserable Wretches are utterly abandoned; their very
Understanding is vitiated, sees, consents to, and approves the Evil: And This
usually is the Case, when Vice and Debauchery meets with a Strong and Vigorous
Mind, and has taken such deep root in it, that it comes at last to be
naturalized, and of a piece with it; all the Faculties are tinctured, it is
corrupted throughout, and Vice so closely interwoven, as to become a part of
its Temper and Constitution. Others, secondly, have their Intervals of Folly
only; They are wicked now and then by fits, just as any violent Gush of a
Temptation disturbs or puts them out of their Course; or some impetuous Passion
drives them headlong upon the Rocks; so that these Men are surprised, and
carried away forcibly, by a Current too strong for them to stem. The Third sort
are betwixt these two Extremes: They have a right Notion of Vice, considered in
it self; and when they reflect upon their Fault abstractedly, do severely
accuse and condemn themselves for it; and thus they differ from the First Sort,
who are advanced even to the desperate degree of a good liking of Wickedness:
But then they have not the violence or surprise of Passions or Temptations to
qualify and extenuate their Crime; and in this respect they differ from the
Second sort too. But these Men go to work in cold blood, and with great
deliberation; they weigh Circumstances, and drive a Bargain as it were; observe
well the Heinousness of the Sin; and then put the Pleasure or Profit it brings,
into the contrary Scale; and thus they barter away their Souls, and are content
to be wicked at a certain Price, and for such as they think a valuable
Consideration. They lend themselves to the Devil, for so much Interest to be
paid for the use of their Persons; and are so foolish to think, that there is a
great deal to be said, in excuse for such a Commerce as this. Of this kind we
may reckon Extortion, and Oppression, and Covetousness for Gain; and the
Excesses and Debaucheries of Wine and Women for the sake of Pleasure; and
indeed several other Sins committed upon occasions, though they be not reigning
and habitual; such as Men think, and consult upon, and at last resolve wrong;
where the Will is manifestly concerned, or where the Complexion of the Man is
apt, against his Reason and better Sense, to determine him.

These Thr comparea.
and nothing less than an unusual, and almost miraculous Impression from Heaven
can be supposed to reclaim them. For they are (as the Apostle expresses it)
past feeling, and commit evil even with Greediness. The Stings and Prickings of
Wickedness are very sharp and piercing indeed, but these Men's Consciences are
so tough and hardened, that nothing can enter them. Besides, The Understanding,
as was observed, is brought over to an Approbation of the thing; and so all
Sense of Remorse must be lost, which proceeds chiefly from acting against our
better Judgment; The Soul is entirely corrupted, the Distinctions of Good and
Evil obliterated and worn away; and consequently the Will can be under no
solicitude to restrain, or refuse. The Third sort of Men, though they may
appear in some measure to repent, and condemn themselves, yet in reality, and
properly speaking, they do not. Take the Fact by it self, as a matter unlawful
and unbecoming, and so they disallow it; but view it dressed up in all its gay
Attire, with all the Circumstances of Pleasure and Profit, that recommend, and
set it off, and you shall find them of another Opinion. They think the
Advantage of their Sin, a sufficient Compensation for the Guilt; and cannot be
said to repent of That, which had the full and free Consent of their Reason and
Conscience; and with which they are always ready to close, as often as it shall
proffer it self upon the same Terms. So that in Truth the Second sort seem to
be the only persons, that are seriously concerned to repent, and reform. And
since we are now upon the mention of Repentance, I shall take this opportunity
to say one word upon that Subject.

Repentance, is a Disposition, or rather an Act of the Will, Repentance.
whereby the Man disclaims, and so far as in him lies, undoes again what he had
done before. It is a Grief and Sadness of Heart, but differing in this one
respect from all other Pains and Passions of that kind, arising from external
Causes, That Reason begets, and heightens This, whereas it mitigates and expels
Those. Repentance is wholly internal; the Ground and Foundation of it is from
within, and upon that account it is more violent than any other: As the Cold of
Agues and Heat of Fevers is more fierce and insupportable to the Patient, than
any, which is ever occasioned by Objects from without. Repentance is the
Physic of the Soul; the Death of Vice; the only Health of Wounded Consciences,
and Depraved Wills. But though all Mankind must agree in the Excellent Effects
and Commendations of the thing, yet many mistake it; and therefore good care
should be taken to distinguish aright, and be perfectly informed in this
matter. As First; There are some sorts of sin, of which Men very hardly, and
seldom repent; as was observed just now concerning old inveterate Vices, such
as Custom has made in a manner natural and necessary, and the Corruption of
the Judgment has given Authority to, by determining in their Favor. For while
a Man continues under the power of such Habits, and the Blindness of such an
erroneous Choice; the sense of his Mind is with him; and he feels no Check or
Reluctance at all; so that Repentance, which implies such Regret, is (usually
speaking) terminated in Accidental and Occasional Miscarriages; the sudden and
surprising Faults, where there is not leisure for Deliberation to interpose; or
the Violent Sallies of Passion, where the Judgment is overpowered, and under
some Constraint to do amiss. Another sort of things there are, which a Man
cannot be said with any Truth or Propriety of Speech to repent of; and those
are, Such as are out of a Man's own Power: At these indeed we may conceive a
Just Indignation, or be much concerned, and extremely sorry for them; but we
cannot be said to Repent of them, because This implies not only Sorrow, but the
blaming and condemning our selves, and failing in what we might have done
better. Nor does That displeasure of Mind deserve this Name, which proceeds
from the disappointment of our Expectations, or Events contrary to our Wishes
and Intentions. We laid, as we thought, a very wise Project, and had a very
fair prospect of Success; but Matters have happened quite otherwise, than we
imagined it likely or possible for them to do; and some unforeseen Accident
steps in betwixt, and blasts the whole Design. Now pray, What is all this to
the Matter in hand? or what ground can here possibly be for Repentance? The
Design, and the Method, were well and justly contrived; every wise and good Man
would have taken the same Course. You have done your Duty; but you have not
succeeded in it. And is that any fault of Yours? You advised well, and
proceeded regularly; and this is the utmost Man can do. For we can neither
command Events, nor have any positive knowledge beforehand what they will be.
The Uncertainty of the Issue is the foundation of all Prudence and good
Conduct, for were This sixth and foreknown, no place could be left for
Deliberation and Management; And therefore there is not a greater weakness, nor
a more unreasonable pretense in the world, either for tormenting our selves, or
entertaining meaner thoughts of others, than Want of Success. Advice, and
Conduct are by no means to be judged by the Event; for there is an unseen, and
an unaccountable Providence, that directs all the Chances, that sometimes
defeats the wisest, and prospers the weakest and most unpromising Counsels and
Undertakings. Again; Repentance is not, as some fondly suppose, that Change of
Mind, which proceeds from Old Age, Impotence, want of Opportunity, or want of
Inclination, or any such Disrelish, as either Satiety and Excess, or a natural
Alteration of Palate, brings upon us. For there is a mighty Disserence between
forsaking Vice, and being forsaken of it; between denying our Appetites when
they are keen and eager; and gratifying them by a pleasing Abstinence from what
they are cloyed with already. Besides, To like any thing the worse upon these
accounts, is really a Corruption of, and a Reflection upon our Judgment. For
the things are still the same; the same Approbation, or the same Dislike, was
due to them heretofore, no less than now; All the Change is in our Selves only,
and that too is a Change in no degree voluntary or chosen, but purely necessary
or accidental, the effect of Age or Sickness. We speak most improperly, when we
say that a Man is grown wiser or better in such cases; for all the Reformation,
that proceeds from humor or discontent; from disrelish or disability; is Fear,
and Phlegm, Coldness, and Listlessness. There is oftentimes not the least of
Real Conviction, or any Principle of Conscience in it. And sure a feeble Body
is a very unfit Conveyance, to carry us to God, and drive us to Repentance and
our Duty. For true Repentance is somewhat very different from all this; it is a
particular Gift of God, by which we grow wise in good earnest; a Remorse, which
checks our hottest Career, even in the midst of Springhtliness and Courage; and
this is what must be created and cherished in us, not by the want of
opportunities, or of power to use them, not by the weakness of a Body broken,
and worn out, and grown unserviceable to Vice any longer; but by the Strength
of Reason and Thought, and the better consideration of a Resolute and Vigorous
Mind. For nothing more argues Greatness of Soul, than the Correcting our former
Follies, and Steadiness in a new Course of Life; notwithstanding all the
Difficulties and Discouragements of an entire Reformation.

Of Confessing and Excusing Faults.
This is usually the Sign, the Consequence, and in some Cases so necessary a
Qualification, that all Professions of Penitence without it are Hypocritical
and vain. It is with the Mind in these Respects, as with our Bodies. For, as in
Bodily Distempers there are two sorts of Remedies made use of, One, that make a
perfect Cure, by going to the very Root, and removing the Cause of the Disease;
Another, which only sooth the Patient, consult his present Ease; and are
properly termed Quieting Medicines; and, as in this case, that former
Application is much more painful, but withal more powerful and effectual, and
better for the person, than the latter; So likewise in the Wounds and
Sicknesses of the Soul, the true Remedy is of a searching and a cleansing
quality; and This is such an Acknowledgment of our Faults, as is full of
Seriousness and Shame; a being content to take the Scandal, and the Folly of
them upon our selves. But there is another deceitful Remedy, which only covers,
and disguises them; its design is not to heal, so much as to conceal the
Disease; and this consists in Extenuations, and Excuses; from whence we
commonly say, That Wickedness makes it self a Garment, to cover its own Shame.
This is a Remedy invented by the Author of Evil himself; and it answers the
Malice of his Nature and his purposes, by rendering the Party so much the worse,
and obstructing the Methods of his Recovery. Such were the Shifts, and
Shufflings, such the Covering of their Nakedness, which the First Transgressors
made; the Fig Leaves and the Excuses were both alike, and made the Matter but
so much the worse, while they labored to mend it.

We should therefore by all means learn to accuse our selves; and get that
necessary Conquest over our Pride and Self-love, as frankly and fully to
confess the very worst of our Thoughts and Actions, and not allow our selves in
any reserves of this kind. For, besides, that this would beget a brave and
generous Openness of Soul; it would likewise be a wonderful Check, and
effectual Preservative, against all such Actions and Thoughts, as are not fit
to be publicly known, and what a Man would be ashamed of, if they were so. For
He that obliges himself to tell all he does, will be sure to take care not to
do any thing which shall need to be concealed. But alas! the Common Practice of
this naughty World is the direct contrary to the Advice I am giving. Every Man
is discreet, and modest, and secret in the Confessing; but bold, and free from
all restraint, in the Committing part. For as indeed the Confidence and
Hardiness of the Crime, would be very much curbed and abated; so likewise would
it be in some measure compensated, by an equal frankness and hardiness in the
accusing of our Selves, and acknowledging what we have done amiss. For whatever
Indecency there may be in doing an ill thing, not to dare to confess our selves
in the wrong, is ten thousand times more odious and base. To this purpose we
may observe, that there are several Instances of Persons eminent for Piety, and
Learning; such as St. Augustine, Origin, Hippocrates, and the like; who have
taken pains to disabuse the World, and to publish Books, wherein they confess
and retract their own Mistakes and erroneous Opinions; and well were it, if
People could be brought to such a Degree of Sincerity, as to do the same in
point of Morals, and Misbehaviour. Whereas now, they oftentimes incur a greater
Guilt, by endeavoring to hide and smother a less; for a public premeditated
Lie seems to Carry some Aggravations along with it, which render it more
abominable and more Vicious, than some other Facts committed in secret; though
these be such as in their own Nature, are apt to raise a greater Abhorrence and
Detestation in us. All This does but inflame the Reckoning; it either makes the
first Fault worse, or adds a fresh one to it; and in either case the Guilt of
the Man is not abated, but increased; and whether we count this Increase by way
of Addition, or of Multiplication, the Matter comes all to one.

CHAP. IV. The Second Fundamental Point of Wisdom.
The Fixing to one's self a particular End, and then chalking out some
determinate Track, or Course of Life: which may be proper for leading us to
that End.
upon, and Drawing out to one's self some determinate Method or Course of Life,
that we may not live at large, and at random; but betake our selves to some
particular sort of Business, or Profession, which may be proper and convenient
for us. My meaning is, such as a Man's own Temper and Natural Disposition
qualifies him for, and applies it self cheerfully to; (with this Caution only,
that, while we follow our own Nature in particular, there be a constant Regard
had to the Dictates of Human Nature in general, which is and ought to be the
Great, the General, the Governing Mistress of us all, as you were told in the
last Chapter.) For Wisdom is a gentle and regular Management of our Soul, that
moves and acts in due measure and proportion, and consists in a constant
Evenness of Life, and Consistency of Behavior.

This no ea^^ matter.
to manage our selves well in making this Choice; with regard to which People
behave themselves very differently, and act with great confusion, and
perplexity; by reason of the great variety of Considerations, and Motives,
which they are influenced with; and These many times such as interfere, and
confound one another. some indeed are very fortunate in this Choice, and
proceed with great Alacrity and Success; and these are such, as either by
reason of a particular Happiness in their Nature, found no great difficulty in
discerning and choosing what was most proper for their purpose; or else by some
lucky hit, which spared them the trouble of any great deliberation, are thrown
into their own Element; so that Fortune has chosen for them, and sixed them
right; or else the friendly assistance and discreet care of some Friends, who
had the advising, or the disposal of them, has conducted them in this weighty
Affair, to the best Advantage.

Others again are in the contrary Extreme, the most unhappy and ill-suited with
their Circumstances, that can possibly be imagined. They made a false Step at
first, and have never been able to retrieve it since. Either they wanted the
Judgment to know themselves, or the diligence and care which was necessary, to
take right Measures, or to think better, and knock off in time, when they found
they had taken wrong. For the best thing left for Them to do, had been to
recede quietly; whereas for want of this prudent retiring, they find themselves
afterward engaged too far, and beyond all possibility of a Retreat. Which
being now cut off, they are forced to drudge on, through infinite
Inconveniences; and lead a Life made up of nothing else, but Trouble and
Constraint, Repentance and Discontents.

But then This frequently happens too, from some failure in the person, that
deliberates about it, and considers amiss; as well as from the Ignorance or the
Rashness, of such as consider very little, or not at all. And That may be, from
a Man's mistaking his own Genius, or Capacity; and thinking too highly of his
own Abilities. And when upon these false Presumptions he has undertaken any
thing above his management, the Consequence of it is; Either to lay it down
again with Disgrace; Or else to live in perpetual pain, and torment, by
obstinately persisting in an Attempt too much for him. We should always
remember, that he that lifts a Burden, must be stronger than his Burden; for
else there is no remedy, but he must let alone, what he cannot carry; or sink
under the weight of it. And a wise Man will always be Master of his own
Business, and not undertake more than it is possible for him to dispatch.

There is also another Obstruction of this kind, no less common and fatal, than
the Former; which is a strange Levity of Temper, that never sticks to any
thing, but is every day forming some new Project; Thus we see abundance of
People that are never pleased or satisfied with any thing; every thing gives
them uneasiness and discontent; Tired of Business, and Sick of Leisure;
Governing and being Governed makes them equally restless, and they can neither
lead nor follow quietly. Such Creatures as these are doomed to Wretchedness
irrecoverable; for they are always under Constraint, and Misery; every thing
they do is grievous, and against the grain: And, which adds yet more to their
Unhappiness, they can never rest in quiet, but are always in motion and bustle,
and all the while without any design; constantly busy, and nothing done;
Whereas the Actions of a wise Man have always some Aim, to direct and determine
them. Magnam rem puta unum hominem agere; praeter sapientem nemo unum agit,
multiformes sumus.
And you must know it is no small commendation for a Man to be constantly the
same; for all of us are of a thousand different forms and shapes, and none but
the Wise Man is all of a piece.

But the grater part of Mankind never bestow any serious thought upon the
matter; and if you ask why they are of this Profession rather than any other,
the only account they are able to give is, that their Father was of it, or that
they took a sudden fancy to it; they are carried by Instinct, or Constraint,
their own blind inclination, or the Authority of Friends and Relations. And as
they engaged in it without Thinking, so they are at a loss how to disengage
again.

he has chosen, may prove successful; there are Two things which require a
very particular Consideration; and these are, The true Nature and Condition,
both of Himself, and of his Business. 1. First, It is absolutely requisite, he
should be perfectly well acquainted with his own Mind; the Constitution,
Inclination, Capacity, and Temper of Soul and Body both; Wherein it is, that
his Excellency lies; and Which are his weak and blind Sides: What he is
qualified for, and of What he is incapable, or less disposed to. For a Man that
goes against Nature, does in effect tempt God, and bid defiance to Providence;
he cuts himself out a great deal of work, which he can never finish; and by
breaking that known Rule, of Nec quidquam sequi quod assequi nequeas.
attempting nothing which we cannot master; exposes himself to Scorn and
Derision, and becomes the Jest of all that know him. 2. After this Knowledge of
himself, it is, in the next place, as necessary, that he should be acquainted
with his Business; that is, with That Employment, or Trust, or particular
Condition of Life, which he proposes to fix in. For there are some Professions
encumbered with Matters of great difficulty; Others of vast importance; a Third
sort, that expose us to Danger; and a Fourth, where the Business, though it be
not of any mighty Consequence, is yet extremely intricate and perplexed; and
involves a Man in a world of Trouble and Care, and other Affairs that depend
upon, or are interwoven with it. Now all Employments of this Nature do greatly
harass and fatigue the Mind; and keep one's Thoughts always busy and bent.
Besides, As the Business of each Profession differs from the rest, so do the
Faculties and Parts, that qualify Men for it. One requires Acuracy of Judgment;
Another Liveliness of Imagination; a Third, Strength of Memory; and a Man may
be very eminent and commendable in himself; and yet spoil all, by being in a
wrong way. Now what has been formerly observed in the first Book, concerning
the Parts and Faculties of the Mind in general, and the differing Temperaments
of the Brain, may, I presume, be of some use in this point; and, if judiciously
applied, assist and direct Men toward the understanding, both the Nature of
each Profession, and Course of Life; and their own Fitness or Incapacity for
it. For by examining first their own Disposition, and then the State of Life
they have thoughts of, and then confronting, and comparing these two together,
they will soon discern, whether these will ever hit it, and agree long with
each other; for agree they must, or no Good can be done: This will quickly show
Men, what they are to trust to. For if it happen, that a Man be obliged to
struggle with his own Inclination, and must conquer, and commit a violence upon
his Nature, to make it serviceable to his purpose, and capable of discharging
the Employment he has taken upon him; Or on the other hand; if in obedience to
Nature, and to gratify our Inclination, we are, either with our own consent, or
insensibly and against our Wills, trapann'd into a Course, that falls short of
our Duty, or runs counter to it; what miserable Confusion and Disorder must
here needs be? How can we ever expect Evenness, under so much Force? Constancy
from so much Constraint, or Decorum where every thing is against the Grain? For
as is well oberved; Si quicquam decoium, nihil profecto magis, quam
aequabilitas Vitae universae and singularum actionum; quam conservare non
possis, si aliorum imitans Naturam, omittas tuam.
If there be such a thing as Decency in the world, it is seen in nothing more
than in an easiness and consistency both of one's whole life in general, and of
each particular Action in it. And this Decorum can never be maintained, if you
live in conformity to other people's dispositions, and have no regard to the
following your own. There cannot be a vainer Imagination, than to suppose any
thing can last long, or be well done, and eminently good in its kind, or that
it can become a Man, or sit easy upon him, if there be not somewhat of Nature
and Inclination in it.


Tu nihil invita dices faciesve Minerva.
Hor. Art. Poet.
-- Discern which way your Talent lies,
Nor vainly struggle with your Genius.
Lord Roscom. Id quemque decet quod est suum maxim. Sic est faciendum, ut
contra naturam universam nil contendamus; ea servara propriam sequamur.
That which is most a Man's own, is always most graceful; And we must always
take care so to order matters, as first to offer no Violence against Nature in
general; and then to follow our own Genius in particular.

But now, if it should so fall out, that a Man, either through Misfortune,
Imprudence, or any other Accident, should perceive himself entered into a
Profession, and course of Life, full of Trouble, inconvenient, and improper;
and that he is so deeply engaged too, that there is no possibility of changing,
or getting quit of it; in this case, all that Wisdom and good Conduct has to
do, is to resolve upon supporting, and sweetning it; keeping one's self easy,
and making the most of it: Like skilful Gamesters, who when they have an ill
Throw, mend it in the playing. For Plato's Counsel is best upon these
occasions, the bearing our Chance patiently, and managing it to all the
Advantage an ill Bargain is capable of. You see what a Knack of this kind
Nature has given to some sort of Creatures; when the Bees out of an Herb so
rough and harsh and dry, as Thyme is, can extract so sweet a Substance as
Honey. And this is such an Excellence, as all those wise and good Men Imitate,
who manage Difficulties dexterously, and, as the Proverb expresses it, make a
Vartue of Necessity.

CHAP. V. The First Act or Office of Wisdom.
The Study of, and serious Endeavor after True Piety.
THE necessary Preparations to Wisdom, being thus explained in the former
Chapters, which are in the manner of laying our Foundation, it may now be
seasonable to proceed to the Building it self, and erect upon this Groundwork,
the Rules and Precepts of Wisdom. And here the First, both in Order and
Dignity, which offers it self to our Consideration, concerns true Religion, and
the Service of Almighty God. For certainly Piety ought to have the precedence
of all Virtues, and is the highest and most honorable in the Scale of Duties;
But the greater and more important it is, the more we are concerned to have a
right notion of it; especially, when to the insinite consequence of the thing,
we add the danger of being mistaken, and withal, how very common and easy it
is, to deceive our selves in this point. Great need therefore we have of
Caution and good Ad^ice, that we may be truly informed, how the Man, who makes
Wisdom his Aim and Business, ought to manage himself upon this weighty
occasion. And the giving Directions of this nature is the design of my present
Discourse; after I have first made a short Digression concerning the State and
Success of several sorts of Religion in the World. Of which I shall choose to
speak but briefly here, and refer my Reader for farther Satisfaction, to what I
have said more at large to this purpose, in another Treatise of mine, called
the Three Truths.

Difference of Religions.
I cannot but take notice, how dismal and deplorable a thing, the great Variety
of Relgions is, which either now do, or formerly have obtained in the World.
And, which is yet a greater misfortune and reproach, the Oddness of some of
them; Opinions and Rites, so fantastical, so exorbitant, that it is just matter
of wonder and astonishment, which way the Mind of Man could so far degenerate
into Brutality, and be so miserably besotted with Frauds and Folly. For upon
examination it will appear, that there is scarce any one thing so high or so
low, but it has been Deified; and even the vilest and most contemptible parts
of the Creation, have, in some quarter of the World or other, found People
blind enough to pay them Divine Honors, and Adoration.

Now, notwithstanding this Difference be really as vast, and as horrid, as I
have intimated, or my Reader can imagine; yet there seem to be some General
Points in common, which, like Principles or Fundamentals, are such, as Most, if
not All of them have agreed in. For however they may wander from one another,
and take different Paths afterward, yet they set out alike, and walk hand in
hand for some Considerable Time. At least they appear, and affect to do so; the
Devil transforming himself into an Angel of Light; and undermining the Truth by
Mimicking it; as knowing that the most effectual Art to seduce Men is by
contriving fair and plausible Lies; and dressing up Wickedness in its most
engaging Attire. To this purpose it is observable, that the most prevailing
Persuasions have sprung from the same Climate, and first drew breath in almost
the same Air. Palestine I mean and Arabia, which are Countries contiguous to
one another. Some of their First and main Principles are very near alike; such
as the Belief of one God, the Maker and Governor of all things; All own the
Providence of God, and his Particular Love and Favor for Mankind; the
Immortality of the Soul; a Reward in Reserve for the Good; and terrible
Punishments, which await the Wicked, even after this Life; some particular
Profession, and set Form of Solemn and External Worship, by which they put up
their prayers, invoke the Name of God, and think that a decent Honor, and
acceptable Service and Homage is paid to the Divine Majesty by so doing. To
give these a better Countenance and greater Authority in the World, some of
them really produce, and others pretend Revelations, Visions, Prophesies,
Miracles, Prodigies; Holy Mysteries, and eminent Examples of Saints, Persons
exemplary for their Piety, or Sufferings, or Doctrine; and these Allegations,
whether true or false, speak the General and Natural Sense of Mankind to agree
in the expectations of Revelation from Heaven, and that Miracles are proper
Attestations of them. Each has a particular Scheme of its own, which
distinguishes the Receivers of it from Those of different Persuasions, and
imposes certain Articles of Faith and Forms of Discipline; Some as Terms of
Communion, and Marks of Distinction, and Others as necessary to be believed in
order to Salvation. All of them have at first been weak, and low, and little
regarded; but from those slender Beginnings have by degrees gained ground upon
the People, been insinuated, received, applauded, and at last entirely
submitted to, by vast Multitudes; spread far and wide, and established
themselves; as if Opinions ran like contagious Diseases, and all that came
within the Air of them, were sure to catch the Infection. And yet some of these
owe all their Authority to Fictions and Tricks; insomuch that even the
absurdest and most senseless of all Errors, have been embraced with as great
Reverence and Devotion, and maintained with as much Stiffness and as Positive a
Confidence, as the very Truth it self. All of them do likewise agree in their
Notions of Appeasing God; and teach unanimously that Prayers, and Offerings,
Promises and Vows, Days of Extraordinary Humiliation and Thanksgiving, are
proper methods to incline his Ear, and obtain his Favor and good Acceptance
for our Persons and our Requests; All believe, that the Principal and most
pleasing Service we can pay to God, the most powerful means o averting his
Indignation, reconciling our selves, and becoming agreeable to him, is by
giving one's self some torment and trouble; by laying heavy Burdens upon our
selves, and cutting out a great deal of work, the more difficult and contrary
to our inclination, the better, and more meritorious. For what other account
but this, can we give of those infinite Professed Austerities enjoined to
particular Orders, the abundance of Fraternities, and Societies of Men, which
in all Religions throughout the World, the Mohammedan as well as Christian, are
devoted to sundry peculiar Exercises, full of Severity, and Discipline; of
Poverty and Pain; and Corporal Sufferings; even so far in some of them, as to
scourge, and wound, and mangle their own Persons? These are observed to be more
numerous, and differently instituted in False Religions, than the True: And All
this, from a strong persuasion, that they merit by this Discipline and
voluntary Cruelty; and are in proportion so much better Men than Others, as
they afflict and torment themselves more than They. An Imagination, which still
prevails, and such as human Nature is never like to get quit of; for we see
every day fresh Instances, and new Inventions of this kind, and what industry
Men use to be more ingenious and exquisite, in contriving new sorts of
mortification and punishment. See the Notes.
Now all this, I say, can be accounted for no other way, than by assigning it
to an Opinion, that God takes delight, and is wonderfully pleased with the
Sufferings and Calamities of his Creatures: An Imagination, which to those who
think Sacrifices to have been of human Invention, seems to have been the Ground
of all that way of Worship, which, before the Christian Religion made its
Appearance in the world, was universally practiced. Thus harmless Beasts were
butchered every where, and their Blood spilt, and poured out upon Altars, as a
valuable Present to the Divinity; and thus too in some places (so prodigious
was the Infatuation of Mankind) poor little innocent Children were barbarously
tortured and murdered; and Grown Persons, sometimes Malefactors, and sometimes
Men of eminent Virtue and clear Reputation, were offered in Sacrifice; and this
was the usual Worship of almost all Nations, and looked upon, as one of the
most solemn, and most acceptable Acts of Devotion. Thus the Old Getae in
Scythia are said, among other instances of Adoration and Honor paid to their
God Zamolxis, to dispatch a Man to him once in five years, to consult and
supplicate him in all things necessary for them. And, because the Ceremony
requires, that this Advocate of theirs should dye in an instant, and the manner
of exposing him to death, (which is the being pierced through with three
Javelins) is somewhat doubtful in the Execution; therefore it often happens,
that several are thus dispatched, before any one wounds himself in a part so
mortal, as to expire immediately; and only He that does so, is esteemed a
Favorite of their God, and proper for that purpose; but all the rest who dye
slowly, are to be rejected, as unfit for this Sacrifice. Thus did the Persians
worship their Gods; as that single fact of Amestris, the Mother of Xerxes,
testifies; who, in agreement to the Principles of Religion then prevailing in
that Country, did, as an Offering of Thanks for her own long and prosperous
Life, bury fourteen young Persons of Quality alive, Branches of the Noblest
Families in the whole Kingdom. So likewise did the ancient Gauls, and
Carthaginians, among whom young Children were Sacrificed to Saturn, and that
with so remorsless a Zeal, that even the Fathers and Mothers used to be
present, and assisting at the Ceremony. Thus the Lacedaemonians sought to
ingratiate themselves with their Goddess Diana, by scourging their young Men in
Complaisance to her; nay, doing it with such Rigor, that they expired under it;
for the Sacrifice of Iphigenia shows, that she was worshipped with human Blood.
The Instance of the two Decij proves, that the Remans were possessed with the
same Imagination too; which gave occasion for this Reflection in one of their
Writers; Quae fuit tanta iniquitas Deorum, ut placati Pop. Romans non possint,
nisi tales viri occidissent?
What strange Provocation could make the Gods so extremely hard and severe,
that there was no way of reconciling them to the People of Rome, unless the
Atonement were made by the blood of such gallant Men? Thus, the Mahometans, who
slash and cut their Faces, their Breasts, and other amembers, to recommend
themselves to their Prophet; and the people in our new Discoveries of the East
and West Indies, and at Themistitan, where they cement the Images of their
Gods, with Children's Blood. Now what Madness, what Stupidity is this, to
suppose, that Inhuman Actions can ever gain upon the Divine Nature; that the
Goodness of God is requited, or decently acknowledged by our own Sufferings; or
that Barbarity can be a proper Method of satisfying his angry Justice? As if
Justice could thirst after human Blood, or feast it self upon the Innocent
lives, that are spilt with infinite torture, and the most exquisite pain. Ut
sic Dij placentur, quemadmodum ne homines quidem s^ewun^.
At this rate the Gods are fond of expiations which even Men abominate; and the
Mercy of Heaven is purchased with such Barbarities, as all Nature starts at.
Whence could so wild a fancy as this, a fancy so distant from all the Just
Ideas and Perfections of God spring up, that he takes a pleasure in the misery
of human nature, and the ruin, or at least the torment and damage of his own
Workmanship? What can be more impious or extravagant, and how monstrous a Being
does such a Belief as This, make of God? And how justly does the Doctrine of
Christ command our Reverence and Esteem, which has abolished all such Worship,
and rectified Men's Notions in this matter?

And others wherein they differ.
or Most Religions have been showed to have some Principles in common, wherein
they are agreed, so have they likewise Others, peculiar to themselves; Certain
Articles, which are the Characters, and, as it were, the Boundaries of their
Respective Communions; and serve to separate and distinguish the many Sects and
Professions from one another. With regard to These it is, that the Men of every
Religion prefer themselves above all the World besides; that they afirm, with
great assurance, their own Persuasion to be the best, the purest, the most
Orthodox of any; and, as another means of magnifying themselves, are eternally
reproaching those that differ from them, with Errors and Corruptions; and by
this means they are eternally employed too in creating Breaches, or in widening
and keeping open such as are already made; by the mutual Disallowance and
Condemnation, which every Party is perpetually declaring against the Notions of
every other Party; and representing all Systems, but their own, to be false and
dangerous, and by no means to be admitted.



The later are built upon the former and more ancient.
and That is the Advantage, which Time and Succession have given in this
matter. For we shall find, that in proportion as One Religion has been of a
later date than another, so it has gained somewhat from that which came into
the World before it, and the Younger has always built and raised it self upon
the Elder; more particularly upon that, which was next of all before it in
Order and Time. And the method of effecting this has been, not by disproving
or exploding all that went before in the gross and at once; for upon these
terms it could never have found entertainment, or got any manner of Footing
with people so prepossessed; but the Course has been, to accuse what was
formerly received, of some defect or Insufficiency; alleging that the
Institution was imperfect in it self; or that it was only Temporary; and the
Term, for which it was calculated, then expired; and therefore this New
Additional one was necessary to succeed in the place of an abolished, and to
complete an unfinished Religion. And thus by degrees the new one rises upon the
Ruins of the Old, and is enriched by the Spoils of its vanquished Predecessor;
As we know the case has plainly stood with the Jewish Religion, when it
prevailed over the Pagan and Egyptian way of Worship; the Jewish people not
being to be brought off from the Customs of that Country all at once: And
afterward the Christian Faith and Promises, when they triumphed over the
Jewish Privileges and Mosaical Dispensation; and since that, the same Pretense
has been made use of to advance Mahumetism upon the Jewish and Christian
Religion taken together. Each of these has retained something of the Religion
it pretended to dispossess; and built upon Old Foundations: But none so much as
the Mohammedan; which professes to persist, and be fully persuaded in All the
Doctrines of Jesus Christ, save only that Great and most important one, which
asserts his Divinity. So that he who would pass from Judaism to Mahometanism,
must take Christianity in his way. And we are told, there have been some
Mahometans, who have exposed themselves to Sufferings and Torture, in defense
of the Christian Truths; as a Christian likewise upon his own Principles would
be bound to do, in vindication of the Authority, and Doctrines of the Old
Testament. But now if we cast our Eyes upon the more Ancient sort of
Institutions, we shall find them dealing after a very different manner with the
New, which (as I said) in part allow, and only profess to improve and refine
upon Them. For They reject and condemn Them entirely, give them no quarter, but
cry out upon them for Innovations, and look upon every thing of later date than
themselves, as a mortal and irreconcilable Enemy to the Truth; as if after the
Period of their own Establishment, Time could from thenceforth produce none but
monstrous Births; and all, who did not sit down and stick there, must be
inevitably abandoned to Falsehood and Corruption.

All of them uncouth to Nature.
that they are, every one, in Some Points uncouth and foreign from the Common
Sense and apprehensions of Mankind. And the Reason seems to be, that They all
of them propound to our Consideration and Belief, and are Systems consisting
of, and built upon, Points of a very distant kind from Common Sense. For Some
of them, when weighed in the Balance of human Judgment, appear to be exceeding
mean, and low, and contemptible; such as a Man of Wit, and Vigorous Thought,
finds himself rather tempted to ridicule and expose, than to pay any Reverence
to them: And Others again are so exceeding sublime, the Luster of them so
strong, the Nature of them so full of Miracle and Mystery, that, as Finite
Causes could never effect, so finite Understandings can never comprehend them
fully; and at These the Men of Discourse and Demonstration take offense, and
will allow nothing to be credible, which is not intelligible. Whereas in Truth,
the Sphere in which the human Intellect moves and acts, is placed between these
two Extremes. For we are capable but of such things as lie in a middle State,
and are of a moderate proportion. These only are of a size with our Souls, They
fit us, and therefore They Only please and are easy to us. those of a lower
Rank we look down upon with Indignation and Scorn; and those of a higher
Condition are too weighty and bulky for us; they create Wonder and Amazement
only; and therefore the wonder ought not to be great, if the Mind of Man recoil
again, and show a disrelish against all Religion; since in All there is so very
little of such Doctrine as is agreeable to the common Temper and Capacity of
Mankind; but the principal Points of Faith and Worship are in one of the
forementioned Extremes, and those of Practice distant, either from common Use,
or from general Inclination. Hence it comes to pass, that the Men of strong
Parts have so often despised Religion, and exposed it to the Derision of the
World; and those of Weak and Superstitious Minds are confounded and scandalized
at it. This was St. Paul's Complaint in the first planting of the Christian
Faith; 1 Cor. 1.23.
We preach Jesus Christ crucified, to the Jews a Stumbling Block, and to the
Greeks Foolishness. And this indeed is the very Reason, why we find so much
Profaneness and Irreligion; so much Error and Heresy, in the World. Some
believe not at all, and others believe amiss, because they consult their own
Judgment only, and hearken to no other Guide, but the Dictates of human Reason.
They bring matters of Religion to the same Trial with other common matters, and
will needs undertake to examine, and measure, and judge of them, by the
Standard of their own Capacity; They treat this Divine, like other Common and
merely Human Sciences and Professions; expecting to master, and penetrate to
the bottom of it, by the strength of Natural Parts. But This is not the way of
dealing with Divine Truths; A Man's Affections must be qualified and disposed
for these Doctrines. They require Simplicity and Honesty; meekness of Temper,
an humble and obedient Mind. These only can fit a Man for receiving Religion;
For he that does so in good earnest, must believe its Declarations, submit to
its Laws, and govern himself by them, with Reverence and Resignation of Soul.
In short, he must be content that his own Judgment should be overruled by the
Word of God; and to live and be led by universal Consent and Authority; which
seems to be the Subjection intended by the Apostle, when he speaks of
Captivantes intellectum ad obsequium Fidei.
Casting down Imaginations (or Reasonings,) 2 Cor x. 5.
and every high thing that exalts it self against the knowledge of God, and
bringing into Captivity every Thought to the obedience of Faith.

Reason good they should be so.
however the Conceited or Unthinking part of the World may quarrel at this
method, yet it was certainly a great Instance of the Divine Wisdom, to order
the matter thus. For such a proceeding seems highly necessary, in order to
preserve that Admiration and Respect, which is due to Religion; and which, upon
any other Terms, would very hardly have been paid to it. For religion ought to
be entertained and embraced with Holy Reverence, and great Authority; and
therefore with some degree of Difficulty too. For Reason and Experience may
soon convince us, that if it were in every Circumstance suited to the Palate,
and of a size with the natural Apprehensions, of Mankind; if it carried nothing
at all of Miracle or Mystery in it; as it would be more easily, so likewise it
would be less respectfully, received. And so much as you bring it nearer to the
Level of common Matters, so much you certainly abate of that Regard it ought to
have, above all other matters whatsoever.

Why they are not to be received by human means.
since all Religions and Schemes of Belief are, or pretend to be what I have
here described; foreign from, and far above the Common Sense and Capacity of
Mankind; they must not, they cannot be received, or take possession of us by
any human and natural means. (For had the Case been thus, the most exalted
Minds would have been in proportion eminent for Religion, and so many Men of
Wit and Judgment in Other things, could never have been defective here), but
these Notions must needs have been conveyed into Men's Minds, by supernatural
and extraordinary Methods, by Revelation from Heaven; and The persons that
receive and imbibe them, must needs have them by the secret Teachings and
Inspiration of God. And thus you find, that All who believe, and profess
Religion, say; for all of them do in effect assume to themselves that
Declaration of the Apostle; Gal. I. 1, 12.
Not of Men, neither by Man, nor of any other Creature, but of God.

But yet so they are.
there will be found very little, or nothing at the bottom of all these mighty
Boastings. For, whatever Men may say or think to the contrary, it is manifest,
that all sorts of Religion are handed down and received by human Methods. This
Observation is true in its very utmost Sense and Extent, of all False and
Counterfeit Persuasions; for These when searched to the bottom, are no better
than Diabolical Delusions, or Human Inventions: But True Religion, as it is
derived down to us from a Higher Original, so it moves us by other Springs, and
is received after a very different manner. And here, to get a right
understanding of this matter, we must distinguish between the First Publication
of the Truth, that Reception, which made it general, and gave it a Settlement
in the World; and that Particular One, by which private Persons embrace and
come into it, when already established. The Former of These which first fixed
this Heavenly Plant, was altogether Miraculous and Divine; and agrees
punctually with the Evangelist's account, The Lord working with the Apostles
and Preachers, and confirming the Word with Signs following. But the Latter
must be acknowledged in great measure Human, and private Men's Faith and Piety
to be wrought by common and Ordinary Means. This seems to be sufficiently
plain, first, from the Manner of Religion's getting ground in the World, and
that, whether we regard the first general planting of any Persuasion, or the
method of its gaining now upon private persons. For, whence is the daily
Increase of any Sect? Does not the Nation to which we belong, the Country where
we dwell, nay the Town, or the Family in which we were born, commonly give us
our Religion? We take that which is the growth of the Soil; and whatever we
were born in the midst of, and bred up to, that Profession we still keep. We
are Circumcised, or baptized, Jews, or Christians, or Mahometans, before we can
be sensible that we are Men; So that Religion is not the Generality of People's
Choice, but their Fate; not so much their own Act and Deed, as the Act of
Others for and upon them. See the Notes.
The Man is made a Member of the Jewish or Christian Communion without his
Knowledge, because he is descended of Jewish or Christian Parents, and in a
Country where this or that Persuasion obtains most. And would not this, do you
think, have been his Case, if born in any other part of the World? Would not
the same person have been a Pagan, or Mohammedan, if born where Heathen
Idolatry, or Mahumetism prevailed? But now as to the Observance, and living up
to the Precepts of Religion; Those who are True and Pious Professors, besides
the external Profession of the Truth, they have the Advantage of the Gifts and
Graces of God, the Assistance and Testimony of the Holy Ghost, common to all,
and from which, even the mistaken are not utterly excluded. This indeed is a
Privilege, which (blessed be God) is capable of being very usual and frequent,
and many great Pretensions and pompous Boasts are made of it. But yet I
vehemently suspect, notwithstanding all the fair show, and plausible pretenses
Men make of this kind, This Grace and Spirit is not so largely and so commonly
enjoyed, nor so strong in its Influences and Effects, as Some would have us
believe. For surely were This so powerful in us, and were Religion our own free
Choice, and the Result of our own Judgment, the Life and Manners of Men could
not be at so vast a distance and manifest disagreement from their Principles;
nor could they, upon every slight and common occasion, act so directly contrary
to the whole Tenor and Design of their Religion. And this Inconsistence of
Faith and Manners, is also a Proof, that our Faith is not from God; for were
this planted and fastened in our Minds by so powerful a hand as His, it could
not be in the power of any Accident or Temptation to shake, or unsettle us; so
firm and strong a Band could not so easily be broken or burst through. Were
there the least Touch, the smallest Ray of Divine Illumination, This Light
would shine in every action of our lives, and dart it self into every corner of
our Souls; The Effects of it would appear in all our behavior, and not only be
sensible, but wonderful and amazing too, according to what Truth himself said
upon occasion to his Disciples; Matthew. xvii. 20.
If ye had faith but as a grain of mustard seed, ye shall say to this mountain,
Remove hence, and it shall remove; and nothing shall be unpossible to you. But
alas! if we look abroad, and consider the behavior of the World; what
proportion, what correspondence can we find, between the Belief of the Soul's
Immortality and a future Judgment, and the Practices of Mankind? Would Men,
Could Men indeed lead the lives they do, and at the same time be persuaded in
good earnest, that a Recompense awaits them hereafter; so glorious and happy on
the one hand, or so full of misery, and shame on the other? One single thought,
and the bare Idea of those things, which Men profess so firmly to believe,
would perfectly confound, and scare wicked Men out of their Wits. There have
been instances of very strange effects wrought upon Persons, only by the
apprehension of public Justice; the Fear of dying by the hands of a Common
Executioner, or some other Accident full of misfortune and reproach; and yet,
What are all these Calamities, in comparison of those Horrors, which, Religion
tells us, will be the Sinner's portion hereafter? And is it possible, that
these things should be entertained and believed indeed, and Men continue what
they are? Can a Man seriously hope for a Blessed Immortality, make This the
Object of his Expectations and Desires, and yet at the same time live in a
slavish dread of Death, which he knows is the Necessary, the Only passage that
can lead him to it? Can a Christian fear and live under the apprehensions of
Eternal Death and Punishment, and yet indulge himself in those very Vices,
which that very Hell, he believes, is ordained to avenge? These are most
unaccountable Stories; and things as incompatible, as Fire and Water. Men tell
the World that they believe these Doctrines, nay they persuade themselves that
they do really believe them; and then they endeavor to proselyte others, and
make Them believe so too; but alas! there is nothing in all this; nor do They,
who talk and act thus inconsistently, know what it is to Believe. Such
Professors as these, are what an Ancient Writer called them, Liars and Cheats;
or, as another expressed himself very well upon the like occasion, who
reproached the Christians with being the gallantest Men in the World in some
respects, but the pitifullest, and most contemptible wretches in others. For,
says he, if you consider the Articles of their Belief, you will think them more
than Men; but if you examine their Lives and Conversations, you will find them
worse than Brutes, more filthy than the very Swine. Now certainly, if we were
wrought upon by such becoming Impressions of God and Religion, as are the
Effects of Grace, and an Engagement so forcible, as Those of a Divine Power;
nay, were we but persuaded of these matters by a bare simple, and common
Assent, such an historical Faith, as we credit every Vulgar relation of matters
of Fact with; did we but allow the same Deference to what we call the Word of
God, which we pay to the advice, and exhortations, and common discourse of our
Friends and Acquaintance; the Doctrines of the Gospel could not but be
preferred by us, infinitely above any other advantages whatsoever, for the sake
of that incomparable Goodness and Excellence, so illustriously visible in every
part of them. But sure the least we can be imagined capable of in this case,
would be to admit them into an equal share of our Affection and Esteem, with
Honors, or Riches, or Friends, or any kind of Allurements this World can
pretend to seduce us by. And yet, all this notwithstanding, there are but very
few, who are not more afraid to offend a Parent, or a Master, or a Friend, than
they are of incurring the displeasure of an Almighty God: And who would not
rather choose to act in contradiction to an Article of Religion, and so forfeit
Heaven hereafter, than to break the measures of worldly Interest and Prudence,
at the expense of what they stand possessed of in present? This is indeed a
Great Wickedness and Misfortune; but for Persons who consider things
impartially, Christianity will not suffer in Their Esteem. The Honor and
Excellence, the Purity and Sublime Powers of Religion are no more Impaired or
Polluted by it, than the Rays of the Sun contract Defilement from the Dunghils
they shine upon. For Principles are not to be tried by their Professors, but
the Professors by their Principles. But we can never exclaim sufficiently
against those vile Men, who profane the Truth, by their Vicious Lives; and
against whom that very Truth it self has denounced so many Woes, and such
dreadful Vengeance.

The Difference between true and false Religion.
will be to distinguish it from That, which is False and Counterfeit, and only
the Mask and Disguise of Religion. Till this be done, we shall but confound our
selves with equivocal and ambiguous Terms; and prevaricate, both in Expression
and in Practice, as indeed the greatest part of Mankind (it is to be feared) do
upon this occasion. Now there is nothing, that pretends more to a graceful Air,
nor takes more true pains to appear like true Piety and Religion, than
Superstition does; and yet, at the same time, nothing is more distant from, or
a greater Enemy to it. Just as the Wolf, which carries some tolerable
Resemblance to a Dog, but is of a quite different Disposition; and comes to
devour that Flock, which it is the other's business to defend; as Counterfeit
Money is more nicely wrought, than true Coin; or as a Flatterer, who makes show
of extraordinary Zeal and Affection, but is in reality nothing less than that
true Friend he desires to be thought. It is no injudicious Character given by
Tacitus, when he describes a sort of Men, Gens Superstitioni obnoxia,
Religionibus adversa.
extremely liable to Superstition, and at the same time violently averse to
Religion. Superstition is likewise envious, and jealous to the last degree,
affectedly officious and troublesome; like a fond Courtezan, who, by her
amorous jilting tricks, puts on more Tenderness, and pretends to infinitely
more concern and love for the Husband, than his true Wife, whom she endeavors
to lessen in his esteem. Now some of the most remarkable Circumstances, wherein
these two differ, are; That Religion sincerely loves and honors God; settles
the Mind in perfect ease and tranquillity, and dwells in a noble and generous,
a free and gallant Spirit; whereas Superstition fears and dreads God; gives Men
unworthy and injurious apprehensions of his Majesty; perplexes and scares the
Man, and is indeed the Disease of a weak and mean, a timorous and narrow Soul.
Superstitio Error insanus. Amandos timet; quos colit violat: Morbus pusilli
animi. Qui Superstitione imbutus est, quietus esse nusquam potest. Varro ait,
Deum a Religioso vereri, a Superstitioso timeri.
It is (according to St. Augustin's account of it,) all over Error and Phrensy;
it lives in terror of those whom it ought to love; dishonours and affronts
those whom it pretends to respect and adore; it is the Sickness of a little and
feeble Mind; He that is once tainted with Superstition, can never more enjoy
peace and rest. Varro 's observation is, That Religious Men serve God out of
Reverence; but the Superstitious out of Horror and perpetual Dread of him. But
we will be a little more particular upon each of these Qualities.

Superstition described.
nor any thing else be quiet, but is eternally teazing and troublesome, both to
God and Man. The Ideas he entertains of God represent him, as an Ill-natured
and Morose, an Envious and a Spiteful Being; Unreasonable, Rigorous, and hard
to be pleased; quickly provoked, but long before he is reconciled again; One
that takes notice of our Actions, after the same manner that we commonly
observe those of one another; with a sort of malicious Curiosity, watchful to
find faults, and glad to take the advantage of any Failings. All this, it is
true, he does not own, nor speak it out; but the manner of his serving God
sufficiently declares, and speaks it for him; for That is agreeable, and
exactly of a piece with these Notions. He trembles and quakes for fear; has no
enjoyment of himself, nor any degree of Comfort or inward Security; full of
Fears and Melancholy Distrusts; always fancying, that he has done too little;
and left somewhat undone, for want of which, all the Rest will signify nothing.
He very much questions whether God be satisfied with his best Endeavors; and
in this disquiet he applies himself to methods of Courtship and Flattery; Tries
to Appease and gain upon him by the length and importunity of his Prayers; to
Bribe him with Vows and Offerings; Fancies Miracles to himself; easily
believes, and takes upon trust the Counterfeit Pretensions of this kind from
others; Applies every Event to his own Case, and interprets those that are most
ordinary and natural, as expressly meant, and directed to Him, by the particular
and immediate hand of God; he catches greedily at every Novelty; and runs after
every new Pretender to Light and Revelation. Duo Superstitiosis propria, nimius
Timor, nimius Cultus.
Two inseparable Qualities of Superstitious People (says one) are, Excess of
Fear, and Excess of Devotion. Now what in truth is all this, but to Torment
one's self most immoderately, and at the expense of infinite trouble and
disquiet, to injure and affront God; to deal with him after a most base,
sordid, and unworthy manner; to use him, as if he were a mercenary Being, and
to treat the Majesty of Heaven and Earth, as we durst not presume to use a Man
of Quality or Honor? And indeed, generally speaking, not only Superstition,
but most other Errors and Defects in Religion, are owing chiefly to want of
right and becoming apprehensions of God. We debase and bring him down to Us;
compare and judge of him by our Selves; cloth him with our own Infirmities, and
unaccountable Humors; and then proportion and suit our Worship and Services
accordingly. What horrid Profanation and Blasphemy is This?

It is natural.
it is in some measure Natural, and all Mankind have more or less Inclination
to it. Plutarch laments the Weakness of Human Nature, in that it never keeps a
due Medium, nor stands firm upon its feet; but is eternally leaning and
tottering to one or other Extreme. For in truth, either it declines and
degenerates into Superstition and Vanity, and mistaken Religion; or else it
hardens it self in a Neglect of God, and a Contempt of all Religion. We are all
of us like a Silly Jilted Husband, that is Put upon by some gross Cheat of an
Infamous Woman; and takes more delight in her little studied Arts to cajole and
bubble him, than he finds satisfaction with his own Virtuous Wife, who serves
and honors him with all the genuine Modesty, and unaffected Tenderness
becoming her Character. Just thus are we abused by the large Pretenses of
Superstition, and prefer it before the less showy and pompous Charms of true
Religion.

Common.
after what has been said of its proceeding from Weakness of Mind, from
Ignorance, or very mistaken Notions of the Divine Nature. Upon all which
accounts we may well suppose it is, that Women, and Children, Old Men, and Sick
Persons, or People stunned with any violent Misfortune, or under the Surprise
and Oppression of some uncommon Accident, are observed to labor most under
this Evil. The same has been likewise observed by Plutarch, of rude and
unciviliz'd Countries. Inclinant natura ad Superstitionem Barbari. Plutarch in
Sertorio.
The Barbarians, says he, are naturally disposed to be Superstitious. Of
Superstition then it is, and not of Religion and true Piety, that what we
commonly repeat after Plato, must be understood; where he says, that the
Weakness and Cowardice of Mankind first brought Religion into Practice and
Esteem; and that upon this account, Children, and Women, and Old People were
most apt to receive Religious Impressions, more Nice, and Scrupulous, and more
addicted to Devotion, than others. This, I say, is true of Superstition, and
mistaken Devotion; but we must not entertain any such dishonorable Thoughts,
of true and perfect Religion. This is of a nobler Descent, its Original is
truly Divine; it is the Glory and Excellence, not the Imperfection of Reason,
and Nature; and we cannot be guilty of greater Injustice to it, than by
assigning such wretched Causes, for its beginning and increase, and drawing so
scandalous a Pedigree for its Extract.

Cherished by Reason and Policy.
and Common to Mankind, there are large Improvements and Additions of this
Vice, owing to Industry and Cunning. For many people support and cherish it in
themselves; they give it countenance and nurse it up in others, for the sake of
some Convenience and Advantage to be reaped from it. It is thus, that Great
Persons and Governors, though they know very well the Folly and baseness of it,
yet never concern themselves with putting a stop, or giving any disturbance to
it; because they are satisfied, This is a proper State-Tool, to subdue Men's
Minds, and lead them tamely by the Nose. For this reason it is, that they do
not only take good care to nourish and blow up that Spark, which Nature has
already kindled; but when they find occasion, and upon some pressing
Emergencies, they set their Brains on work to forge and invent new and unheard
of Follies of this kind. This we are told was a Stratagem made use of by
Scipio, Sertorius, Sylla, and some other eminent Politicians.

Qui faciunt animos humiles formidine Divum.
Depressosque premunt ad terram.

Who by false Terrors Freeborn Souls debase;
And paint Religion with so grim a Face,
That it becomes the Scourge and Plague of human race.
Nulla res multidudinem efficacius regit, quam Superstitio.
Nothing keeps the Multitude under so effectually, as Superstition.

An Introduction to the description of true Religion.
which, like a common Nuisance, ought to be detested by that Scholar of mine,
whom I am now instructing, and attempting to accomplish in the Study of Wisdom.
Let us leave them grovelling in their filth, and betake our selves now to the
Search of true Religion and Piety; of which I will here endeavor to give some
strokes, and rude lines; which, like so many little Rays of Light, may be of
some use at least, and help to guide us in the pursuit of it. Now from the
former Considerations it does, I hope, sufficiently appear, that of the great
Variety of Persuasions at present, or any possible to be Instituted, Those seem
to Challenge the Pre-eminence, and best deserve the Character of Truth and
Religion indeed, which, without imposing any very laborious, or much external
Service upon the Body, make it their business to contract, and call the Soul
home; that employ and exalt it by pure and heavenly Contemplations, in admiring
and adoring the Excellent Greatness, and Majesty incomprehensible of Him, who
is the First Cause of All Things; the Necessary, the Best, the Original Being;
And All this, without any nice or presumptuous declaration what this Being is,
or undertaking positively to determine and define any thing concerning that
Nature, which we cannot understand; or prescribing too peremptorily, how he
ought to be Worshipped: But contenting our selves with such large and
indefinite acknowledgments as These, That God is Goodness, and Perfection it
self; infinite in all Respects, and altogether incomprehensible; too vast for
human knowledge to understand, or conceive distinctly. And thus much the
Pythagoreans, and other most celebrated Sects of Philosophers taught long ago.
This is the Religion of Angels, and that best sort of Worshippers in Spirit and
Truth, whom God seeks and loves. But among all those less spiritualized Pagans,
who could not satisfy themselves with so refined a Principle, as Inward Belief,
and the Exercise of the Soul only; but would needs gratify their Senses and
Imagination with a visible Object of Worship, (which was an Error all the World
almost was tinctured with.) The Israelites chose a Calf; but None seem to have
made so good a Choice, as those who pitched upon the Sun for their God: This
indeed excelling all other Creatures so vastly, with regard to its Magnitude,
and Motion; its Beauty and Luster, its wonderful Use and Activity, and the many
unknown Virtues, and Efficacies of its Influences; that it does certainly
deserve, nay, command the admiration of all the World; we cannot think too
highly of it, while we remember it is still but a Creature; for, look round
this whole Fabric, and (Man excepted) your Eye shall discover nothing so
glorious, nothing equal, nay, nothing near, or comparable to it.

The Christian Religion preserves a due Temper between these Extremes, and by
devoting both Body and Soul to God, and accommodating it self to all Conditions
and Capacities of Men, has mixed the Insensible and Internal Worship, with
that which is Sensible and External. Yet so, that the most perfect and
Spiritual Persons employ themselves chiefly in the former, and the weak and
less exalted are taken up with that which is invisible and popular.

Some descriptione of Religion.
For This is a Relative Duty, and these are the two Terms of that Relation. Its
business is to magnify God, and set Him as high; and to humble Man, and lay Him
as low, as possibly we can. To subdue and beat him down, as a lost worthless
Wretch; and when this is once done, then to furnish him with helps and means of
raising himself up again; to make him duly sensible of his own Impotence and
Misery, how Little, how mere a Nothing he is; that so he may cast away all
Confidence in himself, and place and seek his Hope, his Comfort, his Happiness,
his All, in God alone.



belongs to God only; for he is the Fullness and Perfection of all Good; so
absolute and complete, that nothing can be added to his Essential Happiness;
and therefore Benefit is a thing he cannot receive. And thus if you please, you
may understand that Angelick Hymn; Glory to God in the Highest, Luke II. 14.
and on Earth Peace, and Favor toward Men.

Thus much being premised in general, Piety explained.
must be these that follow: First, It is necessary that we apply our selves to
study, To know God.
For our Knowledge of Things is the Foundation and the Standard of the Honor
we have for them. The first thing then, that we ought to be convinced and fully
persuaded of upon this occasion, is His Existence; then, That he created the
World, and that all other Beings whatsoever are the Products of his Power, and
Goodness, and Wisdom: That by these same Attributes he governs this Universe of
his own making; That his careful Providence watches over all things, and even
the least and most inconsiderable Events do not escape his observation; That
whatsoever his Dispensations to Us are, they are all for our Good; and that all
our Evil comes from our selves alone. For, if we should account those
Accidents, which God appoints for us, to be Evils, this were to be guilty of
great Profanation, and to blaspheme against his Government; this were to tear
up the very Foundations of all Piety and Religion; because Nature teaches us to
Honor and love our Benefactors; but begets hatred and aversion to them that
deal unkindly by us, and do us mischief. Our Duty therefore is to get a right
Notion of God's dealings toward us; to resolve, that we will obey him at any
rate; to receive all that comes from his hand, with Meekness and Contentation;
to commit our selves to his Protection and Care, and to submit all we are, and
all we have, to his direction and wise disposal.

To Honor him.
and which indeed results most naturally from it, is the Honoring him. And the
best, the most becoming, and most Religious Honor we can pay him, consists,
First of all, In raising our Souls far above any Carnal, Earthly, or
Corruptible Imagination; and then exercising our selves in the Contemplation of
the Divine Nature, by all the purest, the noblest, the holiest and most
reverent Conceptions that can be. When we have adorned and represented this
most excellent Being to our selves, in all the most magnificent Ideas; when we
have given him the most glorious Names, and sung forth his Praises in the most
excellent manner, that our Mind can possibly devise, or strain it self up to;
we are still with all Humility to acknowledge, that in all this we have not
done, or offered to his Majesty, any thing suitable to his own Excellency, or
in it self worthy his Acceptance; and to possess our selves with yet more awful
and respectful Ideas of him, by the profoundest Sense of our own Imperfections;
That it is not in the power of Human Nature to conceive any thing better;
though we plainly see, that our most exalted Thoughts serve not so much to show
us his Glory, as to reproach us with our own Weakness and Defects. For God is
the last and highest Flight, which our Imagination is able to make, when it
would soar up toward absolute Perfection; and in aspiring to this Idea, every
Man lets loose his Mind, and enlarges his Notions according to his own
Capacity; or rather indeed, God is infinitely greater and higher than all the
boldest and bravest Flights of poor feeble Man; a Perfection more exquisite,
more bright, than the Dim Eye of Mortals can receive the Luster of, or the most
towering Imagination make any approach to.

To serve him with our Spirit. Joh. iv. 24.
which is most agreeable to his Nature. God himself is a Spirit, and they that
worship him, must worship him in Spirit and Truth, says he, who best knew both
what he was, and what he expects from Us. This Argument the very Heathens could
enforce for Inward Purity, and a Sanctified Mind Si Deus est animus, sit pura
mente colendus.
. This he will not only accept, but it is what he seems desirous of, and has
declared will be exceeding welcome and delightful: The Father seeks such to
worship him. V. 23.
The Offering of a sweet smelling Savor, and what he values indeed, is That of
a clean, free, and humble Spirit, ( The Mind is a Sacrifice to God, says
Seneca;) an unspotted Soul, and an Innocent Life. And thus others; Optimus
Animus pulcherrimus Dei Cultus. Religiosissimus Cultus imitari. Unicus Dei
Cultus non esse malum. Lactant. Merc. Trism.
He that brings the best heart, worships God best. The most Religions Adoration
is to imitate the Perfections of Him we adore; The only way of serving God is
not to be an ill Man. The truly Wise Man is a True Priest of the most High God:
His Mind is God's Temple, and the House where his Honor dwells: His Soul is
God's Image, a Ray or Reflection of that Brightness and Glory above: His
Affections and Appetites, like so many Oblations, are all consecrated, and
entirely devoted to his use and service. And his great, his daily, his most
solemn Sacrifice, is to imitate, and serve, and obey him. You see how different
this is from that absurd Notion of those People, who make Religion consist in
Giving to God. Alas! what can We give to Him? All is his own already; and the
most we can possibly do, is but to restore and pay back what his Bounty has
bestowed upon us. But we are wretchedly mistaken, if we imagine it possible for
God to receive any Addition, or be enriched from Men; No, he is above all That;
Our business must be to ask of Him, to implore his Favor and Assistance for
our Wants and Weaknesses: It is the Character of the Great to give, and of the
Poor and Mean to ask; And therefore we may easily discern which of these two
parts belongs to an Infinite Almighty God, and which to wretched indigent
Mortals. Acts xx. 35.
It is more blessed to give than to receive: And however he may graciously
condescend to interpret those Works of Mercy done for his sake, yet in the way
of Sacrifice and Worship of himself, it is a Prodigy of Vanity that many have
been guilty of, to think themselves in a Condition of Giving to Him, from whose
liberal Hand alone it is, that they receive their own Subsistence.

With our Body.
and God is best pleased to be served with; yet is not the External Worship and
Service of the Body, by any means to be neglected or disdained by us. The
demonstrations of Reverence expressed by This Part, and particularly in his
Public Worship, are by no means contemptible in his sight. He esteems and
expects these from us; that we should appear in the Assemblies of his Servants;
that we should assist and bear a part with our Brethren in what is done there;
that we should observe and conform to those Ceremonies, which either the Laws
have enjoined, or Custom has made common; And that all this be done with
Moderation and Temper; without Vanity or Affectation, without Hypocrisy or
Ambition, without Luxury or Avarice; constantly possessing our selves with this
Reflection; that God expects to be served with the Spirit, and all these
outward Services are more upon our own account than His; that they are decent
significations of our Reverence and Zeal, marks of Unity, and tend to the
Edification of our Brethren, the enflaming their Devotion, and encouraging them
by good Examples; and that they are very Reasonable and Decent upon these
accounts, though they regard Comeliness and Customs only, and are not the
Essentials of Worship; nor of the very Substance of Religion; but Ornaments and
Convenient Helps to it.

By Prayer.
and subject to his own good Pleasure. We should never desire, we must never
ask any thing, but only with submission to his wiser Appointments; and every
Request must be attended with that necessary Reservation, Thy Will be done. To
ask any thing contrary to the order and methods of his Providence, is as if we
should attempt to bribe the Judge of all the Earth, and divert this universal
Governor from his Rules of Justice and Judgment: To imagine that God is to be
courted or flattered into Compliance, that Presents and Promises can win him
over; is to Affront him: God cares not for our Riches, for the whole world is
His, and all that is therein. He demands not any Gifts at Our Hands; for,
strictly speaking, we have nothing to give. For All is His, and he only
requires, that we should walk worthy of those which our selves have so largely
received from Him; He does not expect we should Present him, but that we should
make known our Wants with Faith and Humility, and receive our supplies with
Modesty and Thankfulness. And by such Requests he thinks himself honored. But
even in these we must be much resigned. For Us to prescribe to His Wisdom, to
be too peremptory and particular in our Requests; to inform Him what is fit for
us, or eager and importunate, for what we are fond of, is a breach of that
Deference and Resignation we owe to God; and it is often of ill Consequence to
our selves; it exposes Men to the Inconvenience of Midas in the Fable, and
ruins them at their own instance. The wisest, as well as the most becoming
Style, for all our Addresses to the Throne of Grace, is, That he would act with
us according to his own Wisdom and Goodness; and always do and give those
things, which are most pleasing to Him, and which He knows best, and most
expedient for Us.

In a word, All our Thoughts, our Words, our Behavior, and whole Communion
with God should be managed, even in our greatest privacy, with the same Decency
and Reverence, as if all the World were by, and saw them; and all our
Conversation with Men should be managed with that Sincerity, which becomes
those, who remember that God sees, and is conscious to every thing we do, and
cannot be imposed upon, though our Brethren may.

A Reverent use of his Name.
And those People are exceedingly to blame, who take it into their Mouths
lightly, and promiscuously, and mingle it with every Sentence they speak, and
every thing they do. Of this Nature are all those Exclamations of Passion, or
Wonder, or Surprise; all those vain and customary Oaths, which we so frequently
hear, and find habitual; all those mentionings of God, by Men who do not so
much as think of Him, or know that they do it; and to be short, All those hasty
and trifling forms of speech, wherein God is called upon irreverently and by
the by; for No reason at all; or for Such as is not important enough to justify
such an Invocation. For we should by all means take care of being familiar or
saucy with so August a Majesty; we should name him but seldom; and when we do,
with great Seriousness and Gravity; with Modesty and Humility, with Reverence
and Fear. We should never speak of Him, or His doings, but with all possible
Submission and Caution; and especially, we should never take upon us to judge
or pass sentence upon any of His Actions, but conclude, that whatever he does,
is Just, and Good, and fittest to be done.

Conclusion.
I only add, that This Virtue ought to be had in the greatest Esteem and
Veneration; and that Men should make it their Constant Care and Business, as
well as Entertainment and Delight, thus to be continually exercised in the
Contemplation of Almighty God; with Freedom and Cheerfulness, and Filial
Reverence and Affection; for This is Religion; And not with a Mind terrified
and troubled, and haunted with ghastly and affrighting Idea's of him, which is
the Vice and the Torment of the Superstitious. As to the particular Points both
of Faith and Practice, The Christian Doctrine is to be our Rule: For this is
the Truest, the Noblest, the most Refined and Spiritual, and best accommodated
to the Glory of God, the Comfort and Safety of our own Souls, and the General
Good of Mankind. And therefore here we must fix, and to this we must stick; And
amidst the unhappy Differences of these several Contending Parties, who all
profess to follow this Rule, the Constant Authority, and the Concurring Sense
and universal Agreement of the Church in all Ages and Parts of the Christian
World, is to be our Measure. This is an Authority so venerable, that it
requires our Submission with Meekness and much Deference. Here we must six; and
to This we must refer the Resolution of our Doubts. At least All that are of a
modest and peaceable Spirit will forbear the being factious and troublesome,
and not disturb the Quiet and Order of their Brethren, by starting any Novelty,
or engaging in behalf of any Private and Singular Opinions. And this they are
obliged in Duty and Conscience to do, upon the account of the Reasons laid down
by me at large in the first and last Chapters of my Third Truth; which places
alone are sufficient to satisfy those Readers, who either have not the
opportunity, or will not give themselves the trouble of perusing the whole Book.

Piety and Probity must go together.
and he who makes any pretensions to Wisdom, must by all means attend to it;
which is, That he do not separate the Piety spoken of in this Chapter, from
that Probity and Integrity treated of before; and so imagining, that One of
these is sufficient for his purpose, be at no pains to qualify himself with the
Other; and as careful must he be too, not to confound and jumble these two
together, as if they were but two names for one and the same thing. For in
truth, Piety and Probity, Devotion and Conscience, are distinct in their very
nature, are derived from different Causes, and proceed upon different Motives
and Respects. I desire indeed, that they may go hand in hand, and be both
united in the Person, whom at present I am forming into Wisdom; and most
certain it is, that Either of them without the Other, is not, cannot be
perfect. But still they must both meet, and both continue distinct; and though
we would join, yet we must take care not to confound them. And These are two
Precipices, which must be diligently avoided; and few indeed keep clear of
them; for either they separate Religion and common Honesty, so as to satisfy
themselves with one of them alone; or else they jumble Godliness and Morality
together, so as to make them all one, or at least to represent them, as exactly
of the same Species, and effects of the same Common Principle.

Piety without Probity.
which separate these Two, and content themselves with One of them singly, are
of two sorts: For some devote themselves entirely to the Worship and Service of
God, spend all their time and pains, in Praying, and Hearing, and other holy
Ordinances; and place all Religion in These; but as for Virtue, and strict
Honesty in their Dealings, Sincerity, and Charity, and the like, and in a word,
living in agreement to their Prayers, and practicing what they hear and read,
they have no relish or regard for These things, nor make any account of them at
all. This is a Vice taken notice of, as Epidemical, and in a manner Natural to
the People of the Jews, (who were above all Mankind addicted to Superstition,
and upon that account scandalous and detestable to all the World besides;) and
among them the Scribes and Pharisees in a yet more infamous degree. The
Prophets exclaim against it loudly, and afterward their own Messiah reproaches
them with it perpetually. He exposes that villainous Hypocrisy, Matt. xxi.
which made their Temple a Den of Thieves; which exalted their Ceremonies and
outward Observances, to the prejudice of inward and substantial Holiness; which
made a Conscience of Traditions, that they might, xv.
under that pretense, get a convenient Cloak and Excuse for the most unnatural
Barbarities; which Tithed Mint, and Anise, and Cummin, xxiii.
but overlooked Judgment, and Righteousness, and Fidelity: In one word, They
were so overrun, so extravagantly conceited in the matter of external Devotion,
and ceremonious Observances; that, provided they were punctual in These, they
fancied themselves discharged of all Other Duties; nay, they took occasion from
thence to harden their hearts, and thought This would atone for other Faults,
and give them a Privilege of being wicked. This is a sort of Female and Vulgar
Piety, and vast numbers are tainted with it every where, at this very day; they
lay out all their Diligence and Care upon those little Exercises of outward
Devotion; for Little sure they are, as They use them, who never carry the
Effects of them home to their Lives and Consciences; but Pray, and Read, and
frequent the Church, and Ordinances, and are not one whit the better Men for
doing so. This gave occasion to that Proverb, A Saint at Church, and a Devil at
Home. They lend their hand, and their outside to God, pay Him all the
demonstrations of Reverence and Respect; And a fair outside it is; but all
This, as our Lord told the Pharisees, is but a whited Wall, and a whited
Sepulcher; This people honors me with their lips, but their heart is far
from me. Nay, they do not only neglect the Practice of other Duties, and take
no pains to be all of a piece; but their very Holiness it self is from a wicked
Design; they make this Piety a Cover for greater Impieties; allege, and depend
upon their Devotions, first to give them Credit in the World, and greater
Opportunities to deceive under the Mask of so much Sanctity; and then for the
extenuating or making a compensation for their Vices, and sinful Liberties.



These are the two Vicious Extremes; whether of the Two is the more or less so,
I shall not at present take upon me to determine; nor will I dispute, whether
Religion, or Morality, will stand a Man in greater stead. Thus much only give
me leave to add, by way of Comparison, as to Three Considerations; which is,
that the Former, as described in the last Paragraph, and practiced by the Jews,
is without dispute, by much the easier, the more pompous, and more incident to
weak and vulgar Souls. The Latter must be allowed infinitely more difficult and
laborious; it makes less Noise and Ostentation in the World, and is more proper
to Brave, Resolute, and Generous Minds, for the former reasons; as being more
substantial, and of a larger compass, meeting with great opposition, and having
less to feed Men's Vanity with.

Against them that confound these two.
who confound and spoil all, for want of a just Distinction, but perplex these
Two, and the Grace of God; and jumble all together. These in truth are
defective in all Three. When you come to examine the matter strictly, they will
be found to have neither true Religion, nor true Moral Honesty, nor true Grace
at the bottom; but by the Figure and all the outward appearances they make,
they very much resemble the Persons mentioned before, who are so immoderately
zealous for Religion, that they have little or no concern for any thing
besides; marvellously satisfied with Themselves, and merciless Censurers of all
the World besides. And these are the Men, that make all manner of Probity and
Good Actions to be a consequent and attendant upon Religion; wholly to depend
upon, and entirely to be devoted to it; and so they acknowledge no such thing
as Principles of Natural Justice, or Probity of Mind, and otherwise than they
are derived from, and moved by the Springs of Considerations purely Religious.
Now the Matter is far otherwise; for Religion is not only after it in Time, but
more limited and particular in its Extent. This is a distinct Virtue, and not
the Comprehension and Sum of all Virtues; and, as the Instances of Pharisees
and Hypecrites here prove, may subsist without Them, or that general good
Disposition of Mind, which we call Probity: And so again may They be
independent of Religion, as the Examples of Philosophers, and good Moral
Heathens (who we cannot say had ever any Religion properly so called), show on
the other hand. This is also, according to the common Schemes of Theology, a
Moral Virtue, a Branch of Justice, which we know is one of the Four Cardinal
Virtues, and teaches us to give to All their Due; according to their Quality,
and respective Claims. Now God being Supreme, the Maker and Master of the
Universe, we are bound to pay him the most profound Honor, the most humble
Obedience, the most punctual and diligent Service. This now is properly
Religion, and consequently it is a division under the General Topic of
Justice. Again, These Persons, as they mistake the Nature, so do they likewise
invert the Order of things; for they make Religion antecedent to Probity: But
how can this be, since, as the Apostle says, Faith comes by Hearing, and
Hearing by the Word of God; how, I say, can That which is the Effect of
Revelation and Instruction, be the Cause of a Thing originally rooted in
Nature, born with us, and inseparable from us? For such is that Law and Light
of God, kindled in every Man's Breast, and interwoven with the Constitution of
the whole Species. This therefore is plainly disturbing the true Order of these
matters; and turning them out of all method. They would have a Man Virtuous and
entirely Good, merely for the Prospect of Heaven to allure, or the Terrors of
Hell to affright and awe him into his Duty. But methinks those Expressions
carry a very ill sound, and speak a mean and vulgar Virtue: 'If the Fear of the
Divine Vengeance and Everlasting Damnation did not restrain me, I would do thus
or thus. O pitiful cowardly Wretch! what Sense, what Notion have thou of thy
Duty? what Inclinations do thou cherish all this while? what Motives do
thou act upon? what Thanks do thou deserve for all that is done upon such
constraint and against thy own Will? Thou art not wicked, because thou dare
not be so for fear of the Rod. Now I would have thee so perfect, as not to want
the Courage but the Inclination to do amiss; I would have thee so resolutely
good, as not to commit the least Evil, though thou were sure never to be
chidden, never to be called to an account for it. Thou playest the part of a
Good Man, that thou may be thanked and rewarded for thy pains; I would have
thee be really so, without any prospect of hire or gain, nay though none but
thy self should ever be conscious of thy Virtue. I would have thee so, because
the Laws and Dictates of Nature and Reason direct and Command thee to be so.
(For Nature and Reason in this case are but another word for God; and These
Principles, and That Light, and the Original Distinctions of Good and Evil are
his Will and his Laws issued in a different manner). Because the Order and Good
Government of the World, whereof thou art a part, require this at thy hands;
because thou can not consent to be otherwise, without acting against thy
self, in contradiction to thy Being, to thy Interest, to the End of thy
Creation; And when thou have thus satisfied thy duty and acted upon these
motives, never be solicitous for the Event; but persevere in Virtue, in
despite of any Sufferings or Dangers that may threaten thee.

When I urge This as the best Principle of doing well, I do not wholly disallow
all others, nor utterly condemn that Probity required and cherished by the
external motives of Recompense and Punishment, as if These were unlawful to be
proceeded upon. Doubtless they have their Use and Efficacy; are very proper for
the reducing of Ill Men, who must be treated in a more slavish and mercenary
way; and the Foundations thus laid at first come frequently to noble
Improvements. But still I call this a poorer and meaner Principle, and would
have my Wise Man aspire to something sublimer, and more worthy his Character.
For This requires a brighter, stronger, and more generous Probity, than the
Common sort of Mankind may be allowed to take up with. And even Divines have
generally represented such a Piety as Servile, Imperfect; accommodated to the
weaker and more ignorant, and fitter for Babes and Beginners, than for Strong
and Masterly Christians. This farther is very certain, that the Probity wholly
depending upon a Spirit of Zeal and Religion; and having no regard to the
Principles of Natural Light; besides that it must needs be accidental and
unequal in its Operations, and want that Evenness and Constancy which was there
largely shown to be one of its Properties; I add, that This is a very dangerous
Principle, and does frequently pruduce horrid and scandalous effects; for it
makes all the Rules of Common Honesty subservient to Zeal for Religion; and
opens a Door for all those execrable Villainies, which the dear-bought
experience of all Ages has too sensibly convinced us, are capable of being
committed under the fair Show and Color of Piety. And These are really so
dreadful and detestable, that we have reason to question, whether any other
occasion or pretense in the World have done more mischief, than those false but
specious professions of Religion. The Cause and Honor of God is indeed the
Greatest, the Noblest, and most worthy our Zeal; and if it were not all this in
its own nature, the abuse of it could never be so fatal as it is. For Brave and
Valuable things only are subjects for Hypocrisy; and what is little and
despicable, as the right use of it does no great good, so the perverting it to
wrong purposes can do no mighty harm. It is not therefore any Disparagement to
Religion, but the confessed Excellency of it above any other Subject
whatsoever, that the Corruption and false Pretenses of it are so pernicious;
Were it less good, the abuse of it must have been less evil.

Tantum Religio potuit suadere malorum -- mdash;
Illud in his rebus vereor ne forte rearis
Impia te Rationis inire elementa, viamque
Endogredi sceleris. Quod contra saepius olim
Religio perperit seclerosa atque impia facta.
Lucret. Lib. 1.
Such Devilish Acts Religion could persuade --
If you shall start at these bold Truths, and fly
Such Lines as Maxims of Impiety,
Consider that Religion did, and will,
Contrive, promote, and act the greatest Ill.
Creech. To lay aside all manner of Affection and Common Humanity for all Sects
and Parties but our own; To look with Scorn and Indignation upon them, as if
every Man, of a different Persuasion from our selves were perfect Brutes and
Monsters; To suppose our selves disparaged and defiled with their Company and
Conversation; These are some of the mildest and most moderate principles and
actions of such furious Zealots. He that professes himself a good and an honest
Man merely for the Check and Restraints which Religious Fears have upon him;
and has no other motives of Virtue, no scruples of doing ill, but such as
depend upon Revealed Promises and Threatenings, is a Man of less noble
Principles, more hardly to be trusted, and less to be esteemed or admired. I
will not call such a Man wickeder; but sure there is more danger in him, than
if he had no Virtue nor Religion neither. Such People would tempt one to think
that Religion whets their Passions, and enflames them with Pretenses of Zeal,
John XVI. 2.
as it did the Jews of old; Whosoever kills you, shall think that he does God
service. Not that I mean, by all This to cast the least Aspersion upon
Religion, as if It Taught, or warranted, or countenanced any kind of Evil, (as
some who from hence take occasion to argue and rail at Religion in general,
would pretend; (For this is not to show their reason, but to betray their
extreme Folly, or their extreme Malice) The falsest and most absurd of all
Persuasions that ever were, will not own any such Intention. But the bottom of
all this Mischief seems to lie here; That such Men have no taste or sense, no
Idea or distinct Notion of Sincerity and Honesty, but merely as it retains to
Religion, and is entirely in its service and devotion; and withal they know no
other Definition of a Good Man, but One who is extremely diligent and warm in
the propagating and promoting the Religion himself professes; From which two
Imaginations joined together, they easily and naturally slide into a Third; and
presently persuade themselves, that any the blackest and most barbarous
Enormities, Treachery and Treason, Seditions and Murders, are not only lawful
and allowable, when sheltered under the Color of Sanctity, and the protection
of a Zeal for the advancement of one's Religion; but they are even Sanctified
by this pretense; so far from deserving Punishment or Reproach, that they
commence Commendable and Meritorious; and think nothing less than a
Canonization their due, if their own Party and Persuasion reap any advantage,
or their Adversaries suffer any damage or defeat from them. Thus the Jews, we
read, were most unnatural and barbarous to their Parents; unjust to their
Neighbors; they neither Lent nor Gave to those in want; and were so far from
contributing toward supplying the Necessities of the Poor, that they refused
to pay their own just debts; and all this because they contributed to the
Temple; Matthew. XV. St. Hier.
Corban was thought an answer sufficient to stop the mouths of all the World,
and He that could make this reply, looked upon himself discharged from all
Duties and Demands whatsoever. Let Parents starve, or Creditors be cheated, yet
all was well, so long as the Money that should have paid the one, and fed the
other, was devoted to pious Uses.

Conclusion.
how I would have my wise Man qualified, with regard to Piety and Probity,
which is in one word by a strict union, and inseparable alliance of them both;
and that in such a manner, that, like Persons in a conjugal State, each should
subsist and be able to act upon its own natural and proper Strength, but yet
neither of them should ever part, or be destitute of the other. And then to
make the Union complete, and the Virtue as Christian and Noble as it is capable
of being, I desire that both the Former Qualifications may be crowned with the
Grace of God, which, as I have observed before, he is not sparing in to Them
who do their utmost, but will be sure to give his Holy Spirit sufficiently and
liberally, to all Them that sincerely and devoutly ask Him.

THE Advertisements thought necessary to be inserted here, being not so much in
the nature of Remarks upon little occasional Passages, as Dissertations upon
Distinct Arguments, both here and in the Eleventh Chapter; the Reader will find
them at the End of this Second Book. It appearing more Convenient to allow them
a separate place by themselves; than to make such very large Interruptions in
the Body of this Treatise.

CHAP. VI. Of a due Regulation of a Man's Pleasures and Desires.
ONE very considerable effect of Wisdom, is the Teaching and Qualifying a Man,
to be moderate in all his Pleasures, and attain a perfect Mastery over his
Desires. For, as for renouncing all our Pleasures, and utterly extinguishing
all Inclination, I am so far from expecting any such thing in that Pattern of
Wisdom I am now endeavoring to form; that I look upon This, not only as a
fantastical and extravagant; but, which is a great deal worse, I verily believe
it to be a Vicious and an Unnatural Notion. The first thing therefore requisite
to be done at present, is to confute that Opinion, which absolutely condemns,
and would fain exterminate all Pleasures; and then, after the vindication of
the thing in general, to lay down some directions, how Men ought to govern
Themselves in the Use and Enjoyment of them.

Of the Contempt of the World.
and more affected by those who pretend to be, and would fain pass for the best
and most knowing part of them, than the Contempt of the World. No Man sets up
for extraordinary Wisdom and Sanctity, but One of his solemn and most pompous
Professions, is the Neglecting and absolutely Despising all sorts of Pleasure;
a perfect Disregard of the Body, an Abstraction of the Mind, and retiring
within himself; so as to cut off all correspendence with the World and the
Body; raising and refining his Mind by the Contemplation of noble and sublime
Subjects; and thus contriving, that his life shall pass away in a State of
Insensibility; without so much as ever descending to taste, or take notice of
its Enjoyments. And indeed, the common expression of Men's passing away their
Time is in a peculiar manner applicable to these Persons above any others: For
they have a notion, that the best Use Life can possibly be put to, is to let it
slide over without observation; to deceive the Time, and steal from the World,
as if Living were a most miserable Hardship, full of unavoidable Mischiefs; and
a Penance so burdensome and tedious, that He only is happy, who can make his
escape from it. Thus these great Sages dodge, and run away from the World; they
do not only bring the common methods of Living into Suspicion, and cast an
Odium upon the Recreations and Entertainments, and innocent Liberties in common
use; but they even proclaim War upon the Necessities of Nature; and profess an
Aversion to those very things, which God in his Wisdom has seasoned with
Pleasure, on purpose to recommend the Use of them to us. They never come in the
way of these, but with Reluctance, and are rather dragged, than move willingly;
they keep their mind still in exercise and employment upon somewhat else, and
are absent in thought all the while; In short, If you will believe the mighty
boasts they make, and all the mortified account they give of themselves, Their
whole Life is a Toil and a Burden; Death is the only Ease and Solace they
propose to themselves. And that unnatural Sentence is ever in their mouths,
Vitam habere in Patientia, mortem in Desiderio.
That they do indeed bear and can be content to Live, but if they might follow
their own Inclinations, the thing they wish, and would much rather choose, is to
Die.

This Opininion disapproved.
and to blast the Glories and Commendations it pretends to. For when we come to
a close and impartial Consideration of the matter, The Unreasonableness, the
great Wickedness indeed, of such a Contempt discovers it self in several
Instances. For, First of all, if we consult Nature, and attend to the Condition
and Design of our Creation, Reason will teach us, that nothing is more
Graceful, no Duty more Obligatory, than the considering and maintaining the
Character assigned to us; that is in plain English, the Learning to live here,
in all respects, as becomes Men. It is in truth a very difficult Study, but
withal a most divine Accomplishment, to know how to Enjoy and Use the Being God
has given us, as he intended we should do: To observe the Common Model of
Nature, and then the particular Circumstances and Qualifications of our own
State and Case: And so to adjust and proportion our behavior to the first of
these, as at the same time to be guilty of nothing foreign to our private
Condition, or any way disagreeable to the part we are to play upon this Common
Theater. We are to follow and to act what is given us, but not to invent and
make a new part of our own head. But now these Extravagant Singularities, These
Studied and Artificial Essays and Overtures, These ways of living beside the
common road, are all of them Sallies of Men's own Folly, and Passion, and
impertinent Additions of such, as, because they do not understand their part,
mistake and overdo it. They are the Diseases and Phrensies of the Soul, that
put Men quite beside their Senses. They Spiritualize themselves, only to be
more refined Fools; and while they affect the perfection of Angels, degenerate
into the stupidity of Brutes. It was wisely said by him in the Comedy, Homo
sum' humani a me nihil alienum puto; which with respect to our present Subject
is, I my self am a Man; and therefore must think nothing that is Human,
unworthy my concern. For this is the very State of our Case. Man is a
compounded Being; a Creature consisting of Soul and Body both; and it is by no
means commendable to maim Nature and take the Building to Pieces, by cutting
off this Fleshly Tabernacle. God has United, and as it were Married these Two
together, by all the Ties of Nature, and the most tender intimate Affection;
and how impious an Undertaking is it for Us to create Jealousies and Dislikes,
to drive things to Separation and Divorce, and thus to put asunder those whom
God has joined together? Quite contrary, we should rather tie this Knot
faster, by all the good Offices and mutual Assistances they are capable of to
one another. For indeed, they are well contrived for such reciprocal Services.
The Body of its self is heavy and stupid, and therefore the Soul should
animate, and awaken, and render it Vigorous and Active. The Spirit of its self
is light and airy, and oftentimes very troublesomely brisk; and therefore the
Body is of use to check and six it. In a word, The Mind should govern, and
cherish, and be helpful to the Body, (as a Husband should assist and direct his
Wife) and by no means hate, or cast it off; or despise the Infirmities and
Necessities of this weaker Vessel. It is an unbecoming Niceness and Pride, to
refuse the partaking in its innocent Pleasures; such as Nature ordains, and the
Laws of God and Man allow, for our Recreation and Entertainment. For the thing
required upon this Occasion is not total Abstinence, but prudent Moderation.
Man is really bound to make this Life a considerable part of his Care; to taste
the Pleasures of it; nay, to chew the Cud, and reflect upon them with
Satisfaction; for all this is necessary to give a right Relish and Value of
them, and to make him duly thankful, and sensible of the Goodness of that
Providence, which has made so liberal a Provision for our Entertainment here
below. Do not mistake; There is no part of that which God has in bounty
bestowed upon us, unworthy our regard: Were it below Us to accept, it would
have been much more below Him to give. We shall do well therefore to remember,
not only that we may receive it, but that we are accountable for every the
least mite of it. And therefore the Use of Life is no jesting matter; but a
Commission, and a Talent, which requires our most serious Care; that the living
in agreement to Nature, and governing our selves by such Rules, as result from
a due Consideration of it, is an express Duty, imposed upon us in very good
earnest, and with an intent to be severely reckoned for.

See B. III. Chapter 38.
and how foolish a Delicacy that is, which teaches Men to condemn Actions as
Vicious, because they are Natural; or to nauseate and disdain them, as mean and
below their Character, because they are necessary. Whereas in reality,
Necessity and Pleasure are the happiest Marriage that ever God made in all the
Course of Nature. It is a most convincing Demonstration of his Infinite Wisdom,
that in those Actions which are of greatest Use and indispensable Necessity to
human Life, the matter should be so ordered, that some agreeable Satisfaction
should always attend them; and that our Senses should be feasted, as often as
our Wants are supplied. Thus are we doubly invited to our Refreshments; first
by Reason and Necessity, and then by Appetite, and a certainty of being
Gratified. Now your mortified and Philosophical Contemners of the World take
upon them to invert this Order, break the Rules of Nature, and utterly
overthrow this beautiful Establishment. Whereas in truth, it is every whit as
unreasonable and unjust to fall out with the World, and utterly renounce all
Pleasures, as it is to dote, and be fond of all, and abandon one's self to all
manner of Excess and Abuse of them. In short, We should neither run after them,
nor run away from them. But when they make their Approaches, and put themselves
in our way, we should receive them kindly, love them moderately, and enjoy them
soberly and discreetly; in such manner as will be prescribed hereafter, when
our Method brings us to the Rules proper for this Occasion.



Temperance, which is the Rule and Standard of Pleasure, consists in a
Mediocrity, and is no less distant from a Sullen Insensibility, which is the
Extreme in point of Defect; than it is from Extravagance and Luxury, which is
the other Extreme in Excess. For voluntary Rigor and Torment is unnatural; and
it is as ridiculous to hate cheap and easy Conveniences, as it is mad and
foolish to purchase expensive and uncommon Delicacles.

in the one, nor the other of these Senses; but All that you make the Object of
your Contempt, is the Abuse of things Good and Necessary; that is, The Vanities
and Follies, the Extravagances and Vicious Excesses, which you see daily
practiced, and which are the Failings common to all that appear to be fond of
living like the rest of the World; I must tell you, That, however commendable
your Virtue, or the Design of it may be in it self, yet you give it a wrong
Name. For what can be more injurious than to call those Things the World, which
are no part of it, nor has the World any thing to do with them? So far from
it, that These are all of them directly against the Order and good Government
of the World; and in truth, have no Being, no Foundation in Nature, but are
purely Additions of Men's making, born and brought up within their own Breasts.
These are Artificial Debaucheries, the effect of wicked Industry and Skill, to
corrupt and pervert Nature; and therefore the preserving a Man's Self from
these, in such manner as the Study of Wisdom, and the Rules, which you will
meet with presently, direct; This is not Despising the World, which is not one
whit the less, but would be a great deal more perfect, if all these things were
taken out of it; but it deserves much rather to be called, Making a good Use of
the World, and behaving one's self prudently in it: And thus Divines make a
very just Distinction, between Using the World, and Delighting in it. These
Philosophical Gentlemen, I know very well, imagine Themselves great Masters,
and that they have got quite above the World, and all its Temptations, and
Enjoyments, because they practice some affected Singularities, and have put
themselves in a way of living, quite beside the common Road of the rest of
Mankind. But alas! This is all a Jest. The World has nothing in it so Worldly,
and so particular as these very Men are; There is a great deal more trifling,
and playing the Fool, by Those that pretend to shun and live out of it, than by
Them that are content to be thought in it; and if you would find Fondness and
Concern for the World in Perfection, you must seek it in those places, where
you hear most of running away from it, and scorning all its Enjoyments. Upon
the whole matter, This abandoning all Pleasures, and stifling all our Desires,
is an Extreme as culpable, as abandoning our selves to them. What I say here,
is intended as a just Reproof of Those Men and their Hypocrisy, whose pretended
Mortifications, and particular way of making a Figure in the World, serves only
to swell them more with Pride, and fill them with impudent and censorious
Malice against all who are not of Their way: But I would not be thought to cast
the least Reflection upon any Religious Self-denial, or any such Retirements
and Austerities as are practiced for the Advantage of Piety and Heavenly
Contemplation. But still I say, To condemn and disallow such Appetites and such
Gratifications without Reserve, is the Effect of a Sick Imagination; a
fantastical, morose, and unnatural Opinion. God himself is the Creator and the
Giver of Pleasure; See B. III Chapter 38.
and our Duty is to receive it Thankfully, and not to disparage the Gift, by
charging it with Folly. All that we have to do in the Case, is to learn how to
enjoy these things, and to use them safely; to harken to the Voice of Wisdom,
and conform our selves to those Rules of Behavior, which she will not fail to
furnish us with upon this Occasion.

The second part, which concerns the regulating our pleasures and desires.
That our Desires be Little. Secondly, That they be Natural. Thirdly, That they
be Moderate. And Lastly, That they be bounded within a short compass, and with
regard to one's own self. And these are such Qualifications, as, if these
mighty mortified Persons, and magnanimous Contemners of the World would
practice in good earnest, I should allow them to be Excellent Men indeed. These
Four generally go together. And, when thus in Conjunction, they make up one
Perfect and Entire Rule. One might indeed contract them into less compass; And
he that is disposed to save his Memory, may comprehend all the Four Qualities
in this single Word, Natural. For in truth, Nature, if we would faithfully
pursue her Dictates, is not only the Fundamental, but of her self alone a
Sufficient Direction to us, in the management of this whole matter. But
however, to explain the Thing more fully, and for the making our Notions more
clear and easy, we will allow each of these Particulars a distinct
Consideration.

1. The First Branch then of this Rule concerns the Quantity of the Object, and
commands us to desire but Little. The restraining our Desires, and cutting them
short, so that they shall extend to very few, if any Things at all, is of
infinite Use and Advantage: It is the straightest Road to Happiness; a certain
Defense against the Assaults of Fortune; it secures all the Avenues by which
she can attack us, and leaves her nothing to fasten upon; It is the only course
we can take to live Contentedly, and Happily, and in one word, Wisely. He that
can bring himself to desire nothing, the matter is not great if he have
nothing; for even upon these Terms he is as Rich, and as Great, as he that
possesses all things; They come both to one at last; for in summing up a Man's
Wants, Nihil interest, an habeas, an non concupiscas.
it makes no difference in the account, whether you actually have a thing, or
whether you have no desire of it. For which reason it was well enough observed,
that Wealth and Contentment were not to be attained by Variety and Abundance,
but by Scarcity and Nothing; that is, by Scarcity of Desires; for He that is
Poor in Desires is Rich in Contentation. Summae opes inopia Cupiditatum.
The Want of Desires is the true, the greatest Wealth. In a word, The Man who
desires nothing, has made great Advances toward a State of Absolute
Perfection, and is in some degree like God himself. He approaches very near to
the Condition of the Saints and Blessed Spirits in Heaven, whose Happiness does
not consist in having and enjoying all that We value here below, but in not
wanting, not desiring, and being above it all. Qui Desiderium suum clausit, cum
Jove de faelicitate contendit.
He that has mastered, and confined his Desires, may vye Happiness with Jove
himself; says a Heathen Author. But on the other hand; if we let the Reins
loose, and suffer Appetite to fly out at pleasure; if nothing but Abundance
will satisfy, and we grow Nice and Fanciful in the Proposals we make to our
selves, perpetual Misery and Torment must be our Portion. Things in their own
Nature superfluous will then become necessary and indispensable; our Mind loses
its Native Freedom, and is enslaved to the Body; and all we live for from
thenceforward, is only Wantonness and Pleasure. If we do not moderate our
Pleasures and Desires, and measure all we have, and all we seek, by the
Standard of Reason, Opinion will carry us away, and run us upon Pits and
Precipices, without bounds, or bottom. For when we once have begun to indulge
our Extravagances, there is no knowing where the Luxury will end. At this rate,
for instance, we may cover our Shoes, first with Velvet, then with Gold, after
that with Embroidery, and at last come to set them with Pearls and Diamonds;
And thus when we lay the Foundations, and carry up the Walls of our Houses, we
may rise from Stone to Marble, and then to Jaspar and Porphyry.

This method of enriching one's self has likewise these farther Advantages,
that it exposes a Man to no Fraud or Injustice, but is agreeable to the
strictest Rules of Equity; and it is also entirely in every one's own power and
disposal. There is no need of going abroad to seek for Contentment; it dwells
at home; we need but ask our selves, and we may have it: Stop but the Current
of our own Desires, and the thing is done. How unreasonable is all the
Formality of Prayers, and Vows, and Wishes; all the Complaints we make of
Vexations and Disappointments; all the Blame we lay upon God and Nature, and
the World, how wicked and unjust are they; when the Result of all is in truth
no more than This, That we want something to be given us, which none can give,
none can procure, but our selves; and which we are so abundantly provided with
Means and Opportunities of obtaining, that we cannot possibly fail of it,
unless we will be wanting to our selves? For after all, Why should I rather beg
of another to grant me what I have not, than of my self not to desire or be
uneasy for the want of it? Quare potius a fortuna impetrem ut det, quam a me ne
petam? quare autem petam oblitus fragilitatis humanae? Sense. Epist. xv.
How absurd is it to think Fortune will gratify my Desires, when I cannot ease
my self by ceasing to desire? And wherefore should I so for forget the frailty
of my Condition, as to indulge my Desires? If I either cannot, or will not
prevail with my self, whom I have a Right to govern; with what confidence can I
pretend to importune others, over whom I have no Right, nor Power; and hope to
extort from Them, what, without all this trouble of asking, might have come
much better from my own Hand? Take this then for the first Rule necessary for
the Regulating Men's Pleasures and Desires, That the Quantity be rightly
adjusted. For this Little, or to express the thing in terms every whit as true,
though more acceptable, A moderate Proportion, and Sufficiency of Mind, is the
thing that brings Wisdom and Satisfaction. This is what will content a Wise
Man, and keep him always in a State of Ease and Tranquillity. Upon the full
Conviction of this Truth it is, that I have chosen for my Motto those two
significant words; Paix and Peu. Quiet and a Little. A Fool thinks nothing
enough; he is sickle and irresolute; knows not what he would have; nor when to
have done; and consequently can never be contented, because he never knows what
would satisfy him. Such a Man is well enough represented by the Story Plutarch
tells of the Moon; which came to her Mother, and begged she would give her some
New Clothes that would sit her; but received this Answer, That such a Garment
was impossible to be made, for she was sometimes very Big, and at other times
very Little, and continually Increasing or Decreasing; and how then could she
expect to be sitted with a Garment, which must always be the same, when her own
Body was so changeable, that its Bulk was never two days together the same?

2. The next Point is, Natural; and this in truth carries great Affinity and
Resemblance to the former. For we cannot but observe, that there are Two sorts
of Pleasures; Some of which are Natural, and These are Just and Lawful; They
have a foundation in our very Temper and Frame, and are imparted, not to Men
only, but are exactly the same in Brutes These Appetites and the Gratifications
of them are short, and bounded in a narrow compass; it is an easy matter to see
to the End of them. Now with regard to such, no Man is, or can be poor; because
all Circumstances and all Places furnish enough to satisfy these Inclinations.
For Nature is Regular and Abstemious, a very little contents her; and not only
so, but she is very well provided too, and puts into every Man's hand as much
as will suffice to support him. Thus Seneca observes, Parabile est quod Natura
desiderat and expositum; Ad manum est quod sat est.
That the Sustenance Nature requires, is always ready, and any-where to be had;
and it is very easy to come at enough for the supply of our Necessities; For
that which Nature requires for the preservation of its Being is in reality as
much as we need; and sure we ought to acknowledge it a particular Happiness,
and a special Favor, that Those things which we stand in need of for the
support of Life; as they must be had or we perish, so they are easy to be had,
and no body need perish for want of them; and that the matter is so contrived,
that whatever is hard to be obtained, we can be without it, and suffer no great
Prejudice. If we lay aside Fancy and Passion, and follow Nature and Necessity,
we are always rich, and always safe; for these will direct us to such pursuits,
as all the malice of Fortune cannot defeat. To this sort of Desires, we may add
too those others, which regard the Customs of the Age and Place we live in, and
the Circumstances and Quality of our Persons and Fortunes. For I can easily
allow, that They should be comprehended under this Head too, though it must be
confessed, that they do not come up to the same degree of Necessity with the
former. If we will speak strictly and consider things according to their utmost
rigor, These are neither Natural, nor Necessary; but if they be not absolutely
so, yet they follow close in order, and are next to Those that are. They do
indeed exceed the bounds of Nature, which has done her part, when she
maintains us in Any Condition; but yet we are not tied to all that Exactness,
but are permitted to enlarge our Desires farther; and may, without any breach
of Virtue, desire a Competency, in proportion to the Rank Providence has
placed us in. We may, I say, desire and endeavor this fairly and reasonably;
but yet with this Reserve, that it is against Justice and Reason both, to
murmur and be discontented, if we be disappointed in our Hopes, or deprived of
the Possession of it. For These are Additional Advantages, and the Effect of
Bounty; all that Nature has bound her self to, is the Subsistence of our
Persons, and we have no Right to depend upon more.

But we must not omit to observe, that there are (as I hinted before) another
sort of Pleasures and Desires which we may truly call Unnatural, because they
are quite beside and beyond the Bounds already mentioned. With These Nature
has nothing at all to do; she knows them not; They are of a Bastard Race;
Fancy and Opinion give them birth; Art and Industry Cherish and Improve them;
They are superfluous and studied Follies; and must not be allowed so mild a
Term, as Appetites, but are most truly, and in the worst sense of the word,
Passions. I know not well indeed, what Title to distinguish them by; they are
so fantastical, that it is not easy to find a Name, for them; but call them if
you will, Lustings, Longings, Any thing that expresses the Whimsy and
Impatience of a wild and wanton Mind. These we have therefore spoken to
already, when in the First Book we treated of the Passions at large; all that
is necessary to be added here concerning them is only, That the Greatest part
of what Men call Desires, are such as These; and that They are the proper
source of that Misery and Fretfulness we see Mankind so generally disquieted
by; and That a Wise man will think himself concerned to distinguish his Virtue
in no one Instance more, than in keeping himself absolutely and entirely clear
from any Vanities of this kind.

3. See Book III. Chapter 40.
The Third Qualification requisite upon these Occasions, is, That all our
Pleasures and Desires be Moderate; by which I mean, that they should be guilty
of no Excess in any respect whatsoever. Now This is a Rule of a very large
Extent, and capable of being parcelled out into a great many subdivisions, but
I think All of them may be reduced to these Two; That neither, first our
Neighbor, nor secondly our Selves suffer by them. When I mention other
People's Sufferings, I design by it, that we should indulge our Selves in
nothing that may any way give any person disquiet, by scandalizing him, or
ministering just cause of Resentment; nothing that may contribute to his loss or
prejudice, by hurting his Person, Estate or Reputation: By Our Own suffering I
mean, that we should have all due regard to our Health, our Leisure, our
Business, and particularly the Offices of our Calling and Capacity, our Honor,
and above all, our Duty. And He that is content with being subject to these
Restraints, and takes care not to break in upon any of the forementioned
Boundaries, I admit to be such a one, as exercises what I call Moderation in
his Pleasures and Desires.

4. which the Person himself is the Center. My meaning is, They must not run
out into Lengths a great distance from us, as Right Lines do; but they must
have a constant respect to, keep near, and quickly return again, to the Point
from whence they set out at first: For This is to terminate in our selves; and
to make our own Necessities and Enjoyments the Subject and the Measure of them.
And what miserable work do They make, who do not govern themselves by this
Reflection? How wretched, for want of keeping close, and moving round their
proper Center, are the Slaves to Avarice, and Ambition; and infinite others,
who are sollicitous for Posterity, and contriving to keep up the Family in long
distant Successions, or upon any pretense, as vain as these, run beyond
themselves, and are perplexed for things that no way concern them? Such Actions
are properly Excentrical and Irregular, Fanciful and Vain; and yet so very
frequent withal, that, if all these Unreasonable Projects were reduced, or
quite taken away out of our lives, it is incredible, how great a part of Men's
Cares and Anxieties would be cut off with them.

CHAP. VII. Of Decent Deportment, and Evenness of Temper, in Prosperity, and
Adversity.




Which the harder.
They observe and acknowledge a Difficulty in Both; and think it an instance of
equal weakness, on Which side soever the miscarriage happens. And indeed it is
the same Vicious defect, and as egregious a Folly, for a Man not to be able to
govern himself in Prosperity, as not to support himself under Adversity. But
though all Men of Judgment allow a Difficulty on Either side, yet on which hand
the difficulty is Greater, they are not so perfectly agreed. Some are of
Opinion, that Adversity is the harder Task of the Two; by reason of its extreme
Severity, and that sensible sharpness we feel under the smart of it. So says
one Philosopher, Difficilius est Tristitiam sustinere, quam a delectabilibus
abstinere.
It is harder to endure, and bear up under Grief, than to deny one's self, and
be moderate in Joy; and another, Majus est Difficilia perstringere, quam Laeta
moderati.
It is a nobler Victory to get well over Hardships, than to temper Pleasures.
Others again rather incline to Prosperity, and think This the nicer and more
dangerous State of the Two. They observe very truly, that Good Fortune charms
and gets within us by her Smiles and kind Caresses; That there is Treachery at
the bottom of all this Fondness; that it unbends and softens the Mind,
enervates all its Powers, steals away its generous Qualities, and, as Dalilah
dealt by Sampson, betrays the strength and vigor of the Soul, and reduces the
best and bravest Heroes to the Condition of common Men. And of This we have
frequent Instances; Persons who have been firm and inflexible, stood their
ground, and born the shock of Adversity with all the Resolution and Gallantry
in the World; and yet even These Invincible Sufferers, whom Affliction could
not break, Prosperity has quickly vanquished and melted down. Courtship and
Flattery have effected what Threats and Blows never could; and Verified that
Saying, That Prosperity is no such easy matter, but This must be Endured too;
(how odd soever that expression may sound) and M^^ni ^^^oris est serre
prosperitatem.
is really a difficult and laborious thing to be born. As Full Ears load and
lay the Corn, so does too much good Fortune bend and break the Mind. It
deserves to be considered too, as another Disadvantage, that Affliction moves
Pity, and reconciles our very Enemies; but Prosperity provokes Envy, and loses
us our very Friends. Again, Adversity is a desolate and abandoned State; the
generality of People are like those infamous Animals, that live only upon
Plenty and Rapine; and as Rats and Mice forsake a tottering House, so do These
the Falling Man. Now This has sometimes that good effect, that when One
perceives himself thus reduced and destitute, and that his own Endeavors are
all he has to trust to; his Courage is awakened, he rouzes and shakes himself,
collects and exerts all his Powers, and with wonderful Bravery and Success
forces his way through. In Prosperity, quite contrary, Every body is making
their Court by Compliments, and Commendations, proffers of Service, and
officious Assistances; and This is a Temptation to Negligence and Security, we
trust to Others, and neglect our Selves; apprehend no difficulty because we
feel none, and promise absolute safety, while we see not our danger; Till at
last our false Confidences deceive us, and we are sensible of our Error, when
it is too late to retrieve it. Thus much, and a great deal more might be urged
on both sides of the Question, which I shall not take upon me to determine on
either side; For it may be, that it is not capable of any general and positive
Decision, one way or other. And the most probable Resolution we can come to in
the case, is in my poor Judgment This; That Both the forementioned Opinions are
true as it may happen; and that Prosperity is more difficult to some, and
Adversity to others, according to the different Dispositions and Complexions of
the Persons concerned in making the Experiment. But if we look at the Thing it
self, and the Usefulness of it in general, the Advantage seems to lie on the
side of Adversity: For this is the seed and occasion of great Virtues, the
Field in which the Bravest Heroes have signalized themselves. For Wounds and
Hardships provoke our Courage, and when our Fortunes are at the lowest, our
Wits and Minds are commonly at the best.

Both in common.
To preserve an Evenness of Temper and Behavior, through the several
occurrences of Life, and to meet them all with the same serene composed
Countenance. A Wise Man is Master of his Trade, and knows how to manage his
Matters so, as to make every Thing turn to Account; Let the Accident be what it
wiil, still Virtue shall be the result of it; as the Painter Phidias showed his
Skill, in making the same Figure represented, what form or prospect soever you
put the Piece into. Thus Events are his Materials, and whatever comes to hand,
he will not fail to convert into an occasion of doing good; and how different
soever the Aspects of Fortune may be to Him, yet his own face always keeps the
same Air. Ad utrosque casus Sapiens aptus est; Bonorum Rector, Malorum Victor.
In Secundis non confidit, in Adversis non deficit. Nec avidus periculi, nec
fugax; prosperitatem non expectans, ad utrumque paratus, adversus utrumque
intrepidus; nec illius tumultu, nec hujus fulgore percussus. Contra calamitates
fortis and contumax; Luxuriae non adversus tantum sed and infestus: Hoc
praecipuum in humanis rebus erigere Animum supra Minas and Promissa Fortunae.
Seneca.
A Wise Man (says Seneca) is provided for occurrences of any kind, the Good he
manages, the Bad he vanquishes. In Prosperity he betrays no Presumption, in
Adversty he feels no Despondency. He neither rashly courts danger, nor cowardly
runs away from it; and for Prosperity, he sets not his heart upon it, but
stands well appointed for any thing that happens; He fears no attack in any
kind; the hurry and disorder of the one does not confound him, nor the splendour
of the other dazzle or transport him. Calamities find him gallant, resolute,
and inflexible; Luxury and Ease he is not only no Friend, but an Irreconciable
Enemy to. And, in short, this is his greatest Excellence and the Just
Commendation and Character of a Good Man, in all the variety of human Chances,
to raise the Soul, and get above the Promises and Threats of Fortune. Thus
Wisdom equips us for the Fight; She puts proper Weapons into our Hands, teaches
us to handle the Arms she gives, and when we are well disciplined, leaves us to
engage, as the Laws of Combat, and the present Exigence of Affairs, require.
When we are to encounter with Adversity, She provides us a Spur to quicken us,
raises and whets our Courage, calls up our Resolution, and hardens our mind
against it; and thus She inspires us with the Virtue of Fortitude; When
Prosperity engages us, She puts a Bridle into our Hand to curb and contain us,
that our Flights may not be too bold, but all regulated by Prudence and
Modesty; and thus She qualifies us with the Virtue of Temperance. These are the
two great Cardinal Virtues, which enable us to manage the Two Extremes of
Fortune, and are a Preparation sure and sufficient, against any kind of
Accident, that can possibly befall us. All which the brave Epictetus intimated
his sense of, when he summed up the whole System of Moral Philosophy in those
two significant, and most comprehensive words, (...).
Bear and Forbear. Applying the former to what the World uses to repute Evil,
all manner of Misfortune and Distress; for These things, as Burdens, are to be
sustained with Patience and Constancy. The latter, of Forbearing to all those,
which in common esteem pass for Good things; the Plenty, and Pleasures, and
prosperous Successes of our Lives, all which require Moderation and Restraint.
As for any particular Directions, suited to the particular Favors or
Unkindnesses of Fortune; The Reader must give me leave to beg his Patience,
till the Third part of this Treatise; where I shall have occasion to treat of
this Subject more at large, under the Topics of Fortitude and Temperance. At
present I shall only lay down some general Rules and Remedies, against
Prosperity and Adversity taken in the gross; the design and business of this
Second Book being to extend no farther than general Instructions to Wisdom,
without entering into respective Cases, which call for the exercise of such
Rules; for This you may remember was the Scheme and Method of this whole
Undertaking, laid down in my Preface, at our first setting out.

Of Prosperity.
which I think necessary in this place, with regard to Prosperity, consists of
these Three Considerations. First, That it is a great Mistake, nay, a great
Injustice, which those Men are guilty of, who esteem Honors, and Riches, and
other Gifts and Advantages of Fortune, Good things; and reckon them among the
most substantial Happinesses of Human Life. For with what pretense can they be
called Good? They can neither impart nor improve Goodness; they reclaim no Man
who lives amiss; nor can they reform one vicious Habit; nor are they peculiar
to, or any distinguishing Character of Good Men, but distributed promiscuously,
and, at least in equal Proportions, to the Wickedest and worst part of Mankind.
And He, that calls them Good in the notion of Happiness, and places his Hopes
and his Felicity in them, has committed his Treasure to a Rotten Cable, and
anchored his Vessel upon a Quicksand. For what is there in the whole World, so
sloating and unfaithful, as the Possession of such slippery Advantages? They go
and come at random, no body knows how nor why; flow in upon us, and Ebb off
again like a sudden Tide of Water: Like That, they come on with noise and
observation, are violent and fierce in their motions, troubled and foul in
themselves; And like That too, they presently disappear, leave us drawn dry of
all our overflowing Comforts and Joys, and nothing but Mud, and Stench, and
Filth, left behind at low Water.

tolerable account whereof, among others, may be This; That you very seldom
meet with any fortunate Man, who is content to ascribe his Successes to the
Blessing and Providence of God; but all Men usually think they owe their
Advancement to their own Merit, and call themselves the Makers of their own
Fortunes. Since then this is so very hazardous a State, a Man ought least to
depend upon himself in it, and the greater his Prosperity is, the less still is
he fit to be trusted. This is the proper Time of calling in Succors, of making
use of our Friends for their Counsel and Assistance, of giving what they advise
more than ordinary weight and Authority; and in a manner putting our selves
into their Guardianship and Protection. To be short; a Man upon These occasions
should act, as he would, if he were walking in very slippery Ways, or upon some
dangerous Precipice; he should take every slep with deliberation and fear, and
beg some faithful Guide to lend him his hand. For want of these Precautions it
is, that sharper Remedies become sometimes necessary; and even Affliction it
self often proves a seasonable and very successful Application, to settle Men's
Heads that were grown giddy; and bring them back to the knowledge of themselves
again.

The Eating a good Breakfast gets a Man a keener Stomach to his Dinner); In one
word, it exalts, and carries us quite beyond our selves: And then it is, that
by grasping at More, we lose All; plunge into ruin, and make our selves a Jest
and public Scorn; Like the Monkey that skips from Bough to Bough, till he get
to the Top of the Tree, and then turns up his Tail to the Company. It is really
a very deplorable thing, to rellect how many brave Men have been lost, and come
to a miserable End, merely for want of Prudence to govern themselves, and check
those aspiring Thoughts, which Prosperity and Greatness pushed them forward
with. The most advisble course therefore is to put a stop to these towering
Imaginations; to ^^ove gently and warily; to relish our present good Fortune;
and not lose the Enjoyment of what we have already, by being perpetually upon
the scent, and anxious pursuit of some fresh Advantages. For it is One
considerable point of Wisdom, to set up our Staff when we are well; to secure
our Ease and Contentment, which can never dwell in that Breast, which is never
at rest; but eternally urging its Fortunes on farther, and fixes upon no Period
of its Labors; no End where to sit down, and make a final Settlement.

Of Adversity. It is not Evil.
considered in the gross, are such as follow. First of all, A Man should take
great care that he be not imposed upon with that general Opinion (among the
common sort of People especially) which represents Affliction, as a thing Evil
in its own Nature. This is, like most of the vulgar Notions, extremely false
and unjust, and the most contrary that can be to sound Reason. They have indeed
a strange dread and abhorrence of all manner of Adversity; and therefore, to
propagate, as well as justify this Aversion, they render it as odious as is
possible, by running it down, and loading it with hard Names; they call
Afflictions, Calamities, Disasters, Dreadful Evils; Sore and Intolerable Evils;
whereas in truth, none of these Outward Things are either Good or Evil in their
own Nature; but of a middle kind, and in a state of perfect Indifferency.
Adversity never made any one Man wicked, since the beginning of the World; but
has proved a very successful Instrument for reducing and reforming Persons
very far engaged in Wickedness before; and has in many other respects been the
happy occasion of very great Advantages, to the Persons laboring under it: And
it is too manifest to need a Proof, that it is by no means the Mark of
Vengeance set upon Wicked Men; for the Good have large proportions also; and no
Man can distinguish Virtue and Vice by Events; but all things in this present
Condition of Mortality are ordered by a promiseuous Providence, and happen to
all Men alike.

Excellencies more conspicuous and exemplary; to recommend and endear them the
more to Almighty God, and exalt them to nearer degrees of Affinity and
Resemblance to his own Divine Perfections. To Persons of Wisdom and Conduct,
they are, as Materials in the Hand of a Skilful Artist, who will be sure to
make somewhat Good out of them; they are, as it were, Stairs, by which such
Persons ascend to the highest Elevations of Honor and Greatness: Instances
whereof History furnishes in Abundance; Persons under most prodigious and
unexpected Crosses, such, as when they happened, threatened no less than
irrecoverable Misery and Ruin; and yet by a strange Turn, to these very
Misfortunes have owed all their future Happiness and Advancement; and had, but
for these Accidents, stuck in the Dirt, never come to be significant in the
World; but lived, and died, and been buried in Obscurity and Contempt. This
Observation was made good to that Athenian Commander, who cried out upon a like
occasion, He had been undone, if we had not been undone. (Ferura^^us (...)
periissemus.) How full and noble an Instance of this Nature is that Relation of
^osepl, which Moses gives us? The Envy and Spite of his Brethren, the being
sold as a Slave to Strangers, and imprisoned upon a false Accusation, were so
many Steps to the Throne of Pharaoh, and the Administration of one of the
greatest Kingdoms in the World. It must be confessed indeed, These are very
extraordinary Events, and can be ascribed to nothing less than a strange
overruling Providence; but shil Men are not without their part in it. For
Human Prudence is the proper Instrument, which Providence makes use of for the
finishing these works of Wonder; and upon this account that excellent Advice of
Wise Men ought to be studied by every one in these Circumstances, which is, To
make a Vir^^ of (...)) ^or indeed, it is a Noble Instance of good Management,
and the boldest and most beautiful Stroke of Prudence, when a Man can thus far
imitate God, as to bring Good out of Evil; when he can give a Turn to his
Affairs, and get the Weathergage of Fortune, with such Dexterity and Address,
That even Ill Accidents themselves ^^all turn to account, and, whatever happens
to him, he will order matters so, that his Condition shall be the better for it.

It proceeds from there Causes.
and the Finishers of all our Sufferings. The first Inventer and Original of
them is Sin; this gave them a Being, and without it they had never existed, nor
had any place in Nature at all. The Second is the Anger and Justice of God, who
being provoked by Sin, issues out his Commissions, and employs these, as the
Ministers and Instruments of Vengeance, to execute Wrath upon them that do
evil. The Third is, the Polity of the World, as it stands at present; its Order
disturbed, its Administration corrupted, and its whole Frame vitiated and
Changed by Sin. The State of Nature, by these lamentable Alterations, is like
That of a Kingdom under a general Mutiny or Civil Insurrection; where Every
thing is out of its proper place, and no part does its Duty; and what can
possibly be the Consequence of This, but Calamity and Confusion? The Miseries
of such a Body Politic, are like the Pains, and Aches, which afflict the
Natural Body; when its Limbs are disjointed; the Bones bruised or dislocated;
and all the Ligaments, that should knit and keep these in their Duty and proper
Station, loosed or cut asunder. These three Causes therefore producing such
dismal Effects, our Resentments toward Them should be proportioned to the
Injuries they do Us. The First is the detestable Root of all our Unhappiness,
and This we should hate and avoid. The Second is the terrible Judgment of a
just and provoked Deity, and This we ought to live in an awful Dread of. The
Third betrays us into Mischief, and This we ought to beware of as an Impostor,
and manage our selves as would become considerate Men, to That which they know
will decoy them into Ruin. But with regard to the Afflictions arising from all
Three, the best course of securing our selves, will be to subdue and kill them,
as David did Goliath, with his Own Sword; that is, as I said before, to convert
this Necessity into Virtue, to make Advantage of our Afflictions, and retort
the very Sufferings they bring upon us, back again upon heir own heads. For
Affliction, which is in truth the genuin Fruit of Sin, if well, and wisely
entertained, will choke and kill the bitter Root that bears it. It deals with
its Author and Parent, as the Young Viper is said to do with the Old One, that
hatches it; and is like Oil of Scorpions, the Sovereign Remedy for All that are
stung by them: Thus Sin is made its own Destruction; and does not only breed
the Disease, but provide the Cure. Patimur quina peccavimus, patimur ut non
peccemus.
We suffer because we have sin, it is true; but it is as true too, that We
suffer, that we may not sin any more. The Roughness of Adversity is like that
of a File, it scours off the Rust We had contracted, cleanses and purifies the
Soul from Vice and Filth, and brightens the Mind and its Virtues. By this means
the Anger of God consequently is appeased, the Provocation removed, we released
from the Prisons and Fetters, which Guilt and Justice had bound us in; and
brought out into the free and open Air, the glorious and cherishing Light of
his Countenance lifted up upon us. The Storms are quieted, the Thunder laid
aside, and Grace and Mercy, and a clear Sky succeeds And, then as a farther
Antidote against the Third Source of our Misfortune, Adversity weans our
Affections, and calls them off from the World; begets in us a dislike and
dissatisfaction to a State of so much Misery; and the Bitterness of our
Calamities suppies the place of Wormwood, which Providence, like a wise Nurse,
puts upon the Breast, to make us loath the Milk; and be content to part with
the luscious Delights of that deceitful Life, of which we should otherwise be
most immoderately fond.

oppose against them, a Good Courage, because a Clear Conscience.

More particular Advice.
what we cannot continue Men, and not be moved with; such as Sickness, and
Pain, and the Loss of those things which are very dear to us; or else That,
which is not really such, but falsely represented to be so, and owes its being
reputed such, either to some general Opinion, and Vulgar Error, or else to the
private Interpretation, and Sense of particular Persons. When This is the Case,
a Man has both his Mind and Body at his own disposal, just as before any such
Afflictions happened: And therefore in such Notional Calamities, all that need
or can be said, is this; That what you make such doleful Complaints of, has
nothing painful, or troublesome in it; but all this is of your own creating,
who put on an unnecessary Melancholy, resent things tenderly, cry out when you
are not hurt, and fancy Misery, where there is really none.

Real Afflictions Remedies against them.
and Popular, and Sound Advice is in this Case the most Natural and most
Equitable; and therefore without proposing nice, and studied, and uncommon
Arguments, I shall content my self with these few following Reflections. First,
A Man will do well to remember, that nothing of this kind which he endures, is
contrary to the Law of Nature, and the Condition of Manking; Since Man is born
to Sorrow, as the Sparks fly upward; that is; All such things as these, are
very ordinary and usual; and from his Birth entailed and annexed, as
Encumbrances upon this State of Mortality, into which he is admitted. Therefore
upon every Accident that uses to afflict us, we ought constantly to consider
Two things; The Nature of what happens to us; and our own Nature; and when once
we come to regard things as they really are, and to behave our selves
accordingly, we shall then deliver our selves from any Vexation and Disquiet,
that can arise from them. Vexation and Fretfulness are a Disease of the Soul; a
Distemper unnatural in it self, and what ought by no means to be allowed by us.
For Nature has been so bountiful, and so very provident for our Ease, that
there is not any Accident possible to come upon us, which She has not already
furnished us with a Faculty to bear, and manage, and convert to our Good; and
rendered capable of such Arguments and Considerations, as may very reasonably
prevail with us to be contented under it. There is no one Condition of Life so
destitute and deplorable, but it has some Interval of Refreshment; some
Solace, some mitigating Circumstance to soften it. There is no Confinement so
close, no Dungeon so dark, but some Light will spring in; some Comfort may be
found to cheer the Prisoner, and drive the Sorrow from his heart. Jonas, we
see, found Leisure for Devotion even in he Whale's Belly, and from thence
poured out a Prayer, which God graciously accepted and answered. And sure This
is a Privilege of considerable Value; and a great kindness in Nature, that she
supplies us with Lenitives, and contrives whys for the qualifying and asswaging
of our Pains, even in the instant of our laboring under them. This ought no
more to be forgotten for ou Consolation and Support, than that other
Reflection, That our Condition necessarily exposes us to Suffering, and we were
born liable to all kinds of Misery. For Omnia ad quae gemimus, ad quae
exp^vescimus, Tributa vi^ae sunt.
all those Grievances, which we either groan under, or tremble with
apprehensions of their Approach, are but so many Taxes, or Rent-Charges upon
Life.

Secondly, It may be of great Advantage to consider, that, notwithstanding none
of us are, or can be absolutely exempt from the Power and Jurisdiction of
Fortune; yet we are far from being entirely under it, and That by much the
least part of us is subject to it: The Principal and most valuable is still in
our own hands; no Attempts from without can subdue or wrest it from us; nothing
can lose it, but our own Consent and Voluntary Surrender. It Is confessed,
Fortune can reduce us to Poverty, waste us with Sickness, harass us with
Afflictions; but it cannot debauch our Manners, nor enfeeble our Spirits, nor
make us submit to base, and unmanly, immoral and dishonorable Actions. And how
happy is it that we are thus far out of her reach? how incomparably better,
that she should tyrannize over our Riches, or Successes, or even Health it
self, than that she should deprive us of our Probity, our Courage, and our
Virtue? Let us support and please our selves with this Reserve; for, while we
hold our Own, nothing can render us truly miserable.

Eternal Equity, Shall we receive Good at the hand of the Lord, and shall we
not receive Evil? But it is enough to silence all our Grumblings, and put all
Complainers to the blush, when improved with this Small, but most True
Addition; Shall we receive Good more and oftener, and shall we not be content to
receive the Evil, which is but little and seldom? Nature has taught us to
shut, or turn away our Eyes from all such Objects as are shocking or offensive
to us; to remove them from such Colors, as hurt and strain the Sight, and to
six upon others more gay and agreeable: There is the same Reason here, and
Prudence and Duty both oblige us, to call off our Thoughts from melancholy
subjects, and to divert them with others more pleasant and entertaining. But we
seem to be of quite different Dispositions; to feed upon the Worst, and indulge
our selves in Peevishness and Spite. We are like Cupping-glasses, that draw
only the foul and corrupt Blood, and let all the good alone; like Misers, that
put off their best Wine, and keep the worst for their own drinking; like
froward Children who if you take one of their Play-things from them, throw all
the rest into the sire, for very Rage and Vexation. Thus upon every little
Mischance, we teaze and torment our selves, and for the loss of a Trisle, cease
to enjoy; nay, perfectly forget, and overlook all that we have still left. Nay,
some there are, such unthankful, such ungodly, such unreasonable Creatures,
that you shall hear them call themselves Unfortunate in every thing, and well
you they never knew what Happiness or Success was; insomuch that with these
Wretches one Ounce of Adversity gives more Plain, and provokes more Complaints,
than Ten Thousand times as much Prosperity excites Gratitude or sensible
Satisfaction.

and there observe the infinite multitudes of Men whose Condition is more
grievous, more lamentable than our Own; to think seriously and compare our
selves with the many Thousands who envy what we repine at, and would think
themselves very happy, to exchange, and he in our case. Cum (...) displiceat
r^rum fortuna tu^rum,
Alterius specta, quo sit discrimine pejor.

When thou art bending under Fortune's frown,
Observe the Ills, that press thy Neighbor down,
And from his heavier load learn to sustain thy own.


These querulous People would do well to consider, and, if they please, to
practice that Saying of a Wise Man; That if the Calamities of all Mankind
should be brought together, and laid in one common Heap, and afterward an
equal division be made out of all these, to every Man in particular; The
generality of People would find themselves bid to their loss; and the
disadvantages of such a Distribution as This, would effectually discover the
Injustice of their present Melancholy and Resentment; when They complain of
hard usage, who have less of Misfortune, than comes to their Share, upon a
strict and impartial Dividend.

viz. Custom and Practice for the gross, and ignorant, and vulgar Capacities;
and Meditation for the wise and considerate. Both of them obtain their intended
effect by the help of Time, which is indeed the best Restorative, the surest
and most common healer of all our inward Wounds. Only it is not applied by all
alike; for the Wise are beforehand, and prevent their Miseries by
Premeditation; the weaker Vulgar have a more expensive and painful Cure; and
that which in the Others is Foresight, is in These Experience. That Custom
produces wonderful Effects, we see most manifestly, and every day proves it by
Ten thousand Instances; insomuch that what at first appeared to be insuperable,
and insupportable, grows in process of time very tolerable and easy. Your
Gally-Slaves, when first put on board wring their Hands; and Sighs, and Tears,
and Groans, are all their Music; but their Chains grow softer by degrees, and
by that time they have plied the Oar one quarter of a Year, who more cheerful
and merry than They? Men that have never used the Sea, tremble with fear, when
they weigh Anchor, even in the calmest Weather; and yet the Mariners will laugh
and sing in a Storm. The young Widow is inconsolable upon the loss of her
Husband, and thinks of nothing but Sorrow and Despair for the remainder of her
Days; but a very few Months assuage this violent Passion and the Concern wears
off so fast, that before the year of Mourning comes about, it is odds but you
find her in the Arms of a Second Bridegroom. Thus Time and Practice overcome
all things; and the greatest grievance in most of our Disasters, is that they
are new, and uncouth; but all That abates of it self, and a little conversation
and better acquaintance reconciles us very well to them.

Foresight.
that Sense and Smart have upon Weaker. For by representing matters frequently
to themselves, the Images are so lively, and the Impressions so strong, that
the very Realities themselves could scarce affect them more. Thus the Things
that are not, are rendered as common and familiar, as though theywere. Qu^^ alij
diu pationdo levin saciunt, sapiens levia facit diu cogitando.
What the Vulgar make light and easy by long-Suffering, the Wise Man softens to
himself by long Thinking. Let us then sit down, and take an exact Account of
our Fortunes: Let us consider the Nature of all those Accidents which are
capable of giving us any Disquiet; and let us reflect with our selves the
worst, most dismal, most insupportable, that can possibly befall us; Whether it
be Sickness or Poverty, Flight or Banishment, Injuries and Affronts, Disgrace
or Reproach; and examine in all this whole Black Catalogue, what there is
consistent with Natue, and what contrary to it. Foresight is therefore an
Admirable Preservative against all manner of Misfortunes, because by this
Attention of Mind we have formed the whole thing in our Imaginations before,
and so they cannot make any mighty alteration in us, when they come in good
earnest. And this is so considerable a Point gained, that you rarely find any
great harm done by Calamities, except upon the Parties who suffer themselves to
be surprised by them. Meditation and Reasoning is the very Temper of the Soul;
this steels and hardens it, fortifies it against Assaults, and renders it
impenetrable against all that can attempt to wound or break it. Let the
Accident be never so grievous, yet the Man that stands upon his Guard, and puts
himself in a posture to receive it, suffers but little by it. Praemeditati m^li
wollis ic^u venit. Quicquid expectatum es^^diu, leviu accedit.
When a Calamity is foreseen, the blow is broken; and whatever was long
expected, is less selt when it come, says Seneca.

Now the Method of attaining to this wise and profitable Foresight, is first to
convince our selves, and be very duly sensible how craggy and rough a Standing
Nature has placed us in; That Nothing is stable in this World, but We and All
about us totter, and are in perpetual danger of falling; That whatever has
happened to Another Man, might every jot as well happen to Us; and the Fate,
which hangs over Every Head, may fall down, and crush Any; and in all our
Designs and Undertakings, carefully to form to our selves the Disappointments,
and Inconveniences, to which they are any way liable; that so, if any of These,
shall afterward fall to our Lot, we may not be confounded, as if some strange
thing had happened to us. Alas! how infinitely do we cheat and fool our selves,
by proposing only the fair and inviting Side, and turning all the discouraging
Circumstances out of sight? How miserably do we betray our want of Judgment, by
never considering, that our Neighbors Misfortunes to day, may be Ours before
to morrow; that we are by no means exempt, and out of reach. But how foolishly
do They argue, who prefer a blind Fool-hardiness before it, and pretend that a
Computation of probable Accidents would discourage and put a stop to all
Action? As if a Man might not be prudent without Despondency, nor distrust
Fortune without Irresolution, and Cowardice, and Panick Fear. Whereas, if we
would represent Things to our selves, according as they really are, and as
Reason directs; we should be so far from Surprise at Crosses and
Disappointments, that it would rather appear matter of Wonder and Astonishment,
that so very few befall us, in comparison of what we had ground enough to
expect; and when so many Accidents are always dogging us close at the Heels,
that they should be so long before they overtake us; and when they have us in
their Clutches, and we lie at their Mercy, that they should not treat us more
ruggedly, than the Generality of them do. For He, that sees another Person's
Ill Fortune, and regards it as a thing so usual and common, that his own turn
may very probably be next, This Man is armed against it, and has vanquished
his Foe, before he makes his Approaches. Nothing in these Cases should be left
unconsider'd, and it is very advisable to reckon upon the worst; thus Events
will mend upon us, and a great part of what comes, will be clear Gains. But it
is foolish to sink under a Misfortune, and think to excuse one's Weakness, by
alleging, We never imagined Matters would be so bad. It is a very common
Saying, That when a Man is surprised, he is half beaten; and then by the Rule
of Contraries, a Man forearmed is worth Two others. A wise Prince will make
Preparations for War in the Times of profoundest Peace; a skilful Sailor, lays
in fresh Tackle, and all manner of Provisions for the weathering a Storm, and
refitting after it, before ever he sets sail out of Port; For when the Mischief
is actually upon us, it is too late to provide against it. Besides, There is
this farther Advantage attends a Premeditation, that let a thing be never so
difficult in it self, every Man finds himself dextrous to a wonder, in Matters
that he has been a great while prepared for; Presence of Mind, Prudence in
Choice, and Boldness in Execution, give infinite Advantage in such Cases, and
almost insure the Success. Whereas on the other hand, there eis nothing so
obvious and easy in its own Nature, but Men are confounded and at a loss, if
they be utterly unacquainted with it. Id videndum ne quid inopinatum sit nobis,
qui^ omnia novitate graviora sunt.
This therefore should be our constant Care, That nothing happen unlooked for;
because the being new and strange to us, is really a very great Aggravation of
any Accident whatsoever. Thus much I easily persuade myself, that were we in
any tolerable degree so provident as we might and ought to be, all that
Amazement and Perplexity would be saved, which we so commonly see in the World.
For what is it that confounds Thee, Man? You expected the thing, and it is come
upon you; Astonishment is not the effect of having our Expectations answered,
but the direct contrary. Let us therefore order our Affairs so considerately,
that it may never be in the Power of Fortune to surprise us; let us stand upon
our Guard, discover things at a distance, and observe how they make their
Approaches toward us. Animus adversus omnia firmandus, ut dicere possimus,
-- Non ulla laborum
O Virgo, nova mi facies, inopinave surgit.
Omna praecepi, atque animo mecum ipse peregi.
Tu hodie ista denuncias; ego semper denuntiavi. Hominem paravi ad Humana.


The Mind should be fortified against all that can possibly happen; that we may
be able to say with that Hero in the Poet; -- No Terror to my View,
No frightful Face of Danger can be new.
Inured to suffer, and resolved to dare, [Mr. Dryden.
The worst that Fate can do, has been my early Care.


You foretell these things now, I have told them to my self long ago; I have
allalong contemplated them; for I considered I was a Man, and made provision
against all that could possibly befall me as such.

CHAP. VIII. Obedience to the Laws, Compliance with the Customs, and Observance
of the Ceremonies in use. How, and in what sense necessary.
Submission and Compliance. For, as is well observed, Sola Authoritas est, quae
cogit stultos, ut ad sapientiam festinent.
Nothing but Authority can prevail with Fools, to make any tolerable Advances
toward Wisdom. The Efficacy of this is very often seen in the sudden composing
of Mutinies, and Management of the Rabble; kby the Address and Credit of some
one Person of Reputation and Eminence; and proves, that the People are to be
led by the Persuasion of Others, much better, than guided by their Own
Judgment: A very lively and beautiful Description whereof Virgil presents us
with, in that Similitude; -- Veluti magno in populo, cum saepe coorta est
Seditio, saevitque animis ignobile vulgus.
Jamque Faces and Saxa volant, Furor Arma ministrat.
Tum Pietate gravem ac Mento si forte Virum quem
Conspexere, silent, arrectisque auribus astant,
Ille regit dictis animos and pectora mulcet.
AEneid. Lib. 1.
As when in Tumults rise the Ignoble Crowd,
Swift are their Motions, and their Tongues are loud:
And Stones and Brands in rattling Vollies fly,
And all the Rustic Arms that Fury can supply;
If then some Grave and Pious Man appear,
They hush their Noise, and lend a listening Ear;
He sooths with sober Words their angry Mood,
And quenches their innate Desire of Blood.
Mr. Dryden.

The greatest thing this World can show is Authority. This is the Image of the
Divine Power, a Messenger and Deputy from Heaven. If this Deputation (as to
Men) be Sovereign, and immediately under God, we call it Majesty; if it be
subordinate to any Human Power, we then call it (in a more peculiar and
restrained Sense of the word) Authority. And this is supported upon two Bases;
Admiration and Fear; both which must go together, and jointly contribute to the
keeping it up. Now this Majesty and Authority is principally and properly in
the Person of the Supreme Governor, the Prince, and Lawgiver, and in him it
lives, and moves, and acts, in its utmost Vigor. The next Degree of it, is,
when lodged in his Commands. Orders, and Decrees, that is, in the Law, which is
a Prince's Masterpiece, and the Noblest Copy of that Incommunicable Majesty,
whereof himself is the Original; And by this Law it is, that Fools are reduced
from Evil, informed in Good, governed and led to know and do, what is
convenient for their own, and necessary for the Public Interest. Thus you see
in short, of what Weight and Efficacy Authority and Laws are to the World; how
necessary, and how beneficial to the present Circumstances, and the greatest
part of Mankind.

Custom.
which comes nearest of any up to it, commonly called Custom; a very Powerful,
but withal a very Positive and Imperious Mistress. This Power is all gained by
Encroachment and Usurpation, by Treachery and Force; it get footing by Inches,
and steals in upon the World insensibly. The Beginnings of it are small and
imperceptible; gentle and humble; and frequently owing to Men's Tameness or
Neglect; their Laziness, and Yielding; the Influenc of Example, and the
Blindness of Inconsideration; but when it has once taken Root, and is fixed by
Time, it puts on a stern domineering Look, issues out its Orders, plays the
Tyrant, and will be observed; It is to no purpose then to argue for Liberty and
Right; no Man is suffered to speak, to move, to look, in contradiction to such
an Establishment. It stops your Mouth with Possession and Precedent; which
indeed are its proper and only Pleas of Title, grows great and more eminent,
the farther it goes; and, like Rivers, enlarges its Name and Channel by
rolling; insomuch, that even, when the Mischiefs and Inconvenience of its still
prevailing are manifest, yet is it not safe to reduce it to its first
Infant-State; and Men are oftentimes better advised in suffering under it, than
in attempting to disuse, or reverse it.

Law and Custom compared.
that Law and Custom establish their Authority by very different Methods.
Custom creeps upon us by little and little, by length of Time, by gentle and
acceptable Means, by the Favor and general Consent, or at least with the
Approbation of the Majority; and its Beginning, Growth, Establishment, are all
from the People. The Law, admits none of these flow Proceedings; it is Born at
once, and in full Perfection; comes to Vigor and Maturity in a Moment; it
marches out with Authority and Power, and receives its Efficacy from the
Supreme Commander; it depends not always upon the good liking of the Subjects,
but is frequently full sore against their Wills; and yet prevails, and takes
place, though burdensome and ungrateful to them. This last Consideration is the
Reason, why Some have compared Law to a Tyrant, and Custom to a King. Again,
Custom, though otherwise never so engaging, yet never proposes Rewards or
Penalties; But the Law propounds both, and to be sure threatens Penalties upon
the Disobedient at least. Yet, notwithstanding these Differences, the matter is
so ordered, that these Two are frequently capable, either of strengthening, and
mutually assisting, or of destroying and overthrowing each other. For
Cudestroying and overthrowing each other. For Custom, though in strictness it
be only upon Sufferance, yet when countenanced and publicly allowed by the
Prince, will be still more firm and secure; and the Law likewise gets ground
upon the People, and stands the faster by means of Possession, and long Usage.
On the Contrary; Custom will be quashed by a Law prohibiting the Continuance of
it; and a Law will go down the stream, and be lost to all the purposes and
effects of it, if a contrary Custom be connived at. Thus, I say, they may
interfere to the Prejudice of each other; but usually they go hand in hand, and
are in reality almost the same thing, considered under different respects; The
wiser and more discerning Men considering That as a Law, which the Ignorant and
Vulgar, who have little Notions of a Legislative Power, or its Sanctions,
observe purely as a thing Customary, and because it has been in use, without
attending how it came to be so.

Different and odd Customs.
and the Extravagance of some of them, is really prodigious. It is scarce
possible to think of any Imagination so whimsical and odd, but some Country or
other has received it as a Custom, or established it by a Law. I will give my
self the trouble of instancing in several upon this occasion, to convince
Those, who perhaps cannot easily suffer themselves to be persuaded, how much
Truth there is in this Observation. And here, not to instance in Religion,
which in the Idolatrous and less civilized Countries especially, has had
grosser Deceits, more abominable Absurdities, and more amazing Variety of
these, than any other Subject whatsoever; yet, because it does not fall so
directly within the Compass of our present Argument, I shall pas it over at
present; and confine my self to the Head of Civil Commerce; in which alone
Customs, properly so called, are used to take place; and where the Matter being
exceeding obvious to every Understanding, it is so much the more astonishing,
that Men should be carried into such Extravagances. Now Those, which I think
most remarkable, and sit to be mentioned, are such as follow. The Reputing it
an Instance of Affection and Duty when Parents live to a certain term of Years,
for their Children to Kill, and to Eat them; In Inns and other Public Houses
of Accommodation, instead of discharging the Reckoning with Money, to lend
their Wives and Daughters to the Host for Payment; The having Wives in common;
The setting up Public Stews for Young Men; The esteeming it honurable, for
Women to be Common, and wearing Tufts of Fringe at their Garments by way of
Boast and Glory, to signify the Number of their Gallants; The suffering Single
Women to abandon themselves to all manner of Filthiness, and publicly to
procure Abortions when with Child; but of all Married Women requiring the
strictest Chastity, and Fidelity to their Husbands imaginable; The Marrying of
Men to one another; The Women going to War, and engaging in Battle along with
their Husbands; Wives dying, and laying violent hands upon themselves, either
at the instant, or very quickly after the Death of their Husbands; The allowing
Widows a Liberty of Marrying again, provided their former Husbands died by a
Violent death; but if otherwise, then debarring them of that Privilege.
Investing Husbands with an Absolute, Unlimited, Uncontrollable Power over their
Wives; to Divorce them at Pleasure, without being obliged to show Cause; to
sell them off, if they bring no Children; to Kill them without any manner of
Provocation, merely by virtue of this Despotick Power, and the Relation the
Wife stands in to him, and to borrow afterward from other People; Women to
Bear Children without any manner of Terror, or Complaint; Killing their
Childen, because they are not Handsome, not Beautiful in Complexion; not
well-Featured, Crooked, or ill Shaped, or without assigning any Reason at all;
The Feeding altogether upon Man's Flesh; The Eating Flesh and Fish quite Raw;
the Lodging Persons of all Ages and Sexes indifferently, to the Number of Ten
or Twelve together; Making the putting their Finger down to the Ground, and
afterward pointing with it up to Heaven, the common Form of Salutation;
Turning their Back upon the Person they Address, and make a Civility to; and
taking it for a constant Rule, never to look at the Person, to whom you design
Honor and Respect; Observing it as a Mark of Duty to gather up the Spittle of
Princes in their Hands; Never speaking to the King, but through a long Trunk;
Never cutting the Hair or Nails during their whole Lives; To Shave the Hair on
One side, and Pare the Nails of One Hand, but never to do it of the Other; The
Boring Holes in the Cheeks, and other parts sof the Face, to wear Pendants, and
Jewels at, and the same at the Breasts and Nipples; Absolutely to despise
Death; to welcome it with Feasting and Joy; to contend and quarrel for it; nay,
to plead and sue for it in public, as if it were some remarkable Dignity, or
extraordinary Favor; and to look upon the granting these Suits, and being
preferred before other Competitors in them, as a singular Honor; The Esteeming
it the most Honorable way of disposing their dead Bodies, and much more
glorious than any Burials, to be Eaten up of Dods, and Fowls of the Air, and to
be Boiled or Baked, Dried and Pounded to Powder, and that Dust mingled with
Men's ordinary Drink.

Customs Examined and Judged.
or whatever wonder it may create, yet if we come a little closer to the
matter, and once undertake to pass a Judgment upon them, all then is noise and
scuffle, eager and endless quarrel. The Common People are so overrun with
Prepossession and Pedantick Folly, that They, according to their usual Wisdom,
run all down at a venture; and without more ado, condemn every thing for
Barbarous and Brutish, which is not just according to their own Palate, that
is, which does not agree with the received Practice and Customs of their own
Country. For they, never looking Abroad, nor understanding what is done there,
can see no manner of Reason, why their own Local Usages at Home, should not be
the only, and unalterable Standard of Truth, and Justice, and Decency, all the
World over. If you endeavor to infuse some larger Notions of These Matters, by
telling them, That Other People of their Capacity are even with them; That they
are every jot as much out of conceit with Our Methods, as we can be with
Theirs; they cut you short immediately, by replying, You may see by that how
Barbarous and Brutish they are; whih is but saying the same thing over again;
and here they resolve to stick. But now a Wise Man is more reserved, and allows
a greater Latitude; he gives them a fair hearing at least, and does not
determine hastily, for fear of too much warmth, and wronging his Judgment; and
he is certainly in the right; for there are really a great many Laws and
Usages, which, at first sight, appear insufferably Barbarous, contrary to all
the Notions of Humanity and sound Reason, and yet if they were soberly
considered, (all Passion and Prejudice apart) if they did not so far approve
themselves to our Judgment, as to be allowed Just and Good, yet it would be
found that they are not destitute of all Color of Reason; but have a great
deal to be said in their Vindication; and Arguments plausible enough to excuse
Other Men's Practice, thoughnot enough to recommend them to our Own.

Let us now, for instance, make the Experiment in those Two first mentioned,
which, I must confess, seem extremely odd, and the most distant that can be,
from all the Apprehensions we commonly entertain of the Duty and Affection we
owe to Those who brought us into the World, and were at the Trouble and Expense
of our Sustenance and Education. These Customs then are the Killing one's
Parents, when they come into such particular Circumstances; and Eating their
dead Bodies. The People who receive this Custom, look upon it as the highest
Testimony of Piety and Respect; the last and fullest Proof of their Tenderness
and sincere Affection. The great design they have in it is Compassion to their
old decrepit Parents, whom they think themselves under the strictest
Obligations to deliver from a state of Misery and Infirmity; a State, that
renders them, not only utterly Useless to Themselves and to every Body else,
but even a Trouble and a Burden; a State of Languishing and Decay, of
Uneasiness and Pain; that makes Life a Weariness and a Torment to themselves
and all about them; and therefore they think That Death which gives them Ease
and Rest, and puts them past Suffering any more, a very profitable Exchange, a
Gain, which they might be glad to choose, and thankful for receiving. When they
have done them this Kindness, (as they esteem it) the next Proof of their
Dutiful Regard, is to give them the most honorable Burial in their power: And
for this purpose they make their own Bodies their Repository; lodging these
Carcasses and precious Relics in their own Bowels; thus in some measure
conveying a new Life, and recruiting their perished Nature, by Digesting, and
turning to Nourishment this dead Flesh of their Parents, and Transubstantiating
it into their own living Flesh. These Reasons are not so very Contemptible; at
least, I am apt to believe, they may somewhat abate that Detestation, which the
prejudice of a contrary Opinion is apt to produce in the generality of People.
A Man that considers impartially, will, I believe, allow, That the Persons who
have been brought up to this Custom, may think it so plausible a one, that it
will not be easy to bring them off from it; Nay, that it may appear in the Eyes
of these Persons, a horrible Cruelty, and Abomination, to see their Aged
Parents lie Languishing before their Eyes, in the midst of Sickness and Pain,
and Faint Strugglings for the wretched Remnants of Life; without any kind Hand
to do the good Office of setting them at Rest. And when Declining Nature has
finished its own Course, it is no hard matter to imagine, that These People
should with Reluctance and Horror Interr these Spoils of Those, who gave them
Being; that they might think it a Neglect and a Reproach to cast those Remains
they so dearly Love into a Hole, to Rot in the Earth, to Corrupt and become
Food for Worms; that This is the greatest Disregard they can possibly be guilty
of, and a very ill Expression of Tenderness and Duty.

And, that this Supposition is not so very much out of the way, we have plain
matter of Fact to prove: For Darius made the Experiment, and found it to be
exactly as I have put the Case. He first demanded of some Grecians, upon what
Terms they would be content to take the Indian Custom of Eating the Bodies of
their Deceased Parents; and their Answer was; What! do so Barbarous a thing, as
Eat our own Fathers? We could not do it at any rate! Then again he attempted to
persuade the Indians, That they would Burn the Bodies of their Parents, after
the manner of the Grecians; and he found These a great deal more averse to his
Proposal, and more difficult to be persuaded, than the Other. Give me leave
here only to add one Instance more of Men's different ways of Reasoning in a
Trifling Matter, and such as only concerns Decency and Civility. A Man that
used to wipe his Nose upon his Fingers, being reproved for so unmannerly a
Trick; desired in his own vindication, to know, what Privilege that silthy
Excrement had above all the rest, that we must pay it the respect of a fine
Handkerchief, and then, as if it were some valuable Treasure, wrap it up close,
and carry it in one's Pocket: That in all reason this should rather turn one's
Stomach, and give offense, than throwing it carelessly away. Thus you see how
few things there are, for which some probable Reason may not be alleged; and
This should be a warning to us, not to condemn Things hastily and rashly, but
to consider both sides of the Question.

The force of Custom.
how absolute and uncontrouled an Authority it exercises over Mankind. He that
called it a Second Nature, came far short of the Truth; for it is equal, it is
superior to Nature; it even contends with, it triumphs over, Nature. Whence, I
pray, comes it to pass that Fathers never fall in Love with their own
Daughters, though never so charming and desirable Creatures? Or why are Sisters
seldom or never smitten with their own Brothers, though infinitely handsomer,
better accomplished, and more engaging than Strangers? This Reservation and
Coldness does not properly proceed from Nature; She makes no such Distinctions;
These are the Effect of general Customs and Positive Laws, who forbid such
Mixtures, pronounce them Scandalous, and Horrid, Incestuous and Wicked; but
again, I say, these Characters are fixed by Divine or Human Institutions; for
Nature knows no such thing as Incest, nor condemns any Alliances, let the Line
or Relation be what it will.

This is sufficiently plain from Scripture not only if we consider the Children
and (...) dents of Adam, whose Case made the (...) ^^oidable. But observe the
Marriages and Relation of Abraham and Nahor, and the Descendents from Them;
Genesis ii. xx xxix. xxxviii. Exodus vi. Levit. xviii. Deuteronomy. xxii. 30. 2 Samuel xiii.
13. 1 Kings ii.
the Matches of Isaac and Jacob; the Fact of Judah one of the Twelve
Patriarchs; Amram the Father of Moses; and other Holy and Eminent Persons. It
was indeed the Law of Moses, which Prohibited these Mixtures within the nearest
Degrees; And yet this very Law Dispensed with that Rule in certain Cases, not
only in the Collateral Line, that of taking the Brother's Wife for instance,
which was an express Command, and not barely an Indulgence, but between Brother
and Sister of the Half Blood; nay, even in a Right Line of Alliance, as betwixt
the Son and his Father's Wife; for as to a Right Line in Blood, This indeed
seems a Crime against Nature, and the Example of Lot can give no Countenance to
it; whatever Excuses some great Men have found for his Daughters, See Cajet. in
Loc.
who seem to have done this for the sake of preserving Mankind, which in the
Consternation they were then in upon the Destruction of Sodom, they thought All
extirpated but Themselves. But the Law of Nature is an Original Law, and
Eternal one too, such as none but God can dispense with, and such as we never
find any Example of his having ever dispensed with. But then, as for such
Incests as are Accidental, and Ignorant, and Involuntary, it is very likely
Tertullian's Complaint may be too true, That the World is full of them.

Farther yet; Custom commits a Violence upon the Rules of Nature, and overbears
them; witness that daily practice of Physicians, who frequently forsake the
Theory, and set aside what Art and Reason do both concur in, so far as the
Rules and Grounds of their Profession can discover or direct; and take a
different course with their Patients, in Deference to Experience, and common
Success; Witness again those People, who have wrought a perfect Change in their
Constitutions, even so as to Eat, nay to live upon Poison; Spiders and Ants,
Lizards and Toads; as several whole Nations are said to do in the Indies.
Custom does likewise stupify our Senses, and alter the Temper of the Organ, and
the quality of the Impression, and the Report made from it. To this purpose are
the accounts we read of those People, who dwell near the Cataracts of the River
Nile, and indeed a Millpool, or a Steeple, or a Brazier's Shop will in
proportion have the same Effect; and, if you give credit to some Old
Philosophers, All the World are deaf to the Music of the Spheres, which is
nothing else, but the different Motions of the several Orbs turning round upon
their own Axis, and variously justling and interfering with one another. In one
word, The great and Master-workmanship of Custom is, That it subdues and
conquers Nature, vanquishes every Difficulty; makes those things easy by
degrees, which seemed unattainable and impossible; and the Bitterness of pain
and Suffering it wears out, and softens, till at last our Complaints cease, and
we are reconciled, even to our Miseries themselves. Nay it does not only
produce Content, and lay asleep the sensitive Soul, but it manages and
domineers over the Rational one too; and exercises a most unjust, and arbitrary
Power, over our Imaginations, and Judgments. It makes and unmakes at pleasure:
Gives and takes away Reputation and Esteem; without, nay sometimes, against
Reason. It brings Notions in Philosophy, in Religion, in Politics, Opinions
and Ceremonies, Fashions and Modes of Living into credit; though they be never
so fantastical and extravagant; never so uncouth and distant from what Reason
and Judgment would teach and approve. Nor is its Tyranny less formidable in the
contrary Extreme; for it as frequently does great wrong, to things in
themselves noble, and worthy of universal Advantage, by disparaging and
lessening them, and even bringing them into Neglect, and universal Contempt. So
unreasonably does Custom and common Fame raise or lower the Market; so
precarious and uncertain is the greatest intrinsic Worth, if it happen to be
lodged in an Obsolete Opinion, an Antiquated and Unfashionable Virtue; For all
these things have their Seasons of Improvement and Declension; and the
Sentiments of the World upon them will vary, though the Reason and Nature of
the thing be constantly the same.

Nil adeo magnum, nec tam mirabile quiequam
Principio, quod non desinant mirarier omnes -- Paulatim.
Lucret. L. 11.
-- What we now with greatest ease receive,
Seemed strange at first, and we could scarce believe;
And what we wonder at, as Years increase,
Familiar grows, and all our Wondrings cease. Creech.
Thus you plainly see the vast Influence, and excessive Power of Custom. Plato
was once reproving a Youth, for playing often at Cob-nut; who replied in his
own excuse, Methinks, Sir, under favor, you chide me for a very small matter:
No, (said Plato) you are mightily mistaken; for be assured, Young Man, that
Custom is never a small matter. A Sentence this, which well deserves the
Serious Attention of All, who have the care of educating Youth. Once more.
Custom is so very tyrannical in the Exercise of its Power, and expects so
unreserved a Compliance, that it will not give us leave to struggle with it, or
retreat from it; nay, does not allow us so much as the Liberty to consider, and
reason with our selves, whether what it imposes be fit for us to comply with,
or not. It so perfectly charms our Senses and Judgment, as to persuade us that
every thing which is new and strange, must needs be contrary to Reason; and
that there can be no Justice or Goodness in any thing, which Custom has not
confirmed, and made current by its Approbation. We do not govern our selves by
Reason, but are carried away by (...); whatever is most in use, that we esteem
most virtuous, most becoming; even Error it self, when it is become Epidemical,
has the Authority of Truth with us. These Complaints of Seneca are but too
true in every Age and Place; and, were only the Plain, and Mean, and Ignorant
People concerned in them, the Calamity were somewhat tolerable: Because these
Men are not really qualified to enter into the true Reasons and Differences of
things; they have not Sagacity enough to see, nor Solidity enough to search an
Argument to the bottom; and Therefore it is the best thing They can do, since
they are not able to distinguish and judge for themselves, to pin their
Opinions upon the Sleeves of Those that are able, and let Them speak for them.
This is a safe and a peaceable way, and the Public sinds great Ease and
Convenience from it. But for Wife Men, who are under a very different
Character, and have another part to Act; to see Them led thus about by the
Nose, and enslaved to every Folly, that puts on the Venerable Face of Custom;
is very much below their Judgment and Quality; and may justly be allowed to
move our Indignation, that They should so far forget themselves, and what they
are qualisied for.

Advice with regard to Laws and Customs.
should be Singular and Precise, and denounce War upon all Mankind, and their
Manners; for my Desire and Advice is, that he should be very observant of the
Laws and Customs which are established, and in present force in the Country
where he dwells: Yet that, not with a Servile Superstitious Spirit, but from a
Manly and Generous Principle: That he should speak of them with Deference, and
great Respect; and conform his Actions and whole Behavior to the Rules and
Measures they prescribe. And all this I would have him do; not merely from a
Conviction of their Agreement with the Principles of Justice, and Equity, and
Reason; but without regarding so much what they are in themselves; and upon
this Consideration only, that they are Laws and Customs: Then I desire he
should be very cautious and considerate in his Judgment of Foreign Customs and
Constitutions, and not rashly condemn, or take offense at them, upon slight and
superficial Pretenses. And Lastly, I would have him with all possible
Seriousness, Freedom, and Impartiality, examine into both the Domestic, and
the Foreign; and engage his Judgment and Opinion in the behalf of either, no
farther than Reason will bear him out; These are the Four Instructions, which I
shall a little enlarge upon, and they contain the Whole, of what seems to me
necessary under this Head.

They ought to be complied with.
and being governed by the Customs of the Country where we dwell, is the Great
and Fundamental Principle; the Law of Laws; because indeed it is This, which
gives Life and Vigor to all the rest. All affected ways of living that are
particular, and out of the common Road, give just Cause of Indignation and
Jealousy; betray a great deal of Folly, or Conceitedness, or Ambition; confound
the Order, and disturb the Government of the World.

Not merely for the Justice and Equity of them.
For strictly speaking, these Laws and Custom, support their Credit, and ought
to preserve an Authority, not merely with regard to any inherent Equity or
Reasonableness to be discovered in them; but they are sacred upon this single
Consideration, That they are Laws and Customs, though there be nothing else to
recommend them to our Observance. This is the Mystical Foundation upon which
they stand, and the great Secret of Government; and, properly speaking, they
have no other Motive but their Sanction to enforce them. My meaning is not from
hence, That any Establishment, though never so strong, can derive a Right to
our Obedience, upon Laws and Usages, manifestly Unreasonable and Unjust; but
that He who obeys a Law, merely for the sake of its Subject Matter being just,
though he do the thing commanded by it, yet he does it upon a wrong Principle.
For at this rate every Law must submit it self to the Judgment of every private
Man; and each Subject shall call it to account, arraign and try it at the Bar
of his own Breast; bring all Obedience to be a Matter of Controversy and Doubt,
and by consequence, all the Right of Administration, and the whole Civil Polity
must truckle and submit, not only to the Fickleness and Variety of infinite
several Judgments; but to the Changeable and Humoursome Sentiments of one and
the same Person. That which binds the Law upon Men's Consciences, is the
Authority of the Legislative Power; and the Sanction it receives from thence;
the Reasonableness of the Duty contained in it is only an additional and
collateral Obligation. How many Laws have there been in the World so far from
any appearance of Piety or Justice, that they have really been exceeding
trifling, extravagant, and senseless; such as no Man's Reason knew what to make
of? And yet Mankind have submitted, nay, and enjoyed as much Peace, and good
Order, and been as regularly governed, as highly contented; as if they had been
the Justest and most reasonable, that ever Human Wisdom and Policy enacted.
Now, he that should have gone about to create a Dissatisfaction and Dislike to
such Laws, or attempted to repeal, or to amend them, would have deserved to be
suspected as an Enemy to the Public, and not to be endured or harken'd to in a
wise Government. There are very few things, but Human Nature may in process of
Time reconcile it self to; and when once the Difficulty is overcome, and things
sit easy upon People, it is no better in effect, than an Act of Hostility, to
offer at the dissetling them again. We should always be content to let the
World jog on in its own beaten Path; for it is but too often seen, that your
Removers of Ancient Landmarks, and busy Politicians, under their plausible
Pretenses of Reforming, spoil, and ruin All.

There is seldom or never any considerable Alteration made in established Laws,
received Opinions, acknowledged Customs, and ancient Ordinances, and
Discipline; but it is of very pernicious Consequence. The Attempt is always
extremely hazardous; there is commonly more Hurt than Good done by it; at least
this deserves to be duly weighed; That the Mischief, if less in it self, is yet
sooner felt; for the Disorders every Change creates are certain and present,
but the Advantages it produces are distant and doubtful; so that we exchange a
Good in Possession, for one in Expectation only; and where we submit to That,
there ought to be very great Odds in value, to justify the Prudence of our
Proceeding. This is certain, that Men are but too fond of Novelties, before
they have tried them; and Innovators never want some very fair and plausible
Pretenses, to catch and feed their Fancies with; but the more of this kind they
pretend, the more ought we to suspect and be aware of them. For how indeed can
we forbear detesting the vain and ambitious Presumption of Persons, who
undertake to see farther, and be wiser than all Mankind besides? What an
intolerable Arrogance is it in such Turbulent and Factious Spirits, to persuade
Men into Compliance with their Humors, at the Expense of the Public Peace,
and to think it worth while, that the Government should run the Risque of its
own Ruin, merely for the sake of establishing a fresh Scheme, and passing a
private Opinion into an Universal Law?

I have already hinted, and do repeat it here again, That we are not by any
means obliged to obey all Laws and Constitutions whatsoever, which our
Superiors shall think fit to impose, without any Distinction or Reserve; For
where we find them evidently to contradict the Laws of God and Nature, in such
case, we must neither comply on the one hand, nor disturb the Public Peace by
our refusing to do so on the other. How Men ought to behave themselves in such
Critical Junctures, will fall more properly under Consideration, when we come
in the next Book to treat of our Duty to Princes. And indeed this Inconvenience
is much more frequent upon Subjects, with regard to Their Arbitrary Commands,
than the Established Laws. Nor is it sufficient, that we submit to Laws and
Governors, upon the account of their Justice, and particular Worth; but this
must not be done servilely, and cowardly, upon Motives of Fear and Force; This
is a Principle sit only for the Meanest and most Ignorant; it is part of a Wise
Man's Character, to do nothing unwillingly and upon Compulsion, but to delight
in his Duty, and find a sensible Pleasure in a reasonable Obedience. He keeps
the Laws, for his own sake; because he is jealous and tender of doing any thing
he ought not, and a rigid Master over himself. He needs no Laws to constrain
him, in what is decent and good. This distinguishes Him from the Common
Populace, who have no other Sense or Direction of their Duty, but what Positive
Laws can give. In strictness, according to the old Stoical Notions, the Wise
Man is above the Laws, and a Law to himself. But however, he pays all outward
Deference to them, and a free voluntary Obedience, This is due from him as a
Member of Society, as the inward Freedom of his Mind is owing to the
Prerogative of a Philosopher.



of the whole World, so far as they shall come to his Knowledge, may have a
full and a fair Trial; and that, not for the directing his Obedience, but to
assert his Right, and execute his Office. When This is done, he ought to pass
an honest and impartial Judgment upon them, as he shall find them, upon this
enquiry, to be agreeable, or otherwise, with Truth, and Reason, and Universal
Justice; For This is the Rule, This the Standard, which all of them are to be
Tried and Measured by. To These we are Principally and Originally engaged; nor
may we so far falsify our Obligations, as to depart from Them in favor of any
Customs; or to suffer our Judgments to be debauched with false Notions, though
our National Constitutions were Ten thousand times dearer to us, than it is
possible to suppose them For These can only claim a Secondary Obligation; the
Former was general, and concerned us as Men; This only binds us as Subjects, or
Natives of such a determinate place; and so the Obligation is limited and
particular; and if we pay our outward Observance, and submit in our Behavior
to these Municipal Injunctions, this part of our Duty is discharged; and all
Parties have reason to be satisfied. It is true, Things may so fall out, that
in compliance with this Second, this particular, and Local Obligation, (that
is, in conformity to the Laws and Customs of the Place where we dwell) we may
do something, that does not appear to Us in every point Agreeable to the
Primitive and Universal one; that is, such as Nature and Reason do not dictate,
nor evince the Equity of; but we still are true to this Obligation, by
reserving our Judgment for it, acknowledging that what Nature suggests, and
Universal Equity dictates, ought to be preferred; and continuing firm in our
Opinions, that This is always best, though it be the Unhappiness of our
particular Constitution not to be regulated according to it. For after all, our
Judgment is the only thing we can call our Own, and all we have left to dispose
of; the World has nothing to do with our Thoughts. Our External Behavior,
it is true, the Public lays claim to, This we ought to pay, and must be
accountable for it; and therefore thus far our Laws and Usages take place. We
may very justly do, what we cannot approve for any Justice or Goodness of its
own; and Obey Laws, which have nothing of that intrinsic Excellence, that, had
we been in Power, or perfectly Free, we should either have Enacted, or made
Choice of them. A great deal must be foregone for the sake of Order and Quiet;
for, in short, there is no Remedy; This is the Condition of the World, and, as
matters stand, Mankind could not subsist without it.

Ceremony, which in plain English, is for the most part no better, than a set
Form of Vanity. But yet, through Littleness of Soul, and the spreading
depravation of Mind and Manners, so very general among Men; it has gained so
undeserved Honor and Reputation, and usurped such a Power, and is so insolent
in the Exercise of it, that a great many People are possessed with an Opinion,
That Wisdom consists in a nice Observance of it. Under this Notion of the
Thing, they tamely come to the Yoke, and list themselves its most willing
Slaves; insomuch, that their Health, their Convenience shall suffer and be
lost; Business be disappointed; Liberty be sold or given up; Conscience
violated; God and Religion neglected; rather than they will suffer themselves
to offend against one of the least, and nicest Punctilio's. This is manifestly
the Case of Formal Courtiers, and Others, that affect the Character of Civility
and good Breeding; This Mint, and Anise, and Cummin, is punctually paid, when
the weightier matters of the Law are passed over; and the Idol Ceremony set up
in the place, and to the infinite prejudice, of plain downright Honesty, and
sincere Friendship. Now I am very desirous, That the Wife Man of my Forming
should by no means suffer himself to be thus Captivated and Imposed upon. Not
that I would have him Singular and Morose, as if Wisdom consisted in Rudeness,
and acting in Desiance of Ceremony; for some Allowance must be made to the way
of the World; and all the outward Conformity we can show, is sit to be paid to
the Manners of it, provided always, That this Compliance do not thwart other
more weighty Considerations. For thus much I must needs insist upon, That my
Scholar never bind himself without reserve, nor be so absolutely Devoted to
these sorts of Respect, but that, when he shall sind it Necessary, in point of
Duty, or otherwise shall see fit, he may have the Courage to Dispense with, and
show, that he can Despise these little Niceties. And This I would have done
with so visible a Prudence and Gallantry of Soul; that all the World may be
satisfied, it is not Humor and Affectation, nor Ignorance, or sordid Neglect,
which moves him to a Behavior different from Theirs; but that he is acted by a
right Judgment, and juster Notions of the matter; which will not let him value
these poor things more highly than they deserve; that even where his outward
Comportment is suited to the Practice, his Will and Judgment are entire and
uncorrupted, and have not been perverted to a false Approbation and Esteem: In
short, That, however he may lend himself to the World when he sees occasion,
and not be Sullen, and Restiff, and Particular; yet he will not, nor can it
ever become any Wise or Good Man, to sell, or give himself up to the World, by
being eternally Supple and Ceremonious, and devoted entirely to the Rules, and
Modes of it.

CHAP. IX. Modest and Obliging Behavior in Conversation.
THIS Particular is properly reducible to the Topic of Justice; a Branch of
that Virtue, which instructs us how to live and converse with all Mankind; and
to render to every Man, what by any sort of Right becomes his due. And the
proper Place for Treating of This will be in the following Book; where the
different Rules and particular Directions will be laid down, suitable to
particular Persons and Occasions. At present you must expect only general
Advice, That being agreeable to the Scheme at first Proposed, and such as the
Design and Matter of this Second Part of my Treatise is consined to.

which some accidental Occasion, or Business, or Traveling together, or
Meeting in Third Places, or frequent interviews at places of Public Resort, or
the Civilities of Visits and Complemental Ceremonies, do every day lead us
into; and so increase, or lessen the number of our Acquaintance, introduce new
Familiarities, or change our Old; All, or some of which, happen not only with
those we know, but with such as we never knew nor saw before: And This is a
Correspondence and Conversation wholly owing to Fortune, and Formality; our own
Choice has nothing to do with it, nor did we seek or take pains to procure, or
contract it. The Other sort of Conversation may be called Particular; because
consisting of such Companions as we like and love; Acquaintance of our own
desiring; such as we either industriously sought, and chose to recommend our
selves to; or else such as when offered to Us, was most willingly embraced, and
that with a prospect of Advantage to our selves; either for the improvement of
our Minds, or the advancing our Interest, or some other Profit or Pleasure,
which we hope to reap from an Intimacy with them. And here, we are not to
consider such a supersicial Commerce as before, but that which is stricter and
more endearing, close Conferences, mutual Communication; secret Confidences,
and great Familiarity. Each of which require distinct Rules, and shall have
Directions apart. But before we enter upon either of these Considerations, I
beg the Readers leave, to lay down One general Rule, which regards them both;
and is in truth a Fundamental Principle in the Case before us; for which reason
I choose to place it here, as a necessary Introduction to every part of the
subsequent Discourse.

Easiness of Humor.
must be sure to keep himself clear of; (and indeed a most Unseasonable and
Troublesome ill Quality it is, both to ones self, and to all he converses with)
is the being particularly addicted to some certain Humors, to keep always in
the same road of Conversation. This brings a man into slavery to himself, to be
so inseparably wedded to his own Inclination, and Fancy, that he can upon no
occasion be prevailed with to comply, nor be agreeable to other People; and
it is a certain sign of a perverse and unsociable Disposition; the Effect of
ill nature and ill-breeding; of unreasonable Arrogance, Partiality, and
Selfconceitedness: The Men of this Temper have a rare time on it; for, wherever
they come, they are sure to meet with Objects enough, either to try their
Patience, or to raise a Controversy. On the other hand, It argues great Wisdom,
and Sufficiency, when a Man has an absolute command of his Temper, so that he
can accommodate himself to all Companies; and is of such a flexible and
manageable Spirit, that he can rise and fall with the Company, be pleasant or
serious, keep pace, and constantly make one, with what he finds the rest
disposed to. And indeed the best and bravest Men have always the largest and
most general Souls; and nothing argues Greatness of Mind more, than this
universal Temper; the being always in good humor, free, and open, and generous
in Conversation. This is a Character so beautiful, that it in some measure
resembles God himself, and is a Copy of his Communicative Goodness: And among
other things said in Honor of Old Cato, this is one Noble Commendation; Huic
versatile ingenium; Sic pariter ad omnia suit, ut natum ad id unum dic^es,
quodcunque agere^.
That he was of a Disposition so dextrous and easy, that nothing ever came
amiss to him; and whatever you saw him engaged in at that time, he was so
perfectly Master of it, that you would imagine this, the very thing, which
Nature had cut him out for.

First part. And Advice upon it.
I am now upon; let us return to the former part of the Division, which
concerns what I called Simple, and General, and Common Conversation; in
distinction from that other, which is Chosen, and Intimate, and Particular.





to Know, but to be Known, is like a foolish Tradesman, that makes all the
haste he can to fell off his old (...), but takes no thought of laying in any
new.





is what concerns a Man's self, and not the Company he is engaged in.

Romans was so extremely modest, that even the Witnesses in their Depositions,
and the Judges in their Sentences and Decrees, when they spoke nothing but from
their own positive and certain Knowledge, did always soften their Expressions
with an Ita videtur, To the best of my Knowledge, and This is my Judgment. And
if these Persons were so much upon their Guard in those most Solemn Occasions;
what ought the Generality of People to be in Common Discourse? Sure it were
convenient, for a Man to accustom himself to all those Expressions, that may
any way sweeten the harshness, or take off from the rashness of what we say;
such as, Possibly, As they say, In my Opinion, In some sense; And so again,
when we reply to others, to qualify our Answers thus, Sir, I do not apprehend
you; what is the meaning of that? nay possibly it may be so, say you so? or the
like. By all which we sufficiently make our own Sense understood, but convey it
in a less shocking manner.

I will conclude this first general part of the Chapter with this short
Admonition; That the true Qualifications for conversing with the World, are
Frons aperta, Lingua parca, Men's clau^a, Nulli sidere. Vide, Audi, Judica.
an open good-natured face, a free air, pleasing and agreeable to every body; a
mind close and secret, open to no body; a Tongue sober and reserved, such
Discretion as is always upon its Guard, and lays not too much stress upon other
People; in short, The Man that sees and hears a great deal, that talks little,
and judges every thing, is perfectly accomplished, as to this Point.

Second part. Particular Conversation.
And here these following Hints may probably be of some use, for the due
Government of our selves.

The First concerns the Choice of our Acquaintance; in which it should be our
great care, to find out Men of the best Sense, and soundest Judgment; and to
frequent the Company of such. For by conferring with Wise and Judicious
Persons, the Mind whets and fortifies it self; it improves every day, has
stronger and higher Notions of Things, and is elevated above its common pitch.
As on the other hand, it degenerates and falls off, grows poor, and weak, and
despicably low; by using the Conversation of People that are so: For Ill
Qualities are catching as well as Diseases; and the Mind is at least as much,
if not a great deal more, liable to Infection, than the Body.





all Heat, and Positiveness, and Passion, should be avoided. When a Man
confesses his Mistake, owns his Scruples, or his Ignorance; and acknowledges
his Faults, when made sensible of them; when he can yield quietly and decently
to stronger Reasons; This Man shows more than common Marks of Judgment, and
Candor, and Sincerity; which are indeed the principal Qualities of Honesty and
Wisdom; But Stiffness and Obstinacy is an irrefragable Evidence of an ill Mind;
and a sure sign of great, and many Vices and Defects.



quite out. For, what can you expect but Teazing and Torment, from a Fellow,
that is Untractable, and Incorrigible? Not to discern the Strength of what you
offer against him, to take his own course, to run away with his own Notions,
and never Reply to the Objections of an Adversary; to hang upon some one word;
to catch hold upon a thing accidental and by the by; and let go the principal
and designed Argument of Discourse; to confound and jumble all; suspect every
word; deny every thing at a venture; to proceed in no order; to weary you with
formal Prefaces, and unprofitable Digressions; and after a world of words,
nothing to the purpose, to grow Loud and Clamorous; to stick to his own Sense,
and not to be one whit moved by all one can say; to insist upon Forms and Terms
of Art; and never come to the true head of an Argument, nor know the real
Merits of the Cause; These are the Qualities, and common Practice of Pedants
and Sophisters, Arrogant and Affected Coxcombs. And from this Description we
may very easily learn, how to distinguish between judicious and pertinent
Wisdom, and prating Impertinence and Folly. This is Bold and Rash, Hot and
Fierce, Arrogant and Assured; the Former is never Confident or Positive; but
Cautious and Fearful; Modest and Referved; Calm and Peaceable. The Wise Man is
full of Respect, and free in making Allowances; obtains his Victory fairly, and
uses it generously; but the Impertinent is full of Self-satisfaction and Joy;
leaves the field with an air of Gaiety and Boasting; as taking for granted that
the Day is his own; all his Countenance and Behavior is triumphant, and
proclaims to the Company, that he looks upon himself as absolute Conqueror.

be taken, that we do it not after a bold and assuming manner; nor betray any
thing that looks like Eagerness and a Spirit of Contention. For, if it have any
of these ill Symptoms, it can never be well received; and the Mischief will be
much greater to the Author himself, than to the Person whom it is directed
against. The only way to render any opposition tolerably easy to the Company,
and to be secure from any of those ill Resentments, which are apt to follow
upon it, is to contrive, that it should be produced upon the spot, and
immediately applied to the Matter, which gave the Provocation; that it be not
far fetched, not foreign to the present Discourse, nor ripping up somewhat long
past and forgotten. It must also be levelled at the Thing alone, and be free
from any Personal Reflections; nor must we contradict any thing because such a
one says it, but merely because the Thing it self deserves, and the vindication
of Innocence or Truth requires it. In which case, if there be any manner of
occasion put into our hands, it is a very proper expedient, to soften the
difference of Opinion, with some particular Commendation of the Person we
oppose; But above all things, we must be sure that in all matters of this
Nature, we command our Temper; and Reason with all the Coolness, and calm
Argument; the gentlest Terms, and most inoffensive Language, that is possible.

CHAP. X. Prudent Management of Business.
THIS Particular does in strictness belong to the Virtue of Prudence; of which
our intended Method has not as yet led us to treat, but reserved that to the
following Book. And there indeed is the proper place, for insisting severally
upon the many Rules and Admonitions, which answer to the several Kinds and
Branches of Prudence; and provice against that infinite variety of Occurrences,
which call for the exercise of it in Human Life. But in the mean while, I will
so far enter into that Subject at present, as to lay down some of the principal
Points of Prudence, which may serve for common and general Topics; Thus to
instruct my Scholar in the Gross, how to behave himself well and wisely in the
common Correspondence and Commerce of the World; and to make him a Master of
his Business. For the due Management whereof, I would recommend these Eight
Directions that follow.

Knowledge of Men and Things.
and a competent Knowledge of Men and Things. For the Men he has to deal with,
it is requisite he be well acquainted with their particular Humor and
Disposition, their Understanding and Capacity, their Inclination, and governing
Passions; their Intention and Design, and the Methods by which they move. The
Things, or particular Business, in which a man is engaged, or which he proposes
to undertake, ought likewise to be well understood; Whereby I mean, not such a
slender and superficial Knowledge, as considers the Appearances only, but a
thorough Examination to the very bottom: Such a Disquisition, as does not only
consider the Things themselves in their own Nature, but enlarges and extends it
self, to the Accidents which they in any probability may be encumbered with, and
the several Consequences they are like to draw after them. Now, in order to
attaining this Knowledge, it is necessary to take a close and particular view
of our Affairs; to turn them all manner of ways, eye them in all the different
Prospects they are capable of, and nicely scan all the Forms, and Circumstances
of them, which our own Imagination can represent them under. For there are a
great many Attempts, which have a fair and beautiful side, full of Invitation
and large Promises; and yet if you turn the other side, look horrid and
forbidding, and show nothing but Deformity and Danger. Now there is no occasion
to prove the Necessity of such a Knowledge as This; because it is so very
evident, that This is the very Compass Men must steer by; For no Man doubts,
but that the different Tempers of Men, and conditions of Things bring us under
an absolute Necessity of changing our Measures, and making all our Scheme
suitable to them. A Man in this case should be as vigilant, and as dextrous, as
the Seamen are; who immediately gibe their Sails, and ply their Oars
differently; as the Wind shifts, or their Course they run, brings them upon
different Roads and Shores. And as They could never make their Ports by
steering always the same Course, no more could a Man, who always governs
himself alike in Business, expect any other effect at last, than that his
Affairs should be ruined and come to nothing, and that all the World should
despise and laugh at his Folly. Now, if we do but reflect a very little, how
intricate the Affairs of the World are, and how much more intricate and full of
Disguise Human Nature is; The Perplexity will appear so great, as to convince
us, that the Knowledge I have here been advising, is no such easy matter; but
that we must be content to come at it slowly and painfully; for it requires
much Attention, long Study, and repeated Consideration; a Judgment clear and
strong, and a Mind unprejudiced and free from Passion.

Just Valuation of cm.
so as to give each that real Value, and proper Place in our Opinion, which of
Right belongs to it. And this is a certain Effect of Prudence and Sufficiency.
It is indeed a very high pitch of Philosophy, to be able to do this; and such
as a Man shall never rise up to, except he first get clear of his own deceitful
Passions, and the Common received Errors of the World. There are some six or
seven Qualities, that strangely captivate Vulgar Minds; and seduce them into
very mistaken Valuations of a Thing, which Wise Men will take good Care not to
be deluded by. These are, The Novelty, The Rarity, The Strangeness, The
Difficulty, The Artisicial Composure, The Quaintness of the Invention, The
Absence or present Want, The losing or being refused; it; but especially, and
above all the rest, the Noise, and Show, and Pomp it creates in the World. Thus
the generality of People look upon all things to be little better than
despicable, which are not exalted by Art, and Study, and Human Skill; they must
have them raised and resined, to recommend them. Those that are plain and
simple, and have nothing but their own Native Excellencies to set them off,
(let those Excellencies in reality be never so valuable) are so far from being
had in any regard, that they are scarce taken notice of at all. They pass off
in the common Crowd, unobserved and unseen; or, if they are seen, yet do they
not move us, but are looked upon as low, flat, and insipid: Than which we
cannot have a plainer Proof of the Vanity and Weakness of Mankind, who thus
take up with Air and Emptiness, and are content to accept Base Metal, and
Counterfeit Coin in Payment, rather than True Standard and Current Money. Hence
it is, that Art is so much preferred before Nature; Acquired Excellencies to
Those that are Innate; Things difficult and elaborate, before Those that are
easy; sudden Gushes, and Flights, and impetuous Sallies, before the Constancy
and Calmness of Habit and Temper; Things extraordinary, above Those that are
ordinary and usual; Ostentation and Pomp, above intrinsic and private real
Worth; Things that are Another's, above our Own; Foreign above Domestic,
Borrowed before Natural. And how egregiously foolish now is all This? This, I
say, is the Folly of the Vulgar and the Undiscerning; but Wise Men observe
other Measures. They take care not to be thus imposed upon, nor carried away
with fantastical Notions; but to pass a severe and critical Enquiry; and judge
of Things, first by their True, Substantial, and Natural Goodness, which many
times is internal, and lies far out of sight; And then by the Advantages they
are capable of bringing. These are solid Foundations of Esteem, all the rest is
mere Cheat and Delusion.

Now, it must be confessed, the being able to make these Distinctions
judiciously, is exceeding difficult; for the World is full of Sophistry and
Disguise; Things have a Thousand False Faces; and it often happens, that Those
which are really Counterfeit and worth nothing, look fairer, more gay, more
inviting; than Those that are truly valuable and good. (Nay, Aristotle has
ventured to say, That in Matters of Speculation, there are a great many
Falsities, which carry more show of Probability, and bid fairer at first sight
for engaging our Assent, than several Truths do:) But then, for our
Encouragement, we ought to remember, that as This is a very difficult and
laborious, so is it likewise an incomparably Noble and most Divine Attainment;
and withal, that it is of infinite Use, and Absolute Necessity. Quam
necessarium pretia rebus imponere?
How necessary is it (says Seneca) to set a true rate upon things? And so
without question it must needs be. For, to what purpose does a Man inform
himself in the Rules and Directions for living well, till he be first rightly
instructed, what account he ought to hold those several Objects in, which his
Desires and Actions are conversant about? Riches, for instance, and Health, and
Beauty, and Quality, and Learning, what degrees of Good these can pretend to,
and what Evil he is to expect, or can suffer from their Contraries. It is a
great Instance of Skill in Moral Heraldry, to know the Places of all these, and
what Precedences are due to them respectively; and especially, when several of
them meet together, it is not easy to proportion our Respects, because the
Number confounds us; and indeed all People are not, nor ever will be agreed as
to their Quality, which of them is most honorable. The Tastes and Judgments of
particular Persons differ exceedingly; And it is very well they do, for if all
Mankind were fond of the same thing, they would constantly be interfering, and
hindering one another.

For an Instance of what I have said; let us take these Eight Principal Sources
of all the Happiness, we can propose to our selves in this World; whether of
Body or Mind. I shall pair them together by mentioning Four of each sort; And
they are Probity and Health; Wisdom and Beauty; Good Parts and Quality;
Learning and Riches. These Terms I understand here in the common and received
Sense, and do not confine them to a Philosophical Nicety. By Wisdom I mean a
Prudence and Discretion in the Government of our Selves, and in all our
conversation and Deportment with Others: By Good Parts, that Capacity, and
those Abilities for Business, which such Persons are known to be prepared and
provided with, above others, to whom Nature has been less bountiful. And by
Learning, that Knowledge of Things, which is acquired by Books and Study. The
Rest are so perspicuous, that they need no Explanation.

Now what a prodigious Difference do we find in the Opinions of Men, in
adjusting the Place and Precedence, which is pretended to belong to these Eight
Things? What infinite and irreconcilable Competitions are there among them? I,
for my own part, have delivered my own Judgment freely already in this
Treatise; I have here mingled them together, and tacked them to one another in
such order, that each Advantage of the Mind has one belonging to the Body,
joined; and so joined as to be correspondent, to it; for as Nature has united
Body and Soul together, so she seems to have given each of them Accomplishments
extremely agreeable, and alike. Thus Health is to the Body, what Probity is to
the Mind; it is the Probity or good Disposition of the Body, as Probity is the
Health of the Soul. These should be the Sum of our Wishes. -- Men's sana in
Corpore sano.
Forgive the Gods the rest, and stand confined
To Health of Body, and a Virtuous Mind.
Says the Poet.

Beauty is commensurate to Wisdom; the Just Measure, exact Proportion, and
Comeliness, is the Wisdom of the Body; and Wisdom is the Regularity, the
Decency, the Beauty of the Soul. Quality and Good Birth is a wonderful
Capacity, a mighty Disposition to Virtue; and these Spiritual Abilities again,
and Good Parts, are the Nobility of the Mind. Learning is the Wealth of the
Soul, and Riches the acquired Advantage of the Body. Others, I know, will
differ from me in the Method and Order of ranging these Qualifications; for
some put all the Advantages of the Mind first; and are of opinion, that the
least of These is more valuable, than the best and highest of Those that belong
to the Body; and others, who go not so far, yet may not agree in the Preference
due to each Particular. Every Man in this Case follows his own Sense, and from
that we cannot but expect great Variety of Judgments will ensue.

Wise Choice.
from the Sufficiency of passing a just Estimate upon things, is derived an
Ability of making a Wise Choice; and this is, not only a matter of Duty and
Conscience, but very often an Eminent Instance of Wisdom and good Conduct.
There are indeed some Cases extremely plain and easy; as when Difficulty and
Vice, Honesty and Profit, Duty and Inrest stand in competition; For the
Preeminence in this Comparison is so visible and so vast, on one side above the
other, that whenever these things encounter each other, the Advantage lies, and
the Balance should always fall, to the side of Duty, though attended with never
so great Difficulty and Inconvenience. In the Case of Private Persons, I mean,
for possibly there may sometimes be room for an Exception; but then this does
not often happen, and if it do, it is generally in the Administration of Public
Affairs; and then too, it must be managed with great Tenderness and
Circumspection. But of This I shall have a more proper season to speak, when my
Third Book brings us to treat of Prudence in particular. But sometimes there is
such a Conjuncture of Circumstances, that a Man is driven to a very hard
Choice: As for Instance, When we stand enclosed, as it were, with Two Vices,
and there is no getting clear of both. Thus History describes that Eminent
Father Origin, who had it left to him, Whether he would commit Idolatry, or
suffer his Body to be carnally abused by a Moor: The first was the Thing he
chose, and some say he chose amiss. Now, when we are unhappily involved in such
Perplexities, and at a loss which way we should incline, in the choice of
Matters not morally evil; the best Rule we can be guided by, is to go over to
that side, where there is the greatest Appearance of Justice and Honesty. For,
though every thing should not afterward succeed according to our Wish or
Expectation, yet there will result so pleasing an Applause, such Glory, and
Self-gratulations from within, for our having taken the better Part, as will
make us ample Compensation for our Misfortunes, and abundantly support us under
them: And besides all this, If the Worse, but seemingly Safer Side, had been
chosen, what Security can we have, that the Event would have proved more
favorable? and why may we not reasonably suppose, that the Governor and Lord
of Us, and all our Fortunes, would have been provoked to punish, and disappoint
us that way too? When Matters seem to be so equal, that we cannot distinguish,
which is the better, and shorter course, we should take that which is the
plainest and straightest. And in Things manifestly Immoral (of which properly
speaking there cannot be any Choice) we must avoid that which is most
detestable, and has more of Villainy and Horror in it. For this indeed is a
Point of Conscience, and is more truly a part of Probity than of Prudence. But
it is very often exceeding hard to satisfy one's self, which of Two things of
the same kind is the more agreeable to Justice, or to Decency, or which is
preferable in point of Advantage: And so likewise of Two Ill Things, which is
the more Unjust, more Indecent and Dishonest, or attended with worse
Consequences. Upon the whole matter then, though the Act of choosing is an Act
of Probity and Conscience; yet the Ability of making this Choice aright is a
part of Prudence and sound Judgment. I am apt to believe, that in such
Straights as these, the best and safest way will be to follow Nature; and to
determine, that those Things which are most agreeable to Nature, are the more
just and becoming; and that what is most distant from, or contrary to Nature,
is more especially to be avoided and abhorred by us. This agrees well with what
was formerly delivered in our description of Probity, That we ought to be Good
Men, by the Dictates and Impulse of Nature.

Before I go off from this Point of Choice, give me leave to say one word or
two for the resolving a Doubt, which some People have started, with regard to
the Determination of our Wills in these Cases. The Question is, When Two Things
are proposed so Equal and Indifferent, that we can give no reason, why One
should be valued more than the Other; what it is that disposes the Soul to take
the One, and leave the Other? The Stoics pretend, that it is a rash Operation
of the Soul, somewhat Foreign, and Extraordinary, and beside its proper course.
But let Them say what they will, We may be bold to affirm, That there is no g
round for the Question; and that no Two Things ever do, or can present
themselves to our Consideration, so as to be perfectly Equal and Indifferent to
us: It frequently happens indeed, that the Difference is very small and
inconsiderable; but still some difference there is; something we apprehend in
One, and not in the Other, which casts the Scale, and draws us on to a Choice;
though the Motion be so gentle, that we scarce feel it; and the Motive so
slender, that we know not how to express, and can very hardly give our selves
any account of it. But still certain it is, that were a Man evenly poized
between Two Desires, he would never choose at all: For all Choice implies
Inclination of the Mind, and all Inclination supposes Inequality.

Consultation.
and taking good Advice. For there is great danger in acting upon our own
heads, and depending entirely upon our selves; Others will see further, and
judge better of our Affairs, than Partiality and Concern will suffer Us to do.
Now in this Point of Consulting, there are Two Cautions very necessary to be
observed for the prudent management of our selves, and the making this method
turn to account with us.

The First regards the Choice of fit Persons to Advise with: For Many are much
better let along than applied to, and a Man is as highly concerned to be upon
his Guard, and conceal his Designs from Some sort of People, as he is to
communicate them, and address for Counsel to Others. Those then, who are proper
for such purposes, must First of all be Men of Integrity and Fidelity, that is,
fit to be trusted; and then they must be Men of sound Sense, Sober and
Discreet, Wise and Experienced; otherwise they will not be fit to Direct.
Honesty and Sufficiency are the Two Indispensable qualifications of good
Counselors; and indeed, to These we may add a Third Consideration which ought
to weigh with us very much in our Choice; and This is, That neither They
themselves, nor any of their Relations, or particular Friends, be at all
concerned in the matter we consult about. For, though you may possibly Reply to
this, That I have sufficiently prevented any Mischiefs of that kind, by
providing already, that they should be Persons of Integrity, and whoever is so,
will not be biassed by his own, or his Friend's Interest; yet to that I must
rejoin, in justification of this Advice; First, That Honesty so stanch, and
firm, and Philosophical, as shall be Proof against all the Impressions of
Advantage, is to be met with in very few. It is indeed what ought to be; but as
the World goes, it is rather to be wished for, than found and practiced. And
Secondly, Allowing the Party we Consult, to have attained this Perfection of
unmovable Sincerity; yet it is neither Wisdom, nor Kindness, nor good Manners,
to drive him to such Difficulties, and such Anxieties of heart, as the asking
his Advice in such Circumstances must needs involve him in. This is what we
call putting him in between the Milstones, where he must either crush himself,
or us.

The other part of Caution, requisite upon these occasions, regards the
receiving Advice, when our Counselors are chosen. And this must be sure to
have a patient Hearing, and kind and grateful Entertainment allowed it; we
should follow and put it in practice betimes, and not delay, till we are
reduced to Extremities; we should consider and proceed upon it with Judgment
and Candor, and be well pleased that our Friends should speak their Minds
freely, and declare the Truth, though it happen to be severe and unpalatable to
us. When we have taken our Measures according to it, in full considence of the
Prudence and Friendship with which it was given, we must not afterward repine,
or be sorry that we have been guided by it, though the Event fall short, or
prove contrary to our Expectations. For it is a very common thing for good
Counsel to be very unsuccessful. But a Wise Man ought to take greater
Satisfaction in proper Measures, and prudent Conduct, though the Consequence be
calamitous; than in the greatest good fortune imaginable, when his Measures
were false and ill-adjusted; When as the Historian observes of Marius; Sic
correcta Marij temeritas gloriam ex culpa invenit.
The Rashness of the General was corrected by the Event, and his fault received
Honor and Commendation. It is below a Man of Sense, and agreeable to the
Character of Vulgar and Ignorant Souls only, to sit down and wish they had done
otherwise; and, after the maturest Deliberation, and the best choice their case
will admit, to fancy they took a wrong Course: For such People in their Crosses
and Disappointments, only weigh the Reasons for the contrary Methods, without
having Greatness or Presence of Mind to counterbalance These, with Those other,
once more forcible Arguments, which induced them to act as they did. Thus much
was not amiss, I thought, to be hinted briefly for the use of those who want,
and ask Advice; but as for the Persons addressed to, the Rules fit to be
observed by Them in giving of it, shall be specified at large under the Head of
Prudence. For indeed Counsel is a very considerable and extensive Branch of
that Virtue.

Moderation between Fear and Assurance.
is a Steadiness of Temper; consisting in a middle state, between the Extremes
of Confidence and Distrust; Assurance and Fearfulness. And this is necessary to
be well Moderated, both with regard to our Selves, and Others.

To repose too great Confidence in a Friend, and reckon our selves absolutely
sure of him, is very often Prejudicial to our Affairs; and to distrust his
Ability, or his Inclination to do us Service, is offensive to Him; Insomuch,
that where we entertain Suspicious, though never so just in themselves, yet it
is not prudent to give any Demonstrations of our Jealousy. For no Man loves to
be Distrusted, (because every Man loves to be thought to have Power and
Sincerity) and therefore to betray our Distrust is sure to Displease; nay,
likely to Provoke, and turn a Friend into an Enemy. But then, on the other hand
we must be careful too, not to be so entirely depending, so lazy and secure in
our Confidences, as not to be very much upon our Guard, except it be with some
very choice and tried Friends: A Man never Rides safe without the Reins in his
own Hand; only, the Skill of the Horseman must be shown, in neither letting
them hang too slack, nor drawing them too stiff. A Man should never disclose
all his Thoughts, and Intentions; but, so far as he thinks convenient to
communicate his Mind, he should do it with Truth and Sincerity; he must by no
means Deceive or Ensnare his Friend, and therefore let him tell True; but he
must take heed too, that he be not Deceived or Abused Himself, and therefore he
should take care not to tell All. He should follow that excellent Advice of our
Blessed Master; to Marry the Serpent with the Dove; tempering and qualifying
that Innocence and Simplicity which restrains a Man from hurting Others, with
that Wisdom and Subtlety, which keeps him from injuring Himself; so standing
upon one's Guard, and Defending one's Self against the Cunning Insinuations,
and Treacherous Designs, and unseen Ambushments of our pretending Friends. For
Policy and Stratagem is as commendable a Weapon, when used Defensively, as it
is Dishonorable and Base, when Offensive. And therefore every Motion should be
wary and well-advised; and in our Advances of Familiarity and Confidence, we
must never engage so far, as not to secure a Retreat to our Selves, whenever
our Inclination shall dispose, or the Necessity of our Affairs oblige us to it:
Nay not only so, It is not enough, that our Retreat be possible, but it must be
safe and easy, without any great Reluctance in our Selves, or any Damage from
Those, in whom we Consided.

On the other hand, we should not so far be consident of our Selves, as to let
this grow into Security and Presumption. If we have Friends, though they do not
bear our whole Weight, yet it is not convenient to let go our Hold; nor for any
Opinion, either of our own Abilities, or the prosperous Condition of our
Affairs, to disdain Another's Help, or grow negligent and remiss in our Own
Care. And yet this is oftentimes the Case of Men, who think no body so Wise as
themselves, or have that Opinion of their own Power and Address, to imagine
every thing will bow before, and truckle under them; that no body will dare to
attempt any thing to their Prejudice or dissatisfaction; and from These fond
Possessions, come to abate of their Pains, to despise all Care; and so at last
are abominably overreached, surprised into Mischief and Ruin, and become a Jest
and public Scorn.

Tge katubg gikd ib Occasions.
To take every thing in its proper Time, while it is seasonable, and Occasion
serves. And in order hereunto, we must be sure to avoid Precipitation, which is
a mortal Enemy to Wisdom, the bane and confounder of all good Designs: And a
Vice very usual, and much to be seared, among People in heat of Youth, and all
others of a warm and sanguine Complexion. And in truth, the knowing how to take
every thing in the Nick; to lay hold on every Opportunity and Advantage, and
make the best of all times, and all means of Action, is one of the masterly
Perfections of a Wise and Dextrous Manager. For we are to consider, that every
thing has its Season, and even the best things, as we may order them, may be
irregular, and out of due Time. Now Have and Hurry is the most contrary to that
good Quality, that can possibly be imagined; for This disorders, and confounds
All; and so at last spoils All. You know the common Proverb, Canis festinans
caecos parit catulos.
Hasty Bitches bring blind Whelps. This Precipitation is usually the Effect of
some Passion, which spurs us on too fast, and will not endure to wait till
Matters are ripe for Execution; Nam qui cupit, festinat; qui festinat evertit;
unde festinatio improvida and caeca; duo adversissima rectae menti Celeritas
and Ira.
The impatience of desire puts us upon hastening, and Have disorders and undoes
all; so that This is always improvident and blind; Hastiness and Anger are the
Two things in the World most distant from a Sober and Judicious Mind. Such is
the account generally to be given of it; though it cannot be denied, but these
Hasty proceedings are frequently owing to Weakness, and want of Judgment. Now
the contrary Vice of Heaviness, and Sloth, and Negligence in our Affairs, which
is sometimes mistaken for Solidity, and Thought, and wise Caution, is no less
dangerous, and destructive to our Affairs, especially then, when all
Preliminaries are adjusted, all Resolutions taken, and nothing remains but the
Executive part. For it is well observed, That in Deliberation and Consultation
a Man is allowed to spend a great deal of Time, because then every Particular
is to be nicely weighed, every Advice canvassed, and out of All compared
together, the Best to be pitched upon; but when we come to Action, the case is
much otherwise, for the Mind is then supposed to be settled, and all Doubt
over; upon which account it is, that we are commanded by the Masters of Wisdom,
to to be Slow in Counsel, and Swift in Execution; to deliberate at leisure, but
to sinish apace. It is true indeed, this Rule is not so universally
efficacious, but that sometimes we see Events contrary to it. A Man stumbles
upon Success, though he run headlong upon it; and proves as Fortunate in the
Event, though the Time he took to consider, was very short; and the Resolves he
made, as rash and imprudent, as they were hasty; But this is very seldom seen;
and the few Instances we have of it are owing purely to Chance; And Chance is
somewhat so distant from the ordinary course of Affairs, that a Man can never
depend upon it, or govern himself by such Events. On the contrary, He should
take great care, That these lucky Hits, like a winning hand, do not tempt us to
run too great a Risque, and venture upon them boldly. For, commonly speaking,
Gamesters give out Losers; and all they have to show for their daring
Hastiness, is only That Proverb, Of Resolving in Have, and Repenting at
Leisure; Ruin and a fruitless Remorse being commonly the End of such
inconsiderate Undertakings.

These then are the Two Extremes, which like Rocks must be avoided, and with
equal care too; for if we Split upon Either, our Affairs will be shipwrack'd
and lost. It is as great a Fault to anticipate a fair occasion, and snatch it,
while it is Green and Crude; as it would be to let it Wither and Rot in our
Hands. The Former is a Defect most incident to Young Men; whose Spirits move
briskly, and their Blood boils in their Veins; and whose Desires are so eager
and impetuous, that they want Patience, and cannot be content to let Time and
Providence bring things to Maturity, and work for them; and so these sprightly
Men, by starting too quick, run, and catch nothing; The Latter is more proper
to Stupid Men, the Cowardly and Irresolute; the Lazy and Unactive. For there is
need of a Sprightly and Vigilant Soul to discern and to lay hold on favorable
Junctures; but then at the same time that the Soul must be awake, we must see,
that it be not Restless and Impatient. A Man must look before him; descry
Opportunities at a distance; keep his Eye constantly upon them; observe all the
motions they make toward him; make himself ready for their approach; and,
lying thus upon the catch, when he sees his time, lay fast hold, and not let go
again, till he has done his Business.

Industry and Fortune.
is for a Man to govern himself well, and do his Duty to the Two great
Disposers, and Superintendants of all Human Affairs; Industry I mean, or which
in this place comes to the same thing, Virtue, and Fortune. It has long been
matter of Controversy, which of These carries the greatest Sway; and the
Question never was or will be decided to the Satisfaction of all People; for
some have a greater respect for One, and some for the Other. Thus much at least
is past all doubt; that both the One and the Other do a great deal; both have
Power and Credit; and both have a Title indisputable to show for it; for
nothing can be more palpably false, than that either of these Two does All, and
the other Nothing. Perhaps indeed Matters would go better, if it were not thus;
and Men have reason to wish, That the whole Authority were vested in one of
them singly. For then we should know what to trust to. Then our Task would be
easy, because all our Thought and Diligence would be fixed, and determined to
one Object; whereas now we float between both, the Distraction of the Mind
renders our Attempts infinitely laborious and full of hazard; and we can very
hardly attend to both, and bring them friendly to conspire together. Daily
Experience proves this Truth to us; for usually those who are very much taken
up with the One, disregard and perfectly despise the Other. Thus the Young and
Sanguine, the Forward and Daring Men keep Fortune in their Eye, and lay the
main stress there, as you see plainly by their large Hopes, and the mighty
Successes they promise themselves in every Undertaking: And Fortune often
rewards this Respect they pay her, and declares them her Favorites, by the
many Prodigious and most Surprising things wrought by them. On the Other hand,
Men in Years, whose Blood is cold and heavy, and They consequently calm and
slow, place all their Expectations in Industry: And it cannot be denied, but
These act the more reasonably of the Two. If a Man were disposed to compare
them both together, and observe what can be alleged to determine his Choice on
either side; we may state the Matter very fairly Thus. He that depends upon
Industry, takes the Safest Side, the more Virtuous, and the more Reputable: For
admit, that Fortune run counter, and spightfully defeat all his Diligence; yet
is there still this Satisfaction left, that he has made no false Steps, that
he suffered in his proper Post, doing his Duty; and that he has acquitted
himself, as became a Wife and an Honest Man. Those that take the other course,
are in great danger of waiting and hoping in vain: But if all should succeed to
their hearts desire, yet still this is none of Their doing; nor is there really
any Credit or Commendation due to them for it. But indeed, Wisdom takes a
middle Course; she advises no Man entirely to devote himself to either of
these; and though One may be preferred, yet not to that degree, as to bring the
Other into absolute Neglect and Contempt. For since Neither can be excluded
from our Affairs, it is fit we should allow Both a place in our Regard; and
indeed they are often beholding to one another; and an observing Man will
easily discern a great deal of Mutual Assistance, and a very good Understanding
between them. We must take care then to discharge our part to Both, but Both do
not challenge our Respects alike. For the Preference is abundantly on the side
of Industry; for according to that old Motto, Virtute duce, comite Fortuna.
Virtue should lead, and Fortune go along with us.



CHAP. XI. The Fruits, or Good Effects of Wisdom.
The First, Living in a constant Readiness for Death.
The Day of Death.
That which gives the finishing Stroke, and fixes the Character upon all the
rest; for indeed all the Actions of our whole Life must be submitted to this
Test. This is most truly what we commonly call it, The Great Trial; The Essay,
that distinguishes our Alloy and True Standard; and it is in the good Success
of this Trial, that we are to expect the greatest Fruit of all our Studies. In
order to make a true Judgment of Life, we must of necessity inform our selves
what sort of Conclusion it has; For the End compleats and crowns the Work; and
as a Good Death is an Honor to our whole Life, so an Ill one casts back
Infamy, and sullies all that went before. You can never give a Just Character
of the Player, till his Part be at End; and the Case of Common Life is so far
the same, that the Management of the Last Act is incomparably the most
difficult of any, that belongs to either of them. Epaminondas, one of the
Bravest Men that ever Greece bred, when his Opinion was asked, To which of the
Three, he thought the Preference due, Chabrias, Iphicrates, or Himself; made
answer, That this was a Question incapable of being resolved; For (says he) the
Man that would determine justly of such a Competition for Honor, must stay
till he has seen how we all Three dye. The Reason is evident; because every
other Action of a Man's Life is capable of Hypocrisy and Dissimulation; but in
this Last Scene alone All is Natural, and no room left for Counterfeit or
Disguise. Nam verae voces tum demum pectore ab imo
Ejiciuntur, and eripitur Persona, manet Res.
Lucret. Lib. 3.
For then Men's Words will with their Thoughts agree;
And, all the Mask pulled off, show what they be.
Creech.

Fortune in truth seems to way-lay us here; to drive us upon this as her last
Reserve; to make the utmost Effort upon our Virtue; and in one moment overturn
all that Character and Credit, which we have for many Years with infinite Toil,
and Anxiety, been setting up. Oh what a Triumph it would be then, to make a Man
expire with Laberius his Exclamation; Nimirum hac die una plus vixi mihi, quam
vivendum fuit.
I have lived this one day more, than it was for my Honor and Advantage to
have lived! So truly as well as wisely, so every way worthy of Solon, was that
Observation made to Craesus, which one of the Potes has illustrated thus: --
Scilicet ultima sempet
Expectanda dies homini, dicique beatus
Ante obitum nemo, supremaque funera debet.

-- Man must censured be by his Last Hour,
Whom truly we can never Happy call,
Before his Death, and closing Funeral.
Sandys.

It Is without all dispute a most Excellent Attainment, to have learnt how to
dye: Of knowing how to dye.
and all its Labors determine: He that has laid out his whole Life upon it,
has put it to no ill use; and He, who among all the rest of his Qualifications
is not Master of This, has thrown away all his Time and Pains to no manner of
purpose. That Man can never Live well, who knows not how to Dye well; and he
has lived to very good purpose, who makes a happy End, (says Seneca.) A Man
can no more govern and direct his Actions as he ought, who does not keep Death
in his Eye; than an Archer can shoot well, who never looks at the Mark. In one
word, The Art of Dying as becomes us, is the Art of Liberty, and an Easy Mind;
the way to get above all Fear, and to live in perfect Happiness and
Tranquillity; Without this there is no Pleasure in Life; it is impossible indeed
there should; for who can enjoy That with Peace and Satisfaction, which he
esteems most valuable and dear, and is tormented with perpetual anxious Fear of
losing every Moment?

who goes out of the World with such Loathness and Reluctance, that it is mere
matter of Constraint; and plain, he would fain, but cannot, stay here any
longer.

Five Sorts of Behavior with regard to Death.
may, in my Opinion, be reduced to these Five that follow: 1. They may Fear and
Avoid it, as the Last and greatest Evil. 2. They may expect and wait for it
with great Easiness, and Patience, and Resignation of Mind, as for a Thing
which they look upon as Natural, Unavoidable, and not only Necessary, but also
Reasonable to be undergone. 3. They may despise it, as a Matter Indifferent,
and of no great Concern to them. 4. They may wish for it, pray for it, make
toward it, as the only Safe Harbor which can give them Rest and Protection
from the Troubles of This Life; nay, as that which will not only be a
Deliverance, but a Happiness; a mighty Advantage, as well as a perfect
Security. 5. They may bring it upon Themselves.


Now, if we examine these Particulars, the Second, Third, and Fourth will
appear Commendable and Good; the Thoughts and Resentments of a Virtuous and a
Judicious Mind; though it must be allowed, that as they differ from each other,
so they are expected to move and affect the Man differently, according to his
present Circumstances. For All of them are not commendable equally, and at all
times. But for the First and Last, they never are or can be so at all; as being
the Vicious Extremes of Weakness and Want of Virtue; for how different soever
the Effects may appear, This is the same common Cause of them both. I shall
enlarge a little, and try to illustrate each of these Particulars, in this
Chapter.

Fear of Death.
though indeed it be the Practice (the Failing I ought to say,) of almost all
the World. And what can be a greater Reproach? what a more undeniable Evidence
of the Weakness of Mankind, than that Every body in a manner should be guilty
of That, which No body dares undertake to defend? But on the contrary, against
Those, who labor under this painful Folly, in Tenderness for Themselves; or
are thus concerned upon the account of Others, we can never want Plenty of
Arguments. Among others, These following Considerations may perhaps do
something toward softning the Approach of our own Death, or that of our Friends
to us. The effect of vain Opinion.
There is not in the World any Calamity, which Mortals have such amazing
Notions, and live in such constant Terror of, as Death; and yet it is very
evident, there is nothing they call a Misfortune, dreaded upon such Poor, such
Insignificant Grounds; nay, I must revoke those words, Dreading and Misfortune
too; and dare venture to affirm, there is not any thing which ought to be
received with greater Satisfaction, and a more resolved Mind. So that we must
be forced to confess, in despite of all the Sophistry of Flesh and Blood to
the contrary, that This is a mere Vulgar Error; Opinion has charmed and
captivated all the World; for Reason has no hand at all in it. We take it upon
trust from the Ignorant and Unthinking Multitude; and believe it a very great
Evil, because They tell us so; but when Wisdom assures us, that it is a
Deliverance and sure Repose from all the Evils that can possibly befall us; the
only Haven where we can lie safely, after the Waves and Storms of a Troublesome
Tossing World, we turn the deaf Ear, and believe not one word she can say. Thus
much is certain: Death, when actually present, never did any body hurt; and
none of those many Millions, who have made the Experiment, and now know what it
is, have made any Complaints of this nature concerning it. If then Death must
be called an Evil, it has this to say in its own Vindication; That of all the
Evils which are, or ever were in the World, This is the only one that does no
body harm; and in truth, the mighty Dread of it proceeds merely from ghastly
and monstrous Ideas, which Men's vain Imaginations form of it at a distance.
There is nothing of Foundation or Reality at the bottom: it is all Opinion and
Fancy; nay, it is the very Instance, in which Opinion pretends most to set up
against Reason; and attempts to fright us out of our Wits, by showing the
hideous Vizor of Death: For, Reason to fear it there can be none, because we
are so perfectly ignorant what it is. How Unaccountable is our Concern, how
almost Impossible indeed, for a Thing, of which we have little or no Notion?
Upon which account, He, who had Apollo's Testimony for the Wisest Man living,
said, that To fear Death, was to pretend to be more knowing than one really
was; and a vain Affectation of Wisdom; for it was to make the World believe a
Man understands a thing, which neither He, nor any body else understands: And
we find, that this was his real Sense, by the Testimony his Practice gave to
it. For when his Friends importuned him to plead for his Life, and justify
himself against the Calumnies of his Accusers, the Address he made upon that
Occasion, we are told, was to this Effect. Gentlemen. If I should make it my
request, That you would not put me to Death, I am under some apprehensions of
asking a Punishment, instead of a Favor; and suing to my own Disadvantage. For
I must ingenuously confess, I do not at all know what it is to Die; nor what
Good or Ill is consequent upon it. They who fear Death must in reason
presuppose some Notices of it, for my own part, I declare I have none; nor can
I tell at all, either what sort of Passage that is, which leads into the other
World; or how Matters stand there; so that for ought I know to the contrary,
both the One and the Other, the Condition and the Way to it, may be exceeding
Desirable, and full of Felicity. As for those things, which I know to be Evil,
such as Injustice and Wrong, I have the greatest abhorrence of them, and avoid
them with all possible Circumspection and Care; But for such as I know nothing
of, I know as little how to Hate, or to Fear them. Now Death I own is one of
These; and therefore, Gentlemen, I leave the Matter wholly to You. For really I
cannot be satisfied, whether is best for me; to Die or not to Die; and
therefore I hope you will Order what is really best; and I am perfectly content
you should determine and dispose of me, as you think fit.

Of Weakness.
This in the First Place is most despicable Weakness, and scandalous Cowardice.
The merest Woman, the most tenderhearted Wretch alive can Compose her self in
a few Days, and put an End to the justest Passion, for the Loss of a Husband,
or a Child; and what a Disparagement is it to Reason, and Wisdom, that They
should not effect that presently, which in a little while will do itself? The
most Ignorant and poor Spirited Man alive can do it with the help of Time; And
why should not a Wise and Brave Man do it without that Advantage? For what is
Wisdom, and Resolution, and Gallantry of Soul good for, or how shall we
distinguish it, if it do not quicken a Man's pace, and render him more expert
and dextrous; so that he shall be able to do Greater things, and to dispatch
them with greater ease and speed, than Others, who are destitute of these
Accomplishments? From the same Weakness and Irresolution it is, that the
Generality of Dying Men, are never sensible of their last Hours; but still
flatter themselves with Expectations of perfect Recovery, or longer Delay at
least; and perhaps, there is no one passage of our Lives comparable to this
part for Cheat and Delusion; none that equally sooths, and amuses us with vain
hopes. Not that I ascribe this wholly to Weakness neither; for possibly Vanity
may contribute a great deal toward it. We look upon our Death, as a matter of
mighty Consequence, a strange and most important Revolution; in which the whole
World is concerned; and can scarce be brought to imagine, that Providence will
permit a Calamity, in which all Nature must suffer, and this orderly and
Beautiful System of the Universe End, and Perish. So extravagant are the
Notions we entertain of our Selves, and of the importance we are of to God and
the World.

Of Injustice.
such a Man is evidently guilty of Injustice. For if Death be really a Good and
a Desirable thing, Wherefore are we afraid of it? And if it be otherwise, Why
do we make it worse? This is to aggravate and multiply upon our selves the very
Thing we pretend most to be afraid of; and to create new Pains, and Torments,
which Death knows nothing of, nor would ever bring upon us. This is a
^ool-hardy Madness, like his, who, when an Enemy had Robbed him of one part of
his Goods, threw the rest into the Sea, to show how little he valued the Injury
his Plunderer had done him.

It Is prejudicial to Life.
To Live in fear of Death is the greatest Injury a Man can be guilty of to
Himself; the spightfullest way of destroying his own Life. For no Man, who has
this Dread perpetually upon him, can ever have any tolerable Enjoyment of
himself or the World. He only lives truly free and at ease, who is got above
the Fears of Death: And on the other hand, Life were no better than perpetual
Slavery, if the Liberty of Dying were taken away. Death is in effect the only
Foundation, and Support of all the Freedom we can make any Pretensions to; The
sure, and common Retreat from all our Sufferings and Hardships. A Man therefore
must needs be very wretched and uneasy, (and yet thus wretched are almost all
Mankind) who takes off the Quiet and Enjoyment of Life, by an anxious Concern
and Fear to dye; and loses all the Benefit of Death too, by an immoderate
Fondness, and afflicting Solicitude for Life.

Chiron refused to be Immortal, when it was proffered him, upon receiving
Information from the God of Time (his Father Saturn) what hard Conditions the
Gift was clogged with. On the other hand, What would become of the World, if
there were not something of Pain and Bitterness, which should discourage us,
and create in us some Aversion to Dying? There is no doubt to be made, but were
it not for this Check upon our Nature, Men would run out of the World eagerly,
greedily embrace Death, and upon every little Pett take Sanctuary here, without
any manner of Judgment or Distinction, how far the Provocation ought to carry
them. We must therefore upon second Thoughts confess, that this Mixture is made
with Discretion; sit to preserve us in a due Moderation; so as neither to be
fond of Life, nor peevishly weary of it; and so again, as neither to be afraid
of Death, nor to court and hasten to it; both the One and the Other are
tempered with Sweet, and allayed with Bitter; enough of the One to recommend
and make it Tolerable; and so much of the Other too, as will keep it from being
the Object of any Passion in Extremes. So necessary are the Ingredients, so
just the Proportions; so skilful, and withal so tender of our Good, the Hand
that mingled them.

Operation, what good Effect is to be expected from it? where would all this
End at last, and what a miserable Account should we find when we come to the
upshot, and feel how dear this Course has cost us? For do but imagine the
Condition of a Man surprised by Death; the Tears, the Agonies, the Groans and
Lamentations, the Rage, the Despair, in a word, the inexpressible Confusion of
being seized all on the sudden, by a Merciless, Invincible, and Unseen Enemy.
These are such dreadful Circumstances, that Wisdom sure gives much safer and
better Advice, in directing Men to stand their Ground; to face their Enemy; to
observe his Approaches; and provide for the Combat. Nay rather indeed, to
encounter him perpetually, by following a Method the direct contrary to That of
the Vulgar; which is, by fixing their Eyes and Thoughts steadily upon Death; to
converse, and grow intimately acquainted with it; to render it gentle and tame
by Familiarity and long Use. To carry the Idea and the strongest
Representations of it that we can possibly form, constantly about with us. To
harden our selves in the Expectation of it; and that, not only in Times of
Sickness, and Danger, where we have reason to suspect our Selves; but in our
most confirmed Health; in the midst of what we call Safety. Death should not be
the Companion of our black, and sullen, and melancholy Hours only; but of our
greatest Gaieties, best Humor, and most solemn Entertainments and Delights.
The Sauce to every Dish; the Burden to every Song should be this Reflection;
That we are always in danger, set as fair Marks, and that Death is aiming at
us; That several others have been snatched away, who thought themselves as far
out of the reach of his Dart, as we can suppose our selves to be now in the
height of all our Jollity; That an Accident, which happened at One Time, or to
One Person, may as well happen to Another: And thus we are advised by the
Wisest Men, to check our Pleasures, and abate our blind Security, by imitating,
as well as supplying by These never unseasonable Meditations, that Ancient
Custom of the Egyptians, who at their Feasts served up a Death's Head; and that
of Christians, and other Persuasions too, who contrive, that their
Buryingplaces shall join to their Temples, or be in some other Parts the most
conspicuous and frequented of any: The Original whereof seems to have been,
That these Public Monuments might awaken Men's Minds, and preserve the
Reflections and Remembrances of Death always fresh and vigorous. Where Death
awaits us, is very uncertain; and therefore we should expect to meet it every
where, and every moment; and make such constant and sure Provision against its
coming, that let it steal upon us never so Cunningly, never so Suddenly, it may
sind us always in readiness. This is no such mortifying Exercise, as some
fondly imagine; quite otherwise, it rather sweetens Life, and recommends its
Enjoyments, by setting us above the Fears, and Disappointments, and amazing
Terrors, which Worldly and Sensual Men feel and labor under. It abates our
Losses, by foreseeing and preparing for them; and it doubles our Advantages, by
looking upon them, as Clear Gains, and adding a pleasing sort of Surprise to
the Fruition. Thus the Poet very justly has observed to his Friend: Omnem
creed diem tibi diluxisse supremum,
Grata superveniet, quae non sperabitur, Hora.
Hor. Lib. 1. Ep. 4.
While' midst strong Hopes and Fears thy Time does waste,
Think every Rising Sun will be thy last.
And so the grateful unexpected Hour
Of Life prolonged, when come, will please thee more.
Creech.



finished, all the rest has its due proportion. Years are good for nothing but
to make a larger Sum; nor does the Number of them contribute one whit to the
rendering Life more or less Happy, more or less Desirable. But the shortest Term
is capable of Virtue and Felicity, and has its proper Perfections, which are
no more increased by Quantity, than the Largeness of the Circumference makes
the Perfection of a Circle: The Least Round is as truly so as the Greatest; and
as the Figure in Lines, so the Quality and Manner in Life, does all. A Man of
small Limbs and Low Stature, is as truly a Man, as the Tallest Giant that ever
Story described; and to be short, neither Men nor their Lives are to be
Estimated by their Bulk and Length; but by having All their Parts entire, and
every Qualisication requisite or possible to the Condition of their Nature.

themselves in the way of Dying, when Life and Vigor are at their highest
pitch; they go into a Foreign Land for Graves, and think the Heaps of Slain,
and the Throng of Fallen Enemies the noblest Monument; so far are They from
grieving that They cannot Lie among their Family and their Friends. And as for
the Terrors of a Violent Death, they are exceeding Childish and Vain; and would
easily be cured, could we prevail with our Selves to see Things as they are.
For, as little Children Cry and Tremble at Men in Vizors, but are presently
quiet and lay aside their Fears, as soon as you uncover their Faces; so it is
here. Remember then, Man, That Fire, and Sword, and all other Instruments of
Violence, and Casualties, and surprising Aggravations of this kind are only the
hideous Disguise of Death; a Vizor put on to affright us; but all this Effect
is owing to the dismal Idea's we form to our Selves; for take but off this
Mask, and you will sind that Death is always one and the same. And he, who Dies
in Battle, or is Burnt in his Bed; he that falls in an instant by the hand of
an Executioner, and he that Expires upon a Rack, meet all in the self-same
State, though they do not come to it the same way, and dye the very Death that
Women and Children, and all that seem to us to Depart in the Easiest, Gentlest,
and most Peaceable manner, Dye. The Difference lies only in the Pomp, and
Noise, the Preparation and Prefacing of Death; but let the Ceremonies be what
they will, in the Substance and Thing it self, there neither is, nor can be any
Difference at all.

Hours brings the World round, the same Succession of Light and Darkness: There
is no fresh Sun to be Lighted up, nor any other Course or Revolution, than what
Nature has Traveled in from the very Beginning. But put the longest Period
the thing can bear, and One Year is sure to present you with all the
Vicissitudes: In the Change of these Seasons you see the several Stages of the
World and your own Life; The Sprightliness of Infancy, and a new Born Universe
in the Spring; The Gay and Cheerful Youth of Summer; The Maturity and Manhood
of Autumn; and the Decrepit Age, the Decays and Deformity of a dying World in
Winter. All the Trick is to play this Farce over again, and begin where this
time Twelvemonth we left off. So that they who Live longer, do not see any more
Objects than Others; but only more of the same Objects oftener repeated to them.



sweet Innocence struggle with? How will They be Exposed for want of a Parent's
Care? What a Prey will They be made, if They have Fortunes? And if They have
none, How will They be Supported, or where will They find the Kindness of
Inspection and Good Advice? For They who are Destitute of a Competence, and
stand most in need of Friends, are least likely to have Their Assistance. This
is surely, a very cutting Consideration, a natural Anxiety, and a necessary
Consequence of those Tender Regards though due to a Man's Posterity.

But, hark you my Friend; consider again, whose Children These are; Are They
not God's as well as Yours? Nay, Are They not His a great deal more than Yours?
He has an Original Right in them; He is Their True, Their First Father; You
are only so in a subordinate Sense; as One who by his Permission were an
Instrumental Cause of Their Being. He is able to Provide for his own Family;
never fear it; All Your Care without His Blessing is Vain and of no
Significance while you Live; but though His Assistance be necessary to You;
Yours is not in any degree so to Him. He will feel no Difficulty at all in
Sustaining These Orphans, when You are taken from Them. Every Condition, and
all Times are equal to Omnipotence. And if You cannot question His Power, Have
You any pretense to doubt His Disposition? You have daily Experience of This;
They Subsist by His Bounty, even now; His Bowels are not less Tender than
Yours; and as He is more truly and properly, so is he a more, Infinitely more
Affectionate Father to Them, than Your self are; It is most absurd to think,
that You can either Do, or Wish better for Them, than He. Nay, if upon any
other Consideration such an Imagination could be endured, yet even common
Experience contradicts it. Do but observe the Circumstances of such as seem to
be left entirely upon Providence; destitute of all Human Advantages; and you
shall sind more thriving Men in the World, more that have been raised to great
Honors, and eminent Posts, and plentiful Fortunes, who have had nothing but
His Favor, and their Own Industry to depend upon, than Others, who begun upon
good Funds, and thought They might reasonably promise Themselves much greater
Success. So particularly, so visibly, is He the Father of the Fatherless.



Vitam nemo acciperet, si daretur Scientibus.
Were People thoroughly acquainted with the Conditions, and Encumbrances of
Living, no body (says a Wiseman) would accept Life upon those Terms. What
ground of Dissatisfaction then can occur to Them who have felt and suffered
under These? What Temptation can They have to wish a Second Torment, or to
repine, that Their First was not of a longer Continuance? The Old Philosophers
fixed upon this Argument for Comfort, and thought it an irrefragable one.
Either we are Nothing at all after Death, or we are in a much better State than
at Present; and Either way we have Reason to be well Content to Dye, because
Either way Death puts an End to all our Suffering and Pain. There is, I confess
a great Alteration in the Case, when we come to consider the matter as
Christians; because thus we are assured that there is a State, infinitely Worse
than the most exquisite, and most durable Miseries of this Life. But then This
is what we have fair warning of, and may avoid if we please. A Christian who
Lives as he ought, is better fortified with Arguments against the Fear of
Death, than any Other Person can be. And They who will not Live so, have no
reason to repine; for even thus, the shorter the Life, the less Measure of
Their Iniquities; and the Damned Themselves would not wish to Live again, but
upon a supposition, that they should Live better than before. But be that State
to which Death turns such Men over never so dreadful, yet since this is a
Misery of their own making, it comes not within the compass of our present
Argument, which only undertakes to show, That Death has nothing formidable, so
far as Nature and Providence are concerned in it. And That comes to thus much,
and no more. You came out of Death, that is, out of a State of Insensibility,
into Life, a Scene of Business and Action; and this you did without any Horror,
or Passion, or the least Disorder; You are now going back again into the Former
Condition of Sleep and Inactivity. Travel then the way you came, with the same
unconcernedness you did before. For after all, Reverti unde veneris quid grave
est?
What mighty Calamity can it be to return from whence you came, and where you
lay hid for many Ages?

It Is true, You see their Countenance discomposed, their Features distorted
with Convulsions, and all their Body struggling and laboring under Agonies and
Pains. But all This is only that ugly Vizor, which (as I said before) Death
puts on to scare us; it is not Death it self in its own Natural Visage; for
That has nothing of Horror or Deformity, but is all Quietness and Composure.
We send our Senses and Passions out to discover this unknown Land; and They,
like cowardly Spies, bring us an ill Report of the Country. They never
penetrated far enough to get true Intelligence; they speak nothing of their own
Knowledge, but make a Report only from the common Rumor of Ignorant People,
and their own Fears.

at present, how extremely mistaken these Men are in their Account; For the
Matter is in very Truth, the direct Reverse of all the terrible Representations
these Persons form to themselves. For Death, instead of taking away from us all
that is valuable and dear, puts into our Possession all we are capable of
receiving; Instead of taking us from our Selves, it enlarges us from our
Confinement, and restores our Souls to perfect Liberty, and true Enjoyment:
Instead of locking us up in the dark, it sets us in the clearest and brightest
Light; and serves us as we use to deal by the best Fruits, when we take off the
Skin, or Shell, or other Covering, that so we may see, and use them, and taste
their Natural Excellence. It removes us out of a straight, inconvenient
Dwelling, from a Dark, and Rheumatick, and Diseased Place, where we can see but
a very little Spot of Heaven, and only receive Light by Reflection, and at a
vast distance, through Two little Holes of our Eyes; into a Region of absolute
Liberty, confirmed and uninterrupted Health; perpetual and incessant Light, a
Sun that never sets, and Endless Day without any gloomy Intervals: Aequaliter
tibi splendebit omne Coeli latus. Totam lucem suo loco prope totus aspicies:
quam nunc per angustissimas ocu^orum Vias procul intueris and miraris.
A Place where our Faculties shall be enlarged, and all Heaven will display it
self to us; where we shall not only see Light, but dwell with it in its own
proper Sphere. In a word, It delivers us from the very Thing we dread most, by
making us Immortal, and putting a sinal and full Conclusion to that Death,
which took place from the Instant we came into the World, and was finished at
our Passage into Eternity. Dies iste, quem tanquam extremum reformidas, aeterni
natalis est.
For the Day we have such dreadful Apprehensions of, as if it were to be our
Last, is really our First, the joyful Birthday into a Life, which can never
have an End.

Summum nec metuas diem, nec optes.
With Courage firm, and Soul sedate,
Attend the Motions of thy Fate;
And whether Death be far or near,
Live free from eager Wish, and anxious Fear.


Now these Extremes, except there be some very particular and uncommon Reason
to give them countenance, are both of them Vicious and exceeding blameable; and
when I come hereafter to speak of this Matter in its proper place, you will
see, that nothing less than a very extraordinary Cause can render them so much
as excusable. To desire and pursue Death is very criminal; for it is very
unjust to throw away one's Life without a sufficient Reason; it is spightful to
the World, and injurious to our Friends, to grudge them the longer Use and
Continuance of a thing, which may be serviceable to them: It is the blackest
Ingratitude to God and Nature, thus to slight, and throw back again, the best
and most valuable Present they can make us; as if it were a Trifle, or a
Burden, not worth our keeping: It savours too much of Peevishness, and Pride;
and shows us humoursome and difficult, when we cannot be easy, and bear the Lot
that falls to our share; but will needs quit our hands of the Station God has
called us to, when there is nothing extraordinary to render it cumbersome. And
on the other hand, to fear and flee Death, when summoned to it, is an Offense
against Nature, Justice, Reason, and every Branch of our Duty; since Dying is
Natural, Necessary, and Unavoidable; Reasonable and Just.

Dying is Natural.
it is a part of that Great Scheme, by which the Order of the Universe is
established and maintained, and the whole World lives and subsists. And who are
We, that all this Regularity should be broken, and a new System contrived in
Our Favor? Death is really one of the Principal and most Material Articles in
the Constitution, and Administration of this vast Republic; and of infinite
Use and Advantage it is, for determining the Continuance, and promoting a
Constant Succession of the Works of Nature. The Failure of Life in One Instance
propagates it afresh in a Thousand others.

Sic Rerum Summa novatur.
Thus Life and Death successive keep their round,
Things dye to live, and by decays abound.
But, which comes nearer home, Death is not only a part of this Great Complex
and Universal Nature; but of thy Own Nature in particular; and That every whit
as essential a part, as that Birth which gave Thee Life. So that in cherishing
an Aversion, and running away from This, thou attemptest to flee from thy own
self. Thy Being is divided equally between Death and Life; These are the Two
Proprietors, and each claims a share, and has an indefeasible Right in every
one of us. These are the Terms, upon which Thou were created, and Life was
given with a Purpose, and upon Condition of being taken away; rather indeed it
was only lent, and, like all other Trusts or Debts, must be demanded back, and
may be called in at pleasure. If then the Thoughts of Dying discontent Thee,
consider, that the Hardship does not lie here; but carry thy Reflections
higher, and be concerned that ever thou wast born. For, either there is no
cause of Repining in either case, or else the Ground of all the Complaint lies
in having lived at all. You had Neighbors Fare, and purchased Life at the
Market Price; which is, The laying it down again; no body has it cheaper; and
therefore they who do not like the Bargain, and are loath to go out again,
should have refused at first, and never come into the World at all. But this is
what Men, were they capable of such a Choice, would never do, if their Fondness
of Life be so excessively great. The First Breath you drew bound you fast; and
all the Advances you made toward a more perfect Life, were so many Steps toward
Death at the same time. Nascentes morimur, finisque ab origin pendet.
Asson as born we dye; and our Live's End
Upon its first Beginning does depend.
Manil. Ast. 4.

To be concerned then, that we must Dye; is to be concerned that we are Men,
for every one that is so, is Mortal. And upon the strength of this Impression
it was, that a Wise Man, when the News of his Son's Death was brought him,
received it with all the Sedateness and seeming Unconcernedness that could be,
and only made this calm Reply; I knew very well that my Child was Mortal. Since
then Death is a thing so Natural, so Essential to all Nature in general, and
contributes so much to the Order and Well-being of the Whole World; and since
it is likewise so to your own Being, and the Condition of That in particular,
why should you conceive such horrible Ideas, why hold it in such irreconcilable
Detestation? In This you act in contradiction to Nature. I allow indeed, that
the Fear of Pain is very Natural, but I cannot admit the same Plea for the Fear
of Death. For how is it possible, that Nature should ever have infused into us
a Principle of Hatred, and Dread, against an Ordinance of her own Institution,
and such as she receives such a mighty Benefit from the due Execution of? And,
as an incontestable Evidence, that she does not so, it appears plainly, that,
where Nature works entire, without any Depravation or Restraint, there little
or no Marks of this Passion are to be found. Little Children, for instance, and
Brutes, who are not capable of being corrupted with Prejudice, are so far from
betraying any Fear of Death, that they meet it cheerfully, and seem pleased to
undergo it. The Gay and Smiling Countenances of these Creatures are enough to
assure us, that Nature does not teach us to fear Death, but we learn That from
some other hand. But all the Direction we have from Nature upon this occasion,
is, to expect and wait for Death; and whenever it comes, to receive it with
Submission and Cheerfulness, as considering, that it is of Nature's sending,
and express appointment.

Necessary.
It is necessary; a Sentence past for it, and irreversible; and Thou who
distractest thy Soul with Fears, and bewailest this Fate of thine, art
satisfied at the same time, that there is no possibility of avoiding it. And
what more exquisite Folly can a Man be guilty of, than the tormenting himself
industriously, when he knows it is to no purpose? Where do you find any Man so
stupidly silly, to spend his Time and his Breath in Entreaties, and importunate
Addresses, to One whom he knows incapable of granting, or inflexible and never
to be prevailed upon for his Requests? Or to knock eternally at a Door, that
will not, cannot be opened? And What more inexorable, more deaf to all our
Supplications, than Death? If any Calamities be proper Objects of Fear, they
are such as are barely Contingencies; which may indeed, but may not happen too.
And Those that are capable of Remedy or Prevention, are fit to have our
Thoughts and Care employed upon them. But Those that are fixed, and must come,
(which is the Case of Death) we have nothing to do but to expect, and to
provide for; and all that is to be done with that which cannot be cured, is to
fortify our Souls, and resolve to endure it. The Ignorant and Inconsiderate
fear and flee from Death; The Rash and Foolhardy courts and pursues it; The
Wise Man waits its Approach, and is ready to follow and obey the Summons; but
neither runs away from it, nor advances to meet it. But certainly our
Lamentations are very Idle and Extravagant, where they are sure to do no Good;
and so are our Anxieties and Fears, where there are no means of Escape. Feras,
non culpes, quod vitari non potest.
You must bear, and not complain, when the thing is unavoidable. The Behavior
of David was really very prudent; 2 Samuel xii.
and an admirable Pattern he has set us in it: When his Servants informed him,
that the Child, whose Sickness he had expressed a most passionate Concern for,
was dead; the next thing he did, was to wash, and dress himself, and return to
his ordinary way of Eating, and usual demonstrations of Cheerfulness. This
indeed was somewhat out of the common Road; and those about him, who knew no
better, were much astonished at his proceeding; but the Account he gave of
himself was solid and substantial; That, while the darling Infant was yet
alive, and consequently it was yet uncertain, how God would please to dispose
of him; he fasted, and wept, because he did not know, whether his Prayers might
be heard, and God would be gracious in letting the Child live: But as soon as
he understood it was dead, he changed his Course; because all Hopes of that
kind were then past: Life could not be recalled, nor his Tears and melancholy
Humiliations be of any farther use in this Case. I know well enough, that
foolish People have a Reply ready for all this. They will tell you, that when a
Thing is beyond all Remedy, it is then the fittest Object of our Grief; and,
that our Concern is at no time so seasonable, as when we cannot be better than
we now are. But This is the very Extremity of Senslessness; this compleats, nay
doubles the Folly. It is most truly said, Scienter frustra niti extremae
dementiae est.
That the greatest Madness a Man can possibly be guilty of, is to struggle and
fret himself, when he sees and knows all he does is in vain. Since then the
Matter now before us is so absolutely necessary, so unalterably fixed, so
perfectly unavoidable, it is not only to no manner of purpose to torment our
selves with the fear of it; but, if we would take right Measures, and make any
Profit of this Consideration, our Method must be, to make a Virtue of
Necessity; and if this grim Guest will come, to put on all our good Humor, and
prevail with our selves to receive him decently, and bid him welcome. For the
best thing we can do is to be beforehand with him. It would better become Us to
make some Advances, and meet Death, than suffer It to overtake Us; and to lay
hold on That, than to be surprised and apprehended by It.

Just and Reasonable.
It is highly agreeable to Reason and Justice, that Men should dye. For what
more reasonable, than that every thing should come to the place of its Final
Rest, and be safely deposited, where no new Change, no fresh Removal awaits it?
If Men are afraid of arriving at this Long Home, they should not move toward
it, but stand still, or go back again, or get out of the Road: But none of
these are in their Power to do. What more reasonable again, than that you
should go off this Stage of the World, and make room for new Actors, and a new
Scene, as your Predecessors made room for You? If you have played your Part
well, you go off with Applause, and That ought to content you; If you have
enjoyed your Self and the World, you have had a good Entertainment, enough to
Satisfy and Feast your Appetite; and therefore you ought to rise from Table in
Good Humor. If you had not the Wit to make the best of Life, and all its
Advantages slipped through your Fingers; what Loss do you sustain in parting with
it? What would you do with it any longer? If you could be trusted on, still the
Talent would lie unimproved. Observe to this purpose the Reasoning of the Poet.
Denique si vocem Rerum Natura repent
Mittat, and hoc aliquoi nostrum sic increpet ipsa;
Quid tibi tantopere est, Mortalis, quod nimis aegris
Luctibus indulges? quid mortem congemis, ac sles?
Nam si grata fuit tibi Vita anteacta, priorque,
Et non omnia pertusum congesta quasi in vas
Commoda persluxere, atque ingrata interiere,
Cur non, ut plenus Vitae conviva, recedis,
Aequo animoque capis securam, Stulte, quietem?
Sin ea, quae fructus cunque es, periere profusa,
Vitaque in offensu' est; cur amplius addere quaeris,
Rursum quod pereat male, and ingratum accidat omne;
Nec potius Vitae finem facis, atque laboris?
Lucretius, Lib. III.
-- If Nature should begin to speak,
And thus with loud Complaints our Folly check;
Fond Mortal, what is the matter thou do sigh?
Why all these Fears, because thou once must dye,
And once submit to strong Mortality?
For if the Race thou have already run
Was pleasant; if with Joy thou saw the Sun;
If all thy Pleasures did not pass thy Mind,
As through a Sieve, but left some Sweets behind;
Why do thou not then like a Thankful Guest,
Rise cheerfully from Life's abundant Feast,
And with a Quiet Mind go take thy Rest?
But if all those Delights are lost and gone,
Spilt idly all, and Life a Burden grown;
Then why, fond Mortal, do thou ask for more,
Why still desire to increase thy wretched Store,
And wish for what must waste, like those before?
Nor rather free thy self from Pains and Fear,
And end thy Life, and necessary Care?
Creech, Lucret.

But, besides that we are accountable for the Use of Life while we have it, and
our Profuseness does but inflame the Reckoning, the longer time we have allowed
us to Mispend it in; we must remember, that, according to what was urged a
little before; Life it self is a debt; This is as the Principal Sum put into
our Hands to Traffic with, but such as we should always be ready to pay down
upon the Nail, whenever it shall be called in again; and He who is the Owner
and Giver may Demand it the very next Hour. How then can you Argue against the
Condition of Your own Obligation? How can You falsify Your Trust, and Act
against Your Engagement, and Your Duty? It is most unreasonable to Shuffle and
Flinch, and Kick against these Pricks; because by Death you ease your self of a
mighty Charge and Trouble; You make up your great Account, and pay in that vast
Sum, for which you stood responsible, and which, while in your Custody, was
liable to great Loss and Hazard. Dying is a general thing; Every Body does it,
And can You take it Ill not to be Exempted? Do You expect to be the Single
Instance, the Sole Reserve from Universal Nature; to Enjoy a Privilege by your
self; a Privilege never yet seen nor heard of in the World? What unparalled
Folly and Presumptuous Madness is This? Or why should You be afraid to go where
all the World goes, where you will find innumerable Millions of Men, who have
taken up their Residence before you come, and whither you will be followed by
as great a Number afterward? How singular an Affectation is this? Death is
equally certain to All; and therefore it cannot be Unreasonable, nor Unjust,
with respect to You; for Equality is the first constituent part of Equity; and
no Man will be forgotten or overlooked in this Distribution. Omnes eodem
cogimur, Omnium
Versatur Urna: Serius, ocyus
Sors exitura, etc.
Horat. Od. 3. Lib. 11.
In the same Road All travel on,
By All alike the same dark Journey must be gone.
Our Blended Lots together lie,
Mingled in one common Urn;
Sooner, or Later, out they fly, etc.
IIId. Miscell.

Contempt of Death Good, if upon a Good Account.
and This is a Mark of a Brave and Generous Mind; This frequently proceeds from
exalted Judgment, and strength of Reason, and is more peculiarly the Virtue of
a Public Character, Elevated Fortune, and a Life full of Difficult and Weighty
Affairs. For to Persons in such Circumstances, many Accidents may happen, for
which no Man ought to scruple Dying; and several Prospects present themselves,
of Things so valuable, that they deserve to be preferred even before Life it
self. Let Other matters succeed how they will, This at least is a constant
Rule; That a Man ought always to be fonder, and have a greater Regard for
Himself, than for a Life led in hurry and public Business; which shows him, as
it were, always in a full Theater, and exposes him to the View and Censure of
all the World. He must consisider himself, not only as a Spectacle, but as a
Pattern to Mankind; and remember, That One of the Encumbrances of Honor and
Dignity, is a necessary Obligation to shine brighter than Common Men; to render
his Virtue more conspicuous to those below him; and to do Things exemplarily
Good and Great, though it happen to be at the Expense of All that the World
calls Dear. To such Persons many times the same Methods of safety are denied,
which private Men might make use of, without any reflection upon their
Prudence, or their Duty. They must by no means suffer any diminution of their
Honor; but when driven to a pinch, must Risque and Sacrifice their Lives, and
trust the Event to Fate. The Great Man, who cannot command himself so far as to
Despise Death, is not only made thereby incapable of doing any Gallant and
eminently Good Action, but he lays himself open to more than ordinary Dangers,
by this Timorous Spirit and Behavior; and Those too, such Dangers, as threaten
most, what requires his best care to preserve. For while his great Concern is
to preserve his Person, and see that Life be under Covert; his Duty, his
Honor, Virtue and Probity lie naked and exposed; and run a mighty hazard for
want of Courage to Protect and Stand by them. The Contempt of Death is in
effect the very Principle, to which the Boldest and most Renowned Exploits are
owing; the most daring Attempts, whether in Good or Ill Designs. He that has
Conquered the Fear of Death, has nothing more left to terrify him; He has it
in his Power to do what he pleases; and may at any time make himself Master of
Another Man's Life, because he is already Master of his Own. And, as this
Contempt is the true Source of Generosity and undaunted Firmness in Action; so
is it likewise the very Spirit and Life, that quickens and supports that
Resolution from whence they proceed. Hence Calmness, and Constancy, and
Perseverance, All the Free and Bold Determinations, by which Virtue has
expressed her self; the Noble and Admired Sentences uttered by Celebrated
Persons, when reduced to extremity of Danger and Distress: Such as shine in
Story, give lasting Characters to their Authors, and transport the Reader with
Wonder and Delight; a very few of which, because they now occur to my Mind, I
take the Liberty to insert here.

Helvidius Priscus, having received a Message from the Emperor Vespasian not to
appear in the Senate; or, if he came, strictly prohibiting him to interpose his
Opinion in a Debate, which was to be moved there; sent back word, That his
Character of a Senator required his Attendance, and he should not refuse his
Summons; neither should he, when There, balk any thing that became him; but, if
called upon to give his Judgment, would discharge his Conscience, and deliver
his Sense of the Case freely, and without Fear or Reserve. The Emperor provoked
with what he thought Insolence in this Reply, sent a Second Message, threatening
to put him to Death, if he opened his Mouth; To which he returned thus; Sir,
said he, Did I ever tell the Emperor that I was Immortal? His Majesty, I
suppose, will do his Pleasure, and I will take care to do my Duty; It is in His
Power to put me to Death Unjustly, but it is in my Own to Dye Virtuously and
Gallantly. The Lacedaemonians, when Philip of Macedon, Father of Alexander the
Great, had entered their Country with his Army, received a terrible Message from
him, Threatening what Severity he would use them with, if they did not court his
Friendship, and send to make Terms with him. To which one Brisk Fellow Answered
in behalf of the whole Republic, What Harm can those Men suffer who are not
afraid of Death? And upon another Dispatch from Philip, telling them, That he
would break all their Measures, and prevent the Designs they had formed in
their own Defense; The Answer was, How, Sir, what break all our Measures? No,
Sure you will not pretend to hinder us from Dying? This is a Project which you
cannot Defeat. Another, when his Opinion was asked, What course a Man could
take to live Free and Easy, resolved the Doubt thus, That all other Methods
were ineffectual, except that One of Despising Death. We read of a Young Boy,
who was taken Captive and Sold for a Slave, and in Discourse with his Patron
who had Bought him, Sir, says he, You shall now see what a purchase you have; I
should certainly be much to blame, and guilty of great Folly, should I submit
to Live in Slavery, when my Liberty is in my own Disposal, and I can retrieve
it when I please: And with that he threw Himself down from the House top, and
was dashed to pieces. While a Person was deliberating with himself in deep
perplexity of Thought, whether he should quit this Life, or not accept that
Deliverance, but be content to tug on still under the weight of a very heavy
Calamity, which then oppressed him; A Wise Man told him, That in His Judgment
the Matter under Debate was very small and inconsiderable. For, What is it,
says he, to Live? Thy Slaves, nay thy Beasts and Cattle Live; but to Dye like a
Man of Honor, and Integrity, and Wisdom; to leave the World with remarkable
Constancy and Courage, This indeed is a thing of moment, and worth Studying
for. To conclude this Argument; and to crown it with the most complete and
substantial Consideration that can possibly belong to it; Our most Holy
Religion owes more of its Success in the World, and more of its Effect upon
Men's Hearts and Lives, to this single Principle of getting above the Fear of
Death, than to any other Human Foundation whatsoever: No Man can be an
excellently Good Christian, who is not Resolute and Brave; and upon this
Account we find, that our Great Master, who best understood the Temper of his
own Gospel, does insist upon taking up the Cross; Hating and Despising Life for
his sake; not Fearing Men who can only destroy the Body, and the like; which
are but other Expressions for the Contempt of Death; These he insists upon, I
say, as frequently, as earnestly, as upon any other Duty, or Article of
Religion whatsoever.

Now we must understand, That there are many Counterfeits and False Pretenses
to Bravery upon this Occasion; a great many People, who look big upon the
matter, and would fain persuade the World, nay perhaps are persuaded
Themselves, That they Despise Death, and yet are in truth afraid of it. Thus
several People will tell you; They do not value Life; They would be content,
nay glad to leave the World; but the Ceremony and Process of Dying is what They
cannot away with. Others again, while in perfect soundness of Health and
Judgment, can think of Death without any Impressions of Horror; nay have, as
They imagine, settled their Minds so, as to bear the Shock of it Firm and
Unmoved; and Some have gone farther yet, and resolved to make it their Choice,
their own Act and Deed. This is a Farce very often played; insomuch that the
Soft, the Luxurious Heliogabalus himself had a Part in it; and made Sumptuous
Preparations, that his Death might be as Pompous and Expensive, as his Life had
been. But when These Mighty Men of Valor have come to the Push, their Hearts
have failed; and either Courage was wanting to give the Blow, or they have
repented of such Hardiness for Rash Heat and Folly; (as Lucius Domitius
particularly, who after he had Poisoned himself, was sorry for what he had
done,) and would fain have Lived, when it was too late. Others turn away their
Heads, draw their Cap over their Eyes, and dare not look Death in the Face;
They think of it as little as they can; steal upon it, and plunge in all on the
sudden; They swallow it down like unpalatable Physic; and hasten to get to the
End of that bitter Potion which goes against their Stomach. To this purpose is
that saying of Caesar, That the Shortest Death is the Best; and that of Pliny,
That a Sudden and Speedy Dispatch is the greatest good Fortune, that can happen
to Man in this Stateof Mortality. Now no Man can truly be said to have
Resolution and Courage, such as is above the Fear of Death, who is afraid of
facing, and coming up to it; who dares not meet, and undergo it with his Eyes
open, and his Thoughts and Senses about him. Thus we know several have done,
and therefore this is no Romantic Excellence, above the Power or Capacity of
Human Nature. Thus did Socrates particularly, who had Thirty days time to chew
the Cud, and digest the Sentence pronounced against him; and yet, after all
this Foresight and Consideration, Dyed without the least Disorder or Passion,
without any Change in Countenance or Temper; without any struggle or sign of
Reluctance; in the most Calm, Composed, Cheerful manner, that you at any other
time can suppose a Man in. Thus did Pomponius Atticus, and Tullius Marcellinus,
those Two Gallant Romans; and Cleanthes the Philosopher, who Dyed all Three
almost alike. For, resolving to Fast Themselves to Death, that so they might
get rid of a very painful Distemper, that had made Life a Burden; and finding
their Abstinence to prove the Best Physic, and, instead of Killing them, to
Cure their Disease; They would not desist, even upon this Recovery; but
Finished their Design; and took great Satisfaction in Observing the gradual
Decays of Nature; and by what Steps and Methods Death gained ground upon them.
Among These Fearless Men we may reckon Otho and Cato too; who, after resolving
to Kill Themselves, and all necessary Preparations made in order to it, just as
they were going to put their Design in Execution, took a sound sleep. Thus
preserving their Spirits from any Disorder or Confusion, which the Prospect of
Approaching Death was no more able to cast them into, than any trifling little
Accident in Human Life, would Discompose a Man of Temper and Judgment.

Desire of Death.
which has been often, and with general Approbation practiced, by Persons of
unquestionable Magnanimity, and eminent Piety. But then they have restrained
this commendable Desire of Death to Two particular Cases.

The First of These, which seems most agreeable to Nature, and upon that
account may justify such a Desire, is a Life of extreme Calamity and Distress,
of perpetual Uneasiness, and exquisite Pain; Or an Apprehension of some Death
more Scandalous, more Torturing, more Insupportable, than That which at present
they should undergo; In a word, a Condition so Deplorable, that there is no
place left for Hope, no possibility of Remedy or Redress. Then Death is desired
as a sure Retreat, and quiet Harbor from the Waves and Storms of a troublesome
Life; the Best and most effectual Relief for weary and wasted Nature; the only
Refuge and Support of Slaves harassed and ill Treated; and, as the Case then
stands, the supreme Happiness a Man is capable of. It is, I own, an Argument of
Weakness and Littleness of Soul, to sink under Misfortunes; but it is as sure
an Instance of Folly, to cherish and be fond of them. And, in my poor Judgment,
it is high time to Dye, when (all Circumstances fairly computed,) there is a
great deal more Evil than Good in Living. For, as throwing away one's Life
rashly and inconsiderately is against Nature, so likewise is the taking pains
to Preserve it to our own Loss; and choosing to Live in Misery and Torment. When
therefore Providence has reduced us to such a lamentable Condition as This,
God will not sure be Angry, that we wish a Release. Some Persons have run the
Point so high, as to tell you, That Men ought to Dye to avoid the Pleasures and
Temptations, which are highly agreeable to Nature; And if so, how much stronger
and more cogent are the Reasons for avoiding Pain and Grief this way, which are
of all things in the World the most contrary to Nature? There are, in all
Appearance, several Incidents in Life, worse and much more formidable than
Death: Such as a Man had better Dye than continue under; many Circumstances, in
which, if it were left to any Wise Man's Choice, he would infinitely rather
quit the World, than stay longer in it; So far is Life it self from being a
sufficient Compensation for all the Evils possible to be endured in it. Hence
it was, that when Antipater threatened a great many terrible things, and severe
Revenge upon the Lacedaemonians Refusal, if they did not submit presently, and
comply with the Terms he sent them; They replied, That he did not yet drive
them to absolute Necessity; for if the Sufferings he threatened were worse than
Death, they would choose That, as the more desirable of the Two. And it is a
Saying usual with the Philosophers, That a Wise and a Good Man lives as long as
it is fit he should, and not as long as possibly he can: Which is the Care of
those only who sacrifice their Virtue, their Reputation, their every Thing that
is most valuable and dear, to lengthen out their Term, and gain, though it be
but a little Respit from Death.

Again. Death is much more at Command, and in our Disposal than Life is, or can
be; There is but One Passage into the World, and our Entrance into it must be
assisted by the Will of Others; Our Ways out again are Infinite, and our
Departure hence needs no Consent, but our Own: And the more cheerful and
contented we are at our leaving it, the more becoming and reputable is our
Exit. We may want Lands and Revenues sufficient to maintain us while Living,
but no Man can want enough to receive him when Dead; This is a Freehold, which
neither Poverty nor Prodigality can alienate. No Man is so despicable, but he
may have the Life of any other Man at his Mercy; no Place so secure, none so
strong, as to be inaccessible to Death; for as the Tragedian observes most
truly; Ubique Mors est; optime hoe cavit Deus;
Eripere Vitam nemo non homini potest,
At Nemo Mortem. Mill ad hanc Aditus patent.
Senee Thebais Acts. 1.
Through all the spacious Tracts of Air, Seas, Land,
Death, Omnipresent Death is still at hand.
The numerous Ills, that wretched Mortals wait,
Kind Heaven with Pity saw, and did create
This always near, this ever sure Retreat.
Courage and Strength, Wisdom and Virtue, All
To Vice and Cowardice a Prey may fall:
The Base and Weak may take our Life away,
The Strongest cannot detain, or force its Stay.
The Privilege of Escape none can refuse,
Death has Ten thousand plain and easy Avenues.
The most valuable Present, that Nature has made us; and That which really
renders all the Complaints we utter in our melancholy Moods without Excuse, is,
the Trusting us with the Outlets of Life, and leaving the Keys in our own
hands. Why then (Vain Man) do thou find fault with the World? It detains Thee
not. If thou live in Uneasiness, thank thy self, thy own Cowardice is to
blame for it: For he that has but the Resolution to Dye, needs no more to set
him free, and perfect his Deliverance.

The Second Case, wherein the Desire of Death is most practicable and most
commendable, is purely Religious; when Men have entertained such strong and
lively Apprehensions, and those Apprehensions have kindled such eager Wishes,
of a Future State, that Death is longed for with great Impatience; because This
is looked upon as a Gain and mighty Advantage; the Seed from whence a Rich Crop
shall spring up to a better Life; the Passage to the Seats of Bliss, and Inlet
to Full and Perfect Happiness; the Storehouse where We and all our Earthly
Treasures are safely deposited, to be produced with vast Improvement at the
Resurrection. These are Things of that Moment and Infinite Value to us, that a
firm Belief and steadfast Hope of them is very hardly consistent with the Fear
and Loathness to dye: For sure, if this Principle were pursued through all its
Consequences, the Effect must needs be, to make us dissatisfied with Life, and
weary of being confined here so long, and at so great a distance from our
Happiness: Life upon these Terms should be barely supportable, but Death our
Choice, and the Object of our Love and Desire: To such Men, Living must needs
be a Toil, and a Burden; and Death an Ease and Refreshment, after much
Suffering, and hard Labor. St. Paul's Declarations and Wishes would then be in
the Hearts and Mouths of all Good Men. I desire to be dissolved and to be with
Christ, Phil. i. Romans vii.
which is far better. To me to dye is Gain. And, Oh wretched Man, who shall
deliver me from the Body of this Death? Of such Efficacy, I say, in all Reason
must these Expectatons be, when duly cherished and enforced: And I cannot but
acknowledge those Reproaches upon some Philosophers and Christians, both
Ancient and Modern, to have a great deal of Justice in them; whom Men called
Hypocrites, and Public Impostors. For what better Notions can be entertained
of Persons profuse in the Proofs of an Immortal State, and in the Glorious
Commendations of a Bliss inexpressible in the Life to come; and yet at the same
time, Pale and Shivering for Fear, declining Death by all possible Means, and
trembling at the very Mention of its Approach; though this very Thing, to which
they are so exceeding averse, is confessed to be the Passage into their so much
admired Eternity; the only Method of putting them into actual Possession of
those Joys, the very Hope and Reversion whereof they pretend to value above
this whole World?

Killing ones self.
is only a Putting in execution that which was mentioned before; For what is
Dying by one's Own hand, but the Gratification and Accomplishment of a Man's
Desire of Death? This indeed has at first blush a good fair Appearance; and
seems to proceed from Virtue, and Greatness of Spirit: And certain it is, that
the Allowance and the Practice of it has been both Frequent and Ancient. Many
Instances of this kind live in Story, Persons eminently Great, and Good; of
almost every Country, and every Religion. Greeks and Romans, Egyptians,
Persians, Medes, Gauls, Indians; Philosophers of all Sects, nay Jews too; as is
evident from the Fact of old Razias, who has the Honorable Character of The
Father of his Country given him, 2 Mac. xiv.
and is constantly mentioned with Commendation of his Virtue: Another Instance
the same History gives us likewise in those Women under the Tyranny of
Antiochus, 2 Mac. vi.
who after they had Circumcised their Children, cast Themselves down headlong
from the Wall with them. Nay, not only Jews, but Christians too; witness those
Two Holy Women, Pelagia and Sophronia, Canonized for their Piety and Courage;
the former of which, with her Mother and Sisters, cast her self into a River,
that by drowning they might escape the Rudeness and Violence of the Soldiers;
and the latter stabbed her self, to prevent the outrageous Lust of the Emperor
Maxentius. And, as if single Persons were not sufficient to justify this
Practice, we have whole Cities and Nations giving Authority to it by their
Example. Thus did the Citizens of Capua, to avoid being taken by the Romans;
thus did Astapa and Numantia in Spain upon the same account. Thus the
Abidaeans, when hard pressed by Philip; and a City of the Indians, when
Alexander had encamped against it. This has likewise had the yet more
Authentic Approbations of Laws and Public Sanctions; and several
Commonwealths have not only permitted, but recommended, and in some Cases
brought it into a Custom; as Marseilles heretofore, the Isle of Cea in the
Negropont, and some Northern Nations, in particular; where the Public Justice
regulated the Times, and the Methods of doing this. Nor is it only upon
Precedents, that the Favorers of this Opinion do rely, but they think it
abundantly supported by Reason; and particularly, that several Arguments of
Weight may be deduced from the former Article to justify it. For, say They, if
a Desire and Willingness to dye, be not Allowable only, but Commendable too; if
we may Wish and Pray for a Release; if we may put our selves in the way of it,
and be glad when it is offered; why may we not Give this Relief to our Selves?
Is the Desire it self a Virtue, and the Execution of that Desire a Sin? What is
permitted in the Will, why do you call forbidden in the Act? That which I may
be pleased with from Another hand, why should I be condemned for from my Own?
Indeed why should I wait the tedious Approach of that from other means, which I
can at any time give to my self? For is it not better to Act in this Case, than
to be purely Passive? Is it not more Manly and Generous to Meet Death, than
lazily to sit still and attend its Motions? The more Voluntary our Death is,
the more like a Man of Honor. Again; What Law does this offend against? There
are Penalties indeed ordained for Robbers and Pick-pockets, but is any Man
liable to them for taking his Own Goods? By the same Reason the Laws against
Murder do not concern Me. They provide for every man's Security against the
Insults of Others; See the Animadversions at the End of this Chapter.
they tie my Neighbor's hands from taking My Life, and Mine up from taking
His; because this is supposed to be an Act of Violence, and want of Consent in
the Sufferer makes it an Injury; but what is all This to the purpose, or how
does it render a Man guilty, who voluntarily and deliberately takes away his
own Life? These are the Principal, I think indeed, the Whole of those Arguments
commonly alleged in Defense of this Practice; but then there are Others a
great deal more Substantial, and more Obligatory, that use to be produced for
the Contrary Side of the Question.

First then. As to Authorities, This Practice, however countenanced by some,
but very few States in comparison, has yet been absolutely disallowed, and
condemned by the Generality of Mankind; and not only by Christians, but Jews
too, See Joseph, de Bell. Judaie. L 3. C 14.
as Josephus shows at large, in the Oration he made to his Officers in the
Cave, at the Taking of Jotapata. By the Generality of Philosophers and Great
Men, as Plato, and Scipio, and Others; who all impute this manner of proceeding
to a Defect, rather than any Sufficiency of Courage; and reproach it, not only
as an Act of Cowardice, misbecoming a Brave Man, but of Heat and Impatience,
unworthy of a Good Man. For what can we say better of it, than that This is
skulking and running out of the way, to hide one's self from the Insults of
Fortune? Now a Virtue that is vigorous and stanch, will be sure to stand its
ground: Distress and Pain are so far from making it flinch, that they feed and
cherish, and exalt it; it lives, it grows, it triumphs by them. There is
certainly greater Firmness of Mind expressed in bearing and making an Advantage
of one's Chain, than in breaking it to pieces, because it keeps us confined,
and ties us fast to some Uneasinesses: And all considerate Men must allow, that
Regulus showed infinitely more Gallantry than Cato. Rebus in Adversis facile
est contemnere Vitam:
Fortiter Ille facit, qui Miser esse potest.
Martial Lib. xi. Ep. 57.
The Base, when wretched, dare to Dye; but He
Is Brave indeed, who dares to Live in Misery.
Si fractus illabatur orbis,
Impavidum ferient ruinae.
Horat. Od. 3. L. 3.
If the Cracked Orbs should split and fall,
Crush him they might, but not Appall.
Sir R. Fanshaw. Nay, these Men ought to be accounted Infamous, and treated as
Deserters. For no Man can answer quitting the Post he is ordered to, without
the express Leave, and fresh Orders of the Superior Officer, who placed hi
there. We are by no means put into the World upon our own account alone; and
therefore Personal Calamities must not put us upon an Act of so great
Injustice, as the squandring away That, in which Others have a Right, as well
as We; nor yet are we Masters of our selves, but under the Disposal and
Direction of a Lord who has a Right Paramount.

Thus you see what Arguments are generally brought on either side; but if we
set the Considerations of Duty and Religion aside, and take the Liberty to
speak the Sense of mere Nature in the Case, the Resolution she would come to
seems to be This: That Men ought not to enter upon this Last and Boldest
Exploit, without some very extraordinary, and most pressing Reason to induce
them; that so it may be, what They call, making a Decent and Honorable Exit.
Every slight Occasion, every little Pett, or cross Accident, will not justify
Men's falling out with the World; and therefore, They are certainly in a great
Error, who pretend that a small Excuse will serve to quit Life, since there are
no very Weighty Arguments to persuade our keeping it. This is highly ungrateful
to God and Nature, when so Rich a Present is so much slighted and undervalued;
It is an Argument of great Levity, and betrays a great deal of Moroseness and
Ill Humor, when we quarrel and break Company upon every slender Provocation.
But indeed there is something to be said (though that something is not enough)
for a very Urgent and Weighty Occasion; such as renders Life a perpetual
Torment, and the Thoughts of continuing in it insupportable; such, for
Instance, as I mentioned formerly, Long, Acute, Excessive Pain, or the certain
Prospect of a very Cruel and Ignominious Death. And upon this account, the
several Persons that I am going to name, how favorably soever Story has
represented their Behavior, do by no means seem to have a Plea sufficient to
Justify, no, not so much as to Excuse a Voluntary Death. Such are Pomponius
Atti^us, Marcellinus, Cleanthes, who after they had begun the Process, resolved
to finish it, merely because they would avoid the trouble of having the whole
Course to begin and go through again: For, what Apology soever might be made
for the delivering themselves from a Painful Distemper, yet when that Pain and
the Cause of it were removed, they lay under no farther Temptation to be out of
love with Life; and a bare Possibility of the Disease returning, was a
Consideration much too remote. The Wives of Paetus, and Scaurus, and Labeo, and
Fulvius the intimate Friend of Augustus, of Seneca, and a great many more, were
as fantastically foolhardy; when they killed Themselves, either to bear their
Husbands Company out of the World, or to invite Them to go with them. Cato and
others, who were discontented with the Event of their Undertakings, and the
Chance of War; and chose rather to dye by their own hands, than to fall into
their Enemy's; notwithstanding these Enemies were such, as gave them no just
ground to fear any barbarous or dishonorable Treatment from them neither. The
same Censure will fall upon Them, Gravius Silvanus, and Statius Proximus did,
after Nero had given them his Pardon. Nor are They less to blame, Lucretia
after the Injury she had suffered from Tarquin; and Spargopises, Son to Tomyris
the Seythian Queen, and Boges Commander under Xerxes; the former, because he
could not bear being Prisoner of War to Cyrus; the other for the Loss of a Town
taken by Cimon the Athenian General. Nor They, Nerva the Great Lawyer, Vibius
Virius at the Taking of Capua, and Jubelli^s at the Death of the greatest part
of their Senators, inflicted by a Roman Officer. And least of all can those
Nice and Delicate People excuse themselves, who choose to dye, because they are
cloyed with Life, and weary of repeating the Same Things over again. Nay, I
must go farther yet. For it is by no means sufficient, that the Occasion be
very Important, and full of Difficulty; unless it be Desperate, and past all
Remedy too; for nothing less than Necessity ought to be pleaded here; and This
should be the last Reserve, the Only Escape from Extremity of Misfortune. Upon
this Account Rashness, and Despondency, and anticipating one's Fate, and Giving
all for Lost is always exceeding blameable; an Instance whereof we have in
Brutus and Cassius, who, before there was any occasion for it, put an End to
their own Lives, and with Them to all the languishing Remains of the Liberty of
Rome, which was committed to, and depended entirely upon Their Protection. For,
as Cleomenes truly said, Men are under an Obligation to use Life frugally, and
to make it go as far as possibly they can; nay, not only to contrive, that it
may last as long as is possible, but that it may be useful to the very last.
For a Man may discharge himself of this Trust at any time; and when Things are
at the very worst tht they can be, This Remedy is what no Man can be at a loss
for. But we should wait for better Days, and try whether the hand of our
Fortune will not mend upon us. Aliquis Carnisici suo superstes fuit.
Many a Man, as Seneca observes, has outlived his Executioner. Josephus, and a
great many besides, have followed this Advice to excellent good purpose; and
Matters, when in all human probability desperate and lost, have wheeled about,
and taken a quite different Course, to the mighty Surprise, as well as
Advantage, of all that were concerned in them. Multa Dies variusque labor
mutabilis aevi
Rettulit in melius.
Virg. Aenerd. H.
Good unexpected, Evils unforeseen,
Appear by Turns, as Fortune shifts the Scene:
Some raised aloft, come tumbling down amain,
Then fall so hard, they bound and rise again.
Mr. Dryden.

In this Case a Man of Honor and Virtue ought to act toward Himself, as he
should in sighting, toward his Adversary; To be always upon his Guard; to parry
and ward off the Blows with all the Art and Skill one has, to weary him out,
and make good one's own Party; but never to Kill, except the necessary Defense
of one's self require it, and till Matters are brought to the very last Push.

Secondly, There is no Question to be made, but it is infinitely more Virtuous,
and more Commendable, to endure patiently, and support our selves with firm and
immovable Constancy to the very End, than to sink under the Load, and tamely
flee before the Calamity. For such a Yielding betrays Weakness and Cowardice.
But, because Perseverance, like Continence, is a Grace not given equally to
All, nor is every Man alike able to receive it; the Question before us at
present will be, Whether upon Supposition of some Great Evil, Insupportable for
the Quality, and past all Hopes of Remedy or Recovery; such as is likely enough
to subvert and beat down all our Resolution, and Irritate our Minds to some
very wicked Passion; such as Discontent, Despair, Murmuring against our Great
Lord; Whether, I say, in such a Case, it might not be more expedient, or at
least more excusable, to deliver one's self by One Resolute Act, from such
Dreadful, such Vicious Consequences, while our Understanding is perfect and
undisturbed; than by a Cowardly Delay to expose our selves to the Danger of
being vanquished by the Temptation, and so ruined to all Eternity? Is it not
better to quit the Field, than to Sacrifice one's self by obstinately standing
one's ground? This perhaps is a Course, which in some very Nice and Difficult
Exigencies, Reason and merely Human Prudence might advise; and accordingly
some, who pretended to be great ^^^osophers, have practiced it, in different
Countries; so that the Opinion seems to have been pretty favorably received.
The Stoics do not stand upon so much Ceremony, but give Men leave to dislodge
and pack off, whenever they are disposed to it; as we may collect from Seneca
and others. The other Philosophers are somewhat more reserved, but They allow
it too; provided a Man can give a good reason for his proceeding thus. These
are the Notions, and Determinations of the Schools of Philosophy and Human
Reason; but That of Christ teaches us much otherwise. For the Christian
Religion admits no reason to be sufficient in this Case, nor ever dispenses
with any Circumstances whatsoever. The Truth and Wisdom of God absolutely
condemns all such Officious and Voluntary abandoning of our Post; and never
suffers us to stir from our Duty, till we are regularly dismissed, by the same
Authority which placed us in it. No Man's own Inclinations are sufficient, nor
can the doing it of his own head bear him out in this matter. So that whatever
has been said in this Chapter, which may seem in any degree to advise Men to
Patience and Perseverance, and to propose This, as the better and more
eligible; though, in the Philosophical Sense, it be only recommended as Good
Counsel; yet in a Religious one, it has the force of an absolute and
indispensable Command.

Besides we may add, That it is an Argument of very great Wisdom, for a Man to
know and distinguish rightly, which is the proper season for Dying; and to lay
hold on that Opportunity, when put into his hands. For every Man has a
Critical juncture of this kind, in which Virtue and Honor call; which Some by
being overhasty Antedate, and Others as much too slow let slip through their
Hands. Both these Defects, though so contrary in the Operation, yet proceed
from the same Principles; which are a mixture of Weakness, and of Courage: But
the Misfortune is, That even Magnanimity it self, without Discretion to Temper
and Direct it, will not secure a Man's Character. How many Persons of just
Renown, and once unblemished Honor, have yet had the Unhappiness of surviving
their Reputation; and from an Intemperate Fondness of Life, for the sake of
some poor little addition to their Days, have absolutely Sullied and Eclipsed
their former Glories, followed all their Credit to the Grave, a good Name
Murdered and Buried by their Own Hands? The wretched remainder of their time
has retained not the least Tincture or Resemblance of what went before; but
the Scandal of Their Age, compared with the Honors of their earlier Years,
looks like some wretched old Clout, tacked to some very Rich and Beautiful
Garment. And who would patch up Life at this Odious Deformed rate? It is with
This, as with Fruit; there is a Critical Season of gathering it from the Tree.
If you let it hang too long, it putrifies and grows Insipid; and the longer you
spare it, the worse it is; and if you pluck it too soon, the loss is as great
in the other Extreme; for then it is Green and Sour, and good for nothing for
want of kindly Ripening.

Many Eminent Saints have with great Industry declined Dying, upon
consideration of their great Usefulness, and the mighty Advantage the Public
would receive from their Surviving; and this too, notwithstanding the certain
Prospect of their own Private Gain in leaving the World. And when a Man can
exchange so much for the better, it argues great Charity, to be content to
Live. This St. Paul describes to be his own Case, ( Phil. I.) And there is more
than Men commonly think of Resignation in that Old Saying, If my longer
Continuance be for the Benefit of thy People, I refuse not the toil of Living.
Si Populo tuo sum necessarius, non recuso Laborem.

and going out of the World Quietly, without any troublesome Attendance or
Observation. The usual Ceremonies of our Friends and Relations being by, and
giving Their Assistance in the last Struggles of Life, is exceeding Troublesome
and Inconvenient; One Disturbs your Sight with an Object that had better be
away; Another your Ear with some Impertinent Discourse; a Third your Mouth by
forcing upon you some fruitless Medicine or Sustenance; and All together Crowd,
and Confound, and perfectly Stifle the Dying Man. Then their Tears, and Groans,
and Lamentations, are more Tormenting than all the rest; if they be Real, and
proceed from Affection and Concern, they melt one down, break one's Courage and
Resolution, and cut one to the very Heart: If they be Formal only, and put on
for Decency or Design; they raise one's Indignation, and provoke a very
unseasonable Passion in the very midst of Agonies and Convulsions. Several very
Considerable Persons have been so sensible of this Inconvenience, that they
have contrived industriously, to Dye at a distance from their Relations, on
purpose to be out of the way of it. And sure That which moves many People to
desire the contrary, is very ridiculous. For what can be more Childish and
Senfless, than to please one's self with moving the Compassion of Friends and
Acquaintance; and be proud that a great many People express a tender Concern
for what we Endure? We cannot but commend Firmness of Mind, and a Hardy Virtue
in encountering Misfortunes; We exhort our Friends to it, when it is their Own
Case, and upbraid them with Weakness, if they take it too tenderly; and yet
this very Virtue we hate, and accuse as inhuman and wanting in Affection, when
the Calamity is Ours. Then They who were formerly chidden for resenting their
Own, are reproached, if they are too afflicted, and do not perfectly sink under
Our Sufferings. We condemn their Complaints for what they feel; and yet we
cannot allow them so much as to be patient under what they only see. This is
unjust, unreasonable, and foolish to the last degree. And certainly a Wise Man
when sick, should be very well content at least, if not much better pleased,
with the Composed Countenances, and resigned Behavior, of all the Friends that
assist in his Extremities.

CHAP. XII. The maintaining a True and Uninterrupted Tranquillity of Spirit,
which is the very Crown and Glory of Wisdom: And the Last Head of this Book.
to it, Theirs is indisputable; and what the Wise aspire after, and think a
Prize sufficient for a whole Life's Study, These attain to by a much easier
way. This then is the first Principle we are to go upon, That Multiplicity of
Business, or Having nothing to do, neither of them constitute or destroy, take
from or contribute to, the Tranquillity we are now speaking of. But This is a
Decent and Beautiful, a Gentle and Mild, an Equal and United, a Firm and
Pleasant Composure of Temper. Such a Steadiness of Mind, as neither Business
nor Leisure, neither Prosperous nor Adverse Fortune, no Turn of Time or Chance
can disturb or change, exalt or depress. For This is the Property and Vera
Tranquillitas non concuti.
Character of true Tranquillity, Never to be shaken; but to continue
immovable, and unconcerned; always in humor, and always the same.

Quiet of the Mind; are Popular Opinions, and Common Prejudices, which,
notwithstanding they have made themselves almost Universal, are yet, for the
most part, False and Groundless; and a Man would wonder, which way Notions
could get so much Credit, which have so very small a Stock of Argument to set
up upon. The next Impediment to be removed arises from our Passions and
Desires, for These indulged quite spoil and break our Temper; they make us Nice
and Squeamish; Humoursome and Difficult; and These are Qualities utterly
inconsistent with Contentedness: Now These Passions and Appetites are kindled
and put into motion, by the Two contrary sorts of Events, which we call
Prosperity and Adversity; for They are the Winds and Storms, that swell and
disorder the Soul, and make all within foul Weather, and a troubled Sea. The
last thing to be remedied is that mean and narrow-spirited Captivity of
Thought, by which the Mind (that is, the Judgment and the Will,) is Chained
down like a Slave to his Galley, or cramped up like a Beast with his Yoke, to
set Forms, particular Opinions, and Local Customs. Now the first thing a Man
has to do, is to knock off all these ^etters, and break through such
unreasonable Tyranny and Consinement; to set one's Mind at large, assert our
native Liberty, and resolve to be at our own disposal. To entertain free,
extensive Notions of things; and be Open and Universal, Inquisitive and
Discerning, enlarging our Studies and our Idea's, and ranging through all the
spacious Plains of the World and Nature in general. For a Wise and Happy Man
must answer that Description; In commune genitus, mundum ut umm domum spectans,
toti se inferens mundo, and in omnes ejus actus contemplationem suam mittens.
Born for the Public, considering this whole World as one Common House and
Family, concerning himself with all the parts of it, and employing his
Contemplation upon every thing that passes there.

Place where we dwell; Living without Hypocrisy or Dissimulation, Dealing
Fairly and Above-board, no Crafty Reservation or Disguise, but to let our Words
and Actions speak our Heart; and the inmost recesses of our Soul be thus laid
open to God and the World. This is another Character given of a Wise Man; That
he Conscientiam suam aperi^ns, semperque tanquam in publico vivens, se magis
veritus quam alios.
Spreads his Conscience, as it were, and exposes it to Public view, Lives and
Acts constantly, as if all Mankind were Conscious of what he does, and has a
greater Reverence for Himself than for the Observation of Others. He that
Manages himself thus, can never want Encouragement to do well, nor powerful
Restraints from doing otherwise. Then follows Moderation, which must extend to
All Persons and Things; our Selves, and All that can be any way concerned or
converse with Us; our Thoughts, and Words, our Designs, and Actions, must All
be regulated by it. For Moderation is the Original and Source, the Nourisher
and Cherisher of Tranquillity; by This we learn to lay aside and to despise all
Pomp, and Show, and vain Superfluities; to bring our Desires within their
proper compass; to keep them under Government, and to content our selves with a
Competent provision, such proportions of every thing as our Occasions require,
when really and rightly considered, without any of those Imaginary Wants, which
we are apt to form to our selves: And thus Disposed we come to like, and be
very well pleased with our present Condition, not envious of other People's
Enjoyments, not fond of Change. How much all this conduces to Happiness and
Tranquillity, a very slight Reflection will serve to convince us: For when
Moderation has thus furled the Sails, The Storm, when it blows hard, has less
to fasten upon; and cannot do us any Damage comparable to that we should
suffer, if our Desires were enlarged, and the Sheet let fly to the Wind. By
thus contracting our selves, we are fortified against every Accident that might
Shock or Injure us; we bear our Minds up above all manner of Fear; despise all
the Assaults of Fortune, and the Malice of Death it self; looking upon that, as
the period of all our Sufferings; a kind Friend which takes us out of the way
from infinite Calamities, but creates not, nor exposes us to any one. Thus also
the Wise Man is described. Contemptor omnium, quibus torquetur Vita: supra
omnia quae contingunt acciduntque eminens. Intrepidus, Imperturbatus.
One that despises all those things which are the Plagues and Torments of Human
Life; above the reach of Accidents, without Anxiety, without Fear, without any
kind of tender or troublesome Concern. Thus a Man must secure Steadiness of
Mind, and a good Agreement with himself; he must look for his Satisfaction in
his own Breast; Live Easily, and have no Disputes, no Trouble within; but keep
all there Peaceable, and Cheerful; Rejoicing and Congratulating with one's own
Mind; and Dwelling, as we call it, at Home, with full Contentation, and a sort
of Self-sufficiency; such as is highly Necessary and Commendable, such as
nothing but Wisdom can give, and without which neither It, nor the Happiness it
proposes for our Reward, can possibly subsist. Nisi Sapienti sua non placent.
Omnis Stultitia laborat fastidio sui. Non est beatus, esse se qui non putat.
No Body but the Wise Man is pleased with his own Condition. All Folly in a
little time grows sick of it self; No Man is Happy, who does not think himself
so.

In a word. To this Composition of an Easy and Quiet Mind Two Ingredients are
indispensably requisite. The First, and indeed the Chief, is a Clear and a Good
Conscience; which does inspire Men with wonderful Strength and Assurance, and
is a mighty Stay, and Defense, and Support in all manner of Contingencies. But
yet This, as mighty as it is, will not singly be a sufficient Defense; for
sometimes the Tempest is so exceeding fierce and strong, that all the Innocence
in the World is not able to bear up against it. How often do we see very good
Men in very grievous Calamities, dejected and at a loss? Nay, our Blessed
Savior himself mentions some Tribulations of his foretelling, which should
endanger even seducing the very Elect. To This therefore we must add One more,
which is Strength of Mind, and Natural Courage; and of this too it must much
more be allowed, that It alone is by no means sufficient for our purpose. For
the Force of Conscience is prodigious, and almost unconceivable; It stares us
in the face, haunts and dogs us with guilty Remorse, makes us betray, accuse,
and turn Enemies to our selves; and for want of other Evidence to convict us,
it compels us to inform, and give Testimony of our own Crimes. Occultum
quatiente Animo to^tore slagellum Juv. Sat. 13.
For why must Those be thought to 'scape, who feel
Those Rods of Scorpions, and those Whips of Steel,
Which Conscience shakes, when she with Rage controuls,
And spreads amazing Terrors through their Souls?
Not sharp Revenge, nor Hell it self can find
A fiercer Torment, than a guilty Mind.


It draws our Indictment, Arraigns, Tries, Condemns, and puts us to Death: So
different are the Parts it acts, and yet so dextrous and powerful is it in
supplying the place of Adversary, Witness, Judge, and Executioner, that we need
no other. No Covert can do the Ill Man's business, says Epicurus; for let it be
never so close, yet he can Never think himself safe; for Conscience will be
sure to discover him to Himself, and that Discovery will always represent, and
sometimes create Danger. -- Prima est haec Ultio. quod se
Judice nemo nocens absolvitur.
Ibid.
Though Bribes or Favor shall assert his Cause,
Pronounce him guiltless, and elude the Laws,
None quits Himself, his own impartial Thought
Will damn, and Conscience will record the Fault.
This first the Wicked feels --


So that upon the whole matter, let a Man be never so Holy and Good, yet at the
same time, if he be in his own Temper Timorous and Faint-hearted; and again,
let a Man be naturally never so stout, and a stranger to Fear, yet if he be not
a Good Man, and his Conscience cannot speak Peace to him; neither the One, nor
the Other of these Persons will ever be capable of this happy Tranquillity of
Spirit, this Perfection and Fruit of Wisdom, which we are at present treating
of. There must be a Friendly Correspondence, a Mutual Assistance of Both; and
They, in whose Souls both meet together, are qualified to do Wonders; and such
are the most Eminent Persons, which we find renowned in Story for Great and
Noble Actions, and Intrepid Behavior in Times of greatest Trial. Such were
Epaminondas, Cato and Scipio in particular, whose Unconcernedness in Danger and
Death is admirable. These two Romans, when publicly accused, put those very
Persons, who preferred the Complaint against them, to the blush; and made them
betray their Shame to the whole Assembly. They gained over the Judges to their
side, and struck all the Audience so, as not only to win their Favor, but to
raise their Admiration. And all this only with that astonishing
Unconcernedness, and Equality of Mind, which appeared in their Carriage; for
the Character Livy gives of Scipio, and the reason of his voluntary Exile
assigned there, is, That he had a heart too big, too generous, to know how to
be treated like a Criminal, or descend so low as complying with the Custom of
desending his own Innocence by a formal Apology. Major animus ac Natura erat,
quam ut Reus esse sciret, and submittere se in Humilitatem causam dicentium.

Tit. Live. Hist. Lib. 38.
.

The End of the Second Book.
Advertisements.
Book II. Chap. 5. Page 116. Sect. 2.
AN Imagination, which, "to those who think Sacrifices to have been of human
Invention seems to have been the Ground of all that way of Worship. I have, in
the rendering of this Passage, added those words, "To those who think Sacrifices
to have been of human Invention," not supposing it at all proper, to let the
Sentence run in general Terms, when the Matter affirmed here by our Author is,
(to say the least of it,) so very disputable. And accordingly I beg the
Reader's Leave to detain him a little upon this occasion, while I lay before
him the mistake of our Author, in these Two particulars, with Relation to
Sacrifices; The First whereof is designed to show, that Sacrifices were not at
all of Human Invention Originally, The Second, That supposing them to have been
so, yet this Superstitious and False Imagination of a God taking delight in the
Sufferings and Calamities of his Creatures, does not seem to have been the
Foundation of them, but rather Other Notions of the Deity, of a very different
kind from This.

First then, I desire it may be considered, Whether Sacrifices were Originally
of Human Invention at all; which they must needs have been, to justify Monsieur
Charron's Opinion of their proceeding from an Erroneous and most unbecoming
Idea of God, entertained in the Minds of Ignorant Men. This indeed has been a
Point upon which Learned Men have differed in all Ages, and very great
Authorities it is to be confessed there are on both Sides. The Learned Reader,
who has the Leisure and Curiosity to inform himself how this matter stands,
may see the variety of Judgments, and the Ground of them, in the several
Commentators upon the Fourth and Eight Chapters of Genesis, where the
Sacrifices of Abel and Noah are mentioned; Or if that be too Laborious to
compare Expositors, Two of our Learned Countrymen will help him to a short and
full Collection of what can be said for that side, which asserts the Human
Invention of Sacrifices. Dr. Outram, I mean, in his Book, De Sacrificijs Lib.
1. Cap. 1. De Sacrificiorum Origin. And Dr. Spencer in his Treatise de Legibus
Hebraeorum, Lib. 3. Dissert. 2. Cap. 4. De Ratione and Origin Sacrificiorum
Patriarchalium.

It would be too great an Expense both of the Reader's time and my own, as well
as improper for the nature of an Advertisement, to lay down at large all that
is usually argued on both sides of the Question. The sum of it may be reduced
within a narrow Compass; and therefore I shall with all possible Brevity,
mention the Arguments of Those, who maintain the Human Invention of Sacrifices,
together with the Reasons which I conceive may persuade the Contrary rather,
and that in regard they either seem to take off the Force of Their Arguments;
or otherwise recommend the Divine Institution of Sacrifices, as an Opinion more
probable, and liable to less Difficulties.

I. First then, It is urged, That God himself denies, that he ever Instituted
Sacrifices, till after the Israelites Deliverance out of their Egyptian
Bondage; from whence the Conclusion is this; That whatsoever Sacrifices were
offered before that time, they must necessarily be of Man's own Devising, since
we have the Testimony of God, declaring in very solemn manner, that they were
not of His Appointment. The Texts insisted upon to this purpose are those two,
Isaiah I. 11, 12. To what purpose is the Multitude of your Sacrifices unto me,
says the Lord? I am full of the Burnt-Offerings of Rams, and the Fat of fed
Beasts, and I delight not in the Blood of Bullocks, or of Lambs, or of
He-goats; when ye come to appear before me, who has required this at your
hands, to tread my Courts? The Other, Jerem VII. 21, 22. Thus says the Lord of
Hosts, the God of Israel, Put your Burnt-offerings unto your Sacrifices, and
eat Flesh. For I spoke not unto your Fathers, nor commanded them in the day,
that I brought them out of the land of Egypt, concerning Burnt offerings or
Sacrifices.

Now any One, who considers the Occasion of these Passages, will find that both
of them are intended for a Reproof to the Hypocrisy of the Jews, and a Check to
that Confidence, they reposed in those Ritual Performances, though void of that
real Devotion, and inward Purity, which alone was acceptable to God. The
Context in each place manifestly proves this to have been their design, and the
want of Comparative degrees in the Hebrew Language, w^^ suffer no great stress
to be laid upon the Negative Form of speech. That known instance quoted by our
Blessed Lord, I will have Mercy and not Sacrifice, Matthew. IX. 13. XII. 7. from
Hosea VI. 6.
is Key sufficient to these before us, and can warrant our concluding only thus
much from them; That God prefers substantial Holiness infinitely before these
things; that Obedience was That Thing he always required, and Sacrifices being
in reality but so many professions of That, were not properly to be looked upon
as Essential Duties, wherein the Israelites part of the Covenant consisted;
that These were by no means what he aimed at in admitting them to Covenant with
himself; and consequently, when destitute of their Substance and End, were
empty and insignificant, of no account with God, and not a Worshipping him,
but, to speak plainly and truly, what he very emphatically, and contemptuously
calls, a Treading his Courts. I add too, that this Text of Jeremiah cannot
possibly be taken in a strict and literal Sense, since it is manifest God did
speak to their Fathers in the very day that he brought them out of Egypt,
concerning one Sacrifice, the Passover, I mean, Deuteronomy. XVI. 1, 5, 6. 1 Cor. V.
8.
which though a Feast, yet is it frequently termed a Sacrifice too; and
therefore some Interpreters here have taken refuge in restraining that Text to
Sin Offerings and Peace Offerings, and not extending it to Sacrifices at large;
(...) Zabach. LoTizbach.
which yet will not answer their purpose, since the very same Hebrew word,
which Jeremy makes use of, is twice together applied to the Passover, by Moses,
Deuteronomy, XVI. 5, 6.

II. A Second Argument is drawn from Cain and Abel Offering, each the product
of his own Labors respectively, which makes it probable, that such Oblations
were the product of a grateful Mind, dictating to them that God ought to have
some acknowledgment and return made him for his Benefits. Now that Nature might
inform Men, of a Duty incumbent upon them to Worship God, and the Common
Notions of Gratitude put them upon applying part of their Substance to the
Honor and Service of Him, who gave the whole, Men find easy to apprehend. But
the difficulty is, How Nature should inspire Men with a Thought, that Burning
this by Fire, or otherwise ordering it, as the Custom of Sacrificers was, is a
proper Method of expressing their Honor for, and Gratitude to God. Again, Had
Sacrifices been a dictate of Nature, How came they ever to be Abolished, since
the Natural is part of that Law, which our Savior came not to destroy, but to
perfect and fulfill? Mat. V. 17.
This Inconvenience Dr. Outram was sensible of, and therefore he makes a
distinction between the First and Eternal Dictates and Laws of Nature, and
other Institutions and Ordinances in pursuance of, and agreement with those.
Whether this be sufficient to clear the Difficulty, I leave the Reader to
judge, and for that purpose I have presented him with the whole Passage in the
Id unum hoc in loco monere visum est, hos qui sua cujusque sponte primo
Sacrificatum judicant, etiamsi forte, quibusdam in locis incautius loqus
videantur; hunc tamen Sacrificandi ritum ad Natura Leges proprte dictas,
aeternas utique and immutabiles non refer; sed ad ejusmodt Instituta, quae
Ratio Naturalis excogitaverit tanquam ad conspicuum Dei cultum, apta satis and
idonea. Prius illud si qui fecerint, ex eo falsi arguuntur, quod Christus
Sacrificandi ritus apud Veteres olun usitacos penitus apud Suos delevit; qui
idem tamen tantum abfuit, ut ullas aboleret Naturae Leges, ut has omnes
Authoritate sua ratas, certas, ac firmas fecerit. Outram. de Sacrif Lib. I.
Cap. 1. Sect. IV.
Margin. One thing only I desire may be observed, which is, That this Argument,
of what force soever it may prove, for Sacrifices of Thanks, yet can give no
Countenance at all to Those of any Other Sort; and particularly not to the
Expiatory, which Monsieur Charron has chiefly regard to, if not to them alone,
in this place.

III. A Third Reason is taken from the great Design God seems to have had in
the Legal Sacrifices, That of containing the Israelites within the Worship of
One God, and in order to it, condescending so far to their Infirmities, and the
Infection they had taken from the Idolatry of Egypt, as to conform their
Worship and Rites to those of the Heathen World. Now it is not to be denied,
but this seem to have been the Case, and probably the best account why such
particular Rites were instituted; but to make the Argument effectual, we must
enquire, how those Heathen came by Their Sacrifices and Ceremonies. For That
may be a very good and rational Explanation of the Mosaic Institution, which is
not a sufficient account of the Patriarchal Religion. And in the Sequel of this
Discourse my Reader will find occasion to consider, whether there were not
another End to be served by the Sacrifices both Patriarchal and Levitical,
which mere Nature could not attain to, and therefore a Positive Institution was
necessary for the promoting it.

IV. It may be said Fourthly, That as God left the first Ages of the World, to
the Dictates of Nature and right Reason in the Discovery and Practice of Moral
Duties, so it is most likely they were left to the same Guidance for the
exercise of Religion too; and if any Notions and Ceremonies grew common upon
this occasion, not so agreeable to the Nature of true Religion, and the Dignity
of an Almighty Majesty; these are capable of great Allowances, and suit well
enough with the Simplicity of the First Ages of the World.

To This I presume it may suffice to answer, That the Case of Moral Duties, and
Religious Rites is very different: The One are purely the result of a
reasonable and thinking Mind; The Other of a Nature which we must needs be much
in the dark about. For though Reason would convince me, that God is to be
worshipped, yet He alone can tell me, what Worship will be acceptable to him.
At least, if I must beat out my own Track, the Notions I entertain of God must
direct me. Now These might convince a Man, that Purity and Sincerity, Justice
and Goodness, and the like, must needs please an Infinitely Perfect Being. But
which way could an Imagination so foreign enter into Men's heads, as that God
should be pleased with the Blood and Fat of Beasts? Admit These to have been the
Chief of their Substance, and devoted, because as such fittest for them to
express their Acknowledgments by; that as devoted and entirely, set apart to
Holy Uses, it could not without Sacrilege be partaken of by Men, and that from
hence the Custom of Burning the Sacrifice took its Original: yet what shall we
say to the Expiatory Oblations? And how could Men by any Strength of Reason
comprehend the Possibility of a Vicarious Punishment; or hope that the Divine
Justice should be appeased by Offerings of this kind, and accept the Life of
the Offender's Beast, instead of the forfeit Life of the Offender himself?
These things seem to be far out of the Way and Reach of human Discourse; it is
scarce, if at all, possible to conceive, what should lead the Generality of
Mankind to such Consequences, such Ideas of God as These: And I think little
needs be said to convince Men, that the Difference is vastly great between such
Religious Rites, and those Moral Duties which have their foundation in the best
Reason, and are all of them so coherent, so agreeable to sober and uncorrupted
Nature, that the more we attend, and the closer we pursue them, the greater
Discoveries we shall be sure to make, and the more consistent will be all our
Actions with the first, and most obvious Principles of the Mind. So that no
Parity of Argument can lie between these Two.

The Force of this Reason is sufficiently confessed by the very Learned
Asserter of that Other Opinion; nor can he deny, Spencer, Lib. III. Cap. IV.
Diss. II. Sect. II.
(as some, I think, with a design to make short work of it, have done,) that
Expiatory Sacrifices were offered before the Law: But then These are supposed
to proceed not from any positive persuasion, or good assurance of obtaining
Pardon by that means; but some Hope, that God would have regard to the Pious
Intention of the Person, and consider and restore him upon that account. Which
Opinion Arnobius exposes in such a manner, as plainly to show, that it
generally prevailed; and many Testimonies of Heathen Writers themselves
confess, that they looked upon God to be capable of being mollified and won
over, as Angry Men are, by Submissions, and Presents, and other sweetning
Methods. All which Misapprehensions are conceived agreeable to the Darkness of
Pagans, and the Simplicity of Earlier Ages.

Now with all due Reverence to the Authority of those Great Men who urge it, I
can by no means satisfy my self with the Color they give to these Arguments,
from the rude unpolished State of Men in the first Ages of the World. This, I
know, is a Notion very agreeable to the Heathen Philosophers and Poets, and
Their Accounts of the Original of this World, the Progress of Knowledge, and
Improvement of Mankind. And This might probably agree well enough with that Age
when Abraham and his Seed were chosen out from the midst of a dark and
degenerate Race. But whether it agree with the Times of Abel and Noah, and the
Antediluvian Fathers, will bear a great Dispute. We fancy perhaps, that, before
there was any Written Word, all was dark; but there is no Consequence in That;
nor will it follow, because Arts and Prositable Inventions for the Affairs of
this Life, grew up with the World; that Religion too was in its Infant Weakness
and Ignorance in those early Days. St. Chrysostom, I am sure, gives a very
different account of the Matter; Hom. 1. in Matthew.
He says, the Communications of God's Will were more liberal and frequent then;
that Men lived in a sort of familiar Acquaintance with him, and were personally
instructed in Matters necessary and convenient; much better enabled to worship
and serve him acceptably; and because they did not discharge their Duty, and
answer their Advantages, that he withdrew from this Friendly way of conversing
with Mankind; and then to prevent the utter Loss of Truth, by the Wickedness
and Weakness of Men, a Written Word was judged necessary; and That put into
Books, which the Corruption of Manners had made unsafe, and would not permit to
continue clear and legible, in Men's hearts. In the mean while the Preference
he manifestly gives both for Knowledge and Purity, to the First Ages; and
compares the Patriarchs at the beginning of the World in this Point, to the
Apostles at the beginning of Christianity; as Parallels in the Advantages of
Revelation, and Spiritual Wisdom, infinitely superior to the succeeding Times
of the Church. And it is plain, from Scripture it self, that Enoch, Noah, and
other Persons eminently pious, signally rewarded for it, and inspired with
God's own Spirit, were some of those early Sacrificers. Persons to whose
Character the pretended Simplicity and Ignorance of the first Ages of the
World, will very ill agree.

V. There is, I must own, a Great Prejudice against this Divine Institution of
Sacrifices, from the Book of Genesis being silent in the thing; it being urged,
as a mighty Improbability, that so considerable an Ordinance, and One which
grew so general, should have no mention made of its first Command, and
Establishment; especially, when so many things of seemingly less moment, are
expressly taken notice of; and by that means strengthen the Opinion, which
attributes a matter acknowledged on all hands to be of Consequence, to some
Original, other than Immediately Divine.

Now if we consider the Design and Manner of the Book of Genesis, it will by no
means appear strange to us, that many things should be omitted; This being I
conceive intended chiefly to give a short Account of the Creation and Fall of
Man, the Promise of a Redeemer, and to draw down the Line of Descent to the
Chosen Seed, from whence our Savior sprung, and the People of the Jews, the
Figure of the Christian Church, derived themselves. So that Their History and
Religion being the principal Subject of the Five Books of Moses, we find very
little Enlargement upon Particulars till after the Call of Abraham. For if we
consider the Three first Chapters containing the Creation and Fall of our first
Parents; the VIth, VIIth, VIIth and IXth giving an Account of the Deluge, and
Preservation of Noah's Family; there remain but four more, before the Call of
Abraham; and in those the Succession from Adam to Noah, the Dispersion of
Noah's Posterity for peopling the World, and the Occasion of that Dispersion,
are contained. It Is true, some things are inserted which to Us seem of less
moment; but, besides that some account may in reason be given, why they should
be mentioned, the Holy Spirit, who indicted these Books, was the best Judge of
That. But it is also true, that several other things as considerable as This
are omitted likewise, which we do not upon that score disbelieve; such
particularly, as Those of Times stated, and Assemblies convened for the Public
Worship of God; and certainly it is as necessary and as important at least to
expect a Revelation for the Solemn Service of God, as for any particular Mode
of Serving or Addressing to him.

I have now laid before my Reader the State of the Case, as They who allege
Human Invention for Sacrifices have put it; and in the Answer to those
Arguments, have given some for the Contrary Opinion. That the Authorities on
that Side are considerable, is acknowledged; but the General Sense of the
Christian Church seems to incline to Divine Institution. And the most
reasonable account of this Matter, if I apprehend it rightly, stands thus.

That Almighty God instructed Adam, how he would please to be worshipped, and
Adam trained his Family and Posterity, both by Example and Instruction, in the
same Solemn Methods of Serving and Addressing to God.

That from the Time of a Redeemer's being promised, Expiatory Sacrifices were
both instituted, and practiced; partly as an Intimation to Men of their own
Guilt, and the final Destruction they deserved; and partly as a Shadow and
Prefiguration of that Vicarious Punishment, which God had promised to admit for
the Sins of Men; in the Redemption of the World by the perfect Sacrifice of his
Son.

That as no Age of the World can be instanced in, when God did not afford Men
some visible Signs, and Sacraments, of his Favor, and the Covenant between Him
and Them; so the Ages before the Institution of the Jewish Law, (which abounded
with very expressive and particular Significations of this kind) had Sacrifices
for that purpose.

That the Heathen Sacrifices were not pure Inventions of Men, but Corruptions
of a Divine Institution. Which being propagated to all the Offipring of Adam,
was differently received, and depraved by the Uncertainty of Tradition, long
Tract of Time, the Artifice of the Devil, and Men's own Vicious Affections. Of
which whoever reads the Apologies for Christianity, will find Proofs in
abundance: and be convinced that the Pagan Idolatry was built originally upon
the Worship of the true God, vitiated and perverted and misapplied. For we must
in reason be sensible, that the likeliest, and most usual way, by which the
Devil prevails upon Men, is not by empty and groundless Imaginations, or
Inventions perfectly new; but by disguising and mimicking the Truth, and
raising erroneous and wicked Superstructures upon a good and sound Bottom.

It is therefore, it seems at least in my poor Opinion, most probable, that the
Jewish Ceremonies were indeed adapted to the Egyptian and other Pagan Rites,
which the Israelites had been acquainted with, and were not then in a Condition
to be entirely weaned from. But withal, that those Pagan Sacrifices were
Corruptions of the old Patriarchal; not entirely mere Inventions of their own,
but Additions only, and Extravagant Excrescencies of Error, to which the Truth
and Positive Institution of God first gave the hints and occasions. For though
it can very hardly be conceived how Sacrifices should be of mere human Motion;
yet there is no difficulty in supposing, that the Thing once Instituted, and
once Established, might be abused, and depraved, to very prodigious and
abominable purposes. As it was, no doubt, very early in that universal
degeneracy to Idolatry, from which it pleased God to rescue Abraham and his
Posterity.

One very Remarkable Circumstance contributing to the strength of this Opinion
is, that almost every where the Ceremonies in the Act of Oblation, seem to be
very much alike; which is very Natural to an Exercise and Institution derived
down from One common Head; and originally sixed by a Positive Command; but
scarce conceivable of an Invention merely Human; where Men in all likelihood
would have run into as great Diversity, and thought themselves as much at
Liberty as they do in the Affairs of Common Life. But especially, the
Sacrificing Beasts by way of Atonement obtained universally, and the
Imagination of Their Blood being necessary and effectual for Pardon. Which, I
confess, if a Dictate of Reason and Nature only, is certainly the strangest,
and most remote from any present Conceptions we are able to form of the
Dictates of Nature, of Any that ever yet prevailed in the World. And therefore
This is scarce accountable for any other way, than from the Promise of a
Redeemer and Sacrifice to come, which the Sacrifices of Beasts were in the mean
while appointed to represent.

That such an Institution agrees very well with all the Ends of Sacrifice, is
not to be denied. For the Death of the Beast, though not personally felt by the
Offender, would yet give him a full and very expressive Idea, of the fatal
Consequences of Sin; and the Acceptance of that Life, instead of his own which
was forfeited, and by that Act of Sacrificing acknowledged obnoxious to Divine
Justice, was a lively representation of the Mercy of God. But still the
Apostles Argument is founded in Reason, and may be an Appeal to all Mankind, It
is not possible, that the Blood of Bulls and of Goats should take away Sin. And
therefore not only Eusebius in his Xth. Chap. of Demonstrat. Evang. Lib. I.
ascribes this Worship to Divine Inspiration, but Aquinas says, that before the
Law Just Men were instructed by an Inward Instinct after what particular manner
God would be Worshipped; as they were afterward under the Law by External
Precepts. So Plato says, That no Mortal Capacity can Know or Determine what is
fit to be done in Holy Matters, and therefore forbids the Alteration of the
Established Rites and Sacrifices as Impious. And the Testimonies of St.
Chrysostom and Justin Martyr, Taylot's Ductor Dubit. B. II. Chap. 3. N. 30.
have been thought to mean, not so much, that all Sacrifice was a Dictate of
Nature, as that some Circumstances relating to it were left to the Dictates of
Man's Reason. So that when God had taught Adam and his Posterity, that they
should worship in their several Manners; and what he would please to accept;
The Manner, and Measure, and such like considerations were left to Choice, and
Reason, and Positive Laws. In short, the Religion of our Hearts and Wills, our
Prayers and Praises might be natural and the result of mere Reason: but for
other external Significations of this, especially any so foreign, as that of
Sacrificing; Men were not likely, nor was it fit they should venture, to do any
thing of their own Heads. Nor was it probable they would attempt it, for fear
of mistakes, and such indecent Expressions, as might be very dishonorable to
the God they Worshipped; and rather provoke his Justice by rash and
superstitious Affronts, than incline his Mercy by their indiscreet Intentions
to please him. And therefore, considering the Confusion Adam was in after the
Fall, and the Circumstances of that time, it seems most agreeable to believe,
that he waited God's directions, and was fully informed by Him in such a
Service, as might at once excite both the Fear and the Love of God; enforce the
Offerer's Sorrow and Repentance, and increase his Faith and Hope.

While my Thoughts were upon this Subject, it came into my mind, that possibly
the Tradition of a Redeemer to come, and that God would one day reconcile
himself to the World by the Sacrifice of a Man, and his own Son: That this
Tradition I say darkened, confounded, and perverted by the Increase of Idolatry,
and the Cunning of the Devil, might be abused to the putting Men upon Humane
Sacrifices, and particularly those of their own Children. I know there are
other accounts to be given of this matter; and I propose this as a mere
Conjecture, not otherwise fit to trouble the Reader withal; but that, I
believe, if strict inquiry were made, it would be found, that most of the
Heathen Abominations in Divine Worship were some way or other at a distance, by
Mistake, Imperfect Report, Perverse Interpretations, or by some Cunning
Stratagem of the Devil or other, fetched originally from the Revelations and
Institutions of the true Religion. And I cannot but think, that it would be
great Service to the Truth, if the Falsehoods that have corrupted, and were set
up in Opposition to it, could be well traced, and set in the best Light, which
this distance will permit. But that must needs be a very laborious Undertaking,
and, where a great deal will depend upon Probable Conjecture, will require a
very Judicious hand.

I have thus given the Reader my rough Thoughts upon the Point of Sacrifices,
omitting such Proofs for the Opinion I incline to, as seem to me not
conclusive, but not any that I am conscious of, on the Other side. There is no
danger in either Opinion, considered in it self, but ill Insinuations may be
raised from that of Humane Invention; if Men from thence shall pretend to draw
Consequences to the Prejudice of Natural Religion; and argue either against the
Certainty of, or the Regard due to it; from an Imagination, that Extravagances
so wicked, so odd, or so barbarous as the Heathen Rites of Worship, and the
Wild Superstitions and unbecoming Notions of God, upon which they were
grounded, resulted from Humane Nature, and were the Product of Reason: Rather
than the Horrible Depravations of a Supernatural Institution, highly proper and
significant, serviceable to excellent purposes, and adapted to those Ages of
the World. And in hope of preventing any Consequences of this kind it is, that
I thought these Remarks might not be unseasonable. And for the Usefulness, and
Light which this Account of Sacrifices brings with it, provided we will follow
it in its Natural Consequences; how wise an Institution, how reasonable to be
incorporated into the Jewish Law, how providentially dispersed over the whole
World; and how preparatory of the Doctrine of the Redemption of Mankind, by
predisposing the Gentiles also to believe the Sacrifice of Christ, my Reader
may, if he please, be informed to his great Satisfaction, by that Short but
Excellent Account of this Matter, given by Dr. Williams, the now Reverend
Bishop of Chichester, in his Second Sermon at Mr. Boyle's Lecture for the Year
1695.

II. After so long and particular Enlargement upon the First of those Things,
wherein I endeavor to prevent any Mistakes that may arise from this Passage;
there will need but very little Addition to clear the Other. For if the
Arguments for a Divine Institution of Sacrifices cast the Scale, the Business
is already done to our hands: and if they be admitted of human Invention, yet
according to all the Schemes of this Matter laid down by the Asserters of it,
Sacrificers at first were moved by Apprehensions of God very different from
that of his taking Delight in the Sufferings of his Creatures. For they
Represent Sacrifices as the effects of Gratitude, a Mind impatient to make some
sort of Return, and pay back such Acknowledgments at least of His Goodness who
gave All, as the dedicating the Best of his Gifts to him could amount to. And
accordingly, This Circumstance of choosing the Best for Sacrifice seems to have
been as universally observed, as the Duty of Sacrificing it self. This is the
Reason alleged by some for slaying Beasts, as being the Best of all their
Substance; and upon the same account too those kinds which were esteemed best
for Food. This perhaps was one Motive abused afterward even to the introducing
that Abomination of sacrificing Men, and Children; Virgins and Firstborn. And
even in Expiatory Sacrifices, could these possibly have been invented by Men,
yet it is plain the Persuasion of a Beast being accepted as a Ransom for the
Owner, must include an Idea of Mercy and Condescension at least in the Deity,
which was content with such a Compensation.

It argued, I confess, very gross Notions of God to suppose, that such things
could be Presents fit for a Pure Spirit, and the Majesty of Heaven and Earth,
which every Superior among Men would disdain and detest. But This grew by
degrees, and the Other, of his being a Sanguinary Being delighted with the
Fumes of Reaking Altars, and drinking the Blood of Goats, was owing to the
Superstition and Idolatry of later and degenerate Times; and is a Thought,
which Those who first practiced this way of Worship, whether by Instruction, or
their own mere Motion, were never supposed guilty of by any that have undertook
to consider the Nature and Original of the Patriarchal Sacrifices.

Nay, I add too upon this occasion, That the Notions mentioned in this Chapter,
which it is to be feared are but too commonly entertained of Severities, and
Satisfactions (as they are called) owe themselves to the same Causes, and are
the Genuine Extract of Hypocrisy, Superstition, and formal Devotion. That
Fastings, and voluntary Mortifications are of excellent Use in Religion, no
sober Man ever doubted. They are Prositable in many Cases, and in some
Necessary. They assist us in conquering our Appetites and Passions; and subdue
the Man, by beating down the Outworks: They express a very becoming Indignation
against our selves, in the Exercise of Repentance; and are oftentimes
instrumental in heightening and inflaming our Devotion: But that they are Good
and Meritorious in themselves, or any farther valuable than as they serve to
promote our Improvement in some Virtues or Graces that are Substantially Good;
especially that God likes us the better merely because we use our selves the
worse, is a very Fantastical and Erroneous Imagination: And such as any
Communion or Party of Men by Encouraging, do great Injury to the Honor of God,
deceive the Souls of Penitents, and hinder the Essentials of Religion, which
are Faith and Newness of Life. In short, They expos: Religion in general to the
scorn of all those, who see the Foppery and unreasonableness of those mistaken
Methods; and call the very foundations of it into Question, by tempting such to
think, that it is all Invention and Trick, and Empty Senseless Formality.

Advertisement the Second.
Book II. Chap. 5. Sect. 8.
Monsieut Charron has in this Section put together Two Objections against the
Divine Origin of Religion, and such as, no doubt do it prejudice, in the Minds
of Men, who do not attend to the Reasons of things, and judge impartially. The
First concerns the Manner of Propagating Religion, and Man's first entrance
into it. The Second, That want of Efficacy, which one would expect an
Institution coming immediately from God, must needs have upon the Lives and
Actions of Those who have Embraced, and profess to be Governed by it.

I. Page 125.
The Former of These, is urged to be only a matter of Custom and Necessity, the
Fate of a Man, rather than his Choice; who if Adult, is brought over by Custom
and Multitudes; and if an Infant, is presently initiated into the prevailing
Persuasion of his Country, or his Family, and so continues all his Life long.

Now for Custom, and Multitudes, and Example, it is very evident, This was much
otherwise in the first Plantation of Religion; that of the Christian in
particular. A Persuasion, which, it is manifest, came into the World with all
possible disadvantages; and the Establishment whereof was one of the most
amazing Miracles, that ever was wrought since the Beginning of the World. For
People had common Sense then as well as now; and all the Corruptions of Human
Nature were equally powerful. There was the same Arrogance and Vain Opinion of
their own Wisdom, to render the Mysteries which are acknowledged above the
Comprehension of a Human Mind, offensive to the Men of some Learning and more
Vanity: The same sensual Appetites and Vicious Practices to hold out and stand
at defiance, against the Precepts of Chastity and Sobriety, Self-denial and
Mortification: The same Pride and Opinion of Worldly Grandeur to raise their
Indignation and Disdain of a Crucified Savior; The same Love of the World and
Tenderness for their Persons to prevent any rash Sacrificing of their Lives and
Estates for a Persecuted Faith, when nothing was promised in Reward but a very
distant Happiness after Death. And yet notwithstanding prevail that Faith did;
in despite of Human Opposition, and Interest; and prevail it could not have
done, by any other means, than the Almighty Power of its Author and Protector,
and the Astonishing Effects which the Conviction of its Truth produced upon
men's Consciences. This certainly was Argument sufficient, even to
Demonstration, that those Words were not in any degree misapplied, when put
into the Mouth of Christianity, and its Preachers; Not of Man, neither by Man,
nor of any other Creature, but of God.

And shall it be esteemed any Prejudice to this Religion, that Men do not still
lie under the same Difficulties, in the Choice of it? When it has made its own
way triumphantly, and weatied out, or won over its Persecutors, shall the
Multitude of its Professors, and the Peaceable and Easy Exercise of it be
thought to derogate from its Authority? Sure it is very unreasonable, that
Faith should be thought of Divine Extract, no longer than while it bids Men
embrace it at their Peril. The being handed down in Families is a plain and
natural Effect of an Established Principle. Parents could not have the
Affection which becomes their Character, did they not take all lawful and
Commendable Methods of putting their Children into the same way to Heaven,
which they trust they are in themselves. Especially, if the Case lie between
any other Persuasion, and Christianity; which we have reason to believe is the
only possible Ordinary way thither. The entering Children early into Covenant
with God is a very Profitable, and Charitable Custom; what He himself not only
admitted, but enjomed formerly; and since He is much more eminently the Father
of the Christians, than of the Jews, we have no reason to suspect they shall be
less favorably received, when as early dedicated to him. This gives Security,
that they shall be taught, when their Years enable them to learn, how they
ought to believe and act; so that if their Religion afterward be merely the
effect of Custom and Example, This is utterly beside the Design of Those early
Initiations, where the Express Contrary is positively indented for. If Men
happen to be bred up in a wrong Persuasion, there is little Question to be
made, but great and gracious Allowances will be made for that fast hold, which
the Prepossessions of Education have taken. But be they in the right, or in the
wrong, it is every One's duty, so far as his Opportunities and Capacity will
give him leave to examine and see, that he may have comfort, and be better
established in the Truth; or else retract his Error: Where This is not done, it
is a neglect, and far from the intent of Truth; for Truth will bear Enquiry,
and the more nicely she is looked into, the better she is liked, the more
admired, and triumphs, and reigns more absolute. St. Peter positively commands,
that we should be ready to give a Reason of the Hope that is in us; 1 Pet. III.
15.
and though Men are more disposed to consider, when their Opinions are like to
cost them dear, yet the Reason of the Command is Universal, and by no means
restrained to Times of Persecution only. Every Man should do his best to obey
it, and every Persuasion ought to encourage it; and if any do not, but hide the
Key of Knowledge, either by detaining the Scriptures, or not leaving Men to the
Free Use of Modest and Impartial Reason, These are the Men, who are most
contrary to St. Peter, and best deserve the Censure of Monsieur Charron in this
Passage.

II. The Second Insinuation against the Divine Authority of Religion, is taken
from the Visible Inefficacy of it upon Men's Lives; as if all that came from
God must needs be effectual for reforming the World. Now This, how popular and
plausible soever at first appearance, yet is an Argument of no Foundation or
Strength at all. For the Short of the Matter lies here. Religion never was
intended to destroy Men's Nature, but only to mend it: to change Men indeed in
their Affections and Inclinations, but so as that this Change should be wrought
by themselves. Hence it is, that though the Grace of God be Almighty, yet Man
is not a proper Object for its Omnipotence to exert it self upon. For should he
be forced even to his own Good, that Compulsion would not only take away the
Merit of the Act, but the very Nature of the Person, whose very distinguishing
Character, is Choice and Freedom of Consent. And therefore God deals with us as
he made us; he lets us want nothing, that we can enjoy the Benefit of, and
continue Men; he instructs, suggests, persuades, counsels, encourages,
promises, threatens, puts opportunities into our hands, and gives us a power of
using them; but it will depend upon our selves at last, whether these shall
have a good effect or not. We can do no good without Him; but neither will He
do it without Us, nor indeed, according to the present Scheme and Constitution
of Things, is it at all conceivable how he can. So that the Actions of Men not
answering the Efficacy which might be expected from the Revelation of an
Almighty God, is no Argument against those Principles coming from Him, which
are not better obeyed; because this is not a Case for him to exert his Almighty
Power in: And though he wrought many Miracles formerly for the Consirmation of
the Truth by virtue of that power; yet we never find, that he ever used that
power for the foreing a belief of those Miracles; but Men were left to their
own Consideration and Liberty, what Interpretation they would make of them; and
as they determined themselves, Belief or more Obstinate Infidelity was the
Effect of it.

Nor is it true, that Wicked Men do not believe Religion; It is but too sure,
that they endeavor as much as they can not to believe it, when Matters are
come to that pass, that the Belief of it grows uneasy to them. It is indeed
confessed, that our Persuasion is the very Spring upon which all our Actions
move. But then there must a distinction be made between the Habit and the Act
of Faith. For a Man may entertain an Opinion, and yet do some things contrary
to it, because that Opinion may not in the instant of Action occur to him; and
then, as to all effect indeed, it is the same, as if he thought it not. Thus a
Man may believe Christianity, but through the Strength of Passion, through the
Surprise or Violence of a Temptation, through Rashness or Incogitancy,
Multitude and Intricacy of Business, Inordinate Affection of the World, or the
like he may not attend to what he believes, or he may not consider it
sufficiently, or not allow the Future its due weight, when set against the
Present. Now though such a Person, as to all the purposes of doing well, be pro
hic and nunc, as an Infidel; yet there is a great difference between Him in the
general, and One who does not believe at all. This Man, though he does not act
in consistence with himself, has yet a dormant Habit, which, when the Paroxysm
is off, the Temptation removed, the Passion abated, or the like, may by
Recollection, and Sober Sense be awakened; and then it will at least check him
for what is past, and may (till he has sinned himself past feeling) be a
considerable Restraint upon him. But the Other has nothing to inform, nothing
to control him: And though a Man in sleep may appear to the Standers by to be
dead, yet we know what difference there is in the thing it self. This I take to
be a sufficient Account of even good Men's sinning often, and some Bad Men
doing it very scandalously, and yet retaining the Faith; which if pursued
through all its Consequences, and applied closely and warmly to their
Consciences, would show them the abominable Contradiction they live in to their
own Minds, and make them quite another sort of persons.

From hence I suppose the Reader will naturally draw to himself these following
Reflections. 1. That Men are not wrought upon by Things as they are in
themselves, but by their own Apprehensions of them. They act by the dictates of
their own Minds, and as they are persuaded. It is not the Happiness of Heaven,
or the Misery of Hell, that excites to any one Good, or affrights from any one
Evil Action, in their own Nature; but the Idea, and as I conceive of them. And
consequently, in proportion as I desire the One, and dread the Other, such will
my Care be to practice, or to decline those things, to which the Promises and
Threatenings of God are annexed. 2. That to make this Persuasion effectual, it
is necessary it should be present to the Mind. For that which is not present at
the time of Action, is to all effect for that time as if it were not. This
shows the Necessity of Meditation, and much Thought upon the Principles of, and
Motives to Religion; since Faith will not, cannot work, by barely being
assented to; but by being vigorously and lively impressed upon the Conscience,
warm, and ready upon every new Assault. And this gives us a very Rational
Account, how it is possible, and why it should be common, for a Man to
entertain all the Principles of a true Faith, and upon Premeditation be able to
say as much for it as is possible; nay, to persuade himself as well as others,
that he is a very sincere Believer; and yet lead a Life very contrary to that
Belief. For this proceeds from his thinking a hearty Assent to the Truth of a
Doctrine sufficient; and it is so indeed, to denominate him a Professor;
whereas to make him a Good Man, that Assent signifies little, unless it be
followed, and frequently inculcated, so as to season his Mind thoroughly, and
upon all occasions to be at hand, and vigorous and fresh; for without These
qualities, it can never be a Principle of Action. 3. That consequently the
Inconsistence of Men's Lives with their Profession, can be no just Objection
against Religion; because the Fault plainly lies not in the Principles, but in
Men's neglect to improve them. And when we would be convinced of the Goodness
of any Persuasion, we are to judge the Tree by its Fruits; (not the Faith by
the Practices it produces actually in Men's Lives, as that Expression is
frequently misapplied, but) by the Good Actions it would produce, if Men would
let it have a due influence upon them, follow it as far as it will carry them,
and live up to what they profess. The Men who do otherwise, are very blameable,
and lay a stumbling block before the weak, by briging dishonor upon Religion,
and tempting them to suspect its Power and Excellence; But it is only the Weak
who stumble at it; for there is not, nor ever was in the Affairs of Religion,
or of any other kind, any Scheme of Rules or Opinions, where all the persons
who made Profession of them, acted in all points accordingly. And at this rate
all manner of Goodness, and Virtue, Natural, as well as Acquired, and Revealed,
must be questioned, and exploded; and the very first Dictates of Human Nature
will not escape the same Fate. Of such Eternal Equity and Truth is that old
Axiom, Fides non e Personis, sed contra. And the Christian Faith will
sufficiently clear its own Divine Original, if we will but give it free Course,
and suffer it to draw us to a Resemblance of that Excellence, which first
Inspired and taught it.


Book II. Chap. XI. Sect. 10.
According to the Custom of the Egyptians, etc. The Meaning of this Custom is
very often misunderstood, and misapplied. For whereas the Bringing this Death's
head in to the Company at Public Entertainments, is frequently looked upon as
done with a design to check the Excesses of Mirth, with this Melancholy, but
never Unseasonable Reflection: Both Herodotus in his Euterpe, and Plutarch in
his Tract de Isid. and Osiride, give a quite different Account of the Matter;
and report it to have been done for the heightning of their Jollity; by
considering, that their Time was but short, and therefore they ought to make
the best of it. This Emblem in effect speaking that Maxim of the Epicure, Let
us Eat and Drink, for to morrow we dye.

Book II. Chap. XI. Sect. 18. Page 289.
Although the Answers to these Pretenses usually alleged in favor of
Self-murder be in a great measure taken off in the latter part of the Section;
and the Determination at last be sound and good; yet in regard those Returns
are general, and do not reach every Particular; I will so far trespass upon the
Reader's Patience, as to run over this part of the Argument, Period by Period,
as fresh Matter arises; and observe to him, what has been, or may very
reasonably be replied upon each of the Excuses produced here, (for I rather
call them Excuses than Justifications) to give Countenance to that Unnatural
Act of Self-murder.

First, It is urged that there are great Examples for it in all Story, and of
Persons of all Persuasions, particularly, those of Razias and the Women under
the Tyranny of Antiochus among the Jews; and Pelagia and Sophronia among the
Christians; the Former drowning her self to escape the Rudeness of the
Soldiers; the Latter stabbing her self to get free from the Lust of Maxentius.

Now here in the first place I observe by the way. That Example in General is a
very insufficient and deceitful Rule; nor can we always make any sure
Conclusions of the Lawfulness or Unlawfulness of a Fact, by the Relation given
of it. Because many times the Thing is commended with regard to One Part or
Circumstance, and yet not thereby justified as to all the rest; This, I say,
when there is a Commendation positively added to it; but many, if not most, are
barely related, and left for Us to interpret, without any Character at all
fixed upon them. Nay, I add farther, that the Circumstances of Person, Time,
and several others of the like nature, are so infinitely different that, as it
is exceeding hard for Us, who are not perfectly acquainted with the Reasons and
Motives upon which others act, to pass an exact and true Judgment upon their
Actions; so is it much more difficult to find Instances, where Their
Circumstances and Ours shall agree so nicely and in every Particular, that we
shall deserve just the same Commendation, or Blame, which they did, by
imitating their Proceedings. Thus much was not amiss to be hinted, concerning
the Fallacy of Examples in general, and how very unfit they are to be made a
Rule for the Behavior of other People. I shall now touch briefly, upon each of
the Particulars abovementioned

As for That of Razias It is indeed delivered after such a manner, as seems to
carry a Commendation with it, but this is only a Commendation of his Valor,
and Heroic Greatness of Soul; not of the Virtue of the Action, or any thing
which might render it Imitable by others. St Augustine's Reflection upon it is,
Dictum est quod elegerit nobiliter mori; Cap. xxiii. contra 2. Epist. Gaudent.
melius vellet humiliter, sic enim utiliter. Illis autem verbis historia
Gentium laudare consuevit, sed viros forte hujus seculi, non Martyrs Christi.
His Character (says he) is, That he chose to dye Nobly; it had been much better
if the Commendation had been, that he chose to dye Modestly and Humbly; for
This had been a profitable way of Dying. But those are Pompous Terms, usual in
Profane Story, such as are counted an Honor to the Men of this World, but not
to Martyrs for Christ. The Account in the Maccabecs expresses his resolute
Detestation of Idolatry, and that is commendable; but certainly had he been
taken, and suffered Torments and Death under Nicanor, his Praise had been much
more just, and his Character clear and indisputable. For even Persecution it
self is not a Reason sufficient for our making this Escape; according to that
of St. Jerome in his Comment upon Jonah: Non est nostrum Mortem arriperc, sed
illatam ab alijs libenter excipere. Under and in persecutionibus non licet
propria perire manu. It is not our business to bring death upon our selves, 2
Mac. xiv. 37, etc.
but to receive it willingly, when inflicted by Others; and for this Reason
even the Case of Persecution will not warrant a Man's dying by his own hand.
But in truth, Razias his Case, as the Historian describes it, was none of this;
for his Account at the 42d Verse is very Remarkable. He fell upon his sword,
choosing rather to dye manfully, than to come into the hands of the wicked, to
be abused otherwise than beseemed his Noble Birth. So that Razias at this rate
was what the World vainly calls a Man of Honor, and his Life was sacrificed to
that Principle: Had he done this Act to avoid offending God, it had had a
fairer Pretense at least, though neither would That have excused it; but to
kill himself for fear of Indignities, and Affronts not fit for a Man of his
Quality to submit to; this was far from a Religious Principle; and we cannot
wonder that the Commendation it receives has given so strong a Prejudice to
the Church against the Book of Maccabees, as not to admit it into their Canon
of Scripture. I add too upon this occasion, that some have thought this whole
matter a Fiction; Spanhem. de Author. Lib. Apocryph. in Disp. Theol. V. 41. 43.
44. 45. 46.
and I confess the Circumstances are very Odd and Romantic; That a Man should
fall upon his Sword first; then leap down from a Wall into the midst of his
Enemies; That they should make way for him, where he fell among the thickest of
them; that he should rise up again in anger, but withal in such a Condition,
that his blood gushed out like Spouts of Water, and his Wounds were very
grievous; but he ran through the midst of the throng notwithstanding, and
standing upon a steep rock, When his blood was now quite gone, he plucked out
his bowels, took them in both his hands, cast them upon the Crowd; and yet for
all this, his Senses it seems were not lost at the last Gasp, but after all
those wonderful Exploits this was not the least wonderful, that he should have
the Use of his Understanding so perfect, as to call upon God to restore him
those Bowels again; and so dye. This I thought not amiss to hint; and let them
look both to the Truth of the Story, and the Justice of the Commendition, who
have entitled these Books to an equal Authority with the Scriptures of the Old
and New Testament.

That Instance of the Women under the Tyranny of Antiochus, I do not
understand, for if it refer to those mentioned, 2 Macc. VI. 10. they seem to
have been thrown headlong from the Wall, by the hands of Executioners. But if
they had done it themselves, their Case had been somewhat more Pitiable, but
not more Imitable, than that of Razias.

Those of Pelagia and Sophronia are indeed extolied, but yet St. Jerome, who in
one place makes the preserving of Chastity an Exception, and the only reserved
Case from what I quoted out of him just now against Dying by one's own hand in
Persecutions; says in another place without exception. Epist. ad Marc.
That God receives no Souls who come without his orders. Deus non recipit
Animas, quae se nolente exterunt e corpore. And whether this Case of Theirs was
a Call, notwithstanding the Advocates and Applauses they have found, is greatly
to be questioned. For what is the Chastity God requires? Is it not that of the
Mind? Could not God have restrained even those lascivious Intentions? Does not
Eusebius in the very same Chapter, wherein he relates this Act of Sophronia
delivering her self from Maxentius, Eusebius. Eccles. Hist. L VIII. Chapter XIV.
particularly tell of a Christian Lady at Alexandria, who not being any way to
be conquered by Maximin, he would not so much as Kill her for her obstinacy,
nor indeed Force her Person, but in the Conflict of Rage and Lust, at last only
Confiscated her Goods, and sent her into Banishment? But supposing God had
permitted the soul Act; yet so long as the Mind was unblemished, here had been
no Guilt, but rather a double Martyrdom. If you say, they might possibly
suspect, that they should in the Commission of the Fact, have been polluted
with sinful Inclinations. It Is easy to Answer, That this is but a Fear, but a
bare Possibility; and if an Act be, Otherwise, and in the general, Unlawful,
the bare avoiding a possible Sin, cannot make it lawful to break a Command, and
by going against God and Nature, 1 Cor. X. 13. 2 Cor. XII.
commit and choose a certain Sin. He has promised, That he will not suffer his
Servants to be tempted, above that they are able, and declared that our
Weakness can never be so great, but that his grace is sufficient for us; with
many other gracious Promises, which it is a great fault in us to distrust, even
in our greatest Straits and Necessities. And to deliver our selves by Methods,
contrary to his Laws, is to distrust them, for we are to expect the Assistance
of his Grace, and the Protection of his Providence in the use of those Means,
and observance of those Rules he has given us. And therefore I cannot conceive
how the fear of falling into Sin only, can possibly render that Action Lawful,
which otherwise, and generally speaking, is it self a Sin and Unlawful.
Methinks therefore we should do well in this Case to distinguish with our
Savior in the Parable of the Unjust Steward; and as he commended the Wisdom of
that Man, without approving his Injustice; so we may allow all possible Praise
to the Gallantry, and Constancy of these Female Martyrs; without allowing, that
the Course they took to preserve their Virtue, Tom. 1. Front. Ducae. 628.
compared with Comment on Gal. I. 4.
was strictly regular and good. And thus St. Chrysostom seems to have done,
who, notwithstanding the great Encomium given of Pelagia in one place, yet
speaks of this Act of dying by one's own hand in very severe Terms in another;
and declares without exception, that the Christians had all such Persons in
abhorrence; and that they were more guilty before God than any other murderers.
And some of those Instances, which were thought hard to condemn, the
Vindicators have not well known how to acquit, otherwise than by a presumption
of a particular Impulse of God, which was for that Time and Action a
Dispensation to the General Law. So St. Augustine of Sampson, Spiritus latenter
hoc jusserat, qui per illum miracula faciebat. The same Spirit which wrought
Miracles by him, gave him a Secret Command to do this thing. And Lipsius
speaking of these very Women says, Monitum aut Jussio Dei hic quoque
praesumenda; Lip. Manuduc. ad Philos. Stoic. Cap. XXIII.
That a Command, or at least some Instinct and Direction from God, is to be
presumed in their Case, as well as Sampson's; and he had St. Augustin's own
Authority, he says, for this presumption. All which, when duly considered, as
it will not warrant us to censure these Persons as to their Eternal State, so
neither will it warrant our Imitating such Actions, or arguing from thence in
defense of such Behavior, or for the Extenuating the Sin of Self-murder. For
whatever they might be in Themselves, it is sure they are no Pattern to Us; and
if God see sit to Allow, or the Church to Commend their Zeal, it will still
become us to observe, and beware of the Irregularities of it.

The Examples which follow of Cities, destroying themselves rather than they
would lie at the Mercy of the Conquerors, whatever appearance they may have of
Fortitude and Gallantry, yet as to the point of Conscience, and Lawfulness,
they are certainly blameable, and fall under the same Censure, which is
afterward given of Cato, and others Page 294. N. 3, 4.

The Custom of Marseilles, and the Isle of Ceo, Valor. Maxim. Lib II. Cap. VI.
F. 7, 8.
where Persons willing to Dye made no scruple of doing it, having first
obtained the Judgment and Approbation of the Senate, and by Poison kept on
purpose, and prepared at the Public Charge, is only a Permission and
Allowance, and does by no means take off the Guilt and Injustice of making our
selves a way; except only in that single Point, that here the Public is not
injured, having expressly consented to the loss of that Member. But in all other
respects the Fact was Wicked and Abominable, and is reported to have had no
other foundation, than Affliction, or Extreme old Age, or in general a
Weariness of Life.

Nor will the next Argument hold, concerning the Desire of Death; for
supposing, that whatsoever a Man is allowed to desire, he is likewise allowed
to procure to himself, (which yet is not universally true) yet this Desire it
self is faulty, when it grows into Impatience, and is not content to wait God's
methods, and God's leisure. And there is great difference between meeting Death
gladly, and running into it; between receiving our Release with Satisfaction,
and breaking Prison. So far therefore as this Desire is consistent with
Patience, and Resignation to the Divine Will, so far it is truly Magnanimous
and Commendable, and no farther.

To that Question, What Law does this offend against, it is easy to answer,
Against the Laws of God, and of Nature, against the Condition of Mankind,
against our Duty to the Public; against the Sixth Commandment in particular,
which no more argues us Guiltless when we Kill our Selves, because chiefly
designed to restrain us from Killing Others; than it can be proved from the
Seventh, that we do not Sin against our own Bodies, when we Invade another's
Bed. The Love of our selves is proposed as the standard of our Love to others;
and the Rule must be supposed as perfect at least, as the thing to be regulated
by it. If there be no Prohibition against this in express words, it was because
none was thought needful; and sure it is no excuse to say, That no Law is
violated in Terms, When the Case was such as needed no Law. As to the other
part of the Argument, That Men may dispose of themselves as they please, and a
willing Person can receive no Injury; it supposes an Absolute Right to dispose
of our selves, such as no Creature has with respect to God and Providence, and
no Man can have with regard to the several Relations and Dependencies in which
he is engaged.

And if so little can be said for this Horrid Fact, when the most favorable
Cases are put; How detestable and impious must it needs be, when Disgrace, or
Poverty, Disappointments and Crosses, Raging Passions, and Repining at
Providence, prevail with Men to commit it? For these are such Motives as no
body ever undertook to justify, and the Stoics themselves, who went the
farthest in this matter, yet stopped short of these, and, to speak the Truth,
even wavered in all the rest. A more full account whereof I refer my Reader for
to Lipsii Manuduc. ad Stoic. Philosoph. Lib. III. Cap. XXIII, XXIV. and for a
larger discussion of this whole matter, to Spanhem. Disput. Theolog. De Lib.
Apocryph. Authoritate. Disp. XIII, XIV and Bishop Tailor, 1. De Civ. Cap XXVI.
Ductor Dubitant. Book III. Chap. 2. Rule 3. From all which compared, St.
Augustin's determination I doubt not will seem most reasonable; His exceptis,
quos vel Lex justa, vel ipse Fons Justitiae Deus jubet occidi; quisquis
Hominem, vel seipsum, vel quemlibet occiderit, Homicidij crimine innectitur.
Those only excepted, whom either a just Law, or God himself, who is the
Fountain of all Justice shall command to put to Death; whosoever shall kill any
Person, be it himself, or any other Man, he becomes thereby guilty of Murder;
and is Answerable for his Blood.

Of WISDOM.
The Third BOOK.
In which, Particular Rules are laid down, and Directions for the several Parts
and Offices of Wisdom, branched out under Four General Heads, as they have
relation, and are reducible, to the Four Cardinal Virtues,
The PREFACE.
OUR Design in this Last Part of the present Treatise, being to give the Reader
the most particular Instructions we can possibly, and so to follow and complete
the General Rules of Wisdom, touched upon in the Book foregoing; the most
Convenient and Methodical way of proceeding seemed to me, to range all I have
to say under the Four great Moral Virtues; of Prudence, Justice, Fortitude, and
Temperance: Since these are of a comprehension so large, that it is almost
impossible to instance in any Duty of Morality or Practical Religion, which is
not directly contained, or may very fairly be reduced within the compass of
them. Prudence supplies the place of a Director and Governor; it instructs Us
in other Virtues, and is the Guide of our Life, and all the Actions of it;
though indeed it be more peculiarly concerned in matters of Dealing, and good
Conduct, and its strict, proper Notion is Dexterity in the Management of
Business. Now, as This regards Actions, so Justice, which is the next, is
chiefly concerned about Persons; for the Province of Justice is, to render to
every Man his due. Fortitude and Temperance have respect to the Events of Human
Life; the Prosperous and Adverse, such as move our Passions, and are matter of
Joy or Grief, of Pleasure or Pain to us. Now it is plain, that these Three,
Persons, and Actions, and Contingencies, extend to all the parts of Human Life;
and our Condition and Dealings in the World cannot possibly oblige us to be
conversant with, or employed about any thing whatsoever, which is not
comprehended under One or Other of these Considerations.

CHAP. I. Of Prudence in general.
Its Excellence.
why Prudence should have the first and most honorable place allotted to it;
because it is really the Queen of Virtues; the general Superintendent, that
presides over, and gives directions to all the Rest. Where this is wanting,
there can be no such thing as Goodness or Beauty, Propriety or Decency. It is
the very Salt of Life, the Luster and Ornament of all our Actions; That which
recommends them to the Eye, and gives them that Seasoning and Relish which is
necessary; It Is the Square and Rule, by which all our Affairs ought to be
measured and adjusted; and, in one Word, This is the Art of Acting and Living,
as the Science of Physic is the Art of Health.

Definition.
which it concerns us to desire or to decline: It is a just and true Valuation
first, and then a picking and culling out the best: It is the Eye that sees
every thing, and conducts our Motions and Steps accordingly. The Parts or
Offices of it are Three, and these all naturally consequent, and in order after
one another. The First is Consulting and Deliberating well; the Second, Judging
and Resolving well; the Third, Managing and Executing those Resolutions well.

It Is Universal.
because of a Comprehension so general, so vast, that all manner of Actions and
Accidents belonging to Humane Life are within its Extent and Jurisdiction; and
This, not only considering them in the gross, but each of them singly and in
particular; So that This is as infinite, as all those Individuals put together.

Difficult.
the infinite Compass I have already mentioned must needs make it so: For
Particulars, as they cannot be positively numbered, so they cannot be fully
understood. It is a standing Rule, Si quae siniri non poss^nt, extra sapi^ntiam
sunt.
That whatever is infinite, exceeds the Bounds of Wisdom. But that which adds
yet more to the Hardship, is the great Uncertainty and Inconstancy of Human
Affairs; which is still rendered more intricate and unaccountable, by the
inexpressible Variety of Accidents, Circumstances, Appurtenances, Dependencies,
and Consequences; the Difference of Times, and Places, and Persons. And each of
these is of so considerable Importance, that the Change of one single
Circumstance, even such as may seem least and of no account, produces a very
great Alteration, and sets quite another Face upon the whole Matter. This
Difficulty is likewise greater and more evident, upon account of the Office, in
which this Virtue is employed; which consists in mustering together Contraries,
and then tempering them in just proportions with one another, so as to qualify
the whole at last, in the best manner the Case will admit. Another part of this
Office, is Distinguishing aright between things that are like, and making a
wise Choice by discerning Real from Seeming Good, and preferring a Greater to a
Less of the same Kind. Now all these things are puzzling, and full of
Confusion; for Contrariety and Resemblance both agree in this, that either of
them is a great Impediment, and creates Doubt and Irresolution.

Obscure.
so the Discerning part is subject to great Obscurity; by reason the first
Causes and Springs of Things, from whence they arise, and by which they are
moved and carry^d on, are secret and unknown; and, like the Seeds and Roots of
Plants, lie deep in the Ground, and far out of sight; so deep, that Human
Nature cannot dive to the bottom of them; and some of them so mysterious too,
that it is as criminal to enquire into them, as it is impossible to satisfy
our selves by such Enquiry. Occultat little semina Deus, and plerunque benerum
malorumque causa sub diversa specielatent.
Providence has thought fit to conceal the Seeds of these things; and it often
happens, that the Causes of Good and Bad Effects lie hid, and disguise
themselves under very different Appearances. And besides all this, there is
that strange Turn of Chance, that unaccountable Fatality, (call it what you
please) that Supreme, Secret, Unknown Power, which always maintains its
Authority, and gives the finishing stroke, in despite of all the properest
Methods, and wisest Precautions we can use. From hence it comes to pass, that
the best-laid Designs, and most regular Proceedings, are very frequently most
unfortunate in the Event. The very same Course taken by One Man succeeds
according to his heart's Desire; and with Another crosses all his Expectations;
and yet the Case to all Human appearance is the same in both, and no reason can
be given for such contrary Issues. Nay, the same Man found those very Methods
successful yesterday, which, when he tries again to day, baffle all his Designs
and Dependencies; and he who was a Winner but just now, plays the same Game
over twice, and the second time loses all. This Lottery of Fortune gave just
occasion for that received Rule, That no Man's Counsel, or Capacity, can be
rightly measured by his Success. And He was certainly in the right, who told
some of his Friends, that stood amazed at his ill Fortune, when they observed a
more than common Wisdom in all his Discourse and Behavior: Look you,
Gentlemen, this does not mortify me at all; I am Master of my Methods, and
capable of judging what is proper and convenient; but Events are what no Man
alive can govern, or insure to himself: This is Fortune's doing, which seems to
take a kind of envious Joy, in defeating our subtlest Projects, and diverts her
self with our Disappointments; She in an instant blasts our Hopes, and
overturns the most regular Schemes, which have cost the Study and Care of many
Years to draw and design; and when all the matter is duly considered and
resolved; when we have advanced so far, that nothing remains but the last Act;
when all is brought to Bear, (as we call it) she nails up all our Cannon, and
puts a full stop to all the Execution we intended. And in truth, This is the
only way Fortune takes to make her self great, and maintain her Credit in the
World; thus she exerts her Power over the Affairs of Humane Life; or, to speak
more truly, and in language more besitting the mouth of Christians, It Is Thus,
that Providence takes down our Pride and mortifies our Presumption: Fools
cannot be made Wise by Chance and of a sudden; but then, to check the Vanity of
those who have the advantage in Parts, They are frequently successful, even to
a degree that may provoke the Envy of Virtue and Wisdom it self. Accordingly we
may often observe, that Persons of very indifferent Capacities, and small
Seize, have been able to accomplish vast Undertakings, both public and
private; while others of more Masterly Judgments have been defeated in matters
of less difficulty. From all which Reflections my Reader plainly perceives,
that Prudence is a boundless and a bottomless Sea; never to be limited by
positive Preceps, or reduced to certain and standing Rules; because the Subject
it is concerned with is fickle and inconstant, like the Sea too; and all our
Measures must be changed, all are liable to be broke, as often as the Winds
change. One cross Blast blows us back again, or dashes us to pieces upon the
Rocks; and neither the best Vessel, nor the best Pilot can be proof against
this Stress of Weather. All then, that Prudence can engage for, is to be
circumspect, and consider every Circumstance in the several lights it is
capable of; but still the most discerning Man is in the Clouds; The greatest
Judgment and Application finds all its Endeavors frivolous and vain, and that,
when he thought he saw all things clearly, he was all the while groping, and
blundering in the dark.

Necessary.
this Virtue must be acknowledged of exceeding great weight, and absolute
Necessity. For thus much is her just due; that what is possible to be effected
must be compassed by her assistance; that though she cannot do All, she can do
a great deal; and that, however Men are not constantly successful with her, yet
without her all their Attempts are frivolous and perfectly insignificant. Not
only Riches, but Power, and Opportunities, and Strength for Action, are
impotent and vain, if destitute of Wisdom to use them.

Vis consili expers mole ruit sua, etc. Hor. Lib. 3. Od. 4.
Rash Force by its own weight must fall:
But prudent Strength will still prevail,
For such the Gods assist and bless.
Men's una sapiens plurium vincit manus.
One good Head is better than a great many Hands. Multa, quae natura impedita
sunt, consilio expediuntur. Live.
Many things that Nature has made intricate and difficult, are made easy and
very feasible by good Consideration and Advice. Nor does what I urged in the
former Paragraph at all invalidate the Truth of these Observations; because,
though Prudence be not the never-failing Cause, yet it is the usual Cause of
Success. God does not always prosper Men's wisest Projects; To convince us, that
the World is not governed without him: But he for the most part prospers fit
and proper means, to encourage our Industry, and as a proof, that the World is
governed regularly by him. Now That, which principally requires Our Prudence,
is, that we have to do with Men, and the corrupt Disposition of the Persons we
deal with, their perverse unmanageable Temper, makes Address necessary in all
our Transactions. For of all Creatures in the Universe, there is not any so
hard to be subdued and brought to compliance, as Mankind; Impatie^ns aequi,
nedum servitutis.

Senec. de Clement.
They who cannot bear so much as Equity, and Neighbors fare, must needs be
much less contented with Subjection and Slavery. And thefore nothing less than
great Art and Industry is sufficient to reduce and keep them in order. For
though we are always disposed to mutiny against them that are in any respect
our Superiors, and to fall soul upon People of all Conditions; yet we never do
it with so much Zeal, and such eager Malice, as when we make Head against those
who pretend to Authority and Dominion over us. Now Prudence is the knack of
managing Mankind, and keeping this Factious Principle under; a slack and gentle
Rein, by which the Skilful Rider keeps this Skittish Horse in the Road, and
Ring of Obedience.

Now, although Nature have implanted this, as well as other Virtues in us, and
more or less, in proportion to every Man's Capacity and Parts; and, though it
be from those Original Seeds, that Prudence takes its beginning; yet is this
more acquired, more learned and improved, more the Effect of Study and
Application of Thought, than any other Virtue whatsoever. And this Acquisition
is in some measure the Fruit of wise Precepts, and good Advice; which we
commonly call the Theory or Speculative Part of Prudence; but the best and
Principal Instrument and Help toward it, is Experience, (though this require
much more Time, and Pains) which is termed therefore the Practical Part. And
This again is of Two sorts. The One truly and properly so, because it is
Personal, learnt by what happens to, or is done by our own selves; arising from
Observations of our own making; and to This in strict speaking the Name of
Experience is appropriated; The Other is not our own, but the result of other
Peoples Judgment or Practice; and such is History, which informs us by Hearsay
and Reading. Now our own Proper Experience is much the firmer, more assured,
and what may with better reason be depended upon; for Use, as Pliny says, is
the best Master, the Author and Teacher of all Arts and Sciences; the
perfectest, though the most tedious and expensive way of Learning -- Seris
venit Usus ab Annis.
; it is the result of many Years and Gray Hairs, exceeding hard to be mastered,
very laborious, and very rare. The Knowledge of History, as it is less
satisfactory and assured, so is it likewise more easy, more frequently to be
met with, more obvious and in common to all sorts of People. A Man indeed is
more resolute and confident, when he learns Wisdom at his own Cost; but it is
much easier and cheaper to grow wise at the Expense of other People. And from
these Two. Experience properly so called, and Historical, Prudence is derived;
according to that common Saying, Usus me genuit, peperit Memoria,
Seu memoriae anima and vita Historia.

Experience is my Father, and Memory my Mother; or rather History, which is the
Life and Soul of Memory.

only is concerned; this is something so low and narrow, that it scarce
deserves the noble Title of Prudence; or else it is Social and Domestic,
confined to some small Company, and lesser Societies; and then there is
Secondly, Public Prudence, which is commonly known by the Name of Policy. This
is the more Sublime, more Excellent and Useful, and more difficult to be
attained; and to This it is, that all those lofty Characters and large
Commendations in the beginning of this Chapter do of right belong; which is
again subdivided according to the different Subjects and Occasions that call
for it, into Civil, and Military Prudence.

With regard to the Affairs it is conversant about, These are of two kinds;
Some Ordinary and Easy; Others Difficult and Uncommon. There are also several
Contingencies, by the interposition of which some new difficulties spring up,
which were not in the nature of the things; and consequently doubts and
perplexities not foreseen at the first setting out; and accordingly that
Prudence, whose business it is to manage all these, may be termed either
Ordinary, when it proceeds in the plain easy way, and governs its self by
known Rules, established Laws, and Customs in common Use; or else
Extraordinary, when it is obliged to go out of the beaten Road, and have
recourse to difficult Stratagems, and unusual Methods.

There is still one Distinction more behind, which extends both to the Persons,
and to the Affairs; or, as the Schools speak, the Subject and the Object of
this Prudence. But it is such a one, as regards not so much the several Kinds,
as the different Degrees of this Virtue. I mean that Prudence, which is truly
and properly a Man's Own, and gives him the Denomination of Wife; when one acts
upon his own Judgment, and trades with his own Stock; the Other a Borrowed and
Precarious Prudence, when we follow the Advice of others. And thus it is, that
all Philosophers agree in allowing two sorts of Wise Men. The First and Highest
rank, are those, who walk by their own Light, that penetrate and see through
all Difficulties, and always contrive Remedies and Expedients, by the force of
their own Judgment, and happy Forecast. But where shall we find these Able Men?
They are certainly Prodigies in Nature. The Other of Inferior Condition are
such, as understand how to judge, and take, and make the best advantage of good
Counsel, when it is given them. Now all Persons whatsoever, that make any
manner of pretense to Wisdom, must be included in this Division; for They who
neither know how to give good Advice, nor how to take it when others give it,
are by no means fit to come under this Character, but the contrary of Stupidity
and Folly.



Of the Policy fit for a Sovereign Prince in the Administration of Government.
The Preface.
THE Instructions I am bear about to give, are designed it be useful to
Sovereign Princes, and Governors of States. Their Transactions and Methods are
indeed in their own Nature Uncertain, Unlimited, Difficult to be known and
practiced, and the Rules necessary for their high Station, next to impossible
to be cast into any certain Form, or prescribed and determined in particular
Precepts. But however, we must try, if we can a little clear this matter, and
make it in any degree more easy and practicable. What is proper to be said
upon this Subject may be reduced to two General Heads, wherein the two Great
Duties of a Sovereign consist. The First comprehends under it all those
principal Pillars, by which the State is supported, and treats of Parts of
Governments: so essential to the Public, that they are the very Nerves and
Bones of this Body Politic; its Sense, its Motion, its Form is lost with, and
preserved by them; and these the Prince is in a special manner concerned to
take care, that Himself and the State be constantly well furnished with. The
Chief of them, I think, are these Seven: 1. A true Understanding of his
Government, the People, and their Constitution. 2. Personal Virtue. 3.
Behavior and Address. 4. Counselors. 5. Public Treasures. 6. Men and Arms.
And 7. Alliances. The Three first are in his own Person; the Next in himself
and those near his Person; and the Three last are more at a distance from him.
The Second General Head consists in Action; in carefully employing, and making
the best Advantage of the forementioned Means; that is, in one Word, but that a
very comprehensive one, in Governing well, and keeping up his Honor and
Authority; yet so, as at the same time to secure the Affection and good
Understanding both of his own Subjects and strangers. But to speak more
distinctly and particularly, this Part is Twofold, Civil and Military. Thus you
have in a very summary and general way the whole Scheme of Government laid
before you at once; Thus is the Work cut out, and the first rude Lines drawn,
of what the following Chapters must attempt to finish and fill up. For the
better Convenience then of the Reader and my self, I will according to what
has been here proposed, divide this Subject of Policy, or Prudence in
Government into Two parts. The First shall be the Provisionary Part, or the Care
of being furnished with these seven Necessary Advantages; The Second, and That
which presupposes the former already to be done, shall be the Administration,
or Management of the Prince. This Subject has indeed had great Right done to
it by Lipsius already; who wrote an excellent Treatise, in a method peculiar to
himself, but the Substance of it you will find all transplanted hither. I have
not at all bound my self to his Order, as appears by this general Division
already laid down, and will more plainly be seen in the following parts of this
Discourse; nor have I taken the whole of him; but have left part of what was
his behind, and added to it what I thought fit besides.

CHAP. II. The First Branch of Policy, or Prudence in Government, which is the
Provisionary Part.
Knowledge.
and That which must lead the way to all the rest, is a due Knowledge of the
State or Government: For in all manner of Prudence, the leading Rule is
Knowledge; and he, who is defective in this Qualification, is thereby rendered
utterly incapable of all besides, as has already been intimated in the Second
Book. For, whoever undertakes any sort of Action or Management, must begin with
informing himself, what his Business is, and with whom it lies. And therefore
this Prudence, which undertakes to order and dispose whole Nations and
Kingdoms; and whose peculiar Excellence and Commendation lies in the dexterity
and skill of Governing and Administering the Affairs of the Public to the best
advantage, is manifestly a Relative Virtue; and the Terms of this Relation,
whose Concern in this case is reciprocal, are the Sovereign and his Subjects:
The first step then toward discharging this Duty, is a right understanding of
the Parties; that is, of the People and their Subjection on the one hand; and
the Supreme Authority of the Prince on the other; for both these I include in
the Knowledge of the Government.

First then, A Man in that elevated Post should apply himself to Study and
understand the Humor and Complexion of the People. For this Knowledge will be
a very great direction, and model the Person, to whose Governance they are
committed. What the Disposition of the Common People is in general, has been
at large explained in the First Book, and their Picture drawn at full length.
There we observed that their Reigning Qualities are, Fickleness and
Inconstancy; A Spirit of Faction and Discontent; of Impertinence and Folly;
Love of Vanity and Change; Insolence and insupportable Pride in Prosperity;
Cowardice and Dejection of Mind in Adversity. But besides these Characters,
which are common to Persons of that Condition every where, a Man must be still
more particularly instructed in the Temper and Complexion of that Country, and
those Subjects, where himself is concerned. For the Dispositions of Men differ
extremely, and are almost as various as the Towns wherein they dwell, or the
Persons that inhabit them. Some Nations are in a peculiar and distinguishing
manner, Passionate or Choleric, Bold and Warlike, Cowardly or Luxurious,
addicted to Extravagance, to Wine, to Women; Laborious or Slothful; Frugal or
Expensive. And of those, who agree in these Qualities, there is a difference in
the measure; in Some they are more, and in Others less predominant. So
necessary is that Rule, Noscenda Natura Vulgi, and quibus modis temperanter
habeatur.
That The Common People must be Studied, first to know what they are, and then
what is the best method of dealing with them. And in this Sense it is, that we
are to understand the Old Philosophers; when they pronounce Subjection and
Obedience a necessary preparation to the Art of Ruling; Nemo been imperat, nisi
qui ante paruerit imperio.
No Man (says Seneca) ever Governs well, who hathnot first lived under
Government, and known what it is to be Commanded himself. Not that we are to
infer from hence any Necessity, or indeed so much as a Possibility, that all
Princes ought to be raised to that Dignity from an Inferior Condition; for
several of them are born Princes; and a Great many Governments pass on in a
Line, and come by Succession, and Proximity in Blood: But the true Importance
of that Maxim is, That whoever is desirous to be a good Governor, must inform
himself of the Humors and Inclinations of his Subjects, and understand, which
are the reigning Qualities inthem, as perfectly well, as if He had been one of
the same Rank himself, and had felt and been acted by them in his own Person.

But then it is no less necessary, that the Condition of the Government should
be likewise thoroughly understood; and that not only What Sovereignty and Power
is in general, according to the description formerly given of it in the First
Part of this Treatise; but the Frame and Temper of that Government and that
State in particular, where this Person himself presides, what the Form and
Constitution of it is, how it was six'd and adjusted, and what Extent of Power
is vested in him; Whether it be an Old or Later Establishment; whether it
descend by Inheritance, or whether it be conferred by Election; whether it were
obtained by Regular and Legal Methods, or whether acquired by Force of Arms;
how far his Jurisdiction reaches; what Neighbors are about him; what Strength
and what Conveniences he is provided with. For according to these, and a great
many other Circumstances, too tedious to be specificed here, a different sort
of Conduct will be found necessary. The Scepter must be swayed, as such
Considerations shall dictate; One and the same Method will not serve all alike;
but the Rules and the Administration must be suited to the Temper of the Beast,
and as this proves to be harder or softer mouthed, so the Rider must take care
to keep a slacker or a stiffer Rein.

After this Knowledge of the State and Government, The second Head. Virtue.
which as I said, is in the Nature of a Preface, or Indroduction to all the
following Heads, the next both in Order and Dignity is Virtue. And no Man can
wonder that so honorable a Place is assigned to This, among the necessary
Qualifications of a Governor, who at all considers, how absolutely and
indispensably needful it is to a Prince, and that, both upon his own Account,
and for the Benefit of the Public. First of all, it is highly reasonable, as
Cyrus well observes, That he, who is above all the rest in Honor and
Authority, should be so in Goodness too; This is no more, than what such a
Great and Elevated Station may justly seem to require of him. Then his own
Reputation is nearly concerned in it; For Common Fame makes it one great part
of its Business to pick up and disperse every thing that our Governors do or
say: The Prince stands exposed to the public View; every Eye is upon him, and
he is curiously watched. There is no such thing in Nature, as Privacy for
Princes; They can no more be concealed, than the Sun in the Firmament. They are
the constant Subject of Discourse in every Company; and so are sure to have a
great deal of Good, or a great deal of Ill said of them. And it is of exceeding
great Consequence to any Governor; both with regard to his Personal, and the
Common Interest and safety, what Opinion the World have of him. Nor is it
enough, that the Supreme Governor be Virtuous in his own Temper and
Conversation, but he is likewise obliged to take good care, that his Subjects
be like him in Goodness. And how deeply This concerns him, I appeal to the
Universal Consent of all Good and Learned Men, who with one Voice declare it
impossible for that Kingdom, or Nation, that City or less Society of Men to
prosper, nay, so much as to subsist long, who have banished Virtue from among
them. And those nauseous Flatterers prevaricated much too grossly, who pretend
that it is for the Advantage and Security of Princes, that their Subjects
should be abandoned to Wickedness and Vice: Because say they, This emasculates
their Minds, and renders them more tame and servile intheir Dispositions; so
Pliny in his Panegyric, says, Patientiores servitutis, quos and decet nisi
esse servos.
They are more patient under Slavery, who are fit for nothing but to be Slaves.
For, quite contrary, we find by unquestionable Experience, that the more
Vicious Men are, the more do they flinch, and grow unruly under the York: The
Good and the Gentle, the Meek and Sweet-temper'd Men, these are much better
qualified to live in Fear and Awe of Authority themselves; than to be an Awe or
give occasion of Jealousy to their Governors. Pessimus quisque asperrime
Rectorem patitur: Contra. Facile Imperium in Bonos, qui Metuentes magis quam
metuendi.
Every Man is more ungovernable, in proportion, as he is a worse Man, says
Salust: Mutiny, and Discontent, and perpetual Uneasiness, are the sure
Attendants of a profligate Mind. On the other hand, Good Men are very easily
kept in order; they give their Superiors little trouble, but had rather submit
with Reverence and Fear, than be a Terror or Disturbance to those above them.
Now there cannot be a more powerful Motive, a more efficacious Mean of bringing
over the People, and forming them into Virtue, than the Example of the Prince.
For (as daily Experience shows,) every one affects to be like Him; and the
Court is the Standard of Manners, as well as of Fashions. The Reason is,
because Example is what Men are sooner moved, and more strongly wrought upon
by, than Laws; for this is a Law in dumb Show, but has more Credit and
Authority, than the Voice of the Law speaking in Commands. Nec tam Imperio
nobis opus quam Exemplo; and mitius jubetur Exemplo.
We do not want Precepts so much as Patterns, and Example is the softest and
least invidious way of Commanding; says Pliny. Now, if all Example be a mighty
Inducement, That of Great Persons must be so in a Degree proportionable to
their Quality and Station: For all the Little Ones fix their Eyes and Hearts
here, and take their Observations from those above them. They swallow all
without chewing; admire and imitate at a venture; and conclude, that their
Superiors would not be guilty of any Behavior unbecoming their Character; and
if They do a thing, it must needs be excellent and good. And on the other hand,
Governors are so sensible of the Force of this Motive too, that they think
their Subjects indispensably obliged to those Rules which they are content to
be governed by themselves; and that their own doing what they would have done
by others, is singly a sufficient Inducement, to bring it into Practice and
common Vogue, without the Formality of a Command to enforce it. From all which
it is abundantly manifest, that Virtue is exceeding necessary and advantageous
to a Prince, both in point of Interest, and in point of Honor and Reputation.

Four Principal Virtues.
which seem to have greater and more commanding Influence, than the rest; and
those are Piety, Justice, Valor and Clemency. These are more properly Princely
Qualities, and shine brightest of all the Jewels that adorn a Crown; of the
Excellencies, I mean, that even a Prince's Mind can be possibly endued with.
This gave occasion to that most Illustrious of all Princes, Augustus Caesar, to
say, That Piety and Justice exalt Kings, and translate them into Gods: And
Seneca observes, that Clemency is a Virtue more suitable to the Character of a
Prince, than to persons of any other Quality whatsoever.

Now the Piety of a Prince consists and must exert it self in the Care and
Application, which he ought to use for the Preservation and Advancement of
Religion, of which every Sovereign ought to consider himself, as the Guardian
and Protector. And thus indeed he should do for his own sake; for this Zeal and
pious Care will contribute very much to his own Honor and Safety. For they
that have any regard for God, will not dare to attempt, no not so much as to
contrive or imagine, any Mischief against that Prince who is God's Image upon
Earth; and who plainly approves himself to be such, by his zealous and tender
Concern for the Glory and the Institution of his great Original. And in effect,
this tends no the Security of the People too, and the Quiet of the Government
in general. For, as Lactantius frequently urges, Religion is the common Band,
that links Communities together; Society could not be supported without it.
Take off this Restraint, and the World would immediately be overrun with all
manner of Wickedness, Barbarity and Brutality. So great an Interest has every
Government in Religion; so strong, so necessary a Curb is the Sense, and Fear,
and Reverence of it to unruly Mankind. Thus on the other hand, even Cicero, who
does not appear to have been any mighty Devote, makes it his Observation, That
the Romans owed the Rise, and Growth, and flourishing Condition of their
Commonwealth, to their Exemplary Respect for Religion, more than to any other
Cause whatsoever. Upon this account, every Sovereign is very highly concerned,
and strictly obliged to see, that Religion be preserved entire, and that no
Breaches be made upon it: That it be encouraged and supported, according to the
established Laws, in all its Rights, Ceremonies, Usages, and Local
Constitutions: Great Diligence should be used to prevent Quarrels, Divisions,
and Innovations; and severe Punishments inflicted upon all who go about to
alter, or disturb, or infringe it. For, without all Controversy, every Injury
done to Religion, and all rash and bold Alterations in it, draw after them a
very considerable damage to the Civil State; weaken the Government, Dion.
and have a general ill Influence upon Prince and People both; as Moecenas very
excellently argues, in his Oration to Augustus.

Justice and Fidelity.
without which Governments are but so many Sets of Banditi, Robbers, and
Invaders of the Rights of their Brethren. This therefore a Prince ought by all
means to preserve and maintain in due Honor and Regard; both in his own Person
and Conversation, and in the Observance of those under his Jurisdiction.

1. It is necessary to be strictly observed by the Sovereign Himself: For
nothing but Detestation and the utmost Abhorrence is due to those Barbarous and
Tyrannical Maxims, which pretend to set a Prince above all Laws; and to
complement him with a Power of Dispensing at Pleasure with Reason, and Equity,
and all manner of Obligation and Conscience; which tell Kings that they are not
bound by any Engagements; and that their Will and Pleasure is the only Measure
of their Duty; That Laws were made for common Men, and not for such as They;
That every thing is Good and Just, which they find most practicable and
convenient: In short, that their Equity is their Strength; and whatever they
can do, that they may do. Principi Leges nemo scripsit. Licet, si libet. In
summa fortuna id requius quod validius; nihil injustum quod fructuosum.
Sanctitas, ^ietas, Fides privata bona sunt; qua juv^t Reges eant.
No Man ever presumes to prescribe to Princes, or include them within the Verge
of any Laws, but their own Inclinations. In the highest Post, Justice is always
on the stronger side: That which is most profitable, can never be unlawful,
Holiness and Piety, Faith and Truth, and common Honesty are the Virtues of
private Men: Princes may take their own Course, and are above these vulgar
Dispensations. So say Pliny and Tacitus. But against this false Doctrine, too
apt to be liked by Persons in Power, I entreat my wise Prince, to oppose the
really Excellent and Pious Sentences and Directions of Grave and Good
Philosophers. They tell you, That the greater Power any Man is invested with,
the more regular and modest he should be in the Exercise of it; That this is
one of those Things which must always be used with a Reserve; and the more one
could do, the less it will become him to do. That the more absolute and
unbounded any Man's Authority is, the greater Check, and more effectual
Restraint he has upon him. That every Man's Ability should be measured by his
Duty; and what he may not, that he cannot do. Minimum decet libere, cui nimium
licet. Non ^as potentes posse, sieri quod nefas.
He that can do what he will, must take care to will but a very little. And
Great Men should never think they have a Liberty of doing what ought not to be
done.

The Prince then ought to lead the way, and be first and most eminent for
Justice and Equity; and particularly he must be sure to be very punctual to his
Word; and to keep his Faith and his Promise most inviolably; because Fidelity
and Truth is the Foundation of all manner of Justice whatsoever; whether to all
his Subjects in general, or to each Person in particular. How mean soever the
Party, or how slight soever the Occasion be, still this Word must be Sacred.
When he has thus provided for his own Behavior, his next Care is, to see that
others are Just too. For This indeed is the Fundamental Article of all
Government, the very End of its Institution, and the particular Trust put into
the Hands of every Sovereign. He has his Power committed to him for this very
Purpose, To take care that Justice be equally distributed, and Wrongs and
Oppressions repressed, by interposing his Arbitration and the Power of the
Sword. Therefore he ought in Person, or in Authority and Deputation, to hear
and decide Causes; to let every one have a fair Trial, to award to each Party
what by the Letter of the Law, or by the equitable Construction of it, belongs
to him; and all this without Delays, or Quirks, or Trickings; without
Perplexing the Case, or Countenancing Foul and Litigious Practice: And in order
hereunto it were very well if that Way of Pleading now in use, could be either
reformed, as it ought, or quite turned out of doors; which is at present become
a most vile, most destructive Trade, a perfect Market, Concessum Latrocinium.
Columel.
A Robbery and Picking of Pockets Countenanced by the Law, and upheld under the
Pretense of a Learned and Honorable Profession. It will also be advisable, to
avoid, as much as may be, Multiplicity of Laws and Decrees, which only breed
Confusion, and are Corruptissimae Reipub. plurimae leges.
A Symptom of a sick and corrupt State, as sure as taking much Physic and
wearing many Plasters are Signs of gross Humors and ill Health. For unless
some Care of this kind be taken, that which is established by Good and Wise
Las, will be defeated and quite overturned again, by too many Laws.

One thing, by the way, ought not to be omitted upon this Occasion; which is,
that the Justice, and Virtue, and Probity of a Prince is not in all Points tied
up to the same Methods, and manner of Proceeding with that of Persons in a
private Capacity. It has a larger Range, and freer Scope allowed; and all this
Latitude is Indulgence little enough; no more than is absolutely necessary for
the Weighty and Hazardous Office our Governors are engaged in, and the
Infinite Unconceivable Difficulties that arise in their Administration. This
makes it reasonable for Them to go in a Way by Themselves; the common and
direct Tract is too Narrow; they are obliged to shift, and dodge, and wheel
about, and whatever Censures People, who understand not the Nature of the Case,
may pass, as if every thing that is unusual and indirect, were presently Wicked
and Unjust; yet those, who are capable of considering, and competent Judges of
the Matter, must admit it to be lawful and allowable, as well as prudent and
needful for them to do. For Prudence must be mixed with Justice; some Feints
and Stratagems, and little Slights made use of; and (as they commonly express
it) when the Lion's Skin is not big enough of it self, it must be eked out, by
tacking a Fox-Skin to it.

Nor would I be so mistaken here neither, Salus Populi Supreme Lex esto.
as to be thought a Justifier of these crafty Dealings at all times, and in all
Cases indifferently. By no means, This is not a standing Rule of Action; But
must be reserved for special Occasions; and particularly, there must be three
Conditions to warrant it. The first is absolute Necessity, or at least, some
evident and very considerable Advantage to the Public (that is, to the Prince
and the State, who are to be looked upon as One and the Same, and their
Interests altogether inseparable) and this must by all means be consulted, and
made the chief Aim. This is a natural, an indispensable Obligation: For the
Public Good is a Consideration Paramount to all others; and the Man that is
procuring it, cannot but be doing his Duty.

Salus Populi Supreme Lex esto.
The Safety of the People must be the Supreme Law.

The Second Qualification which these Methods must have to recommend them, nay
indeed to acquit them of Blame, is, That they be used Defensively, only and not
Offensively; with a Design to preserve a Prince or a State, but not to
aggrandize Them, and oppress Others. For this Reason they should seldom or
never be begun with, but only returned back again; and then are they in proper
time and Place, when employed to save the Public from Snares and Subtle
Designs, and not to contrive, but to discover and defear mischievous and sicked
Practices. For one Trick may be answered with another; and it is reasonable to
play the Fox with a Fox. The World is exceeding full of Malice and Cunning: And
Aristotle's Observation is most true, That the Subversion of States and
Kingdoms is usually owing to Treachery and Deceit. What then should hinder?
what forbid? Nay, in such Exigencies, what can excuse the Conservators of the
Public Safety, from preventing and disappointing such Calamities and
Villainous Intentions by countermining? Why may not the State save it self by
the same Methods that were practiced to ruin it, and retort the Artifice of
Factions and Wicked Malcontents back upon their own Heads? For a Man to be
too Squeamish in these Cases; to play constantly above-board and upon the
square; and deal with these Men according to the Rules of that Rigorous Equity
and Plain-dealing, which Reason and Conscience require from us in private
Affairs, is inconsistent with the Nature and the Measures, nay, with the very
End of all Government; and the Event would often be the betraying and losing
all, and Sacrificing the Public to an Unreasonable Scruple.

The Third Qualification is, That these Methods be used moderately and
discreetly; As they are not fit for all Times, nor all Occasions; so neither
are all Persons sit to be trusted with them. For they are capable of great
Abuses: And if abused, will prove of ill Example and ill Consequence by
ministering Occasion to ill Men, to practice and justify their Frauds and
indirect Dealings, and so giving Countenance to Wickedness and Injustice, even
in private Commerce and Transactions: For a Man is never at Liberty to forsake
Virtue and Honesty, to follow Vice and Injustice; These things are so far from
indifferent, that there is no Possibility of reconciling those distant
Extremes, no Satisfaction capable of being made for so ill a Choice. And
therefore away with all Injustice and Infidelity, all Treacherous and Illegal
Proceedings; and cursed be the Principles and the Politics of those Men, who
(as I instanced before) would possess Sovereign Commanders with a Belief that
all things are lawful, if they be but expedient for them. There is a vast
difference between such an Arbitrary Notion of Right and Wrong, and the Rules
and Limitations I have here laid down. Reasons of State may sometimes make it
necessary to temper Honesty with Profit, and try if these two can be so mingled
together as to make a good Composition. But, though we may try to compound and
soften the Matter, yet we must never act in opposition to Justice. We may, nay,
we must sometimes use Artifice and Subtilty; we may sometimes wheel off a
little, and fetch a Compass about it; but we must never lose Sight of it, much
less turn our Backs upon it, and cast all Regard for so Sacred a Thing behind
us. For there is a Cunning very consistent with Virtue and strict Honor, such
as St. Basil the Great calls a Great and Commendable Cunning, (Magna and laud
tbilis Astutia) such as tends to Good; and may be used, as Mothers and
Physicians deal by their Children and their Patients, when they tell them fine
Stories to amuse and entertain them, and by degrees cheat them into Health. In
short, many things may be transacted secretly and in the dark, which are not
sit for public View, and will not bear an opener Process; Prudence and
Stratagem may be added to Courage and Strength. Art and Wit may supply the
Defects of Nature and Force, in cases which these are not sufficient to manage:
A Governor may, nay, he ought to be, as Pindar calls it, a Lion in the Field,
and a Fox at the Council Table; or, as that Divine Savior, who was Truth it
self, has expressed himself upon another occasion; He may be a subtle Serpent,
but still a harmless Dove.

Distrusting others.
what sort of Subtlety I mean. I say that Distrust, and the keeping himself
much upon the Reserve, is highly requisite in a Prince; and this is to be done,
without abandoning Virtue and Equity. Distrust, which is the former of these
two Qualifications, is absolutely necessary; as indeed its contrary, Credulity,
and Easiness, and rash Confidence, is a very great Fault, and of most dangerous
Consequence to a Prince: For his Station obliges him to Vigilance; he is
accountable for the whole Community, and therefore no Faults of his own can be
light and inconsiderable; and where every Action has so mighty effect, such
universal Influence, great Care should be taken, and every thing done
advisedly. If he be of a confiding Temper, he discovers his Intentions, and
lays himself open to Shame and Reproach, and a world of Dangers; Opportunus
Injuriae. Senec. Aditum nocendi Perfido praestat Fides.
He lays himself in the way of being ill used; nay, he even invites and tempts
treacherous and deceitful People to practice upon him; and gives them a power
to do a World of Mischief, with very little danger, and great Opportunities of
Advantage to themselves. Knaves have always the Inclination to be false; and
trusting them gives them Ability of gratifying that Inclination to our
Prejudice. A Prince should always retreat behind this Shield of Diffidence; as
some of the Philosophers have styled it, who represent it as a very
considerable Branch of practical Wisdom, the very Nerves and Sinews, that
impart Strength and Motion: That Diffidence, I mean, which consists in keeping
ones Eyes open, ones Mind in suspense, suspecting and providing against every
thing. And for all this, he will not need any more convincing Reason, any
stronger Inducement, than barely the reflections upon the Temper and Condition
of the World would give him. To observe, how all Mankind are made up of
Falsehood and Deceit, of Tricks and Lies; how Unfaithful and Dangerous, how full
of Disguise and Design all Conversation is at present become, but especially,
how much more it abounds near his own Person, and how manifestly Hypocrisy and
Dissimulation are the reigning Qualities of Prince's Courts, and Great Men's
Families, above any other places whatsoever. A King therefore must be sure to
trust but Few, but very Few; and those should always be such, as long
Acquaintance, and many Trials have given him a perfect Understanding, and good
Assurance of. And even these most intimate Confidents must be consulted with so
discreetly, that he never commit himself entirely, and without any reserve to
them; he must not give them all the Rope, but constantly keep one End in his
own Hand; and how long a Range soever he think sit to allow them, yet it will
be very necessary to have an Eye always upon their Motions. But yet at the same
time, this very Distrust must be concealed, and dissembled too; and in the very
midst of his Reserves, a Prince must put on the Air of Openness and Friendship,
and appear to repose a mighty Confidence in those about him. For nothing is
more provoking and offensive, than plainly to see one s self suspected; and
this Distance and Jealousy is sometimes as strong a Temptation to Treachery
and soul Play, as too supine and free a Confidence. Multi fallere docuerunt
timentes falli. Sen.
Many Persons, says Seneca, have put it into People's Heads to deceive them,
who would never have harbored any such Thought, if their own Fears of being
deceived, had not given the first Hint. And thus it is sometimes in the other
Extreme too; A very great Frankness and declared Reliance, oftentimes takes off
the Inclination to betray a Secret, and wrong the good Opinion and Confidence
you have of them: And many People have been brought over to strict Loyalty and
Fidelity, and hearty Affection, by seeing themselves freely dealt with. For
Vult quisque sibi credi, and habita sides ipsam plerunque obligat fidem.
Every body naturally loves to be trusted; and the reposing a more than
ordinary Confidence, sometimes sixes a Man in Your Interests, and engages him
to be Secret and Faithful. So much Ingenuity still remains in the most
degenerate Minds, that they see the Odiousness of Treachery and Fal^hood; and
though Gain put toomany upon doing the thing, yet not one of all those can bear
the Imputation, or be reconciled to the Character of Falsifying a Trust.

Dissimulation.
For were there no such thing as Diffidence and Reserve, but Frankness and
Fidelity, and Good Assurance everywhere, there would be no place left for
Dissembling; whose Business it is to open the Face, but cover the Heart; and
while one's outward Air seems to unlock all, to keep the Thoughts and
Intentions close and unseen. Now the same Dissimulation, which in Persons of
private Condition would be vicious and abominable, is in Princes highly
commendable; there is no discharging their weighty Affairs without it; and the
very thing which ruins common Conversation, is the best Security, and necessary
support of Government. Feints and Pretenses are absolutely requisite, not in
Military Conduct only, and time of War, to amuse Enemies and Strangers, but
even in Peace and Civil Administration toward one's own Subjects; though upon
such Occasions, I confess, they ought to be practiced more sparingly and
nicely. The plain, and free, and open, such as we commonly say carry their
Heart in their Faces, are by no means cut out for the Business of Governing;
they often ruin and betray both themselves and their People. And yet, as was
observed in the former Paragraph, so here again, this Dissimulation requires
some Dexterity and Skill. It is not every one whose Temper will let him
dissemble, that is Master of this Art; for unless the Part be played well, it
is absolutely spoiled; and therefore care must be taken of Over-doing, and
Unseasonableness, and awkward improper Carriage: For This is easily seen
through, and then you lose your End. For to what purpose do you hide and
disguise your self, if the Mask be so plain, that every Body can distinguish,
and see you put it on? And how vain are all Pretenses and little Artifices,
when the Secret is once out, and the Design has taken Air? Their very Nature
then is changed, and they cease from thenceforward to be Artifices any more. It
is therefore fit for a Prince to pretend to Simplicity and Sincerity, the
better to cover his Address of this kind; and convenient for him to court, and
caress, and commend Men of open Tempers and free Carriage, and all that profess
themselves Enemies to Dissimulation; nay, it is expedient for him, in matters
of less Consequence, to act so, and gain the Reputation of such a one himself,
that so he may be more at liberty to use Art and Reserve in Affairs of greater
Moment, and be safe from Jealousy when he does so; under the shelter of a
contrary Character.

Secret Service.
and the Exercise of it consists not so much in Action, as in forbearing, and
seeming not to act. But some Occasions require a great deal more; and therefore
a Prince must be qualified for bolder Strokes, and advance to actual Deceit; of
which there are Two sorts necessary to be understood, and sometimes to be
practiced.

The First is That of settling a private Correspondence, and getting
Intelligence underhand: The engaging the Affections and Services of Officers,
Attendants, Counselors, and Confidents to Foreign Princes; or, if occasion be,
contriving to have secret Information, not only how one's Enemies, or
Brother-Kings, but even one's own Subjects behave themselves; and what Designs
are brewing. This is a sort of Subtlety much in request, and every where made
use of, between one Prince and another; and Tully recommends it as a very
considerable Point of Prudence. Sometimes this is effected by the power of
Persuasion only; but, generally speaking, there aremore sensible and moving
Arguments made use of, than bare Words can pretend to; Presents, I mean, and
Pensions; whose Force is so irresistible, that not only Secretaries of State,
Presidents of Councils, particular Friends, and intimate Favorites, have by
this means been prevailed upon to communicate, and so prevent and defeat the
Designs of the Master, whose Bread they eat, and to whose Countenance and
Bounty they owe all their Greatness; not only Commanders have assisted their
Enemies in time of Action; but, which is still more prodigious, and proves the
Almighty Power of Bribery, to the Eternal Reproach of treacherous corrupt
Nature, even Wives themselves have been hired to discover the Secrets, and
betray the safety of their own Husbands. Now this corrupting the Confidents of
others, is what a great many make ^o scruple of approving: and indeed, if it be
practiced either against a declared Enemy, or a Subject of ou^'s own, who has
ministered just Grounds of Suspicion; or if it be against any Stranger in
general, with whom we are under no particular Engagements of Alliance or
Friendship, or mutual Trusts, there seems to be no great difficulty in allowing
it to Princes: But certainly it can never be justified against Confederates and
Friends; for where any such Obligations intervene, these very Attempts to
debauch those upon whose Secrecy and Advice they rely, is a piece of Treachery
never to be indulged them.

The other sort of necessary Deceit, is the Address of gaiing Advantages, and
compassing one's Design by cunning and unseen Methods; by equivocating and
ambiguous Terms; by refined Subtleties, and deep Intrig^^s; by good Words, fair
Promises, Complements and Congratulations, the Formalities of Embassies and
Letters; by these outwardly fair Pretenses, and amusing Stratagems, bringing
Matters about, and securing Advantages, which the want of Time, or Opportunity,
or the Difficulty and Perplexity of a Prince's Affairs had cut him out from
effecting any other way: And so he must work like a Mole, underground, and do
that unseen and behind the Curtain, which will not bear the open Stage. There
have been several great and wise Men of Opinion, Plato. Pliny. Valor. Maxim.
that these Proceedings are lawful as well as expedient. Crebro mendacio and
fraud uti Imperantes debent ad Commodum Subditorum. Decipere pro moribus
temporum Prudentiae est.
Governors ought to make no scruple of having frequent recourse to Lies and
Tricks, when the Advantage of their Subjects is concerned, (says one). And
another, That it is a Part of Prudence to deceive, as occasion and the present
prosture of Affairs shall require. I must confess for my own part, These seem
to me very bold Assertions; and I think the pronouncing such Practices
generally and in themselves lawful, savours of too much Positiveness, or too
great Latitude. The furthest I dare stretch in favor of them, and that
possibly one might venture to say, is, That where the Case is almost desperate,
and the Necessity exceeding urgent, when it is a Season of Perplexity, and
Confusion, and general Disorder; when the End proposed to be attained by it, is
notonly the promoting the Interest or Greatness of a Commonwealth, but the
averting and shifting off some very great and threatening Mischiefs; and when
the Persons, against whom we take these Advantages, are profligate, and ofno
Principles themselves; I say, all these Circumstances concurring, a Man perhaps
might venture to say that such Tricks of State are either no Faults; or if
they, be, very moderate and pardonable Faults.

The Reader is desired to observe how cautious and tender the Author is, at the
End of these Cases, which is the more remarkable, because he lived under an
Absolute and Arbitrary Government, where many things were practiced and
allowed, which can by no means hold, or be drawn into Precedents in limited
Constitutions. And generally speaking, no doubt that Prince governs best, who
brings his Measures nearest to those of Common and Private Justice. The Readers
will find an excellent Remark to this purpose, made by one who was himself an
Emperor, in M. Antonin. (...), lib. ix. S. 24.
But there are other Instances still behind of much greater difficulty; such as
minister very just ground of Doubt, whether they are allowable upon Reasons of
State, or not, because they have a strong Tincture of Injustice, Injustice for
the Public Good.
and border hard upon Oppression. I say they have a strong Tincture, because
they are not totally unjust; for there is a Mixture of Justice (...) the same
time, to temper and allay the Injustice that is in them. For wre there not so,
there could be no scruple. That which is altogether unjust, and manifestly so,
all Men agree (...) condemning; even the vilest Wretches alive have not yet put
off all Distinctions of Right and Wrong, all Sense of Guilt and Shame: But what
they allow themselves in the practice of, even that they disallow in Profession
and Pretense. But the Case is otherwise in mixed Actions; there are Arguments
and Appearances of Reason at least, Examples and Authorities on both sides; and
a Man, that enters into the Disquisition, does not find it easy what
Resolutions to take. At least he finds somewhat to give Countenance to what his
Convenience persuades; and that which has divided Men's Judgments, and made it
a moot Point, he thinks will be sufficient for his Vindication. Abundance of
Cases of this nature might be specified; but at present I shall content my self
with a few, that now occur to me, and leave it to the Reader, to put others
like, or parallel to these, as he sees fit.

What shall we say first to the ridding ones Hands of a troublesome pestilent
Fellow, that propagates Faction and

Disorder, and is eternally breaking the public Peace, by getting him taken
off secretly, without any legal Process? This Man, take notice, is supposed to
deserve Death, but the Circumstances of the Offender, and of the Prince, are
such, that without manifest Danger to the State, he cannot be brought to
Justice, nor made an Example in the common way. Here is, they tell you, no
material Injustice in all This; the Offender has but his Due; and, as Matters
stand, the Public is better served by his having it in this way, than it could
be, by punishing him after the manner of other Offenders of the like Nature. So
that the most you can make of this, is a Breach of the Forms and Methods
prescribed by Law; and surely, they tell you, the Sovereign Prince is above
Forms.

The next is Clipping the Wings, and giving a Check to the Wealth and Power of
some Great Man, who is growing Popular, and strengthening his Interest; and
both from his Ability and Inclination to do Mischief, becomes formidable to his
Prince. The Question here is, whether a Prince may not lower and cut such a
potent Subject short in time, without staying so long for a fair Provocation,
that he stall be grown too big to be dealt with; and if any Attempts be made,
either against the public Peace in general, or the Life of the Prince in
particular, it will not then be possible to prevent or to punish them, though
we would never so fain.

Another is, In an extreme Exigence, and when no other Supplies are to be had,
seizing upon private Stocks, and so compelling so of the wealthiest Subjects
to furnish the Public Necessities, when the Nation is not able by all its
Public Funds to support it self.

A Fourth is Infringing and Vacating some of the Rights and Privileges which
some of the Subjects enjoy, when the Authority of the Prince is prejudiced and
diminished, and his Grandeur eclipsed by the Continuance of them.

The Last is, a Point of Prevention, when a Fort, or a Town, or a Province very
commodious to the Government is seized, and got into a Prince's Hands by
interposing first; and to keep it out of the Possession of some other powerful
and very formidable Neighbor; who by making himself Master of this Pass, would
have been in a Condition of doing great Injury, and giving perpetual
Disturbance to this Prince and his Country, who are now the first Occupiers.

All these things, I know, sound harsh, and are hardly, if at all, to be
reconciled with the common Notions of Justice. Matters of State are neither fit
nor safe for me to give a Judgment in; thus much only, I think, may not
misbecome this place to say, That, as on the one hand the indulging and having
frequent recourse to such Actions is very dangerous, gives just matter of
Jealousy to the Subject, and will be apt to degenerate into Tyranny and
Exorbitant use of Power; so on the other, it is plain, Subjects ought to be
modest and very spring in censuring the Actions of their Prince, and the Steps
he makes for the public Safety, however bold they may seem, and beyond the
Lengths which are commonly gone. And this suspending at least of our Judgments
in matters of another and very distant Sphere, will appear the more reasonable,
when I have showed you that very eminent Men, Persons of acknowledged Virtue as
well as vast Learning and Wisdom, have approved all those Practices already
mentioned, and think them not amiss, provided the Success be good, and answer
their Intentions. And to this purpose I will quote you here some of those
Sentences and Remarks which they have left us upon such Occasions.

In order to preserve Justice in greater and more important Matters, there is
sometimes a necessity (says Plutarch) of deviating from it in those of less
Moment. And in order to doing Right to the generality, and in the gross it is
allowable to put some Hardships, and be guilty of some Wrong to particular
Persons. Omne magnum Exemplum habet aliquid ex iniquo, quod adversus singulos
utilitate publica rependitur.
Commonly speaking, (says Tacitus) the bravest Exploits, and most celebrated
Examples, carry somewhat of Injustice in them: But in this Case, what Private
Men suffer is abundantly compensated by the Benefit which the Public receives
from it. (...), etc. in fine Flamin.
A Prudent Prince, says Plutarch again, must not only know how to govern
according to Law; But if a necessary occasion require it, he must learn to
govern even the Laws themselves; When they fall short of their End, and cannot
do what they would, he must stretch and correct, and give a new Power to the
Laws where they happen to be defective; that is, if they are not willing he
should do what is fitting in that Juncture, he must make them willing. Non
speciosa dictu, sed usu necessaria in rebus adversis sequenda esse. Q. Curt.
Lib. 5.
When the State is in Confusion, and things brought to a Plunge, the Prince
(says Curtius) must not think himself obliged to follow that which will look or
sound best to the World, but that which the present Extremity calls for. And
again, Necessitas magnum imbecillitatis humanae patrocinium, omnem Legem
frangit; non est nocens, quicunque non sponte est nocens. Senec.
Necessity, (says Seneca) That great Refuge and Excuse for Humane Frailty,
breaks through all Laws; and he is not to be accounted in fault, whose Crime is
not the Effect of Choice, but Force. Aristotle's Rule is, If a Prince cannot be
good in every part of his Government, it is enough that he be so in the greater,
or at least an equal part; but let him be sure not to be bad in every part. And
Democritus, That it is impossible for the best Princes in the World not to be
guilty of some Injustice.

Thus much however, I presume to add, that let these Actions of theirs find
never so favorable Interpretations, never so just Allowances; yet for their
own Justification, and the softening as much as may be, the Odium of such
irregular Proceedings: There is not only a Necessity that they should be
reserved for the last Extremities, but that when Princes are perfectly driven
to make use of them, they should go about it with a real unwillingness and
great Regret. They should look upon This necessity to which they are reduced,
as a very particular Misfortune, and Mark of an angry Providence; and all their
Behavior and Resentments upon such Occasions, must be like those of tender
Parents, when, sore against their Will, a beloved Child is to have a Limb
seared, or cut off; Methods which nothing but the hope of saving his Life by
this only Remedy, could ever prevail with them to submit to; or as a Man in
extremity of Pain goes about the drawing a Tooth, when nothing else will ease
or assuage the Anguish. And now I have related the Opinions of very eminent
Philosophers and Politicians, and observed what Abatements they are content to
make for Cases of necessity; I must once more solemnly avow, that as for any
Passages, or Politic Maxims, which pretend to greater Liberties, such as set a
Prince above all Consideration of Law or Justice, that make Profit and
Greatness the only End worthy his prosecuting; and either place Advantage upon
the Level with Honesty, or set it higher, every Good Man must abominate them;
and every good Governor will be so far from taking his measures according to
this Standard, that he will reject them with Detestation and Disdain.

I have insisted so much the longer upon this Branch of a Prince's Virtue;
because of the many Difficulties and Doubts, which arise upon this Point of
Justice; the regular Exercise and Administration whereof must needs be very
much interrupted and perplexed by the infinite Emergencies, the sudden and
extraordinary Changes, and the Necessities that the public happens to be
involved in. And these oftentimes are so very intricate and pressing, that they
may very well be allowed to puzzle the Wisest, and to stagger the bravest, and
most resolute Commanders.

Valor.
which go to the making a Complete General. For this is a Qualification
absolutely necessary for a Prince, for the Defense and Security of his own
Person, and the Public both. The Welfare of his Subjects, the Peace and Quiet
of the Kingdom, the Rights and Liberties of a Nation, All lie at His Charge; He
is their Conservator, and they depend upon his Ability, to assert, and protect,
and maintain them. All which Valor only can enable him to do; and by the very
little said already upon it, That appears to be so essential a part of the
Royal Character, that a Man who has it not, scarce deserves the Name of a
Prince.

Clemency. Clemency.
By which I mean such a Habit and Disposition of Mind, as inclines the Prince
to Mildness and Gentleness; to Gracious Allowances, and large Abatements from
the Rigor of the Law, and Extremity of Justice; and all this tempered with
Judgment and Discretion. This moderates, manages, and sweetens all; it spurs
the Guilty, relieves the Poor an dejected, and rescues those that are ready to
perish. Clemency in the Ruler answers to Humanity in common Men; it is contrary
to Cruelty and excess of Rigor, but not to Justice; for with this it is very
reconcilable, and all its Care is to soften, and to moderate its
Determinations. Nothing can be more necessary, more seasonable, considering the
many Infirmities of Humane Nature; how great a part of Mankind offend wilfully,
and do what they should not; and how often do even the best intending Men, fall
short of what they should? Extreme Rigor, and Severitas amittit assiduitate
Authoritatem.
severe Usage, without any intermission, any Abatement, spoils all; it hardens
Men's Tempers, and brings Authority into Contempt. Punishments lose their Force,
and their End, when made common, and executed every Day; they provoke Men's
Indignation and Malice, (for indeed Men are often Wicked out of mere Rage and
Spite,) and many Rebellions have been raised by the Thirst of Revenge. There
is something in Fear, which is even destructive of Duty, if it be not tempered,
and kept within Bounds by Lenity and good Nature; and if turned into Horror by
sharp Usage, and too strong Impressions, it grows Furious and Desperate,
Malicious and Bloody. Thus the Author has observed very truly, Temperatus
Timor est qui cohibet; Assiduus and acer in vindictam excitat.
That Fear which secures Peace and good Order, must be moderate; if once it
become continual and extreme, it spurs Men en to Mutiny and Revenge. Clemency
is likewise of great Advantage, both to the Prince and the Public, as it gains
the Good Will of the Subjects, and binds them in the straitest and the surest
Ties to the Government; even those of Affection and Kindness, for these are
always the strongest and most lasting Security; and Firmissimum Imperium, quo
obedientes gaudent. Tit. Live.
A Prince never sits so fast, as when his Subjects are easy, and take a
pleasure in their Obedience, as I shall have Occasion to show hereafter. For in
such a Case the People will look upon their Governor, as a sort of Deity
Incarnate; They will honor and adore him as such; they will respect and love
him as their Guardian, their Common Father, their Friend; and instead of any
uneasy Fear of Him, they will be in perpetual Fear for Him; tender of his Life
and his Person; and in mighty Pain and Solicitude, lest any Ill should happen
to either; consequently they will be Zealous in his Defense, firm to all his
Interests, averse and implacable to his Enemies. This then is the Lesson, in
which all Princes should be perfect; To get themselves well informed of all
that is done; Not to prosecute every Crime they know; Nay, many times to act,
and manage themselves, as if they knew it not; To be better satisfied with the
Character of having found their Subjects made Good to their Hands, than that of
having reformed and made them so by any Rigours of their own; Readily to extend
their Grace to small Faults, and where such easiness may be inconvenient, to
render heinous Offenders very exemplary, and make them smart severely for their
Insolence and bold Contempt of the Laws. To consider, that frequent Executions
are an Aspersion to their Government; and bring as great a Scandal upon their
Reign, as the Death of many Patients does to the Practice of a Physician; and
therefore not to be fond of taking Men off upon every Provocation, but to
content themselves oftentimes with a Malefactor's Repentance; and esteem the
Sense of his Guilt, his Shame, and Remorse, and Self-condemnation a Punishment
sufficient. -- Ignoscere pulchrum,
Jam misero, poenaeque genus vidisse precantem.

Relenting Misery inclines the Brave;
Conquerours are most triumphant, when they save;
Justice and Mercy may suspend their Strife,
He suffers for his Crime, who yields to beg his Life.
Nor is there any just Ground of that Apprehension, which some People very
inconsiderately pretend, upon these Occasions; that such Mercy will be taken
for Tameness or Impotence; that it makes a Prince despicable in the Eyes of his
People; gives his Enemies Advantage, provokes turbulent Spirits to insult, and
loosens the Nerves of Government: For the Effect is really quite contrary. Such
Mildness is a mighty strengthening to a Prince; adds Vigor and Efficacy to his
Commands, and wonderfully raises his Reputation. A Prince, that is well
beloved, shall be able to do more with the Hearts of his Subjects, than all the
Awe and Terror in the World; This may put Men into trembling and astonishment,
but it gives them no true Principle of Obedience; and as Salust argued in his
Oration to Caesar, such Governments are never Stable and of long Continuance
because they are built upon an ill bottom. Whoever he be, that is feared by a
great many, has a great many whom he has reason to be afraid of too. The
Fear, which he sheds down upon all about him, dashes back again upon his own
Head. Such a sort of Life is full of Anxieties and Misgivings; and a Man is
surrounded with Dangers, that threaten him continually from every Quarter. It
is true indeed, this Clemency ought not to be extended without any Distinction;
Judgment, as was said in the beginning of the Paragraph, must direct and
determine it. For, as it is a Virtue, and that which attracts the profoundest
Veneration, when judiciously managed; so is it a Vice of most pernicious
Consequence, when degenerating into soft and easy Tameness.

Liberality.
there follow some others of a Second Form; and these, though inferior to the
former in Luster, have yet their just Value, and are necessary and useful,
though not so absolutely, and in so high a degree. Liberality for instance,
which is so much more suitable to a Prince's Character, as it is a greater
Reflection upon him to be vanquished by Bounty and Magnificence, than to be
worsted in the Field. But here too, there is great need of Discretion; for,
where That is wanting, this Quality will be apt to do more Hurt than Good.

There are two Kinds of Liberality. The one consists in Sumptuousness and Show;
and this is to very little purpose. Of two Kinds.
It is certainly a very idle and vain Imagination, for Princes to think of
raising their Character, and setting themselves off by August, and Splendid,
and expensive Appearances: especially too among their own Subjects, where they
can do what they please, and are sure to have no Rival of their Grandeur. This
seems rather a Mark of a little Soul; an Argument, that they want a due Sense
of what they really are, and is both beneath Them to do, and very unacceptable
to their People to see. For, however for the present Subjects may gaze at their
Pomps with Delight, yet as soon as the Entertainment is over, they presently
begin to reflect, that Their Princes are thus enriched and adorned with Their
Spoils; that This is no better than being sumptuously feasted at Their Cost;
and that the Money, which now feeds their Sight with Triumphs and Gaudy
Greatness, is pinched from more necessary Occasions, and would have been much
better saved to feed their Bellies. And besides all this; a Prince should be so
far from Lavish and Profuse, that he should make great Conscience of Frugality;
for indeed he should think nothing he enjoys strictly his own; since engaged in
a Trust, that requires his All, his very Life and Person to be devoted to the
Good of others.

The Second sort of Liberality is that which consists in distributing Gifts,
and making Presents: Of This indeed there is considerable Use, and a just
Commendation due to it. But then this must be discreetly managed too; and good
Care should always be taken, To what Persons, in what Proportions, and after
what Manner this is done. As to the Persons. They ought to be well chosen, such
whose Merits recommend them to their Bounty; such as have been serviceable to
the Public; such as have hazarded their Fortunes and their Persons, and run
through the Dangers and Fatigues of War. These are such Persons, as none but the
Unthinking or the very Ill-natured can grudg any thing to, or envy the Favor,
so as to represent the Prince as Partial or Undistinguishing in his Liberality.
Whereas, quite otherwise, great Gratuities distributed without any regard to
Merit, and where there really is none, derive Shame and Odium upon the
Receiver; and are entertained without those due Acknowledgments, and that
grateful Sense, which the Favors of a Prince ought to find. Some Tyrants have
been sacrificed and given up to the Rage and Spite of an incensed Rabble, by
those very Servants whom they had raised from Nothing; while these Creatures of
theirs have been as much diverted with their Masters Misfortunes, as any of
their Enemies, and have taken this Course to ingratiate themselves with the
Mobb, and for securing their own Fortunes, by giving Demonstrations of the
Hatred and Contempt to the Person, from whom those Fortunes were entirely
derived.

Nor is it less necessary, that the Proportion of a Prince's Liberality should
be strictly regarded; for otherwise this may run out into such Squandering and
Excess, That both the Giver and the Government may be impoverished and brought
to Ruin by it. For, to give to every body, and upon every Occasion, is to play
with a losing Hand, and till all is gone. Private Men are for making their
Fortunes, and it is not possible to satisfy them; they will soon grow
extravagant in their Requests, if they find their Prince to be so in his
Favors; and the Rule they Measure by, is not Reason, but Example; not how much
is fit to be granted to Them, but how much has already been granted to Others.
However, by this Means the Public Treasures will be exhausted; and a King be
necessitated to seize other Peoples Rights, that Quod Ambiticne exhaustum, per
Scelera supplendum.
so Injustice and Oppression may heal and reimburse these Wants, which Ambition
and Prodigality have created. Now, it were insinitely better to give nothing at
all, than to take away from one to give to another. For after all our Kindness,
the Gratitude and Affection of those that are obliged by us, never makes so
deep Impressions, nor sticks half so close, as the Resentments of them, that
have been injured and plundered. Besides, This Profuseness is its own
Destruction, for the Spring cannot run always; if you draw too fast, it will
soon be drained dry. Liberalitate Liberalitas perit.
By being Liberal. says St. Jerome, Man makes it impossible to be so. For a
farther Prevention whereof, as well as upon, other very good Considerations, it
will be convenient to spin out ones Liberality; to let it come gently and by
degrees, rather than to give all we intend at once. For that which is done on
the sudden, and at a heat, be the thing never so considerable in it self, yet
passes off, as it were insensibly, and is quickly forgotten. All things that
have a grateful Relish should be contrived to be as slow and leisurely in the
Passage, as can be; that so the Palate may have time to taste them: but, on the
contrary, all those Dispensations that are harsh and severe, (when Occasions
call for any such) should be dispatched with all possible Convenience, that so,
like bitter Potions, they may be swallowed at once. Thus you see, that the
Giving as becomes one, is an Act of Prudence, and the Exercise of Liberality to
the best Advantage, requires great Address and Skill. To which purpose Tacitus
has this notable Remark. Falluntur, quibus Luxuria Specie Liberalitatis
imponit, pordere multi sciunt, donare nesciunt.
Those Persons (says he) are under a mighty Error, who know not how to
distinguish between Liberality and Luxury; abundance of Men know how to
squander, that do not know how to give. And to speak the very Truth, Liberality
is not a Virtue peculiar to King's and milder Governments only, but very
consistent even with Tyranny it self. And surely the Tutors and Governors of
young Princes are much in the wrong, when they labor to possess their Minds
with such strong and early Impressions of Giving; of refusing nothing that is
asked of them; of thinking nothing so well employed, as what they give to their
Friends. This is the Jargon usual in such Cases. But either This seems to
proceed from some Advantage these Instructors design to make of such a
Principle hereafter, or for want of due regard to the Person they address
themselves to. For a too governing Notion of Liberality is of very ill
Consequence, in a Person, whose Fortunes are so plentiful, as to supply the
Expenses of others, at what rate himself shall think fit. And of the Two
Extremes, though either of them are very far from Good, yet a Prodigal or a
Giving Prince, he that spends upon his own Vanities, or he that seeds those of
his Servants and Favorites, without Discretion and due Measure, is a great
deal worse than a Stingy One, that keeps his Hand shut to all. And, whereas
these frequent Boons are pretended of Use to make Friends, and secure the
Service and Affection of those who are obliged by them: There is very little or
nothing of Substance in this Argument; For immoderate and undistinguishing
Liberality encourages every body to ask and to expect, and so for One Friend,
makes Ten Enemies, in Proportion as the Repulses must needs be more frequent,
than the Grants. But indeed, if it be wisely and well regulated, it is
undoubtedly, as I said before, exceeding Graceful and Commendable in a Prince,
and may prove of Excellent Advantage, both to Himself and to the State.

Nagnanimity.
which consists in a Greatness of Spirit not easily to be provoked, such as
despises and can pass over Injuries and Indecencies, and moderate his Anger
when it begins to fly out. Magnam Fortunam magnus Animus decet. -- Injurias and
Offensiones superne despicere. -- Indignus Caesaris ira.
A Great Fortune and Dignity should have a Noble Mind; such as can look down
upon Wrongs and Provocations, as Matters a great way below it, and not worth
its Notice; and Majesty should consider that there are not many Offenses which
will justify a Prince's being angry. Besides, to fret and be concerned, is
often interpreted for Consciousness of Guilt; and that which a Man makes slight
of, blows quickly over, and seldom sticks long. So says the wise Roman,
Convitia si irascere, agnita videntur; spreta exolescunt.
If Reproaches put you in a Passion, the World will look upon this as a sort of
Confession: But if you disregard them, they vanish and die without doing any
manner of Prejudice. But then, if any Provocation be given, which ministers
just and sufficient Cause to be angry, let those Resentments be expressed
openly without laboring to conceal or to dissemble them; that the People about
him may have no reason to suspect any thing of a Secret Grudge, or a
Mischievous Design in him. For these are Qualities for the meanest and basest
sort of People, and Symptoms of a Malicious, Devilish and Incurable
Dispesition. Obscuri and irrevocabiles reponunt odia. Saev^e Cogitationis
indicium secreto suo satiari.
Pitiful Fellows and Vnreclaimable Wretches keep Malice in their Hearts (says
Tacitus) and to feed upon a Grudge is an evident Mark of Baseness and
Barbarity. Of the two, the giving Offense and doing an Ill thing is less
disagreeable to the Character of a Great Man, than the Hating and Maligning of
others for doing so to Him. And thus I have done with the Head of Virtue; the
other Branches of it in general being not so properly distinguishing Properties
and peculiar Ornaments of the Royal Dignity, as Excellencies lying in common
between Princes and the rest of Mankind.

Manner, that is, The third Head. Behavior
his Behavior and Way of Living; the Mien, the Port, the Address, that suit
with the Majesty of a Prince; and all those profound Respects so necessary to
be kept up. Upon this I shall not insist at all, only, by the way as it were,
touch upon it. Now though Nature contribute a great deal to this in the Form,
and Temper, and Person, yet all that Nature does is capable of Amendment and
Improvement both, by the additional Helps of Industry and Art. Under the Head
we are now upon, may be reckoned the Air of his Face, the Composure of his
Countenance, his Fashion and Behavior, his Gate, his Tone, and manner of
Speech, his Clothes and Dressing. The general Rule to be observed in all these
Particulars, is such a Mixture of Sweetness and Moderation, of Stayedness and
Gravity, as may win upon Men's Minds, and move their Affections pleasingly; such
as may keep the middle Way between Familiarity and Fear, engage their Love, and
yet command their Honor and Respect. His Court and Conversation are likewise
worth taking notice of. For the former, it is convenient that it should be very
public, that the Palace he dwells in should be Noble and Magnificent, sit for
Resort and Correspondence; and if that can be well contrived, not far from the
Middle of his Country, or, at least, the most significant Part of it; that so
his Eye may command all the Quarters; and like the Sun in the midst of the
Firmament, pierce, enlighten and warm all round about him, with the Influence
of his Beams. For when a Prince resides in some very remote Corner of his
Dominions, this Distance emboldens those in the contrary Extremity to behave
themselves insolently, and grow Tumultuous and Unruly. As for^h's Conversation,
That should be very reserved, his Considents and familiar Friends but few, his
Progresses and other Appearances in public but seldom; that the People may
always be eager and glad to see him: For the showing himself often, and giving
too easy Access to his Person, will mightily lessen the Majesty of his
Character. Continun^ Aspectus minus verendos magnos homines ipsa satietate
facit. Live.
The being always admitted to the Sight and Presence of Great Persons, does
mightily impair and diminish our Respect, by Glutting our Curiesity, says one
of the Roman Historians: And another to this purpose: Majestati major ex
longinquo Reverentia; quia omne ignotum pro magnih co est.
Majesty is always most reverenced at a distance: for Nature forms all our
Idea's bigger than the Life; and what we are not acquainted with, is always
fancied to be very Great and Stately.

The fourth Head. Counsel.
The Knowledge of his People and Government, the Virtues of his Mind, and the
Fashion and Address of the Prince; all which are inseparable from his own
Person; The next things we are led to consider, are such as are near and about
his Person. And therefore in the fourth place, let us say somewhat concerning
his Counsel, which, in truth, is the main Point of all this Head, which relates
to his Politics, and of Consequence so vast, that it is in a manner All in
All. For Counsel is the Soul of any Government; the Spirit that insuses Life
and Motion, Energy and Vigor into all the rest. And upon the Account of This
it is, that the Management of Affairs consists in Prudence; because Hand, are
of no Significance at all, till the Heads have cut them out their Work, and
prescribed their Methods. It were indeed to be wished, That a Prince were
enriched with so great a Stock of Prudence and Consideration, as to be able
himself to govern, and dispose, and contrive every thing, without calling in
Help from abroad; This is such a Sufficiency, as the first Chapter of this Book
observed to be the Noblest Perfection, and highest Degree of Wisdom; and no
Question can be made, but that Matters would be better ordered, and more
successfully dispatched if it could be so. But this is an Accomplishment merely
imaginary, no Instance of it is to be found in Nature; whether it be, that
Princes want the Advantage of Good Temper, or Good Instruction. And indeed, let
Nature be never so bountiful, and Education never so proper, yet it is scarce
possible to suppose That all the Parts, and all the Improvements in the World
could ever qualify one single Head for the Comprehending and Direction of such
infinite Variety of Business. Nequit Princeps sua scientia cuncta complecti;
nee unius Men's tantae molis est capax.
No Prince, says Tacitus, can have a Reach so great, as to be Master of all his
Concerns: no one Mind is strong enough to carry so great a Burden, A single Man
hears and sees but very little in Comparison; But Kings have need of abundance
of Eyes and Ears to assist and give Intelligence. Great Weights and great
Undertakings can only be made light by a Multitude of Hands. And therefore it
is absolutely necessary for a Prince to provide himself with good Advice, and
with Persons every way capable of giving it; for as the Case stands, and the
Intrigues of Government are perplexed, he that will take upon him to do all of
his own Head, shall much sooner six upon himself the Character of Pride and
Conceitedness, than gain the Reputation of Wisdom. A Prince then, of all Men,
has most need of faithful Friends, Live.
and diligent Servants who may assist him in his Difficulties, and ease him of
part of his Cares. These are the real, the most valuable Treasures of a King,
Tacit.
and the most useful Instruments to the Public: And therefore the first and
great Care must be, to make a wise Choice of Assistants, and employ the utmost
Application, Plin.
and bend all one's Judgment to have such as are excellent and proper for a
Post of such vast Importance. Now of these Assistants, there are two sorts; One
that contribute their Advice, and Project only; Xenoph.
and these employ their Wit, and their Tongue; and are in strict propriety of
Speech, Counselors; the Other are concerned in the executive part, they lend
us their Hands, and their Pains, and these are more properly styled Officers.
Of these the former sort are in much the more Honorable Character: For thus
the two great Philosophers have declared their Opinion, Plato. Aristot.
that it is a most Sacred and Divine Accomplishment, to consider judiciously,
and be able to advise well.

Qualifications of Counselors.
several Qualifications are necessary: As, first of all, It is necessary to
choose such as are Faithful, and fit to be trusted; that is, in one Word, Men
of Virtue and good Principles. Optimum quemque sidelissimum puto.
I take for granted, (says Pliny) that the better Man any one is, the more
stanch and true be is, and more safe to be depended upon. Secondly, They must
be Persons of Ability, and proper for this Office, not only in regard of their
Knowledge and Learning in general, but upon the Account of their Skill in
Politics, and that express Form of Government in particular; such as have been
used, and tried before, and have come off with Honor and Success, versed in
Business, and accustom^d to Difficulties: For Hardships and Adversities are the
most useful and improving Lessons. Mihi Fortuna multis rebus ereptis usum dedit
been suadendi. Mithr. in Salusi.
Fortune, says one, in the room of many Advantages which she has torn frem me,
has given me the Faculty of Advice and Posuasion. And in one Word, They must
be wise and discreet, moderately quick, not too sprightly and sharp; for such
Men will be always projecting. And Novandis quam gerendis rebus aptiora ingenia
illa ignea.
Mon of Fire are more for Change, than steady Management. Now in order to these
Qualifications, it is necessary that they should be Men of ripe Years, to give
them Stayediness, Experience, and Consideration; nay, I may add, to inspire
them with Caution too; for it is one of the many Unhappinesses attending Youth,
that Persons then are easily imposed upon; of which the Tenderness and Softness
of their Brain may perhaps be one reason, as that may dispose them the more
easily to receive any Impression, and consequently to Credulity and Easiness of
Temper. It is for the Convenience of a Prince to have notable Men of all sorts
about him; both those who are called so upon the account of their Wisdom, and
those that excel in Subtlety and Cunning. The former indeed ought to be more
numerous, and are more especially requisite, because they are more for the
Honor of their Master, and of more constant use; for these are the Managers of
all regular and ordinary Proceedings. The Men of Art are for Cases of necessity
and extraordinary Emergencies, to help at a Pinch, and to countermine a Danger.

A Third Qualification necessary for Counselors, is Openness, and Freedom, and
Courage in all their Behavior, when consulted with. They must use their utmost
Care, that all their Proposals be for the Honor and Advantage of their Prince;
and, when once they have secured this Point, that the Advice be wise and good,
all Flattery and Disguise should be laid aside; all Equivocatings, and
Reservations, and Craftiness of Expression detested and despised, by which they
may seem to aim at ingratiating themselves, or to contrive that what they say
may be acceptable to their Master. These are the Men Tacitus describes, who
accommodate all their I anguage as they see occasion, and do Ne cum Fortuna
potius Principis loquantur, quam cum ipso.
not so properly d^s^curse with their Prince, as with his present Inclinations
and Cncumstances. They consider him as a Great Man, as one able to make their
Fortunes; they observe what he would do, not what is best and fittest for him
to do. Whereas indeed all these Regards ought to be utterly banished their
Thoughts; they should have a constant Eye upon the Sacredness of their Office,
and the Importance of the Trust reposed in them; and looking no farther than
the Reason, and Justice, and Cenvenience of the thing, speak the Truth and
spare not: For however harsh and distasteful this Liberty, and Openness, and
honest Blunt-dealing may be at the present to those Persons, whose Opinion and
Inclinations it happens to cross; yet there will soon come a time, when it will
obtain Respect and Esteem. In praesentia quibus resistis, offendis: deinde
illis suspicitur laudaturque.
Opposition is offensive just at the Instant; but upon cooler Thoughts, the
very Persons you opposed, will commend and admire your plain-dealing. A Man
should likewise take care to be consistent with himself, firm to his Principle,
without veering and wheeling about perpetually, as often as other People's
Humors shift into a fresh Quarter. But as he must not be changable and
obsequious in a base compliance with the Passions or Pleasures of others, so
neither must he be stiff and peremptory in his own Opinions. There is always a
Decency to be observed, and great Difference to be made, between Constancy and
Contradiction. For Opiniatrety and Fierceness confounds all manner of
Deliberation; and therefore I am far from desiring my good Counselor to be
inflexible; as knowing very well, that hearkening to other Men's Reasons, and
changing our own Opinions upon them, is so far from deserving the Reproach of
Rashness or Inconstancy, that it ought rather to be looked upon as a Testimony
of Modesty and Ingenuity, and great Prudence: For Non semper it uno gradu, sed
una via: non se mutat, sed aptat.
although the wise Man always walk in the same Way, and by the same Rule, yet
he does not always go the same Pace, nor tread in the same Steps; Change he
does not then, so properly as accommodate and mend himself; Like the skilful
Sailor, who plies to every Wind, and whose Excellency lies in trimming the
Sails that way that the Gale blows freshest. Thus a Man must oftentimes go
about to make the Port he designs, when there is no coming at it by a straight
Course. And it shows the Dexterity and Address of a Counselor, to be able to
change his Methods, when those which were first chosen are either disapproved,
or by some Accident rendered useless and ineffectual.

Another necessary Accomplishment for this Post, is the making a Conscience of
Revealing any Debates he shall be privy to. For Silence and Secrecy are
exceeding necessary in the management of all Public Assairs: Insomuch that a
great Author has pronounced it impossible for that Man to manage any matter of
Consequence, who is not so much Master of himself as to keep his own Counsel.
Res magnae sustinere nequeunt ab eo, cui tacere grave est.
For how should he support the weight of Public Business, to whom even Silence
is a Burden? But upon this Occasion the concealing what one knows is not
sufficient, I must likewise caution him against knowing too much. A Curious and
Inquisitive Temper, which loves to be busy, and inform it self of other
Peoples Actions and Conterns, is no commendable Quality in any case; but to pry
into the Affairs of Princes, and value one's self upon knowing Their Secrets,
is as dangerous as it is unmannerly: And as Tacitus has well observed,
Exquirere abditos Principis sensus illicitum and anceps. Tacit.
Nothing is more hazardous, nothing more unfit for us, than officiously to
dive, and be bold with their retired Thoughts and Intentions. And therefore,
whatever a Man knows of this kind should come freely and without his seeking;
nay, I make no difficulty to affirm, that it is commendable in a Man to decline
the Opportunities of having such things imparted to him, and to know as little
of them as possibly he can. This argues Reverence and Modesty, prevents all
Jealousy, and suits the distance between a Prince and his Subjects.

Thus I have given my Reader a short Account of those good Conditions which
seem necessary for the qualifying Men to be Counselors of State. And by these
he will be able to tell himself, what are those ill Qualities, which
meapacitate a Man for such a Trust. That a Prince in making his Choice, should
be sure to reject all such as are of Confident, Assuming, Presumptuous Tempers;
because these Vices make Men hot, and arrogant in Debates, positive and bold in
their own Sense: And a Wise Man, quite contrary, will be content to allow
Second and Third Thoughts; to examine every thing over and over. It is the
Character of such a one to suspect himself, to be jealous of the Consequence,
searful in advising and resolving, that so he may afterward be more vigorous
and assured, when he comes to execution. Nam Animus vereri qui scit, scit tuto
aggredi.
For the Mind that knows how to be afraid, and undertakes warily, will act
more securely, and go upon surer Grounds. Fools, quire contrary, are eager and
assured, blind and bold in Debate; but when they come to Action, cowardly and
tame. Consilia calida and audacia prima specie laeta sunt, tractatu clara,
eventu tristia.
Advice given with Heat and Confidence looks fair and gay at first sight; but
the execution of it is hard and desperate, and the Event full of Grief and
Disappointment. Next to this presumptuous Vanity and Heat, Passion is improper
for such Ministers of State; All Anger and Envy, Hatred and Spite, Avarice and
Ambicion, all Selfish Narrowness of Spirit, and private Interest; for these are
all of them Corrupters of the best Sense, the very Bane of all sound Judgment;
Integrity, and faithful Discharge of a public Character cannot dwell in the
same Breast, with these personal Piques, and private Affections. Private res
somper ofiecere officientque publicis consiliis; Ce^^umen^ ^^^ affect^is and
judicii venenum sua cuique Utilitas.
Private Advantage ever did, and ever will obstruct and confound public
Counsels; and each single Man's Profit, is that which Poisons all good Sense,
and kind Inclination to the Common Good.

One Thing more remains absolutely Necessary to be avoided, and that is
Precipitation; An irreconcilable Enemy to Prudence and good Counsel; and fit
for nothing but to put Men upon doing amiss, and then being all amed and
unfortunate upon that Account. And thus much shall suffice at Present for a
Description of those Qualities, which ought to concur, and the Vices and
Defects which must be declined in order to the accomplishing Men for
Counselors of State.

That he would look upon him and his Brethren in Office to be such, as the
World esieem'd them. For Hypocrisy is but a parricular Thing, and of a very
limited extent, Ram singuh decip^ and de^^pi possunt; nemo omnes, netait^^^
(...)
Single Men may deceive and be deceived, but never did any Man deceive all the
World we was ever any Man mistaken in all the World. Great Care should be taken
upon this Occasion, that a Prince do not trust himself with Flatterers and
sawning Parasites, with particular Favorites. Court-Officers, and mercenary
Wretches, whose Confidence is a Reproach to their Master; and will be his
Ruin, when they can have a good Price for betraying him. For after all: the
Cabal, and the Cabinet is the Foundation of most Monarch's undoing: We see it
not, till it comes upon the open Stage; but there it begun, and from thence it
moves and works under Ground, long before the World can discern it. Now, when a
Prince has made this Choice, and sound Persons for his Purpose, the next thing
incumbent upon him is to make a Wise Use of them. And That is to be done, by
consulting them early and in a Season proper for Deliberation; not driving all
off, till the very Instant of Action, when the Time is too short for debate,
and cool Consideration; nor, on the other Hand, Trifling and losing Time in
hearing their tedious Disputes, when his Affairs require a speedy Resolution.
Again, This Advice of theirs must be attended to with a Judicious Reserve; he
must not give himself blindly up to it, and follow their Determinations Right
or Wrong, as that very weak Emperor Claudius is said to have done: And he must
likewise temper this Discretion with Moderation and Gentleness, without being
too stiff and inflexible in his own Sense: Since, generally speaking, that
Remark of the wise Marcus Antoninus holds good, who says it is better for one
Man to come over, and to comply with the Advice of a great many good Friends,
than that all their Opinions should be set aside, and they forced to truckle to
his single Arbitrary Pleasure. I cannot but apprehend it of great Advantage in
this Case, to keep a Man's self pretty loose, and use ones Counselors, with a
sort of Authority mixed with Indifference. My Meaning is, Not immediately to
reward Men for their good Counsel; because such present Pay will be a
Temptation to ill Men to thrust themselves forward in advising; and so that
which is really bad, will be put upon him in hopes of a Reward; Nor on the
other Hand to discountenance or use Men roughly for counselling amiss; Because
this will create a Shyness in all about him; and no body will dare to advise
freely if the delivering their Opinion shall expose them to Danger and
Disgrace. And besides, The Judgment of good and bad Counsel is very uncertain,
because it usually proceeds upon the Issue. Whereas the most injudicious
Counsels have often succeeded as well or better than the Wisest, by a strange
overruling Power of Providence, thus asserting its Government of us, and all
our Affairs here below. And again, It ought to be remembered, that They, who
give the best, that is, the safest and most prosperous Counsel, are not upon
that Account to be concluded our faithfullest Friends, nor best affected to our
Interest; for many times They who love us best, may be mistaken in their
Measures; and they who wish us no Good, may yet put us in the way of a great
deal. Nor ought a Prince to resent Freedom and Plainness upon these Occasions.
For This in all Reason ought rather to be acceptable; and a wise Man will keep
a Jealous Eye upon Flattering and Timorous Fellows, such as make it their
Business to sooth his Humors, and had rather see him perish by false Measures,
than disgust him to his own Advantage. And sure if there be a Miserable
Creature upon Earth, it is that Prince, to whom no Body about him dares tell
the Truth; he that must live by the help of other Peoples Senses, and yet all
who see and hear for him, are under a necessity of dissembling and disguising
in their own Defense, and dare show him nothing as it really is. A Man Cujus
Aures ita formatae sunt, ut aspera quae utilia; and nil nisi jucundum and
laesurum recipiant.
whose Ears, as Tacitus expresses it, are so oddly contrived, that all Sounds
are harsh and grating, which tell profitable Truths; and they never think
themselves entertained, but with such pleasing Words as are sure to do
Mischief. The last Caution necessary for the making a good Use of Proper
Counselors, is, To conceal his own Opinion, and not determine Publicly what
he approves most, or what he resolves to do; for when all is done, Secrecy is
the very Life and Soul of Counsel; and Nulla meliora consilia, quam quae
ignoraverit adversarius antequam fierent.
That Advice is always best, which your Enemy knows nothing of, till the
Execution declared what it was.

Officers.
which come now to be next considered; by These I mean such as serve the
Prince, and the Government, in some public Trust. And They ought to be made
Choice of with great Discretion; Persons of Honor and Virtue, well-descended,
and whose Families are of Quality and Reputation in the World. It is reasonable
to believe, that Men of this Character will approve themselves best in their
respective Stations; and That of Birth particularly is so considerable a
Qualification, that it is by no Means for the Honor of a Prince, or the
Decency of his Court, that People of mean Extract should be admitted near his
Person, and commissioned to preside over others, except some very great and
remarkable Merit, give them a just and visible preference, and make amends for
the want of Quality and Descent. But Men of Infamous Lives, False and Base; Men
of no Principles, or of such as are Dangerous and Worse than none; in short,
Men under Circumstances, which either fix an odious Character, such as the
World have reason to hate, or to despise, to be ashamed of, or to suspect,
should not upon any Terms be admitted to any Office or Trust. After these
Conditions, as to their Morals, we must not forget, that as great a Regard is
due to their Understandings. And that, not only to see, that they be Men of
Parts and Judgment in general, but that each Person be disposed of to such an
Employment, as best agrees with his own Genius and Seize in Particular.
For some are Naturally fittest for Military, and others for Civil Trusts. Some
have thought it a general good Rule for Officers of all sorts, to choose Men of
a mild and gentle Disposition, and moderate Character; for your violent and
topping Spirits, that are full of themselves, and cannot be prevailed upon to
yield to any, or quit the least Punctilio, commonly speaking, are not at all
fit for Business. Ut pares negotiis, neque supra; sint recti, non erecti.
Let the Persons you employ be therefore a Match for their Business, and able
to deal with it; but not too much above, and able to play with it; Men that
know how to give and take their Due, but not such as will sacrifice the Public
to a Nice Point of Honor, and their own Unseasonable Vanity.

The Fifth Head Treasure
for certainly these must be confessed a very great Point; a useful, necessary,
and powerful Provision. If Advice be the Head that sees and directs, Money is
the Nerves, the Hands, the Feet of the State, by which it moves, and acts, and
is strongly knit together. For when all is done, there is no Sword cuts deep,
not makes its own way through, like that with a Silver Edge. No Master is so
Absolute in his Commands, so readily obeyed; No Orator so Eloquent, so
Persuasive, so Winning upon the Wills and Affections of Men; no Conqueror so
Successful, or so great a Gainer by Storms, and Sieges, and force of Arms, as a
good Purse. This is served with Zeal, and obeyed without Grudging; this gets
Possession of Hearts, and draws the World after it; this takes Towns and
Castles, without the Expense of Blood, or Time, or Hazard. And therefore a Wise
Prince will always think himself obliged to take care, that his Treasury be in
good Condition; and that he never be disabled in this so very necessary, so
vital a Part of his Government. Now, the Art and the Care of effecting and
securing this, consists in Three Particulars. The First whereof concerns the
providing good Funds; The Second in employing the Money arising from them to
the best Advantage; and the Third in keeping a constant Reserve, that he may
never be destitute of a necessary Supply, upon any sudden Accident, or pressing
Occasion. And in all these Cases, there are Two things, which the Prince must
by all means look upon himself bound to avoid; which are Injustice, and sordid
Frugality; for how Necessary and Advantageous soever the Observation of these
Rules may be, yet he must never purchase this Convenience at so dear a Rate, as
the Invasion of other Men's Rights, or the loss of his own Honor.

Funds.
but, though all of them pour in some, yet they do not all supply the same
Proportion, nor are they all perpetual, or equally to be depended upon. For
Instance. One Fund is the Crown Lands, I.
and Demesnes, and other standing Revenues appointed to the Use of the Prince,
for the Support of his Grandeur and Government. And these ought to be husbanded
to the best Advantage, and kept up to their old Rents, and put into good Hands:
They should by no means be alienated without some very urgent Exigency require
it; but looked upon as things Sacred, and such as in their own Nature are not
transferrable to any other Owner. II.
Another is, the Conquests made upon Enemies, which should be so ordered, as to
turn to good Account; and not squandered, and prodigally wasted, because they
are a sort of additional Wealth, and when they are gone, the Prince is but
where he was before. The Power of old Rome is in great Measure owing to their
good Management in this Point: They always took Care to bring in vast Sums,
not only to pay the Charge of the War, but to enrich and swell their Exchequers
with the Wealth transferred thither from the Towns they took, and the Countries
they vanquished. This their Historian Livy tells us, was the Practice of their
Bravest and most Renowned Generals, Camillus, Flaminius, Aemilius Paulus, the
Scipios, Lucullus, and Caesar: and not only so, but after this first drawing
over their present Treasures, they constantly imposed a Yearly Stipend to be
paid; either by the Natives left upon their own Soil, under these and certain
other Conditions; or by those Colonies of Romans, whom they transplanted
thither. But still every Conquest brought some substantial Advantage to the
Commonwealth, and was more than an empty Name, and the mere Glory of the
Thing. The Presents, Free-Gifts, Pensions, Donations, and Grants, III.
Tributes, Taxes, arising either from Friends, or Allies, or Subjects; Legacies
and Bequests of the Dead, Deeds of Gift from Owners yet surviving, or any other
manner of Conveyance: Tolls, and Imposts, IV.
Customs upon Goods imported or exported, Commodities Foreign or Domestic,
Duties upon Docks, and Havens, Ports and Rivers; which has been a general and
very ancient Method of raising Money, as well upon Strangers as Natives; and a
very just, lawful, and beneficial Method no doubt it is, when limited with
these Conditions; That no Provisions or Other Goods, that are Necessaries of
Life, shall be transported, so as to impoverish the Country, and reduce the
Subject to Streights; nor any raw Wares; but that Materials of home-growth
should be likewise wrought up and finished at Home; to find the Subjects
Employment, and keep the poor and laboring People at Work, upon their own
Manufacture; that so the Profit and Wages, as well as the Stuff might center
and circulate among Natives; and the Growth of one Nation not be transferred to
the enriching of another. But now, when these Commodities are wrought and
dressed, there is good Reason for carrying them to foreign Markets; as it is
likewise Policy to import all the raw and unwrought Commodities they can, and
to prohibit all foreign and finished Manufactures; because in all these Cases
there is greater Encouragement, and Opportunity given for Labor. And it is
also highly reasonable in all Matters of Traffic, that a heavier Imposition
should be laid upon Strangers who trade among us, than the natural Subjects of
the same Country. For all foreign Impositions bring large Sums into the
Treasury, and are a great Ease to the Subject, which is a Consideration always
to be regarded; and for that Reason the Customs which are laid upon all such
Necessaries of Life, as are imported from abroad, should be moderated, and
brought as low, as possibly they can. These Four Methods already mentioned, are
not only allowable, and convenient, but strictly Just, and Equitable;
Honorable and Fair. The Fifth, which, I consess, is not altogether so agreeable
to Decency, V.
and the Dignity of a Prince, is That of Trade, which is carried on for the
Profit of the Sovereign by means of his Factors, and has several Methods of
turning to Account, which are some less, and some more liable to Scandal; but
the most Infamous and the most Destructive of all, is the setting to sale
Offices, and Honors, Preferments and Places of Trust. There is indeed a Course
not yet mentioned, which I think will come within the Notion of Trade; and
therefore I choose to name it under this Head, for the sake of the Resemblance
it bears to the Subject now in Hand. This has no great Matter of Indecency in
it, and has the Example of several very wise and eminent Princes to give it
Countenance; It is the letting out the public Money in Bank, upon a moderate
Interest, (as Five in the Hundred Prosit for instance) and securing the
Principal, either by an Equivalent in Pawns, or Mortgages, or else such
Personal Security, as is sufficient and of unquestionable Credit. And these
Loans are of great Advantage in Three Respects: For First, They add greatly to
the Wealth of any Government, by taking Care, that it shall always turn to
fresh Account, and no part of it ever lie dead. Then Secondly, It is a mighty
Convenience to private Men, who by this means are sure of a Fund to trade upon;
and cannot sail of being furnished in any Proportion which their Occasions
shall require, or which they can find such Security as is fit to be accepted
for. But the Third and greatest Senefit of all is, That it keeps this Money out
of the ^aws of Sharpers, and saves that to the public Use, which would
otherwise become a Prize to the Importunity, and nauseous Flattery of hungry
Courtiers, and be thus extorted from the good Nature of a King wearied into
gaving. And upon this last Consideration singly, to save the Trouble of being
importuned, and the Difficulties of denying; some Princes have found it
advisable to lend out their ready Cash without any Interest to be paid upon at
^^ purely for the sake of securing the Prime Sum, which they took Care to do,
by binding the Debtor in a Penalty of paying double, if he were not Punctual to
his Day. VI.
The Sixth and Last Method is That of Loans and Subsides extraordinary levied
upon the Subject; and this should be a Reserve for times of Necessity, a Remedy
always to be made use of with Reluctance, and such as is properly applied, when
other stated Methods fall short, and the Exigence of Affairs calls for a larger
Supply, than the former Particulars can furnish out. In the Circumstances of
this Kind, no doubt can be made of the Justice of the Thing: But then to make
this still more easy and gentle to the Subject, it is not only requisite, that
the Necessity of such Supplies be evident, and the Public Safety highly
concerned in them, but these following Conditions should likewise concur to the
sofining them. First: I.
That whatever Moneys are advanced upon Loans for the serving a present
Occasion, should be afterward punctually and honestly paid back again, as soon
as the Difficulty is over, and the Occasion served. This we find practiced by
the Commonwealth of Rome, when driven to Extremities by Hannibal. And at this
Rate the Prince will never want Money; for while the Exchequer keeps Touch and
Credit, private Men will be pleased, nay proud to lend; not only because they
think their Cash deposited in safe Hands, and can depend upon their own again
with Advantage; but for the Honor and Reputation of having assisted the
Public, and served their Prince in a time of Distress. And this to generous
Men is a Valuable, and will always be a Powerful Consideration, where the
Hazard and Fears of a Loss do not check it. But Secondly, II.
If the Public Stock be drawn so low, that the Debt cannot be satisfied from
thence, and some fresh extraordinary Imposition be necessary, this should by
all Means be adjusted and charged, with the Consent of the Subjects, who are to
contribute toward it; The present Defects of the Treasury fairly stated, the
Occasion that exhausted it fully represented, and the People made truly
sensible of the necessity they are under; so pressing upon them that Passage of
the Blessed Savior, the Gracious King of Kings, The Lord has need of them;
for thus He in marvelous Condescension was pleased to express himself. And in
such Circumstances, if the Case require it, and the Satisfaction of the People
can be effectually consulted upon those Terms, it may be very advisable to lay
an Account of the Receipts and Expenses before them. Persuasion and fair Means
are always best employed in Matters of this Nature; and to be driven to use
Power and Constraint, is the last Unhappiness that can happen to a Governor.
Themistocles was certainly in the right, when he thought it more for the Honor
of a Ruler Impetrare melius est quam imper^re.
to gain his Point by Request and Expostulation, than by Commands. And, though
it be true, that every Word of a King is full of Power and Force; and what he
asks, his Character makes in effect a Command; yet still it is more for the
Advantage of the Public, and the Continuance of a mutual Affection and Good
Understanding between Prince and People, that this kind of Supply should run in
the form of a free Gift; that the Subjects should express their Sense of the
Public Necessities; and desire the Prince to accept what Relief they are
capable of contributing toward it; at least, it is fit, that these
extraordinary Taxes should be limited to a certain Term, that they do not pass
into constant Payments, things of Course and Continuance, and that the Subjects
never be prescribed to in these Cases, debauch the Subject; and thus all those
things manifestly do, which serve only for Luxury and vain Pomp; such as are
purchased at dear Rates, merely out of extravagant Humor, or useless
Curiosity; all superfluous State in Diet, Clothes, Equipage, the Instruments of
Pleasure, Corrupters of Manners, and whatever contributes to a Licentious way
of Living. And the loading such things with such Impositions as shall make them
yet more expensive, may possibly prove the best Method to discourage the use of
them. For Men in the midst of Luxury, will sometimes be content to save their
Purses, and abstain upon a Consideration of Tenderness in that respect; when
their Consciences would be so far from being restrained by Laws, that a
positive Prohibition would rather set a sharper Edge upon their Appetite, and
make them but so much more impatient and eager, to come at these things.

The Second Branch of this Science, The using the Treasure well.
And to this Purpose I will here lay down a short account of the several Heads
of Expense, upon which a Prince must necessarily, and ought in Duty to make use
of them. Such are, There Subsistence and honorable Salaries of the Household,
the Pay of the Soldiers, the Wages of Officers of all sorts, the just Rewards
of such, as by their good Services have merited of the Public; The Pensions
and charitable Relief extended to those who come well recommended, and are
proper Objects of his Royal Bounty and Compassion. These Five are constant and
unavoidable Occasions. But then there are others too, very useful and fitting,
though not so absolutely and always necessary, such as the Reparation of old
decayed Towns, strengthening the Frontiers of his Country, amending the
Highways, and making Roads as direct and convenient as the Condition of the
Place will bear; keeping up Bridges, and all other necessary Accommodations for
Travelers; founding Colleges for the study and improvement of Learning, and
Religion, and Virtue; Building and Endowing Hospitals for distressed and
disabled People, and erecting Public Halls, and other Structures, that are for
the Honor and Service of the State. These sorts of Repairs, and
Fortifications, and Foundations, are of excellent use and advantage, besides
the Profit which immediately redounds to the State in general by their means:
For by promoting such Designs, Art is encouraged and improved, Workmen are kept
in Employment, the People are highly contented and pleased, and a great part of
that Grudging and Repining usual to the Commonalty, is prevented and cured,
when they see their Taxes converted to so good uses, and The Benefit comes back
to them again: But especially these two great Banes of any Commonwealth are by
this means utterly banished, the Plague of Idleness, and the Scandal of Poverty
and Beggary. Whereas on the contrary, the consuming the Public Wealth in
extravagant Gifts to some particular Favorites, in stately but unnecessary
Buildings, or in other vain Expenses, for which there is no need, and whereof
there can be no use, draws a general Odium and Indignation. For the Subjects
cannot bear to think that so many Thousand should be stripped to clothe and
make one Man sine; that another should strut and look big with their Money; and
that the great Houses should be built with their Blood, and the Sweat of their
Brows: For such as these are the grumbling Terms, in which the Vulgar, when
provoked to discontent, murmur out their Resentments; and nothing touches them
so near as Money, and a Notion of Extravagance and Wastfulness in the Disposal
of their Taxes.

Saving.
That so, in Cases of necessity, a Prince may not be driven to sudden and
unjust Remedies, nor use Violence upon others to help himself. This Store thus
laid up, and frugally managed for the Prince to draw out as he sees sit, is the
common Notion of the Exchequer. Now in the management of this Article, there
are two Extremes which must be both avoided, because each of them is of very
dangerous Consequence to the Person that falls into it. The One is, That of
immoderate Greediness in amassing prodigious Sums; for such Treasures, though
got by Methods never so just and honorable, are not always the most for a
Prince's Security, when they are out of measure. They really very often involve
him in Wars, either by putting him upon Oppressing and invading his weaker
Neighbors, in confidence of hisown Strength, and tha the longest Purse will be
sure to carry it at last; or else they are a Bait to some Enemy to fall upon
Him. And threfore it is much more for the Safety and Advantage, as well as for
the Honor of a King, to convert them to such uses as have been already
mentioned, than to let them grow exorbitantly great upon hishands, and so
either tempt the Owner to Insolence, or expose him for a Prey to those who want
such Prize. The Other Extreme is spending all, and keeping nothing to help at a
Pinch; and This is worse than the Former; for such a Governor stands naked and
defenseless, and like a foolish Gamester, plays away his last Stake. And
therefore all wise Governors take care not to fall into this desperate
Condition. The greatest Treasures that History informs us of in any Monarchy
heretofore, were th^^e of Darius the last King of Persia, in whose Exchequer
Alexander the Great at the Conquest of his Country, is laid to have sound
Fourscore Millions of Gold. That of Tileri^^ amounted to Sixty Seven Millions.
Trajan had Five and Fifty Millions laid up in Egypt. But that of David exceeds
all the rest; for (which is a thing almost incredible in so small, and, in
comparison, despicable, a Dominion as that of Jud^^) What public Treasure for
Civil Uses, this Author refers to, I do not know, for want of his Marginal
Quotations, in which he is frequently defective; but the Sum reserved for
building the Temple, is yet infinitely more amazing: That in the XXII. of 1
Chronic. v. 14. is said to be a Hundred Thousand Talents of Gold; which, at the
rate of Four Pound an Ounce, would be valued among us at Seventy Five Millions
Sterling; and a Thousand Thousand Talents in Silver, which at five Shillings
per Ounce, comes to 187 Millions 500000 l. computing Seven Hundred and Fifty
Ounces of Metal to each Talent. And besides all this, it is said the Brass and
Iron were unmeasurably great, as also the Stores of Timber and Stone left
Solomon to begin with.
the Holy Scripture it self takes notice, that he had amassed together a
Hundred and Twenty Millions.

Now the Method in use heretofore, for preserving these great Treasures from
being spent and squandered away profusely, or being stolen, and secretly broke
in upon, was to melt them down into large massy Ingots or Balls, as the
Persians and Romans were wont to do; or else to lay them up in the Temples of
their Gods, as the securest and most sacred Repository, as the Grecians
frequently did in the Temple of Apollo. Though this did not always succeed to
their Expectation; for Covetousness often broke through the most superstitious
Reverence for their Deities, and plundered their very Gods themselves, in
despite and defiance of all their imaginary Thunder. Thus also the Romans held
their Office of Exchequer in the Temple of Saturn. But that, which of all
others seems to be not only the safest, but the most gainful Course, is what
Imentioned before, of lending out these Sums to Private Men at a moderate
Interest, upon good Pawns, or sufficient Security, Real or Personal. Again,
Another advisable Expedient for preserving the Public Treasures from
Encroachment and Dishonesty, is to take good care in disposing of the Offices
concerned about them. For sure the Management of such a Trust is of too great
importance to be set to sale; and no Fidelity can be expected, where Men are
out of Pocket, and must reimburse themselves at the Public Expense: Nor should
Men of mean Quality, vulgar and Mechanic People, be admitted to purchase them;
but they ought in all reason to be put into the Hands of Men of Birth and
Fortunes, such as may be supposed to act upon Principles of Honor, and whose
Circumstances set them above any violent Temptations of sordid or foul Dealing:
And in this particular the old Romans set us a good Pattern, who entered the
young Gentlemen of their best Families in Rome in this kind of Business: They
looked upon it as the noblest Education; and from this first setting out, their
greatest Men were raised by degrees to the highest Honors, and most important
Offices in the Commonwealth.

The Sixth Head Nilitary Force.
and the Treasury of a Prince; for Nature it self has put that Precedence out
of dispute, by making it impossible for Forces, either to be well raised, or
well ordered, and used successfully, and to good purpose; or indeed so much as
to subsist, when they are raised without the Support and Direction of those two
former Provisions. Now a Military Force is absolutely necessary for a Prince,
to be a Terror to his Enemies, a Guard and Security to his Person and
Government: And for any Man in a Throne to think of sitting quiet there any
considerable time, without some Number of Forces, is the fondest Imagination in
the World. There is never any perfect Security between the Weak and the Strong;
and no State was never yet so composed, as to be quite void of turbulent
Spirits, and free from Dangers and Disturbances, both at Home and Abroad. Now
this Power is either a constant determinate number, such as are always in Pay,
the Ordinary Standing Force; or else it is Additional and Extraordinary, levied
in time of War, and of no longer continuance than the Occasion of raising it.
The Ordinary standing Forces are confined to Persons and Places. The Persons
are of Two sorts. There are the King's Guards, such as always attend his
Person, and are of use, not only as they contribute to the Safety and
Preservation of his Royal Life; but likewise as they add to his Pomp and
Grandeur, in making all his Appearances more august and venerable, and every
way becoming so sublime a Character. For that so mightily celebrated Saying of
Agesilau^, That a Prince might always be safe without any Guard at all,
provided he commanded as he ought, and used his Subject as an affectionate and
wise Father would deal by his Children. This Aphorism, I say, is far from being
alays true; and He were a Madman, who at this time of Day would venture to
make the Experiment, and depend upon the best nd gentlest Treatment for his
Security. For alas! the Wickedness of the World is not so easily won upon; and
Men are too ill-natured to be charmed into Gratitude, and Returns of Duty, by
all the Tenderness, and Affection, and Desert in the World.

Besides these Guards, it is necessary there should be standing Troops kept in
constant Pay, and perfectly well-disciplin'd, which may be ready upon any
sudden Accident that shall require their Use and Assistance; For it would be
extremely improvident to have no Preparations of this kind, and drive off the
raising of Men, and qualifying them for Service, till the very instant that
Necessity calls for them.

As for the Places, in which such Forces are disposed, they are properly the
Forts and Castles upon the Frontiers, which ought constantly to be well Manned,
and provided with Arms and Ammunition, to prevent Surprise, and Incursions from
abroad: Instead of which, the Ancients heretofore, and some at this Day, choose
rather to transplant the Foreigners and former Inhabitants, and to people all
such Towns with new and populous Colonies of their own, as they enlarge their
Borders by fresh Conquests.

The Extraordinary Forces consist of formed Armies, which a Prince finds
himself obliged to raise, and make a plentiful Provision of in time of War.
Now, what Methods he ought to govern himself by in this respect; for the
undertaking any Military Enterprise, is a Consideration relating to the Second
Branch of this Politic Prudence, That of Action, I mean, which will be treated
of in the following Chapter; and falls not within this First, which is only the
Provisionary part, and such as is requisite by way of a Preparatory tothe
other. All therefore that I shall say upon this Subject at present, is only,
That a wise Prince will always take care, besides his own Guards, to have a
competent number of Men in actual Pay, perfectly discisplined and experienced
in the Busness of their Profession. And that this number ought to be greater or
less, in proportion to the Extent of his Dominions, and the Condition of the
Government, to secure Obedience and good Order, and immediately to suppress any
Seditious Practices and Commotions, which give Disturbance, and Threaten any
Danger, either from sactious Subjects, or busy designing Enemies. Reserving
still to himself the Power and Opportunity of making new and greater Levies,
when he shall be forced into a formal War, and to take the Field in good
earnest; whether that War shall happen to oblige him in acting Offensively or
Defensively. And in the mean while, that his Arsenals and Magazines be
constantly well stored with all manner of offensive and desensive Weapons, that
so both Horse and Foot may be sufficiently furnished, and completely equipped
without Difficulty or Delay. In which Provision I likewise include Ammunition
and Provision of all kinds, Engines and Utens^^s of War, whether for a Camp or
a Siege. Such Preparations are not only necessary in order to making War and
sustaining our selves, when Acts of Hostility are committed upon us, and
consequently such as every State ought to be beforehand with, because they
require a great deal of Time and Expense to have them in readiness for use; but
they are excelent Preventions too, and many times put a stop to the Designs of
levying War upon us. For few Enemies will tempt a Danger, or venture upon a
Government, which is always in Condition to receive, and revenge their
Attempts. Surprise, and Advantage, and the being an Over-match, are the
Considerations that animate Strangers abroad, or Parties at home, to injure and
attack us. The best Security, when all is done, will be for a Prince to render
himself formidable; and Men are most likely to be quiet, when they dare not be
otherwise for their town sakes. So infallible, so eternal a Maxim is it in
Politics, That Qui cupit Pacem, paret Bellum.
the Prince who would establish a firm Peace, must be sure to be well provided
for War; and treat with the Sword in his Hand.

The Seventh Head. Alliances.
which is by no means an inconsiderable Point, but a mighty strengthening and
support to any Government. But then the greatest part of this Advantage is
owing to prudent Choice, and good Conduct; and therefore good care must be
taken with Whom those Alliances are made, and upon what sort of Terms they are
established.

The Persons most proper for the Friendship and Alliance of a Prince, are
Neighbors, and Persons of Power and Interest. For if they be either weak or
remote, what Assistance are they in any Capacity of giving? The only
Circumstance that can render such necessary, and engage us in their Interests,
is, the being attacked by a powerful Enemy, so as that by ruining Them, he
gains an Opportunity to destroy Us; and so the succouring Them, is the
preserving Our selves. In such a Case, let the Allie be otherwise never so
unworthy our regard, we ought to join Forces and defend him with our utmost
Might. And, if the doing this openly may be a means of involving us in danger,
then there must be a good Understanding and Assistance given underhand; for it
is a Masterpiece in Politics, to manage a Confederacy with one Prince
bare-sac'd, and in the Eye of all the World; and to be well with another all
the while, by an Agreement behind the Curtain, and unsuspected. But still my
meaning is, that such Secrecy should be free from all Treachery, and Baseness,
and soul Dealing: For Wickedness and Falsehood are never allowable; but Prudence
and good Management are highly to be commended; though even These, when they run
into Intrigue and Doubling, are more especially to be reserved for acting the
Defensive part, and securing the Government from some imminent Danger; Cases
that admit a much greater Latitude than acting Offensively, and where there is
no urgent Necessity, will bear one out in.

But it ought to be farther observed, that there are several Sorts and Degrees
of Alliance. The lowest and most simple of all, is That which extends only to
an Agreement for mutual Trading and Commerce between the Countries concerned;
but the more usual kind is that which obliges to Friendship, and reciprocal
Kindness; and this is either Defensive only; or else Offensive and Defensive
both: And that again, by a League either limited, and with an Exception of some
particular Princes and States reserved out of the Treaty; or else general, and
without any Restraint or Exception at all. The closest and most perfect
Confederacy is that which is Offensive and Desensive, for and against all
Persons whatsoever; this is an Engagement to succor and be a Friend to all
Their Friends; and to oppose and be an Enemy to all Their Enemies. And this
Agreement is of great Convenience to be made with Princes of Power and great
Influence, and upon an equal Foot; so that each side engage upon the same
Terms. Again, Alliances may differ in Point of Time; Some are prescribed and
limited to a certain Term; Others are perpetual. The more common way is to make
them without any fixed Term mentioned in the Treaty, and these are called
Perpetual: But the better and safer Course is to limit it to a number of Years
expressly. Because then the Renewal gives liberty for second Thoughts. Some
Articles may be added, and other; left out. In a Word, Any alterations may then
be made, as the Circumstances or Inclinations of the Parties happen to vary: Or
if occasion be, either of them is freely and entirely at his own Disposal, to
break off, and be absolutely disengaged for the future. Nay, though the Condition
of these Treaties, and the Princes concerned in them, be such as one would wish
to perpetuate them; yet even thus it is more convenient to repeat the
Engagements, and enter into fresh Covenants upon fresh Consideration, than to
enter into a perpetual League at once. (Provided always, that in such Cases the
Treaty be concluded, and all made fast again, before the utter Expiration of
the former Term.) For all Compacts of this kind naturally languish and cool in
process of Time; and He that finds it for his Convenience to be off, will be
more apt to violate his Faith, if the Alliance be perpetual, and give him no
prospect of Redress; than if it be limited, and so he can see to the End of his
Grievance. For in this Case he will be render of his Honor, and wait with
Patience till he be absolved of Course, and can come off without any Blemish.
And thus you have seen what those Seven Heads are, which I thought necessary
for the Provisionary part of Civil Prudence.

CHAP. III. The Second Part of Policy, or Prudence in Government, which
consists in the Administration and good Conduct of the Prince.
Strangers. And accordingly Tacitus distinguishes them, when he advises Persons
in this Eminent Post, to order Matters so, Amorem apud Populares, Metum apud
Hosts quaerat.
that their own Countrymen may be sure to love, and Foreigners and Enemies may
be sure to fear them. And if we would deliver our Judgment freely and fully
upon the Matter, though both are of great Efficacy, yet it must be
acknowledged, that Authority is the stronger and more vigorous Principle of the
Two; the more Venerable and of longer Continuance. But, when there is a just
Temper, and exact Harmony of both together, this Matter is then brought to its
utmost Perfection. A thing not always practicable, because the different
Constitutions of Government, and yet more different Humors and Dispositions of
People, according to their several Climates, or Countries, or Complexions make
a mighty Difference in the acquiring these; and incline Some to the One of
those Afflictions of the Mind, and Others to the other. So that some are easily
brought to Love, and are scarce susceptible of Fear; Others as easily awed into
Respect, but not without infinite Difficulty to be won over to Kindness and
Love for their Prince. What Methods are most Proper and Advisable for the
acquiring both these Advantages, we have already been informed; for the several
Heads of Provision so largely explained, are but so many Means for the
compassing this End: though of Them the most effectual and insinuating seem to
be Those comprehnded under the Heads, which touch upon the Virtues, and the
Manners or Deportment of a Prince. But however, it may not be amiss, now we are
fallen upon the Matter more directly, to say one Word or two more with regard
to each of these powerful Advantages expressly.

Good Will acquired by Gentleness.
it is in a manner absolutely necessary; in so much, that This by its own
single Strength is able to do a great deal, and gives amighty Security; but all
the rest without this is very seeble and unsafe. The Methods of obtaining it
are principally Three. First, Moderation and Gentleness; not in Words, and
Actions, soft Language, and courteous Behavior only, but also in the very
Temper of the Commands issued out, and the whole Administration. For the
generality of Mankind are of such a Disposition, as will neither endure to have
their Hands tied behind them, nor absolutely loose, and at their own disposal.
Nec totam servitutem pati, nec totam libertatem.
They are impatient (says Tacitus) of an Arbitrary Yoke, and perfect Slavery,
and yet at the same time every whit as unable to bear perfect and uncontrouled
Liberty. They make a shift to obey well enough, and are contended to live in
the Qualty of Subjects; but the Chains and Captivity of Slaves they can never
away with; and therefore he says of them, that they are tamed and Domiti ut
pareant, non serviant.
subdued not to serve, but to obey. And the very Truth is Remissius imperanti
melius paretur. Qui vult amari, languida regnet manu.
Every Man finds himself more inclined to comply with a Superior who uses his
Power tenderly; And the greater the Command, the readier and more hearty is
commonly the Observance paid to it. He that will be well carried must take care
not to ride with too stiff a Rein. Caesar, who was very expert, and a perfect
Master in Matters of this kind, used to say, that Power, when moderately
exercised, kept all safe and tight; but when a Man once came to let himself
loose, and commanded things without any regard to the Reasonableness or the
Decency; when he was set upon making himself absolute, and resolved to be
obeyed Right or Wrong; such a One could never be beloved by his Subjects, nor
did he sit fast in his Throne. In the mean while, give me leave to add, that by
this Gentleness and Moderation, I do not mean such a tame and easy, Negligent
and Effeminate Softness, as lets the Reins of Government perfectly loose; For
This will expose a Prince to Reproach and Contempt, and degenerate into an
Extreme, Ten thousand times worse than that of Fear. In all these Cases
therefore a Commander must observe, how far he can go Decently, Sed incorrupto
Ducis honor. Tacit.
and what Indulgences are consistent with his Honor. And the proper Province
as well as the Excellence and Commendation of Prudence in Matters of this
Nature will be, to make so just a Mixture of Justice and Gentleness, that a
Prince may neither seek to be Feared by methods of Rigor and Extremity, and
rendering himself a public Terror to the World; nor study to ingratiate
himself, and become Popular and Beloved, by Methods so mean and unworthy, as
should make him Despicable, and a Jest and Scorn of the World.

Beneficence.
is Beneficence: I mean so general and unbounded a Disposition to do Good, as
shall by no means be confined to those of the first Quality, or near the
Princes Person; but shed it self all over, upon all Sorts and Conditions of
Men, that even the lowest and most distant, the meanest of the People, may taste
and rejoice in it. One excellent way of doing this, is by good Management, and
provident Care; contriving sufficient Provisions and setting moderate Prices
upon Commodities; seeing that the Markets be well furnished, and Corn and other
Necessaries for the support of Life, sold at reasonable Rates; that if it be
possible, there may always be Plenty, and whatever Nature cannot subsist
without, may be cheap; for nothing is so snesible a Grievance as Scarcity, and
extravagant Rates; and the Blame of all will be sure to be laid at the
Governor's Door. The Common People have no other Notion of public Good, but
what they are sustained by; nor can you make them believe that any other,
either Duty or Benefit, is incumbent upon, or to be expected from those that
sit at Helm, comparable to That of seeding the Subject; as if Socity and
Government were instituted for no other Purpose, than to see that the vulgar,
and poorer sort of Men should never want a full Belly. Vulgo una ex Republica
Annonae cura.
And accordingly Tacitus has observed, That the only Motive which can fasten
their Affections to the State is the Convenience of being maintained at the
public Care.

Liberality.
This is a Bait, nay, a Charm rather; for it does not only allure and invite,
but draws, bewitches, captivates Men's Hearts, almost whether they will or no.
So Pleasant and Sweet it is to be on the Receiving, so Honorable and Winning
to be on the Giving Hand: Insomuch that a very wise Man laid it down for a
Maxim, That a Government is better secured by Kindness, and Obligations, than
by Strength and Force of Arms. This is an Expedition useful at all Times, but
more especially so, at the first entrance upon Government; when there has been
either some late Succession, or some new Establishment. What Persons are the
Proper Objects of this Liberality, in what Proportions it ought to be extended,
and what Address ought to be observed in the manner of giving, are Particulars,
which have been largely examined and resolved already. I only add, that
Augustus has given us in his own Person, an eminent Instance, both of the
Practice of these Methods for attaining the Love and Esteeem of Mankind, and of
the Success of such Measures Qui militem donis, populum annona, cunctos
dulcedine otii pellexit.
For he (says Tacitus) won upon the Army by Largesses; the Common People by
Plenty of Corn; and all Degrees of Men by the Sweets of Rest and Universal
Peace.

Majestas Imperii Salutis Tutela.
The Majesty of the Royal Character is its Safety and Defense. This is that
impregnable Fort, Authority.
that keeps the lower and naked World in Aw; by Virtue whereof the Prince can
demand, and force Satisfaction, form any who shall presume to contemn his
Orders, or behave themselves insolently to him. Upon the Account of This it is,
that the Discontents of People end in Murmurs, that the enraged Mobile dares
not storm the Palace, but all desire to be in good Grace with their Great
Master. Now, this Authority is a compounded thing, and the Two Ingredients that
make it up, are Fear and Respect. By These two the Prince and his Government
become formidable, spread a sort of Awe upon all who behold and consider them,
and are secured from Attempts by this Protection. Now, to the acquiting this
Authority, besides that all the Heads of Provision insisted upon in the last
Chapter must concur, there are Three other Things absolutely necessary to be
observed, in the Admistration, and manner of Governing it iself.

The First of These is Severity; which, commonly speaking, Severity.
is much more for the Safety, and Advantage of a Governor, and a better and
more durable Defense from Enemies and Dangers, than Easiness and Clemency;
because these are so very seldom tempered with Discretion; and a great Softness
and Gentleness of Disposition is exceeding apt to degenerate, and, as was
hinted before, to produce very mischievous Effects. Of This several good
Accounts may be given; As First, the Natural Humor of the People, which, as
Aristotle very truly observed, is not cast in so good a Mould, as to be
tractable; nor will they be contained in their Duty by any Principles so
generous, as Love or Shame; nothing less, nothing better will do it than Force
and Fear, Extremity, and a Dread at least of Punishment. A Second Reason is the
General Corruption of Manners, and that Extravagance and Debauchery, which like
a Contagious Distemper, haith tainted and overspread all the World; and this by
being general, takes Courage, grows Insolent and Presumptuous; and is so far
from any possibility of being reformed by fair Means, that such Gentleness only
inflames the Disease, and makes Vice more Bold and Triumphant. It begets
Contempt of Superiors, and strengthens the Wicked with Hopes of Impunity,
which is the Plague and Bane of all Law, and all Government. For as Ciccro says
Illecebra peccandi maxima spes impunitatis.
The most Pewerful Temptation to offend arises from the Hope of Impunity. And
most certain it is, that Rigor upon particular Notorious Offenders, is the
greatest Mercy that can possibly be shown to the Public, and the whole Body of
Subjects in general. There is sometimes a necessity of making signal and solemn
Examples, thus at the Expense of private Sufferings to teach other People
Wisdom, and to prevent the exorbitant Growth of Villainy by cutting it short
betimes. The Body Politic is in this Respect subject to the same Dangers, and
must submit to the same Methods of Cure, with our Natural Body; where a Finger
is many times taken off out of a mere Principle of Tenderness; that by this
seeming Barbarity, a Mortification may be prevented from seizing the whole Arm
first, and then the Vitals. And thus that King of Thrace made no ill Answer, to
one that reproached him, with playing the Part, not of a King, but a Madman;
Aye, Sir, says he, but this Madness of mine keeps my Subjects in their Senses;
and they grow Wiser by that which you think my Folly. Severity keeps Officers
and Magistrates strictly to their Duty, and promotes a faithful Execution of
their respective Trusts; it discountenances Flatterers, and turns Parasites out
of Doors; the Wicked and Dissolute, the impudent Beggars, and little Tyrants of
the Court are not able to stand before it. Whereas on the contrary, Easiness
and Excessive Mildness of Temper opens the Gate Wide, and admits all these
infamous Wretches; by whose Importunity and Unreasonableness the public
Treasures are exhausted, and squandered away; All manner of Vice is encouraged,
The Kingdom is impoverished; all which, and a great many other Miseries, like
Colds and Catarrhes, in a Rheumatick and distempered Body, break the
Constitution; and fall and settle like the Humors, upon the weakest Parts. The
Goodnature of Pertinax, and the Licentiousness of Heliogabalus had like to
have lost All, and were very near ruining the Roman Empire; and then the strict
Discipline of Severus first, and afterward of Alexander restored, and made all
whole again.

But still Extremes must be avoided; and the Severity I recommended should be
exercised with prudent Reserve, and just Distinction: It must not be a thing of
constant practice, but now and then, upon justifiable and important Occasions;
and when it may be seasonable and effectual. For the End of this Dispensation
must always direct the Use of the Means; and the Design of all Rigor in the
Admiministration of Justice is plainly This, Ut poena ad paucos, metus ad omnes.
That the Sufferings of a few, may work Terror and Amendment in the rest, Thus
the Almighty Lawgiver himself, renders an account of several exemplary and
capital Punishments among the Israelites; Deuteronomy. xxi.
That all Israel may hear, and fear, and do no more wickedly. Now, such
Executions, when grown daily and familiar, lose their Efficacy; and therefore
that ancient Author was certainly in the Right, who affirmed, that some few
public Examples contribute more to the Reformation of the People, than
frequent Punishments, which come thick upon one another can possibly do. The
Reason of which is, that the more Surprising and New any Impressions of this
kind are, the more Strong, and Terrible and Awakening they are. But then all
this is to be understood of common Cases; for if Vice gather Strength, if the
Proselytes and Practisers of it grow Numerous, and Resolute, and Bold, In such
a Case Compassion is the greatest Cruelty, Fire and Sword are then the only
Remedies, and it is necessary to go through with the Cure. And whatever
Imputations of a Bloody and Barbarous Temper may in such Circumstances be cast
upon a Prince, they are but the Effects of Ignorance and Unjust Censure; for
here again it is in the State, as in these private Bodies of ours, where the
Crudelem Medicum, intemperans aeger facit.
Extremity of a Disease and the ungovernableness of the Patient, forces the
Physician to be cruel; and he would betray his Skill, and be false to his
Profession, should he relent, and be otherwise.

Constancy.
is Constancy. A Firmness, and Resolved Temper of Mind, by which he keeps to
his own Methods, treads the same Steps, and without any Fickleness or wanton
Love of change, advances still on, gets Ground upon his Subjects; and enforces
a due Observance of established Laws, and ancient Customs. To be continually
Altering and Reviewing, Abolishing Old, and Enacting New, besides, that it
argues a weak and unsettled Mind, which never knows when things are well, nor
where to fix; it does unavoidably lessen a Prince in the Eye of the World, and
derive a very mean Opinion, both upon his Person, and his Laws; nay, it exposes
both to public Scorn and Contempt. Upon This Account wise Men have ever showed
themselves averse to Change, and that to such a Degree, as to dissuade and
forbid Alterations in Laws and received Customs, even though they were to be
changed for the better. For (besides the Uncertainty and the Danger of such
Courses, and that we know the worst of what is practiced now, but cannot
foresee the Consequences of what was never yet tried;) Take the Matter
abstractedly and by it self, and it is certain, that Alteration of an old Law
is always more inconvenient, and does greater Mischief, than the Novelty of a
thing introduced in its Room can posibly do Good. Upon this Account (as I have
intimated in a former Part of this Treatise) Busy Fellows and Reformers have
all along been looked upon as very suspicious and dangerous People, and by all
means to be discountenanced. And in truth nothing less than either evidence or
absolute necessity; or else as evident and very considerable Advantage to the
Public; and This a certain, and not merely a possible, or likely Consequence
of the Change can ever be Argument Strong and Substantial enough, for breaking
in upon ancient Constitutions, and altering the Measures of any Government. And
when such cogent Motives as these are offered to persuade it, yet even then
there is mighty Caution and Diligence to be used; the Proceedings ought to be
exceeding well advised; every Step taken warily and with Deliberation. All must
not be done at a Push; but the Old laid aside with decency and by degrees, and
the New introduced as gently and insensibly, as is possible. For in this above
any other conjuncture of Affairs is that Proverb of Leniter and lent.
Fair and Softly a necessary Rule in Politics.

Communis custodia Principatus, neminem unum magnum facere.
The common Safeguard of the Government and Royal State, is to take Care, that
no one Subject be made too big by the Favor of his Prince, says Aristotle. And
if it happen that he find such a one already made to his Hands, it is a Maxim
in Politics, to lessen and lower him: But then that must be done slily and
smoothly, by some Stratagem not easily seen through, and in the most gentle,
inoffensive, insensible Way that can be. Another Rule is, not to give Places of
great Dignity and Importance, for Life; much less suffer them to be hereditary
and descend in the same Family; nay, it is dangerous indeed to continue These
for any long Term of Years, lest Men by this Means should strengthen their
Party, and at last become a Match for their Master. And whoever shall consult
Histories, both Ancient and Modern, and there examine the Causes of Powerful
Factions, and the most surprising and fatal Revolutions of States and Empires,
will find the greatest part of them owing to the Exorbitant Riches and Power of
some overgrown Subject; or the Influence and Interest of some old and
important Officer: So that Seneca had good Reason to say, Nil tam utile, quam
brevem potestatem esse, quae magna sit.
Nothing is so convenient and advantageous to the State, as the frequent Change
of high Offices; no Trust, no Power, which is Great, ought to be continued long
in the same Hand.

Against Tyranny.
and honest Means, agreeable to Justice, becoming the Character of a Prince, and
fit for him to use for the acquiring and supporting himself, bothin the Good
Affections of the World, and in a Venerable Authority with them. Upon these
Terms he may be loved and seared both; and so it is necessary he should be. For
though a convenient Mixture of these Two be desirable and excellent; yet either
of them singly, and destitute of the other, is neither Reasonable in its self,
nor any Security to the Government. Upon which Account it is, that we detest
and abhor a Tyrannical Authority, a Fear absolutely repugnant to, and
destructive of Affection and Love, such as reners the Person an Object of all
Men's Hatred at the same time. Oderint dum metuant.
Let them hate me, so they fear me, is a brutish and savage Declaration; no one
that is really a Man, would be content with Power and Greatness at that Rate;
and this Authority, if it be sit to allow it so honorable a Name, is such as
Barbarous, and Arbitrary, and Wicked Men procure to themselves; not by the
Exercise, but by the Abuse of their Power. The Qualities and Character of a
good Prince and a Tyrant, have no manner of Resemblance to one another. The
Distance is so vast, the Disparity so notorious, that it is scarce possible for
a Man not to distinguish between them. In short, they all turn at last upon
these Two Points; One is, The observing the Laws of God and Nature, with a
Religious Strictness, or the trampling both under Foot, with the greatest
Insolence and Contempt. The other, making the public Good and true Interest of
one's Subjects the End and Measure of all one's Actions; or the making every
Thing truckle to his own Will, and by every Action and Design serving and
aiming at nothing else, but private Profit and Pleasure. Now the Prince, who
will answer his Character, and be what so glorious a Station requires, must
constantly remember, that as it is the peculiar Happiness and Prerogative of
Power to do whatever he has a Mind to: So it is also the true Prerogative of
the Will, and the most certain Mark of real Greatness, to have a Mind to such
things only as are Just, and Lawful, and becoming. Caesari cum omnia licent,
propter hoc minus licet. Ut foelicitatis est, posse quantum velis: Sic
magnitudinis, velle quantum possis; vel potius quantum debeas.
Caesar (says Pliny) has less in his Power than Common Men, upon this very
account, that every thing is in his Power. For as it is a Happiness to be able
to do what you please, so it is true Greatness to will only such things as you
can do; or rather, indeed, to desire and will no more than you ought to do; for
in strict speaking, a Man can do no more than lawfully hemay do. The greatest
Misfortune that any Prince is capable of, is the being possessed with an
Opinion, that his Will is his Rule; and that all that is possible, is lawful
for him. As soon as ever he has given way to this vile Imagination, his whole
Temper and Manners presently grow corrupt, and from a good Man he is
transformed into a wicked Wretch, and a Monster. Now this Opinion commonly
insinuates it self by Sycophants and Parasites: Flattery infuses and blows it
up; for Persons of that Dignity never want enough and too many, to preach up to
them the Greatness of their Power, because this is a pleasing Doctrine, and
tickles the Ear; but the Obligations of Duty carry a harsh and grating Sound;
and there are few, but very few Servants so hardy in their Fidelity, as to
entertain their Master upon this necessary Subject. But of all sorts of
Flattery. That is the most dangerous, when a Man flatters Himself. In other
Cases, a Man may stop his Ears against the treacherous Insinuation; he may
enjoin Silence, forbid all Discourse of that kind, avoid the Presence and
Company of the nauseous Wretches that use and hope to ingratiate themselves by
it: But when the Person who gives, and he who receives the Flattery, are one
and the same, What shall he do, or whether shall he run from such destructive
Conversation? And therefore a Prince above all other People, is highly
concerned to deal honestly by himself; to decline and despise the fulsom and
base Soothings of other People, who hope to make their court this way; and
especially to be a severe Inquisitor and Judge of his own Actions, and not to
cajole himself into Ruin.

After all that has been said, (and too much cannot be said against Tyranny
and Arbitrary Administration) it is necessary to add, that sometimes such
critical Junctures of Affairs will happen, such Intricacies and Perplexities in
Public Business, with regard to Time, Person, Places, Occasions, or some
accidental Circumstances; that a Prince will be driven to a necessity of doing
some things, which at first view may look like Tyranny: As for instance; When
the Matter depending before him, is the suppressing of another Tyranny; the
Licentiousness, I mean, of a headstrong, hair-brained People, whose
ungovernable Fury is the most absolute, most destructive Tyranny in the World;
Or when he is to break some close Cabal, or powerful Faction of the Nobility,
and Persons of Wealth and Figure in their Country; Or when the public
Treasures are reduced and wasted, the King driven to extreme Wants, and knows
not where to furnish himself with needful Supplies, and so is compelled for the
Relief of the State in its present Exigency, to raise Moneys irregularly, and
borrow from the Rich, by such Loans as they are not perfectly contented with.
Of these Extremities, and the Methods and Remedies proper for them, I have
spoken formerly; and the only design of renewing the mention of them here, is
to persuade People to give the best and most favorable Interpretation to Cases
of necessity; and not immediately clamor against them, and represent them in
their worst and most odious Colors, but make all the Allowances they can bear.
Much less ought we to misconstrue Severity upon particular Offenders, or esteem
the number of his Guards, or the Strength of his Forts, or the Majesty, and
Style-Imperial of his Commands to be Tyranny. For all these things are not only
useful in a very high degree, but in some Circumstances indispensably
necessary. And such Authoritative Methods in Kings, are much better, and more
desirable, than the softest Entreaties, and kindest Caresses of Tyrants.

And thus I have represented the Two firm Supports of a Prince, and a State;
and happy is it for Them, who know how to acquire, and to continue these
Advantages to themselves; and by so doing, effectually prevent the Two
Contraries, which are the very Murderers and certain Undoers of a Prince and
Government, Hatred, I mean, and Contempt: Concerning which I beg the Readers
Patience to say one Word, because a brief Consideration of them may be of some
Service toward the preventing or defending our selves from them.

Hatrod.
is an obstinate, wicked, perverse Affection of the Mind, whereby the Subjects
are violently prejudiced, and bitterly set against the Prince and his
Government. This commonly springs either from some Apprehension of future
Mischiefs, or from a Desire of revenging some past Injury; or else from a
Resentment compounded of both these together. When this Hatred is very rank and
fierce, and when it spreads and grows Epidemical, the Danger is extremely
great, and the Consequence commonly fatal; and very seldom it is, that a Prince
is able to stemm, or get over it. Multorum odiis nullae opes possunt resistere.
Multae illis manus; Illi una cervix.
No Power (says Tully) is so great as to be a match for a general Hatred; The
Multitude have many Hands, and the Prince has but one Head. This is it they
thirst after, This what they want, to put an End to their Rage; and he is but a
Man equal in this regard to any one of his Enemies, but exposed to the Attempts
of them All. You see then, how important, how necessary it is for a Prince to
preserve himself from such a dangerous, such an irresistible Mischief; and the
most likely Course that can be taken for this purpose, will be to avoid the two
Extremes of Cruelty and Avarice, so directly opposite to that Gentleness and
Liberality, which were observed before to be the powerful Instruments, and most
powerful Motives to gain the Kindness and good Affection of any People.

Cruelty.
such as is a Blemish to his Character, scandalous, and abominable, and
unbecoming his Grandeur: On the other Hand, let his Mind be strongly armed by
Clemency, the Reasons and Necessity whereof have been shown already, when we
treated of the Virtues more peculiar to a Prince. But still, in regard Public
Punishments are necessary and unavoidable; and these, even when most just, even
when most necessary, carry some face and appearance of Cruelty, it concerns a
Governor to carry himself very prudently in the management of this Matter; and
perhaps there are not many Cases which require more Dexterity and Address. And
therefore I will presume to venture at a little particular Advice upon this
Occasion. As first, Let him by no means be too eager and hasty in laying his
Hand upon the Sword of Justice; but show, that he draws it merely in his own
Defense; and by his slowness to be provoked, and loathness to revenge, convince
the World, that what he does of this kind, is the effect of mere Necessity, and
sore against his Inclination. Libenter damnat, qui cito: ergo illi parsimonia
etiam vilissimi Sanguinis.
He that passes Sentence speedily, does it willingly, and with a Glee; whereas
there is a Tenderness due, and a King ought to be very saving even of the worst
and vilest Blood. Secondly, Let the Principle upon which he proceeds, be the
Prospect of the Public Good; and let the making their Faults exemplary, and
preventing the spreading and growth of it in others, and a Relapse of the
Sufferer himself, be the Motives of Punishment, rather than any thirst of
Vengeance, or a desire to torment the guilty Person. Thirdly, Whatever of this
kind is necessary to be done, let it be put in execution with all possible
Calmness and Temper. A King should be like his Laws, cool and sedare, void of
all manner of Passion; and therefore Anger, and Joy, and any other Emotion of
the Soul is highly unbeseeming; but if any Passion may be allowed, That of Pity
is the only one, that can show it self with a good Grace upon these Occasions.
Fourthly, Let the Execution be only what is usual, and according to the Laws
and Customs of the Country in such Cases; for the aggravating of the Pain, and
inventing new and more exquisite Methods of Torment, are so many certain Marks
of a cruel and remorseless Mind. Fifthly, Let not the Prince have any hand in
inflicting the Punishment, nor so much as be present at the Execution; for this
looks like insulling, and taking satisfaction in the Sufferings of the
Criminal. Lastly, if there be a necessity of Punishing a great many, let it be
done with all convenient speed, upon all together, that it may be over and
forgotten, as soon as possible. For the prolonging their Execution, and
repeating these Tragical Sights One by One, looks as if a Man played the
Epicure in Blood. For we naturally contrive, that those things may be
lengthened out, or often renewed to us, which give us Entertainment and
Delight. And every Body hastens to make an End of That, which is disagreeable,
and raises his Aversion.

Avarice.
is Avarice, than which no Vice whatsoever can possibly be more misbecoming a
great Man Now this may discover it self two Ways; either in Extortion, and
exacting more than is fit; or in Niggardliness, and in giving less than is fit.
The former of These will be sure to disgust the Common People, who are all of
them naturally covetous, and esteem their Pocket the tenderest Part; for Money
is their Blood, their Life, their very Soul. And therefore nothing gives them
so sensible an Affliction, or raises their Indignation, like the Exactions that
rob them of it. The Second discontents all that have served the State, who have
any Pretensions to Merit, and have spent their Time and Pains, their Strength
and Blood, upon the Public, and therefore think some proportionable Gratuity
their due. Now we have already taken Occasion in the last Chapter, to discourse
the matter of the Public Treasure at large, how the Prince ought to manage
himself in this whole Point; what Methods are proper for the raising of Funds;
what Taxes fit to be imposed, for the putting his Exchequer into Stock; what
Prudence is requisite in the laying out such Moneys; and what Frugality
necessary for the reserving a convenient Supply for extraordinary Exigencies.
And therefore all I shall need to add here, is only thus much, That the Prince
ought very diligently to beware of Three Things. The First, That he bear no
manner of Resemblance to those Tyrannical and Extravagant Impositions, the
insupportable Burden whereof have rather made the Leviers of them Devourers of
their Country, and common Plunderers, than Fathers and Defenders of it. Such as
God describes by the Mouth of his Psalmist, Psalm liii.
that Qui devorant Plebem sicut escam panis; (...), quorum aerarium spoliarium
Civium, cruentarumque praedarum receptaculum.
Eat up the People as they would eat Bread; Woose Treasuries are enriched with
the Spoils of their Subjects, and made the common Receptacle of Blood and
Rapine. For these Oppressions weary out all Patience, and provoke Tumults and
Insurrections; as infinite Examples of Revenge, and Sedition, and other
desperate Calamities prove to us. The Second Thing to be declined, is
Sordidness, and that first in the gathering part; ( Indignum lucrum ex omni
occasion odorari; and ut dicitur, etiam a mortuis auferre.
Following the Scent of Gain every where, and balking no occasion, though never
so vile and unbeseeming his Character; or as the common Proverb says, Robbing
the very Spittle) for which reason it will be highly advisable in him, to be
very sparing in taking the Advantage of Accusations and Attainders,
Confiscations and Forfeitures, and other Spoils, which have an Air of Hardship,
even when they are clear of Injustice. The other Branch of Sordidness is in
being close-handed, giving nothing, or giving in little and sneaking
Proportions; making his Favors mercenary, or being slow and difficult in
granting; so that whatever is obtained shall be dear bought, by importunate
Requests, and long Attendance; and is not so properly the effect of Generosity,
or a Sense of Merit in the Receiver, as extorted by dunning, and wrested out of
his Hands by tiring and vanquishing his Patience. The Third is, Methods of
Violence, and unreasonable Exaction in the levying of Taxes; when the manner of
bringing it in, looks more like forraging, or going to plunder an Enemy, than
to make a Demand upon a Subject. This Caution, I confess, is chiefly aimed at
the Insolence of Collectors and Receivers, who by their base Extortions, and
grinding the Faces of the Poor, expose the Prince to Hatred and Disrepute, and
breed angry Resentments, and ill Blood in the People. For his Honor suffers
for the Misdemeanors of his Underofficers. These Monsters of Foxes and Wolves,
who as one describes them, have Six Hands, and Three Heads apiece. And, as in
other Matters, so particularly in that of making Seisures, are barbarous and
remorseless; especially such Goods as are Necessaries of a Man's Life, the
Tools of his Trade, or Instruments of Husbandry; a Method to be declined in
common Prudence, as exceeding odious, and what nothing less than Extremity, or
very just Provocation ought to put them upon. It is therefore of mighty
consequence to a Prince, what sort of People are employed in these Offices; for
it is highly requisite they should be Men both of Integrity and Prudence: Nor
is it less Necessary for his Honor, to turn them out with Disgrace when they
misbehave themselves: A severe exemplary Punishment, a swinging Fine, to make
them disgorge all their ill-gotten Gains, is what he owes to himself, and his
own Defense: For these State-Sponges should be used accordingly, and squeezed
in their Turn too, till they have given back every Drop of that Blood and
Sweat, which they most mercilesly sucked up, by draining and squeezing the poor
Country People before.

Contempt.
which is Contempt, arising from an ill and mean Opinion both of the One and
the Other. What is it that can possibly support one single Man, and that
sometimes one of great Years and Infirmities, in a Station so much above many
Millions of his Brethren, except it be Authority, and a high Esteem? When once
This is lost, and sinks into Contempt, all the rest is lost with it, and both
Prince and Government fall to the Ground. And therefore, as in this respect,
according to what was urged before, Authority is of greater Strength and
Efficacy, and carries more Pomp and Majesty with it, than the good Affection of
a People; so likewise Contempt is more dangerous and formidable, than even
Hatred it self. For Hatred is Modest and Timorous, it is restrained by Fear,
and dares attempt nothing, till Contempt let it loose; but this shakes off that
Yoke, animates and arms it for the most desperate Undertakings. It is true
indeed, Contempt seldom rises very high, especially under the Government of a
Rightful Prince, unless he be perfectly insignificant, and degrade and
prostitute himself and his Honor to that degree, as only to be Ut videatur
exire de imperio.
a King of Clouts. But still, since there is a possibility of its happening, we
shall do well to observe what are the Occasions most likely to produce it. Now
This, as it is in its own Nature the very Reverse to Authority, so does it
derive it self from Causes directly contrary to Those, by virtue whereof a
Prince's Authority is procured and preserved: As for Instance, those Three that
follow.

under such Princes grow insolent, and bold, and encroaching: They think they
may do what they will, and that He will never regard, or reckon with them for
it: Malum, principem habere, sub quo nihil ulli licet; pejus, eum, sub quo
omnia omnibus.
It is a great Calamity to have a Prince, under whom no Man enjoys any Liberty
at all; but it is still greater to have one, under whom none are subject to any
Check or Restraint at all.

Alexander himself, in the midst of Glory and Conquest, complaining bitterly of
it; Orbitas mea, quod sine liberis sum, spernitur. Munimen Aulae Regii Liberi.
My want of Heirs, says he, is despised, because I have no Children to succeed
Me. For the Children of a Prince are the Honor and the Strength of the Court.



And thus we are got to the End of what I thought convenient to be premised,
with relation to the Active part, or Administration of a Prince in general. We
proceed now to handle it more distinctly and particularly. But in order
hereunto, it must be remembered, that this (as was observed in the beginning of
this Chapter) consists of Two parts, the One Civil, or that which concerns a
State of Peace and public Tranquillity. The Other Military, and proper for a
State of War: For by the former I understand the common and ordinary Methods of
Government, which are of constant and daily use, whether in a time of Peace or
War. By the Latter I mean those Methods which are proper to Martial Discipline,
and the practice whereof is peculiar to the Time of War only.

The Peaceable Administration.
and the Accidents and Occurrences of it so various and unforeseen, that it is
impossible to reduce it to any general Rules. And besides, The Prudence of it
consists oftentimes as much in forbearing to act, as at other times in acting.
But however, I will venture to lay down here some few Heads of Advice, which
are necessary to be considered, and may be of some Advantage perhaps, when the
Duties they prescribe are observed duly, and improved, by applying the
Substance of those general Intimations to particular Actions and Circumstances.
First then, the Prince is concerned above all things, to take care, that he be
faithfully and diligently informed of all Matters which any way concern him to
know. The Matters I mean here may be comprehended under Two Heads; and
consequently the Informations themselves, and the Persons made use of in them,
are of two different Qualities. And to render those of each sort what they
ought to be, these Qualifications are absolutely necessary, and in common to
both; Sincerity and Confidence, Secrecy and Prudence. But though these be
requisite to both kinds, yet they are not so to both equally: For the One have
occasion for much greater Liberty, and Openness, and Plain-dealing, than the
Other. The One of these are the Persons whose business it is to put him in Mind
of his Duty, what he is obliged to, and what becomes his Character; and not
only so, but to make him duly sensible of his Faults and Failings, and to speak
bold Truths to him concerning himself. There are no sort of Men in the World,
who stand in so great need of such Friends, as Princes do; For they have no
Senses of their own, nor any other Direction, but what is received from seeing
with other People's Eyes, and hearing with other People's Ears. They sustain a
public Character, and have a World of People to satisfy; so that every Word
and Action of Theirs is the Matter of Censure or Commendation, and exposed to
the critical Malice of all Mankind. And, as they have in this respect more
Humors to please, so are they less capable of doing it than common Men,
because they are industriously kept in the Dark; and very little of what
concerns them is suffered to come to their Knowledge. And thus for want of
better Instruction, they do things which prove inconvenient and disgusting; and
so, with all the undesigning Innocence imaginable, expose themselves to the
Hatred and Resentments of their Subjects. All which had certainly been
prevented, or very easily remedied, had they been fairly and freely dealt with
in time. But then it must be said, on the other hand, that they are in some
degree destined to this Ignorance, or accountable for it Themselves; because
Matters are so ordered, that Frankness of Humor, and Home-Truths by way of
Admonition or Reproof, (though the best Offices, and surest Marks of Friendship
and Affection) are yet seldom well taken; and especially to Princes they are
not only unacceptable, but sometimes extremely dangerous to the Person, who
has Courage and Houesty enough to venture at them. And yet this cannot in
reason but appear a very criminal Nicety, and an Argument of great Weakness;
when such Persons cannot bear having their Ears grated, and made to glow a
little, for their Good: For this Harshness of the Sound is all they can endure;
They are above Compulsion or Restraint; and have the whole Management of
themselves left still entirely in their own Disposal.

The Other sort of Informers are such as are employed to bring what we properly
call Intelligence; by representing all the considerable Actions and
Occurrences, not only within the Compass of his Dominions, and by his own
Subjects; but by discovering the Projects and Intrigues of neighboring Courts:
I say of All that is doing at Home or Abroad, wherein either his Own, or his
Allies, or Borderer's Government is either immediately, or but remotely
concerned. These Two distinct kinds of Correspondents do in some degree answer
the Character of those two Friends to Alexander, Hephestion and Craterus. One
of which is said to have loved the King, and the other Alexander; That is, One
of them was fond of his Person, the Other of his Government; One regarded him
in his Private, the Other in his Public Capacity; The Description given of
this personal Dearness betwixt Alexander and Hephestion, has that among other
Circumstances mentioned in it. Secretorum omnium arbiter; Libertatis quoque in
admonendo non alius jus habebat. Qu. Curt. Lib. III. 12.
but the tenderer Friend dealt most freely with him.

Memorandums, consisting principally of Three Heads. First, An Abridgement of
all Matters of Public Concern then depending: That by recourse to This, he may
imform himself at one View, what is fit to be done in the present Juncture of
Affairs; what Matters are already in Motion, and want to be completed; that so
every thing may be attended to in its proper Season, and nothing done out of
time, or by halves. The Second is a List of Persons Names, whose Merits may
recommend them to his Favor, either upon the Account of past Services, which
call for Rewards and Gratifications; or of extraordinary Abilities, which
qualify them for Preferments and Places of Trust. The Third, A Memorial of
Gifts and Grants already conferred, to whom, and upon what Considerations: For
without a distinct and particular account of these Three things, it is scarce
possible to avoid the being frequently at a loss, and making a great many false
Steps. And accordingly we find, that Princes of the justest Renown, and most
celebrated in Story for their Wisdom and Policy, have constantly taken this
Method, and felt the Convenience of it; as Augustus and Tiberius, (for
instance) Vespasian and Trajan, Adrian, and the Antonines.

it is certain from Experience, and the common Sense of Mankind, that This is
not so duly considered, but that it leaves a particular Grudge behind, and
creates angry Resentments against that very Person, who is the next and
immediate Actor, though he be in reality never so passive in the thing.



We come now to that part of the Administration, which is Military: and This
every Man easily sees to be necessary for the Defense and support both of
Prince and People, and preserving the Order and Honor of any Government. And
therefore I shall treat of it with all the Brevity that the Subject will bear.
Now, the whole of what is Proper to be said upon it, may be reduced to Three
Heads; The engaging in a War at first, the Carrying it on when begun, and the
Putting an End to it.

1. For the engaging in a War, Of Military Affairs.
Justice and Prudence, and consequently the Two Vices opposite to These by all
Means to be avoided, which are Injustice and Rashness. First of all, It is
necessary that the War be Just; for Justice ought to march in the Head, and
lead Courage on to Actions; as Counsel and Deliberation ought to go before the
Execution of the Design. And therefore such Maxims as these, though common in
every Bodies Mouth, are yet most Wicked and Abominable; That Right is always on
the strongest Side; That the Success will determine the Cause; That the longest
Sword will carry it. For certainly the Goodness of any Cause is not to be
measured by the Event, but by the Equity and the Reasonableness, that is at the
Bottom of it. And though War be a Thing of Violence and Force, and the
Decisions of it very distant from the Method of determining civil
Controversies; yet even War it self is not utterly Lawless, but has its Rules
and Measures to be observed; as well as Peace. Almighty God, who calls himself
the Lord of Hosts, and God of Battles, does favor just Wars in a peculiar
Manner; it is He, who disposes of Victories, and casts the Scale, as he in his
infinite Wisdom sees fit. But it is the Duty of every Prince to qualify
himself for that Favor; and, as much as may be, to engage Providence on his
Side; and the first of those Qualifications, is the Justice of the Undertaking.
To pick Quarrels therefore, and Non ex omni occasion quaerere triumphum.
commence a War upon every Occasion, is what can never be answered. The Itch of
Honor and Triumph will bear no Monarch out in it. And therefore such ought to
take good Heed, that Ambition, and Avarice, and Passion, be not too busy upon
these Occasions; which yet, if a Man may be allowed to speak the Truth freely
are, it is to be feared, the great Incendiaries of the World, and generally at
the Bottom of such Undertakings. Una and ea vetus causa bellandi est profunda
cupido Imperii and divitiarum; maximam gloriam in maximo Imperio putant. Rupere
foedus impius lucri furor and ira praeceps.
One, and that indeed the unusual and ancient Cause of War is the insatiable
Thirst of Riches and Dominion; That Abyss of Avarice and Ambition, which
measures the Greatness of a Prince's Glory by the Extent of his Territories,
and Enlargement of his Conquest. The Raging Desire of Gain, and the Rash Heat
of Anger are the Disturbers of Peace, and Violaters of Leagues and Treaties.

A just War, what.
Three Things must concur: The First, That it be denounced, and undertaken, why
a Person, who has the Power of making and proclaiming it; which can only be
the Sovereign himself; or in Commonwealths, those who are invested with the
Suprme Authority, and whom the Law in that respect looks upon, but as one
single Person.

Roman Orator's Judgment, That Qui non defendit, nec obsistit, si potest,
injuriae, tam est in Vitio, quam si Parents, aut Patriam, aut Socios deserat.
Cic. Lib. I. de Offic.
He who does not defend the Injured, and as much as in him lies, prevent and
ward off the Wrong, is as much in Blame as if he deserted Country or Kindred,
Parents or Friends. So that Injury it self, without the Addition of any other
Motive, is, and ought to be esteemed Engagement Sufficient for the employing
our best Endeavors, to right and assist the Persons laboring under it. And
accordingly we find St. Ambrose comprehending all these three Kinds of Defense
under the Character of Justice. Fortitudo, quae per bella tuetur a Barbaris
Patriam; vel defendit infirmos; vel a latronibus Socios, plena Justitiae est.
That Fortitude (says he) is highly Just and Commendable, which by Force of
Arms defends our Country from the Invisions of Enemies and Barbarians; or
protects the Weak and Suffering, from those that are too mighty for them; or
saves our Friends and Allies from Plunder, and Robbers. Another Nullum bellum a
Civitate optima suscipitur, nisi aut pro Fide, aut pro Salute. Salust.
Author brings the Matter into a narrower Compass still, and reduces it to
these two Particulars, of Faith and Safety. No War (says he) is undertaken by a
Righteous and Good Government, except either Breach of Covenant, or the
Prospect of their own Danger provoke it.

Offensive War must likewise have Two Conditions to render it justifiable; The
One is, that there be really some Offense given, and Damage sustained, upon
which the Quarrel can fairly be grounded; as in the Cases of Violence, and
Outrage, and Usurpation: The Second That Satisfaction and Restitution be first
demanded, in the usual Manner and Solemnities; in which among the Romans a Post
Clarigatum. Plin. Not. Hist. Lib. XXII. Cap. 2.
Herald was the proper Minister: For Force is the last Remedy, and ought never
to be made use of, till the rest have been tried to no Purpose. And Justice
cannot be duly sought this Way, till it has been sought in softer and more
amicable Methods, and denied. If the Aggressor will hearken to calm Reason, and
submit to such Terms as are agreeable to it, there ought to be an End of the
Controversy; but if he will be obstinate, and refuse to do this, then indeed
War is Just and Allowable, because it becomes necessary, and the only possible
Method left for redressing such Grievances, and preserving our own Rights. For
Justum Bellum quibus necessarum; pia Arma, quibus null^ nisi in armis
relinquitur spes.
that is a just War, which cannot be avoided; and those are righteous Arms,
which are taken up by Men who have nothing less to trust to.

Sapientes pacis causa bellum gerunt; and laborem spe otii sustentant; ut in
pace sine injuria vivant.
Wise Men (says my Author) wage War for the sake of Peace; and are centent to
sustain great Labor and Pains for the Prospect of Ease and Leisure, that so
they may live quietly and secure themselves from Wrong.

Prudence.
it is seasonable to consider of the Prudence of the Undertaking. And this
Consideration consists in Mature Deliberation, that a Prince may not run
giddily on, and engage in Attempts which have no probable Prospect of Success:
And therefore to prevent Heat and Rashness, it will be very convenient that
these following Particulars should be very seriously weighed. First, the
Strength, and Conveniences on both sides; what the Aggressor, and what his
Enemy is capable of. Secondly, The Hazard and doubtful Chance of Wars the
mighty and surprising Revolutions of Humane Affairs; Particularly the
unaccountable Events of Engagements and Stratagems, which we see happen daily;
and wherein, when the nicest Policy has done its utmost, Providence has still
the chief Hand, and gives the finishing Stroke; For it is obvious to every
Man's Observation, that what the World calls Fortune, cannot pretend to so
absolute a Dominion in any one Instance, as in the Decisions of the Field. And
accordingly we often see, that One Hour there turns the whole Face of Affairs,
and exalts or reduces a Prince to the very Reverse of what he was an Hour ago.
And therefore Livy has observed very truly, that Simul parta ac sperata decora
unius horae Fortuna evertere potest.
the Glories and Laurels which have been the Acquisition, or the Expectation of
a whole Life, are all blasted and withered by the Fortune of a single Hour; and
he who thought himself sure of All, and stood actually possessed of a great deal,
the next Moment has not so much as the Hope of any thing lest to sustain him.


The Third Consideration necessary upon this Occasion is, That of the horrible
Grievances and Hardships, the Calamities and Miseries, which War (supposing the
very best of the Event and sinal Determination) does unavoidably draw both upon
the Public in general, and private Persons in particular. And these indeed,
when duly reflected upon, are such, that the very Thought alone is Dismal and
full of Discouragement and Horror.

A Fourth Reslection will concern the Slanders and Calumnies, the Reproaches
and Curses, which are sure to light upon the Authors and first Beginners of any
War. For the Misfortunes and Losses, which cannot but happen, will be sure to
alienate the Affections, and provoke the Resentments, of those who suffer under
them; and they, when thus incensed, will not fail to express those Resentments,
in a very plentiful and bitter Manner: For, from what has been said already,
we may easily be convinced, that, nothing lies more exposed to the Tongues and
Censures of the World, than War. And whoever is the Immediate Actor of the
Mischief, the main Burden will be sure to fall upon the Principla. Iniquissima
Bellorum conditio haec est; Prospera omnes sibi vendicant, Adversa uni
imputantur.
This, says Tacitus, is the particular Hardship of War, that Men always make an
unjust Division of Events; all that succeeds well, every Man arrogates to
himself; but all the Miscarriages and Losses, every one Shifts off from
himself, and all agree to lay the Load at the Principal Commanders Door only.
Those that fail in Execution, blaim them whose Business it is to give Orders;
and they who issue Orders, lay the Blame upon Negligence and Failure in the
Execution; and, at the last Rebound, the Whole rests upon the Prince himself.
Upon all these Accounts the very justest War, as St. Augustine says, is odious
and detestable; and a Prince does very ill, and Acts imprudently, when he
engages in it, without extremely urgent Necessity. According to that Remark
made upon Augustus Caesar: And therefore Kings must not suffer themselves to be
won over to it, by those busy Incendiaries that set the World on Fire, and
desire to incense their Master with groundless Jealousies, or allure him with
imaginary Conquest, merely to gratify some particular Passion of their own.
Quibus in Pace durius servitium est; in id nati, ut nec ipsi quiescant, neque
alios sinant.
Men, who (as one describes them) think Peace a Burden, and to live at Ease, a
perfect Slavery; of such Dispositions, that Nature seems to have cut them out
for public Disturbers; for they will neither be quiet themselves, nor content
to let other People be so. And yet these very Persons are commonly the most
backward and dispirited, when once they come to Action; They talk Big; and take
Towns, and beat whole Armies, and entertain themselves and others with the
Pleasures and Advantages of a Camp, and the Love they have for Fighting; but at
last the old Proverb Proves its own Truth, That Dulce bellum inexpertis.
War is pleasant to none, but those who have never tried it. Now, a Wise Prince
will take the best Care he can, to keep, and to promote the Peace of his
Country; he will not be afraid of War on the one Hand; for this is mean and
beneath his Courage; but then he will not provoke, nor draw it upon himself on
the other Hand; for That is every whit as much unworthy of his Wisdom, the
Effect of Heat and Inconsideration. For how rash, how unreasonable is it, to
put his own, or another Government into needless Combustions; to give so many
Persons the uneasiness of a long and anxious Suspense between Hope and Fear;
and to drive things to that desperate Push, that He must at last, either ruin
other People, or be ruined himself?

The Second Head. Carrying on the War.
And for This, Three things are necessary; Provision and Ammunition; Men; and
Conduct, or Skill in the Rules of War. The First is Provision of things useful
and necessary for the War, and that ought to be done early and in good time.
For it would be an intolerable Weakness and Reproach, to put off the Supplies
which ought constantly to be in readiness, till the very instant, that our
Occasions call for the using of them. He that is to seek then, has lost
himself; for a Diu apparandum est, ut vincas celerius.
Long Preparation is the surest Expedient to procure a speedy Victory. Now, as
for the Provisions requisite for the Honor and Safety of a Prince and his
Government, in the usual and ordinary State of Affairs, there has been enough
said already, in the former Part of this Chapter; and that belongs entirely to
the Matter now before us. The Principal Provisions and Strengthenings for War
are Three: First, Money; which is the very Life and Spirits, the Nerves and
Sinews of War; as has been already showed at large. Secondly, Arms Offensive
and Defensive, which have also been spoken to before: These two are of common
Use, and what a Prince should always have plenty of in Reserve. The Third is
Victuals; without which an Army can neither conquer, nor sight, nor live; if
This be wanting, Engagements are needless, for your Men are cut off without
ever a Blow struck; and the Soldiers grow wild and unruly, and cannot possibly
be kept under Government. Disciplinam non servat jejunus Exercitus.
A hungry Army observes no Rules; and Men ready to starve cannot be expected to
perish in obedience to Discipline. It Is true. I mentioned a Provision of
Necessaries before; but that which I am now upon is a different thing, and laid
in on purpose for this Extraordinary Occasion. One therefore of the earliest
and most important Preparations for War, is, upon the first Thoughts or Motions
toward any such thing, to see that there be large and convenient Magazines,
stored with all manner of Victual, Corn, Salt-Meats, and other proper
Sustenance, not only for the Army, which takes the Field, but for the Garrisons
upon the Frontiers; so much as may enable them to hold out a Siege, if the
Enemy should find it for his purpose to sit down before them, and so intercept
any Supplies which should come to them from abroad.

Men.
or to receive an Assault. And here we shall be obliged to distinguish between
them. As first of all, between Private Soldiers, or those who are commonly said
to carry Arms; and Officers, or Persons in Commission. The Private Soldiers are
the Body, the Officers the Head, or Life of the Army; That which inspires and
directs every Motion, and by Virtue whereof they act. Now here, we will first
of all consider the common Soldiers, who make the Bulk and main Substance of
the Army. Of these there be several sorts, some Foot, and others Horse; some
Natives, others Foreigners; some the standing proper Force of the Government,
others Auxiliary Troops, or such as are levied upon a particular Emergency. We
shall do well to take a transient view of every one of these, and bestow the
Pains of comparing them a little together; that so we may be satisfied which
are best and most eligible: And then we will proceed farther to observe, what
Methods are to be made use of for the directing and governing our Choice; and
what lastly for the ordering and well-disposing them, when thus levied, and got
together.

Foot.
For some, and especially the Barbarous and Undiciplined Nations are much more
for Horle than Foot; but others are generally of the quite contrary Opinion.
Indeed it may with great reason be affirmed, that if both are considered
simply, and absolutely without any regard to particular Exigences and
Qualifications, Foot are much the better of the Two, For they are of Service
all along, and run through the whole Course of the War; no place excludes them,
no Action is achieved without them. Whereas the Horse are often useless; for
in Mountainous and rough Countries, and where the Defiles are very straight,
and in the besieging and taking of Towns, they stand a General in very little
stead. Foot are also more ready at Hand upon all occasions; they cannot lie far
out of Call; and, as their Attendance and Service is more, so the Expense of
raising and maintaining them, is considerably less. The Subsistence and
Equipage of Horse is extremely Chargeable; and even for That Action, where they
are of most Advantage, Flanking and Galling the Enemy in a Battle, if the Foot
be well appointed, armed Substantially, and Skilful in their Business, they
will stand the Shock, and maintain their Post very well. And accordingly, Those
who set up for Masters in this Art, usually give them the Preference. The Horse
indeed are of greater use in a pitched Battle, and for making quick Work.
Equestrium virium proprium est cito parare, cito cedere victoriam.
For this (says one) is the Quality of Horse, that they soon get, and soon lose
the Day. The Foot, it is plain, cannot be so good at dispatch; nor can it be
expected they should. But then they make amends another way, and as they are
the slower, so they are a great deal the surer of the Two.

Natives.
Whether Natives or Strangers are sit to be made use of; though to me the
Odds appear so very great, that I make no manner of difficulty to give it on
the Native's side. For certainly, we may expect better Principles, and greater
Fidelity from Home-born Subjects, than we can from Strangers, who are Soldiers
of Fortune, and only fight for their Pay. They will endure more, be better
contented, submit more quietly to Orders, carry themselves with more Respect to
their Officers, use more Civility in Quarters, will think their Honor more
concerned; and when they come to Action, show more Courage in the Engagement,
as they cannot but have a more affectionate and tender Regard to their own
Country, for the defense whereof they are engaged. Besides, the Public saves
more by them; they cost a great deal less; and are more ready at hand than
Auxiliaries from Abroad. For Foreigners are very often mutinous and grumbling;
and that sometimes, just when there is occasion to make use of them: They
commonly keep a great blustering, but have more of Insolence and Vanity, than
of real Service in them: They are generally Troublesome, and a Burden to the
Public; cruel and oppressive to poor Country People, and fancy themselves
licensed to plunder, as if it were an Enemy's Country, because it is none of
their own. Then the Expense of Transporting them backward and forward, the
Voyages by Sea, or long Marches by Land, are a prodigious Charge. And, which is
worst of all, their Motions are frequently so tedious, and their Delays so
many, that Opportunities are lost, incredible Damage sustained, and the Season
of Action quite spent, before they come up. This, I say, is very often the
Case, and therefore where Natives are equally qualified in other respects, and
there is no want of Hands, these are certainly sit to be employed. But
still This hinders not but that there may be occasions, in which a Foreigner's
Aid is advisable, and therefore this staring of the Comparison is not to be
looked upon as a conclusive Rule, nor of any force against Cases of Necessity,
or particular Convenience. But even then, it will be for the safety of a
Prince, to take heed that the Strangers do not exceed those of his own
Subjects; for though they may constitute a Part or Limb of the Army, yet they
must by no means make up the main Body of it: For when once they feel
themselves superior, or but an equal Match for the Natives, there is danger of
their making use of such an Advantage, to subdue and make a Prey of their
Masters that hired them. And History takes notice of this Trick being played so
often, that no prudent Governor would run the risque of it, or put such a Game
into Strangers Hands. And a fair Game to be sure it is; for He that is (...) of
the Field, may be Master of all the Kingdom whenever he pleases. Again; If
there be a ne^^^sry for the Assistance of Strangers, let them be borrowed from
our Allies and Confederates, whose Interests are interwoven with our own; and
so whatever Damage one sustains, will affect both. Upon which account we have
reason to repose greater Confidence in their Fidelity, and to expect better
Service, and more Zeal from them, than we can from mere Strangers, who have no
concern at all either with, or for us. To make such then, not one's Refuge, but
one's Choice, and to multiply them to the Danger and Terror of one's own
Subjects, is a Course fit for none but Tyrants; who, because they use their
Subjects ill, are afraid of them. They treat them as Enemies, and are sensible,
Low general a Hatred they have incurred; and therefore they dare not trust
them, for fear they should have the Inclination to take it when they are put
into a Condition of Revenage; and turn those Swords upon their Master, which he
taught them to use for His defense, but has provoked them to use for their Own.

Ord^^^^ and (...).
Now the Difference betwixt these two is, That the Former are but very few,
they are constantly in Pay, and upon Duty, as well in times of Peace as of War.
And of These therefore all that was necessity has been delivered urder the
Provisionary Part of Civil Prudence. These are People entirely destined to War,
This is their whole Trade, and therefore they ought to be perfect Marters of is
dexterous in all manner of Exercise, and reselute as well as skilful in
handling their Arms. This is what the Moder^^ call the Standing-Forces of a
Kingdom: the Princes Honor in Peace, his main Protection in War, and much of
the Nature with that Institution of the Old R^man (...). Now it will he
convenient that there thould be cont^^'d out by Regiments in time of Peace, and
quarterd in very small Bod^es, remote from one another, to preve^^ any
Co^^binations among them, or the giving Disturbence to the Public. The
Auxiliaries or Extraord^^ary F^ce, are much more numerous indeed; but then they
an not perpetnal, nor devoted to War, and (...) else. They have other
Professions to subsist upon; And These they follow, till the Service and
Necessities of their Country draw them off: When this happens, and there is
occasion for their Assistance, they are called in by Beat of Drum, listed and
mustered, led on, and taught their Military Exercises. And when the Service is
over, Their Business is so too; they are dismissed again, return to their Trades,
and work to maintain their Families at home.

Choice of Men.
is the Choice of them. And this in truth is of mighty consequence, and will
ask great Prudence and Care. It signifies but very little to draw together so
many thousand Men; for Armies are not to be valued by Tale; nor does Victory
attend upon the greatest Numbers, but the bravest Fellows. And commonly, That
part which turns the Day, and is in the Hottest of the Action, consists but of
a sew Squadrons in comparison. A wild tumultuous Rout does more hurt than good.
Non vires habed, sed pondus; potius impedimentum quam auxilium.
It is not a strengthening, but a Burden; and deserves rather to be called the
heavy Baggage that retard a Prince's March, than a Relief or Protection to him.
So perfectly insignificant are Multitudes void of Courage; and Manibus opus est
bello, non nominibus.
The Goodness of the Hearts and Hands is a better Security than the exorbitant
length of a Muster-Roll. And thus you see, how great, and how fatal an Error it
is, for Commanders to press or pick up the next Men they meet, or hire them at
so much a Month, without any distinction. Whereas they ought to be rather nice
and curious in making this Collection. And, as it is always the Reproach, so it
sometimes proves the Destruction of a Nation, to have an Army composed of the
next Chance-Comers, perfectly ignorant of the thing they undertake; the
Sweepings of Goals, the Scumm of the Nation, Lewd and Vicious to the last
Degree; Bullies and Braggadochio's; bold in Plunder, and when no Enemy is in
sight, but timorous and swift of Foot as soon as Danger makes its Appearance. Or
if you please, take that ancient Description, Assueti latrociniis bellorum;
insolentes; galeati Lepores; Purgamenta urbium, quibus ob egestatem and flagita
maxima peceandi necessitudo.
Men trained up to no part of War but the Rapine and Robbery of it; Insolent
and Big; Hares in Armor; the Dirt and Dregs of the Town; Rakehells whom Want
and Wickedness has brought intimately acquainted with Debauchery, and made
exquisite in Impudence and Villainy of every kind.



First, The place of their Nativity and Dwelling, and the manner of their
Education suitable to it: For they should be taken principally out of the
Country, from mountainous, barren, and rugged Situations, or else from
Seacoasts; in all which places People are usually brought up to all sorts of
Labor and hard Fare. So says Vegetius, Ex Agris supprendum praecipue robur
exercitus; aptior Armis Rustica plebs, sub dio and in laboribus enutrita; ipso
terrae suae solo and coelo acrius animantur.
The Levies ought chiefly to be made out of the Country; for such Men will be a
Strength indeed: They are fitter to bear Arms, after being accustomed to endure
all manner of Weather, and to live by Drudgery. Their very Soil and Climate
hardens and gives them Courage. And the less easy and delightful any Man's
Life has been, the less he will be afraid to die. But now your People in
Cities and great Towns are more nice and tender; they run to cool and
artificial Shades, and know not what it is to endure either a scorching Sun, or
a cold Winter Blast. Profit and Pleasure are all They are intent upon; and this
makes them soft, and idle, and effeminate. Vernacula multitudo, lasciviae
sueta, laborum intolerans.
Bred up by their own Fireside, and good for nothing; used to Delicacy and
Luxury; Slothful, and incapable of any laborious Undertaking, or hardy Usage.

Secondly, The Age of the Men is of great consequence; for the best Season of
taking them is in their Youth; about Eighteen or Twenty Years old, when they
have not only Vigor and Strength, but are teachable and pliant, fit to learn,
as well as able to perform their Duty. For Vice and Stubbornness grows upon
them with Years: There is scarce any reforming old Fellows; the bad Habits of
their former Days stick by them; and besides, they are so Headstrong and
Self-conceited, that it is next to impossible to bend them to Instruction and
Discipline.

A Third Consideration is their Body; which, according to the Opinion of some,
ought to be very tall; and thus Marius and Pyrrhus particularly desired their
Soldiers. But the Stature does not seem to be of that mighty importance; for a
moderate Size will do very well, provided the Body be dry and sirm, vigorous
and strong: So says Tacitus, Dura corpora, stricti artus, minax vultus, major
animi vigor.
Their Bodies should be clean, and well set, their Limbs tight, their
Countenance stern; for these are good Indications of a Qualification most
requisite of all, a brisk and courageous Mind. Your huge, overgrown, fat,
flabby Fellows, with loose and washy Bodies, are good for nothing at all.

In the Fourth place, They should look out for Men of lively Tempers, brave and
resolute Spirits, bold and daring, and valuing themselves upon their Abilities;
such as are greedy of Praise; impatient to be outdone, and afraid of nothing
so much as Dishonor and Reproach.

Lastly, Their Condition is likewise of very great Consequence: For those that
are the very Lees and Dregs of the People, of a scandalous Character, or
brought up in Lewdness or Infamy; or such as have followed lazy and sedentary
Trades, or never knew any Business but following Pleasures and Women: In a
Word, All manner of sauntring and disgraceful Prosessions, render a Man
extremely unfit for This, which must engage him in Activity, and all manner of
Hardship.

Discipline.
is to qualify them for Service by good Discipline. For it is by no means
enough, that Persons capable of making good Soldiers are procurd of that
Capacity be not improved, and they actually made such; and to as little effect
is it, that they are once made so, except they be kept so by habitual Practice
afterward. There are but very few Men in the World, who are valiant merely
from Nature and Disposition; for, generally speaking, Courage is owing to
Instruction and Art, to Custom and Discipline. And these things are of so
exceeding great importance in War, that the Uses and Advantage of them are
never to be expressed. Good Discipline is really All in All. It is to This,
that old Rome was indebted for all her Glories; This secured and enlarged her
Conquests, and made her Mistress of the World; all which that People were so
sensible of, that no one Virtue whatsoever, not even natural Affection to their
own Children, was reputed more necessary, or had in higher Esteem. Now the main
Point of Discipline is Obedience; and that old Rule expresses this Matter very
truly and well, which says, That a Soldier ought always to be more afraid of
his Officer than his Enemy.

Two Parts.
which this Discipline should aim at, which are, making good Soldiers, and good
Men; and consequently, it must needs consist of two parts; one of which
respects the Valor, the other the Virtue or Manners of the Persons concerned
to be kept under it. For the promoting of Valor, and perfecting them in the
Business of their Profession, Three Things are expedient.

First, Constant Exercising them in the handling of their Arms, which ought to
be the repeated Work of every Day, and never intermitted at all. And this is so
essential to the very Being of an Army, that the Latin Tongue calls it by a
Name which signifies Exercise. Exercitus
Now this is properly instructing them how to handle their Arms, and be expert
in the use of them upon all occasions; to prepare for, and by just degrees
advance to Action; to shoot and draw regularly upon their Enemy; to make the
best of any defensive Weapons they are provided with for themselves; to show
them distinctly every thing that is likely to happen in the midst of an
Engagement; to bring them acquainted with Trials of that kind; and train them
as in form and heat of Battle: And lastly, to propose Rewards and Honor for
Them that excel, and are most dextrous; by that means to quicken their
Diligence, and warm their Ambition.

Secondly, Hard Labor, which is of great benefit for inuring them to Pain, and
Toil, and Sweat, and Dust: For Exercitus Labor prosicit, Otio conseneseit.
An Army improves and grows m^^e vigorous by Labor, but languishes and decays
by Sloth and want of Employment. It also does good Service toward the Security
of the Army, the Fortisying of their Camp, and Dispatch of Intrenchments. And
therefore they should be taught to break Ground, and cast up well; to plant
regular Pallisadoes, to raise stout Barricadoes; to run, and setch, and carry
heavy Burdens; for all these things are highly necessary, both to cover their
own Lines, and defend themselves; and likewise for the pressing upon, and
enclosing an Enemy.

The Third thing they are to be instructed in, and accustomed to, is exact
Order; which as it is of infinite use, so is it likewise of different sorts,
according to the different posture of Affairs, and Exigencies of War. First it
may be considered with regard to the ranging and distributing the Troops,
cantoning them out either into Battalions, or Regiments, or Standards, or
Companies. Secondly, In the Disposition of the Camp; that due Distances and
Proportions be observed in the several Quarters; that its Avenues, Outlets, and
Lodgments be conveniently ordered for Horse and Foot; so that it shall be easy
for every one to sind his own Quarters, and proper Post. Thirdly, In Motions
and Marches, whether only from Place to Place through the Country, or to front an
Enemy; and here they are to be taught to keep their Ranks, to move equally, and
at just Distances from each other, so as neither to go loose and too far off,
nor too close and crowded together. All this Order is highly necessary, and is
of great use in several respects. It adds much to the Beauty of an Army; is
entertaining and mavelous delightful to all that see and observe it; it
cheers our Friends, and animates them strangely; confounds our Enemies,
emboldens and inspires the Soldiers themselves with Security, and exceedingly
sacilitates all their Motions; and the obeying any Orders that shall be given
by their Generals. For by this means the Word is no sooner given, but, without
any Noise or Confusion in the World, it is conveyed from one to another, and
the meanest most private Man presently understands the Mind of his supreme
Officer. Imperium Ducis simul omnes Copiae sentiunt: and ad nutum regentis sine
tumultu respondent.
All the Forces receive their Leader's Command at once, and in an instant with
all the Order and Composedness imaginable attend and execute the least
Significations of his Pleasine. In a word, When Orders are well observed, they
almost make an Army invincible. And on the other hand, a great many Instances
have happened, of Armies much superior in Number and Strength, and all other
Advantages, which have been entirely routed, and cut to pieces, merely for want
of Discipline, and knowing how to transmit, and obey Orders readily.

Ma^mers.
and for the most part are scandalously dissolute and extravagant, and to the
Reformation of which a Camp brings greater Obstructions, than any other Place
or Condition of Humane Life: Assidue dimicantibus difficile Morum custodire
mensuram.
It is not easy for Men that are engaged every Day in Blows and Blood, to keep
a just Temper, and strict Virtue. But yet how difficult soever the bringing
them to this be, it is necessary to be attempted, and ought to be taken Pains
in; and especially all possible diligence must be used to establish Three
Virtues among them.

The First is Continence, in the larger and more comprehensive sense of the
Word, as it is opposed to Excesses and Sensualities of all sorts; Gluttony,
Drunkenness, Debauchery with Women, and every other kind of Pleasure, that is
lewd and scandalous: All which are most unfit for Men of this Profession;
because such Practices do so manifestly debase the Courage, and enfeeble both
the Body and Mind of the Soldier. Degenerat a Robore ac virtute Miles
assuetudine Voluptatum.
For Men of Arms (says Tacitus) presently degenerate from their primitive
Vigor, and grow soft and tame, by abandoning themselves to Pleasure. And
Hannibal stands upon Record a scandalous Monument of a General, whom one
Winter's Luxury perfectly melted down into Effeminacy, and made that great Man,
who conquered all before him, and was invincible by Arms, a Captive and
Conquest to his own Vices.

A Second necessary Virtue is Modesty. In Conversation first, and Words; free
from Vanity and Boasting, and big blustering Talk. For Courage exercises the
Hands, and not the Tongue; and seeks its Praise, not from fine Speeches, but
brave Actions. Viri nati Militiae Factis magni, ad Verborum Linguaeque
certamina rudes. Diserimen ipsum certaminis differt. Viri fortes in opere
acres, ante id placidi Verbis, Lingua feroces. Plin.
Men that are disposed for War are great in Deeds, but unskilled in Disputes of
Words; For indeed these Engagements are of very different kinds: A Stout and
truly Brave Man is not forward to come to Action, but eager and violent in
Action; calm and composed till he come to it. On the other Hand, your great
Talkers are good for nothing, and are only valiant in Words, as one has very
truly represented them. Now the Tongue is the Instrument of Counsels, as the
Hand is of Action. But then there is a Modesty in Deeds and Behavior too, by
which I mean a ready and entire Obedience, without any trifling, or delaying,
or disputing the Commands of his Superiors, and pretending to be wiser than
They. For Hoec sunt bonae Militiae, Velle, Vereri, Obedire.
These, (says one) are the Properties of good Soldiers, to be ready and
willing, respectful and obedient.

The Third Virtue is Abstinence: By which Soldiers would learn Honesty and
Contentedness, and keep their Hands clean from all manner of Rapine and
Violence; and not (as too frequently happens) turn Robbers and common Ravagers,
and make every thing a Prey that comes within their reach. This in short is the
Substance of Military Discipline, to which a General must give Force and
Authority, by Largesses and Rewards bountifully scattered among those that are
tractable and valiant, and deserving; and by severe and exemplary Punishments
inflicted upon the Refractory, and Idle, and Negligent. For Indulgence in an
Army is the Ruin of the Soldiery.

Of the Commanders.
and therefore the little I shall add more Concerns the Officers; who are of so
great Consequence, that their Soldiers can do nothing without them. For it is
then no longer an Army but a Rabble; a Body without a Soul; a Ship with Sails
indeed to move, but no Helm to steer, no Pilot to direct it. Of These there are
two sorts. The General, who is the Supreme, and then the Subalterns; such as
Lieutenant, and Major-Generals, Brigadiers, Colonels, and so down. But the
General is All in All; and He can be but One, upon Peril of Confusion, and
losing All. Hence it is, that we commonly say, an Army is considerable in
proportion as the General is so; Plus in Duce repones, quam in Exercitu. Tacit.
That he is worth all the rest: more account to be made, more depending upon
him; more Hope or more Distrust and Fear upon his Account, than the whole Body
under his Direction. Now this General is either the Prince in Person, or some
Person of Eminence for Prowess and Conduct, chosen and commissioned by him. The
Presence of the Prince himself is of mighty Moment and Efficacy toward the
obtaining a Victory; for it provokes the Emulation, and inflames the Courage of
his Subjects; and indeed, when the Preservation of the Government, or any part
of his Dominions, is the Occasion of the War, his Personal Appearance seems
highly expedient and necessary. In Disputes of less Consequence it may well
enough be dispensed with: For so Tacitus advises, That Dubiis Praeliorum
exemptus, summae Rerum and Imperii seipsum reservet. Tacit.
Monarchs would not ordinarily expose their Persons to the common Hazards of
War; but reserve themselves for the more important Concerns of the Government;
and stay till Extremity calls them into the Field.

But be the General who, or of what Character he will, a good one he cannot be,
without the following Qualifications. First, Knowledge and Experience in the
Art of War; one that has seen and felt the different Events of War; Secundarum
ambiguarumque rerum sciens, eoque inter^^^s. Tacit.
acquainted with Conquest and Defeat, the Successes and the doubtful Chances of
the Field; and neither to be exalted with the One, nor dejected and dispirited
with the Other. Secondly, Caution and provident Care; and consequently a Man of
sound substantial Sense, cool and strong Thought, weighed and steady
Resolution, free from Heat, and Rashness, and eager Haste; which is not only an
Argument of Folly, but the Cause of infinite Misfortunes, and irreparable
Calamities. For False Steps in War are hard to be recovered; and a Man may not
have the Non licet in Bello bis peccare -- Ducem opertet potius Re^^ (...) qu^m
Perspicere.
opportunity of playing the Fool twice. For which reason we commonly say a
General should rather look behind him than before him; and be more s^llicitous
to sccme what he has already, than eager of getting more to it, at the hazard
of the whole. A Third is Vigilance and Activity, winning upon the Soldiers by
imposing Labor and Hardship upon himself, and by his own Example going before,
and leading them on to every thing he would have Them do. A Fourth is good
Success. Men indeed are not, cannot be fortunate, as they please; This is a
peculiar and immediate Gift of Heaven; but yet the Divine Providence does
usually give Success to probable Means and Endeavors; and where the Three
former good Qualities meet, this very seldom wanting to crown them. In the mean
while, it ought not to seem strange, that I give This a place here among the
other Accomplishments; though it be not so directly within a Man's own Power to
acquire it. For every Body knows what prodigious Effects the Persuasion of a
lucky Commander produces; and how much more bold, and daring, and assured those
Men are, who have a Confidence in the Fortune of their General, and fight under
one who has been accustomed to conquer.

Advice for Action.
which relate to necessary Provision of Ammunition and Men; we will proceed to
the Rules and Directions proper to be observed in the making use of both these.
This Third Point is of infinite Consequence; and the only thing that can render
either of the former so; for Strength and Numbers, Arms and Men, are but empty
and imaginary Things without it. There must be Art and Address, and not only
Instruments, but Skill to work with them. For Plura Consilio quam Vi
perficiuntur.
Counsel and Wisdom atchieves more and greater Explelli than Force. But it must
be confessed, Consilium in Atena.
that to lay down such Rules as shall be standing, and eternally suitable to
every Case and Circumstance, is absolutely impossible, Because These depend
upon a vast variety of Accidents and Occurrences; all which must be taken into
consideration; and the Person will be obliged to comply with, and accommodate
himself to them. And upon this Account it was ingeniously observed. That Men
did not so properly guide their Affairs by Counsels, as their Affairs guide and
determine the (...). That a Man must make War by his Eye; that is, the must
deserve and act upon Discretion; and the wisest (...) that over sat, cannot be
so proper Judges at a (...), of what is to be done, as He who sees, and must
take his Measures upon the Spot. For there are a Thousand, unforeseen (...)
gen^ies, which change the whole Scene, (...) put a new su^^rizing Face upon the
Matter (...) require, that a^ Man should steer a (...) and govern himself
accordingly. But (...) not be so particular, and full, but (...) Reserves must
be made for discretionary Proce(...), yet there are some Methods so general,
and so fix, (...) up Man can be mistaken in observing them; nor can any
con^^^erate Author, who treats of this Subject, overlook them. Some few of
these I shall briefly represent to my Reader here, and leave it to him from his
own Observation or Experience, to add more, as he shall see occasion. Now of
these there are two sorts: Some of constant use throughout the whole Course of
the War: Others accidental and occasional only, as Times, or Places, or other
Circumstances shall happen to make them seasonable. I begin with the Former
sort.



Fama bella constant, fama bellum conficit, in spem metumve impellit animos.
Common Fame begins, continues, ends Wars; exalts Men's Minds with assured
Hopes, dejects them with pannick Fears. They fight as the News goes; and many a
Field has been lost and won, by virtue of a current Rumor; which, though so
powerful in its Effects, had yet perhaps little or no Foundation to, stand upon
it self. This last Advice chiefly regards a Man as yet unsettled in his
Measures: But when the Scheme is laid, and he is not only determined so much as
in those Circumstances one can, but has entered upon his Designs.



him to Negligence, and Thoughtlessness, and Sloth. Now This is the most
dangerous and destructive Condition that a State of War is capable of. For
whoever despises his Enemy, does most cerrainly expose and betray himself; and
give that so despised Enemy an Advantage, which is no other Consideration did,
would singly render him extremely formidable. Frequentissimum initum
Calamitatis, Securitas. Nemo celerius opprimitur, quam qui non timet. Nil tuto
in host despicitur. Quem spreveris, valentiorem negligentia facies.
Security is usually the Forerunner and Occasion of great Distress. No Body is
so quickly defeated, as the Man that is under no Apprehensions of Danger.
Nothing in an Enemy can be despised with safety; for even that Carelessness,
which naturally springs from Contempt, gives him more power to do you Mischief.
These Reflections are true in their most general Sense; but in War nothing
ought to be despised; because There nothing is, or can be frivolous enough to
justify or deserve it; for it, often happens, that what we look upon to be
very small and inconsiderable in it self, is yet fruitful in great variety of
Consequences, and even prodigous Effects. Seepe parvis momentis magni casus; ut
nil timendi, sic nihil contemnendi.
Small Motions are often followed by monstrous Events; and therefore as nothing
of this kind ought to perplex us with anxious Fears of it, so neither ought any
thing to lull us asleep with the slight of it, as not worth our Notice and Care.

Hannibal's peculiar Excellence.

As for Engagement and Action it self, For Battles
the Persons against whom, the Manner how, a Man engages. Otherwise it may be
as unsuccessful as it is an ill-advis'd Attempt. A Battle ought never to be
hazarded, but upon great Deliberation, and very pressing Reasons to persuade
it. Any other Method less hazardous is rather to be chosen; He should try to
break and tire out his Enemy; to harrass him with long Marches; to batter him
with tedious Encampments; with incommodious Places; with want of Provision, and
other Conveniences. In short; To beat him any other way, rather than by Dint of
Sword. Incerti Fxitus pugnarum. Mars communis, qui saep^ spoliantem and jam
exultantem evertit, and perculit ab abjecto.
For the Chance of War is extremely dangerous and uncertain: One Moment turns
the Scales, routs and overthrows the Victorious in the midst of Joy and
Plunder, and carries the just-before beaten and despairing, triumphant out of
the Field.

The Time.
except it be very seldom: That is to say, when absolute necessity compels, or
some great Occasion persuades him to it. The Cases of Necessity are such as
these; when you feel Difficulties grow upon you daily; when you are reduced to
want of Provision; when Money runs low, and no Supplies can be had; when your
Soldiers grow discontented, and desert apace. In such Circumstances there is no
subsisting long; and therefore A desperate Disease must have a desperate Cure;
for you can but perish either way. For the Occasions which may render it
advisable, I reckon the manifest Odds of Strength on your side, either in
Numbers, or in other Qualifications superior to the Enemy; when Victory seems
to invite, and stretch out her hand on purpose to be received and embraced;
when the Enemy is at present considerably weakened by some Detachment, or
otherwise; or not yet fully joined; but expects in a very short time to be
completed or reinforced, and will then bid you Battle: When you have it in
your Power to surpr^^^ them, and they imagine that you are at a Distance, and
incapable of reaching them; When he is harassed, or taking Refreshment: When he
is divided, and Parties out Petrolling, or upon Booty; busy in Victualling
their Camp, or their Horses forced to be Stabl'd up at a distance; and feed
upon dry Meat, for want of Forage near their Camp.

Place.
this being of very great Importance in Action. One may venture to say in
general, That it is by no means prudent to wait for the Enemy in your own
Country; his Entrance thither should, if possible, be prevented; and you ought
either to advance and meet him, so as to make his Territories the Seat of War;
or else to secure your own Passes, and stop him at his approach. But if he have
already vanquished that Difficulty, and got Footing; it is by no means
advisable to run the Risque of a Battle, except you have another Army in
reserve to sustain and recruit you speedily. For this would be to play a
desperate Game, and to stake All upon one single Throw. But when Matters draw
toward an Engagement, the Ground ought to be well viewed, and prudently chosen;
and as you find it for your own, or your Enemies Convenience, you must manage
your self accordingly: For the Ground it self is a very great, and sometimes
almost an insuperable Advantage. Now a plain open Country is most convenient
for the Horse, because this gives them Room to wheel and Scour in; but your
narrow Defiles, and Places full of Boggs, Morasses, Ditches and Trees, are most
Favorable to the Foot, because These give no Opportunity to the Cavalry to
break in and Flank them.

Persons.
and never venture a Battle with an Enemy stronger than himself. Now, this
Strength is not always to be measured by Numbers; but by the Courage and
Resolution of the Men. And nothing makes Men so Valiant as Necessity; because
this is almost an invincible Enemy; and therefore the Stress of it awakens all
our Powers to make Opposition. Upon this Account it is a good Rule, never to
fight with Men reduced to desperate Circumstances, but rather to put an
Opportunity into their Hands of being upon better Terms with you. And this
agrees exactly with the Counsel given in the former Paragraph, of not Hazarding
an Engagement in one's own Country; because the Enemy must then be forced to
make a Desperate and Bloody Business of it; as being sensible, that if he
happen to be worsted, there is no avoiding of utter Ruin. No Fort to protect,
no Retreat to receive, no fresh Succors to relieve and sustain them, and so
nothing in Prospect but certain Victory, or certain Death. Unde necessitas in
loco, spes in virtute, s^lus ex Victoria.


As for the Manner of engaging, XI. Manner.
That is certainly the best, which is most Advantageous, and likely to succeed;
whether Surprise, or Stratagem, or making a Feint; pretending to retreat for
Fear, to draw the Enemy out of a good Post, or into an Ambuscade, and take them
in a Trap. Thus Spe Victory inducere, ut vincatur.
the Expectation of Victory is the very Instrument made use of to work their
Overthrow; Watching all their Motions narrowly, taking Advantages of every
false Step; and charging them when and where they are least in a Condition to
receive the Attack.

Formed Battles.
these following things are very expedient. The First and indeed the Principal,
is a regular Disposition of one's Men, and Marshalling every part of the Army
in their proper Place and Order. A Reinforcement, Secondly, constantly ready;
so near at Hand, that they may pour in upon the least notice; and yet so much
under Covert, that the Enemy may not discern, or be at all aware of any such
Thing, 'till they are actually upon them. And though this Reserve be not very
considerable in it self, yet the Effects of it will be so; for in a Hurry there
is nothing so Ridiculous or despicable, but it is able to create or increase
our Confusion. And Pumi in omnious P^^his vincuntur Oculi and Aures
in all Engagements, the Conquest is first gained upon the Eyes and Ears; for
when once their Senses are struck, and make a Report full of Terror, the Heart
falls, the Hands grow faint and seeble, and all is our own. A Third useful
Direction is, To be first in the Field, and stand ready in Form of Battle. This
gains time, and gives a Commander Leisure to do what he sees fit, with
Deliberation and Ease; it likewise animates our own Men, and discourages the
Enemy, who measure our Assurance by out Forwardness. Besides, This is to make
our selves the Aggressors, and the First Blow is commonly given with more
Spirit and Resolution, than it is received. A Fourth Expedient is, a Becoming,
Bold, Brave, and resolute Aspect in the General and the rest of the Commanders;
when their Countenances do not only speak their own Courage, but inspire and
animate those that want it. The Fifth and Last, is a seasonable and pertinent
Exhortation to the Soldiers; encouraging them to do well, representing to them,
the Glory, the Advantages, nay, the Safety of behaving themselves Gallantly;
That Infamy and Reproach, Danger and Death, are the certain Portion and Fate of
Cowards. For Minus Timoris, minus Periculi; audaciam pro muro esse; Effugere
mortem, qui eam contemnit.
the less Fear, the less Danger always: Courage is its own Defense; and the
readiest way to escape Death, is boldly to face, and generously to despise it.
He that runs, hastens to his own Destruction; and for one that falls in the
Heart of Action, there are Ten cut to Pieces in the Flight.

In the Action it self.
the General is to observe on which side the Advantage inclines; and if he find
his own Party give Ground, he is then to act the Part of a Firm Undaunted Mind;
to do all that can be expected from a Resolure Officer, and a Gallant Soldier.
To rally them again; lead them on in Person; bring them out of their Confusion;
stop them in their Retreat; throw himself into the midst of them; hearten and
encourage them to a Second Shock, by all manner of means; and in his whole
Behavior to give evident Demonstration, both to the Enemy and his own
Soldiers, of his own Bravery, and Presence of Mind; that his Head, his Hands,
his Tongue are free from Fear and Confusion, and serve him for proper Orders,
and vigorous Action, with all Imaginable Readiness, and Address.

If his own Side be Superior, and the Fortune of the Field rest there, his
Duty is to repress, and Check their Eagerness; to prevent their Scartering and
Disorder, by too fierce and obstinate a Pursuit. For in this Case, he ought to
be Apprehensive of a Turn, which has often happened; that the vanquished may
take Heart again when they feel themselves hard pressed; and by making a
desperate Push, rally upon, and rout their Conquerors. For Necessity is a
furious Mistress, and puts Men upon very violent Methods. Clausis ex
desperatione crescit Audacia; and cum Spei nihil est, sumit arma Formido.
When Men are surrounded with Death, Despair emboldens them; and after Hope is
lost, Cowards turn Stout, and Fear it self takes up Arms. Rather therefore let
him open a Passage, and facilitate their Flight; but least of all must he
sufter his Men to fall upon the Booty, and while they are employed in rifling,
and all in Disorder, endanger the being made a Prey themselves. Victory, when
obtained, must be used with Moderation and Prudence; for Victory it self is not
always Safe; if it be stained with Barbarity and brutish Usage, and put the
Enemy out of all Hope, it may turn to very ill Account, and add to our Danger.
For Ignaviam Necessitas acuit; s^epe Desperatio spei causa est. Gravissimi sunt
morsus irritatae necessitatis.
Necessity and Ill Treatment give an edge to the dullest Soul; even Despair
sometimes produces Hope; and no Bite is so Keen, as That, when Extremity is
provoked and makes her Teeth meet. On the other Hand, as it is more Humane, so
it is really more Advisable and Safe, to use beaten Foe gently; to leave Room
for Hope, and encourage Overtures of Peace; not to ravage his Country, nor make
Havoc and Desolation, wheresoever we come. For Rage and Fury are very sierce
and dangerous wild Beasts; and therefore we should take care not to let them
loose. A Wise General will likewise behave himself with Temper and Modesty,
upon his Successes; for Insolence is most unbecoming a Man conversant in War;
most absurd in one, who cannot but have been upon that Account acquainted with
the Inconstancy of Fortune; and ought to remember its Ebbings and Flowings, how
quickly it rolls over to another Shore; how strange those Revolutions are, by
which Prosperity sometimes takes its Rise out of extreme Adversity; and on the
Contrary final Ruin begins at Great, Good Fortune. That some Men are drowned
with Two Foot of Water, and lost when they esteem themselves most safe. That
more die of Surfeits, than of Hunger; and some have Magnam Felicitatem
concoquere non possunt. Fortuna vitrea est, tunc cum splendet, frangitur. O
infidam Fiduciam^ and saepe Victor victus.
not Stomachs strong enough to digest a plentiful Meal of Happiness. That
Fortune is Perfect Glass, and aptest to be broken when it is clearest and
finest. And therefore all Confidence in it is Faithless and Unsafe; and the
Conqueror frequently taken Captive in the midst of Security and Triumph.

If you are beaten, it is an Instance of Wisdom to know it; to examine well
your Circumstances, and consider what your Loss is. And never think to stifle
your Misfortune, or Fancy, that This is nothing, All will be well again, and no
body know it; for such Hopes are trifling and vain; and the Contrivance of
suppressing the News of your Defeat is Childish and Ridiculous. It Is only to
commit the carrying of it to uncertain Rumors, which represent nothing truly,
and will make the Matter Ten times worse. You must therefore apply your self to
a full and serious Consideration of the Case; for how will you ever be able to
find out a Cure, if you do not first search to the bottom of your Disease?
After this, It will become his Courage to entertain better Hopes, to refresh
his Forces with all imaginable Diligence; to call in fresh Succors, and make
new Levies; and put good sufficient Garrisons into all his Places of Strength.
And after all, if Providence be still contrary, as indeed sometimes it is so
far from seeing fit to prosper, that one would almost imagine it perfectly sets
it self against the justest Arms, and most commendable Undertakings, there is
always one Remedy left; for no Man can be denied the Privilege of lying down in
the Bed of Honor: And sure a Decent and Reputable Death is much rather to be
chosen, than a Life of Contempt and Reproach.

Virgil's will by no Means go down with them. Dolus, an Virtus quis in host
requirat?
Courage and Cunning both, the Laurels claim,
A Foe is Priviledg'd; that very Name
Protects Deceit and Stratagem from Shame.
We find Alexander the Great so exceeding nice in this Punctilio, that he would
not so much as take the Advantage of a dark Night, but declared, he scorned a
stolen Victory. Malo me Fortunae pigeat, quam Victoriae pudeat.
I had rather have occasion to be sorry for my ill Fortune, than to be ashamed
for my good Success. Of the same generous Temper were the old Romans; They sent
back the Schoolmaster of the Falisci, who proffered to betray them; and the
Treacherous Physician to Pyrrhus, who was ready to poison him. They always
pretended to Virtue and downright Honesty, dealt fairly and above-board,
disclaimed and discountenanced all their own Countrymen, who gave themselves a
Liberty of doing otherwise; reproached the Greeks and Africans with breach of
Faith; and turned their Craft and Cunning into a Taunt and a Proverb. Quae
salva Fide and Dignitate paratur.
They made it a Principle, That those only are Conquests indeed, which are
gained by Dint of Courage, by honest and just Methods, and such as cast no
Blemish upon the Conqueror's Honor: But as for those which are the Acquisition
of Subtlety and Stratagem, they are neither generous, nor reputable, nor safe,
nor lasting. For those who are beaten upon these Terms, do not look upon
themselves to be fairly vanquished; and the effect of that is what the
Historian observes: Non Virtute, sed Occasion and Art Ducis se victos rati:
Ergo non Fraud, and Occultis, sed palam and armatum Hosts suos ulcisci.
They impute their Defeat to a Chance, to the Subtlety of the General, who took
his Advantage, and dealt indirectly: And this they do not think a Victory, but
a Trick and a Cheat. And again, He scorned to revenge himself by foul play and
Surprise, but took up Arms fairly, and came into the Field openly, and carved
out his Vengeance with his Sword.

Now these Reflections, I must own, are very just, but then they must not be
extended too far. There are indeed Two Cases, wherein such Rules are
obligatory; That I mean of Personal Quatrels, and Disputes between private Men;
and that of National Controversies too, where the Matter in question concerns
some former Engagements, or when there have been mutual Alliances and Compacts
treated formerly between them. But where neither of these is the Case; that is
to say, in a formal and direct War, and where no Faith has been given, and
consequently none can be broken, it is allowable to humble and defeat an Enemy
any manner of Way: For the proclaiming of War is like passing Sentence of
Death; all against whom it is denounced, lie under Condemnation; and if that
Sentence were just, it will be lawful to exterminate and bring them to
Execution, by the snatching every Opportunity and Advantage of doing it. This
agrees with the Notion of very brave and deservedly renowned Generals, who have
been so far from disdaining or condemning a Victory obtained by Subtlery and
secret Stratagem, that they make no Scruple, even of preferring it before those
that are acquired by Dint of Blows, and open Force. And accordingly they made
Distinctions in their Sacrifices of Thanks upon these Occasions; ordering the
most valuable, an Ox, to be offered up for the former sort; whereas a Cock was
esteemed Acknowledgment sufficient, and more suitable to the Advantage of the
Latter. Nor is it Their Opinion only, but even the great Christian Doctor, St.
Augustine, thought it no way disagreeable to the Strictness even of Our
Religion, to give this Determination of the Matter. Cum justum bellum
suscipitur, ut aperte pugnet quis, aut ex insidiis, nihil ad justitiam interest.
When a righteous War is begun, whether Men fight by open Force, and formal
Engagements, or by Subtlety and Stratagem, and secret Ambuscade, it makes no
difference in the Justice of the Proceeding. And indeed a State of War in the
very Nature of the Thing has some Privileges reasonably allowed to it, even
against what Reason in other Matters would think necessary or allowable. And
surely in Time and Place convenient, a Man is not bound to refuse any Occasion;
for why should it not be counted as fair to take the Advantage of an Enemies
Indiscretion and Folly; as it is to make the best of their Weakness, or their
Cowardice? And yet no Man, that I know of, ever pretended, that it was
unbecoming a General to attack his Enemy, except both their Courage, or their
Numbers were in all Points a Match, and equal to his own.

The Third Head. Putting an End to the War.
to the Third Head of this Subject, which concerns Conduct in Military Matters;
which, as it is the Shortest, so is it likewise the Joyfulest and most
Desirable of all the rest; Putting an End, I mean, to the War by Peace. Peace!
There is Music in the very Sound, Delight and Advantage in the thing; it is
Beautiful and Charming in any Dress, and infinitely Profitable for all Parties,
both the Victors, and Vanquished.

-- Pax optima rerum, Quas homini novisse datum est; Pax una Triumphis
Innumeris potior --
The sweetest Bliss that ever indulgent Heaven.
To smooth the Storms of Humane Life has given.
Repeated Pomps and Trophies of the Field,
To the soft Triumphs of One Treaty yield:
Those Laurels full of Blood and Blemish are;
He only conquers, who concludes the War.
But the Advantages I confess, though universal, are not distributed in equal
Proportions; the Losers, by the War have by much the greater and more sensible
Share of them. And these, who are supposed to be enfeebled and reduced, must be
advised, to keep themselves still in a posture of Defense, and preserve an Air
at least and outward Appearance of Resolution, and Courage still unbroken, and
Hope of a more favorable Change of Affairs: For (as has been said before) He
that is desirous of Peace in good Earnest must be always ready for War; and
That Observation is most true, That the Best and Happiest Agreements are made
in the Field, and treated with Sword in Hand. But though Peace be never so
desirable and convenient for our present Circumstances, yet even a good thing
may be bought too dear. We must not therefore be so immoderately Fond of it, as
not to take Care, that it be Honorable, and upon fair and Reasonable Terms;
For if this be not rightly adjusted, however that common Notion may prevail of
a counterfeit and base Peace being better than a just and Creditable War; yet a
Prince had better preserve his Liberty at the Price of his Life, and hazard all
gloriously, than submit himself and his People to vile reproachful Terms, and
live in Slavery and Infamy. A Peace then should not be patched up for a present
Turn, and to Skin over a Sore; but it should be free and fair, without Trick,
or Design, or deceitful Reservations; such as may entirely end the War, and not
only suspend Acts of Hostility for a while, and so protract, and kindle War
afresh. For Pac^ suspecta tutius Bellum.
Downright War is better than a suspected Peace. But, all This notwithstanding,
when Matters are brought to an Extremity, a Man must comply whether he will or
no, and make the best Terms he can. When the Pilot sees himself ready to be
Shipwrackt, he lightens the Ship, and is content to save his Life with the Loss
of his Lading; and thus it often happens, that the throwing all overboard in
the Case before us; insisting upon no Demands, but committing our selves
entirely to the Mercy of the Conqueror, succeeds very happily. For Victores qui
sunt alto animo, secundae res in miserationem ex (...) ^ertunt.
Prosperity has a softening Influence upon generous Adversaries, and they feel
their Anger melted into Pity; and the more they have it in their Power, the
less Inclination they find to take a Revenge.

The Prosperous and Triumphant must give me leave to advise them, that they
would not be over-nice, and difficult to grant a Peace; for, though perhaps the
vanquished get abundantly more by it than the Victors, yet still even These get
a great deal. For, supposing the best Fortune, and the easiest Terms the thing
will admit, yet the carrying on of a War cannot but be a Matter of infinite
Trouble and Inconvenience. And Lycurgus had another Consideration, for which he
thought it always inexpedient to be often at War with one and the same Enemy,
because this is training him up, as it were, and teaching him the Trade, till
at last he grow as expert as his Masters; and learn not only to defend himself,
but to attack us. The Teeth of Beasts in the Agonies of Death are exceeding
venomous, and the Wounds made by them then, commonly prove mortal. ^ractis
rebus violentior ultima virtus.
Valor's last Efforts bold and dangerous are,
And double Fury rages in Despair.


And besides, the Contingencies of War are more than can possibly be foreseen;
they are intricate, and dark, and the Issue always uncertain. One unlucky
Action may blast all that went before; and therefore ^^^lior tutiorque Pax
sperata Victoria. Illa in Tu^, Haec in Deorum mannuest.
A good Peace, which secures All, is much safer and more eligible, than an
absolute Victory at distance, and in reversion only; because That is in the
disposal of Providence, and may never be yours; but this in your own hand, and
you have it actually in possession. So great a difference ought we to make
between Things Present, and those that are Future, and but in Prospect; if no
other Argument concurs'd to balance our Choice. But it deserves to be remembered
further, that the Sting lies usually in the Tail; That Fortune is always
floating and inconstant; and the longer she has favored us already, the
greater reason we have to apprehend, that she will be shifting shortly. And
Nemo se tuto diu (...) potest.
No Man can with safety to himself tempt dangers, which must thicken upon him
every day.

But, besides the making a saving Game while we may, we should do well to
reflect, how honorable a way of proceeding this is. For when all is our own,
and our Enemy lies at Mercy, then to hearken to Proposals, and readily accept a
Peace, is truly Great and Glorious. This shows those Pretenses to be true,
which all Princes affect to make, that we are desirous to end the War, and
fight only for the sake of Peace. And on the other side, The refusing good
Terms, and suffering any Change of Fortune afterward, makes one fall unpitied,
and exposes him to the Scorn and Indignation of all Mankind. They tell you.
That such a one is a Sacrifice to his own Vanity and Ambition. He disdained
Peace, and grasped at Honor; and by refusing one when he might have had it, he
has now lost both. But, when we are so disposed to grant a Peace, we should be
liberal in our Concessions, and give large and liberal Conditions, that so it
may be firm and lasting. For if it be rigorous and hard, we must expect, that
those who are oppressed by us, will be sure to revolt, and break loose from their
Covenants, as soon as ever they find it feasible and convenient. So says Livy
in one of his Treaties, Pacem, si bonam (...); si (...) haud diuturnam.
If you grant a good Peace, it will be durable and firm; but if the Terms be
harsh, this can never bind so fast, but that the first. Opportunity of mending
their Circumstances, will be sure to break thorough it. And it is an Argument
of a great Soul, to be flexible and indulgent, and yielding to an Enemy, when
he sues for Pity; as it is to be invincible, and keep one's Ground when he
engages you in the Field. The Ancient Romans we find have set an excellent
Pattern of this kind, and the good Account it turned to with Them, is a
sufficient Reason to recommend it to (...) Imitation of (...) Posterity.

CHAP. IV. The Preface.
HAving dispatched, as you see, the several Directions necessary for that part
of Civil Prudence, which is designed to guide a Prince in the Administration of
the Government, and the maintaining that Character which is altogether Public:
I design in the next place to allow that Prudence, which is personal, a
distinct Consideration: That, I mean, which is necessary for the preserving
himself under, or for applying proper Remedies to, the Difficulties, and
Dangers, and Calamities that may happen. And this is the fitter to be spoken to
apart, and by it self, because both the Rules themselves, and the Occasions
which require the Practice of them, are agreeable to the Circumstances of all
Conditions of Men, and suit both Prince and Subject; both them, in Public, and
those in Private Capacities.

Now the First thing to be done upon this Occasion, is the obser^ing and
distinguishing duly that great Variety of Business and Contingenties, which
this Subject will engage us in the Consideration of: For they may be either
Public or Pri^^^. They may be Future, and such as threaten ^s at some ^^^ance;
or they may be actual Hardships, and such as we lab^^ under at presons. They
may be ^^^^cate and Uncertain; or they may be ovi^^^^ Dangerous and Difficult;
and of great Concern to is too, (...) of the Violence of the Pressure they put
us under. And again, Those that are of the highest Consequence, and are (...)
and encumbred with most perp^^xing Difficult (...) Secret and Con^^^l'd, or
Vist^^ and Open. Of the (...) Sort (...) may ^^kon T^^^ Close Conspiracies
against the (...) and lift of the Prince, or against the Government in general,
Or Treathery against any (...) or, Town, (...), or some particuliar Body (...)
The (...) such as are Manifest and Open, are (...) sor^ For either they want
the Formalities of War, (...) ^^^tumultuous and disorderly; as Popular
Commotions, (...) Insurrections upon some slight Occasion of Offense; (...) and
(...) into by some Subjects against the (...) and the (...) in these may be
Numerous or Few, Great or (...) Seditions or Mutinies against the Prince or the
(...) the Authority, and (...) self: Or else they are (...) go by the (...) and
be of as many (...) which are indeed (...) and imperfect (...) of such (...)
full Growth by (...) every (...) these, (...) and to (...) to Men's (...) be
(...) (...) Those of the first (...) those of (...) (...) filent (...) about
him, without ever (...) Blow. The Former of (...) govern and order the (...)
Himself. The Former is the brisker Man, and plays a bolder; but the Latter is
the surer, and plays a more saving Game. The Former is always in deep Anxiety
and Suspense, agitated and toffed between Hope and Fear; the Latter puts
himself under Covert, lies down upon the Ground, and satisfies himself with the
Comfort that he can fall no lower. The Former takes pains to escape the
Calamity; the Latter labors to endure and get through it; and it very often
happens, That This Man has the better Bargain of it, and comes off with less
Trouble and Loss We know Men are often at more Expense to defend their Title by
Law, than the whole thing they contend for is worth: And thus it is very often
in other Matters. The cheapest Course they can take is to fit down by the Loss;
and many an Affliction is born with more Ease to the Sufferer, than it can be
either avoided or struggled with. The Covetous Wretch is a greater torment to
himself, than He that is really Poor; and the Jealous Husband feels more
uneasiness, though his Jealousy be groundless and undeserved, than the Cuckold
who has been actually dishonored, but either knows it not, or regards it not.
The peculiar Virtue of the Former, and that which is most necessary for his
Circumstances is Prudence; for His is active Valor; That of the Latter is
Temper, and Constancy, and Patience; for his part is purely passive. But
indeed, why should a Man be confined to either of these singly? Wherefore
should he not use and try both, in their Order and proper Season? For methinks
Prudence and Vigilance should be the first Attempt; and when these are found
insufficient, then is the time for changing our Measures, and Patience should
succeed in their Place. Thus much at least is certain and undoubted, that in
all Public Contingencies the Methods for Prevention and Remedy ought first to
be tried; Those that are in Trust and Office, and have it in their Power to
serve and promote the Common Good, are indispensably obliged to it, and ought
to stand in the Gap against all managable Difficulties and Misfortunes. In the
Case of private Persons, I confess it is otherwise; there a Man has none but
himself to answer for; and it will be agreeable to Wisdom and Duty both, to
consider the state of the Matter before him, and consult his own Abilities; and
then to make a Choice of such Methods and Management, as appear most
advantageous in the present Circumstances, and as he feels himself best
qualified for.

SECT. II. Of Evils and Difficulties actually present, and pressing.
THE proper and most effectual Course to lighten the Sufferings of Human Life,
and to sweeten the Passions under them, is by no means to set on's self in
Battle array, and enter into a formal Combat with them; for Opposition in this
Case does but blow the Coals, and render them more surious and insupportable.
The Eagerness of Debate and Contradiction does but irritate and inflame the
Sore, instead of mollifying the sharp Humor, or asswaging the Pain. And
therefore He who would consult his Ease, and the Serenity of his own Mind,
should betake himself to one of the two following Remedies.

The First is, That of diverting, and drawing them off to another Course. Thus
we preserve our Lands from Inundations, by opening Trenches, and carrying off
the Water by another Channel: And thus Physicians, when they find the Morbisick
Matter too obstinate to be purged away, try to give it a Turn, and throw it
into some other part, where the Consequence may be less dangerous to the
Patient. And This, when attempted, must be done by means as gentle, by degrees
as easy and insensible, as can possibly be. For the Application, when
prudently and dexterously made use of, is of mavelous Efficacy in all manner
of Calamities. Nor ought it to be thought odd or peculiar, since it is the
common Remedy and Practice of Mankind, not in Affliction only, but in every
other Case which is difficult or disgusting: And what I advise here, every Man
who observes nicely, will find to be the Expedient, which he naturally
prescribes to himself. This is the Art we use, to swallow down the bitterest
Morsels, and by which we feel our selves insensibly hardened to endure the
Approach of Death it self. So says the Philosopher, Abducendus Animus est ad
studia alia, curas, negotia; Loci denique mutatione, tanquam aegroti non
convalescentes, curandus est.
The Mind must be drawn off to new Objects, fresh Diversions of Pleasure, of
Business, nay even of Cares and anxious Thoughts of another kind; or, if
nothing else will do, we must treat it as they do sick People, and try if
change of Air, and another Country, will contribute any thing to the Cure.
Thus, when timorous People are to pass by some dreadful Precipice, we prevent
or lessen the Fright, by prevailing with them to shut then Eyes, or look
another way. And thus Men commonly wink, when the Executioner is to give the
Stroke: Thus we endeavor to amuse Women and Children upon letting Blood, and
though neither the Danger or the Pain be what can justify their Fears, yet the
very Sight and Approach of the Lancet is something they cannot support. And,
since all Mankind are in some measure tinctured with this Infirmity; since some
Sufferings seem to be an over-match for Human Nature; we have all the reason in
the World to think the Stratagem of Hippomenes a very proper Pattern for our
Imitation. The Story we find represented by the Poets; and it is briefly thus.
Hippomenes was to run a Race with Atalanta, a Lady of exquisite Beauty, and
celebrated Agility. The Conditions were. That if he lost the Race, he should
lose his Life; but if he won it, the Lady was to be his Prize. He distrusting
his own Swiftness of Foot upon even Terms, provided Three Golden Apples, and as
they were running, took occasion to let these fall at convenient distances one
after another; and thus by taking up her time, who stooped to gather them up,
he diverted her from the Business of the Race, and won both the Day and the
Bride into the Bargain. The Application I would make of that Fable is only
This; That if the Consideration of one Misfortune, or grievous Accident, which
we at present labor under; or if the Remembrance of any past Calamity lie
heavy upon our Minds; or if some boisterous and violent Passion ruffle and
torment us, which we our feel selves unable to subdue by downright striving;
the best Expedient will be, to shift the Scene, and bring some other Thought
upon the Stage. For when we cannot absolutely exterminate, and perfectly
compose it, there is the gaining of a Point in some measure at least, when we
can change a more dangerous Calamity for one that is less so, and banish one
Passion with another less outrageous. All this, in the mean while, is not
intended to discourage Men's entering into the Lists, and making a formal
gallant Opposition against the Evils they suffer, and the Resentments provoked
by them. But the proper Season for this Advice, is when the Enemy is too
mighty, and the Combat unequal and unsuccessful: For when Fighting will do no
good, a wise Man will try to save himself by Flight; he must dodge, and wheel,
and get out of the way of Mischief. Or, if it dog him so close, that there is
no avoiding it, he must try to soften and break the Force of it, by some fresh
Diversions, and taking Sanctuary in some Thoughts of another kind, which may
give a Turn to the Soul, and change the Current of the Imagination: Or, if they
cannot go so far as to make a perfect Exchange, yet such at least may give the
Misery some Interruption, and divide those ungrateful Idea's, which they are
too feeble either to keep down, or to root out totally, though at the Expense of
new one's planted in their room.

The Second Expedient, and that which is most advisable in Cases of great
Extremity, where the danger is so evident, and inevitable, that a Man has
nothing left him to do, but to stand the Shock, is to stoop a little under the
Blow, and give place to Necessity: For by showing a Man's self obstinate in
such a Case, and resolving not to yield in any Point, the Violence is but the
greater, and the Treatment we meet with so much the rougher; it being the
Nature of Opposition to provoke; and our Passions in such Cases, like Torrents,
which no Dams are strong enough to stemm, rage the more for being pent up, and
at last swell the higher, and bear down all before them. In such Cases
therefore, a Man must be content to see himself overruled; and whatever Rules
he has fixed to his Behavior in ordinary Circumstances, they must be dealt
with as wise Politicians do by the Laws of the Land; who, when they fall short,
and cannot do what they would have them, alter their Measures, and make them do
what they can. It has been by Many esteemed a Reproach upon Cato, and a
considerable Blemith in his Character, that he was so very stiff and nice in
the Civil Wars which happened in his Time, and rather suffered the Commonwealth
to be driven to the last Extremities, than he would contribute to its Relief at
the Expense of some I aws, which the present Necessity and Distress made it
very reasonable to have dispensed with. On the other hand, Epaminondas had so
great a regard to the Public Good, that he continued in his Office beyond the
Term prefixed, though the Law prohibited the doing so upon pain of Death; so just
a Sense had he of the End and Nature of Laws, that they are designed for the
Service and Advantage of the State, and cannot in any equitable Construction be
supposed to bind, where the Exigence of Affairs is such, that by observing the
Letter of the Law, a Man destroys the End of it. Accordingly we find this
Commendation of Philopaemon, that he was a Person born to Command: For he was
not only Master of the Art of Governing according to Law, but had the Skill of
Governing the Law it self, when any Public Necessity required that it should
be set aside; and left no other Refuge, but the Discretion of the Magistrate.
For it often happens, That Those at Helm are put out of their common Road by
some difficult and extraordinary Emergencies; and in such Cases it is their
Duty as well as Wisdom to ply to Windward, and steer what Course they can. And
indeed, in all Extremities, Private as well as Public, a Prudent Man will be
content to bend a little, to yield and comply as far as he may, and by all
honest Stratagems to save the main Chance. For in these Matters there is a
Latitude and Privilege of Relaxation allowed; some Moderation and Abatement,
which those who are unacquainted with the present Circumstances, can be no
competent Judges of. And therefore we should be very tender, how we condemn a
Proceeding, which is so far from being contrary to Reason, and Justice, that it
is highly agreeable to both; and not only so, but a Masterpiece of Prudence in
those who manage it skilfully.

SECT. III. Affairs Intricate and Uncertain.
BY this Intricacy and Uncertainty of Affairs, I understand such a Juncture as
has great Appearance of Reason, and strong Arguments on both sides; so that
the Man is at a loss, and does not discern, nor know how to choose what is best
and most convenient for him; This creates distraction and perplexity of
Thought; and till some other Consideration fall in to turn the Scale, the best
thing we can do is to consider, where there are the greatest Odds of Justice,
and Honor, and Decency; and by all means fall in with that side. For, although
the Event should prove contrary to our Expectation or Desire, yet still there
will be a secret Satisfaction, the Complacency and Testimony of our own
Breasts, to support us within; and the Reputation and Praise of Men without,
for having chosen the better, though not the more fortunate Course. Nor ought any
Miscarriage in such a Case, to provoke the least Remorse; because no Man can
tell what Providence has to do, or how that will dispose of Him and his
Endeavors; and consequently he cannot be secure that his Disappointment or his
Calamity would have been less, though he had taken quite different Measures. And
therefore, when a Man cannot resolve himself which is the easiest and the
shortest way to his Journey's End, the best Determination he can come to, is to
keep the streightest Road.

SECT. IV. Difficult and Dangerous Cases.
IT is often Men's Fate in Matters of Difficulty, to succeed as They that are
over-nice and cautious commonly do in Bargaining, and Articles of Agreement;
where an excessive Care to make all fast, and prevent all manner of Danger, is
but a means of increasing the Danger, and ruining All. For by this mighty
Circumspection, so much more Time is spent, so many mere People are employed,
so many more Clauses and Proviso's inserted; that the Differences and Squabbles
arising upon it, are multiplied in proportion to the Clutter made for avoiding
them. To all which we may add, that this is the way to provoke Fortune, who is
jealous of her Honor, and will not bear the Presumption of any Man's
pretending to exempt himself from Her Jurisdiction. Which after all is a vain
Attempt, and what the most provident Man alive can never compass: For there is
One Above, who has a Power Paramount, Vim suam ingruentem refringi non vnlt.
and will not suffer his Dominion to be encroach'd upon. And therefore the best
way seems to be the dispatching them with all the Expedition and Easiness we
can, and rather to run the Risque of some little Danger, than create a great
deal of Dissatisfaction and Torment to our selves, by our extraordinary Nicety
and Caution.

In Cases of manifest Danger, it is necessary a Man should have both Wisdom and
Courage; He should look before him, and see Dangers at a distance, and make a
right Judgment and Estimate of them; For Men are very apt to see these things
in salse Proportions, and to look upon them through the Glass of Passion, rather
than calm and undisturbed Reason. This is one account, why such things are
generally apprehended otherwise than in reality they are, because the Affection
predominant at that time, represents them greater or less, and imposes upon the
Judgment by such Idea's. But then, though it may become a wise Man to foresee all
Hazards that are in any degree probable; yet it is no way unworthy of him to
consider them as Contingencies, that they may not, as well as that they may
happen; that it is great odds all of them will not happen; That of those which
do, All will not have the Consequences and Effects, which it is sit for one to
sorm in his own Mind, who makes it his business to provide against the very
worst that can come; that a Man shall, by the help of Industry and Prudence, be
able to deal with the greatest part of them well enough. In this Case too, it
is sit to consider in which of those Accidents that threaten us, we may promise
our selves Assistance, and accordingly to provide our Succors: And as
generally in All, so in these Junctures more especially, to take Courage, to
six our Resolutions, and be steady in our Undertakings. For, when once a Man
has considered what he goes about, and sinds it agreeable to his Duty, and
what every way becomes him to do, he is obliged by all means to persevere, and
not suffer any Prospect of Danger to discourage him in a commendable Attempt. A
Wise Man indeed will never want Courage, because he proceeds with Deliberation
and Thought; prevents the Mischief of Surprise, and provides against every
thing likely to cross his Design. But then it is no less expedient, That the
Man of Courage have a Mixture of Wisdom too; for without This all his Boldness
is but rath Hear, and a blind foolhardy Giddiness.

SECT. V. Conspiracies.
WE are now advancing to such Accidents, as of all others are of the greatest,
most general, and most dangerous Consequence, and therefore it will be fit to
enlarge a little the more upon them. Which shall be done, first by giving a
particular Description of the Thing it self; Then by laying down such
Directions as may be serviceable to a Prince under them. And then in the
Conclusion of this Subject, casting together into one Chapter that Advice
proper for private Persons to follow upon these Occasions.

By Conspiracies I mean the Attempts made, either by some one Man singly, or by
several in Combination, against the Person of the Prince, or the State and
Government in general. And this must be acknowledged a Circumstance of infinite
Danger, extremely hard either to escape or to remedy, by reason of the
Secrecy, and industrious Concealment of the Thing. For which way shall a Man
be able to secure himself from the treacherous Assaults of an unknown,
unsuspected Enemy? And what shall give any just Jealousy of that Man's being
so, who wears the Face, and acts the part of our faithfullest, tenderest, and
most zealous Friend? The Thoughts and Inclinations of the Heart lie too dark
and deep for Human Eyes to penetrate; and yet here is all the Danger; for they
who design a Prince's Ruin, will take all the care they can, that no Overt
Act, no failure of Respect, no Coldness or Negligence in Behavior, may
minister cause of Suspicion; but will rather exceed in the Expressions of Duty
and Respect, and mask their Villainy by an officious and double Diligence.
Besides, do but consider the Advantages of a desperate and bloody-minded Man;
for he that does not value his own Life, may make himself Master of any other
Man's whenever he pleases. Contemnit omnes Ille, qui Mortem prius.
He knows not how to fear, who dares to die.

So that a Prince is continually exposed to Danger and Death, and lies at the
Mercy of every private Man, who has hardiness enough to sacrifice himself in
the Attacking him.

Machiavel takes great Pains to show how Plots against the State ought to be
contrived, and so laid as to prove Successful. We leave that wicked Policy to
Him; and shall employ all our Care to show how they may best be discovered and
defeated.

Now the best Remedies and Directions that I can think of for so critical and
hazardous a Juncture, are these that follow.

First, Private Intelligence, and cunning underhand Methods, to discover and
counterwork all Attempts of this Nature; in which Faithful, Vigilant, and
Discreet Persons should be made use of as Instruments. These are the Eyes and
Ears of the Prince; and therefore they should be every where, to discover and
bring Information of all that may concern him to know; but particularly they
should have a special regard to all that his Principal Officers and Ministers
say and do: because These are capable of doing most Mischief, and he cannot be
tolerably safe, if they be false to him. Now it is as observable in this Case,
as in any whatsoever, That Out of the Abundance of the Heart the Mouth
speaks; For People, who have a Design upon the Government, naturally love to
asperse and blacken the Prince, censure his Administration severely, and load
him with Calumnies; or if they have Temper enough to be silent themselves, yet
they love the Conversation of those that do so, hearken with a sensible Relish
and Delight to all kind of Factious Discourse; and frequent the Company of Men,
who by railing and blaming all that is done, infuse Jealousies, and foment
Discontents among the People. It is very necessary therefore, that a Prince
should be well informed what his Subjects, but especially what those about his
Person, say of him; what Company they keep, and how they entertain themselves;
and it is fit that he should engage to reward the Persons, who make such useful
Discoveries, not only with Impunity, but large Sums of Money for their good
Service. But then he must be no less careful too of another Inconvenience which
may arise from too easy a Credulity. For though he will do wisely to hear all,
yet he is by no means bound to believe all. The Rewards I mentioned, as they
are Recompenses well bestowed upon faithful and good Men, so are they likewise
great Temptations to ill Men; and therefore every Report of this kind should be
very diligently examined, before a Prince gives credit to it; or otherwise this
Expedient for his own Preservation will be converted into a means of crushing
and murdering the Innocent; and of making himself the common Detestation and
Reproach, the Terror and the Curse of his People.

The Second Preservative in this Case, is Winning and Engaging the Hearts and
Affections of all his Subjects, nay even of his very Enemies, by Methods of
Justice and Goodness, of Courtesy and Clemency. For when all is done,
Fidissima Custodia Principis Innocentia.
A Prince's best and strongest Guard is his Innocence; the being an Universal
Blessing, good to all, injurious and grievous to none. The Apostle had reason
when he asked that Question, Who is He that will harm you, if ye be followers
of that which is good? For, usually speaking, The Man that gives no Offense,
takes an effectual Course that none shall be given him: But he who does
Injuries, must expect to have them paid back again with Interest: And therefore
the worst use that can possibly be made of Power, is to exert it to unjust and
base Purposes, and make it an Instrument of Oppression and Violence. So says a
wise Author, Male vim suam Potestas, aliorum contumeliis experitur.
Power never puts out its own Strength so ill, as when it breaks forth into
Insolence, and contumelious usage of those Persons whose Weakness has laid
them at its Mercy.

A Third Expedient upon these Occasions is, To set the best Face upon the
Matter; not to betray any Dejection of Mind, but carry all off with one's usual
Gayety and Freedom of Behavior; To give out abroad, that he is very sensible
what People are doing, and punctually informed of all their Secret Practices
and Designs; that there passes nothing at any of their Cabals, but he has
immediately an Account of it: For where Privacy is the Life of an Attempt, if
once the Plotters can be brought to believe that all they do, takes Air, the
Project is broken of course. This was an Expedient which a certain Person
assisted Dionysius the Sicilian Tyrant with, and it was bought cheap at the
Price of a Talent.

The Fourth Direction is, To wait for any danger of this kind without any
Confusion or Consternation of Mind: These Three last Rules Caesar practiced in
great Perfection; but in the first he was altogether deficient; Indeed he
professed to disdain it, as a thing below him, and not worth his while; and
declared, That he thought a Prince had better die once for all, than live in a
perpetual Anxiety and Pain, for any Accident which the most vigilant thoughtful
Man alive has it not in his Power to prevent; and therefore he would rather
choose to be easy, and in This, as well as other Matters, trust the Event
entirely to Divine Providence, which alone can protect and secure the Persons
of Princes effectually. But still this Reflection does not take off the
usefulness and necessity even of my first Advice, and the rest it leaves in
their full force. Which in truth are yet more recommended by the ill Success of
Courses contrary to these: For all Histories, and particularly those of the
Roman Emperors, show beyond contradiction, that the Intentions to prevent such
Plottings by speedy Vengeance, and rigorous Punishments, did very seldom obtain
their desired Effect: They rather exasperated Men's Minds, than subdued them;
and the severest and most hasty to take Revenge, and terrify their People,
were commonly least secure, and found the worst Treatment from them.

Thus much may serve for Advice how Princes ought to behave themselves, while
the Designs against their Persons and Government are kept close and in the
dark. But when such Conspiracies come to be discovered, and the Truth brought
to light, What is fit to be done then? Why truly my first and most general
Direction must be, To make the Conspirators public Examples, by punishing them
with all the Severity their Villainies deserve. To spare such black Wretches as
these, were not Compassion but Cruelty; Cruelty to the Innocent, and Peaceable,
and Good; and Treachery to the Public, whose Safety is exposed and endangered
by such indiscreet Instances of Pity: For Justice and Equity require, that
Those who are Enemies to the Peace and Quiet, the Liberties and Rights, and
common Happiness of Mankind, should make Reparation with their Blood, for their
Attempts to over-turn and destroy these so necessary, so valuable Advantages.
But then, even those Executions are to be managed with Prudence and Discretion;
and the manner and Method of Punishing must vary, according as the Face and
Condition of Affairs shall happen to vary. Sometimes it is convenient to use
all possible Dispatch, and punish presently, especially where the Conspirators
are not very numerous. But be the Number of them great or small, I can by no
means approve of putting Criminals to the Torture, in order to larger
Discoveries, and the bringing out Accomplices not yet known. (For there are
other ways of getting Information by softer and more secret dealing, which very
seldom fail; and besides, it may often be of use not to seem very sollicitous
to know, or if one does know, to appear otherwise, and pretend Ignorance in
such Cases.) But, besides all other Mischiefs of such a barbarous Custom as the
Rack, this is one certain Discouragement, that a Man is sure to torment others
for the Discovery of that, which when found out, will be a Plague and Torment
to himself, and set a world of People against him too. Nor do I think it always
necessary that every Individual Malefactor should suffer: It is enough that
some few are made exemplary Warnings to the rest; so many as may encourage and
contain good Subjects in their Duty, and reclaim the Factious, by striking an
early Awe into those, who are not yet, or at least do not imagine that they are
discovered. Sometimes again it is necessary to defer punishing the Offenders;
but to be sure upon all such Emergencies, the Prince's own Safety must be his
first and great Care: In this no Time must be lost; the rest may well submit,
and be regulated afterward, as Opportunities best offer. But the Case may have
greater Difficulties in it still, The Conspirators may be Persons of such
Quality and Figure, or the Discovery may be made in such a critical Juncture,
that a Prince may be obliged to dissemble his Knowledge and his Danger; and the
offering to seize or punish the Guilty, may hazard his Life and Kingdom another
way: In such a Straight it requires a great deal of good Conduct to play a safe
Game. The best Course of all is without question to countermine and prevent
their Plot; to break all their Measures privately; and when the Danger is thus
avoided, to decline the giving Offense, by pretending not to know the Parties
concerned, but to manage the Matter, and secure himself, while all the while he
appears intent upon something else. Thus the Carthaginians managed their
General Hanno, and the Historian's Remark upon this Method of proceeding is,
Optimum and solum saepe insidiarum remedium, si non intelligantur.
That oftentimes the best, nay the only way to prevent treacherous Practices,
is to act as if one knew nothing at all of the Matter. Nay, which is still
more; I am positive that sometimes it is absolutely necessary not to punish
Conspirators at all. For if the principal Contriver be a very great Man; if his
Abilities or his Deserts have made him popular; if his former Services have
been very considerable, and the Prince and Government particularly obliged by
him: If his Children, his Relations, his Friends are in great Posts, or Men of
Wealth, and general Interest: What would you do in such a Case? How would you
break through all these Difficulties? Who indeed would attempt it? Who would
provoke such Dangers, and make so many and such dangerous Enemies, and not
rather by wholly remitting his Punishment, if that can safely be done; or if
not, yet at least by mitigating, and rendering it as gentle as the Case will
bear; continue a good Understanding, and secure the Affections of all who have
an Interest in his Pardon? Clemency upon such an Occasion is not only Brave and
great, (for indeed nothing can be more for the Honor of a Prince, Nil
gloriosius Principe impune laeso.
nothing give us a brighter Image of Virtue and Magnanimity, than a Monarch
pardoning the Affronts and Ill-Usage which he never deserved) But it is also
very often the most prudent and politic Course, and most effectual Security to
him for the Future. For Men, who have any the least remains of Ingenuity and
Humanity, will be melted by it into Repentance and better Principles.
Perfidiousness it self will be put out of Countenance; and others who see such
eminent Goodness, will be ashamed of any base Design, and effectually diverted
from pursuing or projecting it. And of this Augustus has given us a famous
Instance, both as to the Prudential, and the Successful Part, in his Behavior
to Cinna, when engaged in a Conspiracy against him.

SECT. VI. Treasonable Practices.
BY Treachery and Treasonable Practices, I understand a secret Attempt or
Conspiracy, not against the Prince's own Person, or the Government in general,
as the former Head was; but against some particular Post, or Place of Strength,
or some distinct and less Body of Men. In this respect it differs from what
went before; but they both agree in their Nature and Character of being secret
and unforeseen Evils, extremely dangerous if they succeed, and as hard to be
avoided or prevented. For the Traitor is commonly hid in a Crowd, in the very
midst of the Party he designs to betray, or of the Fortification which he
intends to make sale of, and deliver up into the Enemies hand. The Persons most
disposed to this abominable perfidious Trade, are the Covetous, the sickle and
fond of Change, and the formal Dissemblers. And this Quality too they have,
that they make a mighty Noise and Bustle with their Loyalty, are large in their
Commendations of it; violently and unseasonably clamorous against all breach of
Trust; superstitiously nice in Matters of little or no Consequence; and these
Pretenses and Extraordinary Affectations of Fidelity, by which they labor to
conceal their Villainy, are really the best and surest Marks to discover and
distinguish them by: For they are so natural to Men of such Principles, that
any Man who knows what it is to over-act a Part, cannot but find them out. Now
the Directions proper for such Occasions, are for the most part the same with
those in the former Case. Only in the Matter of Punishment indeed, this
difference is to be made, That These Men ought to be made Examples immediately,
to be dealt with after a very rigorous manner, and excluded from all Mercy: For
they are Men of wretched; profligate, incorrigible Tempers, the Bane and Pest
of Mankind; no Reformation is to be expected from them; and therefore since
Pity is lost, as to all hopes of doing Good upon the Offenders themselves, it
is necessary they should be cut off for the Sake and Safety of others.

SECT. VII. Disorders and Popular Insurrections.
OF these I reckon several Sorts, according as the Causes which provoke and
kindle these Combustions, the Persons concerned in them, the Manner and the
Continuance of the Disorders, differ. The Variety whereof will appear more
evidently, by treating in the following Sections of Factions and Combinations,
Seditions, Tyranny, Rebellion, and Civil Wars. But at present I shall insist
upon the plainest and most generally received Notion of the Word; for such
Risings of the People, as proceed from some present Heat, and are only a Tumult
soon up and soon down again.

The Prescriptions proper for this Distemper are, To draw them, if possible, to
a Parley; to try if they can be prevailed with to hear Reason; and in case they
will suffer themselves to be argued with; Then to expostulate and remonstrate
things fairly, by the Interposition of some Person of established Reputation,
eminent Virtue, powerful Eloquence, and skilled in Address; One whose Gravity
and Industry, and Authority may be sufficient to gain upon them, and soften the
Fury, even of an incensed Rabble. For at the Presence of a Person thus
qualified, they will presently be Thunderstruck, and all he says will gain
credit, and make its own way through them.

Veluti magno in populo cum saepe coorta est
Seditio, saevitque animis ignobile vulgus;
Jamque faces and saxa volant; furor arma ministrat.
Tum pietate gravem ac mentis, si forte virum quem
Conspexere, silent, arrectisque auribus astant;
Ille regit dictis animos, and pectora mulcet.
Virgil.
As when in Tumults rise the ignoble Crowd,
Swift are their Motions, and their Tongues are loud;
And Stones and Brands in rattling Vollies fly,
And all the Rustic Arms that Fury can supply.
If then some Grave and Pious Man appear,
They hush their Noise, and lend a listening Ear;
He sooths with sober Words their angry Mood,
And quenches their innate Desire of Blood.
Mr. Dryden. It may not be amiss upon some Occasions for the Prince himself to
appear among them; but then he must take great Care in what manner this be
done: He must have a serene and free Countenance, an Air of Gayety and
Assurance, a Soul at perfect Liberty, and free from all Apprehension of Death
or Danger, and ready prepared to entertain the worst Treatment that can
possibly happen to him. For, to show himself with a Face full of Fear and
Distrust, to descend to Flatrery and mean Remonstrances, is beneath a Prince's
Character: It makes him cheap and contemptible, encourages the Insolence of the
People, and does but inflame instead of appeasing their Rage. This therefore
was done, exactly as ought to be, by Caesar, who, when his Legions were in a
Mutiny, and rose up in Arms against him, is described in the midst of them
thus: -- Stetit aggere fulti
Cespitis intrepidus vultu, meruitque timeri
Nil metuens -- mdash;
Lucan.
-- On the Top
Of a Turf Mount stands Caesar fearless up,
Deserving Dread by his undaunted Look.


The same Account in effect does Tacitus give of Augustus, composing the
Discontents of his Legions at Actium. So that upon the whole Matter there are
two ways of managing the Mobb, and quieting them when they run into Tumults and
riotous Insurrections. The best and bravest is that of the Prince himself
quieting them; but This (as I observed) is a nice Undertaking, and had much
better be waved, if he have not an absolute Mastery over his Passions, and be
not in all Points qualified for the managing it dexterously. The other, which
is more usual, and more seasible, is to do it by another hand; and here a
greater Latitude may be allowed, than the Majesty of a Monarch can admit of.
Flattery, and Cajolling, and all the Arts of Mollifying, are the proper
Applications; for Stiffness and open Force will do nothing; and the more you
oppose the Torrent, the higher and louder it grows. The many-headed Beast is in
this regard like all other Wild ones, which are never to be tamed with Blows
and Beating, but may be brought to hand by soothing and gentle Usage. And
therefore an Agent should never spare for good Words, and fair Promises, since
these are the most successful Artifices upon those Occasions. Nay some
Philosophers and wise Men have allowed such Mediators to be liberal, even at
the expense of Truth; and think that the Folly and Madness of an incensed
Multitude, may as innocently be amused with Fables and Fictions, as the
Simplicity of Children, and the Phrensies of Feverish Men are with idle Stories
and Promises, that are never intended to be made good. Pericles had a wonderful
Knack at this I eading the People at Pleasure; he held them fast by the Eyes,
the Ears, the Belly; entertained them with Shows, and Plays, and Feasts; and
then made them do whatever he had a mind to. This, I confess, is much the
meaner Method of the Two; There is something in it servile and ignoble; but
those Punctilio's must be laid aside, where Necessity gives a Dispensation. But
then they are only sit for some Deputy, or Agent, and can never be
Condescensions becoming a Prince in his own Person. And thus we see Menenius
Agrippa managed the Matter, when delegated from the Senate to the Commoners of
Rome. But, if such a one pretends to act with a high Hand, and expects to
reduce People when they fly out, and break through all the Restraints of Reason
and Duty, without making any Concessions, or offering any Terms of
Accommodation, as Appius, and Coriolanus, and Cato, and Phocion did; this is a
very idle Attempt, and must succeed accordingly.

SECT. VIII. Faction and Combinations.
BY Factions and Combinations, I mean the Divisions and Bandings together of
Subjects against one another; and These may differ both in Quality and Number;
as the Persons concerned are Great and Wealthy, or of a meaner Fortune and
Condition, or as the Clans and Parties are each of them more or less numerous.
This sometimes proceeds from private Piques and Grudges, which have grown and
been cherished between single Persons, or are perpetuated and made hereditary
to whole Families; but the usual and more frequent Original of it is Ambition
and Emulation, that Bane of Society and Government, which sets the World on
Fire, by kindling in every one a desire of aspiring to the highest and most
honorable Post. The Divisions, which happen between Persons of Eminence, and
the first Quality, are by much the more dangerous and destructive to the
Commonwealth. Some indeed there have been, who set up for Politicians, and
pretend, that these disagreeing Parties are of great Service and Convenience to
the Public; and that a Prince by this means is safer, and better supported, as
Cato was of Opinion, that the Authority of Masters in private Families was
secured by the Discords and Quarrels of their Servants. But This seems a Notion
too resin'd and far-fetched; and we may venture to say, there are but a few
Cases in which the Observation holds good. It may be true with regard to
Tyrants and lawless Governors, to whom nothing is so formidable as the good
Agreement of their Subjects; because such a general Understanding may tend to
unite them against their common Oppressor: It may hold too in slight and
inconsiderable Factions, such as the Quarrels and Competitions betwixt one City
and another; or betwixt Ladies at Court, who pretend to set up for
Intelligence, and underhand Interests: But in any Combinations of Consequence,
and in Governments well constituted, and duly administered, it is manifestly
false. It is of infinite Concern, and absolute Necessity, that, in such
Circumstances, all making of Parties should be checked, and Faction crushed in
the very Egg. All their Distinctions, the Names they go by, the Dress or Badges
by which they know one another, and all the Foppery of that kind, utterly
discountenanced and put down. For even Trifles of this Nature have sometimes
laid the Seeds, and been the first Beginnings of prodigious and unconceivable
Mischiefs. Witness the miserable Combustion, and horrid Murders, which Zonaras
tells us, happened in Constantinople by the Persons who distinguished
themselves by wearing Blue and Green, in the Reign of Justinian. And
accordingly all Clubs or private Cabals that tend to the promoting such
Divisions, should be carefully dispersed, and strictly forbidden.

The Counsel I have to give upon such Accidents, is briefly This. If the
Faction happen between two Peers, or Persons otherwise of Consideration and
Character in the State, the Prince will do well to bring them to a better
Understanding by fair Means, and good Words; or if That do not succeed, by
laying his positive Commands, and threatening the Party who refuses to be
reconciled, with his Displeasure, and other severe Penalties upon his
Disobedience. And this Course we find taken by Alexander the Great, to compose
the Difference between Hephestion and Craterus; and by Archidamus with Two of
his Friends. If they still stand out, it may be proper to nominate some
Arbitrator between them; and This a Person liable to no just suspicion of
Partiality; no way interested or prejudiced, for or against either of the
Parties. And this will also be a very good Expedient to end the Disputes, and
settle the Pretensions controverted on both sides between greater Numbers of
Subjects, or between Cities, or Societies of Men. If it be requisite, that the
Prince himself interpose, let this by all means be done with the Assistance of
Counsel, that so the Odium of the Thing may be taken off from himself, and
those who suffer in the determination, may have no Foundation for Resentment.
For the Counsel of Princes serves to this and many other Purposes, as well as
for Direction; and it is Prudence to call them together, and act with and by
them, in a very solemn manner, in sundry Instances, where there arises nothing
of Difficulty, that can deserve the Formality of a Debate. If the Faction be
among Persons of meaner Circumstances, but so, that great Numbers are engaged
in it; or if it grow too strong to be composed by gentler Methods, and the
Course of Civil Justice, the Prince must then have recourse to his last Remedy,
and extinguish it by Force. But in this way of quelling it especially, he must
take good heed not to discover any particular Inclination to one side above the
other. For This is very Ominous, and many Kings have lost themselves by their
unreasonable Partialities. They are the common Fathers of their whole Country;
and it is unworthy the Dignity of that Relation, as well as beneath the Majesty
of their Character, to make Distinctions, and be of a Party themselves. They
must be Friends to All their Subjects; not side with Some, and by making their
Quarrels their (...) suffer themselves to become Enemies, and in effect
denounce War against Others. We easily see the the Indecorum of such
Proceedings, when the Master of a Family debases himself to take part with one
Servant against another; for what is this indeed but to become a Fellow Servants
too, and to forget that both the Contending Parties are under his Jurisdiction?
But sure the Absurdity is more monstrous in Princes, when they forget that all
the Subjects are their own; and therefore the Superior has nothing to do but
to deal Justice with an even hand between Them, who are equal to one another,
but can never be so to Him. Once more: In all the forementioned Cases, it is
best, if the Discontents can be quieted, and Controversies decided, without
making any public Examples; because Suffering exasperates, and many angry
Remembrances will remain, and rise up hereafter. But if there be a necessity of
Punishing, this should be confined to as few as may be; and It sufficiently
vindicates the Honor of the Prince, and answers the End of the Penalty very
well; if some of the Ringleaders, who were first and most active in creating
the Disturbance, be made to smart severely, and all the rest be dismissed with
the Impressions which such a Mixture of Severity and Goodness will naturally
leave upon them.

SECT. IX. Sedition.
SEdition is a violent Commotion of the People against the Prince, or some of
the Magistrates in subordination to him. The Causes of it are commonly
Oppression and Fear. For Those, who have been guilty of some high.
Misdemeanour, are afraid of being brought to the Punishment they deserve;
Others are jealous of their Privileges and Properties, and imagine, that the
Government designs to invade and run them down. And both these sorts of Men are
so strongly possessed with the Apprehensions of approaching Ruin, that they
think the only way to save themselves, is by striking the first Blow. It also
proceeds very often from too great Indulgence, Extravagance and Debauchery,
Necessity, and extreme Scarcity of Money, or want of other indispensable
Supports of Human Life. So that the Persons who seem of all others to be cut
out for this Trade, are your Spend-thrifts and Bankrupts, Indigent and Uneasy,
Fickle and Lovers of Novelty; and all those Lewd and Profligate Wretches, who
lie under the Lash of the Law, or at least are obnoxious to, and afraid of
Justice. These several sorts of Men cannot continue quiet long: Peace is by no
means for their purpose, but every whit as great a Calamity to Them, as War is
to the rest of Mankind: They never sleep sweetly but in the midst of a Riot;
and the Liberty they dote upon is Licentiousness and Confusion. The better to
bring their Matters to bear, they contrive private Conferences, and send abroad
their wicked Instruments to poison the World; make loud and grievous
Complaints, scatter secret and vile Insinuations, at first in doubtful and
suspicious Words, but afterward in virulent and open Defamations of the
Government; set up for Patriots, and pretend a mighty Zeal for Liberty and
Property; profess the Public Good to be their only Hope and End, and promise
to redress the People's Grievances; These are constantly some of the Masks, put
on to cover their Villainy, and thus they draw Numbers after them, who for want
of discerning better, and seeing through their Hypocrisy, swallow the bitter
Pill thus gilded over.

already insisted upon, in the Section of Popular Insurrections and Tumults;
that is, To draw them to a Parley, to have Matters truly represented, and so
make them sensible of their Error, and the Unreasonableness of their
Complaints and Discontents; and all this to be done by the Mediation of
Persons, whose unquestionable Credit and Character may render such a
Negotiation successful. But if This do not succeed, the second thing must be
for a Prince to take Arms, and strengthen himself against their Violence; yet
so as not to be rash and hasty upon them, but to proceed slowly and with much
Deliberation; that they may have Warning and Time to recollect and qualify the
Fierceness and Heat of their Passions; and so the ill Men among them, by
thinking better, may return to their Duty; and those who are harmless, and
good, may desert their Seducers, and unite with the right side. For Time is a
most excellent Physician, and seldom fails to allay and cure the common People,
who are much more disposed to quarrel, and be mutinous, than they are to come
to Blows in good earnest. Ferocior Plebs ad rebellandum quam bellandum: tentare
magis quam tueri Libertatem.
The Mobb (says a wise Historian) are furious and eager to rebel, but tame and
poor-spirited in a regular Fight; and much better at making a push to stretch
their Liberty, than at the lawful defense of it. A Third Expedient is, to be
tampering with them all this while, Spem ofter, metum intend.
by Hope and Fear; for these are the Two Passions that spur them on, and
therefore these must be wrought upon to bring them off. And therefore a Wise
Governor will be sure to be liberal both of his Promises and Threatenings, that
so these Passions may not want Matter enough to feed upon; but then Care must
be taken too, that they be so tempered, as neither to encourage Presumption,
nor drive to Despair. A Fourth Remedy is, to sow Divisions among them, and
break their Correspondence, left behind to do your Business there, by giving
Advice of all their Motions, and communicating their Intentions and Designs; by
laying them asleep by false Securities, and watching all Opportunities to
qualify their Fury. Then, Sixthly,

SECT. X. Tyranny and Rebellion.
BY Tyranny we are to understand an Arbitrary, Lawless Government, a
Domineering over the Subjects with Violence and Rigor, without regard had to
the Rules or Measures of Power, or the Customs and Privileges of the Country.
This is frequently the Cause of public Disturbances, and general Discontents,
which by degrees grow up into Rebellion. And Rebellion is a Rising of the
People against their Prince, provoked by his Tyrannical and unjust Oppressions,
with a design to dethrone, and drive him from his Royal Post. So that Rebellion
differs from Sedition in This, that it no longer acknowledges, or submits to
the Prince as a Master and Governor; whereas Sedition does not go so far; but
is dissatisfied with the Administration, and aims not at changing the Person,
but his Measures, and the Reformation of what it conceives amiss. Now the
Persons, who thus degenerate into Tyranny, are Men of base Dispositions, cruel
in their Temper, Lovers and Encouragers of wicked and turbulent People, and
Mischievous Pick-Thank Slaves, Parasites and Sycophants, and doers of ill
Offices. But for Persons of Honor and Virtue, they have an inward Dread and
Aversion. Quibus semper aliena Virtus sormidolosa; Nobilitas, Opes, gestique
Honores pro crimine habentur; ob Virtutes certissimum exitium; and non minus ex
magna fama quam mala.
The Virtue and good Qualities of deserving Persons, (says one) is formidable
to them; Noble Blood, and Power and Interest, Honors and Offices of Trust well
discharged, are looked upon as Criminal, Worth and Honesty is their certain
Ruin; and a great and good Name as dangerous under such Governors, as a
scandalous and vile Character.

But these Tyrants are generally punished to purpose, and as they deserve; for
they are hated and detested, looked upon as common Enemies; they live in
perpetual Terrors and Apprehensions of the Revenge they have provoked; every
thing is suspected and dreaded, and they never think themselves safe; their own
Consciences turn their Executioners, and all within is Scourges, and Racks, and
Tortures; and at last they come to infamous and untimely Deaths; for the World
has seldom seen a Tyrant live to the fullness of Age, or die after the manner
of common Men.

The Directions and Remedies proper for this Case, are largely insisted upon in
another place. And the Sum of them may be reduced to these Two Points. First,
To hinder a Tyrant from getting the Power absolutely into his own Hands, and
oppose his Government at the first; but if this be not done, and he be actually
possessed of it, then to bear and submit as well as we can. For, generally
speaking, there is nothing got by Opposition, Pejus deteriusque Tyrannide sive
injusto imperio Bellum civil.
a Civil War being commonly a Remedy worse than the Disease; and the Miseries
and Disorders of it are more intolerable than the Tyranny and Oppression it
undertakes to redress. For the being restiff in such Cases, does but exasperate
the Cruelty of a Prince, and make that Disposition in him, which was bad
before, ten times worse. Nihil tam exasperat fervorem vulneris quam ferendi
impatientia.
Nothing (says Plutarch) inflames a Sore, so much as Impatience under the Pain
of it. Modesty, and Submission, and Compliance with hard and rigorous Commands,
have something of a softening Quality in them, which usually rebates the
fiercest and most furious Dispositions. For, as Alexander the Great observed
very truly, The Gentleness and good Temper of a Prince depends not altogether
upon his own Humor, but in some measure upon that of his Subjects too; for
They sometimes by their Sawciness and ill Language, by Stubbornness and
perverse Behavior, corrupt and sour their Governors, and make them quite
other Men than Nature had made them. Obsequio mitigantur imperia; and contra,
Contumacia inferiorum lenitatem imperantis diminuit; Contumaciam cum pernicie,
quam obsequium cum securitate malunt.
Men make Government easy, and secure themselves good Treatment by Obedience;
and on the other hand, Insolence and Refractoriness in Subjects takes off from
the Mildness and good Nature of a Prince: And this is the Misfortune, that the
People had rather be peremptory and Disobedient at the hazard of their own
ruin, than obey quietly, and live securely.

SECT. XI. Civil Wars.
THE several public Disorders hitherto treated of, are but crude and
imperfect; the Beginnings of Evils, and as it were Matter void of Form. But
when Riot, or Faction, or Sedition, or Rebellion is come to its full Maturity
and Strength, when it has all the Perfection it is capable of, and continues
any time; then it Commences, and is called Civil War. For this is nothing else,
but the taking up of Arms by Subjects, either against one another, which is the
Case of the two Former; or else against the Prince or Magistrate, and then it
is one of the two latter. Now there is not in the World a more Calamitous, more
scandalous Circumstance. It is not indeed a single, but a complicated Evil, an
Ocean of Evils. And a wise Author says very truly, that it cannot with any
propriety of Speech be styled a War, but is rather the Sickness, the Fever and
Phrenzy of the State. The wretched Authors of it, whoever they be, ought to be
swept away from the Land of the Living, and driven immediately, and without
Mercy, from among Men. All manner of Wickedness is born and cherished under it;
Impiety and Cruelty reign without control; all Obligations of Humanity and
Friendship are dissolved; and the nearest Ties of Blood and Natural Affection,
broken and utterly lost. Murder, and Confusion, and Rapine cease to be Vices.
Occidere palam, Ignoscere non nisi fallendo licet. Non Aetas, non Dignitas
quenquam protegit.

Nobilitas cum plebe perit, lateque vagatur
Ensis. --

Men have then license to be barbarous, and kill with Authority in the Face of
the Sun; but Pity and Mercy are practiced only by stealth. No Age, no Quality
can give any Man protection; but all Distinctions of Person and Condition are
laid aside. The reeking Sword pours out a Crimson Flood,
And mingles Noble with Plebeian Blood.
Laws and Order are quite out of Doors, and all Discipline utterly abolished.
In omne fas nefasque avidos, aut venales, non sacro, non profano abstinentes.
Men fly greedily at all, and are mercenary in Villainy; they make no difference
between Things Sacred and Common, but all are made a Prey alike. The mean and
vulgar are upon the Level with the best and greatest, and the Peasant Hail
Fellow with the Prince. -- Rheni mihi Caesar in undis
Dux erat; hic socius, Facinus quos inquinat, aequat.
Lucan. l. 5.
-- He was our General
In The German Wars; Here we are Fellows All.
Whom Treason soils, it makes of equal State.
May. Persons in Authority dare not interpose, nor take upon them what is due
to their Birth and Condition; for He, who is embarked in the same Design, must
not reprove his Companion in Wickedness. So dreadful is the Confusion where
even the Obnoxiis Ducibus, and prohibere non ausis. -- mdash; mdash;Metu ac
necessitate huc illuc mutantur.
Commanders themselves are liable to the same Condemnation; and every Thing,
and every Man driven to and fro by Fear and Necessity. In a Word, This is
Misery in the very Abstract. And the very Victory it self is full of Misery;
For supposing the best of the Matter, that Success falls on the side of Right
and Justice, yet this renders the Conqueror insolent and furious; transports
him to Barbarity and Rage, though otherwise of a Temper never so Human and
Gentle; so scandalous are the very Triumphs of a Civil War; so apt to flesh
even a good Man in Cruelty and Blood; so certain to poison, nay to extinguish
the Softnesses of Human Nature. And if we could imagine the Commanders not to
have lost all the Remains of it, yet it will not be in their Power to restrain
those under their Care, from their execrable Villainies.

Now there are two Causes of Civil Wars, which offer themselves to our
Consideration. The one is Secret and Mysterious, such as we cannot see through,
nor come to any distinct Understanding of, and consequently not in the power of
Man to prevent, or to cure; A certain Fatality; I mean, the Will and Decree of
Almighty God, by which he sees fit to take Vengeance, and inflict this heaviest
of Punishments upon the Sins of a Nation; or not only to chastise, but utterly
overturn and exterminate a disobedient and rebellious People. In se magna
ruunt, laetis hunc Numina rebus
Crescendi posuere modum. --
Lucan. l. 1.
Things to their Acme come, in course of Fate grow less;
And States too big for Foes, themselves oppress.


The Other is sufficiently visible to Wise Men, as a sure Prognostic of Future
Evils, and such, as if Men would give their Minds to, it might easily be
remedied; especially if Those who sit at the Helm would show themselves
diligent and vigorous in the Application. And this is a general Corruption and
Looseness of Manners, Remissness in Discipline, and want of executing good and
wholesome Laws for the containing all sorts of People in their respective
Duties. Hence the Vilest and Resuse of the People take Advantage; and Men of
desperate Fortunes, who have no other Game to play, hope to find their Account,
by putting all into Confusion. For, either they raise themselves upon other
Men's Ruins, and heal their own Extravagances by fishing in troubled Waters;
or at least they cover their own private in the Crowd of public Misfortunes.
For, where a Man has nothing left to lose, it is some Mitigation to his
Affliction, that it is general, and he does not fall alone. So the wise
Historian Observes; Miscere cuncta and privata vulnera Reipublicae malis
operire. Nam ita se res habet, ut publica ruina quisque malit quam sua proteri;
and idem passurus minus conspici.
That the Profuse and the Turbulent, shelter themselves under a Common
Calamity; and there is a kind of Malicious Comfort in the Nature of most Men,
that makes them better contented to be crushed in the Common Ruin, than to
perish alone. For though a Man's own Sufferings be equal in either Case; yet
they are less taken notice of, and cannot be distinguished, when he suffers in
a great deal of Company.

Now, the Advice fit to be given in this Extremity, is, To make the quickest
End that such a War is capable of; and for this there can be but two Ways;
Treaty and Agreement, or Victory. The former is certainly the better, even
though attended with some Hardship and Inconvenience, and short of those
Advantageous Terms we desire: For when once those tumultuous Proceedings are
quieted, Time will do the rest for us. And a Man will do well sometimes to
suffer himself to be imposed upon, when he is so largely paid for his Loss. As
it was said of Antipater, Bellum sinire cupienti opus erat decipi.
That it was necessary to cheat him into a Peace, to gratific his Inclination
when he was eager to put an end to the War. Victory is a very dangerous
Conclusion, though a Successful one. For there is great reason to sear the
abuse of it, and that the gaining such an Advantage may inspire Inclinations to
Tyranny, and Oppression, and put mighty opportunities into a Prince's Hands, of
ruling those he has subdued Arbitrarily and by Force, that so they may be
effectually kept under ever after. But, to make sure Work, it is necessary for
a Prince to rid his Hands of the Principal Actors and Instigators of these
Confusions; and such as he perceives to be Turbulent and Bloody-minded Men;
without Regard to which Side they were of; for such Dispositions are always
unsafe to be trusted. And This may be done conveniently enough under some fair
Pretense of employing them in remoter Parts, or sending them abroad into
foreign Service; or else by dividing them, and breaking their Correspondence;
or keeping them in play against a Common Enemy; and then, for the Prevention of
any Discontents for the Time to come, to use the Common People well; and grant
them all reasonable Indulgence; passing over what is already done by an Act of
Oblivion, and ministering no just Occasion of Jealousy, but making his
Government as easy as possible, in the preservation of their Rights and
Privileges for the future.

SECT. XII. Advice for Private Persons, how they should behave themselves in
any of the forementioned Divisions.
YOU have now taken a short View of the several sorts of Calamities and
Confusions, to which the State is Obnoxious, and heard the Directions proper
for each of them, so far as the Prince himself is concerned; it remains now in
the last Place, to consider what Deportment will be proper and prudent for
Persons in a private Capacity, when any of these Troubles and Difficulties
shall happen. Now this cannot be dispatched under any one general Topic;
because there are Two Scruples concerning it to be resolved; The One, whether
it be lawful and sit for an honest and good Man, to fall in, and take the Part
of some side or other in these Divisions; or whether he should rather keep
himself quiet and sit still. The Other, what sort of Behavior is advisable in
either Case, that is, whether he do, or do not interess himself in the Quarrel.

As to the former of these Two Questions; It is propounded for the Satisfaction
of such, as are Loose and at their own Disposal, without any Engagements upon
them, which should determine them to either Party. For if they are already
under any Obligations, This first Query does not in any Degree concern them;
They are got beyond it already, and all the Doubts for Them to entertain, must
receive Satisfaction from the Second Question. I insert this Caution by the
way, because it frequently falls out, that a Man is staked down, as it were, to
one party, almost whether he will or no. For, though he may not make it any
part of his Choice and Design, nay, though, in his own Private Judgment, he
cannot but disapprove it; yet in despite of Intention, Inclination, and Good
Sense, he may find himself involved and entangled, by some Considerations so
Powerful, that he cannot with any Decency break through them: And these being
such Bands, as Nature has tied him up in, or such as Counterbalance all
Motives to the contrary, will at least carry a sufficient Excuse, for his doing
as he does. Now, this first Question has several Arguments pro and con; and
abundance of eminent Instances might be produced, of Persons who have behaved
themselves directly contrary to each other with regard to it. So that differing
Judgments and Authorities, as well as different Reasons, minister just ground
of Scruple in the Case. The Resolutions, which seem to me most convenient to be
come to, according to the different Circumstances of the Persons concerned in
this Debate, are such as follow.

On the one Hand, Nothing seems more agreeable to the Character of a Wise and a
Good Man, than to have nothing at all to do with the Follies and Factions of
the World; and therefore such a one cannot do better than to stand by, and let
them try it out by themselves. Especially too, if we consider, what Account
has already been given of these Divisions, how irregular and unlawful they are
in their own Nature and first Causes; what Wickedness, Barbarity, and Injustice
of all sorts they engage Men in. That these are inseparable Attendants of such
practices, and it is not possible to have any hand in them, and continue
Innocent; I say, If all these Considerations be fairly laid together, it scarce
looks any longer like a Matter of free Choice, what a Man may, or may not do;
but seems rather a Point of Duty, than of bare Allowance and Permission,
absolutely to decline any Concern in them. And accordingly it appears that
several excellent Persons have had so great an abhorrence of these Things, and
such a Sense of the Personal Obligations they violate, that no Considerations
could prevail with them to come in; particularly Asinius Pollio, who, the
Historian tells us, Velleius, lib. 3.
excused himself for these very Reasons to Agustus, when he entreated his
Company and Assistance in the Expedition against Mark Anthony.

But then on the other Hand, What shall we say to those Reasons, which enforce
our Obligation, to take part with good Men, to protect and strengthen such, as
much as in us lies, and to defend Equity and Right, against all that oppose,
and encroach upon it? The Great Solon was so strongly possessed in Favor of
these Engagements, that he is for inflicting very severe Punishments, upon Them
that affect Ease and Obscurity, and refuse to appear and act openly in such
Exigencies of State. And that rigid Professor of Virtue, Cato governed himself
by this Rule; for he did not only declare, and come into One Party in the Civil
Wars of Rome, but took a Command among the Mal^ contents under Pompey.

Now, if we would know, what Measures are fit to be taken, where Judgments are
so divided, and Reasons probable and plausible enough for each to allege in
his own Justification; my poor Opinion is This: For Persons of Eminence and
Character in the World; such as are in public Trust, or great Reputation, or
extraordinary Abilities, and are known to be leading and significant Men in the
State, These I conceive not only may fall into that Side, which they in their
Conscience think the best; but, so far as I am able to discern, they are bound
to do it: For he is a very ill Pilot, that steers the Ship in calm and
favorable Weather, and runs away from the Helm, when it grows Foul and Stormy:
What shall become of the Vessel, if the best Hands let her drive, when there is
the greatest Need of Working her, and keeping her tight? These Gentlemen ought,
in Extremities especially, to stand in the Gap, and act like Men of Honor; the
Care of the Government is upon them, and its Safety or Ruin lies at the Door.
But then, for Persons in a private Capacity, such as make none at all, or but
very inconsiderable Figure in the Government, These are more at their own
Liberty. For as their Condition supposes all the Assistance they can
contribute, to be of no mighty consequence, so the withholding that Assistance
can do no great Damage: And therefore they may be allowed to retire into some
Place of Security, and seek their own Ease and Quiet, at a Distance, from the
Noise and Clutter of the contending Parties. But then both these kind of Men,
those that do, and those that do not declare, lie under an Obligation to demean
themselves, in such manner as I am going to prescribe. In the mean while I add
thus much only upon the present Subject, concerning those who are disposed to
come in and act: That in the choosing what Party they should side with,
sometimes the Case is so plain, that it is almost impossible they can be
mistaken. For where the Injustice of the Cause, and other Disadvantages are so
evident, that they look one full in the Face, and forbid him; no Man of common
Sense will go in thither. But it often happens, that there are Reasons on both
Sides; Each pretends Right and Justice; and each has Advantages to invite us;
and then the Difficulty of coming to a Resolution is very great; because a Man
must not only weigh the Arguments on both Sides, and settle the Point of Right
and Wrong first; but he has several other Considerations to attend to, such as
may and ought to carry some Weight with them, though they have not immediately
respect to the Justice of the Cause.

And now it may be Seasonable to proceed to the other Part of this Advice;
which relates to the Behavior of the Persons under these several Capacities.
To all which, I might satisfy my self with prescribing in one Word, Moderation
and Temper; that they would particularly take Atticus for their Pattern, whose
Name has been so much celebrated for his Prudence and Modesty in the midst of
that boisterous Age, in which he lived; One, who was always believed in his
Judgment to favor the right Side, and respected by all good Men for doing so;
but yet one, who behaved himself so Prudently and Inoffensively, that he never
involved himself in the Common Confusions, nor drew down the Displeasure of ill
Men, or any Inconvenience from that Party, who were sensible enough, he did not
approve their Proceedings.

But, to be a little more particular; and first, for Them who openly declare
themselves; It is certain, that These ought by no Means to be violent, or
betray indecent Heats and Passions in their Conversation; but carry themselves
Modestly and Decently, and reserve their Warmth for times of Action, or 'till
some very just Occasion happens to call for it. They should not be Pert, nor
Forward, nor Officiously thrust themselves upon Business, till they are
required, and in some measure importuned; nay, compelled to it: For in such
Circumstances no Man can be active without Odium; and therefore it is
sufficient that we obey our Call, and follow Duty, without being so eager, as
to run before it, and start of our own accord. But when we are called, and must
act, then we should take Care to render the Execution of our Duty as little
invidious as may be; to do all with such Temper and Tenderness, that the Storm
may fly over our Heads, and no angry Resentments, or infamous Reflections
remain behind; never inflaming, or in any Degree encouraging, much less
allowing our selves in the Commission of those abominable Outrages and
Insolences, usual upon such Occasions; but employing our utmost endeavor to
mollisie and sweeten Men; to divert them from Injurious and Disorderly Methods;
and by all imaginable Arts trying to elude and break all Designs of this Nature.

Those who have not declared themselves openly by actually engaging in any
Party (whose Circumstances with regard to the Easiness and Tranquillity of them
are without doubt much to be preferred before the former.) Those, I say, who
have given the World no visible and authentic Testimony of their Affections to
one or other Party, (though at the same time they may in their Own Breasts be
much more inclined, and wish better to the one than the other;) ought not to
continue in a State of absolute Neutrality. My Meaning is, that they should not
express a perfect Indifference how Matters go, and have no Solicitude beyond
their own private Affairs; for This is to sit like Spectators at a Playhouse,
and entertain themselves with the Tragical Misfortunes of other People; which
is a Coldness highly Criminal, where the Peace and Welfare of our Country lie
at Stake. Such regardless Men as these, are justly detested by all Sides; and
if their own Personal Safety be what they aim at, the Imagination is very vain;
for no sort of People run a greater Risque, nor are worse treated than They. We
see what was the Fate of Thebes in the War with Xerxes, Judge. 21.8.
and of the Inhabitants of Jabesh Gilead, in the time of the Israclitish
Judges. Livy has observed very justly to this Purpose, that Neutralitas nec
Amicos parit, nec Inimicos tollit.
Neutrality never makes one Friend the more, nor one Enemy the less. It is
indeed neither just nor becoming, and can never look well, or be so, except
with Allowance of the Parties concerned. We see therefore what different
Measures the Two great Roman Generals took in this Respect. Caesar declared
that he took it for granted, all that stood Neuter, were His Friends; Pompey
declared he looked upon all such as His Enemies. In a Stranger indeed this is
very allowable; for he is under no Obligation to meddle in the Concerns of a
Country that is none of his own; and so it is likewise in Persons, whose
Eminent Character and Quality may make it beneath them to become Parties, in
such Differences, which they ought rather to be adressed to us Umpires, and
Mediators to determine.

Nor may Men; much less indeed may they show themselves sickle and inconstant;
sometimes on one side, and sometimes on the other; changing their Shape like
Proteus, and in the worst Sense of the Words, becoming All things to all Men.
These are Mungrels, and as such an odious and despicable Breed; worse than the
former, who continue in a State of Neutrality; and more offensive to All, while
they make it their Business, to please and be more agreeable to All. For every
man ought to act upon Principles, and to stick to something.

But, though Men ought to incline to one side in their Wishes and Affections,
because Wishes and Affections are entirely our own; yet in their Actions and
Deportment the Case is otherwise; these are what others have some Right and
Interest in; and therefore, so far as relates to Conversation, these ought to
be extended to all Parties in Common. There is a Title antecedent to all these
accidental Differences and Divisions, which they cannot disannul; and therefore
we are bound to be offensive, injurious, rude and unconversable to none; but to
do Offices of Kindness, and Courtesy, and common Humanity to every Body,
notwithstanding any Contrariety of Interests and Opinions. And thus far at
least all should agree, to lament, and, as much as in them lies, to heal the
public Breaches and Misfortunes. Such Persons secure themselves from all the
Inconveniences mentioned before; they create no new Enemies, and they lose none
of their old Friends. These are Persons of a Temper fit to be employed as
Mediators, and the most likely of any to succeed in bringing Matters to a fair
and amicable Composition; which Those who endeavor, do yet better, and are
more serviceable, than They who content themselves with Expressions of
Courtesy and common Friendship, to Men of all Parties indifferently. So then;
It appears upon the whole Matter, that there may be Four sorts of Persons, who
are not actually engaged in any Party; Two of which are Blameable, and these
are the Neuters or Indifferent, and the Veering or Unsteady; the other Two are
useful and commendable; and These are the Conversable or Courteous to All
without Distinction; and the Mediators in Order to Agreement; But still in each
of these Kinds, One exceeds the other; the Inconstant Man exceeds in Blame
above the Neuter; and the Mediator in Merit and Commendation above the Common
Friend. Of those that declare and act openly, there are likewise Two sorts,
with the same Differences, the Eager and Violent, and the Moderate and
Well-tempered.

SECT. XIII. Of Private Differences and Disorders.
IT may very reasonably be expected, that I should not dismiss this Head of
Prudence, without speaking to one very frequent Difficulty more; which is, How
Men ought to behave themselves in the Quarrels or Misunderstandings of private
Persons, and particular Families. And here One is to consider both what is most
convenient for his own Affairs, and what can in reason be expected from him. If
the Persons thus at Enmity be such as have no indispensable Tie upon him, he
may very fairly keep in with them both; and though perhaps he cannot love, or
approve of both alike, yet he may, and will do well, to be obliging and kind to
both, and give just Offense to neither. It is great Imprudence in these Cases,
to engage so far with One Side, that they shall expect to have us entirely to
themselves, and think us bound in Honor and Friendship, to espouse all their
Interests, and make all their Resentments our own: And therefore the better way
will be to keep upon the Reserve; to be content with a moderate Share of their
Favor and good Graces. To say nothing in their Company tending to the Matter
in controversy; but to talk altogether of indifferent Things; or at least such
as we personally know to be true, or are otherwise very well assured of: If we
touch upon the Dispute, to say what may be for the Service of both, and may
tend to their reconciliation, and better Understanding. But by no means
submitting to that vile practice of reporting idle Stories, or groundless
Surmises; or aggravating things that have some Foundation; or currying Favor
by discommending or railing at the Adversary of Him with whom we converse. For
Matters here ought to be carried with such an even Hand, that nothing should
pass in Company with the one, which we would not speak, if the other were by;
nay, that nothing should be said to the one, which we would not say to the
other in his Turn too; allowing only for some little Alterations in the Forms
and Manner of our Address; which the different Circumstances of the Persons, or
the Relation or Authority we pretend to with them, or some other accidental
Consideration, foreign to the Subject of the Quarrel it self, may render
seasonable, and seem to require from us.

Justice, the Second Cardinal Virtue.
CHAP. V. Of Justice in General.
What it is.
paying first to himself his Own Duty, and then to others Theirs. And,
according to this Definition, it comprehends all manner of Duties and Offices,
which each particular Person can be any way obliged to. Now these, as I hinted
before, are of Two sorts, according to the Objects of them, which are Two: The
First terminate in a Man's own Person; the Second in other People: All which in
their utmost Latitude sall within the compass of that most extensive Command,
which has expressed the Substance and Sum of all Justice, in those very few,
but significant Words, Thou shall love thy Neighbor as thy self. For here it
is very observable, that the Duty to others is put in the Second place; that
the Love and Duty we owe to our selves is laid as the Groundwork upon which
that to our Neighbor is superstructed, and the Model by which it is to be
proportioned. For, as the old Hebrews, and not They only, but all the World use
to say, Charity begins at home.

Primitive and Original Justice.
and the most Ancient and Fundamental Right of all others, is that Dominion,
which Reason has over the Sensual part of us. A Man must be able to command
and govern himself, before he can be qualified to exercise this Authority, in
demanding Subjection from others. And this Government of one's Self consists in
reserving to Reason the Power of bearing Sway, and keeping the Appetites under;
reducing and restraining them to their just Measures and Degrees, and bowing
their stubborn Necks, till they become flexible, and obedient to Discipline.
The preserving our Souls in this Order and Posture, is what we may call,
Primitive. Original, and Internal Justice, the most genuine, the brightest, and
infinitely most beautiful, of any thing that goes by that Name. This
Sovereignty and Dominion of the Rational, over that sensual and brutish part of
the Soul, which is the Source of all our Passions, and by Them of all our
Troubles and Disorders, has been by some Authors not unfitly resembl'd to a
Rider managing his Horse; keeping himself firm in the Saddle, and the Rein
constantly in his Hand; by which he rules and turns the Beast under him at
pleasure.

Distinguished.
which goes abroad, and is exercised in our Dealings with other People, it is
necessary to observe first of all, that there are two sorts of it. The One
Natural, Universal, Generous, and Brave, Rational and Philosophical; the Other
in a great degree Artificial, Particular, Positive, and Political; contrived
and cramped up, according as the Exigencies of particular Countries and
Constitutions would allow it a larger, or have confined it to a narrower
Compass. The Former of these is much the more regular and uniform, more firm
and inflexible, clearer and fairer of the Two: But alas! it is antiquated and
obsolete, capable of doing very little Service to the World, as it now stands.
This occasioned that Complaint, Very Juris germanaeque Justitiae solidam and
expressam essigiem nullam tenemus; umbris and imaginibus utimur.
That the Substance and express Image of true Right and Justice was long since
fled and gone; and all we live by now, is only some faint Shadows, and
imperfect Copies of that Original Representation, taken from the Life it self.
These are like the first Sketches of a Night-piece; but they are such as
Mankind must be contented with, since, though the Darkness of their Condition
need a stronger Light, yet their present Infirmities cannot bear any thing so
exquisitely bright. This is what they say of Polycletus's Rule, Inflexible,
Unalterable. The other is more slack, and limber, and pliable; it comes to, and
accommodates it self to the Necessities and the Weaknesses of Mankind, nay of
the generality; and That to be sure is the worst and most ignorant part. This
is a Leaden and a Lesbian Rule, a Nose of Wax, that bends into any Form, and
may be wrought into any Figure; and indeed is bowed and changed perpetually,
according to the different Exigencies and Circumstances of Time, and Place, and
Person; the Posture of Affairs, and the variety of Accidents. This in case of
necessity and convenience dispenses with, allows, nay approves of several
things, which the other will not so much as connive at, but must absolutely
condemn, and cannot admit upon any Consideration whatsoever. This establishes
some Vices, and gives them not only the Countenance, but sometimes the Sanction
of a Law; and rejects several Actions in themselves Innocent and Good, as
unlawful and not to be practiced. Natural Justice looks only at the Reason, the
Equity, the Virtue, the Decency and Fitness of the thing: But Positive and
Political Justice proceeds upon other sort of Considerations; it has a great,
I might almost say, principal Regard, to the Advantage, the Convenience; at
least its main Aim and Business is to reconcile these two, and make Profit and
Probity go Hand in Hand, and so mutually promote and assist each other. Since
therefore This is the only kind, which the World is managed by, and the Design
of the present Treatise is to reform Men's Manners, and to better them in such
Points as are practicable, we will confine our selves wholly to this latter
sort. For it must needs be to very little purpose to insist upon the Former; of
which there is nothing now but the Idea and bare Speculation left.

Of Justice as now in use.
and that which is esteemed the Judge and Standard of Human Actions, is first
of all Twofold, with regard to the Rules and Measures of it. The One is what we
call Legal Justice, because it is bound up by the Terms and Letter of the Law;
and this is that Rule which Magistrates and Judges are obliged to determine,
and proceed by. If any Injury be, as there often is great Injury done or
suffered by such Decisions, They who pass the Sentence are in no degree
accountable for it; because their Business is not to make the Law, but to be
governed by, and act according to the Law; and so there is no help, but they
must take it, as it lies before them. The Other is termed Equitable Justice;
and this has a larger Range allowed it; it is not fettered up to Words and
Syllables, but has a Liberty left to consider the present Exigency, the
Circumstances of the Person, the Hardships of his Case; and so can administer
Relief, and determine the Point in Dispute, in a Latitude, not only beyond, but
sometimes even above and contrary to the Letter of the Law. Or indeed, to speak
more properly, This Equity overrules and manages the Law to the best
Advantage, and directs it so, as to answer its proper End, by making the
Execution of the Law agreeable to the Intention, and the Reasons of Enacting of
it. Upon this account it is, that a Wise Man said very truly, That Laws and
Justice were not sufficient of themselves, unless they fell into good Hands,
and were justly and skilfully managed; that is, unless their Sentence proceed
upon equitable Considerations. And this larger and freer way of Proceeding is
the peculiar Province of the Supreme Judge; the Prince in Person, or those, who
in the Construction and Practice of the Law, are commissioned by him for this
purpose, and so equivalent in all they do to his own doing it. For his
Authority is present, though his Person be not; and this is the more effectual,
more powerful Presence of the Two.

Again, if we descend to consider this Justice more particularly, there will
another Division offer it self to us, with regard to the different Methods of
Proceeding. One of which is called Commutative Justice, because it consists in
buying and selling, bargaining, and all manner of Commerce; for the several
kinds of This are reduced to that one general Practice, of trucking and
bartering one thing for another. And this is the Justice in exercise among
private Men; the Rule whereof is Arithmetical Proportions; for our Care is to
make what we give and what we receive in exchange, of equal value. The other is
Distributive Justice; and this is administered by the Public, in Rewards and
Punishments: The Rule whereof is Geometrical Proportion; wherein an exact and
nice Equivalent is not aimed at, nor just the Merit and Quality of the Fact,
and nothing else attended to; but several other Considerations taken in: And
the last Result of the whole Debate is this, What, upon a fair Computation of
all Circumstances put together, is reasonable and fitting for the One to give,
or to award; and for the Other to receive, or to suffer.

No such thing as strict and true Justice in the World.
when it comes to be closely and critically examined, will be found to be no
such thing, as strict and perfect Justice. For the Truth is, as I said before,
Human Nature is not capable of such a thing; it is too resin'd for our gross
Condition, and we cannot bear this, or any other thing in its abstracted
Excellence or Purity. In all practicable Justice there is a Mixture of
Injustice, Favor, and Rigor; Too much and too little; these, like the Allay
in our Coin, are properly called the Remedy; for such indeed they are to the
corrupt and degenerate State of Mankind. There is no such thing as pute and
true Standard current among us; that exact Mediocrity, which we can only form,
and truly now can scarce form in our Imaginations. Hence proceed those Maxims
of the Ancients, That he who designs to do Justice in the Gross, will find
himself under an unavoidable Necessity to be unjust in the Retail; for no
general Rule can be constantly obferv'd, but some particular Persons and Cases
will find themselves aggrieved by it. And He, that will be just in great and
important Occasions, must sometimes be unjust in those of less Consequence.
These are Difficulties so well known, so generally felt and confessed, that in
Matters of Commerce and Commutative Justice, some Lawgivers heretofore were
forced, in order to the bringing the Business of Trade under some Rule, and
restraining the Exorbitancies of it somewhere, to give leave for Men to cheat
to some certain Degree, (as for instance, Not to exceed half of what the
Commodity was really worth,) without being liable to the Law. And this they
were forced to connive at, because they could fix it no better. Again, In the
Case of Distributive Justice, How many innocent Persons are clapped up? How
many guilty acquitted and released? And all this without any Corruption or
Fault of the Judges? And to how much greater a Sum would this Account swell,
if to unjust Condemnations and Acquittals, we should add the Excesses and
Defects in Punishments, how much more or less has been awarded, than the
Sufferer really deserved? For This is almost the constant daily Failure, even
where Justice is administered with the cleanest Hands, and most unblemished
Integrity of Heart. Justice indeed perplexes and hinders it self; and the
greatest and most acute Understanding cannot penetrate into the bottom of
Things. To see, and make Provision against all Inconveniences, requires
Abilities and Providence more than Human.

But, that we may not be thought to complain without cause, and shelter our
selves in Generals, I will now give an Instance, and that a very considerable
one, wherein Distributive Justice seems to me to fall exceeding short: And that
is, In inflicting Punishments when Men do amiss, but not providing any Rewards
to distinguish those that do well; and that too, notwithstanding the dispensing
of these two, are the two great Branches, and, as it were, the two Hands of
Justice; and yet, as This is commonly exercised in Courts of Judicature,
Justice is maimed, and cripled, and inclines altogether to the punishing side.
The greatest Favor we can hope to receive from this lame Goddess, is
Indemnity, and a Manifestation of our own Innocence: And this alas! is Short
Commons; a poor Allowance for those to subsist upon, who have signalized
themselves by eminent and difficult Virtues. But This, as bad as it is, is not
the worst of the Matter; for I will put you another Case that happens every
Day. You shall be informed against, imprisoned, indicted wrongfully, and under
these Calumnies suffer exceedingly, in your Person, your Purse, your
Reputation; you are brought to Trial, and acquitted; This you will say makes
some, though but some Amends neither, to your Credit: Your Innocence is
proclaimed to all the World: And what now is the Fruit of all this Suffering
and Expense? Why you escape the Severity of the Law: A goodly Satisfaction
indeed! a Man is not punished that never deserved it. But where is the
Reparation for all the Trouble and Charge you have been at? for This will stick
by you, and can never be wiped off, though the Suspicion, and Scandal, and all
the Dirt that a false Accuser bespattered you with, may. The Plantiff or
Informer in the mean while, if he can but bring the least Color of probability
for what he deposed against you, comes off clear; and a very easy thing it is,
to make any thing look so suspicious, as shall suffice to prevent the
recovering of Damages upon him: So very niggardly, so shamefully miserable is
Justice in the Matter of Rewards, and gratifying Men for having deserved well;
and so entirely addicted to Punishment. Insomuch, that now the Word is brought
to signify That by way of Eminence, and doing Justice, or being obnoxious to
Justice, is constantly understood in the rigorous Sense, as if Justice had
nothing else to do, but to scourge, and take Men off. And any Man, whose
Disposition is litigious, and his Malice and Conscience wicked enough to put
him upon it, may very easily give his Neighbors a great deal of Trouble and
Charge; and without any danger to himself, run them into such Difficulties, as
will not be possible to get quit of again, without considerable Detriment and
Disquiet.

Now if we would consider Justice, as to the several parts of our Duty, and the
Objects in which they terminate; these are principally Three. For every Man is,
by virtue of his Nature and Condition, a Debtor to God, to Himself, and to his
Neighbor: So that One of his Creditors is above him; Another is upon the level
with him; and the Third is Creditor and Debtor both in one Person. The Duty to
God is but another Phrase for Piety and Religion; so that this Head of Justice
has been largely insisted upon already, in the Second Part of this Treatise.
And therefore, without troubling the Reader any more upon that Subject, I shall
betake my self to the other Two yet behind; the Duty to our Selves, and That to
our Neighbor.

CHAP. VI. Of Justice, as That regards a Man's Duty to Himself.
THis indeed is scattered throughout this whole Work, and every Chapter is full
of it. For what else is the Design of the First Book, which attempts to bring
Men thoroughly acquainted with Themselves, and the Condition of Human Life? What
else does the Second drive at in teaching Men Wisdom, and laying down general
Rules for their attaining to it? What, Lastly, makes up this Third Book, but
especially that part of it which treats of Fortitude and Temperance, which are
both of them Virtues, that have a more direct tendency, and immediate Relation
to this Matter? So that any thing industriously applied to this Topic in
particular, might perhaps be well enough spared. But however, I will here lay
down some Directions, and give the Matter an express and solemn Consideration,
in the most compendious Method that conveniently I can. 1. The First Advice I
shall give upon this Occasion, and that which in truth is the Foundation of all
the rest, is, That Men would bethink themselves, and take up a Resolution not
to live Extempore, and at Random, from Hand to Mouth, and without any
Reflection of what they are, what will become of them, and why they are here;
and yet, as extravagant as all this may seem at first hearing, the greatest
part of Mankind by far are guilty of it. They fool away their Time, and never
live in good earnest; but pass Day after Day, without one serious Thought, or
troubling themselves to look at all before them. They have no Relish, no
Enjoyment of Life; nor make any other use of it, but only to employ it in
unnecessary Trifles, and Things by the by. Their mighty Projects, and busy
Cares are rather a Hindrance and Perplexity, than any Furtherance to the great
Ends of Living: Such Men do every thing in earnest, but live. All their
Actions, and the little broken Parcels of Life, are grave and full of
Attention; but the Bulk and Substance of Life goes off without any Regard or
Consideration at all. This is like a Self-evident Principle, or a Truth taken
for granted in Speculation; upon which they never bestow a Second Thought. That
which is Accidental and Insignificant is made their principal Care; and that
which ought to be their main Business, neglected, as if it were only an
Additional and Unnecessary thing. They are exceeding diligent, and
importunately sollicitous in other Matters; some in acquiring a vast compass of
Learning; some in aspiring to Honors and Preferments; some in heaping up
Riches: Others are intent upon Pleasures and Diversions; Hunting, or Play, or
vain Contrivances to pass away their Time, as if This were a Burden, and hung
upon their Hands: Others are taken up in useless Speculations, fanciful
Notions, pretty Inventions: Others set up for Men of Business, and spend all
their Days in Hurry and Noise: Others pursue Designs different from all these:
But amidst this vast Variety of Follies, few or none apply themselves to the
true Wisdom, by studying how to live indeed. They are Thoughtful and Anxious,
entirely given up to, and eager of many Matters; but Life slips through their
Fingers insensibly, and is turned to no Account. This is only in the Nature of
a Term; a set Period of Time appointed to follow other Business in. Now all
this is extremely injurious and unreasonable; the Source of our greatest
Misery; the falsest and basest way of betraying our selves, and abandoning our
true Interest: It is perfectly losing and throwing away our Life, and the most
perfidious, as well as the most fatal Breach of Duty we can possibly be guilty
of. For certainly every Man owes thus much to Himself, Not to trisle, and be
wanting in his greatest Concern; To make Life as easy, as cheerful, as
desirable, as good to himself as he can; which is to be done no other way, but
by making the most of it in point of Usefulness, and good Management. For
Living well and advisedly is the only Expedient in order to dying so; and This
is the great Task incumbent upon all Mortals. We ought to look upon Life as a
Matter of the last Consequence; a precious Talent; an important Trust, of which
we must render a strict and very particular Account; and therefore are bound to
husband it thristily, and improve it to the utmost of our Power; that we may be
found faithful in our Stewardship, and gain by the Increase. This is our Great
Concern; All the rest are Toys and Geugaws in comparison; inconsiderable, and
very superficial Advantages. I cannot deny indeed, but some there are, who
bestow some Thought of this kind, and pretend to set about it with mavelous
Application: But then this Thoughtfulness comes too late, and they begin to
live when they are just going to die. Like foolish Chapmen, who put off their
Bargains till the Shops are shut, and then complain of an ill Market. What, say
they, shall I never get an Opportunity of retreating from the World, and living
to some Purpose? Alas! Quam serum est incipere vivere, cum desinendum est! quam
stulta mortalitatis oblivio! Dum differtur vita transcurrit.
How unseasonable is it to begin to live, when we can live no longer! What
strange Infatuation makes us thus forget, that we are Mortal! While we put off
to a farther Day, and intend to take up hereafter; that very Life which should
have been employed, is lost and gone. So good reason had all the Wise Men of
Old to call upon us so often and so loudly, to make the best of our Time, and
lose no Opportunities; so just is That Warning, That of all the Necessaries of
Life, Time is the greatest, the most indispensable; what they who want, and are
prodigal of, undo themselves to all Intents and Purposes. The shortness of
Life, and the length of Art, is not more properly applied to the Study of
Physic, and the Art of Healing, than it is to the Art of Living. For this is
an Art too, and such as cannot be mastered without long Study, and great
Application of Mind. This is the true, the only Wisdom; and therefore this
present Direction is the first and most concerning; those that follow are but
so many Deductions from, and Helps to it. 2. The Next is, That we would learn
to dwell alone; to be easy when by our selves; and, if Occasion so require,
well content to be deprived of the Company, and Comfort of all the World. It is
an extraordinary Attainment, to know how to enjoy one's self; and a Virtue as
well as Advantage to take Satisfaction and perfect Content in that Enjoyment.
Let us therefore set about it in good Earnest, and never rest 'till we have
gained this Point upon our selves; The conquering all our Fondnesses, and
uneasy Hankerings after the Conversation of others, and the taking Delight in
conversing with our own Souls; That so our Contentment may depend upon our
selves alone, and not upon other People, nor upon any thing without us. But,
though we should not seek Conversation as our Happiness, and what we cannot
want; yet must not this Self-satisfaction degenerate into a cynical Moroseness,
or a proud affected Solicitude. It is a Fault to refuse, or to disdain the
Company of our Friends; This is what we ought not only to accept, but to be
glad of, and good Humoured in; allowing and practicing all those Diversions,
which pleasant Discourse, and innocent Mirth are able to give us. My Meaning is
only to keep Men from being Slaves to those Diversions, and unable to relish
any Pleasure without them; and such are a great part of the World, almost quite
lost, and sadly to seek, what to do with themselves, when they are alone. Now
every Man ought to be sufficiently provided at Home for his own Entertainment;
and he is very poorly supplied, who cannot subsist upon his private Stock for
one Day at least. But the Man, who has brought himself to do so every Day, and
needs be beholding to no body for his Sustenance and Satisfaction of this kind,
is sure to be always Happy, always pleased. It Is true; In the midst of all
this, he ought to be Civil and Complaisant; to put on an Air of Gaiety, or
Business, comply with the Company, and do as they do; submit to the Necessity
of Affairs, and follow when that calls; in a Word, it will be his Prudence to
accommodate his Temper and Behavior to any Thing that may happen; but
howsoever those Considerations may alter his outward Appearance, and oblige him
to make different Figures in the Eye of the World; to put on all Humors, and
shift his Manner, as often as the Scene changes; yet still at Home, and within
himself he must be always the same. This is the Effect of Meditation, and
serious Thought, which is indeed the Food, the Life, the Essence of the Soul.
And it is a remarkable Instance, how kind Nature has been to us, that what we
thus live upon, is the most frequent, the most lasting, the most easy and
natural Employment of our Souls; for Thought is always with us, and most truly
our own.


But, though all Men's Minds are employed, yet is not the Employment easy to
all alike; nor the Matter they are employed upon, the same. In some, this
Entertainment of themselves is mere Impotence and Childishness; the Dosings of
Idleness and Sloth, the want of Business, and merely the Effect of having
nothing else to do: But Great Souls make it their Choice, they court and covet
the Opportunities for it, look upon it as their main Business, and most
improving Study. And therefore they ply it close with their utmost Application,
and Intenseness of Thought; their Faculties are all at Work, and, as was said
of Scipio, they are never less alone, than when they are by themselves; never
more full of Business than when retreated from the World, and sequestered from
all that Men commonly call such. This, so far as Humane Nature can aspire to
the Resemblance of so bright an Excellence, is to imitate Almighty God; for He
lives, and feeds upon the Eternal Reflections of his own Mind; And Aristotle
guessed right, when he laid down this constant Employment, as the Foundation of
the Happiness, both of the Divine and Humane Nature. For Self-sufficiency, and
Self-satisfaction, are but other Words for Happiness; and These are never to be
had, never to be tasted, but by learning to employ, and to entertain our selves
well with our own Thoughts.

3. But then in order hereunto great regard must be had to the Choice of sit
Subjects for the Mind to dwell upon. For some People make so very ill Use of
this solitary Retreat into themselves, that they are their own worst Tempters,
and Company is their best Preservation. To the Intent therefore, that this
Meditation may be an Employment indeed, and this Entertainment delightful; like
His whose Image our Souls are, we must take Care not to trifle away our Time in
vain Thoughts, and much more still, not to mispend it in Vice. The First is
sure to do us no manner of Good, the Second a great deal of Harm. Some grave
severe Study, some useful profound Knowledge, some Contrivance how to improve
and exalt our Minds, and make our selves better Men, should be our great
Employment and Concern. God has given us Reason and Comprehension; and a large
Possession, a Rich Soil it is; but the manuring, and cultivating, and making it
fruitful is our Duty; the principal Task incumbent upon every Man; what the
Laws of Nature and Religion have covenanted for; and what each of us must
expect to give an Account of. It highly concerns us therefore to be serious and
vigilant, to look narrowly into our selves; and see how Matters stand with us;
to call in our Cares and Endeavors unprofitably spent abroad, and try to turn
these to better Account, by laying them out upon Business more Important at
Home. And when, upon Examination, we find, (as find we shall) that many things
are out of Course, and go much amiss; Some through the Corruption of Vice;
Others from some defect in Nature; a Third by Reason of the Infection we have
taken from Ill Company; a Fourth upon the Account of some Accident that
disorders and confounds us; when, I say, we shall thus perceive our several
Failings, and the true Causes of them distinctly; our next Endeavor must be,
to go considerately to work; correcting what was out of Order, providing
against the like Inconveniences, and cutting off the Occasions that drew us
into Danger, for the time to come. A Man is by all means bound to bring himself
to Reason, and though the Opposition made by unruly Appetites, and vicious
Habits may be very great, and the Difficulties very discouraging, yet
Reformation is a Work that must be done. And therefore a Man ought to set about
it with Resolution; to bow the stubborn Neck of his Passions, whatever it cost
him; and not let all run to ruin, and lose himself by Cowardice, or Sloth, or
a disdainful, unthinking Carelessness.

4. And indeed above all things a Man should beware of a sluggish, santring Way
of Life; for To do Nothing, is to do All; the Soul gathers Rust by lying Idle
and our of Use; and the Way to preserve our Minds as well as our Bodies in
Health and Strength, is to keep them in Breath by constant Exercise, and
Employment. And here too, the Prescription holds, that the Exercise should not
be too violent, and laborious. There is no Occasion for a constant Intenseness
of Thought; but it ought to be wholesome and fit for them; that our Thoughts
should be Serious and Grave, Virtuous and Becoming. And if there be not enough
of this kind laid ready to our Hands, we ought rather to cut out Work for our
selves, than not be doing at all. And thus we may consult our own Genius; and
form such Designs as may give us Pleasure and Entertainment, as well as find us
Business; we may read good Books; confer with good Men; and easily contrive to
lay out our Time so regularly, and in Method; as never to be in a Hurry, never
at a Loss what to do next, or how to dispose of our selves to very good
Advantage.

5. Another good Direction will be, To manage all Occurrences so prudently,
that all that offers, all that is done, or said may turn to Account; To learn
somewhat from every Company we come into, from every Action and Accident to
take some warning, lay down some Rule, make some Application, and bring the
Matter home to our selves, and all this in a way so silent, that no body shall
perceive it. For all the Attempts of this kind grow nauseous and offensive, if
we suffer them once to be corrupted with Noise, and Vanity, and Affectation.

6. But to be a little more particular. We cannot but be sensible, that as a
Man has Three things to take care of, as either Essential Parts of, or
necessary Appendages to his Person; so the Duty, which every one is obliged to
himself in, is the regulating and wise Management of his Mind, his Body, and
his Goods. As for the Mind, (which is the First and Principal, and for the Use
and Benefit whereof those general Rules already laid down, are after a more
peculiar manner calculated) All it is Operations, we know, may be reduced to
these Two, Cogitation, and Volition; consequently the Two great Faculties to be
cultivated are the Understanding and the Will; and the Fruits to be reaped from
our Care and Pains, the Ornaments and Excellencies of the Soul are, Knowledge
and Virtue. As to the former of these, the Understanding; there are Two Vicious
Extremes, and in some Sense indeed Contraries to each other, from which we
should use all possible Care to preserve it untainted. The First of these is
Folly; by which I understand all sorts of Vanity, empty and insignificant
Imaginations, Fopperies and Trifles, such as are excusable only in Children,
but unworthy the Character, and far beneath the Dignity of a Man; For This
Noble Creature was not made to play the Fool; Non ad jocum and lusum genitus,
sed ad severitatem potius.
Jest and Sport may be his Recreation, but he is qualified and designed for
Greater Things. Seriousness and severe Thought are his Business, and Matters of
Weight and Importance expected from him. In the other part of my Division, I
likewise include all fantastical, absurd, and extravagant Opinions; vulgar
Errors, and unreasonable Prejudices. For as Vanity debases the Soul, damps
it is Vigor, adulterates and bastardises its genuine Greatness; so
Prepossession and rash Mistakes, pollute and dishonor, and leave an Eternal
Blemish upon it. We must therefore feed and cherish this Noble Creature, with
Entertainment suitable to its generous Appetite and Nature; that is, with
serious, substantial Studies, such as may be serviceable, and turn to some
Account; we must tincture and soak it well (if I may so say) in Sound,
agreeable Notions, such as are conformable to the Dictates of pure Nature, and
right Reason; and our Care should be not so much to exalt, and refine, and fly
it high, to render it Vigorous and Strong, Acute and Nice; as to regulate and
methodize it, that all its Reasonings may be stanch; its Conclusions true, its
Motions orderly, and its Dispositions virtuous: For the doing Things
Pertinently and Properly, in due Method, and Time, and Measure, is the Effect
of Wisdom, and that which makes the Soul and it is Seize truly valuable.
And here again great Care must be taken to keep our selves from Pertness and
Self-conceit, Positiveness and Presumption; all which are Vices exceeding
common among Men of acute Parts, and a lively strong Mind. It would be much
wiser to put a Check upon our Forwardness; to proceed slowly and deliberately;
to be content to live in Doubt, and suspend our Judgment, and confess our
Ignorance, in such Matters especially, as are controverted, and commonly
opposed; where Reason is confronted with Reason, and Authority with Authority;
and these two so plausible, so strong on both Sides, that they ask Time and
Skill to consider and digest them thoroughly. Nor is This a mean
Accomplishment, or below the Character of the Person I pretend to instruct.
For, let my Reader be well assured, it is a great Thing and a very valuable
Quality, to know how to be Ignorant with Modesty and Decency; and keeping ones
self in Doubt and suspense is the surest and safest Way to true Knowledge. This
is what the most celebrated Philosophers always pretended to do; and indeed it
is one of the fairest and most generous Fruits of Learning and a well
disciplined Mind.

7. As for the Will; This must be brought under Government, and made to submit
it self in every Thing to the Directions of Right Reason. And the reducing, it
thus to Subjection is the Office of Virtue, which tames and subdues it, and
inclines its Ear to this wise Guide, by drawing off its Attention and
Inclination from the Seducements of vain, fickle, and commonly false Opinions,
and by delivering it from the Tyranny of Passion. For These are the Three
Principles, some of which always push on our Souls to Action, and preside over
them in it; but They, who are under either of the latter, are lost and
miserable to the last Degree. For, do but observe the mighty Difference betwixt
them. The wise Man maintains his Post; and hearkens to the true Word of
Command; the Dictates of his Mind, which are agreeable to Nature and Reason; he
keeps his Eye constantly upon his Duty, and regards not what he is disposed to
by his Frailties and Corruptions, but what by the Law he is obliged to do.
Whatever common Opinion would persuade him to, he always suspects for spurious;
whatever Passion would prompt him to, he certainly rejects and condemns. And
the Effect of This is, that he lives at Ease and Quiet, finds Peace always
within, goes on smoothly, and without disturbance; is never driven to any
necessity of altering his Measures, or acting in contradiction to himself, or
repenting of what he had done; for, let the Event be what it will, yet his
Methods were right and proper; he chose the best, and made the most of his
present Circumstances. And then, another Advantage he gains too, which is, to
do nothing with Heat and Violence; for Reason is a Cool and Calm Principle.
Whereas, on the other hand, the foolish Man, who gives himself up to the other
Two, is exorbitant and uncertain; all his Motions are excentrick and wild; he
is in perpetual Confusion, at War with himself, and has no Ease, no
Satisfaction. He is doing and undoing, taking new Measures, beginning again,
repenting and condemning what is past, unsteady in all his Resolutions, and
dissatisfied with his own Choice. For indeed none but the Wise Man can ever be
fixed and contented; and all other Principles but Reason and Virtue are too
feeble, too sickle to settle or to satisfy us. Nulla placidior Quies nisi quam
Ratio composuit.
When This composes us to Rest, we may expect it shall be sweet and refreshing.
A good Man will always have regard to, and stand in awe of his own Conscience;
which is in reality what the Heathens use to call his good Genius or Angel; and
the Reverence he bears to This, will make him careful not to step awry, and
ashamed of misbehaving himself in its Presence. And the true Reason why the
World is no better, is, that Rarum est, ut fatis se quisque vereatur.
so very few People pay that Respect which is due to themselves.

8. The Body comes next to be considered; and to This we owe our Assistance and
good Management. It Is a vain and ridiculous Attempt, to separate these two
principal parts of our Persons, and pretend to lay out all our Care and
Tenderness upon the one, to the Prejudice and Defrauding of its Fellow: On the
contrary, a good Understanding, and mutual Kindness ought to be maintained
between them; that by reciprocal Offices they may be still more closely allied,
more intimately joined. Nature has bestowed a Body upon us, as our necessary
Receptacle and Instrument of Life; and therefore the Soul, which is the
Principal, ought to take the Guardianship and Protection of it. It must not
enslave it self to the Body, it is true, for This were to draw the basest, most
unjust, most dishonorable and reproachful of all Servitudes upon its own Head;
but it is bound to succor, to direct, to advise, and to perform the part of an
affectionate Husband, to this Flesh which Providence has married it to. Care
and Love is its due, though Submission be not; and the Soul should give it the
Treatment of a Master, not the imperious and arbittary usage of a Tyrant; it
must cherish, but not cram it; and show, that if it does not live for the Body,
yet it cannot live here without the Body. One great part of the Artificers
Excellence, is to be expert and dextrous in using the Tools that belong to his
Trade: And it is no less Advantage, that a Wise Man finds in knowing how his
Body ought to be used, and employing it as an Instrument excellently fitted for
the Exercise and Promotion of Virtue. Now the way to preserve the Body in a
good Condition, and of keeping it sit for Service, is by moderate Dier, and
regular Exercise. What Share the Mind ought to have in the Pleasures and
Gratifications of Sense, and how far it is allowed to bear the Body Company in
them; has been already showed in part, and will be explained more largely and
particularly hereafter, when we come to treat of the Virtue of Temperance.

9. The last Branch of this Consideration concerns the Goods or Estate; and for
the adjusting exactly what are the Duties of each particular Person in this
respect, we shall do well to observe, that there are several Offices and Arts
relating to this Matter. There is the Gathering or Increasing part, the Keeping
or Saving, the Managing, the Expending, the Trafficking, and Turning the Penny.
For these are in a manner so many distinct Sciences; A Man may be very knowing,
and a perfect Master in one, and yet altonether ignorant and unexperienced in
the rest of them. The Getting part seems to be more difficult and intricate,
and to consist of more several parts than any of the others. The Expending part
is that which brings most Honor and Reputation. The Saving and Managing part
is the proper Province of the Mistress of a Family; and This is but a dull
Business, obscure and mean in common Esteem, by reason the Methods and the
Fruits of it are not so visible as the rest; but yet so necessary, that This is
the Defense and Security of all, and, ordinarily speaking, our other Cares are
to very little purpose without it.

There are Two Extremes in this Case, both equally vicious and blameable; The
one is the Fondness and inordinate Love of Riches; the other Hating and
Refusing them. By Riches at present I understand all that Wealth, which is the
Overplus of what Necessity and a Competency according to our Quality require to
be supplied with. Now a Wise Man will run into neither of these; but
proportions his Desires according to that Prayer of Solomon, Prove. xxx.
Give me neither Poverty nor Riches; feed me with Food convenient for me. He
will do them Justice, and allow them their proper place in his Esteem, looking
upon them as they really are, a Thing indifferent in its own Nature; the
Occasion and Ground of either Good or Evil, according as they fall into Good or
Ill Hands; but capable of being made use of to many excellent Purposes: And
this is all the Value they can fairly challenge from us.

The Miseries and Mischiefs which attend the immoderate Love of Riches, Book I.
Chap. 23.
and the peevish and humoursom Hatred of them, have been spoken to in the
former parts of this Treatise. And therefore all I have now left me to do is,
to lay down that Golden Rule, which consists in the Mean between these two
Extremes; and that I think will be done in these Five Particulars.

First, It consists in preferring and being pleased with them, but not setting
our Affections upon them. Thus the Philosopher describes his Wise Man, Sapiens
non amat divitias, sed mavult.
One that is not fond of Riches, but yet had rather have them than not. A Man
may be sensible of the Convenience of a Thing, and know how to value it as it
deserves, without placing his Heart, and his Happiness in it. Thus, for
Instance, a Person of low Stature, and weak Limbs, would be glad and well
pleased to be taller and better built; and yet it never breaks his Rest, nor
makes him reflect upon himself as miserable, for not being so. He that seeks
what Nature desires, without Passion and Uneasiness, puts himself out of the
Power of Fortune; and he that is content with what Fortune cannot take away
from him, is the Man agreeable to this first part of the Character.

But Secondly, If Passion and Anxiety be a Fault even in those who seek to
enrich themselves by fair and honest Means only, much less can we be allowed to
endeavor our own Profit by the Loss and Detriment of others. For this is to
feed and grow fat at their Expense. No nor yet may we pursue Riches by base,
and pitiful and sordid Arts; but should take care that all our Increase be so
honorable and becoming, that no Man shall have any Temptation but his own
Wickedness and Ill Nature, to complain of our Proceedings, or grudge us our
good Fortune, or once to say, That it is pity such Blessings should be bestowed
upon us.

Thirdly, When the good Providence of God puts these Opportunities and
Advantages into our Hands, and Wealth comes in upon us in an honest and
creditable Way, we are not to reject and disdain it; but receive it with
Thankfulness and Satisfaction, and let it in, but not let it in too far. Riches
should be admitted into our Houses, but not into our Hearts; we may take them
into our Possession, but not into our Affections. For this is going too deep,
and doing them an Honor much greater than they can ever deserve.

Fourthly, When we have them, we should employ them honorably, virtuously,
discreetly; and convert them into Instruments of doing good Offices, and being
obliging to others. That the manner of their Going out may be at least as
innocent, and as creditable, as that of their Coming in.

Lastly, Whenever they take their Flight, and forsake us, we are not to be
dejected, nor melancholy at the Loss; but thould consider, that though they took
themselves away, they did not deprive us of any thing which was properly and
truly our own. And therefore, Si Divitiae effluxerint, non auferent nisi
semetipfas.
if they give us the slip, there is no Robbery or Wrong in the Case; for we had
no indeseasible Right in them before. In one Word, That Man ill deserves the
Love and Favor of God, and ought to quit all his Pretensions to Virtue, and
Philosophy, and Religion, who cannot support himself with these Comforts, but
allows the Enjoyments of this World, the principal Place in his Esteem. Aude
Hospes contemnere opes, and Te quoque dignum. -- Finge Deo.
Dare to be Poor, accept of homely Food,
Be more than Man, and emulate a God.
Mr. Dryden.

Of Justice between Man and Man: Or, The Duty toward our Neighbor.
ADVERTISEMENT.
THis Duty is very comprehensive, and shoots out into a great many Branches;
For the convenience of treating it more methodically, we will make our first
Division into two general Parts. The First of these shall contain all such
Duties as are Common and Universal, required from All and every Man, to All and
every Man: And that, whether they regard Thought, Word, or Deed: And these are
Love, Fidelity, Truth, Freedom in Advising and Admonishing, Beneficence,
Humanity, Liberality, and Gratitude. The Second extends it self to all special
Duties; such I mean, as depend upon particular Reasons, and express
Obligations; which concern some certain Persons and Relations, and not others:
As Those between Husband and Wife, Parents and Children, Masters and Servants,
Princes and Subjects, Magistrates and Private Persons, the Great and the Mean
Man.

CHAP. VII. The First Part of Justice; or Those Universal Duties, due from All
to All in Common. And first of Love.
What it is.
kindled in our Breasts by Nature; Its Primitive and Original Warmths were
first discerned in the mutual Affection of Husband and Wife, Parents and
Children, Brothers and Sisters: But then, cooling by degrees as it dilated it
self, Art and Human Invention found means to blow it up again, and supply fresh
Fuel, by the Institution of Alliances, Societies, Fraternities, Colleges, and
other Incorporations by which the parts of Mankind are cemented and united. Now
in regard that These Artificial Flames underwent the same Fate with those
Natural; and burnt more feeble and dim, as they were expanded and subdivided;
as also, that their Heat is much allayed, by the Mixture of Profit,
Convenience, Delight, and such other Selfish Considerations; therefore to
cherish and recruit this Fire again, Choice has contrived to unite its
scattered Forces, and contract them into the narrowest compass that can be, by
the ferventest and tenderest of all Affections, that between true Friends. And
This indeed is Love in Perfection; as much more ardent, and endearing, and
refined than any other, as the Vital Heat in the Heart is more intense than
than of the Liver, or the Blood in the Veins.

Latins therefore have given a good Intimation of This, in terming Friendship
Necessitudo, and Friends Necessarii: This is the Sun, the Staff, the Salt of
Life; all is dark and comfortless without the Light of this cheering Fire; all
seeble and tottering without this firm Support; all flat and insipid, till this
Seasons and gives it a grateful Relish. Ecclus. vi. 14, 16.
To this purpose that Wise Man, * A Faithful Friend is a strong Defense, the
Medicine of Lise; and He that finds him, sindeth a great Treasure.

Its Usefulness.
or that the Pleasures and Charms of it are confined to small Numbers, and
secret Retirements; Its Joys and its Beauties are equally, nay more ravishing
and delightful, more useful and seasonable to larger Bodies, and public
Communities of Men. For This is the true Mother, the Bearer and Breeder up of
Human Society; and all States and Politic Constitutions are maintained and
preserved by virtue of her Influence. None but Tyrants and Monsters are jealous
of, or have a dislike to it; not but that even They adore this Virtue in their
Hearts, and have a secret Esteem for it; but because they themselves cannot
come within the Verge and Benefit of it, therefore they bid it open Defiance.
Love is powerful enough of it self to keep the World in order, without the
Addition of any other Helps: And were it suffered to have free Course, and
operate every where with its utmost Vigor, the necessity of all Laws would be
quite superseded. For Laws were only a Resuge taken in to help at a dead List,
and as the best Remedy that could then be found, to supply the Defect and
Decays of Love; and the very End and Aim of these is to bring Men by Authority
and Compulsion, to do That almost whether they will or no, which they ought to
have done freely and out of Inclination, upon a Principle of Kindness. But
still Laws fall far short of This in Point of Efficacy and Extent: For These
can only take cognizance of Overt-Acts, and pretend not to restrain or make
Provision against any other: Whereas Love goes to the Bottom, regulates the
Heart as well as the Tongue and the Hands; purifies the Will and directs its
Operations; thus sweetning the very Spring, whence all our Actions flow. Upon
this Account Aristotle seems to have said, That Wise and Good Lawgivers have a
greater regard to Love, than to Justice. And because in this wretched
Degeneracy of Mankind, both the One and the Other of these are but too often
slighted and defeated, therefore a Third Remedy has been thought of, but That
still less effectual in its Operations, and less valuable in it self, than
either of the Former; which is Force of Arms; than which nothing can be more
directly contrary to that first Principle of Love. And thus you have a short
Scheme laid before you of Politic Institutions and Government; and by what
Steps they grew, or rather indeed fell and sunk down into that Condition we now
see them in. But still the first and single Principle of Amity is worth All,
incomparably above all the rest; as indeed it usually happens in other Cases,
that the Second and Subsidiary Remedies never come up to the First and
Principal; for These are the Effects of Choice, and taken for their own Sakes;
but Those the last Shifts of necessitated Men, who in their Extremity lay hold
on any thing that comes next, and must be content to take what they can get.

Distinguished as to Caulis
great Ambiguity in this Term of Love, and many Distinctions have accordingly
been made, which were but needful to give Us a true Idea of the Variety of
Passions proceeding from it. The Ancients were wont to divide it into Four
sorts, Natural, Social, Hospitable, and Venereal. But this Division so far as I
can apprehend, does not do the Business; and therefore we will try another
Method, and distinguish it these Three following ways.

First with regard to the Causes that create it; and They are Four. Nature,
Virtue, Profit, and Pleasure; and these sometimes advance all together in a
Body; sometimes Two or Three of them; and very often One of them appears
single. But of all these, Virtue is the noblest Cause, and the most powerful;
for This is pure and refined, and has it is Residence in the Heart, the Seat of
Love it self. Nature runs in the Blood, Profit lies in the Purse, and Pleasure
is consigned to some particular Part, and works but upon the Senses of the Body,
except at a distance, and by Reflection only. Accordingly Virtue is more free,
and open, and pure, and firm in its Affection; for all the other Causes, when
destitute of this, are sordid and mean, fickle, and of short Continuance. He
that loves upon the Account of Virtue, can never be weary, because there are
always fresh Charms to attract and entertain him; and if such a Friendship
happen to break off, he has no reason to complain, because the Breach could
not have been, if all that was worth his Love had not failed. He that Loves for
Profit, if a Breach happen there, is full of immoderate Complaints; but exposed
to very just Reproach, for having spared no Pains, and yet gaining nothing by
all his Trouble. He that Loves for Pleasure, when the Satisfaction ceases, the
Passion ceases too; and he takes leave of the Object, without murmuring or
complaint.

The Persons.
and of These there are Three sorts remarkable. One proceeds in a direct Line
between Superioural, as between Parents and Children, Uncles and Nephews; or
Legal and Political, as between a Prince and his Subjects, a Lord and his
Vassals, a Master and his Servants, a Turor and his Pupil; a Prelate, or
Preacher, or Magistrate, and the People under his Care. Now, if one would speak
properly, and go to the Nicety of the thing, This is not true Love; by reason
of the Distance and great Disparity between the Circumstances of the Parties,
which hinders that Easiness and Privacy, that Familiarity and entire
Communication, which is the Principal Fruit and Consequence of Love; as also,
upon the Account of that Obligation there ^es upon them, which leaves such
Persons very little at their own Disposal in this Matter, and so takes off from
that Freedom supposed in this Virtue, making the Affection rather an Effect of
Duty and Necessity, than of Choice. And in consideration of This it is, that we
call it by other Names more suitable to those Engagements. Thus Inferiors, we
say, owe Honor, and Respect, and Obedience to those above them; and Superiors
owe Care, and Protection, and Vigilance, and kind Condescension to those
beneath them.

The Second sort of Love, with regard to the Parties, proceeds in a Collateral
Line; and This is between such as are either almost or altogether Equals. This
again is Twofold, either Natural, or Voluntary. The Natural first, as between
Brothers, Sisters, Cousins, and the like; which is more properly called Love
than the Former, because there is less Disparity in their Condition, and so
more room for Familiarity and free Converse; But then here is an Obligation
from Nature too, and that such a one as loosens or slackens that Knot in one
respect, which it ties and binds us by in another. For many Quarrels and
Misunderstandings commonly arise between these Relations, upon the Account of
Portion, Inheritance, and that variety of Business and Interests, wherein they
are mutually concerned. Besides, that very frequently there wants that
Similitude and exact Agreement of Humors and Inclinations, which is the very
Life and Essence of true and entire Affection. I must confess, he is an ill
Man, or a Fool, but he is my Brother, or my Relation, are Complaints exceeding
common in the Mouths of such Persons: But then there is likewise a free and
voluntary Love between Equals, such as that of intimate Acquaintance, and
Friends; which has no other Band of Union but Affection only; and This is what
in the strict and proper Signification of the Word, we call Amity or Love.

The Third sort, with respect to the Persons concerned, is a Mixture and
Compund of the two Former; from whence it follows, that each Ingredient having
its due Force, this Composition ought to be much stronger than either of the
other can possibly be alone. And such is the Conjugal Affection between Husband
and Wife. This has somewhat of the direct and descending Line, by reason of
the Superiority of the Husband, and the Subjection of the Wife; and it has a
great deal of the Collateral Line too, upon the account that This is a Society
instituted for Familiarity and mutual Comfort. An Intimation whereof Almighty
God himself seems to have given us, in the first Creation of Woman, by taking
her out of the Substance of Man, yet not out of his Head, nor his Feet, but his
Side. And thus married Persons do, and are obliged to exercise these two sorts
of Affection in their Behavior to each other; but each of them so, as may be
most seasonable and becoming. In Public, the Duties of the direct Line take
place; for a Wise Woman will always be sure to treat her Husband before Company
with Submission and Respect; but in private and alone, the Familiarities of the
Collateral Line, and all imaginable Freedoms are to be practiced. This Conjugal
Affection is likewise twofold; and of a compounded Nature in another Respect.
For it is both Spiritual and Corporeal; an Union of Bodies as well as Souls;
which is a Qualification peculiar to This alone, and such as no other kind of
Love can pretend to, except That which is abusively and most injuriously styled
so, and such as not only all wholesome Laws, but even Reason and Nature it self
have always disallowed and condemned. Upon these several Accounts then this
Affection of a married State is fitted to be exceeding great and strong,
powerful and endearing. But yet there are two or three Rubs in the way, that
check and cool it, and very seldom suffer it to rise up to all the Perfections
of a just Friendship. One is, That no part here is left to their own Liberty,
but the first Entrance upon it. When once they are in, they must even make
their best on it, for there is no getting out again. The persisting and
continuance in this Soceity is irreversibly bound upon them; and this
Constraint is the universal Condition of all the best and most Religious, that
is of all Christian Marriages; For in other Persuasions Men are left more to
their Liberty, by the allowing Divorces, sinal Separations, and Nullities of
this Obligation. Another (if the Ladies will give us leave to say so) is the
Weakness of the Sex; whose Strength of Mind is not sufficient to keep up, and
hold pace in a perfect Conference, and unreserv'd Communication of all a Man's
Thoughts; and the Contemplations of a penetrating and judicious Mind. So that
here is quite another Turn of Soul; it wants Substance and Solidity to keep the
Knot right; and this Conjunction is like the fastening of one thing which is
stubborn and inflexible, to another that is slender, and limber, and yielding;
which for want of Strength to bear up against it, buckles under, and slips away
from it. A Third Impediment to that entire Affection in a Conjugal State, may
be imputed to the great Intricacy of Business that attends it; the Children,
the Relations on both sides; and a great many other Uneasinesses and
Perplexities, which, though but an Accidental Inconvenience, and not constant and
unavoidable, as the two former are, yet is frequent and considerable enough to
deserve a Remark here, and too often disturbs the Happiness and Quiet, and
cools the vigor of that Affection, which is the Blessing and Ornament of that
State.

Degrees.
With regard to This Consideration it is again Twofold. One Common and
Imperfect, which indeed ought rather to be termed Benevolence or Well-wishing,
Familiarity, Particular Acquaintance: And this varies exceedingly, and may
differ almost infinitely in the degrees of it, each of which may be more or
less close, and intimate, and strong than other: The Other is Perfect; and this
is a sort of Phoenix, few, if any one Instance of it to be seen in the World;
so far from being practiced by Mankind, that they can scarce form a tolerable
Idea of it to themselves; or reach up to the Force and Excellencies of the
thing, by all the Strength of mere Imagination.

For the clearer and more distinct Understanding of this Difference, it may be
of some Service to us to give a Description of each, and to confront them with
one another; as for Example: 1. The Common may be conciliated, and come to its
utmost Pitch in a very little while; but long Time, and great Deliberation must
go to the Finishing a perfect Amity. Such Persons, according to the Proverb,
must eat at least a Bushel of Salt together, before they can be qualified to
contract an entire Friendship. 2. That which is Common may be contracted and
carried on by an infinite variety of Accidents, which contribute to our Profit
and Delight; whereupon a Wise Man prescribed these two Rules for the attaining
to it; That a Man should be entertaining in his Discourse, and obliging and
serviceable in his Actions; for if the One of these do but furnish out
Pleasure, and the other promote the Interest of the Persons with whom we
converse, all that a Common Friendship pretends to, is done effectually: But
now, That which I call a Perfect Friendship is never built upon such mean
Considerations. Nothing less than the Contemplation and mutual Experience of an
unfeigned and vigorous Virtue can be Foundation strong enough for so noble a
Superstructure. 3. The Common Friendships may extend themselves to a great
Number of Persons: But the true entire Friendship admits but of One Partner;
and this is to all Intents and Purposes a Second Self: so that although the
Persons are Two, yet their Hearts and Affections are One and the Same. And the
necessity of confining such Friendships to Two only, is very evident from the
Nature of the thing. For to suppose more, destroys the Notion, and obstructs
all the Offices and Operations of it. For instance, To succor and assist a
Friend in his Distress, is an indispensable Obligation; but if we put the Case
of Two such standing in need of our Help at the same time; and not only so, but
desiring Kindnesses which are inconsistent and contrary to one another, Which
way shall I turn my self; or how can I discharge my Obligations, when one of
these is favored and relieved to the Prejudice and Neglect of the other?
Again, My Friend imparts a Secret to me, What Distraction is here? If I reveal
it, This is a Breach of Trust and Friendship, which obliges me to be Faithful
in keeping what is thus deposted with me: But then, if I do not communicate it
to my other Friend, this is Unfaithfulness too; for it is another Law of true
and entire Friendship, to unbosom themselves freely, and to have no Reserves
from each other. Thus you see the Confusion and Perplexity, the
Impracticableness and utter Impossibility indeed of more Friends than One, in
the highest and most genuine Acceptance of the Word. And, no doubt,
Multiplication of Parts, and Division, is, generally speaking, an Enemy to
Perfection, as Union is a natural and inseparable Property of it. 4. The Common
Friendship admits of Diminution, and Increase; it is subject to Exceptions,
Limitations, different Modifications and Forms; it grows warmer and colder; and
comes and goes by Fits, like an intermitting Fever; according as the Person is
Absent or Present; as his Merits are more or less; and the Kindnesses he does
more or less frequent and engaging; and many other Considerations there are,
capable of making an Alteration in our Affections of this kind. But now, That
Friendship, which is perfect and entire, is much otherwise; firm and constant
to it self, even and steady: Its Warmths are healthful, its Temper regular, and
all its Motions vigorous and uniform. 5. The Common Friendship admits and
stands in need of several Rules for its Direction; several Wise Cautions
contrived by considerate Persons for the regulating and restraining it, and
preventing any future Inconveniences, which may happen to arise from
Unwariness, and an unguarded Conversation. One of these is, To love our Friend
so far as may be consistent with the Preservation of our Piety, and Truth, and
Virtue. For even that old Expression of Amicus usque ad Aras, implies this
Restriction. Another is to love him so, as if you were sure one Day to hate
him; and to hate a Man so, as if you were hereafter to love him; that is, To be
prudent and reserved in your Passions and Affections, and not abandon one's
self so entirely, or be so violent in either Extreme, that a Man should have
just occasion to repent, and condemn his former Behavior, if, at any time
hereafter there should happen to be a Breach, or any Coldness grow betwixt
them. A Third is, To come into our Friend's Assistance of our own accord, and
without being called. For it puts a Friend out of Countenance to demand his
Right; and he buys a Kindness dear, when forced to ask what he looks upon as
his just Due, and that which he conceives he ought to be prevented in.
Therefore these Obligations are never fully satisfied, except we be always
ready and early in our Courtesies, and, if that be possible, beforehand with
his very Wishes. A Fourth is not to be troublesome to our Friends, by
entertaining them with dismal Stories of our own Misfortunes, and being always
in the complaining Strain. Like Women, that make it their whole Business to
move Pity, and are constantly magnifying their own Hardships and Sufferings.
Now all these are very useful and seasonable Directions, fit to be observed in
common Friendships: But in That more sublime and perfect one, there is no
occasion at all for these; This disdains all Forms, and is above the Pedantick
Niceties of Ceremony and Reserve.


Perfect Friendship, what.
by giving the Reader a Draught and Description of Friendship in Perfection:
Which is no other, in short, than a free, full, and entire Mingling of Souls
throughout, and in every part and point. To explain this now in Three
Particulars. I say First, It must be a Mingling and (if I may so express it) an
Incorporating, and not a Conjunction of Souls only. For this gives us a
Resemblance of Solid Bodies, which, how strongly and artificially soever they
may be tacked together in one part, yet do not touch in all; And not only so,
but that very Ligament which joins them together, may be dissolved, or cut
asunder, and each of these Bodies may subsist, and remain, and feel it self
entire, after Separation. But now in these perfect Friendships, the Souls of
Men are entirely absorpt in each other; so confounded, as never to be
distinguished, never to be parted again; like Liquors well mixed, which can
never be drawn off from each other. And That is the perfect, the universal
Communion of Minds, that entire Agreement of Judgments and Inclinations, which
I rather chose to express by mingling of Souls, as a Phrase that gives us a
stronger Idea of this Union, than any Resemblance taken from Solids could
possibly do. Secondly, It is free, and purely the Work of Choice, a generous
and spontaneous Act of the Will, without any Obligation, or distant Inducement,
foreign to the Worth and Agreeableness of the Parties. For nothing is more
voluntary than Love; and so much of Constraint as you put upon it, so much you
weaken the Affection, and take off from the true Nature and Commendation of the
Virtue. Thirdly, It is universal, and without Exception; no Reservation of any
thing, nothing that can be called ours in bar to our Friend's Title and
Pretensions. Estate, Honors, Preferments, Judgments, Thoughts, Wills, all laid
open and in common; nay, even Life it self is what both have equal Right in.
From This so universal and entire Communication it is, that that those Maxims
have taken place, of Friendship finding or making all equal; of Friends having
no Property; and the like; such can no longer lend or borrow; they cannot give
or receive; there is no such thing as Beneficence and Obligation,
Acknowledgments or Returns, or any such Offices of Kindness or Gratitude
practicable or in force for Their Condition. These indeed are the Arts and
Methods by which ordinary Friendships are cherished and maintained; but at the
same time that they are Testimonies of Affection, they are Marks of Distinction
too. Whereas, in this Case, it is as with one's own Self; and as a Man cannot
be obliged to himself for any Service done to his own Person, nor owe any
Gratitude upon the Account of that Kindness and Readiness to relieve his own
Wants, which he feels in his Breast, no more can one true Friend be indebted to
another upon any the like Occasions. Nay, even Marriage, though it give us the
best, yet is even That but a distant and feeble Resemblance of the Divine Union
we are now treating of. The Laws allow no such thing as Distinct Properties,
and Donations betwixt Man and Wife. And therefore in Friendship could there be
any such thing as giving and receiving, the Benefactor would be That Person who
made use of his Friend's Kindness, and so put it in his Power to do what became
him. For the principal Design, and eagerest Wish of each Party, being to snatch
every occasion of mutual Assistance and Benefit; He who surnishes the
Opportunity, and gratifies this Desire, is properly the Donor. Since it is to
his Bounty that the other ows his greatest Happiness; for such is the
Satisfaction of compassing his Desires, and effecting that which is
incomparably more pleasant and dear to him, than all the Advantages and
Enjoyments in the World besides.

Examples of Friendship.
and unreserv'd Communication of Souls in ancient Story. When Blosius was
apprehended, upon the Account of a mighty Friendship known to be between Him
and Tiberius Gracchus, who was already under Sentence of Condemnation for
Seditious Practices; upon Examination what he would have done for his sake, he
replied, That he would have stuck at nothing to do him Service. The Judges
proceeded further, and asked, Whether if Gracchus had defir'd him to set the
Temples on Fire, he would have complied with so Sacrilegious a Request: He
answered again, That Gracchus was not capable of desiring so wicked a Proof of
his Friendship; but upon supposition that he could, he should not have refused
it. Now This was a very bold and a dangerous Answer. The first part of it
indeed, that Gracchus could not entertain a Thought so impious, was no more
than he might well enough venture to say; because, according to the Account we
have already given of this Matter, every Friend in perfection is not only fully
acquainted with the Disposition, and all the Thoughts of his Friend, which
sufficiently qualifies him to be responsible for them all; but he is absolute
Master of them, and so can dispose of them, as much as of his own. But that
last Clause of doing so if Gracchus had required it, was idle and impertinent;
for it does not in any Degree take off from what he had affirmed before,
concerning his Assurance of Gracchus not entertaining any such Desire, nor make
the thing one Whit better or worse. Now this Instance shows us the perfect
Harmony of Souls, with regard to the concurring Judgments and Inclinations of
such Friends.

The Second Instance relates to their Fortunes. To which purpose we read of
Three Friends, (This Number of Three I confess is a Contradiction to the Rules
here proposed, and tempts us to think that this Friendship, though very
extraordinary, had not yet attained to all the Degrees of just a Perfection)
But Three however there were: Two of them in very plentiful, the other in as
low Circumstances, who had a poor old Mother, and a young unmarry'd Daughter,
both lying upon his Hands. This Person upon his Deathbed makes a Will, and
bequeaths to One of his Friends his poor feeble Mother to maintain; to the
Other his Daughter, with a Charge to see her as well matched as possibly he
could; and in case either of these happened to fail, the whole Care of both was
to devolve upon the Other. A notable Legacy you will say; and so the World then
thought it; for every Body made themselves extremely merry with so odd a
Bequest. But, while the World ridiculed this unusual piece of Executorship, the
Heirs themselves took the Administration upon them with wonderful Satisfaction;
and each was greedy to get his Legacy into his possession. Within a very few
Days after, the Legatee to whose share the Mother fell, happened to die too;
and then the surviving Coheir, succeeding into the whole Concern, took
particular good Care of the Mother; and, as soon as conveniently he could,
enquired out convenient Matches for both, married his own only Daughter, and
that of his deceased Friend, upon one and the same Day, and divided his whole
Estate equally between them. Now, according to this Case thus stated, as you
see, it has been the constant Opinion of the Wisest Men, that He who died
first, gave greater Demonstrations of his Friendship, and was a more bountiful
Benefactor, than either of the Survivors; that he really bequeathed them the
most valuable Inheritance, by putting into their Hands such occasions of doing
good; and allowing them the Satisfaction of laying themselves out in his
Service, as became their Character, and the Necessities of his own Family
required.

The Third Example goes higher still, and reaches to Life it self. And here we
may reflect upon that well-known Story of two Friends. That a Tyrant had
condemned one of them to die, and had appointed the Day and Hour of his
Execution; but he with great Importunity obtained Leave to go and take Care of
his Affairs and Family, upon this Condition, that he should give Security, and
find one to be bound Body for Body, for his surrendering himself again at the
Time prefixed; and in case he failed, then his Bail to undergo the same Capital
Punishment, which had been awarded to his Principal. The Condition was readily
accepted, and the Prisoner produces his Friend to be bound for him, who
accordingly was imprisoned in the other's stead. The Day of Execution came, and
this Bondsman prepared himself to die with all imaginable Cheerfulness. But, as
he was going about it, the Condemned Person came in, released his Security, and
offered himself to the fatal Stroke. This strange Generosity made such
Impression upon the Tyrant, that, much out of Countenance, and full of
Astonishment, he was conquered into Mercy; set them both at Liberty, and made
it his Request, that these brave Men would accept of the Proffers he made of
his Kindness and Affection, and do him the Honor to admit him into their
Number, and reckon that they had now a Third sincere and generous Friend.

CHAP. VIII. Mutual Faith, Fidelity; Perfidiousness, Secrecy.
The Excellence of Fidelity.
and unanimously agreed, that Mutual Faith is the common Band and Cement, by
which Human Society is held together, the very Bottom and Groundwork of all
Justice; and even those perfidious Wretches, who are the most infamous in
practice, and delight most in Falsehood and Wrong, cannot but acknowledge the
Excellence of this Virtue, and that it is of infinite consequence to have it
strictly and religiously observed. Nihil augustius Fide, quae Justitiae
Fundamentum est; nec ulla res vehementius Rempublicam continet and vitam.
Sanctissimum humani pectoris Bonum.
Nothing, says Tully, is more noble, nothing more venerable than Fidelity; for
This is the Foundation of Justice; it knits Men to one another, and contributes
as much as any one thing whatsoever, both to the Security of the Public, and
that of Private Persons. Faithfulness and Truth are the most Sacred, most
reverend Excellencies and Endowments of a Human Mind.

Ante Jovem generata, Decus Divumque Hominumque;
Qua sine non Tellus pacem, non aequora norunt;
Justitiae consors, tacitumque in pectore Numen.

Eternal Truth, Sister and Twin to Jove,
Glory of Men below, and Gods above;
The vast expanded Globe's diffusive Soul,
By thy fixed Laws, Sun, Stars, and Seas do roll.
Firm on thy Base, and knit in Sacred Band,
Peace, mutual Trust, and equal Justice stand.
In Man thy Native Light is shed abroad,
And every Breast is filled with a Domestic God.
The Rarity of it.
Men differ extremely, and in practice contradict themselves. For the World is
full of Treachery and Falsehood; and very few shall we be able to find who are
truly and entirely True and Just in their Dealings. Nay, even those who make a
Conscience of being so, yet are frequently guilty of Breach of Faith, such as
not only the World does not easily discover, but such as they themselves who
commit it, are not sensible of. For if they can but six upon any colorable
Pretense to varnish over such an Action, and give it a tolerable good Face;
they presently persuade themselves, that all is well, and they have done
nothing amiss. Others there are eternally upon the Hunt for Niceties and subtle
Evasions, by which to justify their Proceedings; and here they retreat and
shelter themselves. If the World take upon them to censure their Doings, or
their own Conscience be either Scrupulous before, or Clamorous afterward, they
cast up an Intrenchment of Distinctions round about them; and under this Covert
go on, without boggling, or being ashamed of any thing. Now, in order to the
clearing all the Difficulties that may arise upon this Occasion, I shall
endeavor to set this whole Matter in its true Light, and direct Men how to
behave themselves. And the whole, I think, of what needs to be said, may
conveniently enough be reduced to Four Considerations. The Person that engages
his Faith; the Party to whom that Engagement is made; the Subject Matter, or
the Thing covenanted for; and the Manner or Form of entering into that
Engagement.

First, As as to the Person engaging his Faith, it is one necessary
Qualification to the rendering that Promise valid and legal, that he have Power
to promise, and to make it Good; If he be under the Direction, and at the
Disposal of an other, he is in no Condition to engage at all; nor is there any
Force in such a Covenant, till it be ratified and confirmed by the Person,
under whose Authority the Promiser is. Thus God himself has determined and
stated the Matter at large, under the Levitical Law; Number. chapter xxx.
where the Vows of Wives, and Children, and others in a State of Pupillage and
Subjection, are declared of none Effect, till known and approved by their
Husbands, or Parents, or Guardians. And the Reason of this is plain, because
Nature and Duty have vested these Persons with an Original and Antecedent Right
in those under their Care, which no After-act of such, without Their Consent,
can convey away, or disannul: They have nothing to give, and therefore they
promise what is none of their own. Thus in the Roman Story, the Tribune
Saturninus, and his Accomplices are esteemed to have been justly put to Death,
notwithstanding they quitted the Capitol, (which they had rebelliously invaded,
and possessed themselves of,) upon the Consuls Word of Honor. For these very
Consuls were Subjects to the Commonwealth and Ministers of Public Justice
only; and therefore they had no Right to promise Indemnity, for Crimes against
the State and People of Rome in general But, when a Man is entirely at his own
Disposal, and covenants for such Things as he has an indisputable Right to
make Good, he is obliged to keep his Word punctually, let him be otherwise
never so Great, never so Absolute. The rather indeed upon these Considerations;
because the more Absolute he is, the more Free he is to Promise, and the better
Able to Perform. And therefore that common Maxim is a very Just and True One,
That the bare Word of a Prince, ought to be as Sacred and Obligatory, as the
solemnest Oath of a Private Man.

As to the Person, to whom the Engagement is made, This is a Consideration,
which makes but little Difference in the Case; for let him be Who or What he
will, it ought to be discharged. There are but Two Exceptions which are
sufficient to dissolve this Obligation, according to the Judgment of Those who
have discussed this Point. The One is, if he did not accept of this Engagement,
so as to rest satisfied in, or place his Dependence upon it, but required some
other Security, and rested his Faith upon That: For, as the Giving of Faith
ought to be looked upon as Sacred, so should the Receiving it be too; and
Distrust in the one Party is no less a Disparagement to it, than Fallacy and
Trick in the other. If it be not relied upon for the Sake of its own binding
Force, the Confidence is lost and broke; and it ceases to be mutual Faith any
longer. The demanding of Hostages, and keeping Men under Guard, and so entering
into Caution, and requiring Pledges of any sort, is not trusting to Men's
Truth, but to their Security; and it is Ridiculous and Senseless, to call This
trusting to Men's Honesty. He that is confined, either by a Keeper, or a
Prison, has been false to no Engagement, if he make his Escape; nor can he be
said to have deceived those, who never reposed any Confidence in him. Had such
an one been left at large upon his Parole, or had he prevailed with others to
stand bound for his Appearance; Honor and Conscience would have obliged him to
suffer any Inconvenience rather than falsify his Word, or give up his Bail, or
any manner of way disappoint the Expectations, and betray the Trust of those
who depended upon him. And therefore the Reason of that Roman seems to carry a
great deal of Force, Vult sibi quisque credi, and habita Fides ipsam sibi
obligat Fidem. Fides requirit Fiduciam, and relativa sunt.
Every Man is desirous to find Credit; and a Promise is then binding indeed,
when an entire Dependence is reposed in it; For Faith is mutual, it implies and
requires Trust and Belief in the Person to whom it is given; These two are
Relatives, and, as such, stand and fall together.

The other Exception is, If the Promise were conditional, and mutual, and the
Person to whom it was made, broke Articles first. For in this Case (say some
old Authors) Men are to be paid in their own Coin, and Fragenti fidem fides
frangatur eidem -- Quando Tu me non habes pro Senatore, nec ego Te pro Consule.
He that breaks his Word, gives those he deals with a Privilege of doing so
too; according to that Declaration of the Roman Senator; When you cease to
treat me as a Member of the Senate, I shall think my self dispensed with from
paying you the Respect due to a Consul. The false and perfidious Man has
forfeited all his Natural Right to Truth and Fair-dealing; For the Obligations
of this kind, so far as they are founded in Nature, are Reciprocal and
Universal; and therefore, whatever such an one can challenge, must be from some
Supervening Title. But whatever is indented for by Positive Agreement
afterward, cancels all the Advantage, that might otherwise have been taken of
his former Unfaithfulness, and makes it Unreasonable to revenge and retaliate
it. These Two Cases are generally looked upon, as Reservations from the general
Rule of being punctual to one's Word; and we shall do well to give even these a
Careful Censideration, for perhaps there are some Junctures and Occasions, in
which They may not be able to bear us out; or at best, if it be our Privilege
to regulate our selves by them, it is not our Duty to do so; and a Man may
sometimes see good Cause, rather to submit to an Inconvenience, and forego the
Use of his Liberty, than to stretch it to the utmost Point, and do All, that in
Point of Rigor he might well enough justify himself in. But however; allowing
the most that can be made of the Matter, where the Promise does not fall within
the Compass of these Two Cases, no Consideration relating to the Parry for
whose Assurance it was made, can excuse us from looking upon it as Sacred and
Indispensable. 1. For First, Chapter 16.
a Man is obliged to keep his Word with his Subjects, as will be proved and
enforced more at large in the following part of this Treatise; and no
Authority, though never so Arbitrary and Full, can set him above the
Obligations of Conscience in this particular. 2. So is he likewise toward his
Enemy; witness That so much Celebrated Act of Regulus, the Edict of the Roman
Senate, against all those to whom Pyrrhus had given leave to go to Rome upon
their Promise of returning; Witness again Camillus, who would not so much as
reap the Advantage of another's Treachery, though he was to have had no part in
the Fact it self, but sent the Children and their villainous Schoolmaster bach
to the Falisci. 3. Nor have considering Persons thought themselves at Liberty
to be unfaithful even to Robbers, and notorious Malefactors; for Pompey was
punctual with the Pirates and Banditi, and Augustus was so to Crocotas. 4. As
little Privilege to be false does any Difference in Religion give one, as is
sufficiently evident from the Instance of Joshua and the Gibeonites. The safer
and more honorable Way therefore, is never to treat, or enter into any manner
of Terms with those whom we think unworthy of common Honesty from us; to
disdain any Capitulation, and contracting any sort of Alliance with Wretches we
pretend such Detestation to, is much more agreeable to the Pretensions Men make
to Zeal and Religion. And to Persons possessed with so great an Abhorrence to
Heretics and Apostates, much may be said for this. Perhaps indeed, no other
Reason but extreme Necessity, and the hopes of reducing them; or the Prospect
of some very great and Public Good, by amicable Accommodations, should be
sufficient to induce them to plight their Faith to them; but if they condescend
thus far, no question they are bound to stand by their own Act and Deed; for
sure They that are good enough to be treated with, are sit to have the Terms of
the Treaty made good to them.


Mat^ the ^nise.
which respects the Matter of the Promise, if That be unlawful or impossible to
be performed by us, we are absolutely discharged from the Obligation; And in
all Cases of Injustice, the best thing we can do, is to disclaim and get quit
of it; for the Performance would but aggravate our Crime, and make our Guilt
double, by the obstinate persisting in it. All other Excuses, such as Loss, or
Displeasure, Difficulty, Inconvenience, the Trouble, or the Expense of the
Undertaking, are too Weak to pass Muster. And of this the old Romans have left
us many brave Examples, who very frequently Quibus tanta utilitate Fides
antiquior fuit.
used to forego very considerable Advantages, rather than be guilty of any
thing, that might bring Truth and Fidelity into Question.

The Manner of premising.
for, as all the Ways of binding our Consciences are not equally Solemn, so
neither are all equally Obligatory; and therefore several Doubts and
Controversies have been started upon this Point. Several Persons are of
Opinion, that a Promise extorted by Force, and Fear, or obtained Fraudulently
and by Surprise, does leave no Tie upon the Conscience: Because, in both these
Cases, the Will has not it is free Course; nor can the Judgment act with that
impartiality and clearness, which is necessary to the making a just
Determination: Others again tell you quite otherwise; that the Will is not
capable of being constrained; and though the Choice be not absolutely voluntary
and free, yet there is Choice enough left to induce an Obligation. Accordingly
we find, that Joshua was far from thinking himself at Liberty; nay, that he was
commanded to fulfill the Covenant made with the Gibeonites; though perfectly
tricked into it by Surprise, and a false Representation of their Case. The most
I think that can be said, (if thus much may be said) in Favor of the Former
Opinion is, That a bare Promise may be dispensed with in such Circumstances;
but if that Engagement were confirmed by the Solemnity of an Oath, a Man must
look upon himself to be bound by it: Bound, though not in Respect of strict
Equity, and the Merits of the Cause; yet in Respect to the Name of the Just and
Holy God, who was invoked as a Witness and a Judge upon that Occasion. But that
a Man in such Cases may be very well allowed to seek any Redress or Reparation,
which the Laws will give him, and which he has not positively tied up his own
Hands from requiring, for such Violence or Deceit. And this Resolution too
seems to have some Countenance given to it, by the Method Jeshua took, who,
when the Fraud was discovered, did not treat those Gibeonites as common Friends
and Allies, but made them Hewers of Wood, and Drawers of Water; and though he
spared their Lives, revenged their Falsehood, and crafty Dissimulation, by
keeping them under, and employing them in servile and laborious Offices. That
the Formality of an Oath, and interessing Almighty God in our Promises adds to
the Engagement, and makes it more forcible and binding, no Doubt can be made;
for Breach of Faith is then a double Offense, and Aggravates that
Unfaithfulness which is bad in its self, with the Addition of wilful Perjury,
which is much Worse. But to think to tie Men up by new and fantastical Oaths,
as some do, is altogether useless and unnecessary; and so is the multiplying of
common Oaths without some urgent and very important Occasion. For it is
certain, that honest Men need not be thus dealt with; and those that are not
so, will be bound by nothing we can devise. The best and most commendable
Course is to Swear by the Name of the One True Everlasting God; and to do this
with a becoming Reverence, and serious Deliberation; as considering, that he is
a severe Avenger of those who take his Name in vain; that they must give
Account for all breach of Faith, and Trust; but especially, that he will be
very rigorous with those, who by a most monstrous Hardiness, and detestable
Impiety, take Advantage of the Solemnity of an Oath; and turn the Use of his
Name into an Opportunity of deceiving the more effectually.



Keeping of Secrets.
which is that of Keeping the Secrets imparted to, and entrusted with us. And
This is more troublesome than People commonly imagine; especially, when they
are such as Great Men have either committed to us, or are concerned in. Were
the Difficulties that attend this Duty rightly considered, it would give a
mighty Check to curious and inquisitive Tempers. For sure, that Man acts most
prudently, who declines this Trust as much, and knows as little of this kind,
as possibly he can: For he that thrusts himself under these Obligations,
entangles himself in more Snares, and Uneasinesses, than he is aware of. For,
besides the constant Guard he must keep upon his Tongue, that none of these
Things make their Escape, he falls under a Necessity many times of lying or
disowning what he knows, in a manner irreconcilable with Sincerity and a Good
Conscience; or at least of evading it by such mean and little Shifts, as are
very grating to a Man of Generosity and a Great Soul. This therefore of
avoiding such Troublesome and Dangerous Knowledge, is the first and best
Advice. But if there be no Remedy, and Men will unlock their Breasts to us,
notwithstanding all the modest Pains we are at to be excused, the Next Rule is,
To be Faithful and Exact in the safe Custody of all committed to us under the
Seal of Secrecy; and to this Purpose to practice a prudent Reserve in all our
Conversation; Which is an Art, that every Man cannot be Master of; for it
requires something of a Disposition in Nature, as well as Art and Industry
afterward, and the Sense of that Obligation we are under in these Cases;
Attendency to Silence, as well as a Custom of it: For the open and gay Tempers
are always in Danger; and They who affect to Talk much in all Companies, will
be sure very often to say a great many Things, which ought to have been
suppressed.

CHAP. IX. Truth, and Freedom in Advising and Reproving.
Its Excellence.
I mean the venturing to say bold and unacceptable things; for free and cordial
Advice, and Reproof is a most wholesome and admirable Medicine: It is one of
the most noble and useful Offices of Friendship; the best Argument, that a
Man's Affection is Sincere, when he is content to run the Hazard of giving some
little Uneasiness, in Prospect of doing a great deal of Good: For it is
Profiting, and not Pleasing, that every Friend should aim at; and one of the
most important, as well as most express Commands, which the Gospel has left
upon us with regard to Conversation, is This; If thy Brother offend against
thee, admonish him.

The Usefalness.
so circumspect in all his Behavior, as not sometimes to stand in need of
having this Physic applied to him. But Those, who are prosperous and great in
the World, seem to require it more than others; For there is somewhat in that
Condition, which by naturally disposing Men to a loose Gayety, and unthinking
Heedlessness, makes it exceeding difficult and rare, to be very fortunate and
very wise at the same time. But especially Princes, who are always in view, and
curiously watched; who sustain a public Character, and have an infinite deal
of Business constantly upon their Hands; who are fain to take things upon
Trust, from the Observation and Report of other People; and who are used to
have by much the greatest part of what is true, and highly concerns them to
know, concealed from them; These Persons above all others have very great need
to be freely dealt with, and set right in their Proceedings: And they who are
not so by the Persons about them, either run a desperate Hazard for want of it,
or else are wise and penetrating, much above the rate of common Men, if they do
well without it.

The rarity and difficulty of it.
as necessary and useful as it is, is discharged faithfully by very few. For
indeed, few are capable of discharging it; There being Three Qualifications
requisite to capacitate Men for it. These are, Judgment or Discretion; Freedom
or Courage to speak what one thinks; and Affection or Fidelity. All These make
the Composition perfect; and all must concur, to give a Relish and due Temper
to each other. But if Men had all these Accomplishments, yet it is to be
questioned, whether they would put them in practice. So that the Difficulty is
double: For very few undertake this ungrateful Office for fear of displeasing;
and of those who have Sincerity enough to attempt, few have Skill enough to
perform it as it should be. Now This is an extremely nice Undertaking; and if
ill done, like a Medicine improperly given, though never so Sovereign in its own
Nature, it puts the Patient to a World of Uneasiness, and is sure to do more
hurt than good. The Effect of it is only to harden him the more; and thus
Reproof has the same Operation that Flattery would have; only with this
Difference, that the One gives Pain and Resentment, and the Other Pleasure and
Self-Satisfaction. For, as excellent and noble as Truth is, yet has it not the
Privilege of being always seasonable and becoming; but requires a great many
favorable Circumstances to soften and recommend it. For, let a Man's Intention
and Meaning be never so Holy, and the Substance of his Advice never so
excellent, yet there may be Faults in the applying it; and such as, that it
were as well, and perhaps much better let alone.

Rules for it
That we may know how to govern our selves in so very ticklith a Point, I shall
take the Liberty to offer these following Directions. Which yet are to be looked
upon, as calculated for such Persons and Circumstances, where something of
Distance, and Ceremony, and a Fear of being offensive, may be expected. For, in
case there be any intimate Familiarity, or particular Confidence; any Power or
Authority in the Person reproving, that may set them above such Formalities,
then all the necessity of observing these following Rules, is quite superseded.
But They, who cannot pretend to the Privilege of an open and unrestrained
Freedom, will do well, 1. To have a due regard to Time and Place; for a great
deal depends upon the Nicking of these Two. For Instance, It should not be done
at a Public Entertainment, nor amongst Persons met together for Mirth and
Diversion; for This is to be very impertinent, and to spoil good Company. Nor
is it seasonable, when we see the Party in some more than ordinary Trouble,
Melancholy, and out of Humor, or under some very sore Affliction. This looks
like an Act of Hostility, and barbarous Insulting; as if we took the Advantage
of his Misfortunes, or Dejection of Mind, and only waited for an Opportunity to
grieve, and teaze, and quite oppress him; when his Condition calls rather for
our Comfort, and Encouragement, and Assistance. It is an Act of great Cruelty
to chide Men in Distress; and Perseus King of Macedon was so incensed at this
ill Treatment, that he killed two of his particular Friends, for presuming to
make this Addition to his Calamity. 2. It must not be done for all Faults
indifferently; Not for such as are inconsiderable, and of no very ill
Consequence; for This savours of Peevishness and Ill Nature, and betrays too
much of Eagerness and Delight in this, at best ungrateful, Office. A Man will
be apt to tell himself, that such a Man is fond and glad of such Opportunities,
and makes use of them, more to gratisie his own Spleen, than with any Design of
prositing his Friend. Nor yet should it be done for very gross, notorious, and
dangerous Actions; such as cannot but leave a Sting behind them, and the
Enormity whereof he must needs be affected with, without our awakening his
Conscience, or taking the trouble of working him up to a Sense of them. For he
will be sure, upon such Occasions, to dread the Reproach and the Uneasiness of
an Admonition; and will fancy that we lie upon the Catch for his Fall, and
labor to put him quite out of Conceit with himself. 3. This Admonition and
Reproof ought to be private, that there may be no Witnesses of his Disgrace;
for it is very grievous to be publicly exposed. We are told of a Young Man,
who was so overwhelmed with Shame and Confusion at a Rebuke given him by
Pythagoras, that he could not bear to outlive it, but immediately went and
hanged himself. And Plutarch delivers it as his Opinion, that the Provocation
which enraged Alexander, and transported him to the killing his old Friend
Clytus, was not so much any Offense he took at what he said, as the Rudeness of
saying what he did before Company. More particularly yet, We must be sure to
forbear all Liberties of this kind, before those Persons, whose Approbation and
Esteem, either the Person is ambitious and tender of, or the Character he bears
renders necessary to him. And therefore it is not to be done to either Husband
or Wife before each other; nor to a Parent before Children; nor to a Master
before his Servants, nor to a Minister or Teacher before his Parishioners or
Scholars. 4. It should be delivered with a plain, easy, unaffected Freedom;
somewhat that looks unstudy'd, and as it were by the bye: And, to be sure,
without any regard to private Interest, or the least Appearance of Passion and
Disorder. 5. This is capable of being sosten'd a little, by including our own
selves, and not seeming to confine the Blame to Him alone, as if it were a
strange or particular thing; expressing our Sense likewise in general Terms; as
thus: We are all apt to forget our selves upon these Occasions; One would
wonder what Men think of, when they do such things; or the like. 6. A Man
should always begin with the Commendations of something that is good or
well-done in his Friend, and close all with Tenders of Service and Assistance;
(This sweetens and takes off very much from the Smart and Severity of the
Correction; and makes the necessary bitter Pill go down more glibly) And then
by comparing these things together, we may show the Miscarriage more evidently;
as thus: Such a Thing becomes you, and you do mighty well in it; I wish I could
say as much of this: Or, Good lack! what a difference there is between such an
Action of Yours, and such an one! Who could ever imagine that Pieces so unlike
could ever be done by the same Hand? 7. It is likewise advisable, to express
the Fault in Phrases as soft and gentle as we can, and such as fall very much
short of the Enormity and real Proportion of the thing. For instance; instead
of You have done very ill; to say, Sure you did not consider what you did; you
were mistaken, or not well aware; or the like. Instead of Have nothing to do
with this Woman, why should you ruin your self upon her Account? Pray never
think of entertaing a Woman, who will certainly be the Ruin of you: Instead of
desiring him not to bear such an one a Grudge; to beg, that be would engage in
no dispute, nor concern himself with him. 8. Lastly, When the Business is over,
a Man must not immediately leave the Party with uneasy Impressions upon his
Mind; for these will but ferment there, and gall him; and therefore it is
necessary he should stay with him till all that Uneasiness be got over: In
order whereunto, he must contrive to turn his Discourse upon some common
entertaining Subject, which may divert the present remembrance of the
Reprehension, and bring them to part very good Friends, and in perfect Humor.


CHAP. X. Of Flattery, Lying, and Dissimulation.
Flattery.
But as for Princes, it is almost the Only, the Universal Cause of their Ruin,
and infinitely fruitful in Mischiefs to their Subjects and Government in
general, by betraying them to, and supporting them in their Tyranny and
Maladministration. It is a Thousand times worse than False-witness: That
deceives and mis-leads the Judge, it draws a Sentence from him, wicked and
unreasonable in it self; but not so with regard to Him; for his Will and
Judgment are blameless: They proceed according as Matters appear in Evidence;
and so the Man preserves his Integrity still: But here the very Mind and
Judgment is debauched; the Soul is charmed and bewitched, made incapable of
improving in the Knowledge of the Truth, and utterly averse from the Love of
it. It is a Rank and spreading Evil; for if once a Prince be corrupted by
Flattery, and fond of it, there is a necessity that all about him, who desire
to be well in his Opinion, and hope to make their Fortunes by his Favor,
should turn Flatterers. For Interest and Ambition will not fail to make
Converts enough; and the Rule these govern themselves by, is to study and
practice what they see agreeable, and likely to recommend them most to the good
Graces of their Patron. Whatever can be said to show the Excellence of Truth,
all That proves the Baseness and Deformity of Flattery: They who esteem and
adore the one, must in proportion despise and detest the other; which indeed is
nothing else but the Corruption and Perverting of the Truth. It is a pitiful
mean Vice, the Submission of a poor degenerate Spirit; an Effeminacy and
Weakness, as unbecoming a Man, as Garishness, and Affected Confidence is to a
Woman. Ut Matrona Meritrici dispar erit, atque
Discolor, infido Scurrae distabit Amicus.
Horat. Lib. XVIII.
Not Friends and faithless Flatterers differ more,
Than a chaste Woman, and a common Whore.


Upon this Account Flatterers are compared to Strumpets, to Sorcerers,
Poysoners, Public Cheats, Debauchers of Mankind; nay, to Wolves, and Foxes;
and a wise Author declares it better to fall among Birds of Prey, and be Crow's
Meat, than come into the Hands of Flatterers.



Alexander, who was so great a Monarch, with all the Philosophy of his Tutor
Aristotle to Arm him, could not stand against it. And, though we commonly pretend
to lessen and condemn Kings for suffering themselves to be thus imposed upon,
yet there is never an one of us all, but, if we were in Their Circumstances,
and perpetually laid at by Parasites and Sycophants, as They are, we should be
a Thousand Times worse than They. No Man of ordinary Condition can be a
competent Judge in this case, because he cannot have any Thing like the Trials
and Temptations of an elevated Post. But, though Flattery, like Diseases, do not
seize all Persons and Constitutions alike, yet contagious it is, and no Man
lives utterly out of the reach of its venomous Infection. There is somewhat so
agreeable, that even They who hate and seem most to reject it, conceive a
secret Pleasure, and shut the Door against it so faintly, that after many
pretended Denyals, it is let in, and kindly entertained in private. That which
adds to the danger is, that Men are tainted by it insensibly; for it is so
cunningly varnished over, so disguised with a Mask of Friendship, which it
affects always to wear, that one cannot very easily distinguish between them.
It usurps and invades all her good Offices, puts on her Air and Countenance,
calls it self by her Name, counterfeits her Voice; in short, observes the Tone,
the Mien, the Readliness, the Zeal; so that you would swear it could be none
but she. The Business of Flattery is to please, and be taking: It pays
mavelous Respect and Deference, is very liberal in Praises, exceeding
officious and eager to serve the Person applied to, and careful to be always in
good Humor; or indeed in any Humor that prevails, and will be most agreeable
at that time. Nay, to show how exquisite the Hypocrisy of this Vice is, it
goes a great deal farther, and ventures upon the last and highest, the severest
and most dangerous Act of Friendship, and is free and full in its
Expostulations and Reproofs. In own Word, the Flatterer's Care is always to
profess and make himself believed much more sincere and passionate in his
Affection and Concern for the Person whom he addresses to, than he is or can be
to Him in return. But all these boasting and pompous Pretensions
notwithstanding, there is not in the World any thing more destructive of true
Friendship: Ill Language, Affronts, open and avowed Enmity, are not in reality
greater Contradictions, how different soever they are in Figure and outward
Show. It is the very Bane of all Sincerity and true Love; they are
irreconcilable, and cannot dwell together. Non potes me simul Amico and
Adulatore uti.
When once I am your Friend, I cease to Flatter; and when I begin to Flatter,
from that very instant you may conclude me none of your Friend. And therefore
that Observation is most true, Meliora vulnera diligentis, quam oscula
blandientis.
That the Wounds and Strokes of a Friend are better and more desirable, than
the Kisses of a Flatterer. Those, though we feel some Pain in them, are yet well
intended, and may contribute to our Benefit and Amendment. These are soft and
smooth, but full of Treachery and Mischief; and the End of all those kind
Caresses, is to keep us unacquainted with our selves, and so to lead us
hoodwinked into Ruin.

easy Matter; I shall endeavor to draw off the Vizor; and draw, if not the
whole Face, yet so many of the Features and principal Lines of it, as that by
these Strokes my Reader may be able to distinguish Flattery and Friendship from
each other. 1. First, Flattery is always followed close at the Heels by private
Interest and Advantage: This is the Scent it follows, and you may know it by
the manner of Hunting, and the Game it pursues: But a Friend is generous, and
undesigning; has no By-Ends, nor is Self at the bottom of what he does
continually. 2. A Flatterer is perpetually veering and changeable in his
Judgment and Opinion of Things; like a Looking-Glass, that readily reflects all
Faces, or Wax prepared to receive any manner of Impressions. He is a Camelion,
a Polypus, never of one Color and Complexion, longer than you determine and
encourage him to it. If you appear to commend and love a Man, he admires and
exalts him to the Skies; pretend Dislike, or Resentment, or Aversion, He tacks
about straight, and is in with you There too; he censures, condemns,
aggravates, as he finds You stand affected: For You are the Principal, the
Substance, the Original; and He your Image, your Representation, the Shadow,
the Copy, the constant Attendant and Mimick of all you are, and say, and do;
affecting every Motion, and putting on every Shape, as he sees his Pattern
alter. Whereas a Friend is firm, and uniform, and consistent with himself; For
Truth and Reason are the Compass he steers by, and these are fixed and
unchangeable. 3. Another Mark to distinguish him by, is his Carriage; which is
always eager, and officious to a great excess; and especially in such things as
he is sensible will be observed, or otherwise like to come to the Knowledge of
the Person he addresses to; and, as in all other respects, so is he
particularly forward in his Commendations, in proffering his Service and doing
every little thing that may look like Deference and Zeal. In all his Behavior
there is nothing of Steadiness or Moderation; and yet, as fair a Show as all
this makes outwardly to the World, there is not any solid Bottom, not one Grain
of cordial Affection within. Now a Friend is the very Reverse of all This; an
Enemy to Ostentation and large Pretenses; and content, that the Sincerity of
his Kindness should prove it self by solid and substantial Testimonies: Not at
all the less disposed to act as becomes his Character, though he were sure that
he should never be taken notice of, or thanked for it: And therefore the
Integrity of his Heart and Intentions, often puts him upon studying secret ways
of obliging; and, provided his own Duty be done, and his Conscience satisfied,
he can very well abate the publishing his Endeavors to serve his Friend. 4.
The Flatterer constantly yields the Prize to his Patron, declares him in the
Right in all he says, applauds his Prudence in all he does, and this without
any other Design, but only to please, and render himself agreeable. Hence it
is, that he over-shoots the Mark so much, commending All without Distinction,
and All extravagantly and in excess. Nay sometimes he will not grudge to do it
at his own expense, and to lessen his own Desert, that he may magnisie his
Patron's. Like Wrestlers, that stoop and bend, only to show the Cunning of
their Play, and mend their Hold; that so they may gain the Advantage of
throwing the Adversary a fairer Fall. Now a Friend goes to work plainly and
bluntly; Preference and Esteem are of small Consideration with Him; nor is his
Design so much to please and minister Delight, as to bring substantial Prosit,
and to do much Good; and what way this is done is of little concern to him; he
is not nice and scrupulous in the Choice of Methods; but, like a good
Physician, considers the Case and the Necessities of his Patient; and prepares
his sharp and painful, or his gentler Remedies, not according as they suit the
Palate, but the Exigencies of his Friend. Recovery and Amendment is his End and
Business, and all things else are indifferent to him, except so far as they may
prove subservient to this Great Design. 5. Sometimes he will needs take upon
him to rebuke his Friend, but he does it so very aukwardly, that a Man may
easily discern This to be only a Copy of his Countenance; and that at the same
time he puts on the Hardiness of a Friend, his chief Care is not to incur
Displeasure by handling Matters too roughly. To this purpose he will be sure to
six upon light and trivial Faults only, or some very excusable Defect,
pretending himself blind all the while to those that are grosser, and much more
obnoxious to Censure and Reproach. He will express himself with great Severity
and Bitterness against Relations, or Acquaintance, or Servants, as if They were
wanting in the Diligence and Respects due from them. Or else he will introduce
the Liberty he takes with a Pretense of some idle Stories he has heard, and
profess great Solicitude to be informed of the Truth from his own Mouth, that
so he may be capable of doing him Service in a just Vindication of his
Innocence. And, when his Patron either denies the Fact, or excuses himself, he
will not fail to catch at this Opportunity of exspatiating in his Praise, I
confess, Sir, says he, this was a wonderful Surprise to me, and what I could
not prevail with my self to give Credit to. I was satisfied I knew you better;
for how is it possible you should be guilty of any such Thing? I told your
Enemies who taxed you with Injustice, that they, must pardon me, if I was
peremptory to the Contrary. For who could imagine that you should invade
another's Right, who are so far from insisting Rigorously upon your own? One,
who to my Knowledge is so Generous, so Bountiful, so Charitable, could never,
you may be sure, pass upon me for a griping or covetous Man. Such Jealousies, I
said, might find Entertainment with Strangers, but with me, who have the Honor
to be so well acquainted with your Virtues, they would all go for nothing. Or
else he takes Occasion to chide him kindly, for having no more Care of himself,
and exposing that Person so much, which is of such infinite Importance to the
Public; as one of the Senators particularly is said to have curried Favor
with Tiberius, in a full Senate, after a very nauseous and fulsome manner of
Complementing. 6. In a Word; I shall need to add but this One Mark of
Distinction more. A true Friend always regards, and advises, and promotes that
which is agreeable to Reason, and Duty; he consults the Character and
Circumstances of the Person; and observes what is sit and most becoming;
but the Flatterer spies out a blind Side, and strikes in with Pleasure, and
Interest, and Inclination. So that no Man is so proper an Instrument for
corrupting Men's Principles, and soothing them in all manner of Extravagance and
Vice: None so improper for the putting forward any thing of Virtue, or
Difficulty; or Danger. Indeed he is like an Ape, that serves to none of those
necessary Uses which other Creatures are assisting to us in; but seems cut out
merely for the Jest and Diversion of Mankind.


Lying.
and usually goes along with it: And This is likewise of the same infamous
Quality; a mean, and dishonorable, and rascally Vice. For what can be more
Despicable and Base, than for a Man to speak contrary to his own Knowledge and
Sense of Things? The first and boldest Step toward the Corruption of Manners,
is the banishing Truth out of our Discourse; as on the Contrary, the Courage
and Resolution to be true, is, according to Pindar's Account of it, the
Beginning and Foundation of a Brave and Eminent Virtue. But, besides the
Despicableness of this Vice in it self, it is likewise highly Destructive to
Humane Society. For we cease to be Men, and are loose from all the mutual Ties,
and Securities possible to be had upon one another, when mutual Confidence, and
Truth, the only ground of it, is lost. Speech indeed is rightly said to
capacitate Mankind for Society; but if once That be abused to Falsehood and
Deceit, Silence is a Thousand times the more sociable Quality of the Two. If a
Lie indeed were constant to it self, and wore but one Face, as Truth does, then
there would be some Hopes at least, and the Mischief were more tolerable; for
we might depend upon it, that the direct Contrary of what the Liar says is
True. But alas! it is our Misfortune, that the Reverse of Truth has a Hundred
Thousand several Shapes, and the Space it ranges in is Infinite. Good, (that
is, Virtue and Truth) is certain and circumscribed, staked down to One single
Spot, and fixed beyond the Power of Variation, as there can be but One Way to
hit the Mark. But Evil, (that is, Vice and Error) is Infinite and Uncertain,
and there are a Thousand Ways to shoot beside the Mark: For short or beyond,
too high or too low, on this or on that Side, all are wide of the Matter.
Without all Doubt could Mankind be made duly sensible of the Horror, and
mischievous Consequences of Lying, they would be so far from practicing or
giving the least Countenance to such Wickedness, that they would set themselves
to drive it out of the World with Fire and Sword; and think no Punishments too
severe, no Methods too cruel for the utter Extermination of it. And This is a
good Hint to those, who make the Education of Youth their Care, with what
Vigilance the very first Tendencies to this Evil ought to be observed, and the
Growth of it prevented and opposed. This should be their first Business, and
the Checking of a positive and obstinate Humor their next; and both these
should be taken down betimes; for otherwise the Corruption of Nature will be
beforehand with us; and it is scarce to be conceived indeed, how very early
such rank Weeds spring, and how prodigiously they shoor, if not nipt in the Bud.

Hypocrisy.
for what else is all that Hypocrisy and Dissimulation, so generally practiced
in the World? This, I confess, is represented as an Accomplishment, and has
obtained the Character and Reputation of Complaisance and good Breeding. But
yet, let the Men of refined Manners say what they will, it is in reality a
Blemish and Dishonor, a mean Submission, and base Degeneracy of Soul, for a
Man to appear abroad always in Disguise. To walk with a Mask, and not dare to
show his Face to the World. Let Men talk of Honor as long as they will, Honor
can never be consistent with Dissimulation; and He that is an Hypocrite is
certainly the greatest Coward, the most abject Slave.



But, besides that this is a difficult and laborious Trade, it is a poor and
paltry One; for most Men Break of it in a very little while. Dissimulation
cannot go very sat; It will be discovered at one time or other, and leave those
that depend upon it, in the Lurch. It is a common Observation, and daily
Experince proves it to be as true as it is common, that Nothing which is either
Violent or Counterfeit continues long. Herein, Art and Force differ from
Nature, that They decay by Time, and This improves by it. And, when once such
Men are detected, all they get by it is, never to be trusted afterward; to
have no Stress laid upon what they Do, nor any Credit given to what they Say.
Nay, Truth it self suffers by this means, and can gain no reception, when it
comes out of their Mouths. And how Despicable a Wretch is That, whose Authority
is lost, and whose Example goes for nothing; whose whole Life is looked upon as
one continued Banter; and his most serious Actions are thought to smell so rank
of Trick and Design, that they only serve to awaken Men's Suspicion, and warn
them to be more upon their Guard?



other. The First are Princes, who, as I have observed before, may sometimes be
obliged to dissemble upon very important Considerations. The Public Good, the
Safety of their Persons, the Peace of the Government may require it; all these
might be ruined and lost, if the Counsels and Methods that support them, were
carried so openly, that every Stander by could see through, and penetrate into
the bottom of the Governor's Designs. And therefore, taking the Condition of
the World as it now stands, so full of Treachery and Villainy; it is no
Derogation to Justice or Religion to say, that Princes may be allowed some
Measures in their Public Character, which neither They, nor any other Man, is
privileged to take in his private one. Would all their Subjects be Faithful and
do their Duty, then indeed the Rules of Political, and Private Virtue would be
the same; but now Men must be governed, not according to what they should be,
but to what they actually are. And, as Laws, when made for the Reformation of
Vice, suppose the worst of Men; so the Administrators of those Laws, must by
their Wariness and Wisdom provide against the Worst.

The Second sort of Dissimulation in some Degree allowable, is in Women; and
the Reason that enforces it, is Decency, and the Gracefulness of Modesty and
Reserve, in Their Sex more especially: For what would be interpreted Freedom
and Assuredness in a Man, would in one of them be condemned for Impudence. And
therefore the little Disguises in their Carriage and Looks, the making up their
Mouth, and affected Ignorances, look pretty enough; and have a becoming Air of
Bashfulness and Innocence: And besides, These do no manner of hurt; for they
pass for Things of Course, and no body but Fools and Men utterly unacquainted
with the World, can ever be imposed upon by them. But This is a Trouble I might
have spared my self; for the Sex are so naturally addicted to Hypocrisy, that
it is very needless to recommend, or to instruct them in it. They are indeed a
fair Outside all over; their Faces, their Cloths, their Talk, their Looks,
their Smiles, their Tears, have all but too much of Art in them; and are
contrived to make a Show: Nay, which is still Worse, they do not only dissemble
with the Living, but with the Dead too; The Long Veil, and the Dark Room; the
Bed so many Days, and the Chamber so many Weeks; what are these but the Pomp
and Pretense of Sorrow. Appearances which all indifferently are obliged to
make, whether for good or bad Husbands, in point of Decency, forsooth, and
conformity to Custom; when yet there is so little at the Bottom of this
composed Formality, and the Farce is so very Gross, that many of these
disconsolate Widows have much ado to hold their Countenances. It was observed
long since, that Jactantius moerent quae minus dolent.
Counterfeit Grief is always most Ambitious to show it self; and a Man would
almost be tempted to suspect, that all those Solemn Fopperies, above the
Reasonable and comely Expressions of Grief, were invented to make out in
Ostenation, what was waming in the Reality of their Concern.

CHAP. XI. Of Beneficence and Gratitude.
THE Art of doing and receiving Good Offices, as That Respects the Beneficence
of the Donor, and the Obligation and Gratitude in the Person to whom they are
done, is a Subject of great Compass, and Extent; of great Use, but withal of
much Intricacy, and Difficulty. There is not any one Instance, in which Men are
more Deficient. Very few know, either how to oblige, or how to be obliged, as
becomes them. It looks as if Goodness, and Desert, and Gratitude were in the
Declension; and Revenge and Ingratitude in the Ascendent; as if Those were a
Loss and Diminution, and These a Gain and Privilege; so eager and zealous we
are generally in the former, so so very cold and indifferent, so averse indeed
to the latter. Thus Tacitus observes, that Gratia oneri est, Ultio in quaestu
habetur. Altius Injuriae qaum merita descendunt.
Thanks are reputed Trouble, but Revenge an Advantage; and Seneta, That
Injuries and Affronts make much deeper Impression than Favors and Kindness. We
will therefore endeavor at present to correct and redress this so common
Defect; (or Corruption rather,) of Mankind; by treating at present, First of
Beneficence, under which I comprehend Humanity, Liberality, Charity or Relief
of the Poor and Distressed; and of their Contraries, Inhumanity, Niggardliness,
Want of Compassion: And then Secondly, of the Obligation, the Gratitude of the
Receiver, or the Neglect, and Ingratitude after such Kindnesses received.

Motive to Beneficence.
for the Exercise of Kindness, and Beneficence. God, and Nature, and Universal
Reason, and Equity, All join in their Invitations to it, In God, whether we
consider his Effence, or his Providence, what he is, and what he does, we see
nothing but Goodness; for He is the very Perfection of it, Goodness it self;
and That not a speculative and unprofirable Excellence, but the most diffusive
and communicative Goodness; and Nulla re propius ad Dei naturam accedimus, quam
Beneficentia: Dei est mortalem succurrere mortali.
of all the Resomblances and Imitations of the Divinity that Human Nature is
capable of, the nearest Approach we can make toward him is in this Particular;
as Tully very justly observed. And Pliny; when one Man succors another, he does
an Act more than Human, and becomes as it were a God to his Brother. The
Inducements, which Nature furnishes us with, are many. Such as, The sensible
Satisfaction a Man feels in seeing the Person whom he has obliged; the
Consideration, that he is a Person of the same Condition with himself, cast in
the same Mould, wrought up of the same Materials, a Transcript of the same
Original; For Nihil tam secundum Naturam, quam juvare consortem Naturae.
nothing is so agreeable to the Dictates of Nature, as to assist one who is a
Partaker of the same Nature; It is a Generous and Noble Act; worthy a Person of
Honor and Virtue, to be useful and beneficial to others, to embrace and
improve, nay, to seek Opportunities of being so. For the Liberalis etiam dandi
causas quaerit.
Liberal Man does not content himself with taking them when they come in his
Way; but he goes out to meet, and takes Pains to find them. And it is an old
Adage, that Truly Noble Blood will neither let a Man tell a Lie, nor be wanting
good Offices, where they are Seasonable. There is somewhat of Greatness and
commendable Pride in doing Kindnesses, as there is of Meanness in having them
done to us; and this may be one convenient Sense of that Saying, which St. Paul
ascribes to our Savior; It is more Blessed to give than to receive. He that
gives, gets himself Honor, and gains an Advantage; he becomes Master of the
Receiver, and acquires a Right in him; as on the other hand, the Receiver sells
his Freedom, and is no longer at his own disposal. The First Inventer of Good
Offices, (says one with Ingenuity enough) contrived the strongest Fetters that
ever were, to bind and captivate Mankind. Upon this Account several People have
refused to accept of Kindnesses, because they would not suffer their Liberty to
be entrenched upon; and particularly, if the Person conferring the Favor were
one, whom they had no Kindness for, and did not care to be obliged to. For
which Reason it is, that the old Philosophers forbid us to receive any
Kindnesses from ill Men, because in so doing we let them get a Hank upon us.
Caesar used to say, that no Music was so charming in his Ears, as the Requests
of his Friends, and the Supplications of those in want. The Motto of Greatness
is, Ask me. And that Command and Promise gives us a Noble Idea of the Majesty
of God, Call upon me in the time of Trouble; Psalm. l. 15.
so will I hoar thee, and thou shall glorify me. This is likewise the most
Honorable way of employing our Power and Plenty; which, while we keep by us,
and in our own private Possession, are called by the mean Names, of Houses, and
Lands, and Money; but when drawn out into Use, and expended to the Benefit of
our Brethren, they are dignified with new and August Titles; and from
thenceforth commence Good Actions, Liberality, Magnificence, Alms, and
Treasures in Heaven. Nay it is not only the most Honorable, but the most
prudent and profitable Method of trafficking with them; Ars quaestuosissima,
optima Negotiatio.
the gainfullest of all Arts, the best and least hazardous Way of Merchandise;
for here the Principal is secured, and the Interest arising upon it rises
exceeding high. And, to say the very truth, no part of what we have is so
properly our Own, none turns to such a prodigious Increase, so comfortable
Account, as that which we expend upon good Uses. What lies by us is locked up,
and hid privately; it lies and wastes; or at least it never grows upon our
Hands; and it is sure to give us the Slip at last, either by some of those
infinite Accidents, by which all such Things are liable to be snatched from Us;
or by that certain and inevitable Separation, by which Death will shortly
snarch Us away from Them. But so much of these as is thus put out, can never
fail, never be wrested from us; never rust, or decay, or lie buried in
Unprofitableness. Hence it was, that Mark Anthony, when deprest, and at an Ebb
of Fortune so low, that he had nothing but Death lest at his own Disposal,
cried out, that Hoc habeo quodcunque dedi.
he had lost All, except what he had given away. And thus you see, what a
brave, and noble, and becoming Temper, this Compassionate, and good Natured
Frame of Soul is; how worthily a ready Inclination to do Good to all the World,
attracts the Love and Admiration of all that consider it; How Amiable and
Engaging, how Powerful and Irresistible the Charms of Generosity are. As
indeed, on the other Hand, nothing is so Mean and Sneaking, so Detestable and
Despicable, so Deformed and Unnatural, as Hard-heartedness, and Insensibility
of other Peoples Misfortunes; It is therefore deservedly styled Inhumanity; to
intimate by that Name, that such People are Monsters, and not Men. And, as the
Vices themselves, so the Source and Causes of them stand in direct Opposition
to each other. For, as Beneficence springs from Greatness and Gallantry of
Spirit, so unreasonable Parsimony and Hard-heartedness is the Spawn of
Cowardice, and Brutish Degeneracy of Soul.

Several sorts of it.
or to their Pleasure. The First procures us Admiration and Esteem; the Second
Love, and good Will. The First is much more valuable, because it regards Men's
Necessities and Distresses; it is acting the Part of a Tender Father, and a
True Friend. There is likewise a Difference in these Acts of Kindness
themselves; Some are due from us, such as the Laws of Nature, or positive
Institution require at our Hands; Others are free, and what we are under no
express Obligation for, but the Effect of pure Choice, and Love. The Latter of
these Two sorts, seem to be more Brave and Generous; But yet the Former too,
when discharged with Application, and Prudence, and sincere Affection, are very
Excellent and Commendable, though they have the Nature of a Debt, and are such
as we cannot be faithful to our Duty, and dispense with our selves in.

Internal and External.
that which a Man sees, and feels, and tastes; this is too gross a Notion; and
all we that can allow, is that These are the Matter, the Signs, and the
Demonstrations of our Kindness; but the Thing it self is the Disposition and
good Heart. The Outward and visible part may be very small and inconsiderable;
and yet that within may at the same time be wondrous great. For This may have
proceeded from an exceeding Eagerness and Affection; a hunger and thirst of
doing good; watching, and contriving, and seeking Occasions for it; and
esteeming such Actions in our Savior's Terms, One's Meat and Drink; snatching
them as greedily, and receiving as sensible a Satisfaction and Delight from
them, as from the most necessary Refreshments, by which this Life of ours is
sustained. A Man may have given to the very utmost of his Ability, and by this
means exhaust that little Store, which is scarce sufficient for his own
Occasions; or he may part with that which is particularly valuable and dear to
him. These are the Considerations, that enhanced the value of the Widow's Mite;
and rendered one small piece of Money, not equal only, but far superior to all
the large Donations of the Rich Contributors. And thus Heathen Authors have
likewise concurred in their Estimate of good Works. In Benesieio Hoc
suspieiendum, quod alteri dedit, ablaturus sibi, utilitatis suae oblitus.
In every Benefit, say they, we are to have a more than ordinary respect to
that, which a Man by relieving his Neighbor, streightens himself in; and for
the sake of another's Convenience and Advantage, postpones and forgets his own.
On the other Hand, where the Gift it self is large, the Obligation may be very
small; and indeed, in great Gifts there are some Circumstances, which most
commonly make it so. For such are bestowed frequently with Unwillingness and
Reluctance: They expect to be much entreated, and long attended for them, and
take time to consider, whether they shall bestow them or not: Now This has too
much of Pomp and Formality in it; such a Man is desirous to magnify his own
Bounty; and after all, he gives more to gratify his own Vanity and Ambition,
than to supply the Necessities of them that want; and so Himself is the Giver
and Receiver both. But that which gives another very just Preference in the
Case before us, is. That the External Benefit may be presently wrested from us
again; or if not by Fraud and Force, yet it may be spent, or lost; it may decay
upon our Hands, and in process of time vanish quite; but the inward
Disposition, with which it was conferred, is permanent and firm. The Liberty,
or the Health, the Wealth, or Honor, or Preferment bestowed upon us, may by
some fresh Accident be lost in an instant; but still the Kindness and the
Obligation remains entire.

Rules for Beneficence.
are such as follow.

First, With regard to the Persons; who are the proper Objects of our
Liberality, and whether it be fit to extend it to All, as their Wants, and our
own Abilities furnish Opportunities for it. This is a very reasonable Enquiry,
and highly necessary to be resolved; because, by doing good to wicked Men, and
such as do not deserve our Kindness, a Man may seem to be guilty of a great
many Faults at once. This derives Censure and an ill Name upon the Donor, and
exposes his Bounty to very vile Interpretations; It hardens and supports such
People in their Wickedness and Extravagance; breeds Envy and malicious
Thoughts; takes away all Distinctions between the Good and the Bad, by allowing
the same Countenance and Encouragement to Vice, which is due to Virtue and
Desert. For certainly those Assistances, which depend upon our own free Choice,
and are the Effect of Grace, and not any Debt by virtue of Obligation and Duty,
Worth and Goodness have the best Title to; but yet extreme Necessity, and the
general Good of Mankind lay all in common. In these two Cases none are
excluded, but even the Wicked and the Ungrateful have Right to come in for a
Share, if their Necessities are urgent; and if they be so mingled and
interspersed with the Good, that One cannot enjoy the Benefit, without the
Other partaking of it too. And undoubtedly it is much better to do good to
those who do not deserve it for the sake of them that do; than to withold our
Assistance from those that do deserve, in revenge, and for the discouragement
of Them who do not. Accordingly we see, that God sets us a daily example of
Universal Beneficence, He causes his Sun to rise on the Evil and on the Good;
and gives Rain to the Just and to the Unjust. These are the Effects of a
general Providence: But then he bestows, over and above these, some special
Blessings, which are the Effects of a distinguishing Providence; There he makes
choice of his own Faithful and Beloved ones; and that Rule mentioned by our
Blessed Lord takes place; It is not meet to take the Children's Bread, and to
cast it unto Dogs. Multum refert, utrum aliquem non excludas, an eligas.
There is a vast deal of difference (says the Philosopher) between not
excluding a Man, and making him your Choice. In Cases of Extremity, when
Affliction and Necessity cry aloud for present Redress and Assistance, we
should extend our Charity without Distinction of Merit, and it will not serve
us to say, that Men are unworthy. Hominibus prodesse Natura jubet ubicunque
Homini beneficio locus.
Nature calls upon us to be serviceable to all without exception; and the
Consideration of his being a Man is sufficient to excite our Compassion, when
Opportunities of doing Good offer themselves to us. Humanity bids us bear a
tender regard, and lend our Endeavors to those that seek, and stretch out
their Hands to implore our help; not to pursue them, who turn their Backs upon
us: And our Kindness is much more due, much better bestowed, where we are able
to do good, than where They who receive it are capable of doing good to Us. It
is an Act of Generosity to take the weaker Side, to support those that are
sinking, to heal a broken Fortune, and support a drooping Spirit, and to rob
the Conqueror of his Pride and Triumph, by snatching the Spoils, and rescuing
the vanquished Prey out of his Hand. Thus Chelomis is said to have done. She
was both the Wife and Daughter of a King. These two Princes had a Dispute with
one another; in which, while her Husband had the Advantage, she showed her self
a dutiful Daughter, and followed her Father's Fortunes, never forsaking him in
his greatest Distress; but when the Chance of War turned, and cast the Scale on
the other side, then She turned too, and left her Father to enjoy his
Prosperity; and thought This a proper Season to exert the Affection and
Fidelity of a Wife, by sticking close to her Husband in his Calamitous
Condition.

Not grudgingly, or of necessity, says St. Paul; for God loves a cheerful
giver. And Bis est gratum, quod opus est, si ultro ofteras.
The Kindness you do is doubly welcome, when what is seasonable and necessary
comes of its own accord, without staying to be asked, or pressed to it. For so
much of Entreaty and Attendance as it costs, so much of the Value and
Satisfaction is abated. And Nemo Iubenter debet, quod non accepit, sed
expressit.

Non tulit gratis, qui accepit rogans; imo nihil charius emitur, quam quod
Precibus.


No Man takes any great Joy in being beholding to a Man for that which he did
not so properly receive, as extort. That which is gotten by Importunity is dear
bought: He that obtains by dint of asking, ought not to esteem his Supply a
Gift; for Attendance, and Address, and earnest Supplications are a very high
Price, and pay well for the Purchase. He that asks, humbles and debases
himself; he acknowledges himself inferior; is ashamed and out of Countenance;
pays mighty Deference and Respect to the Party applied to; and the true English
of all his Behavior is that beggarly Form, Your Petitioner, as in Duty bound,
etc. This is the very Ground of what I observed of Caesar; it was the Pride of
his Heart that made him say, after the Defeat of Pompey, That He never took so
much Delight in any thing, as in being supplicated and sought to; and, to
gratify his own Vanity in this particular, he gave All, even his Enemies, some
Hopes of obtaining their Requests in time, that so he might drill them on to
repeat and continue their Applications to him. And what can we make of This? It
was not out of any good Intentions to others, but merely to please himself,
that he showed himself exorable, and easy of Access. For Kindness comes easy;
and therefore as an Emblem of its doing so, the Graces of old were described
and painted, with loose, transparent Garments; not girt close about their
Bodies, but flowing and free; to show, that Favors should have nothing of
Trick or Design, nothing strait-lac'd, or of Constraint in them.

Qui tarde fecit, diu noluit.
He who delays his Relief, was so long in a State of Unwillingness to give it.
And as that Loathness is a very great Rebate, so the speedy Compliance and
Alacrity of the Mind is a great Enhancement, and doubles the Gift. That cold
Indifferency, and those trifling Put-off's, commonly practiced upon such
Occasions, are approved by no Body but Men of Insolence, who make it their
Diversion to banter and abuse People: For Diligence and Dispatch are
commendable in all Cases, and in none more requisite than in This now before
us. There are Five different Methods of proceeding in it; Three of which are
liable to Censure, and the other Two as worthy of Commendation. A Man may deny,
but he may keep one in suspense and Expectation a great while first; This is a
double Injury. He may refuse immediately, or he may grant at last; and both
these amount much to one, when the Matter comes to be fairly computed; at
least, Minus decipitur, cui negatur celeriter.
He that is soon said Nay, is less deceived. The Fourth is to grant speedily;
and This is very well: But the Best of all is, To prevent a Request; to foresee
Men's Wants and Wishes, and never put them to the Expense of asking at all.

A Fourth Commendation is the Giving without any prospect of a Requital; and
indeed This is the very thing, wherein the Virtue of Beneficence chiefly
consists; for when once you make it mercenary, it ceases to be a Virtue. Tunc
est Virtus dare Beneficia non reditura.
There is a great deal less Kindness where there are Expectations cherished of
the Benefit reflecting back again upon the first Mover. But when there is no
Opportunity, no Possibility of a Return; nay, when Matters are carried so
privately, that the Party obliged does not so much as know his Benefactor, then
the Benefit shines in its full Luster. If a Man study the Point of Retaliation,
he will give but slowly, and by Peace-meals; because this is the thrifty way of
being as little out of Pocket as he can. Now it were much better to renounce
all Thoughts of being paid again, than to be slack in doing good; because by
coveting this Return, which is accidental only, and foreign to the purpose, he
loses that which is the true and natural Recompense, the inward Complacency of
Mind, and the ravishing Satisfactions which result from a Sense of doing good.
A Man should not need to be twice entreated for the same thing. For, as the
being guilty of Injustice is of it self abominable and base, and there needs no
other Consideration, than the Dishonor and Obliquity of the Thing to defer us
from it; so the doing Good is a generous and becoming Act, and it is a Fault to
want any other Motive, more than its Native Beauty and Excellence; the staying
till we are argued and importuned into Matters of this Nature, betrays either
much Ignorance, or great Indifference. In a Word, Non est Beneficium quod in
quaestum mittitur.
To keep one's Eye upon the Return, and the Account our Kindness is like to
turn to, is not properly doing good with our Substance, but turning the Penny,
and putting it out to Interest; These are Methods too distant to be reconciled,
and confounded together; and Demus Beneficium, non foeneremus. Dignus est
decipi, qui de recipiendo cogitavit, cum daret.
we should always distinguish between Giving, and driving such a Trade. Such
Men are right enough served, when their Expectations are disappointed. As That
Woman must not pretend to Honor and Virtue, who denies her Lover, only to
inflame his Passion the more, and in hopes that he will renew his Courtship; so
That Man must not think to pass for Liberal and Generous, who sends away his
Petitioner to Day, that he may see him again to morrow, or expends that which
he hopes will shortly come home to him. For this Reason Hesiod, and the old
Poets, described the Graces in a State of Virginity; that no Man when he does
good Offices, should have regard to multiplying and increase. And especially
this falls infinitely short of a Christian's Virtue, whose Master has
positively commanded him, upon these Occasions, to hope for nothing again, to
look at no other Recompense than that distant and future one, reserved for him
by his Paymaster in Heaven; and has described the very Heathens and Publicans,
the most ignorant and most scandalous sort of Men by this Character, that even
They will give and lend to those, from whom they have any hopes of receiving as
much again.

some other Necessity or Distress. And these should be carried with all the
Privacy imaginable; so much that, if it be possible, none but the Person
himself should know it: Nay, if that can any way serve his Interest, or be more
acceptable to him, it will be very fit and prudent to keep Him in Ignorance
too; to let the Kindness drop into his Mouth, and convey it to him underhand.
For many times a Man's Circumstances require a Relief, which he is out of
Countenance to accept; and there is a Tenderness due to the Modesty of Persons
reduced by Afflictions and Casualties, who cannot change their Souls with their
Fortunes. Besides, that all divulging of Kindness is perfectly useless to one
that does it upon a true Principle; for a Man's own Conscience cannot possibly
be ignorant of his Merit, and this single Witness is as good as Ten thousand
others.

Ecclus. xxxiv. 18, 20.
He that sacrifices of a thing wrongfully gotten, his Offering is ridiculous,
and He is as one that kills the Son before his Father's Eyes.

some paltry Evasions are laid hold of in their Excuse: But still the Evil Day
is put far from them; and the Suitor's Mouth is stopped for the present. Now
All this is quite wrong, and a miserable Instance of Human Frailty; for no Man
ought to promise, or encourage the Expectation of any thing which he either is
not able, or may not lawfully, or does not really and sincerely design, to make
good to the uttermost. And when he finds himself at a Bay, enclosed between
these two Difficulties, of making a Promise, which is either unjust, or
inexpedient, or dishonorable and unbecoming his Character to fulfill; or else
of giving a Denial, which is sure to be ill taken, and breed Mischief and
Discontent; the best Course to extricate himself, is to break, to evade the
Blow; either by declining a positive Answer, or else by wording his Promise so
cautiously, and in general Expressions of Civility and good Inclination, that
the Person may have nothing of a punctual Engagement to fasten upon. There is,
I confess, somewhat of Management and Cunning in doing so, which may make this
Advice seem strange and inconsistent, with that Frankess of Temper, and
Sincerity in Conversation, which I have been lately recommending; but we are to
consider this as a Case of Necessity, that when Men will be unreasonable, we
must deal with them as we can; and that they deserve at least to be thus
treated.

to succor the Afflicted; but we must not afflict our selves for them, nor
make their Miseries our own. This were unprofitable to Them, and greatly
prejudicial to Us; nor may we strain a Point of Decency or Duty upon their
Account; for Charity cannot dispense with Justice, nor set aside our other
Obligations. God himself has positively forbidden us to favor a Poor Man in
his Cause. And God Himself and the Saints are said to be Pitiful and
Compassienate; but yet not so, as to give any Disturbance to the Perfection of
their own Happiness; any more than to impair the Perfection of their Holiness;
in the Methods made use of for the succor of those they do pity.



Beneficii tui etiam infoelicitas placeat: nusquam hae^ vox' Vellem non fecisse.
Let even the Miscarriage of your Kindness give you Satisfaction, (says the
Philosopher) and let not any such Expression escape you, as, I wish I had never
done so; For indeed there can be no just Foundation for grudging our Kindness.
The Unthankful Wretch injures no Body but himself; and the Favor, that was
misplaced, is not utterly lost or thrown away, it is devoted to a Holy and
Excellent use, and cannot be destroyed or profaned by the Receiver's Fault. If
another will needs be wicked, and act otherwise than becomes him, this can
never justify my ceasing to be good. But further, The generous and noble
Spirit distinguishes it self by Perseverance; and triumphs in the Conquest of
Ingratitude and Ill Nature, when invincible Beneficence has heaped Coals of
Fire upon their Heads, melted them down, and softened them into good Temper, and
a better Sense of Things. So says the Moralist, Optimi and ingentis animi est
tamdiu far ingratum, donec feceris gratum; vincit malos pertinax Bonitas.
A Great Soul bears the ungrateful Man so long, till at last he makes him
grateful; for obstinate and resolute Goodness will conquer the worst of Men.

If You made me Pope, pray let me be so, and do not take back again the
Authority you gave me.

Several sorts of Kindnesses.
that there are Benefits of several sorts; some of them much more acceptable
than others, and thus some more, and others less engaging. Those are most
welcome that come from the Hand of a Friend, and one whom we are strongly
disposed to love, without any such Inducement: As, on the contrary, it is very
grievous and grating to be obliged by one, of whom we have no Opinion, and
desire of all things not to be indebted to. Those are likewise so, which
proceed from a Person whom we have formerly obliged our selves; because This is
not so much Gratuity, as Justice and Payment of Arrears, and so draws very
little or no new Debt upon us. Such again are those done in a time of
Necessity, and when our Occasions were very urgent: These have a mighty
Influence; they utterly deface all past Injuries and Misunderstandings, if any
such there were; and leave a strong Tie upon a Man's Honor; as, on the other
Hand, the denying our Assistance in Cases of Extremity, is extremely unkind,
and wipes out all Remembrances of any former Benefits. Such, once more, are
Those, that can be easily acknowledged, and admit of a suitable Return; as, on
the contrary, such as the Receiver is out of all Capacity to requite, commonly
breed Hatred, and a secret Dislike: For there is a Pride in most Men, that
makes them uneasy to be always behind-hand; and hence he who is sensible, that
he can never make amends for all he has received, every time that he sees his
Benefactor, fancies himself dogged by a Creditor, upbraided by a living Witness
of his Insufficiency or Ingratitude; and these secret Reproaches of his own
Mind, give great Uneasiness and Discontent; for no Bankrupt can bear being
twitted with his Poverty. Some again there are, which the more free and
honorable, and respectful they are, the more burdensome and weighty they are;
provided the Receiver be a Person of Honor and Principle: Such, I mean, as
bind the Consciences and the Wills of Men; for they tie a Man up faster, keep
him more tight, and render him more cautious and fearful of failing, or
forgetfulness. A Man is Ten times more a Prisoner, when confined by his own
Word, than if he were under Lock and Key. It is easier to be bound by Legal and
public Restraints, and Forms of Engagements, than by the Laws of Honor and
Conscience; and Two Notaries in this Case are better than One. When a Man says,
I desire nothing but your Word, I depend upon your Honesty; such a one indeed
shows greater respect: But if he be sure of his Man, he puts him upon a
stricter Obligation, and himself upon better Security than Bonds and Judgments.
A Man who engages nothing but his Word, is always in Fear and Constraint, and
upon his Guard, lest he should forfeit or forget it. Your Mortgagee, and he
that is under the power of Legal Forms, is delivered from that Anxiety, and
depends upon his Creditor's Instruments, which will not sail to refresh his
Memory, when the Bonds become due. Where there is any external Force, the Will
is always less intent; and where the Constraint is less, there in proportion
the Application of the Will is greater. Quod me Jus cogit, vix a Voluntate
impetrem.
What the Law compels me to, is very ha^dly my own Choice; for I do not
properly choose, but submit to it.

Of the Obligation.
and from Obligations again fresh Benefits spring up: So that Beneficence is
reciprocally the Child and the Parent, the Effect and the Cause; and there is a
twofold Obligation, which we may distinguish by an Active and a Passive
Obligation. Parents, and Princes, and all Superiors are bound in Duty, and by
virtue of their Station, to procure the Benefit and Advantage of Those, whom
either the Laws and Order of Nature, or the political Constitutions of
Government, or any other Law relating to their Post, have committed to their
Inspection and Care. And not only so, but All in general, whether their
Character be Public or not, if they have Wealth and Power, are by the Law of
Nature obliged to extend their Help and Bounty toward the Necessitous and
Distressed. And this is the first sort of Obligation. But then from good
Offices thus done, whether they be in some regard owing to us, as flowing from
the Duty incumbent upon the Benefactor, by virtue of this former Engagement: Or
whether they be the effect of pure Choice, entirely Grace, and nothing of Debt,
there arises the Second sort of Obligation, whereby the Receivers are bound to
acknowledge the Kindness, and to be thankful for it. All this mutual Exchange,
and propagation of Engagements and good Turns, Hesiod has intimated to us by
his Description of the Graces, when he paints them Three in Number, and all
joining Hands.

The first Original Obligation.
which each Person's respective Station requires from him. And what these are,
we shall very shortly take occasion to explain at large, when the Special
Duties, which make up the other Branch of Justice to our Neighbor, come to be
considered. In the mean while, I desire my Reader to observe, that the
Primitive Engagement we are treating of at present, though it cannot be utterly
dissolved, yet it may be tied faster and closer, or slacken and sit more loose
upon us, by several accidental Circumstances; and particularly, it may be
mightily strengthened, or diminished, by the Conditions and Behavior of those
we have to deal with. If the very Relation of a Subject or a Child bind us to
them, the Affectionate and Dutiful Carriage of good Subjects, and good
Children, enforce the Obligations of Kindness yet more. And so again; Their
Misdemeanors, their Ingratitude, their Insolence and Unworthy Behavior, do in
a great Measure discharge us of that Tenderness and Care, which they have
otherwise a Right to expect from us. And I cannot tell, whether this
Observation may not hold in some Degree, with Regard to Natural Defects also. A
Man may; perhaps indeed he cannot but, have less Affection for a Child, or a
Kinsman, or a Servant, not only if he be Ill-tempered and Perverse; but if he
be deformed, or crooked, or unfortunate in his Person. For God, who made Beauty
an attractive Excellence, seems himself to have lowered the Natural Value such
Persons are to be rated at. But then, whatever Influence this Consideration may
have upon our Minds and Inclinations, it must have none at all upon the outward
Administration of our Office. These unhappy Persons have the same Title to our
Justice and Charity; their Necessities put in the same common Claim to our
Assistance and Relief; and all the Good we are engaged to upon any public and
general Account, is still to be Punctually performed toward them; and indeed
the less to be neglected, because, those Natural Defects are their Misfortunes
only, not their Faults; and as such should excite our Pity to supply the Place
of Inclination.

The Second Eligation.
which lies before us at present, is the Second Sort; such as arises from
Benefits received: And for our better Direction in this Matter, we shall do
well to observe.

First of all; That the Laws of Acknowledgment and grateful Returns are Natural
and Universal; They are not confined to Humanity alone, but even Brutes
themselves have a Sense of, and share in them. Nay, and those too, not only
tame, and manageable, and Domestic Animals, which might tempt us to think this
Disposition the Effect of Art or Custom; but even the Wildest and most Savage
Creatures: For in them we meet with several notable Instances of Gratitude; One
Example whereof I have formerly mentioned, in the Behavior of a Lion, to that
Roman Slave, Book I. Chap. 8. Sect. 12.
who was exposed in the Theater to be devoured by him.

Secondly. It is a Virtuous Act, and a certain Indication of a good Mind; for
which Reason it is really more valuable, than Beneficence it self: For
Liberality often proceeds from Plenty, or Power; Regard to one's own Interest
or Reputation, and not very often from pure Virtue; But Gratitude cannot spring
from any other Cause than an ingenuous Disposition. And therefore, though the
doing of good Offices may be the more desirable, yet the grateful
Acknowledgment, and studying to requite them, when they are done, is the more
Commendable of the Two.

Thirdly, Gratitude is likewise an easy and a pleasant Duty; and yet such as
no body can be excused from, upon the Pretense of Disability, or Want of
Opportunity; because it is always in our own Disposal, always present with us.
Now, nothing is so easy, as to obey and follow the Dictates of Nature; and
nothing so Pleasant and Satisfactory, as for a Man to acquit himself of
Obligations, to come out of Debt, and set himself Free, and upon the Level with
his Neighbors.

Dixeris Maledicta cuncta, cum ingratum hominem dixeris. Ingratitudo grave
vitium, intolerabile quod dissociat homines.
To call a Man Ungrateful, is the worst and blackest Accusation you can lay to
his Charge. It is an Offense against Nature, and a certain Indication of an ill
Temper; a scandalous and reproachful Vice; such as is not to be endured,
because it breaks all Society and good Correspondence. The Revenge, which
follows upon an Injury, and the Ingratitude which follows a Kindness, are both
Bad and Blameable, but not equally so. Revenge is indeed the stronger and more
violent Passion; but it has less of Deformity and Degeneracy of Soul, than
Ingratitude. The Evils and Diseases of our Minds are like those incident to our
Bodies; where those that are most Dangerous and Mortal are not always the most
Painful and Acute. And therefore Revenge may disorder a Man more, but
Ingratitude corrupts his Virtue more. In the Former there is some Appearance of
Justice, Men are not ashamed to pursue and own that publicly; but the latter
is all over Infamy and Baseness, and no Man was ever yet so abandoned or hardy,
to confess or glory in it.



First, A Man must receive the Kindnesses done to him, cheerfully and friendly;
he must look, and express himself well pleased with them. Qui gratu Beneficium
accepit, primam ejus Pensionem solvit.
He that gives a Favor kind Entertainment, has made the first Payment
already. Secondly. He must never forget, or be unmindful of it. Ingratissimus
omnium, qui oblitus; nusquam enim gratus fieri potest, cui totum Beneficium
elapsum est.
He that forgets his Benefactor, is of all others the farthest from Gratitude;
for how is it possible a Man should discharge this Duty, who has suffered the
Foundation of it to slip quite from under him? Thirdly. He must not be sparing
to own and publish it, Ingenui pudoris est fateri per quos profecerimus, and
haec quasi merces Authoris.
It is an argument of Ingenuity and becoming Modesty, frankly to confess who we
have been the better for; and this is a Reward due to the Maker of our
Fortunes. As we have found by comfortable Experience, the Hearts and Hands of
our Friends open to our Advantage, so it is fit they should find our Mouths
open too, and our Tongues liberal in the Declarations of their Readiness to
assist us. And that our Memory upon this occasion may never want Refreshing, it
will be Decent to mention the Advantage we have received, by the Title of his
Gifts, who conferred it upon us. The Fourth and Last is, to make a Return, and
Restitution, wherein we may govern our selves according to these Four Rules.
First, That This be not done too hastily; We should not be extremely Eager and
Anxious in the Thing; for this has a very ill Savor: It looks like Pride, as
if we were loath, and scorned to be obliged; and for that Reason were impatient
to get out of their Debt. This ministers a very just cause of Jealousy to our
Benefactor, that his Kindness was not well taken, when we show our selves so
very uneasy under the Engagements it lays upon us. A convenient time therefore
is necessary to be taken, and a favorable Opportunity waited for Though this
ought not to be very distant neither, nor be put off to too long a Day. For the
Graces are painted Young, to hint, that Favors should not grow old upon our
Hands. I add farther, that this Opportunity should be one that offers it self
of its own Accord; or if of Our seeking, yet so contrived, that it may be void
of all Suspicion of Vanity and Ostentation. Secondly, We should pay back with
Interest, and exceed the Proportion of what we receive; like a good Soil, which
cannot maintain the Character, if it only produce the Seed again; So a grateful
Man Ingratus est, qui Beneficium reddit sine usura.
will forfeit that Title, if he restore no more than the Principal. But the
least we must do, is to return as much as we received; and that with all
possible Demonstrations, that we thought our selves under an Obligation, and
wished it in our Power, to do more. That what we have done in the mean while,
is not looked upon as full Satisfaction, but only as an Acknowledgment of the
Debt, and a Testimony of our Sincerity, and Respect. Thirdly, That these
Returns be made willingly and cheerfully; for Ingratus est, qui metu gratus est
-- Eodem animo beneficium debetur quo datur -- Errat siquis Beneficium
libentius accipit quam reddit.
he is not Grateful, whom Fear, or Force, make desirous to appear so.
Especially too, if the Kindness was done Frankly and generously; For we should
pay back in the same Coin, and with all the commendable Qualities the Favor
brought along to recommend it; And that Man is much to blame who is more ready
and cheerful when he is to receive a Kindness, than when it is expected he
should requite one. Fourthly. If a Man's Circumstances be such, as render him
Incapable of actual Restitution, at least he ought to take Care, that he be not
wanting in Will, and this Grateful Disposition is the First and Principal Part
of the Thing; the very Life and Soul both of the Benefit, and of the
Acknowledgment in return for it. This indeed, can have no Witness but it self
to testify for it. But, as the Thanks of the Heart, ought to be well accepted,
where People are in no Condition to pay more; so the Desires and Offers of
obliging us, either when our Friends could not compass their Desires, or when
we had no need, or did not think fit to accept their Services, must be
acknowledged, as if we had actually received them. For here was the Will,
though not the Deed; and this, as I said, is the Chief, and of it self a
sufficient Ground of Obligation to Gratitude.


THE Second PART OF JUSTICE: CONSISTING
Of Duties owing to, and from certain Persons, and arising from Special and
Personal Obligations.
The PREFACE.
MY Design is, in the next Place, to treat of such Duties, as are peculiar to
some Men, and not to others. And These differ according as the Persons
concerned in them, and their respective Conditions differ. Some of them are
unequal, as Superiors, and Inferiors: Others are equal and upon the same
Level. I shall begin with married Persons, because This is a Relation mixed and
compounded of both; They being in some Respects Equal, and in Others Unequal.
Besides, it will be convenient to set out with such Instances of Justice, as
are Private and Domestic, These being in the very Nature and Order of Things
antecedent to those that are Public and Political. For Families are the
Foundation, and first Matter of Commonwealths, and Kingdoms. And therefore the
Justice exercised here, is the Scurce, and Model, and first Draught of Public
Administrations. Now, these Domestic Relations, are Three; Husband and Wife,
Parentsand Children, Masters and Servants. These are the Principal Parts of a
Family, but that of Husband and Wife is the Groundwork, and beginning of all
the rest. And therefore That has a right to be first considered.

CHAP. XII. The Duties of a Married State.
Book. I. Chap. 42.
Of this Subject we have spoken more at large in the first First Part of this
Treatise.

Husband's Duty.
according to the Terms of that unequal Relation, in which they stand. For,
those of the Husband, considered as Superior, are. 1. Instructing his Wife,
conferring with, and directing her in every Particular, that may any way
contribute to their Honor and Advantage; taking Care, that she may be Ignorant
in no Part of the Duty expected from her Character, nor defective in any useful
and necessary Accomplishments, which she is capable of attaining to; and all
this to be done not in a Rough and Magisterial Way; but with all possible
Gentleness and Sweetness, in the softest and most engaging manner, with the
Tenderness of a Parent, and the respectful Affection of a Friend. 2. The
maintaining her as his Wife; as befits One, whom he has made the same with
himself; and therefore without any Regard to her former Circumstances. Whether
she did, or did not bring a Fortune, That alters not the Case one whit; such
Considerations are quite out of Doors, and nothing now lies before him, but the
present Relation between them. He is indeed to be governed by his own
Abilities, and will do well to secure the main Chance; but then all the
Frugality upon this Account must extend to the retrenching his own Expenses
too: For whatever Figure he allows himself to make; his Wife ought to be
supported Suitably and in Proportion to it. 3. The providing her with Clothes,
which is a Right so undoubted, that all Laws concur in giving a Wife this
Privilege; and that in so Solemn and Incommunicable a manner, that they have
denied the Husband a Power, of disposing any thing of this Kind away from her;
and have not left them liable to the Payment of his just Debts. 4. The Rights
of the Bed. 5. The Loving, Cherishing, and Protecting her. Those Two Extremes,
which the World are apt to run into, are Vicious and Abominable. The keeping
them under, and treating them like Servants; and the submitting to them as if
they were absolute Mistresses. These I take to be the principal and constant
Duties. Others there are, Accidental, and Occasional Duties, secondary to, and
consequent upon the former: Such as, Taking Care of her, if she be sick;
Ransoming her, if she be taken Captive; Burying her Honorably, and according
to her Quality, if she happen to die; and Making Provision by his last Will,
for her decent Support in her Widowhood, and the comfortable Subsistence of the
Children she has brought him.

Wive's Duty.
looking upon him, as a kind and Affectionate Master. Accordingly the Scripture
takes Notice, that Women eminent for their Conjugal Virtues, used to call their
Husbands Lord; and it is observable, that the same Word in the Hebrew Tongue,
signifies Lord and Husband both.

The Imagination, that a Woman lessens her self by this respectful and
submissive Behavior, is most Frivolous and Foolish; for she that discharges
this part of her Duty well, consults her own, more than her Husband's Honor;
and she that is Insolent and Imperious, Humoursome and Perverse, does the
greatest Injury to her self. A Second Duty is Obedience to all his lawful and
just Command's, complying with his Humors, and bringing over her own
Inclinations to His: For a good and a prudent Wife, is like a true Glass, which
makes an exact Reflection of the Face that looks in it. She should have no
Design, no Passion, no Thought particular to her self; but to be sure, none in
Opposition to His. Like Dimensions and Accidents, which have no Motion, no
separate Existence of their own, but constantly move with, and subsist in the
Body whereunto they belong; so Wives should always keep close, and be from the
very Heart, and even Affections of their Souls, entirely, and inseparably
united to their Husbands. A Third is Service, That part especially, which
relates to the providing him seasonable and Necessary Refreshments,
over-looking the Kitchen, ordering the Table, and not disdaining to do any
Offices, or give him any kind of Assistance about his Person; a Duty so fit to
be condescended to, that the Ancients were wont to reckon Washing the Feet in
particular, among the Instances of Service, due from the Wife to her Husband.
Fourthly. Keeping much at Home, upon which Account a Wife is compared to a
Tortoise, that carries her House upon her Back; and used heretofore to be
painted with her Feet Naked, an Emblem of her not being provided for stirring
abroad. This is a modest and decent Reserve, requisite at all Times, but more
especially in the Absence of her Husband. For a good Wife is the exact Reverse
of the Moon; she shines abroad and in full Luster, when near her Sun; but
disappears, and is totally invisible, when at a Distance from him. A Fifth is
Silence; for she should never give her self the Liberty of talking much, except
with her Husband, or for him; Here indeed her Tongue may take a Loose, and is
subject to no other Restraint, than the speaking no more, than is convenient.
This, I confess, is a very difficult Point, hard of Digestion in this lavish
Age; where Multitude of Words sets up for a Female Virtue; and so rare in all
Ages, Ecclus. xxvi. 14.
that the Wise Son of Sirach calls a silent Woman a Precious and Particular
Gift of God. The Sixth is applying her self to Houswifery and good Management;
Prove. xxxi.
for though Solomon's Description of a wise and good Woman may be thought too
Mean and Mechanical for this refined Generation, yet certain it is, that the
Business of a Family is the most Profitable, nay, the most Honorable Study
they can employ themselves in. This is the Reigning Accomplishment, That which
so far as Fortune is concerned, ought to be (...) esteemed and regarded in the
Choice of a Wife; To (...) the Truth, This is a Fortune singly, and by it self;
the Observation, or the Neglect of it, without the Addition of any Casualties,
is sufficient to ruin, or to preserve, nay, to make a Family. But This has
the Fate of all other Excellencies too, which is to be exceeding rare and
scarce. There are, I confess, a great many sordid and scraping Wives, but very
few good Managers. But alas! there is a vast deal of Difference between Avarice
and Parsimony, and provident Care and good Houswifery.



CHAP. XIII. Good Management.
THis is a very becoming and necessary Care. An Employment, not hard to be
attained to; every Man of common Discretion is capable of it. But, though the
Art be easily learned, the constant Exercise of it is Intricate and Laborious;
by Reason of that Great Variety of Business, in which it engages us; and,
though many Matters about which it is managed, be small and inconsiderable in
themselves; yet the constant Succession of them is very troublesome. Domestic
Cares give great Uneasiness, because they allow of no Intermission; but, if the
Difficulties are occasioned by the principal Persons in the Family, they fret,
and gall, and wrankle inward, and scarce admit of any Rest or Remedy.

The Best Method of rendering this Care easy and effectual, is, To procure some
faithful Servants, in whose Honesty we can have entire Confidence, and
Security. To buy in Provisions in their proper Seasons, and wait for the best
Markets; To prevent all unnecessary Waste, which is the Province, proper to the
Mistress of the House. To make Necessity, and Cleanliness, and Order, our first
Care; and when These are served, if our Circumstances will extend farther, then
to provide for Plenty, and Show, and Niceness; a gentile Appearance, and every
Thing fashionable in it is Kind. To regulate our Expenses, by cutting off our
Superfluous Charge; yet so, as to have a Regard to Decency and Convenience, and
grudge Nothing, which either Necessity or Duty call for from us. One Shilling
saved, with these Limitations, will do us more Credit, than Ten idly squandered
away. But to the avoiding Profuseness, we should also add the other commendable
Quality, of good Contrivance; for it is a Mark of great Address, when we can
make our Penny go a great Way, and appear Handsomely with little Charge: But
above all things, a Man must be sure to keep within Compass, and suit his way
of Living to his present Circumstances: For the most probable Prospects, are
still but Futurities; and, as such, they must needs be uncertain; so that there
cannot be a more ridiculous Folly, than to spend high in Confidence of
Reversions, and distant Expectations.

A Master's Eye must be every where; and if either He or the Mistress be
ignorant and unexperienced in Business, they must take Care to conceal this
Infirmity, and pretend at least to understand all that belongs to them. But
especially, they must never appear Negligent or Remiss, but put on an Air of
Diligence and Concern however. For, if once the Servants get a Notion of their
being Careless, how their Affairs are managed, they will not fail to take their
Advantage, and in a short Time, leave them little or nothing to take Care of.

CHAP. XIV. The Duty of Parents and Children.
Lacedoemonian, and some other very wise Governments, there were Mulcts and
other Penalties inflicted upon Parents, when their Children proved Perverse and
Ill-tempered. And Plato declared, he knew no one Instance, that needed a Man's
Care more, or deserved it better, than the endeavoring to make a good Son. And
Crates in great Wrath expostulated thus with his Countrymen. To what Purpose
is all this Pains to heap up great Estates, while it is no part of your Concern
what manner of Heirs you leave them to? This is like a Man's being Nice of his
Shoe, and Negligent of his Foot. What should a Man do with Riches, who has
not the Sense, nor the Heart to make a good Use of them? This is like an
embroidered Saddle, and sumptuous Furniture upon a Jaded Horse. Parents indeed
are doubly obliged to the Performance of this Duty. In Kindness to themselves;
as they are their own Offspring; and in Regard to the Public, because these
young Suckers are the Hopes of the Tree, the promising Shoots, upon the
thriving and kindly cultivating whereof, the Strength and Succession of the
Body Politic depends. So that this is, killing Two Birds with One Stone,
serving one's own private Interest, and promoting the Welfare and Honor of
one's Country, at the same time.

First respects the Time of a Child's Existence, till his Birth inclusively;
The Second his Infancy; The Third his Youth, and the Last his riper Age.

First of These I shall only say, that though it be very little attended to,
yet is it of mighty Consequence, and of strict Obligation: For no Man, who has
any the least Insight into Nature, can be ignorant, how hereditary
Constitutions and Complexions are: And therefore we may be good or ill Parents,
even before our Children are born. And I am sure, among other Inducements to
the care of Health, and a regular Way of living, This ought not to be the
least, that Those who derive their Being from us, do depend upon this Care for
a great part of their Happiness; For by what has been largely discoursed in
the first Book, it may plainly appear, that the Capacity and Turn of Men's
Minds, and the Soundness and Vigor of their Bodies, are in great Measure owing
to a Parents good Constitution. And certainly, To Men of any Conscience, it
should be an Eternal Sting and Reproach, to reflect what Rottenness and
Diseases, they entail upon their Posterity, by abandoning themselves to
Lewdness and Debauchery; how dearly those Innocents pay for their Ancestor's
Excesses, and what a Barbarity it is to send poor Wretches into the World, to
languith out a Life of Misery and Pain, and suffer for Sins, which they never
committed. So Necessary, so Important a Virtue is Temperance to Successions and
Families, as well as to Men's own Persons: So Mischievous is Vice, and so
Subtly does it propagate its dismal Effects, even to those that are yet
unborn.

Second of these Heads I leave to Physicians and Nurses; and having thus
briefly dispatched the Two First, because somewhat foreign to our present
Design, and necessary to be mentioned, only for the rendering this Division
complete, I shall proceed to the Third, which concerns the Instructing of them,
and is a Subject more worthy our serious Consideration.

Lycurgus made People sensible of this, by taking Two Whelps of the same
Litter, which he had brought up different Ways, and in the Presence of a great
Company, setting before them Broth and a young Leveret; The Dog which had been
brought up tenderly, and within Doors, fell to the Broth; but the Other, which
had been used to range and hunt, neglected his Meat, and pursued his Game.

Now that which renders such Instructions so marvellously powerful, is, that
they are taken in very easily, and as hardly lost again: For that which comes
first, takes absolute Possession; and carries all the Authority you can desire;
there being no Antecedent Notions to dispute the Title, or call the Truth of it
in Question. While therefore the Soul is fresh and clear, a fair and perfect
Blank, flexible and tender, there can be no Difficulty in making it what you
please; for this Condition disposes it to receive any manner of Impression, and
to be molded into any manner of Form.

Aristotle and Plutarch most just, though there is little or no Care taken to
redress it, when they cried out Loudly against the Education of Children being
left entirely to the Mercy and Disposal of Parents, as a most notorious,
deplorable, and destructive Injury to the State. For why should This rest
wholly upon Persons, who are so often found to be Careless, or Ignorant, or
Indiscreet, and by no Means sit to govern themselves? Why should not the
Public concern themselves in the Thing, and order some better Care to be taken
of it, rather than suffer what they Daily do, by sitting still and seeing their
own Ruin? Lacedamon and Crete are almost the only Constitutions, where the
disciplining of Children has been prescribed by National Laws. And Sparta was
indeed the best School in the World; which made Agesilaus persuade Xenophon, to
send his Children thither, because there they would be sure to be instructed in
the Best and Noblest Science; that of Governing, and of Obeying well; and
because this was the Workhouse, where they made admirable Lawgivers, Generals,
Civil Magistrates, and Private Subjects. They seemed indeed to be more intent
upon the Instruction of Youth, and to lay greater Stress upon it, than upon any
other Thing whatsoever. Insomuch that when Antipater demanded Fifty Children
for Hostages, they Replied, That they did not care to part with any at that
Age, and had much rather give him twice as many grown Men.

being drawn from the Motions of Minds so very Young; the best course will be,
to possess them with such Instructions, as may be universally Good, and of
general Use at first; and when they are seasoned well with these, That will
prove a most excellent Preparation, for their taking to any particular
Employment afterward. Thus you build upon a sure Bottom, and perfect them
presently, in that which must be the constant, and daily Business of their
Lives; and this first Tincture, like the Ground of a Picture, fits them for the
receiving any other Colors.



Plato would never endure, that Children should be left to Servants, or
entertained with their Stories: For if they talk nothing worse, yet the best we
can expect from them is idle Tales and ridiculous Fictions, which take such
deep Root in this tender Soil, that I verily believe a very great Part of the
Vulgar Errors and Idle Prejudices most Men are possessed with, is owing to the
Giants, and Hobgoblins, and the rest of that ridiculous Stuff, which they were
kept in awe, or diverted with, in their very Infancy.

Valerius Maximus, than there is to the knowing the Fears of Guy of Wurwick, or
Amadis of Gaul. The Greek and Roman History, which is the Noblest and most
Useful Dearning in the World, is every whit as entertaining, as easy to be
comprehended, as any Romance of the same Bulk. A Child, that can tell how many
Cocks and Hens run about his Mother's Yard, and can count and distinguish his
Uncles and Cousins; what should hinder him from remembering with the same ease,
the seven Kings of Rome, and the Twelve Caesar's? There is indeed a great
Difference, between several Sciences; And the Faculties of Children have their
proper Seasons; but then this makes no Difference between the different Parts
of the same Science, and Exercises of the same Faculty; and no Man will ever be
able to prove, that one Matter of Fact is easy, and another difficult or
impossible to be attained; but especially, that the False and Fictitious
Inventions, are accommodated to the Capacity of Children, and that True and
Serious Narratives are above, and unfit for them. This looks, as if God had
made our Minds only capable of being deceived; and given them a strange
Alacrity in Lies and Fables. But the Matter is much otherwise. For the main
Business is, to manage the Capacity of a Child well, and if this be done, the
Improvement will quickly show the Vanity of trifling with Children, and
distrusting their Abilities for greater and better Things.

The Third Admonition to this purpose is, that these Tutors and Governors would
behave themselves as becomes them toward their Charge; Not putting on always
solemn and austere Looks, or treating them with Harshness and Severity; but
with Methods that are gentle and engaging, good Humor, and a cheerful
Countenance. I cannot here but condemn without more ado, that general Custom of
beating, whipping, scolding and storming at Children; and keeping them in all
that Terror, and Subjection, which is usual in some great Schools. For This is
really a most unreasonable Thing; of pernicious Consequence, and as indecent as
it would be in a Judge to fall into violent Passions with Criminals at the Bar;
or a Physician to fall foul upon his Patients, and call them all to naught. How
Prejudicial must this needs be in the Effect, how contrary to the Design of
Education, which is, to make them in love with Virtue betimes, to sweeten their
Tempers, and train them in Virtue and Knowledge, and Decency of Behavior! Now,
this Imperious, and rough Treatment gives them a Prejudice to Instruction;
makes them hate, and be afraid of it; fills them with Horror, and Indignation,
and Rage; tempts them to be Desperate and Headstrong; damps their Spirits, and
depresses their Courage: Till at last by being used like Slaves, they
degenerate entirely into cowardly and slavish Dispositions. The Holy Ghost
himself has given us fair Warning of this Mischievous Consequence; when he
commands by St. Paul, Coloss. iii. 21.
that Parents should not provoke their Children to Wrath, lest they be
discouraged. This is the ready way to make them good for Nothing; they curse
their Teacher, and hate the Government they are under. If they do what they are
bidden, it is only because Your Eye is upon them, and they dare not do
otherwise; not with any Cheerfulness or Satisfaction, or because they are acted
by any Noble and Generous Principle. If they have been tardy in their Duty,
they take Sanctuary in the vilest Methods to save themselves from Punishment.
Lies, and Equivocations, and shuffling Excuses; Trembling, and Tears of
Madness, and Despair; Playing Truant, and Running away from School; all which
are Refuges infinitely worse, than the Fault they were guilty of before. Dum id
rescitum iri credit, tantisper cavet:
Si sperat fore clam, rursum ad ingenium redit.
Ille, quem Beneficio adjungas, ex animo facit;
Studet par refer; praesens absensque idem erit.
Terent. Adelph.
He that is compelled by Threats to do his Duty,
Will be wary no longer than you have an Eye over him;
But when he sees he shall not be found out,
He Will even follow his own Inclinations.
But he that is governed by Love, obeys most cheerfully;
Strives to make due returns, and is the same, Present or Absent.


Pudore and Liberalitate Liberos retinere
Satius esse credo quam metu. --
Hoc Patrium est, potius consuefacere filium,
Sua Sponte recte facere, quam alieno metu.
Hoc Pater ac Dominus interest, hoc qui nequit,
Fateatur se nescire imperare Liberis.

'Twas always my Opinion, that it is much better
To keep Children in Order by Shame, and Generosity
Of Inclination, than by Fear --
This is a Father's part to use his Child,
So as his own Choice rather than Constraint
Should put him upon doing well.
Here lies the Difference between a Father and a Master;
And he that acts otherwise, let him confess,
That he understands not at all the Art
Of managing Children. --
Blows are for Beasts, which are incapable of hearing Reason; and Rage and
Brawling, and contemptuous Usage, for none but Slaves. He that is once
accustomed to these, will come to very little. But Reason and Argument, the
Gracefulness of the Action, the Imitation of excellent Men, the Honor and
Respect, and universal Approbation that attend their doing well, the pleasing
and generous Satisfactions of one's own Mind, which result from a Sense of
having done so, and the Deference paid by others to such Persons and Actions;
The Deformity of an ill thing, the Representations of its being unworthy and
unbecoming, a Reproach and Affront to Human Nature; the Shame and Scandal, the
inward Upbraiding and Discontents, and the General Dislike and Aversion it
draws upon us; how despicable and little it makes us appear, both in our own
Eyes, and the Esteem of the World; These are the Defensive Arms against Vice;
these the Spurs to Virtue, that influence and quicken up all Children of good
Tempers, and such as give us any tolerable Hopes of making significant Men.
These we shall do well to be perpetually ringing in their Ears; and if such
Arts as these prove ineffectual, all the Methods of Rigor will do but little
Good upon them. What cannot be compassed by dint of Reason, and Prudence, and
Address, will either never be compassed by dint of Blow; or if it be, it will
turn to very poor Account. But indeed there is no fear of Disappointment, if
such Methods are taken in time, and the Corruptions of Vice be not suffered to
get beforehand with us: For these Notions are commensurate, and Proper to the
Soul, and the most natural that can possibly be, while it is preserved in its
Primitive Innocence and Purity. I would not be mistaken in all this; As if it
were any part of my Intention to countenance or commend that loose and
effeminate Indulgence, which admits of no Contradiction, no Correction at all;
but makes it a Principle, to let Children have their Humor in every Thing, for
fear of fretting and putting them out of Temper. This is an Extreme every whit
as extravagant, and as destructive, as the other. Such Parents are like the
Ivy, that certainly kills the Tree encircled by it; or the Age that hugs her
Whelps to Death with mere Fondness. It Is as if when we see a Man drowning, we
should stand by, and let him sink, for fear the pulling him out by the Hair of
the Head should hurt him. Against this Foolish Tenderness it is, that the wise
Preacher inveighs so largely, and so smartly. Prove. xiii. 24. xix. 18. xxiii.
13, 14. Ecclus. xxx. 8, 9, 12.
He that spares the Rod, hates his Son; but he that loves him chasteneth him
betimes. Chasten thy Son while there is hope, and let not thy Soul spare for
his crying. Withold not Correction from the Child; for if thou beatest him
with the Rod, he shall not die. Thou shall beat him with the Rod, and shall
deliver his Soul from Hell. An Horse not broken becomes Headstrong; and a
Child lest to himself will be wilful; Cocker thy Child, and he shall make thee
afraid. Bow down his Neck while he is young, lest he wax subborn, and bring
Sorrow to thine Heart. And all this Advice is very consistent with what I
recommended before; for Youth must not be suffered to run wild, and grow
Lawless. They ought to be contained in Discipline and good Order; but then this
Discipline should be so tempered and managed, as becomes a Spiritual, Human,
and reasonable Discipline; and not fly out into Rage, and Fury, as if we were
dealing with Brutes who have no Sense; or with Madmen, who have lost their
Senses, and must be banged into them again.

Advice for forming the Mind.
and the Rules for Instruction and Education suited to each of them. The First
of these Particulars was said to consist, in exercising, sharpening and forming
the Minds of young People. And here we might take Occasion to lay down a great
Variety of Directions; But the First, and Chief, and indeed the Fundamental
Rule of all the rest, (that which regards the Aim and End of all this painful
Toil; and which I am the more concerned to press and inculcate, because it is
very little observed, but by an Epidemical and fatal Mistake, Men are generally
fond of the quite contrary Course) this Rule, I say, which I would urge, and
presume to be infinitely the most concerning and material of any, is, That Men
would employ the greatest Part by much, and make it in a manner the Whole, of
their Business and Study, to exercise, and improve, and exert. That which is
our Natural and Particular Excellence; to brighten, and bring to light the
Treasure hid in every Man's breast, rather than to heap up, and make
Ostentation of that which is a foreign Growth. To aim at Wisdom rather than
Learning, and the quaint Subtilties of Speculative Knowledge; to strengthen the
Judgment, and consequently give the true Bent and Turn to the Will and the
Conscience, rather than fill the Memory, and warm the Fancy; in a Word, That
they would labor to make the Persons committed to their Charge, Prudent,
Honest, and good Men, and think this better Service, and infinitely higher
Accomplishments, than the making them Nice, Florid, Learned, or all that which
the World calls fine Scholars, and fine Gentlemen. Of the Three predominant
Parts of the Reasonable Soul, Judgment is the Chief, and most Valuable; Book I.
Chap. 19.
as was shown at large in the Beginning of this Treatise, to which I refer my
Reader. But almost all the World are of another Opinion, and run greedily after
Art and acquired Learning. Parents are at an infinite Expense; and Children
themselves at infinite Pains and trouble, to purchase a Stock of Knowledge; and
yet Tacitus his Complaint may be ours at this Day; That the Excess of Learning
is our Disease; and as it is in all other Excesses, the World is not the
better, but the worse for it: For in the midst of all this Fruitless Care and
Charge, they are in little or no Concern, for that which would come at a much
easier Rate; the breeding them so, that they may be Prudent and Honest, and fit
for Business. Now, though this Fault may be so general, yet All are not Guilty
of it upon the same Principle. Some are blindly led away by Custom; and
imagine, that Wisdom and Learning are either the same thing, or very near of
Kin to one another; but to be sure, that they constantly go together, and that
one of them cannot possibly be attained without the other. These Men are under
an innocent Mistake, and deserve to have some Pains taken with them, for their
better Information. Others are wilfully in the Wrong; and know well enough the
Difference between these Two: But still they will have artifical and acquired
Knowledge, whatever it cost them. And indeed as the Case stands now with our
Western Parts of Europe; this is the only way to make a Noise in the World.
Reputation and Riches are not to be got without it. So that the Persons we now
speak of, make a Trade of Learning, and sink it into a Mercenary, Pedantick,
Sordid, Mechanical Thing. A Commodity bought dear, to be sold again dearer at
second Hand. These Hucksters are past all Cure, and it is not worth while to
give our selves any Trouble about them. Not but that our Men of Mode are, some
of them as Extravagantly Foolish in the other Extreme, who esteem Learning an
ungentile Thing, and somewhat too Pedantick and Mean for Quality, and esteem a
Man the less for being a Scholar. This is but another Proof of their Folly and
Emptiness, and Want of all Sense of Virtue and Honor, which their Ignorance,
Impertinence, sauntring Lives, and vain Fopperies, give us such abundant
Demonstrations of every Day.

Learning and Wisdom compared.
that give us some Hopes of Recovery, and for the discovering where their
Mistake lies, we must show Two Things First, That there is a Real Difference
between Learning and Wisdom; and that the Latter is infinitely to be preferred,
before any the most exquisite and exalted Degree of the Former. Secondly, That
they do not always go together, nay, that most commonly they obstruct each
other; insomuch that your Men of nice Learning are not often eminent for
Wisdom; nor your Truly wise Men deep Learned. There are, I confess, some
Exceptions to this last Observation, but it were heartily to be wished there
were more of them. They that are so, are Men of Great, and Noble Souls; of
which Antiquity furnishes some Instances, but the more Modern Times are very
barren of them.

Stock laid in with Labor and long Trouble, of all that we have seen, and
heard, and read in Books; the Sayings and Actions of Great and Good Men, who
have lived in all Ages and Nations. The Repository or Magazine, where this
Provision is treasured up, is the Memory. He who is provided by Nature with a
good Memory, has no body to blame but himself, if he be not a Scholar; for he
has the Means in his own Hands. Wisdom is a calm and regular Government of the
Soul: That Man is Wise, who observes true Measures, and a due Decorum in his
Thoughts, and Opinions, and Desires; his Words, and Actions, and Deportment. In
short; Wisdom is the Rule and Standard of the Soul, and he that uses this Rule
aright, that is, The Man of Judgment and Discretion, that sees, and discerns,
judges and esteems Things according to their Nature and Intrinsic Value; who
places each in its just Order and Degree, is the Person we would have every one
attempt to be. And how Reasonable that Advice is, will quickly appear, by
observing how far the greater Excellence of the Two, this of Wisdom is.

Learning, however Valuable in it self, Men to be Subtle, and to distinguish
all Plain-dealing quite away. Look into the Characters of Excellent Persons in
History; and you shall find most amongst them of moderate and very indifferent
Seize. Witness Old Rome, which, in the Days of her Ignorance, was
renowned for Justice and Honor; but when Learning and Eloquence got the
Ascendent, the Fame of her Virtue was in its Declension; and in Proportion as
Men's Wits grew more Subtle and Refined, Innocence and Simplicity fell into
Decay and Contempt. Sects and Heresies, Errors and Atheism it self have ever
been set on foot and propagated, by Persons of Artifice and Learning. The
primitive Source of our Misery and Ruin, and that first Temptation of the
Devil, which inveigled and undid Mankind, was an unseasonable and intemperate
Desire of Knowledge. Ye shall be as Gods discerning between Good and Evil, was
that fatal Expectation, which deprest our first Parents, and made them less
than Man. The more Men employed their Wits in Study, the more plausible, and
consequently the more dangerous Notions they started; which made St. Paul bid
his Colossians beware, that they were not seduced by Philosophy, and vain
Deceit. And one of the Learnedest Men, that ever lived, speaks but very meanly
of it, as a Thing Vain and Unprofitable, Hurtful and Troublesome, such as was
never to be enjoyed without many grievous Encumbrances; since he that
increases Knowledge must unavoidably increase Sorrow at the same Time. In a
Word; Learning, it is confessed, may Civilize and refine us, but it cannot
moralize us; we may be more courteous, and conversable, and accomplished; but
we cannot be one jot the Holier, the Juster, more Temperate, or more Charitable
for it. Fourthly, it does us no Service, neither in the sweetning of our Lives,
or abating our Resentments, for any of the Afflictions that embitter them. It
rather sets a Sharper Edge upon our Calamities, and raises our Sense of them to
be more quick and tender. Accordingly we see, that Children, and plain ignorant
People, (who measure their Misfortunes, only by what they feel at present, and
neither anticipate, and give them an Imaginary Being; nor revive and, as it
were, raise them from the Dead again by melancholy Reflections,) get over their
Sufferings much more easily, and support themselves under them with much
greater Temper and Moderation, than your quaint, and refined, and more thinking
Men. Ignorance is in some Degree a good Remedy; a strong Amulet against
Misfortunes; and our Friends (it is very manifest) are of that Opinion, when
they beg of us to forget, and not to think of them. For what is this but to
drive us hither for Shelter? I confess such Advice is Ridiculous, and a mere
Jest; for Remembering and Forgetting, are not Things in our own disposal; and
all we can contribute toward this, is not to torment our selves Industriously;
not to awaken the sleeping Lion; and when such Reflections offer themselves, to
soften, and counter-Work them, by Arguments for Patience and Contentedness; But
here our Advisers play the Surgeon's Part; who when they cannot heal the Wound,
assuage the Pain and Skin over the Sore, as well as they can. Those that have
advised People to dispatch themselves, when their Sufferings are come to
Extremity, and all Hope, all Possibility of Amendment gone, are directly of the
same Mind: For what is Death but a State of Stupidity and Insensibility? and
those who seek a Refuge here, acknowledge Ignorance to be their last, and most
effectual Remedy.

But now, Wisdom is an Accomplishment, of absolute Necessity, and universal
Use; All Things fall within the Verge of its Jurisdiction, and nothing can be
exempted, or concealed from its Cognizance. It rules and sits Supreme in War
and in Peace; in Public and Private; nay, it presides over our Frolicks and
Feasts; our Jollities and Recreations; for All these ought to be managed with
Prudence, and Discretion, and Sobriety. And, where Wisdom does not interpose,
all things run into Disorder and Confusion.

Secondly. Learning is Servile, and Mean, and Mechanical, when put into the
Balance with Wisdom; It is a borrowed Excellence, and borrowed with great
Importunity too. A learned Man is like the Jay in the Fable, tricked up and
made fine with the Feathers of other Birds. He sets himself off and entertains
the World with his Reading; but this is like making a Feast at another Man's
Cost. Whereas the Wise Man lives upon his Rents, and has an inexhaustible Fund
of his own: For Wisdom is a Man's proper Possession, an Inheritance settled upon
him by Nature; but cultivated, and made Fertile, by Art, and Industry, and
Exercise.

Thirdly. The Qualities and Conditions of these Two are vastly Different; more
Graceful, more Generous in the One, than the Other. Learning is usually Proud
and Peevish, Captious and Cavilling, Arrogant and Presumptuous, Peremptory and
Bold, Quarrelsome and addicted to Disputes, Ill-mannerd and Indiscreet. Wisdom
is Modest and Reserved, Gentle and Peaceable, free from a Spirit of
Contradiction, and full of Respect. Again. Learning is commonly Forward and
Affected, Unseasonable and Pretending, always thrusting it self in at every
Thing, and yet able to do Nothing: For it consists not in Action, but in Talk.
But Wisdom is full of Efficacy and Activity; it Manages and Governs every
Thing; and is never Troublesome, or Vain; never Nauseous or out of Time.

Thus it Appears, that there is a mighty Difference between true Wisdom, and
acquired Knowledge; and how much the One is Better and more Valuable than the
Other. As much indeed, as a Thing that is indispensably Necessary, and of
general Use, Active and Vigorous, and Substantial; Noble, and Virtuous, and
Becoming; excels another, which is Serviceable but in some Cases, and
absolutely Necessary in none; Impotent and Unactive, Mechanic and Mean,
Presumptuous and Positive, Stiff and Humorsome; Captious and Cavilling.

Rome was as Ignorant as any other Part of the World, for the First Five
Hundred Years; and then was it is Acme both for Virtue and Valor: when Learning
came in, Corruption and Vice, Factions and Civil Wars entered with it. The most
glorious Constitution the World ever saw, was that of the Lacoedemonians
founded by Lycurgus. The Gallantest Men in Story were bred under it, and yet
they do not seem to have made any Pretension to Learning, or to express any
great Esteem for it at that time. This was the Famous School for Virtue and
Wisdom; and conquered Athens, the most refined City in the World, the Scene of
Sciences, the Seat of the Muses, and Storehouse of Philosophy. These Examples
are Notorious in Ancient Story. If we descend down to our own Times: All those
large, wealthy and flourishing Kingdoms in the East and West Indies, lived very
well, and wanted neither Grandeur nor Plenty; they never had Learning, nor did
they ever feel the Want of it; nay; they were Ignorant even of reading and
writing; and the Knowledge as they have now, has been purchased at the expense
of their Liberty: Besides that, they have learnt to cheat, and to be Vicious
into the Bargain, and several wicked Arts, never so much as mentioned amongst
them before. But indeed where do we find an Empire, for Glory and Success,
comparable to that of the Grand Signior? He, like the Lion of the World,
renders himself Formidable to all his Neighbors; and is a Check and Terror to
the Princes and Monarchs of the Earth. And yet in this whole Dominion, Nothing
Reigns so Universally, as profound Ignorance of Letters; No Professors of
Sciences, no Schools, no Allowance to read for the Public Instruction of
others; no, not even in Religion it self. What then has contained this State
in such excellent Order? what has procured all its Successes? what indeed but
Prudence, and Discipline, and Conduct? Turn your Eyes now, and observe those
other Kingdoms where Learning has been in Authority and Reputation. That of
France, for Example, which seems to succeed Athens in all its Glory. The
Principal Ministers of this Crown, the Constables, and Mareschals, and
Admirals, and Secretaries of State, through whose Hands all Business of Moment
passes, are for the most Part Persons of little or no acquired Learning. And we
know, that several eminent Lawgivers, and Princes, and Founders of
Commonwealths, have utterly banished all Studies of this Nature as the Poison
and Plague of a Nation; So did Licinius, and Valentinian, and Mahomet, and an
ancienter and better Man than all these, Lycurgus. This is a sufficient Proof,
that there may be Wisdom, where there is no acquired Learning. Let us next
enquire, whether we can find Learning destitute of Wisdom; and the Instances of
this Part, are no less obvious, and numerous, than the other. Do but take
notice of great part of the Men, who make Learning their Study and Profession,
whose Heads are full of Aristotle, and Cicero, the Philosophers, and the
Schoolmen. Are there any People in the World more awkward and uncouth in
Business? Is it not a common Proverb, when we see a Man Odd and Clumsie, to say
He is a mere Scholar? One would almost think, that they had pored away their
Senses; and that excess of Knowledge had stunned and stupify'd them. How many
are there, who would have made excellent Persons, had they not sunk and
dwindled into Pedantry; and had been wiser Men, if they had traded upon their
own Natural Stock, and never sat down to Books at all? and how many of their
own Brethren do we see, who never had that Education, and prove much shrewder
Men, and better Contrivers, more quick and expert in all manner of Business?
Take one of your Nice Disputants, or quaint Rhetoricians, bring him into a
debate at the next Corporation, where any Matter of Government, or Civil
Interest is under Deliberation; put him upon speaking to the Point, and he
shall Blush and Tremble, turn Pale, and Cough, and Hem: But it is Odds, if he
say any Thing to the Purpose. At last perhaps, you shall have a formal
Harangue; some Definitions of Aristotle, or Quotations out of Tully, with an
Ergo at the End of them. And yet at the same Meeting you shall have a dull,
plodding Alderman, that chalks up all his Acounts behind the Door; and can
neither write nor read, and yet this Fellow, by seeing and knowing the World,
shall out of his own Observation and Experience, come to better Resolutions,
and propose more feasible and proper Expedients, than the subtilest and most
refined Student of them all. Were Matters indeed so managed, that Men turned
their Speculation into Practice, and took Care to apply their Reading to the
Purposes of Human Life; the Advantage of Learning would be unspeakable; and we
see how illustriously such Persons shine in the World. And therefore what I
have said upon this Occasion, is not to be stretched to the Prejudice of
Learning in general; but only to such a false Opinion of it, as depends upon
This alone for the most eligible, and Only Qualification of the Mind of Man;
and so rests upon it, and buries it in Inactivity. This the foregoing Instances
show is frequently done, and a very vulgar Error; and consequently they prove
the Point, for the Illustration of which alone they are produced; and that is,
That this Distinction between Wisdom and Learning is not Imaginary, but
grounded upon a real Difference; and that in Fact these Two do not always go
Hand in Hand, nor meet in the same Person.

and undeniable Matter of Fact, give us Ten thousand Instances of it is being
otherwise.

Tantalus in the Fable, starved with the Meat at their Mouths. When they apply
themselves to Reading, the Thing they principally aim at, is to learn Words
more than Things; or at least, they content themselves with a very slight and
superficial Knowledge of Things; and He is reputed the best Scholar, who has
made the largest Collections, and crammed his Memory fullest. Thus they are I
earned, but not with any Care of polishing their Minds, and forming their
Judgments, or growing practically Wise. Like a Man that puts his Bread in his
Pocket, and not in his Stomach; and if he go on Thus, he may be famished for
want of Sustenance, notwithstanding both Pockets are full. Thus they continue
Fools, with a vast Treasure of Wisdom in their Brains. They study for
Entertainment, or Ostentation, or Gain, or Applause; and not for their own true
Benefit, and the becoming Useful to the World. They are living Repertories and
Commonplace Books; and would be rare Compilers of Precedents and Reports.
Cicero, they tell you, or Aristotle, or Plato say Thus and Thus; but all this
while, They say not one Tittle of their own Observation. They are guilty of Two
great Faults: One is, that they do not apply what they read, to themselves, nor
make it their own by Meditation, Reflection and Use; so that all this while
they have not advanced one Step in Virtue; nor are One whit more Prudent, more
Resolute and Confirmed in Goodness; and thus their Scholarship is never
digested, and incorporated with the Soul, but swims and floats about in the
Brain, and consequently can never nourish, or do them any manner of Good. The
Other is, That in all this Time and Trouble, so diligently spent in heaping
together the Wealth of other Men, they neglect their own Proper and Natural
Fund, and let this lie dead, and rust upon their Hands, for want of Exercise.
Now, Others, who are not capable of Study, have nothing but their own Common
Sense and Reason to be intent upon; and therefore they must keep it in constant
Employment. They manure and cultivate their little Plat of Ground, and reap a
Crop in proportion to their Diligence; grow Better, and Wiser, more Resolure
and Steady, though not so Knowing, or so Eloquent, so Wealthy, or so Celebrated
in the World. The whole of which Observation may be reduced to that short Maxim
of an Author to this purpose; That weak and little Souls are spoiled by
Learning, but vigorous and great Ones are perfected by it. The Former are
diverted by it from Matters more Weighty and Substantial; the Latter make it
only Subservient to such, and transcribe it all into their own Practice.

Non paranda nobis solum, sed fruenda sapientia est.
We must not only get Wisdom, but we must use and enjoy it, if we will do any
thing to Purpose. We must not do like the Gatherers of Nosegays, that pick up
here and there whole Flowers, and after that make them up into Nosegays to sell
or give away; For thus unskilful Students do; They get together a Collection of
good Sayings and Observations out of the Books they have read; merely for the
Sake of Ostentation, and to put them off in all Company where they come: But we
must imitate the Bees, that never take away the Flower entire; but sit and
brood upon it, suck out the Life, and Spirit, and Quintessence, and convert it
into their own Substance, and Nourishment; and when This is done, they do not
render it back again in Thyme, or Marjoram, as they drew it in, but distill it
into most delicious and excellent Honey. Just after the same Manner, We are not
obliged to put our selves under the Slavery of getting Things by Heart; and
saying them again by Rote; (which some value themselves upon,) nor need we tie
up our Attention, to that superstitious Vanity of others, That of remembering
precisely the very Passage, and Page, and Chapter; (all which devours our Time,
and our Pains, and is bought very Dear with the Loss of that which our Minds
should principally aim at;) but we should draw out the Marrow and Substance of
our Authors, feed and feast our Thoughts upon them; deduce Inferences, and form
the Judgment, and give the Soul quite another Turn; we should bring all Home,
and lay it close to our Hearts; that it may be entirely of a Piece with us,
instruct our Understandings, regulate our Affections, direct and incline our
Wills, and guide our Consciences in all their practical Determinations and
Debates. In a Word, The Principles of Honesty, and Wisdom, and Prudence, and
Perseverance, which we meet with scattered up and down in Books, we are to
collect into one entire Body; and out of that make an Honest, Wise, Prudent,
and Well-resolved Man. So says Tacitus upon a like Occasion, Non ad pompam, nec
ad speciem, nec ut nomine magnisico sequi otium velis, sed quo firmior adversus
fortuita Rempublicam capessas.
Our Intention must not be Pomp, and Show, the Credit and Reputation of being
Book-learned; but the fitting our selves for Action and Business, and
fortifying our Minds against any Accidents that may happen to us.

by; but these we may fix and dwell upon, because They will not fail to stick
by Us, and amply to reward our Pains.



Cato the Elder used to say, that Wise Men might learn a great ^deal more from
Fools, than Fools could from Wise Men. The Lacedoemonians, to work in their
Children an Abhorrence of Drunkenness, and draw them off from this beastly Vice
effectually, made their Slaves drunk; that so this Odious and Ridiculous
Spectacle, might leave lasting Impressions behind it. Now, this Second Way of
Learning by Example, is insinitely the easier, and more entertaining of the
Two. To learn by Precepts is a long and tedious Journey, and carries us a great
way about; because it costs us Time and Pains to understand them; and fresh
Labor to remember what we do understand; and, after all this, the greatest and
most difficult Part of our Business, is to be ready and punctual in the
Practice of what we do remember. So that we cannot easily assure our selves of
reaping the Fruit, which is, and ought to be propounded, as the Recompense of
our Studies in this kind. But now Example and Imitation comes Home to us
presently, and does the Work at once; it draws us on with greater Eagerness and
Zeal; it fires us with a Noble Emulation, of our Patterns, and encourages us
with a Prospect of the same Reputation and Advantage, which those Good and
Great Men have already attained to by their shining Virtues. All Seeds do by
Degrees conform to the Quality of the Soil into which they are transplanted;
and carry the Relish of that which is the natural Growth of the Place. And thus
the Minds and Manners of Men are assimulated and transformed, into the
Dispositions, and Habits, of the Persons, whose Actions they contemplate, and
whose Company they frequent: For there is an Universal Contagion in Nature, and
One thing is daily more and more changed, and drawn into a nearer Resemblance
of another.



The Former, of holding a Correspondence with the Living, is the more Lively,
and Vigorous, and Natural. This indeed is a very Profitable Exercise; much in
request among the Ancients, and especially in Greece; but then it is accidental
and uncertain; it depends upon another, and you cannot always enjoy it, when
you would. It is also Difficult and Rare, for a Man cannot every where meet
with Persons proper for it, and less yet can he enjoy them sufficiently to
improve by. This again is capable of being practiced, either about Home, or at
a greater Distance, by traveling and visiting foreign Countries. An that is an
Advantage, I confess, very considerable, provided a Man make the most of it:
For the End of Traveling is not to entertain our selves with fine Sights, or
to bring back an Account of the Buildings, or Grottos, or Fountains we see
abroad; but to study the Natives, and observe their different Humors, and
Manner of Living, their Vices and Virtues, their Laws and Customs, their
private Conduct, and public Constitutions. This is a most agreeable, and a
most profitable Way of Education in all Respects; It contributes much to
Health, by keeping the Body in Morion and Moderate Exercise, a due Medium
between Idleness and Fatigue: And it keeps the Mind in continual Employment
too, by presenting new and strange Objects to it every Day; and provoking it to
proper Observations and Reflections from them; and particularly to the drawing
Comparisons between these fresh and foreign Matters, and what we had seen and
were acquainted with before. And indeed there is no better School of Life in
the World, than the seeing continually so many different Tempers and Ways of
living; contemplating the Beauty of Nature in all her different Forms, and out
of all these, to pick and cull that, which may complete and adorn our own
Conversation.



Putting our Scholars upon Discourse
which it will be proper for him to Observe, in Order to the making his Care
Successful. This Head consists of several Parts. The First Advice I shall give
upon it is, That he would frequently confer with his Charge; ask him Questions,
and put him upon giving his own Opinion, upon every fresh Occasion or Object,
that offers it self to his Consideration. This I am afraid is but too opposite
to the manner of proceeding generally in use; the Master talks All, and teaches
his Children in a Dogmatical Way; thus pouring his own Notions into their Heads
like Water into a Vessel; so that They in the mean while have nothing to do but
to keep their Ears open, and are purely passive in the whole Matter. This is
certainly a very Ill Custom. Obest plerumque iis, qui discere volunt,
Authoritas eorum qui docent,
The Authority of the Teacher, and his taking so much upon himself, is a common
and a mighty Hindrance to the Improvement even of the most diligent Scholar.
Their Apprehension should be awakend and warmed by starting of Doubts, and
requiring an Account of what we have infused into them; and they should
likewise be indulged in the same Liberty of asking us Questions, and putting
Cases, informing themselves, and opening their own Way. If we never allow them
to come in for a Share of the Discourse, all we say to them will be to little
Purpose: Our Scholar only gives us the Hearing, and that sometimes but Coldly
and Negligently neither; but as to any Application or Improvement, he troubles
not himself, nor is at all Zealous about it; because This is a Matter which he
is not called upon for, nor concerned to bear a Part in the Conversation. Nor
is it enough in this Case, that we make them Deliver their Opinions, except we
moreover require them to allege their Reasons, and oblige them to argue in
Defense of it: For this is the Way to prevent their talking without Book, and
by Rote; This will make them Heedful and Attentive, Cautious what they say, and
considerate before they speak; and, for their better Encouragement to confer
with us freely, we must commend, and make the best of what they say; and where
the Performance falls short, we must accept the Endeavor very graciously. This
Method of Instruction by way of Questions, was admirably put in Practice by
Socrates, who was indeed the greatest Master in it of all the Philosophers; and
we see all along in Plato, by what a Chain and Mutual Connection of Enquiries,
he led Men gently up to the Truth; and by insensible Degrees gained his Point
upon the Objectors. But indeed a much Greater than Socrates has set us a
Pattern in it; Even our Blessed Lord, who, with inimitable Prudence, appealed
to Men's own Sense and Judgment; and as he sometimes taught his Disciples, so
did he at others confute his Adversaries out of their own Mouths. Now these
Questions and Conferences need not always be confined to such Subjects, as the
Seize of Memory, or Fancy, or what we call acquired Knowledge are
concerned in; but may, (indeed they ought much rather to) be extended to such
as are Trials of the Judgment, and sound Sense. So that no sort of Subjects,
will be excluded; for all, even the least and most Inconsiderable, are capable
of being employed to very good Purpose. The Negligence of a Servant, the Folly
of a Child, the Moroseness and Ill Nature of a Clown, the Sports or Plays of
Boys, the Talk at Table; for the Excellency and Business of Judgment does by no
Means consist in the Management or Determination of Weighty or Sublime Matters
only, but in passing a true and Right Decision, and setting a just Value upon
all Manner of Things, be they Great or Small, Trivial or Important: It is not
the Condition of the Subject, but the Truth, and Pertinency of what is
resolved, and said upon it, that proves the Person to be Judicious. It will be
very convenient therefore to let him deliver his Opinion of Men and Actions;
but, to be sure, always to say somewhat in Justification of his Opinion; and to
let nothing pass without some Reflection, and the Inducements, which move him to
think thus rather than otherwise: For This will have a wonderful Influence in
the directing his Conscience, and practical Judgment; which is of all other
Faculties most necessary to be cultivated and set Right; because, if This
Happen to go amiss, all our Actions which result from its Determination, must
consequently be Irregular. Cyrus his Tutor in Xenophon took this Course; and
propounded the following Matter of Fact for an Exercise and Lesson to his
Pupil. A great Boy having a short Coat, gave it to one of his Playfellows, who
was less than himself, and took away his Coat in Exchange, which was Larger,
and too Big for the right Owner: Now, the Thing required of Cyrus was to
deliver his Judgment upon this Matter. Cyrus his Opinion was, that the Matter
was very well ordered, and much better than before; for now both the Boys were
fitted to their Turn, whereas, till that Exchange was made, neither of them was
so. His Tutor rebuked him very sharply for so rash and unjust a Judgment; for
that he had only considered the Convenience of the Thing, and not the Right and
Merits of the Cause; since Justice is of so much greater Consequence, that the
other ought not to be put into the Balance with it; nor must a Man's Property
be invaded, upon the Pretense of giving somewhat that its sitter for his
Circumstances in the stead of it. This now is an excellent Way of informing
them. Again, When they repeat or quote any Thing out of their Books; as Cicero,
or Aristotle, or the like, This Task should be imposed, not merely for the Sake
of retaining it in their Memories, but to fasten it in their Minds, and give
them a true Taste of it, and enable them to judge of it themselves. And, in
order to this, he should take it under all its different Appearances turn and
examine it every way; and be taught to apply it to several Subjects. It would
be a Matter of very small Consequence, for a Youth to tell a Story, of Cato's
killing himself, for Fear of falling into the Hands of Caesar; or how Brutus
and Cassius engaged in the taking Caesar off; This is the least Part of the
Improvement such Historical Narrations are Capable of furnishing. The Main
Point is, To call these Men before him, to Arraign, and Try, and Sentence them
for these Actions; Whether they did Well or Ill; whether they consulted the
Public Good, and behaved themselves like true Patriots; what Prudence, and
Justice, and Courage, there was in these Instances; and wherein these
Excellencies exerted, or their Contrary Qualities betrayed themselves. Lastly,
In all the Questions, and Conferences, he ought to take Care, that his Charge
proceed according to Truth; that he be taught to express himself Properly, and
Pertinently; to reason justly; and to exercise his Practical Judgment of
Things, which is an Excellence and Accomplishment infinitely to be preferred
before any the nicest Subtilties of the most refined speculative Knowledge. And
in such Exercises as these, No Doubt should be left unsatisfied; no Point
suffered to pass off Imperfectly discussed; no Connivence given to lame and
superficial Accounts of Things, the little Shiftings of an Argument, or the
calling of an other Cause; but the Scholar must be pressed home; carried to the
Bottom of all that is propounded; kept close to the Matter in Hand; that so he
may be a perfect Master of what he undertakes, and have solid and substantial
Grounds for the Opinions he entertains.

Secondly, He ought to train his Pupil up to a becoming Curiosity, and a Desire
to know every Thing his Condition is capable of. That so he may always have his
Mind intent, and his Wits about him; applying himself to weigh and consider
Critically all that is said or done in his Company; taking nothing at first
View, without Reflection, and a Second Examination of it privately in his own
Thoughts. And not only so, but with Modesty and Temper to inform himself, and
consult others, in Matters both of Right, and of Fact. It is a common Proverb,
That he who never asks Questions, will never be a Wise Man; that is, If a Man's
Mind be not kept stirring, it will rust and mould; and nothing but constant Use
and Exercise can cleanse and brighten it. Now, whatever of this Kind falls
under his Consideration, should be managed to the best Advantage; applied and
brought home to himself; discoursed and advised upon with others; and that,
whether it be somewhat already past, to discover what Defects there were, and
which were the false Steps in it; or whether it be somewhat future, that he may
govern himself regularly; be warned of any Hazards and Dangers that attend what
he goes about; and prevent Miscarriages and Inconvenience, by growing wise in
Time. Children should never be left to their own idle Fancies, to dare and
trifle alone; For their Age and Capacity, not being of it self able to furnish
Noble Matter of Thought, will certainly dwindle into Vanity, and feed upon
Impertinencies and Whimsies of a Size with their Imaginations. They should
therefore be kept in constant Employment; to exercise and give them a Manly Way
of thinking; and particularly to beget and excite this inquisitive Humor, and
eager Appetite of Knowledge, which will be sure to keep their Souls always
awake and busy, and by inspiring them with a Noble Emulation, be Eternally
putting forward to fresh and larger Seize. And this Curiosity, if
qualified, as I have here described it, will neither be Vain and Fruitless in
it self, nor Troublesome or Unmannerly to any, they converse with.

Thirdly, Another necessary Care in the Instructing of Children is, To frame
and mould their Minds, after the Model of Universal Nature, taking the World at
large for our Pattern; to make the Universe their Book, and whatever Subject
lies before them, to draw it in sull Proportion, and represent the several
Opinions and Customs, which do, or ever have prevailed with regard to it. The
Greatest and most Excellent Persons have always had the freest and most
enlarged Souls: For this indeed strengthens and confirms the Mind; delivers it
from Wonder and Surprise; and fixes it in Reason and Resolution; which is the
highest Point of Wisdom. This Particular, and the Benefits of it, as well as
the Absurdity and great Uneasinesses of the Contrary has been so largely
insisted upon heretofore, See Book II. Chapter 2.
that I shall omit what might be said more upon it here; adding only this
Observation, That such a large and universal Spirit must be the Business and
Acquest of early Application, and Diligence in the Master; before the
Prepossessions of his Native Country and Customs have taken too fast Hold upon
his Scholar; and when he is ripe for Traveling and Conversation, that which
will contribute most to the perfecting him in this Disposition, is going
abroad; conferring much with Foreigners; or, if that cannot be, yet informing
himself at Home, by reading such Books as give Account of Travels into remote
Parts of the World, and contain the Histories of all Nations.

Lastly, Children ought to be taught betimes not to swallow things at a
venture, nor receive any Opinions upon Trust, and the bare Authority of the
Person who delivers them; but to seek and expect all the Evidence that can be
had, before they yield their Assent. The contrary Easiness of Mind, is to
suffer one's self to be led about hoodwinked; to renounce the Use of Reason
quite, and submit to the Condition of Brutes, whose Business is only to know
their Driver, and go as they are directed: Let every Thing therefore be fairly
propounded; let the Arguments on each Side be stated, and set in their true
Light, and then let him choose, as Judgment shall determine him. If he be at a
Loss, which Side he should incline to, let him deliberate longer, and doubt on;
such a distrust and uncertainty of Mind is an excellent Sign; more Safe, more
Promising than a rash Confidence, which resolves Right or Wrong, and thinks it
self always sure, though it can give no reason why. The Perplexities and
Dilemmas of a cautious and considerate Person, are much to be preferred before
even the true Determinations that are made in a Heat, and by Chance. But then,
as the Youth should be taught always to practice upon his own Judgment, so
should he learn likewise to have a Modest Diffidence of his Abilities; and when
any Difficulty interposes, or the Resolution is of great Consequence, to
consult those, who are proper to be advised with, and never venture to come to
a peremptory Determination, merely upon the Strength of his own reasoning. For,
As the being able to examine and compare Things is One Argument of Sufficiency,
so is the calling in Help Another; and the refusing to rest upon one's own
single Opinion is no Reflection upon our Wisdom; No Disparagement to what we
think alone, but rather the quite contrary.

Advice for the Body.
and this is not to be deferred any more than the other. It has no distinct
and separate Seasons, but must go along with the Former; and only differs in
This, that, though we ought to express a constant Care and Concern for both, yet
we are not obliged to have that Concern equal for both. But, since Nature has
united these Two into One and the same Person, we must contribute to the Good
of each by our joint Endeavors. Now, the Care of the Body will be most
profitably Expressed, not in the Indulging its Appetites, or treating it tenderly
(as the Generality of those, who pretend to resined Education do;) but by
utterly abandoning all Softness and effeminate Nicety in Cloths and Lodging,
Meat and Drink; to give it plain and hearty Nourishment; a simple and wholesome
Diet; considering the Convenience of Health and Digestion, more than the
Pleasures and Delicacy, of the Palate: To support it in a Condition of
Strength, capable of supporting Labor and Hardship; and accordingly inure it
to Heat and Cold, Wind and Weather; That so the Muscles and Nerves, as well as
the Soul, may be fortified for Toil; and by That, for Pain; For the Custom of
the Former, hardens us against the Latter. In a Word, to keep the Body Vigorous
and Fresh; and the Appetite and Constitution indifferent to all forts of Meats,
and Tastes: For the several Parts of this Advice, are by no Means so
insignificant, as they may seem. It were enough to say, that they conduce
mightily to the preserving and confirming our Health; but That is not all; for
the Benefit extends beyond our own Persons, and the Public is the better for
them; as they enable and qualify Men for the enduring Fatigues, and so fit
them for Business, and the Service of their Country.

Third Branch of this Duty, Directions for Man^ners.
which contains a Parents Carey of his Childrens Manners; in which, Soul and
Body both are very highly concerned. Now, this Care consists of Two Parts; The
Preventing Ill Habits; and Cultivating Good Ones. The Former is the more
Necessary, and Requires the more diligent Attention of the Two. And This is a
Business, which ought to be begun very early indeed, a Man can hardly set about
it too soon: For Vicious Dispositions grow into Habits apace; so that the
Corruption of Nature is sure to be beforehand with us; and, if these Things be
not stifled in the Birth, it is very difficult Dealing with them afterward. I
suppose, I need not say, that this Endeavor ought to be Universal, and bend it
self against all Vice without Exception: But some there are, which I shall
mention, and recommend the subduing of more especially, because they are more
incident to that Condition of Life, and therefore more formidable than the rest.

The First is Lying; A pitiful, poor-spirited Vice; the Character of Slaves and
Cowards, the most ungenteel Quality that can be, and certain Indication of a
base, degenerate, and timorous Soul; but more particularly, sit to be cautioned
against in this Place; because harsh Methods, and rigorous Severities in the
Education of Children, very often fright them into it at first, and lay the
seeds of Fear and Falsehood for their whole Lives.

The Second is an Awkward Bashfulness, which puts them upon hiding their Faces,
hanging down their Heads, blushing and looking out of Countenance, when they
are spoken to; makes them incapable of bearing any sort of Correction, or the
least angry Word, without being disordered, and put quite out of Humor. A great
deal of This is owing to the Natural Weakness and Tenderness of their Minds;
but this Infirmity must be corrected by Study and Application; by learning them
to bear Admonition and Rebukes, using them to see Company; and fortifying them
with a becoming Assurance and Presence of Mind.

Thirdly, All Affectation and Singularity in their Dress, their Mean, their
Gate, their Gestures, their Speech, and every other Part of Behavior. Making
their Deportment and Conversation Masculine, and free; easy and unconstrained:
For Affectation is a sure Sign of Vanity, an inordinate Desire of recommending
themselves by doing somewhat particular, and out of the common Road; and is
extremely Nauseous and Offensive to all Companies; it displeases even where it
labors to oblige; and casts a Blemish upon our best Actions and kindest
Intentions. Licet sapere sine pompa sine invidia.
A Man may be Wise without Ostentation, and should labor to be so, without
giving Prejudice or Offense.

But especially, They must check and utterly banish all Anger, and Peevishness,
and Spite, and Obstinacy. And in order hereunto, It will be a good Rule to
settle a Resolution never to gratify Children when they are froward, nor give
them any thing they cry and are outrageous for. To make them sensible betimes,
that these Arts will never do them service; and are therefore unprofitable, as
well as unbecoming. Another necessary Course to this purpose will be, never to
flatter, or wheedle, or caress them in their querulous Humors; for Fondness
and Indulgence, which is blameable at all times, is of most dangerous
consequence at such times as these: This absolutely ruins them to all Intents
and Purposes, incourages them to be Passionate and Sullen, if they have not
what they ask for, and renders them at length Obstinate and Headstrong,
Intractable and Insolent: For Nihil magisreddet Iracundos, quam Educatio mollis
and blanda.
Nothing disposes Men more to extravagant Passion and Resentment, than the
being humored and cocker'd in their Infancy; and the greatest part of those
Fretful, Exceptious, and Self-conceited Qualities, which render Conversation so
difficult, and so full of Cavils, as we find it, are owing most certainly to a
Failure in this part of Education. The Niceness and Tenderness they have been
used with in their Infancy, and the Unreasonable Compliances with their
Passions then, have absolutely broke their Tempers, and make them Whimsical and
Jealous, Furious and domineering all their Life-long; They expect, because
Mothers and Nurses have done it to my young Master and Miss, that all the World
should submit to their Humors when they come to be Men and Women.

Humility; and at Seasons so proper, that all the World may perceive we have
due Dread, and a constant Awe of that Being, which we take care to treat so
very respectfully. Not to use themselves to dispute upon Religion, or call the
Mysteries of it in into Question; but resign their Understandings to the
Oracles of God, and be content to believe the Scriptures in such a Sense as the
truly Catholic Church has embraced, and commanded to be taught and received.



Alcibiades's peculiar Excellence was said to lie in this obliging Easiness of
Humor: And Aristippus was a Man of perfect Address; so far from Moroseness, or
suffering the Study of Philosophy to sour him, that Horace takes notice of him
as a Person so debonnaire and well-fashion'd, that every thing he did became
him, and he was never at a Loss. Omnis Aristippum decuit color, and status, and
res, etc. Hor. Ep. xvii.
All Fortune sitted Aristippus well,
Aiming at Greater, pleased with what befell. Creech.


Let your young Charge be so much a Master of Conversation, as to be capable of
keeping all manner of Company, but let him choose and frequent none but such as
are virtuous and good. Let him abstain from Vice, not upon Compulsion only, out
of Fear, or Ignorance, but out of Inclination and Choice. For Multum interest,
utrum peccare quis nolit, aut nesciat.
There is a great deal of difference between refusing to be Wicked, and not
daring, or not knowing how to be so.

Book II. Chap. 9.
This will preserve them from that Forwardness which puts them upon
Contradiction and Dispute, and attacking all they come hear. With some Persons
it is never proper for us to engage at all; as those particularly, whose
Quality is much above, or very much below our own; whether the Difference lie
in Birth, or Riches, or Honor, or Parts, or Characters; These can never be a
fit Match for us at any time. But indeed, Those that are so should not be
encountered at All Times, nor upon All Occasions; not for a trifling
Circumstance, an improper Expression; in short, What is of little Moment in it
self, or little or no Concern to Us, will not justify our wrangling for it. To
let nothing go without putting in an Exception to it, is ill-manner'd,
impertinent, and troublesome: Bur even in those things that are worth a
Dispute, to be opinionative and peremptory, warm and violent, clamorous and
loud, is as much a Breach of this Virtue; for Modesty teaches Men to be Meek
and Gentle, Moderate and Condescending; it cannot be reconciled with a positive
dogmatical way of Talk with an abounding in our own Sense, and a Resolution not
to be convinced: But it yields the Point when it is no longer defensible; and,
As it never disputes for Ostentation, or Disputing's sake, so it has a just
Deference to the Person, and his contrary Opinion; it preserves Decency and
good Manners; allows all that can possibly be granted, and takes Care to soften
the Opposition of that which Judgment will not suffer it to allow. But of This
I have spoken in another Part of this Treatise already; and therefore shall
dismiss the Subject at present, and with it Three parts of that Duty which
Parents owe to their Children.

Paternal Affection.
and the manner of treating and conversing with them when they are grown up,
and the former Rules have had their desired Effect. Now we need not be told
that the Affection between Parents and Children is natural and reciprocal. But
it is stronger and more natural on the Parent's side; because This is the
straight Course of Nature, carrying on the Life, and promoting the Succession
of Mankind by the Descent of a right Line; whereas That of Children is only by
way of Rebound and Reflection, and consequently cannot move so vigorously back
again, as the former does forward. This indeed seems rather to be the Paying of
a Debt, and the Sense and Return of Kindnesses received, than free, and
natural, and pure Love. Besides, He that first does the Kindness, loves more
than the Person who is passive, and receives it: And therefore the Parent, who
is the first Mover, loves more vehemently than he is beloved again. Of this
Assertion there are many Arguments to assure us. Every Thing is fond of
Existence, and Existence proves it self by Exercise and Action. Now whoever
does Good to another, does after some sort exist in that Person; and he who
gives Being, manifestly lives and acts in That Being which is propagated by
him. He that does a Kindness, does a noble and generous Thing; but he who
receives it, has not the same to alledg. For the Virtue is the proper Quality
of the First; but the Prosit and Advantage is peculiar to the Second. Now
Virtue, we know, is rooted in the Nature of the Thing, and consequently is a
more worthy and amiable, a more firm and permanent Quality, than that of
Advantage can possibly be; for This is additional, occasional, and accidental
only; it may quickly vanish into nothing, and take it self away. Again, We are
fond of those Things that are obtained with Difficulty and Expense; That is
dear to us which costs us dear, says the Provetb. But the Bringing Children
into the World, the Cherishing, Maintaining, and Educating them, are infinitely
more troublesome for Parents to bestow, than it is possible to be to Children
to receive these Advantages.

Of two kinds.
yet thus far they agree, that both are Natural. The First is purely and
entirely so; little, if at all removed from that which we commonly call
Instinct in Brutes; for they partake of it as well as we. This disposes Parents
to a strange Tenderness for their Children, even at the Breast, and in the
Cradle, and gives the first Infant-Cries and Complaints, a wondrous Power of
moving Compassion, and piercing their very Souls. This likewise inspires an
unaccountable Fondness and Delight in them; while as yet they are only capable
of diverting us, and as mere Play-things, as those Wax and Plaister-Babies,
which themselves are shortly to be entertained withal. Now This Affection is
not strictly and properly Humane: Nor ought a Man enriched with an Endowment so
noble as Reason, to suffer himself to be thus enslaved to Nature, after the
manner of Beasts that know no better; but rather he should be led by these
Motions of the Soul, and follow them freely, with all that Temper and Evenness,
which Judgment and Consideration should inspire; For these should preside over
Nature, and moderate its Affections, reducing all to the Measures and Guidance
of Reason. But now the other sort is more agreeable to These, and consequently
more Humane and worthy of us. This inclines us to love our Children more or
less, as they are more or less attractive and deserving our Affection; to rise
in This as these tender Plants of ours Blossom and Bud; and in proportion to
the early Dawnings and brighter and stronger Shinings of Wit and good Sense,
Virtue and Goodness in them. Some Parents there are, who seem wonderfully
transported with the first Appearances of this kind, but lose the Satisfaction
soon after, because the Charge of maintaining them at first, is no great
Matter; but That of the Education, which must improve and finish them, and
bring Credit to their Natural Gifts, is grievous and insupportable. This looks
as if they grudged their Children the Honor and Happiness of growing wiser and
better, and were sorry that they answer the End of their Creation; A Folly so
absurd, so infinitely unreasonable, that we may justly call them brutish and
inhumane Fathers who are guilty of it.

to their own Authority, and the Character of a Parent. For certainly such
prudent Reserves may be used in this Case, as would in no degree diminish That;
and yet abundantly condemn that stern and austere, that magisterial and
imperious Countenance and Carriage, which never lets a Child hear one mild
Word, nor see one pleasant Look. Men think it now below them to hear of the
Relation, and disdain to be called Fathers; when yet God himself does not only
condescend to, but delight in that Title, above all others whatsoever. They
make it no part of their Endeavor or Concern, to win the Love of their
Children, but prefer Fear, and Awe, and respectful Expressions of Distance,
before all the Endearments and Testimonies of a dutiful and tender Affection.
And, to contain them in these Sentiments the better, and to confirm them the
more, they show their Power by holding their Hands, and denying the Supplies
that are necessary and sit for them; make them (as the Term is) bite of the
Bridle, and not only live like Beggars or Scoundrels at present, but threaten
to keep them so, by leaving their Estates from them when they die. Now what
Stuff is all this? how sottish and ridiculous a Farce do such People act? What
is this but to distrust the Efficacy of that Authority which is real and
natural, and of right belongs to the Relation they stand in, that so they may
usurp a foreign and unjust Jurisdiction, and frame an artificial and imaginary
Authority to themselves? An Authority which all serious and good Men do but
pity or contemn; nay, which crosses and contradicts the very End of all this
foolish Project; for they destroy that very Reverence they would maintain, and
render themselves despicable in their own Families, a Jest and Scorn even to
those Children. But, if it have not this Effect (which it too often has) of
drawing such Contempt upon them, yet is it a mighty Temptation to young People
thus used, to take to Tricks, and little dishonest Shifts, and, without the
least Remorse, to cheat and impose upon such Parents; Whose Business, indeed,
should have been to regulate and inform their Minds, and show them the Equity
and Reasonableness of their Duty; but by no means to have Recourse to such kind
of Treatment as is much more agreeable to the Arbitrary Violence of a Tyrant,
than the Affectionate Regards, and kind Care of a Father. What says the wise
Comedian to this purpose? Errat long mea quidem Sententia,
Qui imperium credit esse gravius aut stabilius
Vi quod fit, quam illud quod amicitia adjungitur.

Truly in my Mind that Man thinks much amiss,
Who believes that Government purely by Force
Should have more Authority, and a better Foundation,
Than when it is accompanied with Tenderness and Respect.


that This, as it is one of the last, so it is one of the most important and
serious Actions of our Lives; and therefore Reason, and Law, and common Usage
ought to take place in it. For these are the wisest Guides we can follow, and,
in conforming to Them, we take the surest Gourse to answer the Obligations of
our Character, to vindicate our Proceedings to the World, and to quiet and
satisfy our own Consciences.

Duty of Children.
than which there is not any more plainly and visibly writ in the Book of
Nature, or more expressly and positively enjoined by Religion: A Duty which
ought to be paid them, not as mere and common Men, but as a sort of Demy-Gods,
earthly and visible Deities in this Mortal Flesh. Upon this Account Philo the
Jew tells us, that the Fifth Commandment was written half of it in the First,
and the other half in the Second Table of the Decalogue: Because it in part
regards the Duty we owe to God, and in part That which we owe to our Neighbor.
This is likewise so self-evident and acknowledged a Duty, so strictly and
indispensably required at our Hands, that No other Duty, no other Affection can
supersede it; even though our Affection to other Persons may, and is allowed to
be more intimate and tender. For put the Case, that a Man has a Father and a
Son both involved in the same Distress, and that he have it in his Power to
relieve but one of them, it has been the Opinion of very wise Men, that he is
bound to assist his Father, notwithstanding his Affection to the Son,
(according to what has been lately urged upon that Occasion,) be the greater
and stronger. The Reason of which Resolution seems to be, That the Son's Debt
to the Father is of longer standing; and the Obligation bore Date, and was in
Force before that to his own Son; and that therefore it is in this, as in other
Cases of like Nature, where no antecedent Tie can be cancelled by any
Engagement or Debt contracted afterward.



The First is Reverence; by which we are to understand, not only those External
Respects of the Looks, or Gestures, or Behavior, but the Inward and Respectful
Sense of the Mind; and This indeed chiefly as the Source and Foundation of the
other. Now This consists in a high Esteem, and prosound Veneration for them,
looking upon them as the Authors and Original of our Being, and all the
Comforts of it. The Instruments and Immediate Causes which the Universal Father
of all things was pleased to make choice of, for the bringing us out of
Nothing, and making us what we are; and therefore in that Quality bearing a
very great Resemblance to God himself.

The Second is Obedience; Which, provided the Matter of the Command be lawful,
cannot be dispensed with, upon the Pretense of any Rigor or Hardship that it
is encumbered with. And thus we find the Rechabites commended by God himself,
for complying with the Severities of Life, Jer. xxxv.
imposed upon Them, and their Posterity, by Jonadab their Ancestor.

The Third is, Succouring them in all their Exigencies and Distresses;
maintaining and cherishing them in their Wants and Weaknesses; Old Age and
Sickness, Infirmities and Poverty must be so far from Provoking our Scorn and
Contempt, that they are but so many louder Calls, and more engaging Ties to
Love and Duty, to Assistance and Respect; aiding and advising them in their
Business, and exerting our utmost Power to do them Service. Of This we have
some wonderful Examples in the other Parts of Nature; and Brutes themselves
have set us a noble and almost inimitable Pattern; particularly the Stork,
which St. Basil so elegantly extols upon this account: For the young Storks are
said to nourish and feed the old ones; to cover them with their Feathers when
the Shedding of their own exposes them to the Injuries of Cold and Weather; to
fly in couples, and join Wings to carry them on their Backs. Nature, it seems,
inspiring them with this Artificial Contrivance of showing this Piety and
Affection. This Example is so lively, so very moving, that the Duty of Parents
to their Children has been expressed in some Translations by (...), that is,
acting the Part of a Stork. And the Hebrews in cohsideration of this eminent
Quality, call this Bird Chasida, which signifies Kind, Charitable,
Good-natured. Some very remarkable Instances of this kind among Men, we read in
ancient History. Tymon, Son to the Great Miltiades, when his Father was dead in
Prison, and so poor that he had not wherewith to bury him, (though some say it
was for the Payment of his Debts, for failure whereof his Corpse was arrested,
and kept above-ground) sold himself, and sacrificed his Liberty, for a Sum of
Money, to be expended in defraying the Charges of the Funeral. This Man did not
contribute to his Father's Necessities out of his own Abundance, or his actual
Possessions, but parted with his Freedom; a Juying dearer to him and esteemed
more valuable, than either Fortune, or Life it self for his Father's Sake. He
did not relieve him alive and, in distress; but when he was dead, no longer his
Father, no longer a Man. What a Brave, what an Heroic Act was this? What may
we reasonably imagine, so gallant a Son would have done, what indeed would he
not have done for a living and a necessitous Father, One that had asked, or
that had needed his Assistance? This is a generous and a glorious Instance of
the Duty now under Consideration. We are likewise told of Two Examples in the
weaker Sex, Women who suckled, the One her Father, and the Other her Mother,
when they were Prisoners under Sentence of Condemnation, and to be famished to
Death; which is said to have been heretofore a Punishment very commonly
inflicted in Capital Cases. It looks a little Unnatural for a Mother to Subsist
upon her Daughter's Milk; This is turning the Stream back again up to the
Fountainhead; but sure it deserves to be considered by the Ladies of Our Age;
how very Natural, indeed how Fundamental and Primitive a Law of Nature it is,
for Mothers to suckle, and give that Sustenance, which Nature has provided on
purpose to their own Children.

The Fourth Duty is, To be governed and directed by them in all Matters of
Moment; to attempt no considerable Thing without taking their Advice, and
asking their Consent, and being confirmed in our Intentions and Designs, by the
Parents Approbation and good Liking. This is a general Rule, extending to all
the important Affairs of Humane Life; All that are fit to trouble and consult
them about; but it has a special Regard to the Disposing of themselves in
Marriage, which is of all others the most Weighty and Serious; and such as
Parents have a particular right to be well informed of, and perfectly satisfied
in.

The Fifth is, Covering their Vices and Imperfections; submitting to their
Humors and Passions; their Severity and hard Usage; and bearing all their most
unreasonable Peevishness, and angry Rebukes with Patience and Temper. Of This
we have a notable Instance in Manlius Pomponius. The Tribune had accused the
Father of this Manlius to the People, of several grievous Crimes; among the
rest of horrible Barbarity to his Son; and among other Indignities, that he
forced him to dig and drive the Plough. This Son went to this Tribune's House;
found him in Bed; and, putting a Knife to his Throat, made him swear that he
would withdraw the Indictment, and prosecute his Father 10 farther; declaring
that he had rather submit to the most Slavish Drudgery his Father could impose
upon him, and toil at it all the Days of his Life, than see him prosecuted and
exposed for any rigorous Carriage to him.

These Five Duties, at first Sight, may perhaps seem too Rigid, but there is no
Child, who would not allow them to be very reasonable and becoming him to pay,
did he but give himself the Trouble of considering seriously, how much he has
stood his Parents in. What Pain and Anxiety, what Tender Care and Concern, what
Trouble and Expense, and what a World of Affection went to the bringing of him
up. But This in Truth is a Computation which no Man is capable of making
justly, till he come to have Children of his own; Then Matters will appear to
him quite otherwise, than now they do. And therefore, as the Philosopher, who
was found riding upon a Hobbyhorse with his little Boy, desired that his
Friend would forbear to expose that Levity of his, till he was a Father
himself: So in the Case before us, whoever shall imagine, that the Duty to
Parents is carried beyond Equity and Reason, or Their Merits to their Children
over-rated here, we must beg that he will be content to suspend his Final
Determination of this Matter, till that Time come, which alone can make him a
competent Judge of it.

CHAP. XV. Duties of Masters and Servants
THere remains now only the Third and Last Part of Private and Domestic
Justice to be spoken to, which consists of the mutual Duties of that lowest
Relation, between Masters and Servants.

Now, in Order to a right Understanding of this Matter, we must remember, that
there are different Sorts of Servants, and more especially these Three that
follow. The First are, what we call Slaves, in which all the World abounded
heretofore, and the greatest Part of it does so still; for except one Quarter
of Europe, they are still reckoned as part of their Masters Riches and Estate:
And accordingly, they have no Right in any Thing, not so much as in their
Goods, their Children, or their own Bodies; but their Patron has an absolute
Power, to buy and sell them, to give them, or barter them away; and to deal by
them in as Arbitrary and Uncontrouled a Manner, as We do with our Horses, or
Cattle, or any Beasts of Service. Of these we have delivered our Opinion at
large in the first Book. The Next are, Book I. Chap. 43.
what we commonly call Servants or Attendants; These are Freemen, and have a
Right Inviolable in their own Persons and Possessions; nay, they have such an
indefeasible Liberty, that it cannot be taken away from them, by any Voluntary
Compact of their own, or any other Means used in Prejudice of it. But they are
bound to Pay Honor and Respect, Obedience and Service, for so long a Time, and
upon such Conditions, as have been covenanted for; and their Masters
accordingly have a Power of commanding, correcting, and punishing them, within
the Bounds of Moderation and Discretion. The Third Sort are, what we may term
Hirelings, or Workmen; which are still less in Subjection than the Former: For
they are not obliged to Attendance, nor Obedience in general; but only to the
Performance of that Particular Work, we take them for; and so they only make an
Exchange of their Labor and Industry, for so much of our Money; for those that
Hire them, have no Authority either to correct them for doing amiss, or to
command them at large in any other Thing.

Now, The Duty of Masters toward their Servants, whether in the Quality of
Slaves, or of Attendants, is; Not to use them Barbarously, but always to
remember, that These too are Men; of the very same Species withthemselves, made
up of the same Materials, cast in the same Mould; descended from the same
Ancestors. That it is not Nature, which has put any Difference, but only
Fortune; and Fortune is a very Humorsom and changeable Thing, for the seems to
make her self great Diversion with her Wheel; and to triumph in turning those
that were at the Bottom up to the Top, and tumbling those that sat at the Top,
down to the Bottom. Consequently, that the Distinction is not so great, as they
are willing to imagine; nor what can bear them out in keeping their Fellows at
so vast a distance; and expecting such wonderful Submissions from them. For
Sunt homines, contubernales, humiles amici, conservi, aeque F^rtunae subjecti.
these, says Seneca, are Men, and our poor Friends, and humble Companions, but
withal our Fellow Servants, for we are all equally at the Disposal of the same
Providence. Our Servants then should be treated with Courtesy and
Condescension; not with proud Disdain, and impious Contempt; we should rather
make it our Business, that they may love us, than that they may be afraid of
us: But to deal Roughly, and use them Hardly, discovers great Inhumanity and
Cruelty of Disposition; and plainly declares, that we should use all Mankind
just so, if we had them as much at our Mercy; and that it is not want of Will,
but want of Power, which hinders us from the Execution of our Barbarous
Inclinations. We are also obliged to have Regard to their Health, to be Kind
and Tender of them in Sickness, and sad Accidents; to Provide for their
Instruction; and take special Care, that they be taught their Duty; especially
such Things as are Necessary to be known for the Good of their Souls, and which
their everlasting Salvation may be promoted by.

The Duty of Servants is to Honor and fear their Masters, with regard to this
Relation between them; whatsoever they may be, or how little soever they may
deserve such Deference in any other respects. To obey them Faithfully and
Diligently; to be true to their Trust; to serve, not only in Appearance, and
while the Master's Eye is upon them; but Sincerely, Seriously, and Cordially;
out of a Principle of Conscience, and without the least mixture of Hypocrisy
and Dissimulation. To sow no Discord, or foment Jealousies and Discontents in
the Family; to keep Secrets; not to turn Whisperers or Hearkeners, or busy
Bodies; not divulging what is done at Home to the Prejudice of their Master;
but advancing his Interest, and vindicating his Reputation; as well as
assisting and defending his Person, so far as lies in their Power. And indeed
there are several very Noble, and Generous, and Brave Instances upon Record of
eminent Things done by Servants for their Masters; nay, some of them have gone
so far, as to hazard their own, for the saving their Masters Life, or the doing
Right to their Honor.

CHAP. XVI. Duty of Princes and Subjects.
COncerning Princes and their Dignity, the Different Measures of their Power,
the Humors to which this Elevation disposes them, the Miseries and
Inconveniences of so important a Trust, we have had Occasion to speak already,
in the Forty Sixth Chapter of the First Book; as we likewise have done very
largely in the Second and Third of this Book; concerning their Duty, and how
they ought to Govern: But, all this notwithstanding, we will just touch upon
the main Strokes, and general Heads, of their Business, in this Place.



It is evident then, first of all, that he is in an especial Manner obliged to
Devotion, Religion, Piety and the Fear of God; and That, not only with regard
to himself, considered abstractedly, and for the satisfying his own Conscience,
as he is a Man; but moreover with respect to his Government, in his Politic
Capacity, and as a Prince. Now, the Piety, which concerns us to observe in this
Place, is consequently not so much the Personal, as the Public and Princely
Acts of it; The Care and Regard he ought to have for the Preservation and
Security of the Established Religion; making seasonable Provision for its
Protection and Defense by wholesome and wise Laws; ordering and inflicting
severe Penalties, upon the Poisoners and Disturbers of it, and taking all
possible Care, that neither the Doctrines and Mysteries of it be reviled and
blasphemed, nor the Rights of it violated, nor the Exercise of it innovated and
confounded by Fickle and Factious Men. This is a Care, that will conduce
mightily to his Honor, and the Security of his own Person and Government: For
Men are naturally disposed to stand in greater Awe of, and pay a more willing
Obedience to a Governor, who (they are continued) does truly fear God. They
are more Fearful and Cautious in forming any Attempts against such a one,
because the Natural Notions of a Superintending Providence, represent him to
Mankind, as one under the more special and immediate Care of God. Una custodia
Pietas. Pium virum nec malus Genius nec Fatum devincit. Deus enim eripit eum ab
omni malo.
Piety (says an old Author) is one strong Guard. All the Malice of the Evil
Genius, and all the Strength of Fate are not able to take any hold on the Pious
Man; For his God delivers him from all Evil. Nor is this a Safeguard to his
Person only, but to his Country and Government also; for all the Philosophers
and wise Men are unanimously agreed, that Religion is the Strongest Tie, the
closest and most binding Cement of Human Society, and mutual Commerce.



Has he said it, and shall be not do it? and God is not a Man that he should
lie, or the Sun of Man that be should repent: Behold I the Lord have said it, I
will certainly bring it to pass. These are the Characters given us of Himself,
by the God that cannot lie, in Holy Scripture. And it would ill become his
Image upon Earth, to degenerate from that Great Pattern above; and be changed
into the Resemblance of Him, who is the Father of Lies. But, besides the
Obligations to Truth in this Respect, A Prince is the Security, the formal
Guarantee for the Laws and mutual Agreements between his Subjects; and he is to
see that they proceed in all their private Transactions, according to Justice
and Truth. His Engagement therefore to keep his Word is superior and more
binding, than that of any other Man can possibly be; for there is not any
Quality or Crime possible for a Prince to be guilty of, so shameful and
detestable, as the violating his Word, and his Oath. Upon which Account it has
been observed, that when ever a Prince goes counter to his Promise, we are to
suppose him controuled and over-powerd by some extraordinary Accident or
Exigence: For to imagine him false to his Engagements, without invincible
Necessity, were to entertain a Presumption inconsistent with the Reverence due
to so high a Character. Nor is he bound by his own Promises and Covenants only;
but likewise by those of his Predecessors; if he succeeded into their Right by
Inheritance; or any other Way that declared him satisfied to take the Crown as
he found it; or if they be such as manifestly contribute to the Public Safety
and Advantage. In short, by the same Reason, and upon the same Accounts, he may
discharge himself of all the unreasonable and prejudicial Promises, with Regard
to his People; that private Persons think sufficient to disengage Them from,
when They stand bound to their Prince.

Augustus had like to have died with Remorse, for having once upon Occasion
done in his own Person, a thing contrary to Law; Agesilaus, and Seleucus have
left us very memorable Examples of this kind, and paid very dear for them.

Thirdly, The Prince is a Debtor to his People, for the regular Administration
of Justice; and ought upon all Occasions to make This the Measure of his Power,
and not to stretch beyond the Line. This indeed is the Peculiar Excellence of a
Prince; a truly Royal and distinguishing Virtue. Upon which Account, it was
both smartly and pertinently replied by an old Woman to King Philip; upon his
putting her off, upon Pretense that he was not at Leisure to do her Right; That
if he could not spare time to do the Duty of his Office, he ought to lay it
down, and be a King no longer. But Demetrius did not come off so easily upon
the like Provocation: For upon his throwing several of their Petitions into the
River, without ever returning any Answer to them, or redressing the Grievances
they complained of, they thought themselves at Liberty to take an other Course,
and Dethroned that King, who had expressed such an haughty Disregard, to his
People, and their Addresses.

Cui non Civium servitus tradita, sed tutela.
The People are committed to him, not as an absolute Possession, and to make
them Slaves; but as a Trust, to be their Guardian; and to use them like so many
Minors under his Direction; to cherish, and breed, and watch over them. That by
virtue of his Vigilant Care, his Subjects may sleep securely; that in his Toil
and Fatigues they may find Ease and Leisure; that his Industry may preserve
their Properties and Pleasures, and that every Man under his Jurisdiction may
know and feel experimentally, that he is as much for their Advantage as he is
above them in Dignity and Power.

Now, In Order to the Being so indeed, and the Effectual discharge of this
important Trust, it will be Necessary for him to govern himself by the Rules,
which have been laid down at large in the Second and Third Chapter of this
Book. That is, To be sufficiently provided, with a wise Counsel, a substantial
Exchequer, and a convenient Strength of Forces at Home; and with significant
Alliances and Friends abroad. To manage this Provision to the best Advantage;
and so to act and Rule, both in Peace and War, that he may reign in the Hearts
of his People, and be both loved and feared by them at the same time.



Three Particulars. The First, is Honor and Reverence; And This is due to
Princes, in regard they are the Image and Similitude of the most High God;
established and ordained by him; and therefore Those, who disparage and detract
from them, that revile or speak ill of them, and endeavor to sow Discords and
discontented Thoughts, by virulent Reproaches, or wicked Scandals, are very
highly to be blamed. These are indeed the true Descendents, of Profane and
Undutiful Ham; who either invent and contrive, or at least expose and deride
their Father's Shame. The Second is, Obedience; which is a Word of very
extensive signification, and includes serving them in the Wars, paying the
Taxes and Tributes imposed by Their Authority, and the like. The Third is,
Heartily Desiring their Happiness and Prosperity, and recommending Them, and
Their Undertakings to the Blessing and Protection of Almighty God, in constant
and servent Prayers for them.

possessed of. If his Entrance upon the Government be Tyrannical; that is, If he
invade without any just Pretension, be he otherwise a Good or a Bad Governor,
it matters not much; It has been the general Sense of Wise Men, that he ought
to be withstood by Methods of Justice and legal Redress, if there be any
opportunity of obtaining Redress that way; but if there be not, then by open
Force. And indeed I take it, that where we meet with the Word Tyrant in old
Authors, who use it in an ill Sense, it ought constantly to be thus understood.
And Cicero says, that among the Ancient Greeks, there were particular Honors
and Rewards assigned to those who distinguished themselves by such Deliverances
of their Country from a lawless Yoke. Nor can This in any good propriety of
Speech be called Resisting one's Prince, since it supposes him never to have
been so, either in Right or in Fact; but only One who put himself upon the
People, without ever being received, or recognized as such.

The Case is different, if this Tyranny be charged upon the Exercise and
Administration of his Power only; That is, If he be duly possessed of his
Power, but use it unduly; if he be Cruel, or Wicked, which in the modern
Language is, Tyrannical and Arbitrary. And here again we must be beholding to
another Distinction, to help us to a right Understanding of the Case: For a
Prince may be Tyrannical in this Sense of the Word, three several ways; and a
different sort of Behavior is required from Subjects, with regard to each of
them.

First he may be so, by violating the Laws of God and Nature, acting contrary
to the established Religion of his Country, the express Commands of God, or the
Native Liberty of Men's Consciences. In this Case we must by no means obey him,
according to the Maxims laid down in Holy Scripture, that We ought to obey God
rather than Men; and to fear Him who has power over the whole Man, more than
Him who has power over one part of the Man only, and that the less, and more
inconsiderable part of him too. But then, if we can have no Relief by Law or
Justice, we must not have Recourse to Violence; which is the contrary Extreme
to a sinful Compliance; but keep the middle Way, which is to flee or to suffer.

The Second Case is not quite so bad as the former, because it offers no
Violence to the Consciences of Men, but to their Bodies and Estates only, by
abusing his Subjects, resusing to do them Justice, taking away the Liberty of
their Persons, and the Property of their Estates. And here the three Duties
mentioned before, Honor and Obedience, good Wishes and Prayers ought still to
be paid, with Patience and Submission, and a Sense and Acknowledgment of the
Wrath of God let loose upon them in this Scourge of an Unjust Prince: For there
are Three Considerations fit to be attended to upon such Occasions. One is,
That all Power is of God, and he that resists the Power, resists the
Ordinance of God. Principi summum Rerum judicium Dii dederunt: Subditis
obsequii gloria relicta est. Bonos Principes voto expetere, qualescunque
tolerare.
The Gods, (says a very wise and judicious Heathen) have committed the Supreme
Judgment, and last Determination of Humane Affairs to the Prince: The Glory of
Obedience is the Subject's Portion; we must therefore wish and pray that we may
have none but Good Princes; but when we have them, we must endure them whether
they be Good or Bad. The Ground and formal Reason of our Obedience does not lie
in the Consideration of their Personal Virtues, or just and commendable
Administration, but in their Character, and Superiority over us. There is a
vast difference between True and Good; and he who is truly our Governor, though
he be not a good Governor, is to be regarded as the Laws themselves are; which
bind us, not upon the Account of their Justice or Convenience, but purely upon
the Account of their being Laws, and having the Sanction that is requisite to
give them Authority. A Second Reflection upon this Occasion should be. That God
permits Hypocrites, and sets up wicked Men to bear Rule for the Sins of a
People, and in the Day of his fierce Anger. He makes a barbarous unjust Prince
the Instrument of his Vengeance; and therefore This must be born with the same
Temper of Mind with which we submit to other Calamities made use of by God for
that Purpose: Quomodo Sterilitatem, aut nimios Imbres, and caetera Naturae
mala, sic Luxum and Avaritiam Dominantium tolerare.
Like a Blast, or a Barren Year, Inundations and excessive Rains, or other
Evils in the Course of Nature, so should the Avarice and Luxury of Princes be
endured by those they oppress, says Tacitus. Instances of this kind we have in
Saul, and Nebuchadnezzar, and several of the Roman Emperors before
Constantine's Time; and some others, as wicked Tyrants as was possible for them
to be, and yet Good Men paid them these Three Duties notwithstanding, and were
commanded so to do by the Prophets and Preachers of those Times; in Agreement
to our Great Master, the Oracle of Truth it self, who directs his Disciples to
obey those that sat in Moses's Chair; though in the same Breath he charges those
very Governors with Wickedness and Cruelty, with binding heavy Burdens, Matt.
xxiii
and laying upon Men's Shoulders more than could be born.

The Third Case concerns the State in general, when the very Fundamentals of
Government are endeavored to be torn up, or over-turn'd; when he goes about to
change, or to take away the Constitution; as if, for Instance, a Prince would
make that which is Elective, Hereditary; or from an Aristocracy, or Democracy,
or any other such mixed Government, would engross all to himself, and make it an
Absolute Monarchy; or in any other Case like or equivalent to these, shall
attempt to alter the State from what it was formerly, and ought to continue; In
this Case Men may and ought to withstand him, and to hinder any such Attempts
from taking place upon them, and That, either by Methods of Legal Justice, or
otherwise: For a Prince is not the Master and Disposer of the Constitution, but
the Guardian and Conservator of it. But then, This must be done regularly too;
for the setting such Matters right does not belong to all the Subjects
indifferently; but to those who are the Trustees of the State, or have the
Principal Interest in it. Who these are, the Constitutions of the respective
Countries must determine: In Elective Kingdoms, the Electors; in others, the
Princes of the Blood; In Republics, and those Places which have Fundamental
Laws, the States General assembled: And This I conceive to be the only Case
which can justify Subjects in resisting a Tyrant in this Second Sense of the
Word, with regard to the Exercise of his Power, and the Pretense of
Maladministration. What I have hitherto delivered upon this last Case is
meant of Subjects; that is, of Those who are not permitted in any
Circumstances, or upon any Provocation to attempt any thing against their
Sovereign; of Them, I say, who are by the Laws declared guilty of a Capital
Crime, if they shall but Counsel, or compass, or so much as imagine the Death
of their King. And if so much be allowable to Men under these Obligations and
Penalties, then, no doubt, it is lawful, nay, it is highly commendable and a
glorious Action in a Stranger, or Foreign Prince, to take up Arms, for the
Defense and Revenge of a whole Nation, laboring under unjust Oppression: To
redress their Wrongs, and deliver them from the heavy Yoke of Tyranny; as we
find Hercules in his Time, and afterward Dion and Timoleon, and not long since
Tamerlane Prince of the Tartars, who defeated Bajazet the Turkish Emperor at
the Siege of Constantinople.



CHAP. XVII. Duty of Magistrates.
Julian Law among the Romans abundantly testisies,) unbecoming a Man of Honor;
and the shrewdest sign that can be, that the Person is unsit for the Trust he
seeks so vehemently. To buy public Offices is still more infamous and
abominable; the most sordid, the most villainous way of Trading in the World:
For it is plain, he that buys in the Piece, must make himself whole by selling
out again in Parcels. Which was a good Reason for the Emperor Severus, when he
was declaring against a Fault of this nature, to say, That it was very hard to
condemn a Man for making Money of that which he had given Moncy for before.

breeds him to his hand, and uses him to the Exercise he is designed for: And
is there not the same reason that this wild and restiff part of our Soul should
be tamed and accustomed to bear the Bit? Should be perfectly instructed in
those Laws and Measures which are to be the Rules of our Actions, and upon
which, the good or ill Conduct of our Lives will depend? Is it not reasonable,
I say, That a Man should be Master of his own private Behavior, and expert in
making the best of every Accident and Occasion, before he venture out upon the
public Stage; and either give Laws to others, or correct them for the neglect
of those they have already? And yet, (as Socrates observed very truly) the
manner of the World is quite otherwise: For, though no body undertakes to
Exercise a Trade, to which he has not been Educated, and served a long
Apprenticeship; and how Mean or Mechanical soever the Calling be, several Years
are bestowed upon the Learning of it; Yet in the case of public
Administrations which is of all other Professions the most intricate and
difficult, (so absurd, so wretchedly careless are we) that every body is
admitted, every body thinks himself abundantly qualified to undertake them.
These Commissions are made Complements and things of Course, without any
Consideration of Men's Abilities; or regarding at all, whether they know any
thing of the matter; as if a Man's Quality, or the having an Estate in his
Country, could inform his Understanding, or secure his Integrity, or render him
capable of discerning between Right and Wrong, and a competent Judge of his
Poorer, (but perhaps much honester and wiser) Neighbors.

so many Characters at once, and to Act each part so well, as to merit a
general Approbation and Applause.



Oyer and Terminer; and in all others, where there is this Clause, (so far as
to you shall appear) or any other Clause equivalent to This, inserted; or
which, though they do not refer the Cognizance to Him, yet order such things,
as are either manifestly just, or at least lawful and indifferent in their own
Natures, he ought to obey readily, and without demur; for here is no
difficulty, nor any ground at all for a just and reasonable Scruple.



far as in Honor and good Conscience he may, and for the rest, to excuse
himself, as well as he can.



Papinian did. For Frustra niti, and nihil aliud nisi Odium qutrere, extremae
est dementiae.
it is the very extremity of Midness to strive against a Stream; where no
ground can be get, nor any thing but Hatred and Disfavour for our pains.

As for their Duty,

to the Use and Benefit of other People: Magna servitus, magna fortuna.
A great Post is a great slavery. And this was the reason why Moses his Law
Commanded, That the Judges should keep their Sessions, and decide Controversies
in the Gates of their Cities; that so Justice might offer it self to all that
went in and out, and none might find any difficulty in addressing for, or in
obtaining it.



Cleon was chosen and admitted to the Government, he called all his Friends
together, and solemnly renounced from that time, whatever Friendship had been
formerly between them; as thinking the continuing under such Engagements, by no
means reconcilable with the Trust he had now took upon him; and Cieero
observes accordingly, that a Man must put off the Character of the Friend, and
lay that quite aside, before he can do Right to the part of a Judge.

Gerere personam civitatis, ejus dignitatem and decus sustinere.
preserve and keep up the Honor, and Dignity, and just Rights of the Prince,
who has employed him, and of the Public whose Representative he is, with a
becoming State, with Gravity, Authoritative Behavior, and a well-tempered
Severity.

The Living and the Speaking Law.

Plato calls, (what indeed it ought to be) a Pure Unblemished Virgin: This will
also be a Guard to him against his Passions; the Aversions, or the Affection he
may bear to the Parties concerned; and indeed all other Resentments, which are
but so many Enemies and Underminers of Right and Equity. But then he will find
great occasion for Courage too, to stand his ground against the Menaces and
Imperious Solicitations of Great Men, the Requests and Importunities of
Friends who fancy they have a sort of Right to dispose of him, and will not
take a reasonable Resusal: To harden him against the Prayers and Tears, the
loud Cries, and bitter Complaints of the Miserable and Afflicted; for all these
are very moving and forcible inducements, a great Violence upon Reason and
Duty; and yet so committed, that there is a plausible appearance of both, in
the very Diversion they labor to give us from both. And the truth is, this
firmness and inflexible Constancy of Mind is the most masterly Virtue, and
particular Excellence of a Magistrate; that he neither be terrified and subdued
by Greatness and Power, nor melted by Miseries, and deplorable Circumstances.
These are what very brave Men are often transported by; and therefore it is the
greater Praise to continue Proof against them. For, though being softened by the
latter have an Air of Goodnature, and is more likely to prevail upon the
Better sort of Men; yer either of the Extremes is sinful, and both foreign to
the merits of the Cause, which is the only thing that lies upon the Judge. The
Motives to Pity then are very dangerous Temptations; and what a Man in
Authority ought as much to stop his Ears against, as Promises or Threatenings;
for even that God himself, who is Love and Mercy in Persection, has
discountenanced this unseasonable Compassion. And the same Legislator, who
said, Thou shall not receive a Gift to blind thine Eyes therewith, neither
shall thou accept the Person of the Mighty, found it no less necessary for the
Good of Mankind, and the equal Distribution of Justice, no less agreeable to
his own Goodness, to add that other Command, Thou shall not favor a Poor Man
in his Cause.

CHAP. XVIII. The Duty of Great, and of Mean Men.
THE Duty of Persons of Honor and Quality consists principally in these two
Points. The lending a strong and powerful Assistance to the Public; employing
their Wealth, their Interest, their Blood, in the Maintenance and Preservation
of Piety and Justice; of the Prince and the Government, and in general, of the
common safety and advantage. For they are the Pillars and Supporters, upon
which these noble Structures stand; and by which they must be sustained. The
other Branch consists in being a mighty Defense and Protection to the Poor and
Needy, the Injured and Oppressed; by interposing their Power on the behalf of
such, standing between Them and Ruin, and giving a Check and Diversion to the
Violence of wicked and unreasonable Men. Persons of Honor in a State, should
be like the Spirits and good Blood in our Bodies, which always run to the
wounded, and the ailing part. It was this, that rendered Moses so proper to be
made the Captain of the Israelitish Nation; and the Scripture takes express
notice of his Zeal in revenging the Injuries of one of his Brethren who
suffered Wrong, Act. 7.
and slaying the insolent Aegrptian; as a Sign, that God had Marked him out for
a Deliverer of his People. Thus Hercules was Deisted among the Heathens, for
being a Scourge to the Cruelty of Tyrants, and a Refuge to those that were
Oppressed, and opprobriously Treated by them. And those other renouned Names in
Antiquity, who followed his Example, have always been looked upon as Heroes,
and something more than Men. Particular Honors and distinguishing Rewards were
heretofore awarded to all such; as to Persons, who deserved exceeding well of
the Public; and for an Intimation, That no Character is more glorious, none
more attractive of Universal Admiration, and profound Respect, than that of
being a Succor to the Afflicted, and Abused; and helping those, who were in no
condition of helping themselves. It is by no means true Greatness, to appear
formidable to any part of Mankind, except one's Enemies only. The affectation
to have others stand in Awe, and Dread, and to Tremble before one, is a mean
and pitiful Temper; and, at the same time that it renders the Man a Terror, it
renders him an Odium too; a public Nuisance, and a common Enemy. Love in this
case is more desirable, than even Adoration could be without it. Such imperious
Men betray a fierce and haughty, a proud and assuming Disposition. This is it,
which makes them so Contumelious and Disdainful; scorning their Inseriours, as
if they were no better than the Dross and Dung of the World; and not Men of the
same Nature with their own Great Selves. From hence, by degrees they degenerate
into Barbarity and Insolence; abusing all beneath them, without the least Pity
or Remorse; enslaving their Persons; invading their Properties and Possessions;
as if Humanity and Justice were intended only for the Benefit of them who need
it least; and as if they had no right to any thing, who cannot right
themselves. All this is infinitely distant from true Greatness; and utterly
inconsistent with Generosity and a Noble Mind; for these never dispose a Man to
Cruelty or Contempt; but are a Safeguard and Defense, and delight in Offices of
Courtesy, and Condescension, of Charity, and Mercy.

The Duty of Mean and Inseriour Persons toward those that are above them, is
likewise Twofold. First, That of Honor and Respect; and this, not confined
merely to the outward Behavior, and the visible Marks of a Ceremonious
distance; (which is due upon the account of their Quality and Rank in the
World, considered abstractedly, and by it self. Be they in themselves what they
will in other respects, their Virtues or their Vices make no difference in the
Case;) But there is likewise an internal Honor, the real Esteem and Affection
of the Heart, which must constantly attend and put forward the other, if they
be deserving Persons, and lovers of the public Good. Honor and Esteem are
therefore capable of very dirserent Senses; They are both due to such as are
Good, for such indeed are all that are truly Great Men. To those who want this
substantial Character of Quality; we must pay the Civilities of the Cap and the
Knee; our Bodies may and ought to bow to them, but our Hearts cannot; for this
is done only by paying them our Love and Esteem.

The other part of this Duty consists in endeavoring to please, and be in
their good Graces, by respectful and voluntary Tenders of our Service.

To please the Great is not the smallest Praise. Creech. and putting
Principibus placuisse viris non ultima laus est. Horat. Fp. 17.
our selves under the shelter of their Protection. However, if we cannot make
them our Friends, we should be sure to take care that they may not be our
Enemies; which Care too must be as Prudent, as it is Necessary; and rightly
tempered with Moderation and Diseretion. For nothing is more nauseous, than a
Cringing Fawning Coxcomb, and excessive Officiousness does more harm than good.
He that declines the Displeasure of a great Man, with too sollicitous a
Caution; or tries to wriggle into his favor by impertinent and unseasonable
Addresses, does not only discover his own weakness and despicable littleness of
Soul; but he likewise ministers just occasion of Jealousy and Offense; and
secretly accuses his Patron of Cruelty or Injustice. And therefore what is done
of this kind must be unseen, and by the by. Non ex professo cavere aut fugere;
nam quem quis fugit, damnut.
He must not make it his professed Business to decline and keep out of the way of
his anger, for no Man avoids another, who does not in his own Breast condemn,
and think ill of him at the same time. But besides, this too anxious and
constrained way of making our Court may have another very untoward Effect: For,
if the Person be disposed to do ill, and delight to be feared, it may be a
Temptation to him, to Exercise his Power to our prejudice. For many times Men
take a Pride to crush and insult over the fearful and suspicious; and mean
unworthy Submissions do but provoke a more extravagant and remorseless
Barbarity.

OF FORTITUDE.
The Third Cardinal Virtue.
THE two Virtues, which have been insisted upon hitherto, are a Rule to Men,
considered as Members of Society; and regard their Deportment, and
Conversation; their Interests and Obligations with Others; These two that
follow are to govern them within, and for themselves. They look upon Fortune in
her two different Aspects, Prosperity and Adversity; which are general Terms
for all the good or ill Accidents of humane Life; and the provision made
against them, is to arm the Mind by Fortitude against Adversity, and in
Prosperity to balast, and moderate it by Temperance. Both these Virtues might
indeed be comprehended under the general notion of Constancy; which is a tight
and even firmness, or steadiness of Soul, in all manner of outward Accidents or
Occurrences, so that the Man is neither elevated and transported upon the
account of Prosperity, nor dejected and disheartened from any Adversity that
befalls him.

CHAP. XIX. Of Fortitude in General.
Seneca describes it, a Quality Timendorum contemptrix, quae terribilia, and
sub jugum libertatem nostram mittentia despicit, provocat, frangit.
that despises all things in their own nature formidable; that challenges and
conquers the cause of our Fears, and such as enslave and subdue the native
Liberty of the Soul.

Latins, Virtus.
that they gave it the Title of Virtue by way of Singularity and Eminence. It
is of all others the hardest to be attained; the most pompous and splendid; and
produces the greatest, and most illustrious Fruits. Magnanimity and Patience,
Constancy, and invincible Perseverance, and the rest of that Heroic Catalogue
of Godlike Excellencies are all contained under it. For which Reason, Men
greedy of Fame, have oftentimes not only entertained Calamities gladly, but
have even courted, and eagerly sought out Hardships and Dangers, to gain
thereby the greater opportunities of exercising it, and exerting themselves. It
is an impregnable Bulwark; a complete Armor tempered and proved: Munimentum
imbecillitatis humanae inexpugnabile, quod qui circumdedit sibi, securus in hac
vitae obsidione perdurat.
The Fortification, behind which bumane nature lies securely entrenched, and he
who has cast up this work about him holds out the siege of Life, and can never
be taken, or dismantled.

which are not really of the right Line. It may not be amiss to expatiate a
little more upon the true Nature of Fortitude; and in so doing, to discover and
reject the vulgar Errors concerning it. We will therefore observe four
Conditions, which are all of them requisite to the forming of this Virtue; and
if what would pass for such, be desective in any one of them, That we may be
sure, is counterfeit, and of a Bastard Race.

As first of all, True Courage is universal, that is, it makes a brave stand
against every kind of Difficulty and Danger without distinction, and this shows
us the mighty mistake of confining this notion of Courage to Military Valor
only; That indeed gains Esteem with the generality of People, because it makes
more Show and Noise in the World, and yet oftentimes there is nothing of
substance or solidity at the bottom of it. Now allowing Military Valor all
that can possibly belong to it, yet at best, it is but one part, and that a
small one neither; a single Ray of that Glory which the true and entire, the
perfect, and universal Valor, sheds round about it. For by this a Man is the
same thing alone, that he is in Company; the same brave Man upon a Bed of
Languishing and Pain, as in the Field, and heat of Action; and marches up
against Death with all his Friends and Relations looking on, and lamenting his
Fate, as he would at the Head of an Army, when animated by the Shouts of those
that assist in the Engagement. This Military and Fighting Courage, is more
peculiar and natural to Brute Beasts; and among them, we sind accordingly, that
the Female Sex have it in common with the Males. But in Men it is frequently
the effect of Art, rather than any Tendency in Nature; kindled by the dread of
Captivity and ill usage; by the evident Necessity of doing bravely in their own
Desence; and the certain prospect of Death or Wounds, Poverty, or Pain, or
Punishment, if they do otherwise. All which have not any influence upon Beasts;
nor do they lie under the least apprehension of them. The Courage of Men is a
sort of wise Cowardice; and we commonly say, That every Man would be a Coward
if he durst. It is Fear attended with skill to shun one Evil by another; and
Anger is the Liquor that tempers, the File that sharpens it; But in Brutes it
is genuine and pure, undesigning and unconstrained. Men arrive at some sort of
Mastery and Perfection in it by Custom and long Acquaintance, by Instruction,
Education, and Example; upon which account it is, that we find it sometimes
among the meanest, most ignorant, and most degenerate sort of People. A Footman
that has run away from his Master, an Apprentice from behind a Counter, a
Villain out of a common Gaol, shall very often make a good Soldier, stand a
Charge, and do Duty very well; and yet have no such thing as real Fortitude;
there is not the least tincture or spark of Virtue, or Philosophical Bravery in
all this Fire.

Non est inconsulta temeritas, nec periculorum amor, nec formidabilium
appetitio; diligentissima in tutela sui fortitudo est. Et eadem patientissima
eorum quibus falsa species malorum est.
It is by no means ( says Seneca) an inconsiderate forwardness; not a fondness
of Danger, nor a desire of those Accidents, which strike a Terror into common
Men; Fortitude is provident and careful, and diligent in her own Defense; and
yet she is extremely patient and resigned under those things, which are
(commonly but falsely) reputed Evils. There cannot possibly be any such thing
as Virtue, where there is no Knowledge, no Apprehension; and a Man cannot with
any good Sense be said to despise that Danger, which he knows not, and does not
rightly understand. For at this rate we cannot refuse the honor of this Virtue
to Brutes; who in every part which concerns the Action, or the Suffering, do
equal, if not exceed the Stoutest Men; and yield to us in no point, but that of
foreseeing and making a true Estimate of our Danger. For Valor distinguishes
it self particularly by going on with our Eyes open, and not running blindfold;
and accordingly we find by Experience, that those who undertake boldly, without
regarding, or duly weighing what is like to come on it; commonly flinch and
sneak, and prove errand Dastards, when they are driven to a push.

firmness of Mind founded upon solid and good Principles; the sense of Duty,
the Honesty, and Justice of the undertaking; and such other Motives; and this
too such a Resolution, as never wavers or abates, whatever the Event be: But
persists with unmovable Generosity, till either the Design be brought to
Perfection, or the Life lost in the Attempt. The mention of this Qualification
may at first sight seem somewhat superfluous in the former part of the
Description, but it is in reality seasonable and of good use; and that, as upon
its own account, so more especially because it gives us an occasion to obviate
two or three very gross and common Mistakes, with relation to this Matter.

of Valor. But these do not often meet with People silly enough to be
frightened into such an Opinion; and when the Bully comes to be tried, a
difference is soon seen, between a Hector and a Hero.

Nor are they less deceived, who give the Title of Valor to subtlety and
stratagem, or to Industry and Art; This is too sacrilegious a Profanation, to
bring in Courage acting so mean and sneaking a part: These are trick and
disguise, and would put false Stones upon the undiscerning World for true
Jewels. The Laccdaemonians, who bred their Youth to Wrestling, would not suffer
Masters in any of their Cities, that so their Warlike Exercises, and growing
expert in them, might be entirely Nature's Work, and that Art might usurp no
part of the Glory. We count it a bold and brave undertaking to encounter Bears,
or Lions, or wild Boars, who have nothing but their natural Fierceness to
render them formidable; but the same Commendation is not reckoned due to one,
that engages with Bees or Wasps, who watch their advantage, and go cunningly to
work. Alexander would never play at the Olympic Games; for the Strife, he
said, was not well contrived, where a private Man of no Soul might come off
with applause, and a King with a great one might be thrown out with Disgrace.
There is no manner of reason, why a Man of Honor should value himself, or
offer to put his Valor upon a Proof, which the errandest Coward in the World,
if he be better taught, and dextrous at his Weapon, shall be able to bassle him
in. For such a Conquest is in no degree owing to Courage, or true Virtue; but
to activity of Body, and some particular motions, which are purely the effect
of Artifice and Address; such as the basest and most timorous may excel in, and
such as a truly valiant Person, may either not know how to perform, or may
think it beneath him to descend to them. Fencing particularly is such an
advantage, The Bravest may be utterly unskilful in it, and the most despicable
Wretches may be Masters of it. And how many Scoundrels do we see in every
Street, ready to draw upon all occasions; how many Cheats that play Prizes, and
Hack one another for Money; who would not stand one Charge at the approach of
an Enemy? The same may be said of that assurance and presence of Mind, which
proceeds from habitual Exercise, and long Custom. How many hazardous things do
Tumblers, and Rope-dancers, and Seamen do, without the least concern? Not that
these Men are really more valiant than others, or dare venture farther into
Danger; but because this is their own way, what they have been bred up in, and
accustomed to from Children; and Practice has worn out those Apprehensions,
which a Gallanter Man would have, who is raw and unexperienced in the Trade.

Antigonus his Soldier, who, whilst in violent Torment with a Fistula,
ventured at all, but when the Disease was Cured, and he in perfect Health
again, could never be got to face an Enemy more. In a word, if there be nothing
but some particular humor, or selfish and foreign Consideration at the bottom,
how fair soever the Exploits, that are built upon this may look, yet still the
foundation has a flaw, and consequently, call the thing what else you will,
but while it is defective in so very material a part, you must not be allowed
to call it Valor or Virtue.

opinions relating to this Matter, are from thenceforth out of doors, such
particularly as these that follow. That a Man, who is really courageous, should
not use any defense to shelter himself from the Evils and Inconveniences which
threaten him; that he thould never be in fear of a Surprise, nor be follicitous
to make provision against it; that he should not so much as feel the least
shock or impressions of disorder from any thing more than ordinary, or that
happens unawares; as a Clap of Thunder, the Discharge of a Cannonshor, the
tumbling down of a Breach. Now all this is monstrously foolish and absurd, for
a Man of Fortitude is allowed to take all imaginable care of his own
Preservation; and to have as quick and sensible resentments of all accidents
whatsoever, as any other Person. Nor is this the least disparagement or
reflection upon his Virtues, provided he be not daunted and dismayed, but keep
up his mind in the same steadiness of Temper, and do not depart from his Reason
and Resolution. Nay, it is not only his Right and Privilege, but his Duty and
just Commendation, to wheel and decline, and defend himself from harms, so long
as there are any honest shifts, and decent Remedies left; but when there are
none, then he must stand his ground, receive the worst that can come, and dare
to suffer any thing rather than to do what is vicious, or unbecoming his
Character, for the prevention or escape of it. He must then like Aeneas, obey
the Commands from Men's immota manet, lachrymae voluntur inanes.
above at any rate, for so we find him described by the Poet. Sighs, Groans,
and Tears, are all employed in vain:
Firm the resolves of his unbroken mind remain.


Socrates therefore used to laugh at those idle Men, who condemned all Flight,
and giving of ground, as inconsistent with Fortitude. What? says he, shall a
Man be reproached with Cowardice, for defeating his Enemy, because this was
done by retreating from before him? Homer, among the other Heroic Excellencies
of Ulysses, puts this of Skill in retreating into his Characler. The
Lacedaemonians, who pretended to the most obstinate Courage of any Nation in
the World, yet in that renowned action of Platea gave ground, on purpose to
break the Persian Troops, and disorder them in the pursuit. This was an
advantage which they had no other way of compassing, and the Success answered
the wisdom of the Design; for they won the Day by this Feint of losing it. In a
word, the most warlike Countries in the World have given it authority, and never
thought themselves dishonored by the Practice. Nay, even the Stoics after all
their impracticable, and romantic Stretches of humane nature, are content to
allow their wise Man, so far as looking Pale, and shivering at new and
surprising Accidents; provided this be only a bodily Affection, and that it do
not enter so deep, or last so long, as to give the Soul any part of the
Disorder.

And thus much may suffice to possess us with a true Idea of Fortitude, or
Courage in general.

Of the particular Objects, and Exercise of Fortitude.
NOW that we may cut our Work out, and lay it in due order; it is necessary, in
the first place, that I put my Reader in remembrance, that this Virtue
undertakes to deal with all that, (whatever it be) which is called Evil;
according to the most popular and extensive signification of the Word. Now this
Evil is of two sorts, either External, or Internal. The former is that which
assaults us from without, and goes by great variety of Names; such as,
Adversity, Afflictions, Injuries, Misfortunes, Casualties, or unwelcome
Accidents. The other arises from within, and has its residence in the Soul;
but it is excited, and agitated by the Evil from without: Such particularly are
those Passions, which disturb and discontent us, as Fear, Grief, Anger, and the
rest of that black disorderly Crew. It will be proper for us to speak to each
part of this Division fully and distinctly; to explain their Operations, to
provide Men with proper Remedies, and sufficient means for the subduing and
softening, and regulating these Grievances. And such are the Arguments and
Directions for the Virtue of Fortitude, now under our Consideration.
Consequently then, what you are to expect upon this Subject will consist of two
parts, the one respecting the Calamities and Disastrous Accidents of our Lives;
the other concerning the Passions, which these Accidents provoke, and stimulate
in our Minds. And here my Reader must recollect that the general Directions
thought necessary for the bearing good or ill Fortune decently, he has been
supplied with already. So that referring him back to the second Book, Rock II.
Chap. 7.
for what regards Prosperity and Adversity in the gross, he is only to expect
now, that we should descend to the particular sorts of Misfortunes, and what is
^it to be prescribed for each of them respectively.

CHAP. XX. Of External Evils.


The Causes or Occasions of these afflicting Accidents, which are capable of
happening to every one of us, may be public or general, when they affect a
great many at the same time; when whole Kingdoms, or Neighbourhoods at least
are involved at once; such as Pestilence, Famine, War, Tyranny, and Oppression.
And these, for the most part, are Rods of the divine Vengeance; Scourges sent
by him to chastise the exorbitant Wickedness of obstinate Men, who resuse to be
won over by gentler methods of Reformation: (At least we know not what
immediate cause to ascribe them to,) or else they are private Calamities, and
such as we are able to trace up to their first Author and Original; that is,
they are inflicted and brought upon us by some other Person: And thus both the
private and public Misfortunes are of two forts. Now the public Calamities,
those, I mean, which proceed from a general Cause, though they do really come
home to each single Person; yet are they in different respects more or less
grievous, important, and dangerous, than the private ones, of which we are able
to give a distinct and particular account. They are more so, because they
assault us with united force, fall on in Troops, and with greater violence,
make a louder noise, rage more horribly, have a longer and blacker train of ill
Consequences attending them, are more perplexing and amazing, and create
greater Disorders, and a more general Confusion. But then, they are less so
too, in regard of their being thus general; and for the numbers, which are
involved in them together: For when a Disaster is common, every Man is apt to
think his own share of it the less. It is some kind of comfort, to think that
we are not singled out for Examples; and for this reason, the efficacy of such
Corrections is usually the less; for every Man takes Sanctuary in the
commonness of the Calamity, and imputes it to some universal disorder in
Nature, or to some unusual concurrence of natural Causes; and so shelters
himself in the Crowd by vain pretenses, which personal afflictions leave no
room for. And besides, daily experience shows, that the Evils brought upon us
by other Men, gall us more sensibly, and go nearer to the Quick, and have a
greater influence upon our Minds, than any of the former sort are wont to do.
Now all these, both of the one, and the other sort, have several proper
Remedies, and Considerations to qualify and render them very supportable to
us, as particularly these that follow.

hope to burst his Bands asimder, and to cast away his Cords from them; that we
and all the whole Creation are tied by Laws of an invincible necessity; and
that the strongest Combinations, nay the universal joint strength of the whole
World, is much too weak to reverse or resist his Will. Most certain it is, that
Providence, and Necessity, or Destiny, when we speak strictly and properly, are
but one and the same thing; There is no essential disserence between them, or
the Laws upon which they proceed; and all they vary in, is only as to those
different respects, which we are used to consider, and reason upon them in. Now
to murmur and repine, and torment our selves, that Matters are not otherwise
ordered with us, is first of all an Impiety peculiar to Mankind; for all other
Creatures submit quietly and contentedly, and Man only has the insolence to be
angry, and find fault, and fly out into saucy Passions, and discontented
Complaints against his Maker. But besides the wickedness of the thing, it is
extremely foolish; for all this rage is to no manner of purpose, nor does it
mend the matter one whit. Our Mistress is absolute, and her Power (as I said)
uncontrollable, and those who draw back the shoulder, and will not follow her
contentedly, she will drag him along, whether he will or no. Ad hoe sacramentum
adacti sumus; far mortalia, rec ijs perturbari, quae vitate nostrae
potestatis non est. In regno nati sumus. Deo parere libertas est. Desine sata
Deum flecti sperare querendo.
This is the Obligation we are bound by, the Allegiance we all owe; to bear the
Casualties of this mortal State, and not be disturbed at things, which it is
not in our power to avoid: We are born under Government, but it is that of a
gracious and good King, whom to serve and submit to, is the only, the true way
to make us free.

Fate and the Dooming Gods are deaf to Tears. Mr. Dryd.

The best remedy our Case is capable of, is to conform our selves to
Providence; to bring our Will to that of Almighty God, and so make a virtue of
Necessity, which is the advice humane Wisdom would give in this case; for Non
est aliud effugium necessiratis, quam velle quod ipsa cogat.
the only way we can take to escape the hardship, is to be content with what we
cannot help. We may parry and play in Guard, but all this fencing against our
Fate will not ward off the blow, but only irritate the wound, and add to the
anguish. Laeto animo far quioquid accide^it, quasi volueris tibi accidere;
debuisses enim velle, si scires ex deereto Dei fieri.
You should bear whatever happens cheerfully, as if you had wished it might
happen; for the truth is, could you have known beforehand, that God designed
it for you, it would have been your Duty to wish for it. Again, besides that we
shall come off casier by this means, we shall likewise have the satisfaction of
doing our Duty, which is to follow our I eader, and obey Orders, let the
Service, or the Post he commands us upon, be what it will. Optimum pati quod
emendare non possis; and Deum, quo Authore cuncta proveniunt, sine mormuratione
comitari; malus miles est qui Imperatorem gemens sequitur. Senec.
The best thing you can do is to submit to what you cannot cure, and to attend
and follow Almighty God without murmuring or disputing, for it is by his
appointment, that all things come to pass; and he is a very bad Soldier, who
follows his general grumbling. This Resignation of Spirit is so far from
betraying any tameness or degeneracy, that it is directly otherwise; and such
submission proves the excellency of our Courage. Grumbling and Disputing is the
effect of Cowardice and Fear; it is mutinying against our Officer, and running
from our Colors. Magnus animus qui se Deo reddidit; pusillus and degener, qui
obluctatur; de ordine mundi male existimat, and ^mendare mavult Deum, quam se.
Mean and little Souls stuter and struggle, and repine; but they who do so,
have not a very reverent Opinion of the Government of the World; for the plain
English of these Discontents is, that such Men are more sollicitous to amend
God's works, than their own.



weighing them and their Consequences, in the just balance of Reason and Truth.
For the generality of Mankind are ramely led by the nose, wholly governed by
Prejudice and Impression. How many of those, who call themselves Men of Honor,
think it a less affront to have a dangerous wound given them, than a Box on the
Ear, and had rather die upon the Spot, than hear approbrious I anguage? In
short, Opinion measures and judges of every thing; and it is not so much the
thing it self, as the Opinion Men have of it, that provokes our Indignation;
Our own Impatience does us more hurt, and creates us more uneasiness, than the
Persons who have occasioned it. So that we our selves are more injurious to our
selves, than ever those we complain of were to us.

live, if we take exceptions at every trifling thing, every little freedom that
passes in Conversation.

disregarding and despising him; it robs him of all the pleasure he promised
himself by provoking us to passion, and plainly declares, that we think him an
impertinent and insignificant wretch, better than all the sharpest repartee
would possibly express it. If we reply, this debases us and is a sort of
entering into comparison with him; it is the showing him too much respect, and
doing an injury to our selves. For Male loquuntur quia been loqui nesciunt;
faciunt quod solent and sciunt, male quia mali, and secundum se.
they give ill Language because they cannot tell how to give better, they act
as they use to do, and according to the best of their understanding, for the
worse they behave themselves the more consistent they are, and more of a piece
with themselves.

Socrates has taught us what comforts to apply in such Extremities by his own
Example. Anitus and Melitus may kill me, says he, but they cannot hurt me. And
thus a good Man as he is not capable of ill within, and will not offer any, so
he is impenetrable from without, and cannot suffer any real Injury: Virtue is a
Wall of Brass, the Scoffs and Affronts are all repulsed or lodged there, and
not one of them comes through to touch his Person; and to all this
self-security we may likewise add another Consideration from the Opinion and
Esteem of the World; for there is no body but will look upon the Aggressor as a
very ill Man, and upon the Patient as one not deserving to be so treated: As to
the Party who has thus affronted you, if you esteem him no better than an
impertinent or idle fellow, use him accordingly, and show that you value him
not by a generous disdain; if he be otherwise, you should plead his excuse to
your self; you ought to presume that he had (or at least apprehended that he
had) occasion for what he did; That it was not done out of any malicious
design, but through inadvertency or mistake, want of breeding, or some other
very pardonable defect; if not so, then you may be confident he has seen his
error, is angry at himself for it, and wishes most heartily it had never been
done: Once more let me add, that we ought to play the good husbands, and make
the most of Injuries and Offenses; for indeed they are no small advantages
which these put into our hands, particularly, they are capable of turning to
very good account two ways, with regard to each of the parties concerned in
them. For first with regard to the person who did the Injury; this has
discovered the Man to us, we have seen a little more of the World; we know such
a one two well to trust him another time; and have fair warning to avoid him
ever after. But then Secondly, they help us to know our selves too, show us our
own infirmities, our breaches and blind sides, where the Foe may get within us,
and what we cannot hold out against; and this gives us warning to work upon
those breaches, and put them in a defensible condition against the next attack
upon us. Let us learn to amend that fault too, which occasioned the abuse, that
no other Man may have the like provocation to reproach us hereafter: This is
the true way of defeating the malice of others, and doing right to our selves;
for what nobler Revenge can a Man take upon his Enemies, than to turn their
injuries and affronts to his own Prout, and to learn more Prudence and Conduct,
and to grow the wiser and better, more cautious and inoffensive by being ill
used. The World at this rate is an excellent School; and the more unreasonable
Men are, the more a Man of good fense and temper may improve himself under
their even unjust Corrections.

CHAP. XXI. Of External Evils with regard to their Fruits and Effects.
HAving thus considered the Causes, let us now enquire into the effects of our
evils, and what fruits they produce; where again we shall meet with very
powerful Antidotes and substantial remedies against them. Now these effects are
many and great, general, and particular.

The general effects are such as concern the good, the support, the order, and
improvement of the Universe. The World would be quire stified and choked up,
it would Stagnate and putrify, if it were not sometimes stirred and changed,
and put into a new form by such important and alterative accidents, as Plagues,
and Famines, and War, and Mortality; these are the things that prune and purge
it, and throw down that product which overburdens the soil; and by so doing
they preserve the rest, and give them elbowroom: for were there no such
evacuations we should not be able to move and live by one another. But then
consider the grateful Varieties and Vicissitudes, the regular Successions and
alternate Changes, by which the World is thus adorned and beautified, every
part of the world finds some convenience by these alterations. For from Nations
and Men coming to be transplanted by such means, the barbarous and wild and
savage part of Mankind are polished and civilized; Arts and Sciences, Learning
and Policy are spread wider, and communicated to every part of the habitable
Earth; so that we are to look upon the Universe as one large Plantation, where
some Trees are removed to a more convenient Soil, others are grasted and
inoculated, others cut down to the root, that they make more regular shoots by
the loss of superfluous suckers, others quite plucked up, but all this done in
such order by the skillful Cultivater, that every thing tends to the profit and
beauty of the ground. These enlargements of our Thoughts, and considerations of
Universal advantage ought to content every Wife and good Man, and prevent
irreverent reflections upon those wonderful works of God, which Men are too apt
to accuse for barbarous and disorderly; or to look upon with amazement as
strange and unaccountable. It is enough that they are the ordinances of God and
nature, and ought to satisfy us, that how odd soever they may appear with
regard to that little spot of ground which is commanded by our own Eye, yet
they do great and signal service to the whole. For would we extend our
prospect, we should quickly discern that what is lost in one place is gained in
another, or rather indeed to speak more properly, that nothing is lost any
where, but all conduces to the just variety and convenience of the World in
general. Vir sapiens nihil indignetur sibi accidere, sciatque illa ipsa, quibus
laedi videtur ad conservationem universi pertinere, and ex his esse quae cursum
munch officiumque consummant.
A Wise Man, says one, will take nothing amiss that happens to him; for he will
observe, that those very things by which his particular Interests seem to
suffer, are expedient, and greatly contribute to the preservation of the whole;
and that these are the methods by which the course of the World is continued,
and every part of it brought to its just and necessary perfection.



And first, these external evils provide the good Men excellent opportunities
of exerting and improving their Virtue, which would otherwise want matter to
work upon, and lie idle and undiscerned. A good Man under affliction, is in the
same circumstances with Fencers in their Schools, or Mariners in a Storm, or
Soldiers in an Action, or Philosophers in their Academy; that is, he is upon
his proper duty, attending the business of his profession, and showing his
skill in it; for these are the very methods that instruct, and enter, and sorm,
and finish him in Virtue, that establish him in Constancy and Courage, and
enable him to conquer and triumph over Fortune and the World: They bring him
acquainted with himself, make him know his own strength by frequent
experiments, tell him what he may depend upon, and promise himself from it; nor
do they only give him a true representation of his past and present condition,
but they help to amend it too; they encourage and confirm his resolutions of
doing well, harden and accustom him to suffering, fix and determine his mind,
secure his past conquests, and render him invincible for the time to come;
Whereas on the contrary, a long calm of prosperity is exceeding apt to soften
and enervate Men's minds, and to corrupt them by ease and leisure, carelessness
and sloth, inactivity and long disuse. Demetrius, for this reason used to say,
that of all Men living he thought none so truly miserable as those who had
never met with disappointments, and crosses, and trying afflictions, and
compared their life to the dead sea, where there is a perpetual Stagnation, and
noxious vapors breed and reign for want of winds, and a vigorous commotion of
the waters to break and disperse and drive them away.



wise and kind being, in whose disposal all these things are, and who
distributes them according to his own good pleasure, and as they may be most
suitable to every Man's occasions.

ADVERTISEMENT.
Of External Evils, considered in themselves particularly.
ALl these Evils which are many in number, and various in their kinds, are so
many privations of some contrary good; for so much indeed is employed in the
very name and nature of evil: Consequently the general heads of evil must
answer and be equal to the several heads or species of good. Now these may very
properly be reduced to seven. Sickness and Pain, (for these being Bodily
indispositions, I join them together as one) Captivity, Banishment, Want,
Disgrace, Loss of Friends, and Death. The good things we are deprived of in the
forementioned Circumstanc's every one sees very plainly to be Health, Liberty,
our Native Country, Wealth, Honor, Friends, and Life; each of which we have
had occasion to treat of at large in the foregoing parts of this Treatise. All
therefore that remains to be done at present is to prescribe such Antidotes
against these as are proper to them respectively; and that very briefly and
plainly, without any nice or formal Reasoning upon the Case.

CHAP. XXII. Of Sickness and Pain.
IT has been observed in the beginning of this Treatise, Book 1. Chap. 6.
that Pain is the greatest, and in good truth the only evil attending this
Mortal Body of ours; the most sensible, the most insupportable, that which is
least to be cured, least to be dealt with or assuaged by consideration. But
still, though this be not altogether so capable of advice as most other
afflictions; yet some Remedies there are drawn from Reason, Justice, advantage
and usefulness, imitation and resemblance of great persons celebrated for their
illustrious Virtue, and that branch of it which consists of Patience, and these
such as they are I shall just propound to my Reader's Consideration.





Confide, summus non habet tempus dolor. Si gravis brevis; si longus levis.
If the pain be long it is but moderate; and consequently very supportable; and
a Wise Man will be ashamed to complain of any thing less than extremities. If
it be violent and exceeding acute it is but short, and we should not repine or
be driven to impatience for a suffering which is quickly over. And yet this
must of necessity be the case; for nature cannot sustain it self under the
continuance of extreme Torture: There must be an end either of that or of the
Patient in a little time; and which of these two soever be the conclusion of it
as to the suffering part, the matter comes all to one, and therefore let this
give us courage and comfort.

they furnish matter, and put occasions in our way for a more noble exercising
of Virtue than any that we owe to Ease and perfect Health: And surely where
there is more occasion of praise and Virtue there cannot be less good. If the
Body be what the Philosophers usually call the instrument of the mind, why
should any one complain, for this instrument being applied to its proper use
and worn out in the service of its proper master? The Body was made on purpose
to serve the Soul, but if every inconvenience which befalls the Body shall
disorder and afflict the mind, the order of nature is quite inverted, and the
Soul from thenceforth becomes a servant to the Body. Would you not think that
man unreasonably querulous and childish, who should cry and roar and take on
heavily because some thorn in the hedge, as he passed by, or some unwary
passenger had spoiled or torn his Clothes? A poor broker, who was to make Money
of the Suit, might be allowed some concern upon such an occasion; but a
Gentleman and one of substance and condition would make a jest of it, and not
esteem it worth a thought, when so trivial a loss was compared with the
abundance he had left. Now this Body of ours is no other than a garment,
borrowed for a little while that our Soul may make its appearance, and act a
short part in it, upon the stage of this lower World: But the Soul in the mean
while is that which commands our value and regard; and our great affair is to
secure the honor and quiet of this better part, while sojourning in this busy
and tumultuous life. And what do we think may be the true reason why Pain
provokes us to so great impatience? What indeed, but that we place our
happiness upon wrong objects, and do not set up our rest, nor seek our
satisfactions in the Soul. Non assueverunt animo esse contenti; nimium illis
cum corpore fuit.
Men grow into coldness and negligence of this part, and grow too familiar and
fond of the Body. And Pain, as if it were sensible of this folly of ours, plies
us hard in our tenderest part, especially when a Man shivers and trembles at
its approach, as if it took a pride to insult over such unreasonable fear and
concern.

must shortly leave; for there is no one thing more assisting to us in giving
us a due sense of the emptiness of the World and what an errant cheat it is,
than Sickness and Pain; and I think every Man must confess this to be a very
considerable piece of service.



Non quia difficilia non audemus, sed quia non audemus, difficilia.
We do not flinch from things so much because they are hard to be born, as we
create that hardship to our selves by dreading and shrinking at them.

notions, which Men of refined thoughts entertain when they are at ease, but
would soon find impracticable if brought to the trial; and therefore to obviate
this objection, I have reserved to the last place the instances and examples of
persons whose practice has justified the possibility and mighty efficacy of
all that has been said here, or is usually urged in Books upon this occasion.
And these, not only of wise and extraordinary but of ignorant and common Men;
Nay, even Women and Children are frequently mentioned in story to have endured
both long and acute pains and diseases, and with a mind so steady and unbroken,
that the anguish which has taken away their lives was never able to subdue
their constancy and courage. They have waited the approach of their torments,
and encountered them knowingly, and met them gladly, and supported themselves
under them with mavelous cheerfulness; nay, have even sought and courted the
severest and most exquisite tortures humane nature is capable of suffering. The
Lacedaemonian Boys are notorious for whipping one another, till sometimes they
expired under the scourge, and all this without the least change of
Countenance. A sort of barbarous discipline, instituted to harden them, that
they might be better qualified to do their Country service when thus inured to
sussering. Alexander's Page was burnt to the very Bone with a Coal, and endured
it without the least complaint, rather than he would interrupt the Sacrifice. A
Spartan Boy let his Bowels be cat out by a Fox, rather than he would discover
his Theft. Pompey, when taken by King Gentius, who would have compelled him to
reveal the secrets of the Roman state, thrust his singer into the Fire, and
burnt it till Gentius could bear the sight no longer, to convince him, that all
Torture would be lost upon him. The Case of Mutius with P^rsenna was another
instance of the same kind; and good old Regulus endured more than all of them
from the Carthaginians. The account of Anaxarchus has scarce any Parallel;
who, when pounded in a Mortar at the Command of a Tyrant, cried out, Beat on,
beat on your Belly-full, you cannot touch Anaxarchus his self, you only bruise
the Shell of him.

But that which is a remedy indeed, is one peculiar to Christians, the sure
prospect of a future and eternal state; the consideration what cruelty and
contradiction of sinners their Savior condescended to suffer; and that
participation of glory and bliss with him in Heaven, which is ordained and
reserved for those who suffer with and for him: that is, after his example in a
good cause, and for the sake of Faith and a good Conscience. These reflections
will animate Men, not by rendering them insensible or taking sanctuary in nice
and airy distinctions, but by furnishing arguments superior to the quickest
and tenderest sense of Pain. And accordingly we see what incredible effects
these Religious comforts had in all the Primitive Persecutions; how triumphant
they were in the midst of Racks and Fires and Crosses. The having respect to
the recompense of Reward, The balancing the light Afflictions of a moment with
the Eternal and far more exceeding weight of Glory; the committing this Body to
the Ground, like seed for a plentiful and joyful harvest at the general
Resurrection; the considence in the promises of him who cannot lie. These
inspired the noble Army of Martyrs; and these are able to support all their
followers, who have a title to the same expectations, and are heirs through
hope to the same Kingdom. And all the Stoical Philosophy put together, cannnot
minister the hundredth part of that Consolation, which those two short
Sentences of S. Paul do, No chastening for the present seems to be joyous but
grievous; Heb. 12.11.
Nevertheless afterward it yields the peaceable fruit of Righteousness unto
them which are exercised thereby; And, We know that if our earthly house of
this Tabernacle be dissolved, 2 Cor. 5.1.
we have a building of God, a house not made with hands, eternal in the
Heavens.

CHAP. XXIII. Of Captivity or Imprisonment.
THis Affliction is very inconsiderable in comparison of the former, and the
conquest of it will prove exceeding easy to them, upon whom the prescriptions
against Sickness and Pain have found their desired effect. For Men in those
circumstances have the addition of this misfortune, confined to their houses,
their Beds, tied to a Rack and loaded with fetters; and this very consinement
is a part of their complaint, though the least part. But however we will say
one word or two of it.

Now what is it that Captivity or Confinement imprisons? The Body, that which
is it self the cover and the Prison of the Soul; but the Mind continues at
large and at its own disposal, in despite of all the World: How can it indeed
be sensible of any inconvenience from a Prison, since even there it ranges
abroad as freely, as gaily, takes as noble, as sublime, as distant slights, if
not much more so, than it does in other circumstances? The Locks and Bars, and
Walls of a Prison are much too remote to have any power of fastening it down or
shutting it in; they must needs be so, since even the Body it self which
touches upon, is linked to, and hangs like a Clog fastened to it, is not able
to keep it down, or six it to any determinate place. And that Man will make a
jest of all these artisicial and wretched, these slight and childish
enclosures, who has learnt how to preserve his native liberty and to use the
privilege and prerogative of his condition, which is, to be confined no where;
no, not even in this World. Thus Tertullian derides the cruelty of the
Persecutors, and animates his Brethren by relling that a Christianus, etiam
extra carcerem, saeculo renunciavit, in Carcere etiam carceri; nihil interest
ubi siris in saeculo, qui extra sacalam estis. Auseramus carceris nomen,
secessam vocemus; ^^si corpus includitur, caro detinetur, omnia Spiritui
patent; totum hominem animus circumfert, and quo vult transfert.
Christian even when out of Prison had shaken hands with the World, that he
desied and was above it; and that when under Confinement, the case was the same
with his Gael too. What mighty matter is it in what part of the World you are,
whose principle it is not to be of the World? Let us change that name of so ill
a sound, and instead of a Prison call it a retreat; where when you are shut up
the slesh may be kept to a narrow room, but all doors are open to the Spirit,
all places free to the Mind; this carries the whole Man along with it, and
leads him abroad whithersoever it will.

Prisons have given very kind entertainment to several valuable, and holy, and
great Men; to some, a Gaol has been a refuge from destruction, and the Walls
of it so many fortifications and entrenchments against that ruin which had
certainly been the consequence of liberty; nay, some have chosen these places
that there they might enjoy a more perfect liberty, and be farther from the
noise and clutter and confusion of the World. He that is under Look and Key is
so much safer and better guarded: And a Man had better live thus, than be
crampt and constrained by those Fetters and hand-cuffs which the World is full
of; such as the places of public business and concourse, the Palaces of
Princes, the conversation of great Men, the tumult and hurry of Trade, the
vexation and expense of Lawsuits, the envy and ill nature, the peevishness and
passions of common Men, will be continually clapping upon us. Si recogi^emus
i^sum magls mundum carcerem esse, exisse nos e carcere, quam in carcerem
introisse intelligemus. Majores tenebras habet mundus, quae hominum praecordia
excaecant, graviores ca^enas induit, quae ipsas animas coustringunt, pejores
immunditias expirant libidines hominum, plures postremo reos coutinet,
universum genus hominum.
If we do but reflect (says the same Author again) that the World it self is no
better than a Prison, we shall imagine our selves rather let out of a Gaol than
put into one. The darkness by which the World blinds Man's minds, is thicker
and grosser, the chains by which it clogs and binds their affeclions heavier;
the silth and stanch of Men's lewdness and beastly conversation more offensive,
and the Criminals in it more numerous, for such in truth are all Mankind. There
have been several instances of persons, who, by the benefit of a Prison, have
been preserved from the malice of their e^emies, and escaped great miseries and
dangers. Some have made it a studious retirement, composed Books there, or laid
a foundation of great virtue and much learning, so that the uneasiness of the
flesh has been a gain to the spirit, and the confinement of the body was well
laid out in a purchase so valnable as the enlargement of the mind. Some have
been disgerged as it were by a Prison, thrown up when it could keep them no
longer, and the next step they made has been into some very eminent dignity,
as high as this World could set them; this remark the Psalmist has left us of
the wonderful dispensations of providence: Psalm. 113.
He takes the simple out of the dust, and lifts the needy off from the
dunghill, That he may set him with Princes, even with the Princes of his
people. And he indeed who was an Israelite might well make this reflection,
since even among his own Ancestors they had so eminent an instance as Jeseph,
of the mighty alteration we are now speaking of. But others have been advanced
yet higher, exhaled as it were and drawn up into Heaven from thence. But thus
much is certain, that there can be no such thing as perpetual Imprisonment;
general Gaol-deliveries are unalterably established, an Article of the Law of
Nature; for no Prison ever yet took in a Man, whom it did not shortly after let
out again.

CHAP. XXIV. Of Exile, or Banishment.


have been delivered in any other place, as well as that where they were; and
nothing is more entirely Casual, than the particular Spot where we first drew
Breath, for there was in Nature the same possibility of our being born any
where? Besides, every Climate produces and carries Men, sustains them with its
Fruits, and furnishes them with all the Necessaries of Life; so that there is
little fear of Perishing any where. Every Country settles us among our
Relations too; for all Mankind are so, nearly allied in Blood, and nearer yet
in Charity and Affection. Friends too may be found any where, we need only be
at the pains to make them, which will soon be done, if we are careful to win
their Hearts by our Virtue and Wisdom. Every quarter of the Habitable World is
a Wise-man's Country, or rather indeed no part of it is his Country. It were an
injury and disparagement to suppose him a Stranger any where; and a weakness
and littleness of Spirit in him to esteem himself so. A Man ought to use his
Privilege, and assert his natural Right, which consists in living every where,
as if he were at home, and dwelt in his own: In Omnes terras tanquam suas
videre, and suas tanquam omnium.
looking upon all places, as if he had a propriety in them; and upon his own
Estate or native Seil, as if it were in common to all Mankind.

Brutus) from carrying his Excellencies, all he is really and truly worth, into
Banishment, or Captivity? The Mind and its commendable Qualities are subject to
no consinement, circumscribed within no determinate space of ground; but can
live, and act, and exert themselves in all places indifferently. A good Man is
a Citizen of the whole World, frank and free, content and cheerful wherever his
Lot casts him; always at home in his own Quarters; and always sixth and settled,
however this Case or Portmantean that incloses and conveys him, may be hurried
and jumbbied from one place to another. Animus facer and aternus ubique est,
diis cognatus, omni mundo and aevo par.
The holy and immortal S^ul is an Vbiquetary, of near resemblance and affinity
to God himself, and like him diffused equally, and ever present to all the
stages of time, and all the distances of place. And wheresoever a Man feels
himself well, and easy, and in full enjoyment, that is his home, call the
Country by what name you will. And it is evident, that Ease and comfortable
Enjoyment is not entailed upon particular Cities or Climates; this is what no
place can give, he can only depend upon his own mind for it, and that can give
it him in any place equally.

Romans, Rutilius, and Marcellus in particular; And again, how many do we read
of, whom good Fortune has taken by the hand as it were, and led them abroad,
put them in the way of Honor and Preferment in foreign Lands, such as they
could have no probable prospect of ever attaining at home?

CHAP. XXV. Of Poverty, and Want, and Lesses.
us to a needy Condition, that a little will serve the turn, and that little is
to be had almost every where: Nay, it is to be had in such quantities, as will
not only reach to the keeping Life and Soul together, but are a sufficient
Competency for moderate and frugal Persons. If we do not affect to lay it on
thick, and squander away our Provisions; if we would take our measures from
Reason and Nature, and be satisfied with what these desire, and prescribe to
us; we shall seldom or never want enough for our purpose. But if we will create
to our selves fantastical and imaginary wants, nothing can ever satisfy us. Si
ad naturam vives, nunquam eris pauper; si ad opinionem, nunquam dives. Exiguum
natura desiderat; opinio immensum.
He that lives by Nature, says Seneca, can never be Poor; and he that lives by
Fancy, can never be Rich; for the former will gladly take up with a little, but
the latter grasps at all, and there is no end of it. A Man that is master of
any sort of Trade, or bred up to any Profession; nay, he that has neither of
these advantages, if he have but the use of his Hands, is safe from these
Extremities, and will find no just reason to fear, or to complain of this first
sort of Poverty.

The other sort consists in the want of those things, which exceed a sufficient
provision for the uses of Nature, and minister to Pomp and Pleasure, Delicacy
and Supersluity; what we commonly call a Decency, and this is in truth the
thing most Men are so mightily concerned for; loss of rich and sumptuous
Furniture, the not having a Down Bed, and a Table well spread, or a stately
House; shut out from the Comforts and the Ornaments of Life. But this, when all
is done, is not Want, but Niceness; and that is the very Disease we labor
under. Now all complaints of this Nature are highly unjust, for what they dread
as Poverty, is rather to be preferred and wished for: We see the Wisest Man
that ever lived, was for neither Poverty nor Riches, but only such Food as was
a convenient Subsistence for him. It is more agreeable to nature, more truly
rich, more quiet and safe, than all that abundance Mankind are so fond of.
First, it is more congruous and agreeable to our Condition, because Man came
Naked into the World, and he must go so out; and how can he call any thing his
own, which he neither brought along with him, nor can carry away with him? The
Possessions we pretend to here, are like the Furniture in an Inn; ours to use
while we stay, but not to remove when we leave the House: And therefore all we
ought to look at is our present Accommodation. Secondly, it is more true
Riches, for a larger Manor none can be possessed of. He that has enough, has
all the World. 1 Timothy 6
Godliness with Contentment is great Gain, says the Apostle, it is safer and
more quiet: For here is no Fear to perplex, no hope of Booty to tempt, no
danger of Enemies to fence against; Poverty is secure in the inidst of Banditi.
A little Man, when covered all over with his Buckler, is less liable to danger,
than a bigger and stronger, who is in many parts exposed, and cannot bring his
whole Body within the compass of his Shield; such a condition, as it does not
burden and fatigue a Man with great Troubles, so neither does it make him
capable of great Losses. And therefore these sort of People are always more
easy, and free, and cheerful, for they have not so much to take care of, nor
can they suffer so much by any storm that shall happen to blow. Such a Poverty
as this is snugg and close, gay, and jolly, and secure; all foul Weather flies
over its head; it makes us truly our own Men, masters of our Lives, without the
hurry and noise, the squabbles and contentions, which are the necessary
encumbrances of plentiful Fortunes, and devour the greatest part of their Ease
and Time, who stand possessed of them. And what precious things are these to be
called, the Goods of this World, that are big with so many Mischiefs, such
substantial and vexatious Evils, that expose us to Injuries, enslave us to
Jealousies and Suspicions; to anxious Fears, and inordinate Desires; and have
so many thousand artifices to trouble and disquiet us? He that is discontented
with the loss of these things, is miserable indeed; because he is deprived of
his Possessions, and understanding both; and so does more than double his loss.
The Life of Men in moderate Circumstances is a condition much like that of
Coasters; but that of the rich is like Sailors out at Sea. These are tossed and
driven, and cannot make Land though they would never so fain; they must wait a
favorable Gale, and the Current of the Tide to carry them in: The former are
always near home, and have it in their power to Debark whenever they please.

To all these Considerations we shall do well to add one more; That of Great,
and Generous, and justly Celebrated Persons, who have despised such Losses,
n^y, have welcomed, and improved them to their advantage, and thanked Almighty
God for them, as so many signal Blessings. Such as Zeno after his Wrack, the
Fabricij, Serrani, and the Curij among the Romans. And this is an extraordinary
Attainment in Virtue, when a Man can find his account, and discern, and
satisfy himself with the wisdom and kindness of Providence, in instances which
the generality of the World look upon with the greatest Horror and Aversion.
The Gods were heretofore painted Naked, to intimate, that they are above both
the Necessities and Gayeties of this World; and how Godlike a Quality the
Philosophers heretofore esteemed the despising of them, we may learn by that
voluntary Poverty, which so many of them embraced; at least, if it was the work
of Fate, and not their own Choice, by that easy Content and Acquiescence of
Spirit, with which they entertained it. To sum up all then in one word, to
Persons of Prudence and unprejudiced Affections, Men of elevated Souls, refined
and purged from the dross of Sensuality and Avarice, this condition of Life
will appear preferrable; but to all People, who think at all, it is very
tolerable.

CHAP. XXVI. Of Infamy, or Disgrace.
THis Affliction is of several sorts, according to the different Senses, of
which the Title here is capable.

If by Disgrace, be meant, the loss of Honor, or Dignity, or offices of
Importance and Trust, the Man is rather a Gainer than otherwise, and has made
a very advantageous Exchange. For what are such promotions but splendid
slaveries, by which a Man hires himself out to the Public, and lays out his
Property, and the enjoyment of his Person in the Service of other People? These
Honors shine indeed and glister, but with that dazzling light they kindle Envy
and Jealousy, burn up the Owner, and at last go out in Exile and Poverty. Let
a Man but refresh his memory with the Histories of all Antiquity, and the most
memorable passages of Great Men; see how thick a cloud they set in, and
whether, almost to a Man, those that were most renowned for Gallantry and
Virtue, did not finish their course, in Banishment, or a Prison; by Poison, or
some other violent Death. See the declining Aristides, Themistocles, Phocion
and Sucrates among the Greeks; Camillus and Scipio, and Cicero, and Papinian
among the Romans; Jeremiah and other Prophets among the Jews. Insomuch that a
Man may say, Calamity and Disgrace is the very Livery and Mark of distinction
of the best and bravest Men; the usual Reward which the People bestow upon
those that have done them the best Service.

If this word be interpreted of common Fame and Opinion, every Wise Man should
have Spirit enough to despise That, and never trouble himself at all about it.
He does but disparage and degrade himself, and betray his want of improvement
in the study of Wisdom, who is got no higher in this noble Science, than to be
concerned at those false, rash Judgments, and scandalous Reports, which are
made and scattered at random; and which neither make a Man the better for their
Commendations, nor one whit the worse for their Censure and Reproaches.

CHAP. XXVII. Loss of Friends.
BY Friends, I understand Children, Relations, and all whom Nature or
Acquaintance have rendered near and dear to us.

And here, first of all, we shall do well to examine pretty strictly into the
true soundation of this Concern; whether the Complaints we utter, the Tears we
shed, and all the sorrow and tender Resentments we pretend, be grounded upon
their Interest, or our own. I make no question, but every Man will answer, that
he grieves for their sakes; but then most People must give us leave to doubt
the Truth of this; and not take it ill, if we be Infidels in the case, till
satisfied by some more substantial Argument, than the mere authority of having
their bare word for it. It is but an officious Dissimulation of tenderness and
natural Affection, to put on an inconsolable Melancholy, and be eternally
lamenting the Misfortunes of our Friends, or the Dangers and Calamities of the
Public; for would we but draw aside the Curtain, and probe our Souls to the
quick, Self would be found at the bottom, and the true cause of our Griefs will
appear to be that private Interest of our own, which is involved, and
interwoven with theirs, this is the very thing that affects us so sensibly. And
what is this but a spice of Envy, rather than true and generous Affection? For
that very Death, or absence of our Friends, which we bewail under the specious
Title of their Loss and Misfortune, is in reality their mighty Gain, and
greatest Advantage. Moerere hoc eventum, invidi magis quam amici est.
The true use and consequence of Death is the putting a final and absolute
Period to Men's Miseries, the placing them in a condition incapable of
suffering. Had God in his Wisdom intended us a happier and more easy Being
upon Earth, no doubt he would have contrived, that it should have lasted
longer. But, as Matters now stand, and considering the Evils our Lives are
beset with, it is a mercy he has made them so short.

If then we would speak out, and confess the truth impartially, this Affliction
looks at home, and we lament the loss, because our own Affairs suffer in it.
Now this at the first blush is evidently dishonorable and selfish; and we
shall have much ado to justify our being sorry, that those we profess so
dearly to love are in ease and happiness. If we loved them, as our Savior
says, in the like case, we should much rather rejoice; and if they loved us, it
is but a decent gratitude to be content with some inconveniences, when the
suffering of these is softened by the consideration of their unspeakable
Advantage. For Suis incommodis angi, non amicum, sed seipsum amantis est.
to be troubled at our own Loss may argue that we love our selves, but it can
never prove, that we love our Friends.

But, after all, there is an excellent and never failing Remedy in store for
our Affliction, which all the malice and power of Fate can never wrest out of
our hands. And that is, a Reflection, that these Losses are not irreparable:
For so long as we survive our Friends, so long we have opportunities of making
new ones. Friendship is one of the greatest Blessings humane Life can boast of;
and there is this mighty advantage in it, which other happinesses cannot
pretend to, that it is one of the easiest to be attained. God makes Men, but
Men make Friends: And they that do not want Virtue, need never want Friends;
for this is the instrument of acquiring them; and that which will always be
serviceable in supplying the number of those that are taken from us. If then
Fortune has robbed us of this Treasure, let us take care to reimburse our
selves; and by this means we shall be so far from living destitute, that the
parting with those we had, will only give us an opportunity of enlarging our
Affections wider, and adding to the number.

Of Death.
THis Subject has been already treated of so largely and fully in the Eleventh
Chapter of the Second Book, that I have nothing new to offer upon it here. And
therefore to avoid being tedious to my Reader, by cloying him with Repetitions,
I shall only beg his leave to refer him back to that Passage.

The second Division of Evils, consisting of such as are Internal, to wit, the
Disquieting Passions of our own Minds.

PREFACE.
FRom these several Evils already insisted on, several tormenting Passions are
begot and bred in our Minds. For when any of those Afflictions are considered
absolutely, and in themselves; there springs up Fear in us, if we apprehend
them as future and approaching; or Grief, if we reflect upon them as present,
and at that instant actually oppressing us. And if these Calamities do not
immediately affect us, but others suffer in them, then the Passion we are moved
to, is Pity and Compassion. When to the Consideration of their own Nature, we
join that additional one of their Causes or Occasions, and reflect upon them as
done or procured by some other Person, than the Passions provoked by them are.
Anger, Hatred, Indignation, Spite, Envy, Jealousy, Revenge; and all those
other Resentments, which dispose us to bear a grudge, and look with an evil Eye
upon the Person (...) a create us uneasiness and trouble. Now this Virtue of
Fortitude consists in the entertaining these misfortunes regularly, and a
^eeably to right Reason and Equity; in behaving our selves gallantly under
them, and so preserving our Souls free and undisturbed by any of the Passions
apt to be excited, and so grow outrageous upon these occasions. But in regard
they owe their very Being to these Afflictions, if a Man can manage the Rules
and Remedies here already prescribed, so as to gain an absolute Conquest over
the Evils themselves: These Passions will be crushed in the Egg, and all
farther directions concerning them are wholly superseded. And this indeed is
the best and most effectual way, to stifle and cut off the first Tendencies
toward them. Efficacy and Success must unavoidably wait upon this method, as
that Fire is sure to be quenched, from which all combustible Matter that might
feed it, is withdrawn in time. But though this taking off the Fuel be the best,
yet is it not the only way of keeping down this slame; and therefore I will
provide for the other Course, by adding some Directions against each of these
Passions in particular; which design will take up the less of our Time and
Pains, in regard each of them has formerly been drawn at length, and that in
Colors so natural, so black and hideous, that it may reasonably be expected,
those Representations should work us up to a due horror and detestation of
them.

CHAP. XXVIII. Remedies against Fear.
LET us not be too hasty, and anticipate our Misfortunes, but be content to
stay till they overtake us. Why should we run forward to meet those Miseries,
which at the same time we would fain run away from? Possibly they may not carry
so far, but be spent, or fall to the ground before they reach us. Our Fears are
every jot as fallible as our hopes: Perhaps the time which we expect with
terror, to bring our Affliction, may come big with Joy, or at least bring a
Comfort equivalent to the Sorrow. How many millions of surprising Accidents may
interpose, and ward off that Thurst, which we apprehend must give us our mortal
Wound? Lightning, they tell you, will be diverted from its course by the motion
of a Hat, and the fortunes of great States, and whole Nations are blasted, and
blown down in an instant by accidents, as slight as the Breath of ones Mouth.
Give the Wheel but one whirl, and that which was at the top is tumbled down to
the bottom; and it very frequently happens, that the Persons who were our
Terror, become our Pity or our Scorn; and the Thing, from whence we looked for
nothing but Ruin, is the best instrument and insurance of our Safety. Nothing
is so liable to Mistakes as humane Prospects: What the Prudence of Man hopes
for, disappoints him; what this fears, vanishes, and slips from under him, and
what it never dreamt of happens to him. Almighty God keeps his Counsels to
himself; he alone knows what he has to do: But his Measures and Methods are
dark and distant from humane Sight; and this is the occasion of the many
amazing Changes we see in the World; that what we Project and Form to our
selves in one way, God decrees and brings about in another. Let us not make our
selves unhappy before our time; and it is very likely we may never be so at
all: The future, which cheats so great a part of Mankind, may probably cheat us
among the rest, to our advantage. It is a famous Maxim in the practice of
Physic, that the acutest Distempers have no Prognostics to be depended upon:
And thus far it holds in our Fortune too, that the more furious and threatening
her Symptoms are, the less we can form any certain Judgments from them. While
there is life, there are hopes, is as good a Rule, as just a Comfort, with
regard to our Affairs in Disorder, as it is with respect to our Bodies in
Sickness.

This Fear is not always the effect of Temper and Complexion, but very often of
Delicacy, and a too tender Education. For we apprehend many things to be more
grievous than really they are, merely for want of being hardened in our Youth,
and accustomed betimes to difficult and laborious Undertakings. And upon this
account, we should find great benefit in using our selves a great while before
hand, to that which is apt to strike a Terror into us; representing to our
Imaginations the dreadfullest Dangers, that we can possibly fall into, and
growing familiar with them by degrees; making some hazardous attemps by way of
Gallantry and Trial, that so we may bring our Courage to the touch, be
beforehand with mischance, and wrest the weapons of Fortune out of her hands.
For we shall find it much easier to resist her, when we are the Aggressors,
than when she puts upon the Defensive. At such times, we have the Law in our
own hands; can take leisure to arm as we please, can make the most of every
Advantage, and secure our Retreat; whereas, when she comes on, and Attacks us,
she surprises, and singles us out at pleasure. We shall do very well therefore
to exercise our skill upon her, and, by beginning the Combat unprovoked,
practice, and grow perfect in the Art of defending our Post: To sound sometimes
a false Alarm, to see how we should receive it, if it had been in earnest, and
a real Engagement. To set before our Eyes instances of astonishing Dangers,
which the greatest and worthiest Men have been driven to; and recollect, that
some have escaped the dismallest that we can imagine, thereby to prevent
Confusion and Despair; and that others have perished under the slightest and
most inconsiderable, thereby to awaken us out of our foolish security, and
convince us, that we are no where so safe, that Consideration and Prudence
should be laid aside as unnecessary.

CHAP. XXIX. Against Grief.
GRief has been formerly delineated, under the Characters of the most
tormenting, most prejudicial, and most unjust passion of all others. The
greater reason to be sure we have to acquaint our selves with proper Remedies
against it. And these are of two kinds, Direct or Oblique.

I call those Direct, which we derive from Philosophy, and the force of Reason;
such as are employed in facing the Calamity, and learning to disdain and
contemn it; persuading our selves, that these External misadventures are no
real Evils, or if there be any thing in them, which may justify so harsh a
name; yet that they are so small and slight, as not to be worth the disordering
our Minds about them; that any notable change in our Temper and Mind is more
than the greatest and most grievous of them all ought to obtain from us; and
that to spend our Breath in Complaints, and our Days in Melancholy upon their
account, is highly unjust and mis-becoming. (For at this rate the Stoics, and
Peripateticks, and Platonists have delivered themselves upon these occasions.)
This method of keeping our selves above Grief, and every painful Passion, is
indeed very beautiful and excellent; what challenges, not only our Commendation
but our Wonder, because it is exceeding Rare, and none but Souls of the first
rate seem to be qualified for the undertaking.

There is another of a meaner and more practicable Dispensation, the effect of
Philosophy too, but not in its Aeme and utmost Perfection; for this is a more
popular Method, and condescends to the Infirmities of Mankind; not so nobly
descended, but of more general use. And this is what I call Oblique, because it
consists in quieting the uneasy thought, by drawing off the Mind from its
present Anguish to some more pleasant and agreeable, or at least to some fresh
Object. This is properly shifting the Scene, declining, or, according to the
modern way of expression, shamming the Misfortune. A remedy exceeding common,
and such as Mankind are fain to take refuge in upon several other occasions, as
well as this. For, if we observe the thing nicely, it will appear, that many
Cures are wrought both upon our Bodies and Minds this way. Thus when we are
assaulted by Temptations, Divines advise, that we would not trust our selves
alone, but flee into Company. Thus when there is any strong Defluxion of
Humors upon the Vitals, which cannot be carried clear off, Physicians divert
the Morbifick Matter, and throw it into some of those parts, where the Lance,
or the Searing-Iron may be able to deal with it. Thus Men that travel over
dangerous and frightful Precipices, shut their Eyes close, or look another way.
Thus the Men of Courage in Fight, do not reflect upon their Danger, or think
they are grappling with Death; but find themselves transported and busied with
the Heat of Action. And of the many renowned Heroes, who have suffered calmly
and patiently, nay, even of those who have died by their own choice, or their
own hands, (which some Greeks and Romans heretofore were vain enough to do
merely for the Honor and Reputation of despising it; and others have been so
brave and constant to undergo, in the confidence and assured hope of a better
Life, as the Christian Martyrs; the Scholars of Hegesias, and others after the
reading of Plato's Antiochus; or for the getting quit of the Miseries of the
present Life; or whatever other Motives they had;) still this was but a
Stratagem of Diversion; for these Motives took their thoughts off from the main
point in Difficulty. For that which they aspired after, or that which they fled
from, made the more vigorous impression; and either quite swallowed up, or
mightily assuaged the Terror of what they were about to suffer. But few or
none of these had that firmness of Soul to consider the Calamities themselves;
to converse with, and come close up to them; to see them in their frightfullest
forms, and yet not start at them. This was a glory reserved for Socrates, and
Flavins condemned by Nero to die by the hand of Niger, and some very few
besides. We may therefore content our selves very well with diverting our Minds
by some other Considerations, when any cross Accidents, or other external
Calamities assault us. The common People seem to be sensible of some more than
ordinary Efficacy in this Prescription, when, upon all Melancholy occasions,
they advise their Friends not to think of that which gives them the Disorder.
And those, who undertake to advise or comfort Persons in Affliction, will do
well to consider what Counsel they are capable of following; to infuse some
other thoughts into them, by gentle and insensible degrees, so loosening and
undermining the Object of their trouble, and trying to plant another in its
room. For this taking the ground of their Melancholy from under them, before
they are well aware of it, will prove a more real Consolation (in the first and
furious Paroxysms especially) than the most Philosophical, or which is yet
better, the most Christian Harangue in the World. For though every Man may
know, and urge pathetically enough, such Arguments as Reason tells us, it is
fit Melancholy Persons should submit to; yet these may all be lost, if the
Application be out of time: And therefore it is very necessary, that Men should
proceed with Judgment, and Tenderness; that they should observe, both in what
manner the Passions are to be treated, and when they are fit to be treated
with, when they will bear coming up to the point; and when they must be
pacified by some powerful Diversion.

CHAP. XXX. Remedies against Compassion.
MY Reader may possibly be startled at this Title, suspecting, that it favors
too much of Inhumanity; but to abate his Surprise, I must remind him, that
there are two sorts of Pity. The one firm, and brave, virtuous and commendable,
such as we are told Almighty God and the blessed Spirits partake of; and this
consists in applying our inclination, and actual Endeavors to relieve the
Afflicted, yet so as not to take the Affliction upon our selves, nor do any
thing in diminution of the justice of the Cause, or the dignity of our
Character. The other is a womanish and senseless Pity; full of Tenderness and
Concern; which proceeds from weakness and effeminacy of Soul, concerning which
I have spoken sufficiently heretofore, Book I. Chap. 32.
in that part which described the several Passions. Now for the conquering and
composing this second sort; Wisdom directs us to succor the Afflicted, and to
ease his Burden, but not to put under our own Shoulder so far, as to bear the
Load with him. In this Sense it is, that God is said to be Pitiful; and his
Bowels and Yearnings must not be interpreted of the same uneasinesses we feel
upon these occasions, but of the same readiness to do good, and to extend his
help, which we find in our selves upon feeling those uneasinesses. As the
Physician does all he can for his Patient, and the Counselor for his Client;
but then it ends in diligence and industry, and making the most of their Case;
but never goes so far, as laying their miscarriage to heart. The Wise Man is
desirous to assuage the Pain, but not content to smart with it; nor to darken
and disorder his Mind with the Vapors of that Melancholy, which he labors to
quiet and compose. God Commands us to have a regard to the Poor, and to
qualify their Afflictions as well as we can; to plead their Cause for them,
and to defend their Right; but yet at the same time he charges us to watch over
our Passions, and take care that we be not balanced even by good Nature and
Pity it self, against Equity and Justice, and the Results of true Reason.

CHAP. XXXI. Remedies against Anger.
THese Remedies are many and various, such as the Mind ought to lay in, and be
strongly armed and guarded with long before; Like People that expect a Siege;
for it will be too late to begin to fortify, when the Enemy has opened his
Trenches, and plays his Batteries upon us. They may be reduced to three Heads;
The first are such as secure all the Passes, and cut off the approaches and
first beginnings of this Passion. For it is infinitely easier to repel, and
guard the Avenues against it, than either to subdue and bring it to Rule, or to
beat it out again, when once it has got within us. We shall do well therefore
to consult our safety betimes, by delivering our selves from all those causes
and occasions of Anger, which were heretofore observed and explained, when we
were describing the nature and rise of this Passion. Such in particular as
these that follow, 1. Weakness of Judgment; 2. Indulgence and Effeminacy; a
Sickness of the Soul, which must be cured by hardening it against any Accident,
which can possibly happen. 3. Niceness, and humoursome Fancies, fondness for
little Trifles, which must be corrected by bringing our Appetites, to plain and
easy and simple things; for this indifferency and simplicity of Manners is the
Mother of inward Peace and Content. And therefore Ad omnia compositi simus,
quae bona and paratiora, sint no^is meliora and gratlora.
let us be prepared and capable of every thing, satisfied with what comes next,
and esteeming those conveniences best and most acceptable, which are nearest at
hand, and will cost us least trouble. This is the general Rule given by
Philosophers; and would be of great use, for the crossing these particular
humors, gives birth to furious Passions and infinite Inconveniences. Cotys,
upon receiving a very Noble Present of Beautiful, but brittle Ware, broke all
the Vessels immediately, to prevent his being angry, whenever they should
happen to be broken by any other hand. This is what I cannot much extol, by
reason it plainly showed a distrust of his own Virtue and Resolution, and
condemned him of Cowardice and Fear. He had therefore done a great deal better,
in sparing that extravagant way of Prevention, and settling in his Mind a firm
Resolve not to be moved at such an Accident, whenever it should happen. 4.
Curiosity, which makes us eager and inquisitive into things which we had much
better live in contented Ignorance of. Thus Caesar, when upon his Victory, he
took the Letters, and Memorials, and several other Papers of Consequence,
written by his Enemies, burnt them without ever examining what they contained.
5. Credulity, and easiness to receive every new Impression. 6. And above all
the rest, a cavilling and captious Humor, jealousy of other People's
Behavior, and fancying they design Injuries and Affronts to us. This Indeed is
very much beneath a Man of Spirit and Generosity, for how much soever it may
seem to savor of Pride, and so indeed it does, yet this is a false Pride; and
the Opinion of ones self at the same time, that it is more than it ought to be,
is yet degenerate, and of a Bastard breed, mingled with meanness, and a little
Soul; and therefore, wanting Solidity, for this self-conceit, and being
conscious of some notable Defect, it exposes the Person yet more by this
peevish and suspicious temper. For he that looks upon himself under the
Contempt of another, is in some sense less than he; at least he debases
himself, and becomes so either in Reality, or in Opinion, by these distrusts,
and nicenesses in point of Respect. Nemo non eo, a quo se contemptum judicat,
minor est.
If therefore we would express a just and generous Sense of our own Worth, we
should put any other interpretation rather than this, upon the doubtful
passages of Conversation. Imagine them to proceed from Folly, or Indiscretion,
an unthinking Gayety, some defect in the Person, or what he did not observe, or
could not help; if it come from our Friends, let us call it too great freedom,
and the privilege they take upon intimacy with us. If from those under our own
Government, we should not suppose they knew they did amiss; or ever were so
stupid and foolhardy, to provoke a Person, who they know has power to
chastise and make them smart severely for their Insolence. If it proceed from
mean and insignificant Fellows, we can neither receive any Dignity, nor suffer
any Indignity from such hands. Our Honor is not at their disposal, and
therefore we should not descend so low, as to be angry, whenever they please to
provoke us. Agathocles and Antigonus made a jest of those that affronted them,
and scorned to punish them, when they had them at their mercy. Caesar had a
peculiar Excellence this way: Moses, and David, and the other celebrated
Patterns of Virtue in Holy Writ have done so too. Magnam fortunam magnus animus
decet.
A great Post should have a great Soul to fill it. The noblest Conquest is to
subdue our selves, and to leave it in the power of no other Person to disorder
us. Flying into Passion is a shrewd symptom of Guilt; and a Consciousness, that
we deserve all the indignities put upon us. He cannot be a truly great Man, who
bends under another Man's ill treatment; a Conquest there must be on some side;
for if we do not subdue our Anger, it will subdue us; and therefore the only
way to preserve our Liberty, and our Honor, is to get above this rebellious
Passion and Injurias and offensiones supreme despicere.
look down upon the Tempests gathering below with scorn and Contempt.

Augustus never to let his anger loose, till he had first repeated the Letters
of the Alphabet; and some Christians have given the same counsel in effect, but
better in the diversion they prescribe when they direct us to say over the
Lord's Prayer, before we give any vent to the boiling passion: All we say and
do in heat, should be shrewdly suspected and carefully watched, and therefore
it is but fit we should make a halt Nihil tibi liceat dum irasceris; Quare?
Quia vis omnia lice^^.
. Allow your self in nothing when you are angry, because there is nothing so
ill, which you would not at such a time be content to allow your self. We ought
to be afraid and extremely jealous of our selves, for while our minds are in
disorder, it is impossible we should do any thing properly and as we ought.
Reason at such a time is entangled in the passions, and can do us no more
service than wings do a Bird whose feet are fast in the Lime-twigs: we may
flutter and struggle, but shall very hardly be able to extricate our selves by
all the efforts we can make; and therefore we should never trust our selves,
but take sanctuary in the company of some friend, and there mellow and compose
our passions by his calm advice and wise conversation. 4. Another good
expedient, when we feel the storm gathering, will be to divert and disperse it,
by somewhat that is agreeable and entertaining; and in this case no diversion
is better than Music to smooth and sweeten the passions, and by a kind of
Sympathetick power to make perfect harmony and true concord in the Soul.

are the more softly they move, and are freer from Precipitation, as they
approach nearer to purity and perfection.



It is much for the advantage both of our selves and of those with whom we
converse, to be thus angry upon some occasions, provided always we keep within
the bounds of moderation and prudent conduct; and a little vehemence does well
to awaken people into a better sense. There are a sort of people who value
themselves upon restraining such resentments, and keeping in their passion as
they call it; which though very convenient when we have our superiors to
engage with, or such as we have reason to be very tender of giving any offense
to, yet is no good rule for our general behavior: They who boast of it, make
indeed large pretensions to temper and government of their passions, and are
mighty Philosophers in their own eyes and esteem; but yet they frequently burn
and fret inwardly, and gain a Conquest upon themselves, which costs them more
than the thing is worth: It were much better to give it vent, and let their
resentments flame out a little now and then, than that they should glow and
torment them within. For this covering of our anger incorporates and makes it
of a piece with our Souls, and the hasty Man is much rather to be commended
when soon pacified again, than the fretful and morose, the sullen and the
silent. If this weapon must wound somewhere, it were much more advisable to
draw it upon others, and give them a slight hurt, than that the Point should be
turned back upon our selves and stab us to the heart. Omnia vitia in aperto
leviora sunt, and tunc perniciosistima, cum simulata sanitate subsidunt.
All vices are less dangerous when the effects of them are visible and
apparent, but never so destructive as then, when they lurk secretly and impose
upon us by an artificial and counterfeit virtue. Thus a sore skinned over and
rankling underneath threatens ill consequences, and wounds are laid open to
prevent a Mortification.



The several Remedies prescribed here, though particularly insisted upon with
regard to Anger only, will yet be very applicable and useful in the correcting
of the following Passions.

CHAP. XXXII. Remedies against Hatred.
TO defend our selves effectually from the insults of this Passion, we shall do
well to bear constantly in mind that old rule of Epictetus, (and a most
excellent and useful observation it is) That every thing has two handles, and
that every Man has it in his choice, whether of them be will lay hold of it
by; Take it by one and it will seem heavy and grievous, but by the other it
will be light and easy to us. Let us rather be sure to take every thing by the
better handle, and look upon it in the most advantageous light. That is, put
the best and most favorable interpretation upon all that happens to us, and so
shall we find by experience, that what we hate and find fault with has a great
deal to soften and recommend it to our acceptance. For Providence has in
infinite wisdom so ordered the matter, that there is not any one accident
possible to us in this World, which a dextrous and skillful Man may not turn to
some account. And even in that which gives us greatest offense, there is more
subject for lamentation and complaint than there can be for hatred and just
Aversion. He who does an ill or unbecoming thing to us, has done the first
wrong, and suffered the greatest damage in it himself: For he has lost the use
of his Reason and betrayed his own virtue, which are injuries so substantial
that nothing we can suffer at second hand can be comparable to them. Let us
therefore take this accident in another prospect, and view it there; let us
give a fresh turn to our Passion, and change Hatred into Piety; let us take
pains to make the persons who have tempted us to hate them worthy of our love
and esteem. Thus Lycurgus is said to have dealt with a Man that put out his
eye; instead of prosecuting so sensible an injury, he took another course of
punishing him, which was by his severe remonstrances and good instructions to
render him a virtuous, modest, and peaceable Person ever after.

CHAP. XXXIII. Remedies against Envy.
IN opposition to this fretful and tormenting Passion, let us consider and
weigh nicely the nature of the thing we set so high a value upon, and grudge
another the fruition of. We are apt to envy our more prosperous Neighbors,
their Riches and Honors, their Preferments and the favor of Great Men: But
all this is reasoning without Book, and want of attending to the condition of
the purchase; we are not sensible how dear these things have cost their owners.
Were this rightly understood, it is highly probable if they were offered to us
upon the same terms, we should think it our wisdom to decline striking the
bargain. Flattery and Attendance, Anxiety and Care, Sufferings and Injuries,
Affronts and Repulses, loss of Liberty, and ungenerous compliances with the
Passions and Pleasures of those we make our court to; Violations of Justice and
contradiction to our own Consciences, these are usually the price such
advantages come at: Thus much however is most certain, that there is nothing in
this World worth the having which can be had for nothing. To hope for Wealth
and Honor, a Plentiful Estate, or a gainful Office upon other Terms than they
usually go at, is to desire that we may be made an exception to the rest of
Mankind; to repeal an Universal Law; or at least to break and pervert a general
Custom received and established all the World over: It is taking the Commodity
and keeping our Money too. Why should you then who set up for the Character of
Honor and Virtue be discontented, because you are not possessed of those
advantages which are never to be acquired but by ignominious and reproachful
methods, and must be bought at the expense of Modesty and Decency? If this be
the case, these splendid appearances call rather for your Pity than your Envy:
Either the Object of your Passion is a real Good, or it is not; if it be a
fantastical and imaginary good only, it is beneath this resentment, nay it is
inconsistent with it. For no Man is envious upon a supposition of a treacherous
and deceitful outside, but upon an implication of substantial and intrinsic
worth: But if it have this, and be a feal and solid good, then ought it to be
matter of Joy and Pleasure. For the Laws of Humanity, and those of Christianity
much more oblige us to desire, and take delight in one another's Happiness; and
the exercise of this Virtue with regard to other peoples satisfaction and good
Fortune would be a very considerable addition to our own.

CHAP. XXXIV. Remedies against Revenge.


Ultio doloris confessio est; non est magnus animus, quem incurvat Injuria.
Ingens animus and verus aestimator sui non vindicat injuriam, quia non sentit.
He that is impatient for satisfaction, acknowledges himself in pain; that Soul
cannot be truly great, which bends beneath an Injury: A generous Spirit, and
one that truly values himself, never revenges a wrong, because he is too big to
feel the smart of it.

Caesar was remarkable for both these good Qualities: No Victory is so
desirable, none so triumphant, as that which makes your Enemy buckle under you
by kindness undeserved: That which lays him with his mouth in the Dust, and
strikes him dumb at his own Baseness, and so shames his Spite into Friendship:
For what can melt him, if this will not? What can deserve Laurels so justly, as
the being thus invincible, and not suffering any Aggravations an Injury is
capable of, to stop our hands, or get the better of Virtue and Reason? This
indeed is a Resolution we should settle to our selves, as considering, that the
more grievous the Crime, and the bitterer and more implacable the Spite, the
more fit it is for us to pardon it: And the better we could justify taking a
severe Revenge, the more it makes for our Honor and Commendation, to take none
at all.

Jupiter, they tell you, has a right to cast such Thunderbolts, as are
favorable to Mankind, and portend good Events, by virtue of his own Despotick
Authority: But when any Thunder is to be discharged upon wicked Men, and those
Bolts are let fly, which carry Devastation and Ruin, and any sort of
mischievous Effects; This he has no right to do of his own head, nor without
the advice and assistance of twelve Gods met in Counsel. This was a very
significant Thought, and showed the importance of the Occasion; That even the
Supreme of all the Heavenly Powers, who had unlimited Commission to do good to
all the World of his own head, should yet have it restrained, and his hands
tied up from hurting; so much as one single Person, till the matter and merits
of the Cause had been solemnly debated. But the Reason couched at the bottom,
deserves our attention: Kindness and Beneficence there can be no danger in, no
mistakes, no excesses of this kind are pernicious; But when Revenge and
Punishment come under Deliberation, this is so nice a point, that even the
wisdom of Jupiter himself was not secure from all possibility of Error; and
therefore an assembly of dis-interested Persons was requisite to direct and
moderate his Anger.



CHAP. XXXV. Remedies against Jealousy.
of ones own Mind; and an Argument, that we are conscious of our own want of
merit. When the Emperor Aurelius was asked by his Wife Faustina, what he would
do, if his Enemy Cassius should win the Field, his answer was, I do not serve
the Gods so ill, that they should have such an Affliction in reserve for me. So
they that partake of another's Affection, and are tempted to any suspicion of
losing it, will do well to silence such uneasy Suggestions, by telling
themselves, The Regard I have for him is so sincere, that I dare be confident
he will not rob me of a treasure I value so highly. An assurance of our own
faithfulness, and deserving better usage, is the best pledge of our Friend's
kindness and fidelity to us in return.



Lucullus, Caesar, Pompey, Cato, Augustus, Antony, and a great many besides.
But you will say, the World has discovered your shame, and it is grown common
talk. And pray, who is there, that the World does not talk of to their
prejudice, more or less, whether they have any ground for such Discourse or no?
How many Persons of Honor and Virtue have you your self heard branded with the
infamous Title? If you make a bustle, and blaze abroad your Disgrace, the
Ladies will only have the advantage of the better Jest. And the commonness of
this Affliction one would think, should long ago have worn out all the
uneasiness of it. But however, put the worst of the Case, that you are in
reality the thing you suspect; yet how is this a just Calamity? it is no
reflection upon your Virtue, or your Wisdom; the World is most unreasonable and
absurd in loading the innocent Person with Infamy, and rendering that
ridiculous, which is in no degree a Fault. But if they will proceed by wrong
measures, your own breast should follow those that are right and equitable.
Nay, even in respect of others, there is some remedy left still: For it is in
your own power to render your Virtue so illustrious, that it shall stifle and
swallow up this Misfortune; and make your name never mentioned, among Wise and
Good Men at least, with one whit the less Esteem. They will cover your Infamy
by their just Commendations, and curse the wicked occasion of it; who is so
much the more profligate, and abandoned, despicable and detestable, for using a
Good Man ill.

Medium between two very vicious and foolish Extremes. The one, that silly
tormenting of themselves, which devours their Spirits, destroys all their
satisfaction, and flies out into transports of Fury and Rage. The other, that
tame Negligence practiced in the Indies, and some other Eastern Countries;
where Wives use their utmost endeavors to advance the honor of their Husbands
(which is there thought to consist in the number of Wives and Mistresses) or
their satisfaction, or the increase of Posterity, by turning Bawds and
Procurers. This is a piece of service, which I think they might very well be
excused. But when all is done, the only cure for this Evil on both sides, is
such an affectionate and discreet, such a modest and reserved Carriage, as
shall minister no manner of occasion for calling the fidelity of either Party
into question.

CHAP. XXXVI. Temperance, the fourth Cardinal Virtue.
Of Temperance in General.
in all manner of things whatsoever. In this comprehensive Interpretation, it
does not denote any one Virtue in particular, but the Complex of them all in
common; and is that quality, which seasons and gives a relish to good actions
of every sort. In this Latitude we are under perpetual obligations to it, but
chiefly so, in those matters, that admit of Controversy; and engage us in
Differences and Disputes. For the due observance of it thus understood, there
needs but this single Direction, of laying aside all personal and self-ended
Considerations, and make it our entire business to stick close to our Duty. For
all lawful and commendable Affections are temperate; Hatred, and Anger, and
Cruelty, are excesses much beyond the limits of Justice and Duty; and are only
second-hand Remedies, necessary to be used upon them, who refuse to be kept to
their Duty by the power of Reason, and the softer arts of Persuasion.



Voluptatibus imperat, alias odit and abigit, alias dispensat, and ad sanum
modum redigit; nec unquam ad illas propter illas venit; scit optimum esse modum
cupitorum, non quantum velis, sed quantam debeas.
Pleasures are her Province and proper Dominion; over these she presides, and
exercises her Coercive power. Some she detests and utterly discards, others she
corrects and distributes in their just proportions. She never chooses any
merely for their own sakes, and the best measure of gratifying our Appetites
she declares to be, the taking not so much of any of these Objects, as we have
an inclination to, but so much only as is fit for us. This is the authority and
superintendance of Reason over those eager and violent Affections, which carry
our Wills toward Pleasures and sensual Delights. The curb of our Soul, the
instrument to scumm off those Ebullitions, which by the Heat and Intemperance
of the Blood are apt to boil over; that so the Mind may be preserved uniform,
and in consistence with Reason: And not debase it self, by submitting, and
accommodating its measures to sensible Objects, but preserve its rightful
Superiority; and force them to serve and suit themselves to the Dictates of the
Mind. By this we wean our Souls from the childish delights of the World, and
qualify them for a more substantial and generous sustenance. In short, it is a
Rule, that squares all things by the proportions of Nature, Necessity,
Simplicity, Ease, Health, and Strength, and Hardiness: For these are things
that commonly go together, and they are the measures and bounds which Wisdom
sets out. As on the other hand, Art, and Luxury, Superfluity, Variety,
Multiplicity, Difficulty, Sickness, a weak and tender Constitution, bear one
another company, and are the usual attendants of Intemperance and Folly.
Simplici cura constant necessaria, in delicijs laboratur. Ad parata nati sumus:
nos omnia nobis difficilia faciliam fastidio facimus.
The Necessaries of Life come cheap and easy, all the Labor and Toil is about
the Delights and Entertainments of it. Nature intended we should take up with
such things as she has made ready at hand; and designed to free us from
trouble; but we have created it to our selves, and made Life one perpetual
difficulty, by nauseating and disdaining every thing that is easy.

CHAP. XXXVII. Of Prosperity, and Advice thereupon.




such ill use of. To all which we may add the secret and undiscernable Reasons
of his Dispensations, or, to express the thing in a more secular Phrase, that
Inconstancy of Fortune, which from a fond Mother changes her humor
unaccountably to all the Severities of a cruel and cursed Stepmother.

Non est tuum fortuna quod fecit tuum. Qui tutam vitam agere volet ista viscata
beneficia devitet, nil dignum putare quod speres. Quid dignum habet Fortuua,
quod concupiscas?
What Fortune has made yours, is none of yours. He that will live safe and
easy, must decline those treacherous Baits, those Limed twigs of Fortune. For
what has she in her disposal, worth engaging our desires, or fixing our Heart
and Hopes upon?

CHAP. XXXVIII. Of Pleasure, and Directions concerning it.
Epicuraeans in particular,) who resolved the chief Happiness of Man into
Pleasure, and paid it greater Honor than we think fit to do, took it in
another Signification, and extended the thing no farther than a privation of
Grief or Uneasiness, such as they thought sit to express by Indolence.
According to their notion, humane Nature was capable of rising no higher, than
the not being uneasy. This is a sort of middle State, a Neutrality between the
first and vulgar acceptance of the Word, and Pain: And bears the same
Proportion, with regard to this Life, which some Divines have thought Abraham's
Bosom does to the next; A Condition between the exquisite Happiness of Heaven,
and the extreme Torments of Hell. It Is a sweet and peaceable sedateness of Body
and Mind; an uniform, constant, and fixed Pleasure; which carries some
resemblance to that Euthymia, or tranquillity of Soul, which other Philosophers
esteemed our chief Good: Whereas the other is an active and sensible Pleasure,
full of vigorous and sprightly motion. At this rate, there would be three
distinct Conditions, of which Mankind are capable; two in extremes, Pleasure
and Pain; which are neither stable nor durable, but both of them sickly, and in
excess; the Mean between them firm, and sound, healthful and permanent; to
which the Epicuraeans attributed the name of Pleasure, (and such indeed it is,
when compared with Pain) and placed the supreme happiness of our Nature in it.
This unhappy Name brought that general scandal upon their Sect, which the
opposite Parties of Philosophers insult over with so much Pomp and Triumph. For
after all, (as Seneca with great Ingenuity confesses,) there was no hurt but in
the Name; no offense, but what was merely Titular; for to those who will be at
the pains of a nice Examination into their Lives and Manners, it will appear,
that none ever advanced Doctrines of stricter Sobriety, none were greater
Enemies to Vice and all manner of Debauchery, none more distant from those
Reproaches to a rational Soul, than the Men of this Profession. Nor indeed was
it without a fair appearance of Reason, that they gave this name of Pleasure to
that so much exalted Indolence of theirs. For this Titillation of the Sense
comes at last to this, and seems to make it the ultimate end and aim of all the
more feeling satisfactions we find in it; as for instance, the delight we find
in Meats and Drinks, pretends to nothing more, than to deliver us from that
torture and those eager cravings, which Hunger and Thirst had brought upon us;
and, by satifying the Appetite, to place us in a Condition of Ease and Repose,
till the same Wants return again upon us.



of its necessity, in that all the actions, by which Life is sustained, are
seasoned with, and recommended by it. And yet all Philosophy has allowed, that
the way to live well, is to follow the Dictates of Nature. God placed Man,
during the state of Innocence, in a place and condition richly, furnished with
vast variety of Delights: And the very name given by Moses to Paradise, is in
the Hebrew Language Pleasure: And not only so, but, Eden.
if we raise our Eyes and Thoughts above this World to the highest perfection,
which Religion bids us aspire after. What are the felicities of the Saints
above, but a lasting, and uninterrupted Series of Pleasure? They shall be
filled with the Pleasures of thy House, and thou shall give them Drink out of
thy Pleasures, as out of the River, says the Psalmist, when he would describe
the Satisfactions of the holiest Men. These, I confess, do not mean those gross
and carnal Satisfactions, which this Term is abusively made to denote; but it
ought not by any means to be confined within that compass, as if nothing that
is truly generous and great could be intended by it. These things ought to be
included, when we speak in vindication of Pleasure; and the other have no
reason to be disdained, when regulated by Equity and Reason. And, accordingly
we find, that the most renowned Philosophers, and acknowledged patterns of
Virtue, such as Zeno, Cato, Scipio, Epaminondas, Plato, and the Immortal
Socrates himself, did not think it below them to taste the Comforts and
Diversions of Life; nay, descended so far, as even to Discourse, and write
Tracts of those, which some now by an affected nicety, pretend to accuse, (as
you have heard,) and would in their mighty, but mistaken zeal for Virtue, fain
banish out of the World, under the odious Character of Pleasures of Sense.

esteems her own solitary Enjoyments, Wealth enough, without concerning her
self what other People think of her; and enjoys her self more in Retirement,
than in the eye of the World. Those again, that are so very easy, as to be
always at our command, grow flat, and nauseous, and lose all their relish,
except there be now and then a little Uneasieness or Obstruction, to set an
edge upon our Appetite. There are likewise spiritual, and corporeal Pleasures:
The ground of which Distinction is not any real Separation capable of being
made between them; for Pleasure of every kind affects the whole Man; and
extends to every part of the Composition; and one part has not any one
resentment peculiar to it self, which the other does not likewise share in; nor
can have while this intimate Union of Soul and Body continues the present Life
to us. But that which is the true foundation of this Distinction, is, that
there are some Sentiments, which affect the Mind, more than they do the Body,
and may therefore very fitly be called manly Pleasures; as being more proper to
us, better suited to our Faculties and powers of Perception, than they are to
those of Beasts; And, as they are more worthy in respect of the Faculties they
are commensurate to, so are they likewise more steady and durable. Such, for
instance, are those Satisfactions, which enter at our Eyes, and Ears; for these
two Senses are the Doors of the Soul, and the Objects they receive, only pass
through there, in their way to the Soul; which entertains, feeds upon, and
digests them, and finds long Refreshments and Delights from them. But the Body
tastes but a very little part of these Satisfactions: Others again, the Body
ingrosses almost wholly to it self; such as those of the Touch, and the Taste;
which are more material, and of a courser Composition: Such as Brutes keep us
Company in. And such Pleasures are received, performed, and finished, by the
Body, and its Organs. The Mind has no other advantage in them, than by
Reflection only; and what must needs belong to it, while it continues an
assistant and Companion to the Body. And these are short, and transient, the
crackling of Thorns, the flash of a Meteor; born, and bred up, and dead in a
moment.

first, we ought to put a very great difference between natural, and unnatural
Pleasures: By the unnatural, I do not understand those only, which are contrary
to Nature, and such usages as the Laws have established and approved; but even
those which are the most natural of all others, are comprehended under this
Title, in case they degenerate, and run out into Superfluity and great
Excesses. For these things are not within the Verge of Nature, for She concerns
her self no farther, than merely to supply our Necessities and real Wants,
which (however) we have leave to enlarge a little, and that we may not complain
of scanty measure, are free to consult Convenience and common Decency. For
Example, it is a natural Pleasure, to be sheltered by a good tight House, and
to have our Nakedness covered with good warm Clothes; for these secure our
Persons from Wind and Weather, and bitter pinching Blasts; and are some defense
against the attempts of wicked Villains. But now, that those Clothes should be
of Tissue or Embroidery, or that House built of Jasper and Porphyry; this there
is no occasion for, and the satisfaction which would result from their being
such, is not any natural Pleasure. Again, they may be unnatural, if they do not
come to us in the way, and method of Nature; as, if they are sought with
Anxiety and Industry, procured by Artifice, prepared by Medicines, or any other
Stratagems of humane device and invention, to create, to heighten, to force,
either the Appetite, or the Pleasure by which it is gratified. So they are
likewise, when formed and beaten out originally in the Mind, by the strength of
imagination, or the violence of Passion, and so are afterward communicated to
the Body; which is just inverting the order of Nature: For the usual Course is,
that Pleasure should begin in the Body, and from thence pass on to the Mind.
And indeed, as that Laughter, which is forced by Tickling, is not natural nor
pleasant, but rather a convulsion and violence upon Nature; so that Pleasure,
which is courted, and industriously contrived, kindled up first in the Soul,
and from thence descending to the Body, is not a regular and natural Pleasure.

even being bidden by Nature, are to be looked upon as Busybodies and
Smell-feasts, and either denied entrance, or thrust out of Doors again. But
neither may we think our selves at liberty, to entertain the true Guests as we
please, for even these must be treated by Rule, and with Moderation. And thus
you have the Duty and Business of Temperance in general laid before you at
once; The whole of which may be reduced to these two good Offices; excluding
all unnatural Pleasures, and regulating those that are natural.

First, That whatever we indulge our selves in, be no way Offensive, or
Scandalous, Injurious or Prejudicial to any other Person. For where any of
these is the plain and natural Consequence of the thing, we must forbid our
selves the fruition of it, and seek out some more innocent and unexceptionable
Entertainments. Secondly, That this Liberty be not to a Man's own Prejudice, by
impairing his Health, casting a Blemish upon his Reputation, devouring his
Time, encroaching upon his Duty, or being disagreeable and unbecoming his
Office and Character in the World. Thirdly, That even those, which are clear of
all the former Inconveniences, be taken in due measure and proportion; and our
Affections moderated with regard to them. As we are not to act against the
grain in all we do, so neither must we lay any of those things which are most
with it, too close to our Hearts; we should neither court our Pleasures, nor
run away from them; neither be averse to them, nor doatingly fond of them: But
take their Sweets, as we do that of Honey; a drop or two upon the Tip of our
Finger, not lay it in by whole handfulls; not engage too deep in them, I mean,
nor make them our Business, and the main design of Life; much less intoxicate
and lose our selves in them. For these are additional Comforts, Recreations and
Diversions only, to render our Continuance here easy, and give us a better
relish of Life; to refresh and recruit our Spirits, and sustain them under the
Fatigues of a troublesome World: As Sleep is intended to make us forget our
cares a while, and inspire us with new vigor; that we may return to our work
again, and be more sprightly and fresh in Business. In a word, they are made to
use, and not to live upon. But especially, we ought to be very vigilant, and
guard our selves strictly, against their deceitful Insinuations: For many of
them are bought at too dear a rate, and do us more hurt, than all their
satisfactions can ever compensate. They leave a Sting behind, and create
lasting Remorse, and great Disquiets of Heart: And this is done after a very
subtle and treacherous manner. They put themselves forward, and amuse and cheat
us by some present Gratifications, but hide the Hook that lies under this Bait.
They put on the Face of Friends to cover their murderous Intentions; caress and
embrace us with a seeming tender Affection, but hug us so close with a design
to strangle us. Thus the Pleasures of Intemperance go before the Pains and sick
Qualms of it; and thus do the generality of those Delights, which heat of Youth
is so prone to, and plunges it self so unwarily in. Then we venture in over
head and ears, but when we are drowned in them, the Infirmities of Old Age
succeed; and then they forsake us quite, and leave a miserable Spectacle behind
them, as the tide of Ebb does its Nuisances and Carcasses upon the Shore. The
delicious Morsels, which were swallowed so greedily, turn to Gall and Choler
upon our oppressed Stomachs, and end in Repentance, and bitter Reflections. And
the Dregs of our foul and polluted Enjoyments stick fast to our Souls, and, by
their poisonous corroding quality, infect and corrupt our Dispositions, and
settle into ill habits, and inveterate Diseases.


Hannibal, whose Courage was more broken by the Luxuries of Capita, than by the
rugged Passes of the Alps, or all the Efforts of the Roman Armies? This gave
occasion for the Lacedaemonians, who denounced open War against all manner of
Effeminacy, to be called Men; and the Athenians, who were soft, and delicate in
their way of Living, to be reproached with the Nickname of Women. When Xerxes
undertook to punish the City of Babylon for a Revolt they had made, and to
secure himself against any danger that might come from that Quarter for the
future: The Method he took, was to bring all the Exercise of Arms, and other
laborious and fatiguing Practices into Disuse; and to let loose all manner of
Pleasures and sensual Delights among them, with free Liberty for every Man to
revel in these without Check or Control.

Secondly, It banishes all the bravest and most Heroic Virtues from the Mind,
where it has taken possession; for these are serious and severe, considerate
and hardy, and cannot be endured by a Master of so contrary a Temper; nor
indeed were it possible for them to live under so effeminate and disssolute, so
careless and unthinking a Government.

Thirdly, It quickly degenerates, and sinks into its contrary Sentiment, which
is Pain and Uneasiness, Dislike and Remorse. As the Freshes run apace to the
Sea, and lose the sweetness of their native Rivers, in Tides of Salt Water.
Thus the honey of Pleasure in the Mouth, upbraids the Eater, and turns to the
Gall of Pain upon the Stomach. In praecipiti est, ad dolorem vergit, in
contrarium abit, nisi modum teneat: Extrema gaudli luctus occupat.
All exquisite Pleasure stands upon a ticklish point, and all its generous
Taste is upon the turn; sowrs, and changes, and is swallowed up in Pain; the
very moment it rises to excessive Joy, Grief dwells upon the confines, and one
step beyond its own bounds, brings you into this troublesome Neighbors ground.

Lastly, It is the Seminary of all manner of Mischief, and final Ruin. This is
the Lure to draw us in, and when we are once in, we stick at nothing: This is
the conveyer of secret Intelligences, the betrayer of Councils and Trusts, the
contriver of Treasons, and underhand Designs against the Peace and Safety of
Mankind. In short, the love of Pleasure ruins private Persons by Prodigality
and Injustice, dishonours and stains whole Families by Debauchery, and
shameless Lewdness: Propagates Diseases, and entails Beggary upon Children yet
unborn; corrupts public Justice; murder's Kings, overturns Governments, and
scatters Confusion and Misery over the face of the whole Earth. Thus much may
be most justly said of Pleasure in general, which being now sufficiently
enlarged upon, we will proceed to consider the several kinds of it in
particular.

CHAP. XXXIX. Of Eating and Drinking, Abstinence and Sobriety.
Simplex ex simplici causa valetudo; multos morbos, supplicia Luxuriae, multa
fercula fecerunt.
Health is a plain and simple thing, and requires a cause of the same kind to
produce it: Distempers are many and various, and nothing contributes more to
them, than variety of Dishes, and high Feeding. When Men complain of their Head
for so many troublesome Defluxions, and those Humors which fall upon the
Vitals, and lays the foundations of the most dangerous Diseases, they should do
well to remember, how justly the Brain might return upon them, that old saying,
Desine fundere, and ego desinam fluere.
Do you give over pouring in, and I will give over pouring out. While we are
perpetually filling the Vessel, how is it possible it should not overflow? But
alas! these Considerations are now grown quite out of fashion. Excess and Pomp,
Variety and nice Cookery, are come into Reputation. We have learnt to esteem
our Meals, and to measure our welcome, by the number of Dishes, the different
sorts of Meats, the height of the Sawces, and the superfluity of the
Entertainment. Nay, so prodigious is our Vanity, that after we have set more
before our Friends, than can be wholesome for them to taste of, or fit for us
to spend, we make solemn Excuses for our want of Provision, and are sorry we
have nothing better to receive them with.

Qualques Chooses, and high Dressing are, every one might easily be convinced by
his own Experience. Gluttony and Drunkenness are gross and paltry Vices; they
discover themselves, and sufficiently publish their own Shame in the
Countenances and Gestures of the Persons addicted to them. The best and least
forbidding whereof is a dozed, and heavy look; and indeed, the best Quality
such Men can have, is to be stupid and dull too. For certain it is, no Man yet,
who is a slave to his Belly, was ever capable of doing any glorious or
considerable Action. And, generally speaking, we find them trifling and
insignificant Fellows, if not down right Beasts and Sots. But Drunkenness
especially has these cursed Effects, and pushes Men upon the basest, the most
extravagant, and unaccountable actions in the World. Of which Alexander is a
miserable Instance, though otherwise a wonderful Prince; who in heat of Wine
killed his old dear Friend Clytus, and when he came to be sober; had like to
have killed himself in Revenge. In short, what can be said bad enough of a Vice
that robs the Mind of Understanding, and the Body of Sense; makes grown People
Children again, and Men of Wit mere Naturals, and driveling Fools?

Socrates owed the vigorous and confirmed Health he enjoyed purely to
Abstemiousness. Masinissa, who was a Pattern of it to all Kings of after Ages,
begot Children at Fourscore and Six years Old, and won a Battle of the
Carthaginians at Ninety Two. Whereas Alexander, who had naturally one of the
best and strongest Constitutions of any Man that ever lived, killed himself
with Drinking in the very Flower of his Age. Several Persons (as Atticus
particularly) who have been given over by Physicians, of the Gout, and other
Distempers, looked upon to be incurable, have been perfectly recovered by
Abstinence, and a sparing regular Diet. And what can we desire more for the
Body, than a long, and a healthful Life? What can recommend any Virtue to Men
fond of the World, if this will not? But then it is of equal advantage to the
Soul too. For by this means our Heads are kept clear and unclouded, our
Faculties awake and sprightly, we are capable of thinking, and fit to be
advised. All the very great Men in Story have been particularly eminent for
their Sobriety; not only Philosophers, and such as made pretensions to a strict
and severer Virtue, but all that have been Excellent, and whose Names live upon
Record, for any sort of Greatness whatsoever. Such were Cyrus, and Caesar, the
Emperor Julian, and Mahomet. Such was Epicurus too, who, though a professed
admirer of Pleasure, and run down as a Scandal to Philosophy for espousing it,
was yet famous for these abstemious Virtues, above any of his Accusers. The
Curij and Fabricij are more celebrated in the Roman History for their frugality
and simplicity of Diet, than for the greatest and most glorious Conquests they
ever won. And though the Lacedaemonians wanted neither Courage, nor Success,
nor a Reputation equal to both, yet the Character they valued themselves upon,
and pretended most to, was that of strict Discipline, Frugality and Sobriety.

Athenians.; who are said never to have asked a Peace, but in Mourning Weeds,
for their Friends and Relations slain in Battle; when all their Men of Note
were lost, and they no longer in a condition to defend themselves. This is what
our English Proverb calls Sera in sundo parsimonia.
Shutting the Stable-door when the Steed is stolen; and turning good Husbands,
when we have brought our Noble to Ninepence.

well to accustom our Palates to, if we would secure our Ease and Health: For
they are easy and every where to be had; and so our desires are not like to be
disappointed when we want, and they are also lightest of digestion and most
agreeable to Nature when we have them.

CHAP. XL. Of Luxury and Excess in Apparel, and their contrary Virtues,
Frugality and Modesty.
Nidus Luxuriae.
These are the great occasion of Quarrels and Disputes; for the distinction of
property seems to have begun in this point: When things were most in common,
every Man had a peculiar title to the Cloths he wore, which is intimated by the
French Language in particular, expressing all manner of Rapine, by Stripping,
Derober; and the English Word Robbing, is very probably an Allusion to the same
thing.

than this striving to recommend ones self, and gain respect by such despicable
means as Dress and Rich Cloths: None will insist, none depend upon these
Ornaments but they who have no other. How wretched a thing is it to confider
the Care and Cost laid out upon Luxury and Show, and the general neglect of
those shining Habits of the Mind; that Virtue, that Bravery which should enable
us to make a beautiful Appearance, and set us off in real and solid
Excellences? The Lacedaemonians prohibited any but common Women to wear gay and
sumptuous Cloths; this was looked upon as the mark to distinguish such infamous
people by; but the Ladies of Reputation desired to be known by their severe
Honor a^^ shining Virtues.

Nec affectatae sordes, nec exquisitae munditiae.
between affected Slovenliness and effeminate Nicety. Caligula made himself
ridiculous by the softness and Fantasticalness of his Habit; and Augustus was
as much admired and commended for the Modesty and Gravity of his.

CHAP. XLI. Of Temperance with respect to Carnal Pleasure; which is, Chastity,
or Continency.
because here the propensions to Vice seem to be strongest, and the
Solicitations to it more frequent and importunate than in any other instance
whatsoever.

August in says,) It is not the Single State that we commend in Virgins, but
their Abandoning the World, and Consecrating their Souls and Bodies entirely to
God: Witness the Vestals of Old, and the Five Foolish Virgins in the Parable,
whose Celibacy stood them in no stead at all. And here I observe by the way,
how Absurd a Vanity and Popular an Error that is, which in common speech calls
the Ladies who have no blemish upon their Reputation, and who either are Chaste
in the Single Life or Faithful in the Married one; Women of great Virtues and
great Honor. Honor! For what? Is Honor sunk so low, that the mere not doing
evil and not violating one's Duty in the most Scandalous instance must pretend
to that name? Why do we not by the same Reason style those Men of Honor who
are under the same Circumstances? Nay, there would indeed be more Reason for
this than the other, because the manner of the World puts more Opportunities of
offending in these respects, and exposes Men to stronger Temptations, than
Women are liable to. But in truth, Honor is so far from being a Recompense due
to the abstaining from evil, that it is not every sort of good, which when
punctually performed can lay claim to it; but (as was said before) those kinds
and degrees of good only which bring advantage to the World, and which, besides
their being beneficial, have cost great toil and trouble, and been achieved
with considerable difficulty and danger.

But besides; how few of these Continent persons arrive even at a common and
very practicable Virtue? How many of them do we find scandalously tainted with
other Vices, and making up for this self-denial by indulgences to some more
darling Humor or Passion? Particularly, how exceeding few are there who escape
the Temptations to Vanity and Presumption, and Spiritual Pride, and while they
take mavelous Content in their own perfections are very liberal in their
Censures and Condemnations of other People? Does not experience frequently
convince us, how very dear some Husbands pay for the Fidelity of their Wives;
who while they dispossess the Devil in one part of their Souls and preserve
their Honor entire, do yet erect a Throne for him, and let him reign
Triumphant in another? If then this Virtue beget insolence and Malice,
Censoriousness and Imperious Pride, it is like to turn at last but to very poor
account. And thus clogged will very ill deserve the name of Virtue, whatever it
might be allowed otherwise: Not that I am over scrupulous, or would stand with
the Sex for a Complement; and therefore, provided the flattering them with this
title of Honor, will contribute any thing to the making them more tender of
it, and encourage the Modesty and Decency becoming their Sex and Condition, I
shall be content to promote the discharge of their Duty at any rate, though it
be by straining a point to gratify an useful Vanity. But to return; It is
likewise observable, that Incontinency when simply and strictly considered,
like other faults which are what we call Corporeal, and tending to gratify the
Carnal inclinations of Humane nature, has no mighty Malignity in its own
single self; (it being only an excess of what is natural and not contrary to
Humane nature,) but then there is a train of vices so black and hideous
attending it, and some or more of them so inseparable from it, that the danger
of being entangled in those snares is infinite, and the consequence very fatal:
For this is one of those sins that never go alone, but is accompanied with
other Devils more and more wicked than it self; tainted with base and
villainous circumstances of persons and places, and times prohibited and
unpardonable; Intrigues carried on, and beastly satisfactions contrived by the
wickedest methods; Lies and Tricks, and all manner of Deceit; Subornation and
Forswearing, and Treachery; to all which we may add that which is by no means
inconsiderable; the loss of Time, the distraction of Thought, the interruption
of Business, and other unbecoming Follies, which draw very great and just
Scandals, and insupportable mischiefs after them.

pleasure too, in vanquishing these desires than in complying with them. And
all the transports of fruition are flat and dull, nauseous and insipid, in
comparison of those ravishing satisfactions which overflow in our Souls, when
we have gained a virtuous and noble Conquest over our selves. And this is the
general Sense of Sober Mankind; for there is no one Action in the Life of
Alexander or Scipio, in which their Historians so justly glory, as that of the
treatment they gave to their beautiful Captives, and the tenderness for their
Honor, which the Fortune of War was generally thought a privilege to violate.
This Continency and Conquest of themselves is more highly commended than all
their successes, and has more engaging Charms than the fairest of their
Prisoners could ever boast of. These I say, are Considerations pertinent and
proper enough, but it cannot be expected they should have a constant efficacy:
For this Vice abounds with Sophistry and cunning, and as it will not be
reasoned with sometimes, so at other times it will not be safe to go about it;
And therefore in cases of violent Assaults, the best course will be to betake
our selves to our heels and get loose from the Temptation. And it is very
observable, that the Holy Ghost which bids us in all ordinary cases Resist the
Devil, Jam. 4.7.
with a promise that he shall flee from us; yet when he mentions Youthful
Lusts, the advice is, that we would flee from them. 2 Timothy 11.22.
Debates as well as delays are dangerous here, the Cause must be referred to a
Judge under shrewd suspicions of Corruption; and therefore the safest Issue we
can make is to throw it out and never give it the hearing. Business,
Recreation, Company, any thing to divert this stream of our Thoughts and
Affections into another Channel: There can be no difficulty in the Choice; for
in such cases the worst Company a Man can possibly be in is to have none but
his own.

Theater; or the boasted Triumph of a Man of the Town. The Parties concerned in
these holy Engagements must have no Affections, nor cherish any desires beyond
the Chaste Embraces of each other; but utterly Abandon the very wishes of
stolen and unlawful delights, and be content to Drink the Waters of their own
Cistern; Prove. 5.15.
and the running Waters of their own Well; that is, pure and innocent,
unpolluted and untroubled delights of a faithful and lawful Marriage; as the
Wise Man expresses it, according to the usual significancy and extraordinary
decency of the Scripture Style. They that allow themselves in other liberties,
fall into the blackest and most complicated guilt imaginable; they violate and
Sin against their own Bodies, by making them Vessels and Instruments of
Uncleanness and Dishonor; they transgress against all manner of Laws which any
Man can be bound by. The Laws of Revealed Religion which forbid us to
prostitute our selves to silthiness and shame, and have commanded the strictest
purity of Conversation; the Law of Nature, which forbids the invading another
Man's property; and the tenderer the right is to him, the more detestable is
the injustice; the Law of Reason and Equity, which enjoins fidelity and
stedfastness to promises and mutual Contracts; the Laws of the Land, which have
Established Marriages as the only conveyance of Right, and giving a Title and
Propriety in such cases; the undoubted Rights of Families, by grafting in a
foreign growth upon the natural Stock, injuring the other Children, and
transferring the fruit of a Man's Industry, his Acquisition or his Inheritance,
to Strangers and Interlopers; the Laws of Justice and Charity, by starting
difficulties and Disputes among Friends and Relations; alienating the
Affections of Parents from their Children, and dissolving in great measure the
Duty of Children to their Parents, when there are these Jealousies among them;
and leaving a lasting and indelible stain upon the Unfortunate (though
innocent) Posterity of so suspected a Race.

As to the other parts of this Vice I add only in one word; that though
Adultery be the highest, yet it is not the only Violation of it; Men would
therefore do well to see how many Aggravations of this kind just now mentioned
concur in any of those allowances they make to themselves; to lay aside the
bias of their present Passion, and even in cases of simple Fornication, ask
their own Consciences how they should like to have the honor of a Sister or a
Daughter so injured by another person; and if they think but scurvily of such a
blemish in a near Relation, this at least makes the gratification an offense
against Reason and Equity, and natural Justice; nor is it in such circumstances
for a Man to allege that the partner of the crime is no other Man's, it is
enough to Condemn him that She is not his own.

CHAP. XLII. Of Ambition, and Temperance with regard to the Desire of Honor
and Fame.
Socrates, and Phocion, and Aristides, and Epaminondas, your Cato's and
Scipio's, who seem to have been Charmed by the bright Ideas of Virtue, without
any the least mixture of additional and mercenary Considerations; but then
there were a great many more who were manifestly moved by other Springs, such
as Themistocles, and Alexander, and Caesar, who courted Fame, and were led on
by the prospect of Greatness and Renown. And, though it be very true, that the
Gallant Exploits of such Persons when nicely examined, and considered with
regard to their proper Motives and the principles their Authors went upon, be
not, strictly speaking, the product of Virtue but of Ambition only; yet still
they must be acknowledged of general use and benefit, and the consequences of
them to the public in all respects the very same, as if the inducements had
been the most refined and perfect that Humane nature is in any Case capable of.
Now besides the force of this Consideration to commend it, the Philosophers
have allowed it to be excusable at least upon two occasions; the one is, when
the Actions it excites Men to are profitable and good, but not in a degree of
perfection eminent enough to pretend to the title of Virtuous; because they lie
in common to all Mankind, and the good or ill dispositions of our minds
incapacitate, no person from excelling in them. Of this kind particularly are
Arts and Sciences, Humane Inventions, Military Courage, and all manner of
Industry in general: The other is, when we find it necessary to preserve the
favor and good Opinion of some person upon whom our interest depends; for
though it be a standing rule in Philosophy, never to make the Opinion of others
the measure of our Behavior, yet there is this reserve, and allowed Exception,
that we may govern our selves upon such principles, to avoid the inconveniences
which either the want or Contempt of other Men's approbation may happen to
involve us in.

and propounding them to our minds, as the end and adequate Reward of them: So
shall we be established upon a true bottom, and proceed upon resolutions
sincere and immovable, such as will stand like so many Barriers about the Soul,
and guard it against the vain assaults of vanity and Ambition, and every mean
and selfish inducement.

Horizon, the less shadow it casts; and the more Sublime any Man's Virtue is,
the less affectation of Honor and Fame it is attended with. Nor is the
similitude improper, if we consider the nature of the thing: For Glory is in
earnest a very shadow, it follows those that fly from it, and runs away from
those that pursue it. We should always remember who sent us hither and what we
are doing. That Life is a Play where the parts are infinitely various, but no
Man chooses what he will act; he acquits himself well who studies the humor of
the part assigned him, and performs it agreeably to its Character, or (as
Epictetus says upon another occasion,) that we live in this World, as People
sit at an Entertainment, where every well mannered Man will be content to feed
upon that Dish which the Master of the Feast helps him to, without reaching
over the Table, and scrambling and snatching from other People's Plates. If
then a Preferment, or some Office of Honor and Trust be offered to us, if we
are capable of discharging it, let us accept it gladly, but modestly too; and
let us do the duty of it faithfully and sincerely; assuring our selves, that
God has set us our Post; and that by committing to us a public Trust, he
expects we should stand Centry, and be continually upon the Guard; that by our
vigilant care those who are committed to our charge may sleep securely. And for
all this Laborious Attendance, let us propose no other Recompense or
Commendation, than that only of our own Consciences; and the sweet
satisfactions of doing what becomes us; or if others do, (as without question,
they will) see and approve our Good works; let us desire, that the Testimony of
our having done well, may be graven in the Hearts of our Country, rather than
published by Statues, and pompous Frontispieces, and long flattering
Inscriptions. In a word, let this be a Principle with us; that the Fruit of
noble, generous Actions cannot possibly be lost; that the glory of having done
them is an ample Compensation: And that, when Virtue descends to go out of her
self, and look abroad for a Reward, she undervalues her own worth, and must
take up with things beneath her. To despise Greatness, and expose the vanity of
setting our Hearts upon it, is no such mighty matter. He that loves himself,
and can make any tolerable Judgment of Happiness, will be content with a
moderate and easy Fortune; the Stations that are at the top of Mankind, as
they excel in Dignity, so they exceed in Harms, and Difficulty, and Trouble;
and those that are at the very bottom, tormented with Poverty, and anxious
uncertainties of Subsistence, are equally to be declined. Here is too much
Business, or too much Suffering, for any Man of sound Wisdom to wish, none but
sickly Palates will be fond of either. Otanes, one of the seven, who had a
joint Right to the Principality of Persia, quitted his Pretensions to the rest
of the Competitors, provided that he and all his Family might live quietly
under that Government, and be free from all Subjection, except such as the old
standing Laws obliged them to. This was truly great, neither to affect to
command, nor bear to be commanded; and other instances of contemning Honor and
Greatness, we have several in Story; for even Dioclesian divested himself of
the Empire, and Celestine quitted the Papacy; so little have the Charms of
Sovereignty it self been sound upon Trial, and so far from impracticable is the
utmost pitch of the Virtue opposite to Ambition.

CHAP. XLIII. Of Temperance in Speaking.
He that offends not in word, the same is a perfect Man, (says St. James,)
and the Reason is evidently what he gives there at large, that the Tongue is
all in all: Good and Evil proceed from it; Life and Death depend upon it. Book
I. Chap. 23.
Which being formerly illustrated at large, all that lies upon me to do more at
present, is only to lay down some short and plain Directions, for our Conduct
and good management of so very important a Member.

Lacedaemonians, (of whom we have made so frequent mention, for their noble
improvements in Virtue and Valor,) were no less memorable for Silence, and
made this one part of their solemn Profession, to Educate their Youth in a
modest and reserved way of Conversation. So justly, so generally is this sort
of Restraint approved and commended; so necessary, so prudent, that Prayer of
the Psalmist, that God would enable him by his Grace, to set a Watch before his
mouth, and keep the door of his lips. An Emblem of this we have in the Mosaical
Institution; where, among many Typical representations of Moral Duties this
seems to be one; That every Vessel was unclean, which had not a Cover fastened
to it: And the wisest Author that ever wrote, has left us this Mark to
distinguish Men by, The Heart of Fools is in their mouth, but the Tongue of the
Wise is in their Heart.

Chap. 10.
They who practice it out of design, are of all wretches the most profligate
and despicable; and they who do it in Raillery, should consider how insolent a
thing it is to banter and abuse the Credulity of Mankind; and that Truth and
mutual Faith are things much too serious and too weighty to be made a
Diversion, and sacrificed to the itch of an unmannerly Jest.

is nauseous, so Indecency and Lewdness, and every thing that tends to
Obscenity or Licentiousness, is wicked and abominable.



But especially, we should be careful not to transgress this Rule of profiting
others, by running into the contrary extreme of Injurious or Offensive
Language; For Speech is in the very original intention of it, an Instrument,
and Harbinger, a Reconciler, and Uniter of Mankind, and therefore, to apply it
to any purposes contrary to these, is to abuse, and pervert the nature and
design of it. This Consideration was never more necessary than now; and, if
applied to the modern way of Conversation, would soon convince us, how vainly
those Persons pretend to Wit, and Sense, and Honor, whose whole Discourse
consists of Slander, Detraction, Mockery or Reproach, sacrificing the
reputations of the absent to an ill-natured Jest; or exposing and ridiculing
their Defects, by Mimickry, and Buffoonery; all which are infinitely unbecoming
the Character such Men aspire after, and a Diversion too base and barbarous for
any Wise or Good Man to allow himself in.





Chap. 8.
I thought not improper to make another mention of here. And the rather,
because I take Secrets here in a more large and comprehensive Sense; so that
the Virtue at present prescribed, does not only oblige us not to disclose those
things, which were committed to our Trust, under the Seal of Secrecy; but also
to suppress, whatever in Prudence and our own Discretion, appears unfit to be
divulged. All that is dangerous, or of ill consequence; all that can any way
reflect upon our own, or be injurious to another's Reputation. In a word, so
strict a Guard, so steady a Conduct in all our Conversation, that our Tongue
may not outrun our Judgment; and that neither our own Consciences, or those we
keep Company with, upon the severest and most impartial Recollection, have
cause to accuse us, of saying any thing which was not fit to be said. This is
of greater Importance, and needs to be more diligently attended to, than People
seem generally well aware of; and yet it is no more, than every Man's own
Reflections upon the indecent Gayeties, and unthinking Freedoms, in
Conversation, and the many ill Effects and hard Censures these produce, may
soon convince him of: And satisfy him, not only of the Beauty and Comeliness,
but of the safety and great advantage there is, in a modest and cautious
reserve. While the word is kept in, it is entirely our own; but if it once
break loose from us, it can never be retrieved; we have lost all our Property
and Jurisdiction, and must stand to the courtesy of the World; who will make
what use they please of it, and very seldom are just or good-natured enough, to
make the right use, or to understand it as innocently as we intended it.

which, in a skilful Composition, conspire together to make a more perfect, and
delightful Harmony.

-- Si vis me flere, dolendum est --
Primum ipsi tibi: tunc tua me infortunia laedent,
Telephe. -- Hor. de Art Poet.^

We weep and laugh as we see others do:
He only makes me sad, who shows the way,
And first is sad himself; then (Telephus)
I feel the weight of your Calamities,
And fancy all your Miseries my own.
Ld. Roscom.

It is in such cases with the Standers by, as it was with Brasidas and his
Enemy, who drew the Dart out of his own Wound, with which he stabbed him to the
Heart. Thus Passion is first conceived and formed in our own Mind, then born
and brought into the World by apposite Expression, and afterward, by a subtle
and quick Contagion, conveyed into others, and begets its likeness there. By
this short Reflection it sufficiently appears, that Men of soft and gentle
Tempers, are not cut out for Orators. Their Spirits are too sedate and sluggish
to communicate any powerful Impressions. They want the Force, and Fire, the
Sprightliness and Activity, that is necessary to animate what they say. And
when such Persons would display the most masterly beauties of Eloquence, they
languish and faulter by the way, and drop short of the Mark. Thus Cicero
reproached Callidius, who accused Gallus with a sneaking Voice and languishing
Action, by telling him, that his Coldness and Indifferency betrayed the
falseness of his Charge. But when a Man has all that Vigor and Ornament
touched upon before, his Words will be as strong and compulsive as the Commands
of a Tyrant, with all the Pomp and Terror of his Guards about him. They will
commit an irresistible Violence upon the Soul; not only persuade and draw, but
drag his Auditory whether they will or no, lead them in Triumph, and establish
to themselves an Absolute and Arbitrary Dominion over the Minds of Men.

Theophrastus) is the true Physician of Souls, and his business must be to Cure
the Venomous Bitings of Serpents, by the Charms of his Music; that is, The
poisonous Slanders, and false Insinuations of wicked Men, by the harmony of
Reason, set out to the best advantage. But since there is no possibility of
cutting off ill Men from the use of this advantage too, since they will be sure
to seize and usurp the Weapon, for the more effectual Execution of their
mischievous Designs; we are the more concerned not to go into the Field Naked,
but to beat them at their own Weapon, and with equal Industry and Skill to
Counter-work them; that so Virtue and Truth may not be circumvented, or tamely
lost, for want of proper Preparations to defend it. Several indeed have abused
their seize of this kind to very villainous purposes, and made Eloquence
the instrument of Ruin and Oppression to private Persons, and whole Communities
of Men. This is a melancholy Truth; too manifest to be denied. But then the
Consequence of grancing it must be, not to despise or set aside the thing, upon
the account of any ill Effects, that have followed upon the misemployment of
it. No, This is a Misfortune common to every thing, that is useful and
excellent; for none of these are so necessarily confined to Goodness, but that
they are capable of being perverted to very great Evil. Nature has provided
them with an Aptitude and Efficacy; but it will depend upon the Disposition of
the Person that manages those Powers, what sort of Effects those natural
Abilities shall be applied and determined to. For even that Reason and
Understanding, which is the peculiar Prerogative of Humane Nature, and sets us
above Brutes, is most miserably abused; turned against God and our selves, and
made the occasion of our more inexcusable Ruin; but this is only an accidental
Misfortune, far from the natural tendency of so noble a Privilege. And he, who
would argue from hence that Mankind had better want these Faculties, may justly
seem to have degenerated into Brute, and to be forsaken of all that Reason,
which he so wildly and so rashly condemns.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
PReface, Page 6. line 11. read Probity. p. 23. l. 10. r. as well as. In the
Account of the Author, p. 2. l. 15. r. improving. Lib. 1. p. 97. l. 8. r.
dipos'd. p. 209. l. 9. r. the. p. 227. l. 5. r. deforms and defaces. p. 315. l.
21. r. washing. p. 332. in Note r. mers est. binocentes.


