A RELATI^^^ Of the La^^^ EMBASSY OF Monsr. De Chaumont, Knt.

TO THE COURT OF THE KING of SIAM.

With an Account of the Government, State, Manners, Religion and Commerce of
that Kingdom.

LONDON, Printed for Henry Mortlock, at the Phoenix in S. Paul's Churchyard.
1687.

A RELATION OF THE EMBASSY OF Monr. De Chaumont, Knt. TO THE COURT OF THE KING
of SIAM.
With an Account of whatever past that was remarkable in his Voyage.
I Parted from Breast the third of March, 1685. on the King's Ship, called the
Hawk, accompanied by one of His Majesty's Frigates, named the Maline, and that
with so favorable a Wind, that in seven days we arrived at the Madera Islands;
we thus happily past on till we came to four or five degrees northward of the
Equinoctial line. When we were overtaken by a calm, and suffered extreme heats,
but which yet did not much incommode us; the wind began again to blow, and we
past the line three hundred and fifty degrees five minutes of longitude, thirty
days after our setting out. We found the water here to be as fresh and good, as
if it had sprang from some pleasant fountain, which made us neglect to use that
in our Jarrs. At five degrees southward of the line we found the Winds very
inconstant, but the heats not troublesome, and I left not off my winter garments
in all this passage. The Winds, though variable, yet carried us our course, so
that we arrived at the Cape of Good Hope the 31st of May, to take in fresh
water, and other Provisions, although my old store was not exhausted. We cast
anchor late at night, and found in this road four Dutch Vessels, that came from
Holland, and had on Board a Commissioner, who was to order affairs in behalf of
the East India Company. Monsieur St. Martin Major General, a French man, who
has been in the Dutch service this thirty years, was also in one of these
Vessels, intending for Batavia, where his Employment lay. The Commissioner
General sent to complement me the first day of my arrival; and the next morning
his Nephew and Secretary, came to offer me whatsoever (...) might want. The
Inhabitants of the Country brought presents of Fruits and Cattle; and the
Dutch Vessels sa^uted our Ships after the accustomed manner.

The Dutch have here a small Fort, and near an hundred Houses about a Musket
shot off it, which are well built, and in good order. The situation of this
place is very pleasant, although bounded by a great Mountain, inhabited by an
infinite number of Monkies, which often come down into their Gardens, and spoil
the Fruit. There are also several Summer-houses, two three and four leagues off
in the country; and beyond this vast Mountain there is plain near ten Leagues
long, where are several Houses well inhabited, and which are every day
increasing. The Climate is mild enough* their Spring beginning in October, and
ending in December, their Summer last^ January* February and March, their
Autumn is in April, May, June, and their Winter in July, August, September; the
heats would be very great^ were they not moderated by gentle Gales. The Dutch
East India Company have here a most pleasant Garden^ whose great Walk is
fourteen hundred paces long, it is planted every where thick with Citron Trees:
This Garden is ordered into Apartments; in one of them you may see Fruit Trees,
and the rarest Plants of Asia, in the other the most exquisite of Africa, in
the third such as are choicest in Europe* and in the fourth such Fruits and
Plant^ as grow in America. This Garden is very well kept, and of good use to
the Dutch, by a great quantity of Herb^ and Roots which it supplies them with
for the Refreshment of their Fleets, when they come here to pass to the Indies,
or returning to their own Country.

I found there a French Gardener; who had heretofore learnt his Trade at the
Gardens of Monsieur at St. Cloud. The Soil is very good, and yields good store
of grain. A person, worthy credit, has assured me he saw an hundred and sixty
Ears of Corn on one stalk. The Inhabitants of the Country have fair
Countenances, but herein deceitful, for they are mere bruits; they go naked,
excepting that part which they cover with a nasty Skin of a beast. They till
not the Ground, yet abound with Cattle, such as ^ows, Hogs and Sheep. They
scarce eat any of these, their chiefest diet being Milk and Butter, which, for
cleanliness sake, they make in Sheep Skins. They have a root which has the
taste of the Kernel of one of our small Nuts, which serves them for bread. They
are indifferently skilled in Simples, which they can use in the Cure of Wounds,
and other Distempers. The greatest Lords amongst them, are they that have most
Cattle, which they watch and keep themselves. They of^ have wars with each
other about their pastures. Are greatly annoyed with wild Beasts, there being
more than a few Lions, Leopards, Tigers, Wolves* wild Dogs, Elephants, and
other savage Creatures. All their Arms are a kind of poisoned Lance, to strike
these Beasts with. They have a kind of Toyls wherewith they enclose their
Cattle at night: They trouble not themselves much about Religion, yet observe
some slight Ceremonies to the Full-moon, which do not signify much. Their
Language seems difficult to be understood. They have much game, as Pheasants,
Partridges, three or four sorts, Peacocks, Hares, Coneys, and Deer in such
abundance, that sometimes a Man shall see near twenty thousand together in a
plain. We ate some of these before mentioned, and found them admirable good.
The Sheep are here very large, of fourscore pound weight commonly. Here are
great quantity of Cows and Oxen. The Sea in this Bay is full of Fish, which are
of good relish, some of them having the taste of Salmon. This place abounds
with Sea-wolves, and when in our Shallop we perceived an infinite number came
tumbling by us, of which we could not kill one. Several wild Horses scamper
along the plains, which, if I mistake not, are inferior to none in other
parts, both in strength, and beautiful colors and shapes; I brought along
with me one of their Skins; they are hard to be mastered. This being such a
good Country, the Hollanders send continually fresh people to it, who make
every season considerable discoveries. Some say they have found out Gold and
Silver Mines; of which it is not to be expected they should say much themselves.
The water is here very good, proceeding from several Springs, near Rivers which
abound, as I already noted, with Fish.

We parted from this Road the seventh of June, with so favorable a North Wind,
and North North West, that we soon got into the open Sea, and that night
steered to Bantam: we endured vehement Rains, and met with great Seas, till we
reached the Isles of Madegascar, which was on the seventeenth of June. On these
Seas you perceive great quantity of Birds, but find therein no Fish. Till July
we encountered with boisterous Seas, and met with variable Winds, which forced
us forty degrees southward, where we found a Western Wind, with which we made
great way. The twenty fourth the Maline Frigate was separated from us by bad
weather, being driven to the North. The third of August we found the Sea less
troublesome, and the weather more favorable, and at break of day discovered an
Island seven or eight leagues before us, which surprised us, it not being
described in our Chart; It is situated ten degrees nineteen minutes of latitude
Southward. This Isle lies convenient for the finding of the Isle of Java, which
cannot be distant from it above an hundred and fifty Leagues, and since we
understood it is called the Isle of Money, being ill set down in our Maps, which
place it near that of Java. This Isle lies very high; we coasted yet two days
with a good gale, and on the fifth about eight in the morning, we discovered
the Isle of Java which gave us much more Joy, and the seventh following we
found our selves between the Princes Isle, and that of the Emperor, which make
the entrance of the Straits. The Isle of the Emperor lies on the side of
Sumatra, and the Isle of the Prince on the side of Java. We lay four days
between these Islands, the Winds and Streams opposing us in so violent a
manner, that what we gained in twelve hours, we lost in four, by means of
calms, which often happened. Before we entered this Strait, the Frigate which
lost us on the twenty fourth of June, came up to our Ship side this day, before
we knew who she was. The thirteenth we left these Islands behind us, and cast
Anchor within a League of Java. There came on board us several persons in
little Boats, who brought us the Country Fruits, such as Coco's, the water
which is contained in them being excellent drink, as also Melons, Citrons, and
several otherlike Presents, which much refresht our Men, tired with the
fatigues of the Sea, and overrun with the Scurvy.

On the sixteenth in the morning we came to Bantam, where I found the Maline
Frigate, which tarried For me two days: The Captain of it came and told me, that
the Governor of the place would not give him entrance, but only presented him
with some Fowl and Fruits: whereupon I sent Mr. De Forbin, my Lieutenant, to
compliment this Governor from me, and entreat him to grant me leave to land my
sick Men, to take in fresh water, and other necessaries. He returned answer, he
was not the Master of Bantam, and that there was a King of the place, who would
not admit any stranger to his Country. The Hollanders make use of this King's
Name, being unwilling that strange Vessels should come amongst them, especially
the Europeans. Since they have settled there, they have driven all other
Nations out. It Is a great Town, and well peopled by the Natives, before the
Hollanders became Masters of it, 'twas the chiefest place of the Indies for
Commerce, people came there from Europe, Persia, China, Japon, the Great
Mogol's Country, and diverse other parts, but now the Hollanders have got all
into their Hands, which is of vast advantage to them; for this place may be
compared to what heretofore was Cales in Spain. As soon as I received the
Governor's Answer, who yet told me, that if I would go to Batavia, I should
find there a kind reception, I therefore weighed Anchor, and set sail for that
place, to which there is but fifteen Leagues. I was three days before I arrived
there; for having no Pilot that was acquainted with those parts, I fell on
several Islands, which caused me to cast Anchor every night, and in the day
time to move with small sail, sounding all places I went over; but I arrived on
the thirteenth at night, where as soon as I had cast Anchor, I sent my
Lieutenant to the General, to complement him, and to desire leave to bring my
sick Men on shore, and take in refreshments. He took my Complement in good
part, and returned answer, he would take care I should be satisfied. I sent
next morning sixty five sick Men on shore, who all recovered their healths in
seven days that I tarried at Batavia. On the nineteenth in the morning the
General sent me a Complement by three Officers, the Sum of which was to desire
me to come on shore, offering me his own House to lodge^ in. After necessary
Thanks, I answered, I wished my Orders would have permitted me that Liberty.
The General sent me a great Shalop, laden with all sorts of Indian Fruits,
Herbs, new Bread, two Oxen, two Sheep, and thus continued for several days
presenting us. On the twenty second I landed incognito, and viewed the Town in
a small Boat. It Is like Venice, having Channels which run through every street,
and planted with great Trees which yield an agreeable shade, as well to the
Channels as the Streets; the Houses are built as they are in Holland; there is a
Citadel indifferently well fortified; the Town in enclosed with a Wall, and
great Ditch, but not deep. The Houses round about it are extreme pleasant,
being related to curious Gardens, and Fish Ponds, wherein are admirable Fish of
all sorts. In this Town the Traders are exceeding rich, and spare no cost ^or
their Delight, neither do they de^y themselves unlawful satisfaction with
Women. I took the liberty my self to entertain four or five of them ^t diverse
times, in my walks in the gar^ens; their dresses are like the French. There is
in Batavia about fifty Coaches, some of which are very stately; their Horses
are none of the biggest, but to make amends, are in so good plight, that they
need no spur. This Town ^s a place of vast Commerce, and its Riches are so
great, that the Inhabi^ants need not be sparing of their Money; it is well
peopled, and the Dutch keep a strong Garrison; they have there ^ear three
thousand Moors, who are ^laves, and several of the Natives they ^eep under
their Obedience, who live about the Town. The Isle of Java, in which this City
is situated, is very populous, contains two hundred Leagues ^n length, and
forty in breadth; it has five Kings, over whom the Hollanders ^re Masters; they
are Mahometans. I sent to the General for a Pilot for Siam, mine having never
been there; he lent me one who had sailed there four times; for these
civilities, I sent Mr. Forbin to thank him.

On Sunday, being the twenty sixth of August, at six of the Clock in the
morning, we set sail, and steered our course to pass the Strait of Banca; we
advanced that day ten Leagues with a small Wind, and at nine at night I was
told of a Sail that made toward my Vessel, whereupon I bid the Officer be
prepared; when immediately I saw out of my Window this Ship coming up to us: we
called out to know what she was, but could have no answer, and coming on the
Deck, I found all our Men provided for her, and the Bolt-sprit of this Ship
laid on cross my Stern, I caused about twenty Musket Shot to be fired among
her Men, which immediately made her clear her self of us, and taking the
advantage of the Wind, and clapping on all her Sails, we knew not what Nation
she was of, for no body in the Ship spoke one word, and we observed but few Men
on board her. I suppose her to have been some Merchant Ship, guided by
unskilful hands; they did our Ship some mischief, but the damage was repaired
next morning.

On Tuesday, being the twenty eighth, at night we discovered the entrance of
the Strait of Banca, and on the twenty ninth in the morning we entered therein.
Although we had a good Dutch Pilot, yet we ran upon a muddy bank of Sand, there
being many of this kind in this Strait, and ti being usual for Vessels to meet
with them without much hurt, therefore this did not much disturb us, for I
caused a small Anchor to be cast on the side of Sumatra, and in less than two
hours we got off clear from this Bank. We were three days passing this Strait.
The Isle of Sumatra is on the left, and contains two hundred and fifty Leagues
in length, and about fifty in breadth. The Hollanders have four or five
Fortresses here, its people are Mahometans, and under the Regiment of five or
six Kings. The Queen of Achem possesses one of the largest Countries, and
governs with great Authority and Regularity. The Hollanders are in a manner
Masters of all these Princes, they deal with them for whatsoever the Island
yields, where it is said there are golden Mines, great quantities of Pepper,
Rice, all sorts of Cattle, and in some Cantons the people are very barbarous,
and the Kings are often at war one with one another. Those who receive the
Hollanders protection are ever the strongest: It Is the same in the Isle of
Java, for three hundred Europeans do beat five or six thousand Men of these
Nations, who know not tho Art of War. It lies four degrees Southward of the
Equinoctial Line. The Dutch have a Fort on the side of the Strait of Banca,
strengthened with twenty four pieces of Canon; the Fort is built upon the River
called Palembone, which runs so violently into the Sea, that three or four
months in the year, in rainy weather, the water of it, when in the Sea, does
yet keep its freshness.

The Isle of Banca lay on the right hand of us, being about forty Leagues
long; The Dutch have a Fort there, and drive a considerable Trade with the
Natives of the Country; it is said to be a very good and fruitful Country,
when I sailed by the River of Palembone, the Dutch were there lading two
Vessels with Pepper. On the third of September we past the Line again by the
help of good weather, the air being temperate, and without excessive Heats, so
that I still wore my Cloth suit, till I past over to the Coasts of Africa. We
came before the Strait of Malaca, which has four or five passages, or
entrances, but the Streams were so great, and running sometimes against us,
that we were forced often to cast Anthor; for when the Calm took us, the Streams
forcibly carried us a great distance; but we left not this Coast, by reason of
the Winds, which always ^low from the land, and greatly helped us in our
course. I believe this Countrey's Air to be good, for we had many sick, who
were all recovered by ^t.

On the fifth we discovered the Isle of Polimon, which is inhabited by
Malaises, who are Mahometans. This is a plentiful Country, and obedient to a
Prince by whom it is governed. The Queen of Achem has some pretensions to it,
and for this effect she sends thither every year some Vessels; but this Prince
being not willing to engage in a War against her, his people pay her Tribute.
There came a small Boat to our Ship side, which brought us some Fish and
Fruits. This Isle is distant from the Continent about six Leagues, part of its
Coasts was heretofore subject to the King of Siam; but it has been since some
years in the possession of two or three Kings, one of which is the King of
Malais. This is a very unsociable Nation, and will enter into no Commerce.

From the fifth to the fifteenth we had but small Winds, and very variable, and
Calms which caused us often to cast Anchor, as also by reason of Streams which
run along this Coast. From the Strait of Banca to Siam the Land is not wont to
be left.

The same day we found our selves before Ligor, which is the chief place
belonging to the King of Siam. The Hollanders have a habitation there, and
liberty of Trade. It Is hard to express the Joy which the Siamoises whom we
brought along with us had to see their own Country, and it cannot be better
compared than to that which we felt at our return, when God brought us safe to
Breast. Here died a young Gentleman having been ill five months with a bloody
Flux, whom the King sent to attend me in my Voyage, he was a Youth of great
hopes, and I was much afflicted at the loss of him.

In short (thanks be to God) on the twenty fourth we cast Anchor before the
River of Siam. Our whole Ship's crew were in good health. I sent to the Bishop
of Metellopolis Mr. le Vacher a Missionary, who came with the Mandarins into
France, and whom I brought along with them, with charge to entreat him to come
to me that I might learn what had happened this eighteen months since the King
of Siam sent into France.

On the twenty ninth the Bishop came on board with the Abbat of Lionne, who
informed me of whatsoever had past, telling me that the King of Siam having
heard at midnight of my arrival by Mr. Constance one of his Ministers, he
showed great joy, and ordered him to go and advertise the Bishop of it, and to
dispatch two Mandarins of the first rank, who are in a manner as the chief
Gentlemen of the King's Chamber are in France, to assure me of the joy he
conceived at my arrival. They came two days after on board me, whom I received
in my Cabin; the Bishop sitting by me, and they and others sitting down on
Carpets laid on the floor, it being the custom of the Country to sit in that
manner, there being no person but the King who sits higher.

They told me the King their Master had commanded them to show me the Joy he
had at my arrival, and at the News of our King's having vanquished all his
Enemies, and become absolute Master of his Kingdom. Having denoted to them how
much I thought my self beholden to the King their Master, and answered what
they offered touching our Prince, I told them I was extremely satisfied with
the Governor of Bancok, for his reception of those I sent him, as also with the
Presents he had made me. They replied he had done only his duty, seeing in
France the King their Master's Envoys had been so well received, and that
moreover I merited this good usage by my procurement of an Union between the
Kings of Siam and of France. Having treated them with the honors and
civilities usual in such like occasions in these Countries, I presented them
with Tea and Comfits. These two Mandarins were well shaped Men, of about 25
years of Age, and Apparelled after their mode, being bare headed, without Shoes
or Stockings, wearing a kind of long Scarf down to their Knees and coming
between their Legs was fastened behind. This Scarf was of painted linen neatly
done, and embroidred at the edges; from the waste upwards, they had nothing but
a kind of Muslin wastcoat, which they let hang over this Scarf, the sleeves
being somewhat large, but not long. They remained about an hour on board our
Vessel, and I saluted them with nine pieces of Canon at their departure.

On the ninth of October Mr. Constance, the King of Siam's Minister I lately
mentioned, and who though a stranger, has obtained by his merit the chief place
in the King's favor, sent to Complement me by his Secretary who was an honest
man, and offered me from himself such a great present of Fruits, besides Oxen,
Hoggs, Pullets, Ducks and such like things, that all the Ships crew were fed
with them for four days together. These refreshments are grateful when a man
has been seven or eight months at Sea.

On the eighth the Bishop of Metellopolis who had returned to the chief City of
Siam, came on board us again with two Mandarin's to enquire as from the King
after my Health, and to inform me how impatiently he took my delays of seeing
him, entreating me to hasten on shore. I returned their Complement, and told
them I should soon be there. I gave these Mandarins the same Entertainment I
gave the first, saluting them also at their departure with nine pieces of
Canon. About two of the Clock the same day I went into my Shalop, and those of
my Attendance into Boats which the King had ^ent; being arrived at night in the
River, I found five Barges, one for my self, which was a very magnificent one,
and the four others for the Gentlemen which accompanied me, with several others
to carry the rest of my Retinue and Goods. Two Mandarins came and Complemented
me from the King. (...) could not reach that night the place ^esigned for my
Reception, which obliged me to pass out of the Barge unto the Maline Frigate,
which had ^ntred the River two days before, on ^oard of which I lay all night.

The same Evening a person whom (...) had sent to Siam to buy such Provisions
as we needed, came and told me that Mr. Constance had delivered to him from the
King eleven Barks full of Oxen, Sheep, Calves, Ducks, Pullets and Strong-water
made with Rice, together with a Request that I would not spare to ask for what
we wanted, for we should be supplye^ all the time we tarryed in the Kingdom, at
his Majesty's charge.

On the ninth there came two Mandarins to my Barge from the King, who told me
they came for my orders, and I parted from this place about seven i^ the
morning. Having went about fiv^ leagues, I came to a house built (...) purpose
for my entertainment, whe^^ two Mandarins, and the Governour^ of Bancok and
Pipely with several other^ were ready to receive me. This House was made with
Bamboos, and covere^ with neat Matts. All the Furniture (...) it was new; it
contained severa^ Chambers hung with fine painted line^ the Floor of my Room
was covere^ with Tapstry, the Chairs were curiou^ly wrought and gilt, as also
the Table^ to speak nothing of the neatness (...) the Bed; I was here served
with choic^ Meats and delicate Fruits. I left thi^ place after Dinner, and all
the Mandarins followed me. I went to Bancok which is the chief place the King
(...) Siam has on this River, distant about twelve leagues from the Sea. I
foun^ here an English Vessel, which saluted me with his Cannon, which were
answered by the Forts which defend both sides of the River; which Forts are
regular enough, and well furnished with Guns. I lodged in a House well built
and furnished, where I was treated after the fashion of the Country.

The next Morning I parted at eight of the clock attended by all the Mandarins
and Governors who were come to complement me. At my departure I was also
saluted by the Cannon, and arrived at Noon in a House built on purpose for me,
and as well furnished as the former. There was near adjoining two Fortresses
which saluted me with all their Guns, and two Mandarins more came to receive
me. I was very well served at Dinner; and I parted here at three a clock, and
the Governor of Bancok took his leave of me to return to his charge. Holding
on my course I came to two Ships the one English and the other Dutch lying at
anchor, who also discharged all their Cannon, and I arrived at seven at night
at a convenient House furnished after the same manner as the preceding ones,
where I was received and treated by other Mandarins.

The eleventh in the morning I parted thence, and went and dined in another
House, and at night I lay and was treated as before.

On the twelfth I lodged two Leagues off of Siam, where I was again received by
two Mandarins. The principal Merchants of the English and Dutch Companies came
to complement my arrival in those parts, and as to the French they attended me
all the way. Here I remained till I made my entrance.

The River of Siam called Menon is very large and commodious, being adorned all
along the sides of it with pleasant Trees; but three or four months in the Year
all these places are overflowed with water, and therefore all the Houses are
built on a kind of sledges, and made all of Bamboos. This wood serves the
Siamoises both for the foundations and tops of their houses, and for infinite
purposes besides, making use of it as we do Flints and Steels, for they need
only take a little of this wood on a heap, and rub it together, and it
presently lights. All the people of these parts have little Boats to pass from
one house to another for what they want. Here are seen none but Women to work,
the Men being for the most part employed in the Kings service, whose Slaves
they are. I had the same honors showed me, as to the King when he is wont to
pass on the River. I could see no body in the houses, all people were in
Barges, or on the side of the River, lying flat on their Bellies, and their
hands joined against their foreheads. They reverence in such a manner their
Prince, that they dare not lift up their eyes to look on him. I observed that
the houses where I lodged were painted with red, that I might be treated as his
own person, there being only the Royal Houses of that color.

All the Mandarins which came to receive me on the River, still accompanied me.
The Princes also visited me. They have all convenient Barges, in the middle of
which there is a kind of Throne whereon they sit, and they usually go but one
in a Barge, on both sides of them are their Arms, as Scimitars, Swords and
Darts, and even Forks. They are all clothed in the manner I already mentioned.
A Portuguese whom the King had made General of the Troops in Bancok continually
accompanied me, and gave orders for all things. I was attended with near fifty
or sixty Barges, some of which were fifty, sixty, seventy and eighty foot long*
having Oars from twenty to an hundred. They row not after our manner, they sit
two on each bench, one on one side and another on the other, their Faces turned
on that side where they go, and have a Scul which they call Pagais, being about
four foot long, with which they take a world of pains, being contented with sod
Rice, and if they have a piece of Fish, they believe they Dine sumptuously.

They eat of a Leaf which they call Betel, which is like Ivy, and a kind of
Corn which they call Arrek, putting Lime thereon, and this gives it a taste.
They eat the Tobacco growing in their Country, which is very strong, all which
blackens their Teeth, which they esteem the handsomest. A man may live after
this rate for fifteen pence a month for they usually drink nothing but water.
They have a kind of Aqua vitae, which they call Rack, made with Rice. When I
came to a House which was intended for me, all the Mandarins that accompanied
me made a lane for me to pass through to my Chamber door.

On the thirteenth I sent word to the King by the Mandarins that were with me,
that I had been informed of the manner wherewith they were wont to receive
Ambassadors, and it being very different from that of France, I entreated him
to send me somebody to instruct me about my entrance.

On the fourteenth he sent me the Sieur Constance, with whom I had a long
conversation, the Bishop of Metropolis being our Interpreter. We had a tedious
dispute, and I would bate nothing of the mode of receiving Ambassadors in
France, which at length he granted me.

On the fifteenth the Tunquinoises came to complement me on my arrival.

The sixteenth the Cochinchinoises did the same.

The seventeenth Mr. Constance came to me, and brought with him four stately
Barges to carry the Presents which his Majesty sent to the King of Siam. And on
the same day the King gave order to all the Indian Nations that reside at Siam,
to congratulate my arrival, and to pay me all the espect which is due to the
character of an Ambassador to so great a King. They came to me at six at night,
each of them habited after their own manner; there were of forty different
Nations, and each of them of Kingdoms independent one of another, and that
which seemed most remarkable, was that among the rest there was the son of a
King who was driven out of his Country, and taking Siam for his refuge,
entreated assistance toward his re-establishment; their dresses were the same
as the Siamoises, some having Turbants, others Armenian Bonnets, and others
bare-headed, like the common Siamoises; persons of quality having Bonnets of
the same fashion of our Dragoons, made of white Muslin which tie under their
Chins with a string, being all of them barefooted.

The King made Mr. Constance tell me, that he would give me Audience the next
morning, being the eighteenth. I set out at seven of the clock in the morning
in the manner which I shall relate, having first recited the honor wherewith
the King of Siam received the King of France's Letter. It Is true he is wont to
receive with respect the Letters delivered him by Ambassadors of foreign
Potentates, but he would give a distinct honor to that of our great Monarch.
There came forty of the chiefest Mandarins in the Court, two of which were
Oyas, which is to say Dukes, who told me that all the Barges were ready to
receive his Majesty's Letter, and carry my self to the Palace. The Letter was
in my Chamber in a golden Cabinet; the Mandarins having entered prostrated
themselves, their hands closed and adjoining to their foreheads, and their
faces toward the ground, and saluted in this posture the King's Letter for
three times together. I being seated on a Throne near the Letter, received this
honor, which was never paid to any but his Majesty of France, which Ceremony
being ended, I took the Letter with the golden Cabinet, and having carried it
seven or eight paces, I gave it to the Abbat of Choisy, who came from France
with me. He walked at my right hand a little behind, and carried it to the water
side, where I found a curious Barge, sumptuously gilded, in which were two
Mandarins of the chief rank. I took the Letter from Mr. Choisy, and having
carried it into the Barge with me, I put it into the hands of these Mandarins,
who laid it on a stately raised Table gilt; I entered into another, a very
magnificent one, which followed immediately that wherein was the Letter of his
Majesty. Two others also as stately as mine, in which were Mandarins, rowed on
either side of that where the Letter was. Mine, as I now said, followed after
Mr. Choisy, the Abbat was in another Barge next to mine, and the Gentlemen
which accompanied me, and others of my retinue in other Barges: Those of the
Great Mandarins likewise were very fine, and were on head of us. There were
about twelve gilt Barges, and near two hundred others that followed us. The
King's Letter, the two Barges that attended it, and mine, were in the middle.
All the Nations at Siam were attending, and the whole River, although very
large, was covered with Barges. We moved after this rate to the Town, whose
Cannons were discharged, which never was done to any other Ambassador, all the
Ships saluted me likewise, and at landing, I found a great golden Chariot*
which only the King rode in. (...) took His Majesty's Letter, and laid (...)
into this Chariot, which was drawn by Horses led by Men* I afterward went into
a glorious Chair, which was carried by ten Men on their Shoulders; the Abbat of
Choisy* was also in another, but of less finery; the Gentlemen and Mandarins
which accompanied me, were on Horseback, all the several Nations which dwell at
Siam walking on foot behind; the Procession was in this wise to the Castle,
where I found the Soldiers, who were drawn up on each side of the Street,
having Head-pieces gilt with Gold, red Shirts on, and a kind of Scarf of
painted cloth, which served them for Breeches, but having neither Shoes nor
Stockings: Some of them were armed with Muskets, others with Lances, others
with Bows and Arrows, and lastly, some with Pikes.

There wanted not musical instruments, as Trumpets, Drums, Timbrels, Pipes,
little Bells and Horns, which Music made a pleasant noise; and thus marched we
the length of a great Street, through an infinite number of People. We came at
lenght to a great open place in which stood the King's Palace, where were
ranged on each side Elephants of War: We afterward entered into the first Court
of the Palace, where I saw about two thousand Soldiers in a posture of
sitting, with the Butt-end of their Muskets to the ground standing upright,
they were placed six in a rank, in a direct line: There were on the left
several armed Elephants, ready for War. We afterward saw an hundred Men on
Horseback, naked, and clothed after the Moorish Fashion, having a Lance in
their Hands; all the Soldiers were accoutred as I already mentioned; in this
place those of foreign Nations left me, excepting some Gentlemen who
accompanied me all the way. I past into two other Courts which were garrisoned
after the same manner, and I entered into another, where was a great number of
Mandarins, all of them prostrate on the ground; here were six Horses held, each
of them by two Mandarins; they were well harnest, all their Trappings being of
Gold and Silver, covered with Pearls, Rubies and Diamonds, so thick that a Man
could scarce see the leather; their Stirrups and Saddles were of Gold and
Silver, and the Horses had golden Rings on their Feet; there were also several
Elephants harnessed in the same manner the Coach Horses were. The Gentlemen
entered into the Hall of Audience, and placed themselves before the King came
into his Throne, and when he was there attended with Mr. Constans, du Barcalon,
and the Abbat of Choisy* who carried the King's Letter, I was surprised to see
him on a higher Throne, for Mr. Constans had agreed with me, that the King
should be on a Throne no higher than where I might give my Letter with my own
hand, without straining my self; then I told the Abbat de Choisy, the promise
they made me was forgotten, but that I would not give the King my Letter in
this manner; the golden Cabinet wherein 'twas put had a great Handle, three
foot long; 'twas imagined I would take hold on it, thus to raise it to the
King's Throne, but I was resolved to present His Majesty's Letter to the King
in a befitting manner: Being then come to the Door, I saluted the King, the
like I did also in the mid way, and when I was near the place where I was to
sit; having uttered two words of my Harangue, I put my Hat on, and sat down,
and continued my Discourse in these Terms.

AN HARANGUE TO THE KING of SIAM.
SIR,
THE King, my Master, who is now so famous in the World, by his great
Victories, and the Peace he has often granted his Enemies at the head of his
Armies, has commanded me to come to Your Majesty, to assure you of the
particular Esteem he has for you.

He knows, Sir, Your princely Qualities, the Wisdom of your Government, the
Magnificence of your Court, the Grandeur of your States, and especially the
Goodwill You bear His Person, demonstrated by the continual Favor and
Protection You show His Subjects, especially to the religious Emissaries who
are God's Ambassadors.

He experiences so many marks of kindness from you, as makes him ready to offer
the most suitable returns, to keep a continual correspondence with you, to
entertain and increase a Commerce with Your Subjects, but especially to begin
an Union between the two Crowns, which will be the more famous to posterity, by
Your Countrey's lying so distant from His, by the vast Seas which separate them.

But nothing will so much keep Him in this resolution, and more unite Him to
You, than to live together in the same Opinions and Belief.

And this is, Sir, what the King my Master, who is so wise and enlightened a
Prince, and who has never failed in his Advice to the Kings his Allies, has
especially enjoined me to recommend to You.

He conjures you, as one of his sincerest Friends, and by the Interest which he
has in your Welfare, to consider that this supreme Majesty with which You are
endued on earth, can come only from the true God, that is to say, from a Being
Almighty, Eternal and Incomprehensible, such as the Christians acknowledge, by
whom alone Kings do reign, and who subdueth the People that are under them.
Submit Your Greatness to this God, who governs Heaven and Earth; this is what is
far more reasonable than to adore Idols, so customary in this Country, of
whose insignificany Your Majesty's Great Judgment cannot choose but be sensible.

But Your Majesty will more clearly perceive this, if You would be pleased to
hear the Missionaries who are ready to serve You.

The best news, Sir, I can carry home to the King my Master, is, that Your
Majesty being convinced of the reality of what I say, has made farther
enquiries into the Christian Religion, and given Your Name up to it; and what
Honor will this bring to You, Sir, what Assurance will it give to Your
Estates, and what Happiness will it lead You to at the last?

This Harangue was interpreted by Monr. Constans; I afterward told His
Majesty, that the King my Master had given me the Abbat de Chaisy, and those
twelve Gentlemen for my Company, whom I presented to him. I took the Letter
from the Hands of the Abbat de Choisy, and carried it in the design of
presenting it, no otherwise than I before mentioned, Mr. Constans, who
accompanied me, crawling and jumping on his Hands and Feet, called out to me,
and making Signs I should stretch out my Arm as well as the King, I made as if
I understood not what was told me, when the King, smiling, arose, and stooped
down to take the Letter out of the Cabinet, and that in such a manner as one
might see his whole Body; as soon as he had taken it, I made my Obeisance, and
retired to my Seat* The King enquired of the Health of His Majesty, and all the
Royal Family, and whether the King had made any Conquest of late, I told him he
had gained Luxembourg, an impregnable place, and the most considerable the
Spaniards held in that Country, which shut up the Frontiers of France, and
opened a way to those who might become his Enemies, and that he had lately
agreed to a Peace with all Europe, when at the Head of his Armies. The King
replied, he was glad of our King's Victories, and the Peace he enjoyed; he
added he had sent Ambassadors to France, who embarked at Bantam, in the Rising
Sun; that he would seek all ways to give the King satisfaction in every thing I
offered him: The Bishop of Metellopolis was present, who interpreted several
Questions the King made me. This Monarch had a Crown enriched with Diamonds,
fastened on a Cap, which stood up above the Crown like almost to our Dragoons,
his Vest was of a very rich flowered Stuff, wrought with Gold, and embroidered,
at the Neck and Sleeves with Diamonds, which looked like a kind of Collar and
Bracelets. He had a great many Diamond Rings on his fingers; I cannot say what
kind of Shoes or Stocking he had on, having only in this Audience seen half
his Body. He had fourscore Mandarins in his Parlor, where (...) was, all
prostrate on the ground, and who never left this posture all this while.

The King is about fifty five years of age, well shaped, somewhat tanned, as
all of those Countries are, having a cheerful countenance; his inclinations
are Royal, he is courageous, a great Politician, governing alone, magnificent,
liberal, a Lover of Arts, in a word, a Prince, who by his Wit has freed himself
from diverse Customer which he found in his Kingdom, borrowing of strange
Countries, and especially of Europe, whatsoever he thought might most
contribute to the Honor and Happiness of his Reign.

These Mandarins, whom I now mentioned, had neither Shoes nor Stockins, and
were apparelled like those I have heretofore spoke of, with Caps, like the
King's, and each of them had a Box, wherein he put his Betel, Arreck, and
Tobacco. By these Boxes a Man may distinguish their Qualities and Ranks, some
differing from others. Affter the King had discoursed with me an hour, he shut
his Window, and I retired. The place of Audience was about twelve or fifteen
steps high, 'twas finely painted within with flowers of Gold, from the top to
the bottom, the Floor was covered with rich Tapestry; at the end of this Parlor
there were two pair of large Stairs on each hand, which led into the Chamber
where the King was, in the middle of these two pair of Stairs are Windows to
which you must go up some steps, before which there were three great
Umbrella's, they were of Cloth of Gold, and their Sticks painted with Gold, one
was in the middle of the Window, and the two others on both sides, it is through
this Window we saw the King's Throne, and through which he gave me Audience.
Mr. Constans carried me afterward to view the rest of the Palace, where I saw
the white Elephant, who ate and drank out of Gold, I saw also others, very fine
ones, after which I returned to my Lodging in the same Pomp wherein I came,
which House was well enough, and all my retinue were well accommodated in it. I
was informed that Mr. Constans had given order from the King to all the
Mandarins (...) foreign Nations that dwell in his Kingdom, to come to these
Lodgings and being there he told them the King was minded they should see in
what distinct manner he treated the Ambassadors of France, and those of other
Nations* This distinction being due to the King of France, a most mighty
Monarch, and who knew to requite the Civilities showed him. These Mandarins
were astonished, and answered, they had never seen an Ambassador from France,
and were persuaded that the singular reception which the King gave him was due
to the Character of so great a Prince, seeing his Victories have long since
been known to the remotest parts of the World; and therefore they were not
surprised at the King's distinction. At the same time Mr. Constans ordered them
from the King to come and complement me.

The same day at night Mr. Constans ^an e again to see me, and then we had a
longer conversation. There were ^n my Lodgings a great number of Mandarins and
Siamoises as a guard, and to furnish us what things we needed, at the King's
charge.

On the ninteenth there came a great many Mandarins to attend me, and Mr.
Constans with a Present of Fruits, and of that Countries Sweetmeats.

The same day the Bishop of Metellopolis was sent for by the King to interpret
his Majesty's Letter.

On the twenty second the King sent me several pieces of stripped Satin, morning
Gowns of Japon, and a set of Gold buttons, and to the Gentlemen which
accompanied me some stuffs of Gold and Silver, Indian work; the King's custom
being to present at one's arrival Stuffs wherewith to make Clothes after the
fashion of the Country: But as for my part I made no new Clothes, and there
were only the Gentlemen of my train, who did it: At night being accompained by
the Bishop, I went to give a visit to Mr. Constans.

On the twenty fourth the King se^^ me word he would give me Audien^^ the next
morning.

On the twenty fifth I came to the Palace with all my, Train together with the
Bishop, the King gave me (...) particular Audience, wherein he told me many
things, of which I gave a^ account to his Majesty. I Dined (...) the Palace
Garden under great Tree^ and I was served with several Dishe^ of Meat and
Fruits; the chief Mandarins, as the great Treasurer, the Captains of the King's
Guards, and other^ attended us; this Treat held three o^ four hours, and there
was in the Garden a Pond, in which there were (...) great many rare Fish, and
among^^ others there was one which represented the countenance of a man.

On the twenty ninth I went to give a visit to the Barcalon, who is the King's
chief Minister, who seemed to me to be a man of sense, the Bishop accompanied
me, and was Interpreter to us both^

On the thirtieth I went to the Palac^ to see the Pagod, or the King of Siam*
domestic Temple, there was then i^ the Court of the Palace a Combat, or to
speak better, an Elephant fight, for the Elephants were tied by the two hind
feet, on each of them rode two men, who held in their hands a crook with which
they governed them, as Horses are managed by a bridle, they struck them several
times to animate them, and the Elephants had fought well no question, had they
had liberty, they only gave one another blows with their teeth and trunks; the
King was there present, but I did not see him: We past through this Court into
several others, and afterward came into the Pagod, the Portal appeared to be
ancient and well wrought, the whole building indifferent handsome, and of the
form of our Churches in Europe; we saw several Statues of Brass gilt which
seemed to offer sacrifices to a great Idol all of Gold, about forty foot high,
on the side of which Idol, there were several other small ones, some of which
being also of Gold, had lighted Lamps fastened into them, from the top to the
bottom of them. At the end of this Pagod, there is another great Idol on a
stately Tombestone: I afterward went into another Pagod adjoining to the
first, and I past under into a Vault like a Cloister, where there were Idols on
each hand gilded, who had each o^ them a Lamp burning before them, which the
Talapoins, which are the Priests of Siam, do light every night. In this Pagod
was the Tomb of the deceased Queen who died about four or five years since;
it is magnificent enough, and behind this Tomb, was another of this present
King's Predecessor's, represented by a great Statue lying on one side and dressed
as Kings are wont to be in days of Ceremony; this Statue is about twenty five
foot long, 'twas of Brass gilt; I went farther into other places where there
were a great many of these Statues, both of Gold and Silver: several had rich
Dimond Rings and Rubies on their fingers; I never saw so many Images and so
much Gold.

I afterward went to see the Elephants, there is a great number of them, and
who are of a prodigious size. I saw a piece of Cannon, cast at Siam, of
eighteen foot long, and that would carry bullets of three hundred pound weight;
there is a great many Cannons which they make themselves in this Kingdom.

The thirty first was a day of rejoicing for the King of Portugal's coming to
the Crown, which was solemnised by the letting off the great Guns and several
shows of Fireworks from on board the Portugal Vessels.

The next morning being the first of November, Mr. Constans invited me to a
great Feast, which was made as a farther continuation of the former Solemnity,
to which I went, and all the Europeans in the Town, the Guns ceased not from
firing all that day: after Dinner there was a Comedy, the Chianoises began the
Postures, there were Siamoises in it, but I knew not what they said, their
gestures seemed to me ridiculous, and far unlike those amongst us; yet there
were two men, who ascended to the top of two Perches which were hung very high,
which had at their end a little Apple, and standing upright on the top of them,
they showed several strange tricks. Afterward we had a kind of Puppet play,
which yielded small diversion.

On the fourth being Sunday Mr. Constans told me that the King was to go to the
Pagod, where he is wont to go every year, and prayed me to see him pass by. I
went with him and all my Attendance; and having remained there a while, there
appeared a great gilded Barge, in which was a Mandarin who came to see whether
all things were in order: scarcely was he past by, but I saw several Barges
wherein were the Mandarins of the first rank, who were all of them in Suits of
red cloth; they are wont on these solemn days to be all clothed with the same
color, and it is the King who nominates it; they had white Bonnets on, very
high crowned, and the Oyas had at the bottom of their Caps a golden Fringe, as
to their Breeches, 'twas a kind of Scarf, as I already said. After them came
those of the second rank, the Life Guards, several Soldiers, and then the King
in a Barge attended with two others which were very fine ones; the Watermen
were apparelled like the Soldiers, but only they had a kind of breast and
back-plates, and each of them an helmet on their heads, which is said to be of
Gold; their Pagais or Sculs were gilt with Gold, as all the Barges were, which
showed very fine; there were an hundred and fourscore and five Rowers in each
of these Barges, and in those of the Mandarins about an hundred, and an hundred
and twenty; there were Guards that followed, and several other Mandarins who
made the rear Guard; the King was richly Apparelled with several precious
Stones, I saluted him in passing by, and he returned my complement, his Train
consisted of an hundred and forty stately Barges, which appeared very finely
indeed on the water, marching all in good order. After Dinner I went into my
Barge to see the rest of the Ceremony, at night the King changed his Barge, and
proposed a prize to that Barge that should first arrive by force of Oars to the
Palace, he himself was one of the party, and he advanced by much before the
others, so that his Rowers won the money; I know not how great 'twas, the other
Barges past on very swiftly, all the River was covered with them who came to
see the King; that day being designed for his showing himself to his People, I
believe there were an hundred thousand to see him.

At night there were Fireworks for joy of the Coronation of the King of
England, the whole affair was well carried on, and strange Vessels fired from
all parts their Cannon.

On the fifth this Feast continued, and the Cannon was fired from all parts of
the Town, Mr. Constans invited me to Dinner, where all the Europeans were,
where I was made very welcome.

On the eighth the King parted for Louvo, which is a Country Seat where he
generally remains for eight or nine months in the year, it being distant twenty
Leagues from Siam.

On the fifteenth I parted for that place, I lay in the way at a House which
was built for me, 'twas in the same form as that where I had been Lodged all
along, 'twas near where the King lies when he goes to Louvo. I remained there
all the sixteenth, and on the seventeenth set out thither, where I arrived the
same day on eight at night, I found this House of the King's built after the
Moorish fashion, and a man may justly praise the Country; in your entrance to
it you must pass through a Garden, where there are several Conduits, in this
Garden you ascend five or six steps, and you go to a kind of Summer House
standing very high where you take the Air, I found a very fine Chapel, and a
Lodging for all those who attended me.

On Monday the ninteenth the King gave me a particular Audience, after Dinner I
went abroad to take the Air on Elephants, whose goings are very uneasy and
incommodious, I had rather ride ten Leagues on Horse back than one on these
animals.

On the twenty third Mr. Constans told me the King would give me the
divertisement of a combat of Elephants, and entreated me to bring along with me
the Captains who had conducted me to show them the sport, who were the Sieurs
de Vaudricourt and Joyeuse; we went thither on Elephants, and the Fight was
carried on after the same manner as that which I above related.

The King sent for the Captains and told them, he was very glad they were the
King of France's first Captains who came into his Kingdom, and he wished them as
happy a return as their arrival was. He gave each of them a Scimitar, whose
handle and guard was of Gold, and the sheaths almost covered with the same
metal, a golden Chain curiously wrought and very large, a Vest of cloth of Gold
with Gold buttons; as Mr. de Vaudricourt was the chief Captain, so his Present
was richer and better, the King gave him notice to have a care of their Enemies
by the way, they answered that his Majesty furnished them with arms to defend
themselves, and that they would acquit themselves of their duty. These Captains
spoke to him without lighting off their Elephants; I saw very well that under
pretense of a combat of Elephants, he was minded to make these Presents in the
sight of several Europeans who were present, to give a public mark of the
particular distinction he would make of the French Nation: The King afterward
returned, and I went to see an Elephant which had been brought by the females
who are instructed to go into the woods with a man or two to conduct them, as
far as twenty five or thirty Leagues to seek wild Elephants, and when they have
found any, they so order it as to draw them on to a place near the Town
designed to receive them; it is a great space dug in the earth, and surrounded
by a wall of Brick very high, there is also a second enclosure about fifteen
foot high, through which a man may easily pass, and a double gate of the same
height, which shuts of it self by means of a pully, so that when an Elephant is
within, he cannot get out. The female Elephants do first enter, the wild ones
follow them, and they are fast.

This same day Mr. Constans presented the two Captains with several fine
wrought Japon works of Silver and other Curiosities.

On Saturday the twenty fourth I got on horseback to go see the wild Elephants
taken.

The King being come to the end of this place which is enclosed as above said,
there entered a man who went with a staff to attack the wild Elephant, who at
the same time left the females, and pursued him, the man continued this
management, and thus busied this wild Elephant, till the females who were with
him got out of the place by the gate, which was immediately shut after them,
and the Elephant seeing himself left alone imprisoned, grew enraged; the fellow
set upon him again, and instead of flying on that side which he was wont, he
ran out of the gate, and the Elephant followed him, and when he was between the
two gates he was shut in, and being hot they threw a great deal of water on him
to refresh him, and there were several Elephants brought to him, who caressed
him with their trunks, to comfort him as it were; they tied his two hind legs,
and the gate was opened to him, he marched five or six paces, and found four
Elephants of War, and one to confront him, two others who were fastened to his
sides, and one behind him to push him with his head; they brought them in this
manner into a kind of Stable ground, where there was a great stake fastened, to
which he was tied, and two Elephants were placed on each side of him to bear
him company, and the others are led away. When the wild Elephants have remained
fifteen days, in this manner, they know them who were wont to feed them, and
follow them, and afterward they become as tractable as the others. The King
has a great many of these females who do nothing else but decoy these wild ones.

On Monday the twenty fifth I went to see a Tiger fight with three Elephants,
but the Tiger was not the strongest, he received a blow with a tooth that
carried a way half his jaw, although the Tiger was not wanting in courage.

Tuesday the twenty sixth I had a particular Audience, this being the fourth
time, and the King showed me the esteem he had for the French Nation, after
several other discourses, of which I have given the King an account. At night I
went to see a Feast, which the Siamoises celebrate at the beginning of their
year, which is attended with great lights. It Is performed in the Palace, in a
great Court, round about which there are several boxes full of Lamps, and
before these boxes there are a great many perches drove into the ground, along
which hang several horn Lanthorns prettily painted, this Feast lasts eight days.

On Sunday the second of September, Mr Constans sent me a Present, he did the
same also to the Abbat of Choisy, and the Gentlemen which accompanied me; the
Presents were Bracelets, China Cabinets, night Gowns and Japon works made of
Silver Bezoarstones, Rhinocero's horns, and other curiosities of that Country.

On the tenth I went to see the great hunting of Elephants, which is in this
following form: The King sent a great number of female Elephants all in a
company together, and when they have been several days in the wood, and he is
informed they have found Elephants, he sends thirty or forty thousand men, who
make a great ring in the place where the Elephants are; they post themselves
several foot distance one from another, and each company has a fire about three
foot high or thereabouts: there is also another ring of Elephants of War,
distant from one another about an hundred and an hundred and fifty paces, and
in those places where the Elephants may more easily pass thorough, the
Elephants of War are more numerous; in several places there is Cannon which is
fired at the wild Elephants when they will force a passage, for they are in
great fear of fire: every day this enclosure or ring is lessoned and at length
it is very small, and the stres are also diminished. These Elephants hearing a
noise about them, dare not fly, although now and then one or two do escape, for
I was told that some days past there were ten got away. When they are to be
taken they are made to enter into a place surrounded with stakes, where there
are some trees, through which a man may easily pass, there is also another ring
of Elephants of War and Soldiers, among which there are men mounted on
Elephants, who dexterously throw cords at the Elephants hind feet, who when
they are fastened are brought between two tame Elephants, besides which there is
another who tends on him behind, if need be to push him forward, so he is
obliged to march, and when he is unruly, the others strike him with their
trunks; they bring him into a kind of stable open on all sides, where they are
fastened and managed as I have already related: I saw ten taken, and I was told
there were a hundred and forty in the ring; the King was there present and gave
orders for what was necessary. In this place I had the honor to have a long
conference with him, and he prayed me to leave Mr. Fourbin, the Leiutenant of
my Ship with him, which I agreed to, and presented him, and at the same time
the King gave him a Semitar, whose Handle and Guard was of Gold, and the Sheath
studded with the same, with a Justaucorp of embroidered Satin with Gold
Buttons. Then the King presented me with a Golden Cup, and gave me a Collation
in a Grove, where I had excellent Wine and Fruit.

The next morning being the eleventh I returned to this game, being mounted on
an Elephant, the King was there, and sent two Mandarins to me, to desire me to
come to him, he spoke several things to me, and entreated me to leave Mr. de la
Mare the Engineer, who came along with me behind me, to fortify some places in
his Country. I told him I did not doubt but the King my Master would be
content I should leave him, seeing His Majesty's Interests were as dear to him
as his own; I thereupon ordered Monsr. de la Mare, to remain with the King, who
gave to him a Vest of Stuff of Gold. The King told me, he would send a little
Elephant to the Duke of Burgundy, which he showed me, and having a while
thought on it, he said that if he should give one only to the Duke of Burgundy
he feared lest the Duke of Anjou should take it ill, and therefore he would
send two, and I designing to part the next morning to go on board, I presented
the Gentlemen to him who were with me, to take leave of his Majesty, the King
wished them a good Voyage. The Bishop would have presented to him Messieurs, the
Abbat de Lionne, and le Vacher, Missionaries, to take their leave of him, but
he told the Bishop, that as to those two persons, they were of his Family, and
that he respected them as his Children, and that they should take their leave
of him in his Castle: afterward the King retired, and I attended on him to the
end of the Wood, taking the way of Louvo, because the King had a House in the
Wood, where he usually tarries whilst he is busied in this Game of Elephants.

On Wednesday, the twelfth, the King gave me Audience of Leave, the Bishop was
there, he was pleased to say he was very well satisfied with me and my
Negotiation; he gave me a great golden Vessel which they call a Boss, and this
is one of the most honorable marks of the King's Favor; he told me he would
not have the accustomed Ceremonies about it, because there might be something
which would not please me by reason of the Genuflexions which the greatest of
the Kingdom are obliged to make on this occasion. There is no Stranger in his
Court, excepting the King of Camboye's Nephew, who has received the like Mark
of Honor, which signifies that one is an Oyas, a Dignity in that Country
comparable to a Duke in France; there are several sorts of Oyas, which are
distinguished by their Bosses. This Monarch had the goodness to tell me several
things in such an obliging manner, that I dare not relate them; and in all my
Voyage I received such great Honors, that I should scarce be believed, were
they not sole due to the Character His Majesty has been pleased to honor me
with: I received also a thousand Civilities from his Ministers, and the rest of
his Court. Messieurs the Abbat of Lionne, and le Vacher, took at the same time
their leaves of the King, who having wished them a good Voyage, gave each of
them a golden Crucifix, the Foot of it being Silver. At the end of the
Audience, Monsr. Constans carried me into a Parlor, surrounded with
Water-spouts which was in the Palace, where I found a Table very well spread,
after the manner of the Kingdom of Siam: The King had the goodness to send me
two or three Dishes from His Table, for he dined at the same time; about five
of the Clock I went into a gilt Chair, carried by ten Men, and the Gentlemen
who accompanied me rode on Horseback, we entered into our Barks, and were
attended by a great many Mandarins, the Streets were lined with Soldiers,
Elephants, and Moorish Cavaliers. 'Twas the same also in the morning, when I
had my last Audience; all the Mandarins that accompanied me to my Barge, went
into theirs, and came with me; there were about an hundred Barges, and I
arrived the next morning, being the thirteenth, at Siam, about three in the
morning. The King of Siam's Letter, and his Ambassadors for France, were with
me, in a very stately Barge attended by several others. The King made me
several Presents, amongst which was a crucifix, the body of which is Gold, a
Cross of Tambacq, which is a metal more esteemed than Gold in that Country,
with several other Curiosities of the Indies; and the Custom of these
Countries being to gratify those who bring the Presents, I gave to the
Steers-men of the King's Barges about eight or nine hundred Pistols. As to
Monsr. Constans, I took the Liberty to give him a piece of Household Stuff,
which I had brought along with me from France, and to Madam his Wife, several
Presents, to the value of an hundred and fifty Pistols; the King also gave
Presents to the value of seven or eight hundred Pistols to the Abbat de Choisy
in China Cabinets, Japon Works, and other Indian Curiosities.

On the fourteenth, at five of the Clock at night, I parted from Siam,
accompanied by Mr. Constans; several Mandarins, and a great many Barges, and
arrived at Bancoc the next morning, the Forts by the way, and those of Bancoc,
saluted me with all their Artillery; I remained a day at Bancoc, because the
King had told me in an Audience, that being a Soldier, he desired me I would
view the Fortifications of it; and to tell his Servants what it wanted, and to
pitch on a place whereon to build a Church; I drew a small draught, and gave it
to Monsr. Constans.

On the sixteenth in the morning I parted thence accompanied by Mandarins, the
Forts saluted me, and at four of the Clock I arrived at the Bar of Siam, in the
Shalops belonging to the King's Ships, on board of which I went about seven of
the Clock.

On the seventeenth the King of Siam's Frigate, in which were the Ambassadors,
came and cast Anchor near my Ship; I sent my Shalop, which brought two of the
Ambassadors, and I afterward sent back the same Shalop, which brought the
other Ambassador, and the King's Letter, which was written on a Leaf of Gold,
rolled up, and put into a Gold Box; we saluted the Letter with the firing of
several pieces of Cannon, 'twas laid on a Table, with a Canopy over it, and
when the Mandarins ^ast near it, they reverenced it after their manner, it
being their custom to ^oe the greatest Honors they are able to the King's
Letter. The next morning this Ship left us, and went back again up the River,
and at the same time appeared another Ship of the King of Siam's, who came and
cast Anchor ^ear us, in which was Monsr. Constans; ^e came on board of me the
next morning, being the nineteenth, where he di^ed, and afterward he went to
land in ^^y Shalop; I saluted him with twenty pieces of Cannon, and we parted
with ^o small trouble, for we had begun a strict Friendship, and treated one
another with the greatest confidence; he is a Person of great Sense and Merit.
I was astonished to hear no News of Monsr. de Vacher, a Missionary of the French
Company, and of my Secretary, who were to have been on board before me, having
been informed that they parted from the River of Siam on the sixteenth with
seven Gentlemen, who were to accompany the King of Siam's Ambassadors, and
several of their Domestics* this made me think they were lost, a^^ made me
resolve not to tarry for the^ for the Wind was favorable; b^ Monsr. Constans
desired me to have patience one day, whilst he would sen^ along the Coast for
News of them.

The next morning, being the twentieth, part of these People came o^ board,
four of the Gentlemen belonging to the King of Siam's Ambassadors, and most of
their Domestics having been unwilling to embark themselves in a Boat they had
gotten by the way, because 'twas too shallow; they told me, that the same day,
being the sixteenth, they came near our Vesse^ at eleven at night, and thinking
to ca^^ Anchor, they had not Rope enough i^ their Boat, which they perceived i^
seeing their Boat fall off from the Vessel, then there arose a great Wind*
which made the waves arise, and the Streams ran against them, which carried
them forty Leagues out at Sea, with great danger of being cast away; they told
us they had left the others about twenty five Leagues off, who were thrown upon
a muddy bank, so that they are not to be expected so soon, which made me
resolve not to go away before next morning. I believe I ought (...) this place
to speak of the Jesuits which were embarkt with us at Breast, and whom we left
at Siam: They were ^ather Fontenay, Tachart, Gerbillon, le^^mte, Bouvet, and
another, Men of Virtue and Learning, whom the King had chosen to send to China,
to make Mathematical Observations; I think I ^m bound in Justice to say of
them, ^^at when we were arrived to the ^ape of Good Hope, the Dutch Gover^our
was very kind to them, and gave them an House in the Garden belonging to the
Company, very fitting to ^ake their Observations in, where ^hey carried all
their Mathematical In^truments; but as I remained but six or ^even days in this
place, they had not ^^me to make a great many: These Fathers have been very
useful to me in any Voyage to Siam, by their Piety, their good Examples, and
the pleasantness of their conversations; I had everyday near five or six Masses
said, and (...) had set apart a Chamber for that very purpose. All the
Festivals and S^^ days we had a Sermon, or a short E^^hortation, Father
Tachart, one of the^^ catechized the whole Ship's Company three times a Week,
and the same ^^ther has done much good in the Ship^ for discoursing familiarly
with the Se^ men and Soldiers there is not one (...) them but performs his
Devotions; (...) composed all differences which ar^ amongst them. These Fathers
went (...) Siam intending to embark themselves on Portugal Vessels, which are
to (...) met with commonly at Macao, a^^ which return to China. They fou^^ here
Monr. Constans, the King of Siam (...) Minister, who very much loves the
J^suits, and protects them, he has entertained them at Louvo, in one of the
King's Houses, and defrays all the^^ Charges himself.

In an Audience which the King gav^ me, I told him I had brought with (...) six
Jesuits, who intended for China, to make Mathematical Observations, and that
they had been chosen by the King my Master, as the most capable in this
Science. He told me he would see them, and was very glad they were reconciled
with the Bishop; he has spoke to me several times on that Subject. Monsr.
Constans presented them to him four or five days after, and by good hap for
whom there was then an Eclipse of the Moon* The King bid them bring along with
them their Mathematical Instruments into a House where he was going to lie, a
League off of Louvo, where (...) commonly is, when he takes the pleasure of
Hunting; the Fathers fai^ed not to come there, and planted themselves with
their spectacles in a Gallery, where the King came about three of the Clock in
the morning, which was the time of the Eclipse. They made him see in their
Instrument all the Effects of the Eclipse, which ^id much please him, he showed
them much respect, and told them he knew Monr. Constans was their Friend, as
well as Father de la Chaize* He gave them (...) great Crucifix of Gold, and of
Tambacq, and bid them to send it from him to Father la Chaize; he gave another
smaller to Father Tachart, telling them he would see them another time^ Seven
or eight days before my departure, Mr. Constans offered the Fathers that if two
of them would remain at Siam the King would be very glad of it, they answered
they could not, being ordered by the King of France to make what haste they
could to China; he answered, this being so, they must writ^ to their General to
send a dozen of them as soon as he could to Siam, the King having told him he
would build them Prospect houses, Churches and (...) other Conveniences:
Father Fonten^^ made this known to me, I told hi^ he could not do better than
accept o^ this proffer, seeing in the end thi^ must turn to a great advantage;
he told me upon my encouragement, (...) intended to send Father Tachart into
France on this occasion, which I approved of. Father Tachart being a man of
great Wit, and who would undoubtedly effect this business, Letter not being
sufficient to remove seven objections which might be raised, wherefore I
brought him with me home. This Father has moreover much assisted me, as also
the Gentlemen which accompanied me, whom he taught during our Voyage a
considerable part of the Mathematics. I shall say nothing of the great
qualities of Mr. the Bishop of Metellopolis, nor of the Progress of the
Missionaries in the East, seeing that according to their Custom, they will not
fail to give the public a full relation of what concerns Religion in those
Countries. I should have great satisfaction to have met there with Monsieur the
Bishop of Heliopolis; the King of Siam told me one day what Joy 'twould have
been to him, to have seen an Ambassador in that Country from France; but it
did not please God to give us that consolation, and we were informed that he
had ended in China his laborious Pilgrimage.

But before we relate our Arrival at Breast, I believe it will be convenient to
give an Account here of what I remarked (during that small time I was in the
Kingdom) of the Manners, Customs, Government, Commerce and Religion of these
People.

Of the Government, State, Manners, Religion and Commerce of the Kingdom of
Siam, in the neighboring Countries, and several other particularities.
EVery day the Mandarins, whose place it is to do Justice, meet together in a
Hall, where they hear Causes: This place is in the King's Palace, where those
that have any request to make stand at the door, till they be called, and then
they enter with their Petition in their Hands.

Strangers, who have any complaint concerning Traffic, offer it to the
Barcalon, who is the King's Chief Minister, and determins all Affairs about
Commerce, and the occasions of Strangers; in his absence, his usual Deputy does
it, and in both their absences a kind of Aldermen. There is an Officer
appointed to see after the Taxes, and others for other matters. When Affairs
have been examined, an account thereof is given to the Officers within the
Palace, who relate the same to the King, sitting then on a high Throne, all the
Mandarins prostrate themselves with their Faces on the Ground; and the
Barcalon, or others of the Chief Oyas, acquaint the King with the Affair, and
their Judgments thereupon, which he confirms or alters according to his Will,
and this extends to the chief businesses, but he often causes matters to be
brought into the Palace, and sends his pleasure in Writing.

The King is a most absolute Prince, and a Man may say him to be the Siamoises
God; they dare not call him by his Name. He punishes most severely the smallest
Crime, for his Subjects must be governed in a strict manner; he sometimes makes
use of Soldiers of his Guard to punish the guilty, when their Crime is
extraordinary, and sufficiently proved. Those who are commonly employed in
these sort of Executions, are an hundred and fifty Soldiers, or thereabout,
who have their Arms painted from the Shoulder to their Wrists; the common
punishment is thirty, forty, fifty or more stripes on the Shoulders of the
Criminal, according to the greatness of the Crime; others are peckt into the
head with a sharp pointed Iron: as to Accomplices in a fault worthy of Death,
after the Head has been cut off from a real Criminal, it is tied about the Neck
of the Confederate, and is left exposed to the Sun for three days and three
nights, which gives a most filthy stink to him that carries it.

In this Kingdom the Law Talionis is in great use, the worst punishment was,
not long ago, to condemn Malefactors to the River, which is such another kind
of punishment as the Galleys, or rather worse; but now they are punished with
Death. The King minds building more than any of his Predecessors, repairing
the Walls of Towns, raising up Pagodes, and adorning his Palace, building
Houses for Foreigners, and Ships after the European Fashion; he is very kind to
Strangers, retaining several of them in his Service, and desirous of more.

The Kings of Siam were not wont to let themselves be seen as this does; they
lived always alone, but this present King lives like others; but Monsr.
Berithe, an Apostolic Vicar, made use of a certain Brame, who being a kind of
Boufon, had great liberty of speaking to this Monarch, by whose means he gave
the Prince to understand the Power and Manner of the Government of our great
Monarch, and also the Customs of all the Kings in Europe; so that he being a
Man of Sense, as I already observed, he thought fit to send for Monsieur
Berithe, and afterward several others: since which time he is become very
affable, and accessible to Strangers. Those who administer Justice are called
according to their different Offices, Oyas Obrat, Oyas Momrat, Oyas Campeng,
Oyas Ricchou, Oyas Shaynan, Opran Olvan, Oeun, Omun.

Heretofore when the Kings would not let themselves be seen, the ministers did
what they pleased, but the present King who wants not Judgment, and is a great
Politician, will be ignorant of nothing; he has sixth to him Mr. Constans of
whom I have several times spoken. He is a Greek by Nation, a person of great
vivacity of spirit, and extraordinary prudence, he can and does do all things
under the King's authority in the Kingdom, but this Minister would never accept
of any great office which the King has offered him several times. The Barcalon
who died about two years since, and who by right of his place had the
management of all affairs of State, was a person of great abilities, that
acquitted himself well in his employments, and was greatly beloved, he that
succeeded him was a Malais by nation, which is a Country near to Siam, he made
great use of Mr. Bacon an English man to bring the King into an ill opinion of
Mr. Constans, and render him suspected, but the King underst^od the others
malice, caused him to be cudgeled to death, and dispossessed him of his office;
he that enjoys it at present lives in good intelligence with Mr. Constans.

As by the Laws introduced by the Priests, who are called Talopoins, it is not
allowable to kill, so Malefactors were heretofore condemned to the chain, or
led into some Deserts to perish there with hunger, whereas this present King
causes their heads to be struck off, and throws them to Elephants.

The King has spies to know whether matters of any importance are concealed
from him, he most severely chastises those, who abuse their authority. Every
strange Nation established in the Kingdom of Siam has particular Officers, and
the King takes of all these Nations persons which he makes general Officers
throughout all his Kingdom. There are many Chinoises in his Country; there
were heretofore many Moors, but some years past he discovered so many foul
treacheries amongst them, such frauds and enormities, that he has banished most
of them out of his Country.

The commerce of strange Merchants was heretofore very considerable; but since
some years, the various revolutions, which have happened in China, Japon and
other parts of the Indies, have discouraged all Trade. Yet it is hoped, seeing
all these disturbances are quieted, Trade will flourish again; and that the
King of Siam by means of his Minister will send his Ships to take in the most
precious commodities in all the Eastern Countries, and reduce all things to
their first state.

They make War after a different manner from most Nations, driving their
Enemies out of their places, without doing them any farther harm than the
making them slaves; and if they bear Arms, it seems rather they intend to
affright them by shooting on the ground or up into the air, than to kill them,
and if they do, it is rather out of necessity than by their good-wills; but
this happens seldom, because all their Enemies follow the same method. There
are Companies and Regiments who are detached from the rest during the night,
who go into the Enemies Villages, and lead away all the Inhabitants captives,
as well Women as Children; the King gives them Lands and Buffalo's to cultivate
them, and when the King has need he makes use of them. These late years, the
King has made War against the revolted Cambogions, assisted by the Chinoises
and Cochinnoises, where he was forced to fight in earnest, and there were
several Soldiers killed on both sides: He has had several Commanders that are
Europeans, who instruct them to fight after our manner.

Before this War there was a great commerce between their States, and that of
Siam drew great advantages by the great quantities of Gold, Musk, Elephants
teeth and other Merchandises which came from Laos in exchange for Linen and
other Goods.

The King of Siam is still at wars with the King of Pegu, he has several Slaves
of this Nation.

There are People of several Countries in his Kingdom, the Moors were in great
abundance, as I already said, but now several of them are fled into the Kingdom
of Colconde, who were in the King's service, and have carried along with them
above twenty thousand Catis, each Catis being worth fifty Crowns: The King of
Siam wrote to the King of Colconde to send him back those Fugitives, or oblige
them to pay the Sum, but the King would not listen to the proposal, which has
put the King of Siam on proclaiming a War against him, and taking a Ship at the
time when I was at Siam belonging to him, whose lading is valued at an hundred
thousand Crowns. There are six Frigates commanded by English and French, who
cruise on those Coast.

Of late the Emperor of China has given leave to all Strangers to come and
Negotiate in his Kingdom; this permission is only for five years, but it is
hoped it will be continued, seeing it is of great advantage to his Country.

The King of Siam has a great many Malais in his Kingdom, they are Mahometans,
but good Soldiers, yet their Religion differs much from the Moors. The
Pegorans are as numerous in this Country as the originary Siamoises.

There are also a great many Laoises, especially toward the North. Here are
also eight or nine Families of Native Portuguises, but of those which are
called Mesties above a thousand, that is to say, those who are born of
Portuguises and Siamoise women.

The Dutch have there only one Factory.

The English the same.

The French also.

The Cochinnoises are about an hundred Families, most Christians.

Amongst the Tonquinoises there are seven or eight Christian Families.

The Malaises are in great numbers, who are most of them slaves, and who
consequently do not make a body.

The Macassars, and several of the People of the Isle of Java are there
established, as also the Moors; under the Name of these last are comprehended
Turks, Persians, Moguls, Colcondoises and those of Bengala.

The Armenians make a separate body, they are fifteen or sixteen Families all
Christians, the greatest part of them are Horsemen of the King's Guard.

As to the manners of the Siamoises, they are a People very docible, which
proceeds rather from their nature, which desires quiet, than any other cause;
and therefore the Talapoins, who make profession of this apparent virtue,
forbid the killing of all sorts of animals, yet when any others kill Pullets or
Ducks, they eat their flesh, without troubling themselves who did the murder,
or wherefore they were killed.

The Siamoises are generally chaste, having but one Wife, but the rich People,
such as the Mandarins have Concubines, who remain shut up all their lives. The
people are trusty, and seldom steal, but it is not the same with some of the
Mandarins.

The Malaises who are very numerous in this Kingdom are a very base People, and
great Thieves.

In this great Kingdom there are several Pegovans, who have been taken in War,
they are a more stirring and vigorous sort of People, than the Siamoises; the
Women are given to liberty, and their conversation is dangerous.

The Laoises people the fourth part of the Kingdom of Siam, and being one half
Chinoises, they partake of their manners, their craft and inclinations to shirk
handsomely; their Women are white and not ugly, very sociable and consequently
perilous. In the Kingdom of Laos, a man that meets a woman to salute her with
the accustomed civility, kisses her publicly, and did he do otherwise he would
grievously offend her.

The Siamoises as well Officers as Mandarins, are generally rich, for they
spend hardly any thing, the King giving them Servants, who are obliged to
maintain themselves at their own cost, being as it were slaves, they are under
an obligation to serve them for nothing half a year; and these Masters having
many of them, they make use of one part whilst the other rest themselves, but
those who do not serve them, pay them every year a sum of money; their Victuals
are cheap, it being only Rice, Fish, and little Flesh, and there is great.
plenty of this in the Country; their Clothes last them long, being entire
pieces of Stuff, which do not so soon were out as our Apparel, and cost very
little. Most of the Siamoises are Bricklayers, or Carpenters, and there are
very good workmen amongst them, exactly imitating the curious Works of Europe.
As to Painting, they are in a manner ignorant of the use of it, there are
Carved works in their Pagodes, and their Tombs are well polished, and very
stately.

They color finely with Lime, which they soak in water which they draw out of
a Tree, found in the Forests, which makes it so lasting, that it dures an
hundred or two hundred years, although exposed to the injury of the weather.

Their Religion to speak properly, is only a parcel of Fabulous Tales, which
serve only to bring respect and profit to the Talapoins; who recommend not so
much any Virtue to them, as that of giving them Money: They have Laws, which
they strictly observe, especially outwardly. Their end in all their good works
is the hope of a happy Transmigration after their death, into the body of a
rich Man, of a King, or great Lord, or of a tame animal, as Cows or Sheep, for
these People are so far Pythagoreans; they for this reason do much esteem these
Animals, and dare not, as I have noted, kill any of them, as knowing not but
they may kill their Father or Mother, or some other of their Relations. They
believe a Hell, where great enormities are severely punished, only for a time;
as also a Paradise, wherein men of virtue are rewarded, where having become
Angels for some time, they afterward return into the Body of some man or other
animal.

The Talapoins chief business is, to read, sleep, eat, sing and beg; they go
every morning to the Houses or Barges of persons they know, and stand there for
a while with great reservedness, holding their Fan so that they cover half
their Faces; if they see any one disposed to give them any thing, they tarry
till they have received it; they eat whatsoever is given them, whether Pullets
or any other flesh, but they never drink Wine, at least before people; they
perform no office nor prayers to any Divinity. The Siamoi^^^ believe there have
been three great ^alapoins, who by their most sublime ^erlts in several
thousand Transmigrations have become Gods, and having been so, have moreover
acquired such great merits, that they have been wholly annihilated; which is
the term of the greatest merit, and the greatest ecompence attainable, being no
longer fired by their frequent changes of bodies: The last of these three
Talaeins is the greatest God called Na^don, because he has been in five
thousand bodies; in one of these Trans^igrations, of a Talapoin he became (...)
Cow, his Brother would have killed him several times; but there needs a great
book to describe the miracles, which they say, Nature, and not God wrought for
his preservation. In short, this Brother was thrown into Hell for his great
sins, where Nacodon caused him to be crucified; and for this foolish reason
they abominate the Image of Christ on the Cross, saying we adore the image of
this Brother of their God, who was crucified for his Crimes.

This Nacodon being annihilated, they have no God at present, yet his La^
remains, but only among the Talapoine who affirm that after some years, the^
will be an Angel who will become (...) Talapoin, and afterward an absolut^
Divinity, who by his great merits may come to be annihilated. These are the
principles of their Creed; for (...) not to be imagined they adore to Idols,
which are in their Pagodes (...) Divinities, but honor them only (...) men of
great deserts, whose Souls (...) at present in some King, Cow or Talapoin. And
herein consists their Religion, which to speak properly at knowledges no God.
Vice say they, carries with it its own punishment, making the Soul pass into
the body of some vile Fellow, or Hog, or Crow, or Tiger, or such like animal.
They admit of Angels, which they believe to have been the souls of just men and
good Talapoins; as to Demons, they say, they have been the souls of wicked
persons.

The Talapoins are much reverenced by all the people, and even by the King
himself; they cast not themselves on the ground when they speak to him, as the
greatest in the Kingdom do, and the King and persons of highest Quality salute
them first: When these Talapoins thank any one, they put their hand to their
forehead, and as to the common people they salute them not as all: They are
Apparelled like other Siamoises; excepting that their Sash (...) yellow, their
Legs and Feet naked, they wear no Hats, they carry over their heads a Fan, made
of a large Palm leaf, to keep them from the Sun which is very hot; they make
but one meal a day, to wit in the morning, and they eat at night perhaps some
few Figs, or other Fruits; they may leave when they will their Profession and
marry, having no other engagement on them but only to wear a yellow Sash, and
when they leave it, they are at liberty; and this makes them so numerous, that
they are almost one third of the Kingdom. That which they sing in the Pagodes
are some fabulous stories, larded with now and then a fine sentence; those
which they sing during the Funerals of the dead are, We must all die, We are
all mortal* The dead bodies are burnt, musical instruments playing all the
while^ these Funerals are very costly, and after the bodies are burnt of those
that are dead, their ashes are put under great Pyramids, all gilded with Gold,
raised about their Pagodes. The Talapoines practice a kind of Confession; for
the Novices go at Sun rising to prostrate themselves, or sit on their Heels,
mumbling some few words, after which the old Talapoin lifts up his hand on the
side of his Cheek, and gives him a kind of Benediction; which done, the Novice
retires. When they preach, they exhort the People to be charitable to them, and
suppose themselves very able Fellows, when they can cite some passages out of
their ancient Books, written in the Baly Language, which is like the Latin
amongst us; for this Language is fine and emphatical, having its Conjugations
like the Latin.

When the Siamoises intend to marry, the Man's Kindred go first to found the
Maid's Kindreds Inclination, and when they have agreed on the business, the
Man's Parents present seven Boxes of Betel and Arect to the Maid's Relations,
and though they accept of them, and they are already esteemed as married, yet
may be broke off.

Some days after the Man's Relations present him, and he himself offers more
boxes than before, and then he remains in the House of his Father-in-law, and
this only to see the Maid, and to accustom themselves to one another, which
lasts for two Months; after this all the Parents meet, when they put into a
Purse, one a Ring, and another Bracelets, and another Money; there are others
who lay pieces of Stuff o^ the Table: In fine, the most ancient of the Company
takes a lighted Tores and carries it seven times round these Presents, whilst
all the Assemble shouts, wishing it a happy Marriage the Spouse a long Life,
and a perfect Health; they afterward eat and drin^ together, and so the
Marriage is finis^^ As to the Portion, it is as in France excepting that the
young Man's Relations carry his Money to the Maid's Relations; but all this
turns to the same for the Maid's portion is laid apart and the whole is given
to the new married Couple.

If the Husband puts away his Wife without any form of Justice, he lose the
Money that has been given him; (...) he repudiates her by the Judge's Sentence,
who never refuses it, the Woman's Relations give him her portion; (...) there
be any Children, the Boy follow^ the Mother, and the Girl the Father if there
be two Boys, and two Girls one Boy and one Girl live with the Father, and one
of each with the Mother*

As to strong places in the Kingdom, there is Bancock, which is about two
Leagues from the Kingdom of Siam, where there are two Forts, as I already
mentioned. There is a Capital City called Juthia, otherwise Siam, which is
newly fortified by an enclosure of brick Walls. Corsuma, a fronteer Town lying
near the Kingdom of Camboye is ^^t a weak place, and so is Tanaserin on the
side of Malabar, and so are indeed most of his Places.

As to their Soldiers, 'twas not the Custom to pay them; but this present
King having understood that the Kings of Europe paid their Men, intended to
have done the like; but being informed by his Treasurers what an immense ^^min
'twould cost him, by reason of the multitude of his Soldiers, he changed this
pay into Rice, which he districted to them, and they were therewith all well
contented; for heretofore every Soldier was bound to further himself with Rice
at his own cost.

As to their Boats and Vessels their ^arges of State are the finest in the
World, (being made of one piece of Timber,) and which are of a prodigious
length, some of them holding near an hundred and fourscore Rowers; the two ends
are high raised, all is gift with Gold, and neatly carved, and (...) the midst
of them there is a kind of Throne, built like a Pyramid.

Heretofore they had only Vessel built like those of China, some of which they
use still to go into Japon, China and Tunquin, but the King has cause several
to be built after the Europea^ fashion, and has bought some of the English.
There are about fifty Galleys to guard the River and Coasts; h^ Galleys are not
like ours, there being but one Man to an Oar, and they are about forty, or
fifty at most, on each The King makes use of Moors, Chinases and Malabars for
his Seamen. The Commanders of his Ships are either English, or French, by
reason of the^^ the Nations unskilfulness.

He sends every five or six years Vessels to China, of which there are (...) a
thousand to fifteen hundred Tun, laden with Cloth, Coral, and diverse other
Commodities, from the Coasts of Coromandel and Suratte, as Saltpeter, Tin and
Silver; he draws thence raw Silks, Satins, Tea, Musk, Rubarb, Purcelins,
Varnisht Works, China-wood, Gold, Rubies. They make use of several Roots in
Physic, which turns much to their advantage:

The King sends to Japon two or three small Vessels, laden with Merchandise,
there being no need of sending Money, such as Hides of all sorts, which are
good Commodities there, for which they sometimes receive Wedges of Gold and
Silver, Copper, and all sorts of Goldsmiths Work, as also Tea, Cabinets, and
other things, He sends sometimes two or three to Tonquin, of three hundred Tun
at farthest, with Cloth, Coral, Tin, Ivery, Pepper, Saltpeter, and other
Commodities of the Indies, for which he has Musk, raw Silks, varnisht Wood,
wedges of Gold. To Macao the King sends a Ship, for the most part laden with
the same Merchandises as to China. One may send there also to good advantage,
Fans of Gold, Silver, Silks and Arms, for which you receive the same
Merchandises as at China, but not at the same rate.

At Laos the usual Trade is carries on as well by land as by water, sometime
Flat Boats go there, in which are sent Cloth and Linen of Suratte, and the
returns are Rubies, Musk, Gum, Elephants Teeth, Rhinoceros Horns, Buffalos
Skins, and here is great prof^^ in this Trade, because there is no ris^^ to run.

To Camboye the King sends small Barks with Cloth, Suratte Linen, and Kitchen
Utensile which come from China, for which he has brought him Elephants Teeth,
Benjamin, three fort^ of Gums, Buffalo's Skins, Nests o^ Birds for China, of
which I shall speak hereafter.

They sometimes send to Cochinchim but seldom; for this People is untractable,
being most of them unfaithful which hinders Commerce; they can when they go,
Silver of Japon, to great Profit, yellow Wax, Rice, Lead, Saltpeter, red and
black^Cloth, white linen, Vermilion and Quicksilver.

For which they have raw^Silk, Sugar candied, Birds Nests, which are made like
those of Swallows, found on Rocks by the Seaside, they are a good Commodity
for China, and several other places; for these Nests being well washed and
dried, they become as hard as horn, and they are put into Broths; they are of
admirable virtue to the sick and languishing persons, and to those who are
troubled with pains in their Stomach, I have brought some of them into France.

When there is no Vessel to be had at Fret, they send one to Suratte, laden with
Copper, Tin, Saltpeter, Elephants Teeth, Japon Wood, and several other
Merchandises which come from other parts of India, and the returns are
Linen-cloth, and other European Commodities, when there comes none from Siam.

You may also trade to the Coasts of Coromandel, Malabar and Bengala, the
Commodities are Elephants, Tin, Saltpeter, Copper, Lead; and the returns are
Linen of all kinds.

There is seldom any trade to Borneo; this is an Isle near that of Java, where
the returns are Pepper, Dragons blood, white Camphire, yellow Wax, Gold, Pearl,
Diamonds, the best in the World.

The Prince that possesses this Island is not willing to permit a Trade,
fearing always some surprise, and will suffer no European to settle in his
Countries. There have been some French Merchants there, for he trusts them
rather than any other Nation.

There is also a Trade driven to Timor, an Isle near the Molucques, whence is
drawn yellow and white Wax, Gold, Slaves, etc. and thither is sent Linen of
Suratte, Lead, Elephants Teeth Powder, strong Waters, some sort of Arms, red
and black Cloth, and Silver. The People here are peaceable, and negotiate
fairly. Here are a great many Portugueses.

As to the Commodities of Siam, there is only Tin, Lead, Ivory, Skins of wild
Beasts and Elephants; there will be store of Pepper in time, that is to say,
the next Year, L'arrek, Iron, good quantity of Rice, but you may find here
Commodities from all the places before mentioned, and very cheap. Here are
brought pieces of English Cloth, and Searges, Coral and Amber, Cloth from the
Coasts of Coromandel and Suratte, Money in Piastres which are truckt; but as I
now said, most Merchants have left trading here since the King would turn
Merchant, there being brought few Goods, for the Ships that were wont to come
here, came not the last year; so that here is little to be found, all being in
the King and his Ministers Hands, who sell for what they please.

The Kingdom of Siam is near three hundred Leagues Long, without reckoning the
Tributary Kingdoms, to wit, Camboges, Gehor, Patavi, Queda, etc. It Is bounded
northward by the Kingdom of Pegu, and by the Sea of Ganges; on the side of the
West, and from the South by the little Strait of Malaca, which was taken from
the King of Siam by the Portugueses, who have been Masters of it near sixty
years; the Hollanders have taken it from them, and are the present Masters of
it; on the East it is bounded by the Sea, and by the Mountains which divide it
from Camboges and Laos.

The situation of this Kingdom is advantageous, by reason of the great extent
of its Coasts, lying, as it were, between two Seas, which open the passage to
so many vast Regions; its Coasts are five hundred Leagues round, and are every
where accessible, from Japon, China, the Philippin Islands, Tonquin*
Cochinchine, Siampa, Camboge, Java, Colconde, Bengala, and from all the Coasts
of Coromandel, Persia, Suratte, Arabia and Europe; and therefore the Country
is capable of a great Commerce, would the King permit all people to come and
trade there as heretofore.

The Kingdom is divided into eleven Provinces, to wit, that of Siam, Tanaserin,
Josalam, Reda, Pra, Jor, Paam, Parana, Ligor and Siama. These Provinces had
heretofore the Quality of Kingdoms, but are all now under the sole power of the
King of Siam, who sets Governors over them.

There are some which may retain the Name of Principalities, but the Governors
depend on the King, and pay him Tribute. Siam is the principal Province of this
Kingdom, the Capital City is situated fourteen degrees and an half of latitude
northward, on the side of a great and stately River, and Vessels laden come up
to the City, which lies above forty Leagues distant from the Sea, and reaches
above two hundred Leagues up the Country, and (...) this means it leads into
part of the Provinces, which I have above mentioned. This River abounds with
Fish, and its sides are well peopled, although they lie under water one part of
the Year. The Earth is indifferently fruitful, but ill dressed, the inundation
proceeds from great Rains, which fall for three or four Months together, which
makes their Rice grow apace, so that the longer the inundation lasts, the more
Rice they gather; and so far are they from complaining, that their greatest
fear is of dry weather. There are several lands lie untilled, for want of
Inhabitants, which has happened by the preceding Wars, and they being enemies
to labor, they love only those things that are easy; so that those Plains
and Forests which are to be seen on the Mountains serve for a retreat to
Elephants, Tigers, and wild Cows, Deer, and Rhinocero's, and other Animals,
which are here in great quantities.

As to Plants and Fruits, there are several in the Country, but which are not
of great use, and which cannot be easily brought over, by reason of the length
of the way. There are no Birds but what we have in Europe, excepting one like a
Blackbird, which counterfeits the laughing of a Man, his singing and
whistling; the Fruits the most esteemed are Durions, they have a very strong
scent, which does not agree with every body, but as to their taste it is
excellent. This fruit is very hot and dangerous to ones health, if a Man eats
much of it. There is a great Nut, about which is a kind of Cream shut in a
rine, which my Palate could never approve of.

Mango is in this Country in prodigious quantities, and this is the best Fruit
in the Indies, of an exquisite taste, no ways incommoding, unless a Man eats
too much of them, then indeed they may cause a Fever; it is like an Almond, but
as big as a large Pear.

The Mangoustan is a Fruit like a green Nut, which has within it a white Fruit,
of a sharp and pleasant taste, like that of a Peach or Plum, it is very cold,
and yet stringent.

The Jacques is a great Fruit which is very good, but hot, and causes Fluxes in
the Bowels when one eats of it with excess.

The Nana is like the Durion, that is to say, in respect of its Skin, it has at
its end a crown of leaves, like the Artichoke; its meat is very good, tasting
like a Peach and Apricock together; it is very hot and strong, which makes it
commonly eaten soakt in Wine.

The Figs are a sweet Fruit of a kind nature, yet somewhat phlegmatic, there
are of them all the year long.

The Ate is a very good sweet Fruit, and does no hurt; there are who esteem it
more than all the Fruits in the Indies. There are Oranges of all kinds, which
are very good.

The Pataie is a very good Fruit, but the Tree which bears it lives only two
years.

The Penplemouse is a wholesome Fruit which is like the Orange, but of a
sharper taste. There are several other Fruits which are not so good. They began
some years past to sow Corn in the high Countries, near the Mountains, which
comes up well, and is very good.

As also Vines which have been several times planted, but to little purpose,
being eaten up to the roots, by a sort of Ants.

There are a great many Sugar Canes which yield abundance, as also Tobacco,
which the Siamoises eat with Arrek and Lime.

As to the Arrek the Siamoises esteem this Fruit more than any other, for this
is their common food; there is such a great quantity of it, that the Markets
are full of it; and a Siamoise would think himself guilty of a great undecency,
should he speak to any one without having his mouth full of Arrek Betel, or
Tobacco.

There is no City in the East, where is seen more different Nations, than in
the Capital Town of Siam, and where so many different Tongues are spoken; it is
two Leagues round, and half a League long, well peopled, although so much under
water, that it resembles rather an Island; there are none but English, French,
Moors and Chinoises who dwell in the Town, all the other Nations being lodged
round about it in Camps, each Nation by themselves, who, should they come all
of them into one body, would take up as much room as the Town does; but the
reasons I before mentioned hinder most strange Nations to come and bring any
thing with them.

The people are obliged to serve the King four months in the year, and longer
if he needs them; he gives them no pay, they being obliged to keep themselves;
and therefore the Women work to maintain their Husbands.

As to the Officers, from the greatest Lords of the Court, to the meanest of
the Kingdom, the King only allows them some small gratifications, being as
much slaves as the rest, and this saves a great deal of money. As to far
distant Provinces whose Inhabitants do not actually serve, each singular person
pays him a Tribute. I arrived at a time when the Country was wholly under
water, the Town seemed the more pleasant for it; the Streets are very long,
large and straight, there are on both hands Houses built on Piles, and Trees
planted round about them, which makes a fine sight, and you cannot go to them
but in a Boat; you would think you see at one look a City, a Sea and a vast
Forest, where are several Pagodes, which are their Churches, most of which are
gilded; about these Pagodes there are places like Churchyards, planted with
Trees, which are for the most part Fruit Trees, the Houses of the Talapoins are
the biggest and finest, and are very numerous.

This Country is wholsomer than any of the Indies; the Siamoises are commonly
well shaped, although all of them have tanned Countenances, they are well
sized, their Hair black, which they wear short by reason of the heat, they
Bathe often, which contributes to the preservation of their health; the
Europeans who dwell there do the same to avoid sickness: They go about all
their business in Barges, during the Inundations, which lasts six or seven
months together.

The King rises in the morning, and holds a great Council about ten of the
Clock, wherein all affairs are treated of, which being ended his Physicians
assemble to know the state of his health, and he afterward goes to Dinner; he
makes but one real Meal a day, and after Dinner he withdraws into his
Apartment, where he sleeps two or three hours, and it is not known about what he
imploys himself the rest of the time, it not being permitted his Officers to
enter into his Chamber. About ten at night he holds another privy Council,
where there are seven or eight Mandarins of those which are most in his favor;
which Council lasts till mid night: Afterward he has Histories or Verses made
after their manner read to him, to divert him, and commonly after this Council,
Mr. Constans tarries with him alone, to whom he opens his whole mind; the King
being sensible of his vast parts, his Conversation pleases him, and he seldom
can get away till three of the clock in the morning; and this is the manner of
the King's living. At certain times he takes pleasure in hunting, as I already
observed; he is always well dressed: He has no other Children, but a Daughter,
who is called the Princess Queen, of twenty seven or twenty eight years of age,
the King greatly loves her; I was told she was a handsome woman, but she has
never been seen by any men, she eats in the same place and at the same time her
Father does, but at a Table apart, and she is served by Women, who are always
prostrate in her presence.

This Princess has her Court consisting of Mandarins Ladies, who see her every
day; and she holds a Council with her Women about her own affairs; she
distributes Justice to those belonging to her, and the King having given her
Provinces, she maintains her Court with the Revenue. It has happened that when
her Women have been proved guilty of great slanders, or revea^ing Secrets of
great importance, she (...) made their mouths be sowed up.

Before the death of the Queen her Mother, she was as it is said inclinable to
great severities; she goes sometimes a Hunting with the King, but it is in a
curious Chair placed on an Elephant, and where though she is not seen, yet she
beholds all that passes. There are Horsemen who march before her to clear the
way, and if there be any one in the road that cannot soon get out, he
prostrates himself on the ground on his face. She is all day shut up with her
Women, diverting her self with no work, her dress is plain and light, her Legs
bare, she has light Pumps on her feet, always bare headed, and wears her Hair
not passing four or five Fingers long: She is a great lover of sweet scents,
anointing her Head with oil; for in those Countries their Hair must look
shining, to be fine; she Bathes every day, which is the custom of all Indians,
as well men as women: I have learnt all this of Madam Constans, who often makes
her Court to her. All the Women which are in her Chamber are always prostrate
with their faces (...) the ground in a rank; the ancientest are nearest her,
and they have the liberty to look on the Princess, which (...) have not in
reference to the King, be they of what quality they will; for as long as they
are in his presence, they lie prostrate on the ground, even when they speak to
him.

The King has two Brothers. The King's Brethren here are next Heirs of the
Crown, to the Exclusion of his Children. When he goes out to Hunt or walk,
notice is given to all Europeans not to be in the way, unless they will lie
prostrate on the ground. A while before he goes out of his Palace you hear the
Trumpets sound and Drums beat, who march before the King; at this noise the
Soldiers who stand in a row, prostrate themselves, their foreheads to the
ground, with their Muskets under them; they are in this posture as long as the
King can see them on his Elephant, where he is placed in a close gilt Chair;
the Horse-Guard which attends him, which consists of Moors is about forty, all
the King's Household are on foot, some behind and some on one side, holding
their hands closed, and thus follow him.

There are some of the principal Mandarins who follow him on Elephants, ten or
twelve Officers who carry Umbrellas about the King, and there are only those
who do not prostrate themselves, for at the same moment that the King stops,
all the other fall down on their faces, and even those that are on Elephants.

As to the manner which the King of Siam observes in the reception of
Ambassadors, as those of Tonquin, Cochinchine, Colconda, Malais, Java, and
other Kingdoms; he receives them in a great Hall covered with Tapestry, the
chief men of the Kingdom being in another Hall which stands lower, and the
Officers of lesser quality in another, lower than the former, all of them
prostrate on Tapestry in expectation of the King's appearance at a window which
is over against them; the Hall wherein the Ambassadors must be is raised about
ten or twelve feet, and distant from this Hall thirty feet; it is known the King
is upon appearing by the noise of Trumpets, Drums and other Instruments: The
Ambassadors are behind a wall which encloses this Room in expectation of the
King's coming, and the Minister's orders, which the King sends by one of the
Officers of his Chamber, according to the quality of the Ambassadors; after the
Ministers have the King's command, the door of the Hall is opened, and then the
Ambassadors appear with their Interpreters, and the Officer of the King's
Chamber, who serves for a Master of Ceremonies, and precedes them on his Knees,
his hands closed; the Ambassador with his Interpreters follows him in the same
posture, with great modesty, till he is come one half of the way where he is to
go, and then bows himself three times, and so continues going to the nearest
corner of the Halls where the Guards are, and then he begins to bow again;
there is a Table between the King and the Ambassador, about eight foot distant,
where lie the Presents, which the Ambassador brings the King, and between this
Table and the Ambassador's there is a Mandarin who receives the King's words:
in this Hall are the King's Ministers, distant from the Ambassadors about three
paces, and the Captain of the people, whence the Ambassador is, between him and
the Ministers; the King begins to speak first, and not the Ambassador,
ordering his Ministers to enquire of the Ambassador, when he parted from the
Presence of his Master, whether the King and all the Royal Family be in health,
to which the Ambassador answers what is fitting, by his Interpreter, the
Interpreter tells it the Captain of the Nation (as they call it) of which the
Ambassador is, the Captain to the Barcalon, and the Barcalon to the King. After
this the King offers some questions about two or three Points concerning the
Ambassador; and afterward the King orders the next Officer to the Table to
give Betel to the Ambassador, which is the sign to present him a Vest; and
immediately the King retires with the noise of Drums and Trumpets, and other
Instruments. The Ambassador's first Audience passes between him and the
Minister, who examines the Letter, and the Presents of the Prince who has sent
them: The Ambassador does not present the Letter to the King, but to the
Minister, after some days of Council held on this subject.

When they be Ambassadors of Independent Kings, as of the Countries of Persia,
the Great Mogol, the Emperor of China or Japon, they are received in this
following manner.

The Grandees of the first and second rank go to the foot of the window where
the King is, to prostrate themselves according to their qualities on Tapestry,
when those of the third, fourth and fifth rank, are in a lower Hall, and expect
the King's coming, who appears at a window which jets out of a wall, and is
raised ten foot; the Ambassadors are in a place out of the Palace, expecting
the Master of the Ceremonies, who comes and receives them, and there are the
same Ceremonies used which I have already mentioned. The Ambassador entering
into the Palace, puts his hand upon his head, marches through two Halls to the
Stairs, which are over against the window where the King is, and when he is
there, he claps one knee to the ground, and then immediately a door is opened
that he may appear before the King, and the same Ceremonies are practiced which
I have already denoted. There is a Golden Platter on the Table, wherein lies
the letter translated and open, having been received by the Ministers some days
before in a Hall appointed for that purpose. When the Ambassador is in his
place the Minister's Deputy takes the Letter, and reads it aloud; which done,
the King asks the Ambassador some questions by his Minister, his Minister by
the Captain of the Nation, and the Captain by the Interpreter, as I have
already observed.

Having learnt this manner of receiving Ambassadors, which did not seem
agreeable to the greatness of the Monarch by whom I was sent, I desired two
Mandarins who attended me by the King's order, to inform him that I entreated
him I might have the same reception which Ambassadors are wont to have in
France, which was granted me in the manner I related.

Departure from the Road of Siam.
Having given some account of the Religion, Manners, Customs and Situation of
the Kingdom of Siam, ^ come now to relate my departure which was on the twenty
second of December, 1685.

We hoisted Sail at three of the morning with a good Northern wind, which
continued all along the Coasts of Camboge, which is a Kingdom adjoining to that
of Siam, and Cochinchine, The People of these two Kingdoms have the same
belief, and live after the same manner, There past nothing remarkable to the
Strait of Banca, where I ran on ground, on the side of an Isle called Lucapara,
on a Muddy bank where there were but three fathoms of water, and our Vessel
required above sixteen; this did not much disturb me, though it did much the
Ships Crew, whom I sent to sound about the Vessel, I caused a small Anchor to
be brought, to which there was a Cable, and we got off this bank in less than
five hours, and though I had a good Dutch Pilot, yet I caused this Strait to be
often souded; I continued my course and arrived at Bantam the eleventh of
January, 1686. As soon as I had cast Anchor there, I sent an Officer of my Ship
to Complement the Governor, and to have fresh provisions. He sent me for a
Present six Oxen, Fruits and Herbs, and I remained in this Road but thirty
hours. We weighed Anchor on the twelfth at night, but the calm overtook us,
which obliged us to cast Anchor.

On the thirteenth I weighed Anchor, and we had all that day calms and contray
winds, but at night there arose a small wind, which made us double the point of
Bartam, and pass the Strait of Sonda in less than eight hours: I was obliged to
land at the Isle of Prince, which is at the mouth of the Strait; in expectation
of the Mali^^ Frigate, which could not follow us, but at length joined us.

On the fourteenth I held on my course directly for the Cape of Good Hope, with
a favorable North wind, and North North-East. The twenty third at break of day
having made about an hundred and fifty Leagues we saw the Isles of Holy Cross,
which surprised us, because the evening before I caused the Pilots point to be
showed me, who told me to be at farthest, but fifteen Leagues of Latitude
Southward, and twenty of Longitude.

This Island lies very low, and had it been three or four hours in the night,
we had certainly run on ground, but it pleased God to preserve us. We
attributed this error to the Tides which ran against us; we past this Isle
quickly, the wind blowing hard, and continued our course. The Sea is full of
Fish in these parts, and there are a great many Birds, the weather was fair,
and we every day made thirty, forty, fifty Leagues; we were diverted by
pleasant game we saw carried on by the Albucorps and Bonnitres, and a small
Fish called a flying-fish, who when he sees himself pursued, gets out of the
water, and flies as long as his wings ^ie moist, which may be as far perhaps as
the flight of wild Ducks; but there is a Bird which carries a great feather in
its Tail, longer than the others by half a foot, and which has the form and
almost the color of a Straw; he is always in the air, and when he sees this
flying-fish leave the water, he lets himself fall down upon it, as a bird of
prey on his game, and some times they go deep into the water after it; so that
this slying-fish seldom fails being taken.

On the fifteenth of February, we found our selves not far from the Isle of
Maurice, where we met with a blast of wind that lasted us three days; the Sea
was extreme rough, and gave us a great deal of trouble; the waves passing often
over our Ship, which made as to ply our Pumps to clear it of water.

On the ninteenth the Weather grew fair, and gave us leisure to set to rights
what the Sea had disordered. The first night wherein this bad weather happened,
the Frigate that was with me left us, the rendesvouz being at the Cape of Good
Hope. Keeping on our course we had more hard weather, which much incommoded us,
the waves beating against our Ship in such a manner as threatened great danger.

On the tenth of March, about two hours after noon, we perceived a Vessel, at
first I thought it was that which had left me, but coming nearer, we saw her
carrying English Colors, and being willing to hear. News, and supposing she
came from Europe; I came up to her, and sent out my long Boat with an Officer,
to know if there were any Wars, for when a man has been long at Sea, one Knows
not whom to trust; word was brought me 'twas an English Merchant-Man, who, had
parted from London five months since, and had touched now here, and that he
intended straight for Tonquoin, that the Captain had told him that there was no
War in France, and that all Europe was at Peace; but yet there had been some
troubles in England occasioned by the Duke of Monmouth, who had placed himself
at the Head of ten or twelve thousand men, but that the King's Troops had
routed them, and taken him Prisoner; and that he was beheaded, and several of
his Followers hanged, and so this rebellion was ended. He also told us that he
had seen Land the day before seven Leagues off, which made us judge that we
were thirty or thirty five Leagues off of it. We held on our course the rest of
the day and night, and the next morning at ten of the clock we spied Land,
seven or eight Leagues off us; I sounded and we found fourscore fathom and
upward, we clapped on all our Sail to endeavor to get before night to the Cape
of Good Hope; the next morning at break of day we saw it and doubled it; about
ten of the clock we espied a Vessel windward of us, and drawing near we found
'twas the Frigate, which left us near the Isle of Maurice; this was the second
time we met after our separation, both together at the place of our
appointment, which seldom happens on the Sea. When I was ready to cast Anchor
the wind blew so hard against us, that I was forced to tack about and Anchor at
the Isle of Robins, which is about three Leagues from the Fort of the Cape; the
next morning being the thirteenth of March we weighed Anchor, and went and rode
near the Fort, where I arrived about two of the clock: I found there nine
Vessels which came from Batavia, and were bound for Europe. I sent the
Ghevalier Cibois to Complement the Governor, and to ask his leave to send
eight or ten sick people on shore, and take in fresh water and necessary
Browisions. He received respectfully my Complement, and bid the Officer tell
me, I was Master, and that I might do what I pleased. Arriving there in Autumn,
wherein all Fruits are good, he sent me Melons, Grapes and Salads, I saluted
the Fort with seven Cannon; for the King's order is to salute the Forts first,
and they were exactly answered. The Vessel which carried the Admiral's Flag,
saluted me afterward with seven pleces, and I returned him the same Civility.
There were in this fleet three flag Ships, to wit, the Admiral, Vice Admiral
and Counter-Admiral. The Fruit which was sent me were excellent good, as well
as the Salads, and so were the Melons and Grapes; I went to land, and walked in
their Garden, which made me remember those in France, for as I already said,
'twas a very fine one, and well kept; the great quantity of Pulse growing there
is very grateful to Seafaring Men, the Governor was no Niggard, ordering us
what we pleased.

He is a Man of sense, and well becomes the place he holds, in which it is said,
if he remains long, he will make his Fortune: When there be any Hollanders that
will dwell there, he gives them as much Land as they will, builds them a House,
gives them Oxen for Tillage, and all other Cattle and Utensils of Husbandry
that are necessary; all which is valued, and when they are able they pay the
Company for them. They are obliged to fell all the Fruits of their Lands to the
Comapany, at a certain price, which is advantageous to both parties. The Wine
that they buy of them for sixteen Crowns an Hogshead, they sell for an hundred
to strangers, and to their own Fleets which pass this way; that is to say, to
the Seamen who drink it on the spot; Sheep and Oxen are sold also
proportionably, which brings a great Revenue to the Company; and makes their
Fleets refresh themselves at small charge, and remain whole months there,
according to their occasions.

When I arrived, 'twas not long since the Governor was returned from a
Discovery which he had made of Gold and Silver Mines. It Is said that there are
many, and that they lie easy and shallow. He was two hundred and fifty Leagues
up the Country; he carried along with him three or four Outantosts, who spoke
Dutch, who lead him to the next Nation, which was likewise Outantosts, and took
others in his way. He met with near nine different Nations, or sorts of People,
some of which he took along with him, according as he changed the People, to
make himself understood; he has, I am told, gotten great light in what he aimed
at; he says the last Nation is the most polished, and that they came before him
Men and Women dancing, being all clothed with the skins of Tigers, which hung
down to their Feet. He brought one of these Outantosts, whom he has caused to
be taught Dutch, to return thither the next Year. All these several People have
many Cattle, and this is their Revenue. The Governor had with him fifty
Soldiers, a Painter to draw colors of Beasts, Birds, Serpents; and such
Plants as he should find; one to observe the course they took, and a Pylot, for
they went always by the Compass, and drove along with them three hundred Oxen,
to carry their Provisions, and draw fourteen or fifteen Carts; when they met
with any Mountains they dismounted their Carriages, and took out whatsoever was
therein, and loaded the Oxen with it, and thus passed over them. Being advanced
in the Country, they were three or four days before they could find any Water,
which much incommoded them; he was five Months and an half in this Journey.

He met with several wild Bea^^s, and says that the Elephants are Monsters, far
exceeding in bigness those of the Indies; as also Rhinocero's of a prodigious
size. He saw one with which he thought he should have been killed; for when
this Animal is in a fury, there is no weapon can stop him, his Skin is hard,
and a Musket shot cannot pierce it; they have two Horns which grow together in
the Skin of this Animal.

The Abode I made at the Cape furnished me with Fish during the time of Lent. I
saw a Whale of the largest size, I think which came within less than a Pistol
shot of our Vessel; there were also store of Birds, which gave us the same
diversion as those which I have already mentioned.

A Journal of the Way I made from Siam to the Cape of Good Hope.
WE parted from the Road for Bantam the twenty second of December, 1685.

The 22. December. I made to the South quarter South East 30 Leagues. 23.
December. To the South South East 19 Leagues. 24. December. South East quarter
of South 17 Leagues. 25. December. South East quarter of East 5 Leagues. 26.
December. Same 20 Leagues. 27. December. South quarter South East 27 Leagues.
28. December. South half quarter of South East 42 Leagues. 29. December. South
quarter of South West 35 Leagues. 30. December. South South West 6 Leagues. 31.
December. South 3 Leagues.
1. January. South South East 3 Leagues. 2. January. South East quarter of
South 17 Leagues. 3. January. 3. South 4 Leagues. 4. January. South 7 Leagues.
5. January. South 5 Leagues. 6. January. South 1 Leagues. 7. January. South
East quarter of East 2 Leagues. 8. January. East South East 8 Leagues. 9.
January. South 11 Leagues. 10. January. South West quarter of South 7 Leagues.
11. January. South quarter of South East 3 Leagues. 12. January. South 7
Leagues. 13. January. South 6 Leagues. 14. January. South South West 7 Leagues.
15. January. South West 3 Leagues. 16. January. South West quarter of South 6
Leagues. 17. January. South South West 3 Leagues. 18. January. South 10
Leagues. 19. January. Strait of Banca to 45 Leagues. 20. January. South quarter
of South East 24 Leagues. 21. January. South 20 Leagues. 22. January. South and
South East to Bantam Way from Siam to Bantam 422 Leagues.
Departure from Bantam to the Cape of Good Hope, 12 March, 1686.
12 of March.
From Bantam to the Isle of Prince 25 Made to the South West 26frac12; The same
31 To the West South West 18 South West quarter of West 24 South West 18 South
West quarter West 24 West South West 30 The same 39 South South West 24 West
South West 20 Same 42 Same 29 Same 27 866 Leagues.
South West quarter of West 16 West South West 20 South West quarter West 25
West South West 23 The same 37 The same 25 South West quarter West 24 West
South West 43 The same 49 The same 51 The same 51 The same 46 West quarter
South West 40 The same 30 West South West 46 The same 60 South West quarter
West 56 South West 42 West quater South West 5 West 43 West quarter South West
33 The same 10 West South West 19 West quarter South West 31 The same 33 The
same 18 West quarter North West 10 West half quarter South West 20 West quarter
South West 16 1796 Leagues.
To the West quarter South West 32 West South West 43 West 20 West 37 West
quarter South West 45 The same 51 West South West 11 North West quarter North
11 North East quarter North 8 South West 28 West North West 20 North North West
20 Considering the Cape of Horn beaks, and I made to the Bay of the Cape of
Good Hope 33 The total 2158 Leagues.
On the twenty sixth of March at two in the afternoon, I set Sail with a good
Wind; in leaving the Bay near the Dutch Fort of the Cape of Good Hope, I saw
three Vessels who made toward the Cape, but I could not distinguish of what
Nation they were, I believe them to have been Dutch, because this number was
expected from the Isle of Ceilan. After we had past forty Leagues from thence,
we found the Sea very boisterous, which gave us much trouble, but we continued
on our course to pass the Line in the same longitude we did before. Our Voyage
must needs be pleasant, for as I already noted, the King of Siam sent with us
Ambassadors into France, to show the King how earnestly he desired his
Friendship; his great Qualities and Renown having reached his Ears, and been
long since known in the Indies. He told me in an Audience, that he would give
them no Instructions in point of Ceremony, those of France being very different
from his Kingdom's, because he was persuaded the King would not require any
thing of them prejudicial to his Honor, and that he would leave me to counsel
them what they had to do when they came to France; that he relied upon me for
this, being sure I would not impose upon them. We had then with us three
Ambassadors, the most considerable Persons in Siam. The first is Brother to the
late deceased Barcalon, who was the King's Chief Minister, a Man of sense,
having been ever concerned with his Brother in all his greatest Affairs; this
Person, accompanied with another, came and received me at the mouth of the
River of Siam, when I arrived, and has been ever with me, attending me wherever
I went. The first time I saw him he seemed to me an ingenious Person, free from
all affectation and reservedness, which made me tell Monsieur Constans that he
would be a very fit Man to be sent over Ambassador to France. The second is
aged, and wants not wit, having been Ambassador in China, and acquitted himself
to the King his Master's Satisfaction. The third is aged about twenty five or
thirty years, his Father is Ambassador in Portugal; these are the best natured
People in the World very easy and obliging, good humoured, and their
Friendship is not to be regarded as unprofitable. They write down the smallest
matters they see, and I like that the better, seeing they will have
Observations enough in France, neither do I doubt but they will give a true
Account of them to their Master.

They should have had twelve Mandarins for their Retinue, but they have but
eight, four of them being left behind at Siam, because they came not soon
enough on board; they brought with them twelve young Youths, to learn the
Tongue, and Trades, but part of them are also left behind with the Mandarins.
The Abbat de Lionne was entreated by this King to go to France with his
Ambassadors, because he speaks their Language. The King also told Mr. Vacher,
that he would be very glad that he would return with his Ambassadors, which he
has also done; he will be to them of great use, being an active Person. We have
also with us Monsr. the Abbat de Choisy, who went to Siam to reside there in
quality of Ambassador, in case the King should become a Christian; he is a very
honest. Gentleman, and wants no good quality. He said his first Mass on board
us, and gave us several good Sermons; Monsr. the Abbat du Charter was of our
company, an able and honest Preacher. Mr. Vaudricourt was the Captain of our
Vessel; he is a Gentleman admirably well qualified for his Place, taking care
of every thing that concerned him, and gave us all content.

There have remained about twelve or fifteen French men at Saim, in the Service
of that King, or Mr. Constans

I Continued my course till I dame near to the Isle of St. Pleten which is
inhabited by English; such Ships as come from the Indies touch there, that is
to say when they go not to the Cape of Good Hope; I was told it was a very good
and fruitful Island, it lies six Degrees Latitude Southwards I past on in
sight of the Isle of Ascension which is eight degrees Southward of the Line.
This Isle is not inhabited, most Vessels make some stay here to take Tortoises,
there being here great numbers of them, and they are no small refreshment to
Seafaring men; they live a month or six weeks without eating, they can only
be taken a nights, for in the day time they keep to the Sea, and at night come
to Land to lay their Eggs, which they hide in the sand. To take them you
must^ly hid with a great stick in your hand, and surprise them when they come
out of the water, and throw them on their backs, and then they cannot stir; a
man may strike fourscore or an hundred in a night. Here Vessels come on purpose
to take these animals and salt them, and then carry them to the Isles in
America, being bought by the Inhabitants for their Slaves. Having a good wind I
tarried not long here, not being willing to lose time in passing the
Equinoctial Line; for sometimes a man is forced to be long about it by reason
of calms and rains to be met there: The twenty eighth of April I past the Line
most happily, the heats no wise incommoding us; this is the fourth time I past
it without leaving my Cloth Suit; all our men were in health excepting four or
five, who were sick of the Gripes, which Distemper they brought from Siam; this
Distemper is seldom cured in that Country, and I lost about ten or twelve men
who died of it. We saw but few Fish all along, which is unusual, for one
commonly meets with great quantities: We took one about eight foot long and
four foot broad, he had a hole on the to pof his head, through which he
breaths, and throws up water into the air like a fountain; he made a great
noise, and weighed about three hundred weight, he is good to eat. On the twenty
ninth we took two more Fish which weighed about an hundred and fifty a piece.
We were on the Northern Coasts, having a good wind; I was about thirty two days
coming from the Cape of Good Hope to the Line.

On the sixteenth of May about midnight we past the Tropic according to the
best judgment our Pylots could make in taking the height. On the seventeenth
about noon, this being the sixth time we past the Tropicks in this Voyage, we
left by the benefit of a good wind the Torrid Zone.

The first of June we saw Land, when we thought we werea bove an hundred and
fifty Leagues off it; this surprised us, because there arose great mists we
were obliged to draw near it, and the weather clearing, we found it was the
Isle of Flora, which is one of the Aures, and which lies most Westward, and
stands high, there falls from its mountains great water courses into the Sea.
We needed swift streams to carry us to the West, which we gained above an
hundred and fifty Leagues Eastward. The fifth we saw a Vessel that came near
us, but it being night we knew not what she was, on the seventh we saw another
which advanced toward us, I sent an Officer on board in my long Boat, who
brought me word it was an English Vessel that came from Virginia and was bound
to London, she was laden with Tobacco; and there being a great wind, and we out
sailing her, soon left her behind us. We had variable weather till the twelvth,
but about six of the clock at night, having a Western wind, the Sea grew so
boisterous, it blowing hard also that we were forced to let down all our sail
and cast Anchor being within an hundred Leagues distant from Breast. The weather
being very cloudy and showery; we kept off the Land as much as possible, for
these blasts of winds lasts sometimes eight days together, but about ten of the
clock at night on the thirteenth the wind grew calm, and we again set sail, and
on the eighteenth of June arrived in the Road of Breast, at four in the
afternoon, where as soon as we had cast Anchor I made both our Ships fire their
Guns to salute the Ambassadors of Siam, which I brought along with me.

Departure from the Cape of Good Hope for Breast, on the twenty sixth of March,
1686.
March. Made to the North West. 30 Leagues The same. 14 Leagues The same 19
Leagues To the West North 12 Leagues To the North North West 15 Leagues To the
North West 26 Leagues The same 20 Leagues To the North North West 29 Leagues To
the North West 20 Leagues The same 31 Leagues The same 38 Leagues North West
quarter West 38 Leagues To the North West 38 Leagues The same 45 Leagues To the
North West West 35 Leagues To the North West 36 Leagues The same 46 Leagues The
same 40 Leagues The same 34 Leagues The same 39 Leagues The same 42 Leagues The
same 32 Leagues The same 31 Leagues The same 37 Leagues The same 36 Leagues To
the North West quarter West 34 Leagues To the North West 33 Leagues To the
North West 27 Leagues The same 28 Leagues To the North West 24 Leagues The same
24 Leagues The same 24 Leagues The same 21 Leagues The same 29 Leagues To the
North North 27 Leagues The same 19 Leagues To the North West 17 Leagues The
same 29 Leagues The same 24 Leagues The same 18 Leagues The same 30 Leagues To
the North West quarter West 27 Leagues Between the North West, and the North
West North 37 Leagues To the North West quarter North 29 Leagues To the North
North West 37 Leagues The same 33 Leagues To the North North West 40 Leagues To
the North North West 35 Leagues To the North quarter North West 35 Leagues To
the North 36 Leagues To the North quarter North West 32 Leagues To the North 31
Leagues To the North East 22 Leagues To the North East quarter North 29 Leagues
To the North East 26 Leagues To the North 29 Leagues To the North West North 12
Leagues The same 14 Leagues The same 27 Leagues The same 5 Leagues To the North
East quarter North 22 Leagues The same 40 Leagues To the North East 38 Leagues
The same 31 Leagues The same 39 Leagues The same 24 Leagues To the East quarter
North East 20 Leagues To the North 18 Leagues The same 30 Leagues To the North
East quarter North 26 Leagues The North North East 25 Leagues To the North East
quarter East 26 Leagues The same 30 Leagues To the North East quarter 53
Leagues The same 22 Leagues To the South East East 17 Leagues To the East 34
Leagues To the East 51 Leagues The same 50 Leagues The same 27 Leagues The same
35 Leagues The same 20 Leagues The total about 4200 Leagues.
A Memorandum of the King of Siam's Presents to the King of France.
TWO pieces of Cannon six foot long cast, hammered cold, set out with Silver,
mounted on their carriages, garnished also with Silver; made at Siam. A Basin
and Ewer of Tambac, a Metal more esteemed than Gold, which is made at Siam
after that Country fashion. A Golden Basin raised on four fronts, with its
Ewer upon a level for its support, made at Japon. A Golden Ship, after the
Chinoise fashion, with all its Tacklings, 2 Flagons of Gold embost, of Japon,
to stand on a Cupboard, which may be put upon occasion into a Japon Trunk. A
Javelin with embost work, after the Japon manner. Two small Golden Cups, with
their small Bowls on a high Stand, Japon work. Two small Golden Cups, without a
covering, well wrought, Japon work. A Golden Porringer, fine Japon work. Two
Chinoise Dames, each of them on a Peacock, carrying in their hands a Silver Cup
enamiled, the Peacocks by turning a spring walk on a Table. Two Silver Trunks,
Japon work. Two great Silver Flaggons, with 2 gilded Lions, with 2 great Basins
all of the same Japon work. Two great Goblets of Silver, Japon work. A great
Silver Goblet without a Cover, with a Silver Basin. A Basin and Ewer of Silver,
on four fronts of Japon. Two Silver Bowls, English fashion, to drink Beer in,
with small Cups, Japon work. Two Chocholate Dishes with their Silver Covers,
Japon work. Two large Japon Cups. Two Cups with their Silver Dishes to drink
out of. Two great Silver Gargling Cups, Chinoise fashion, with their Dishes
Japon work. Two Chinoise Horsemen carrying in their hands 2 small Cups, who
have a motion by springs, all of Silver. Two Ewers on two Tortoises, all
Silver, and wrought, China work. Two Silver Covers, Japon work, which have a
motion by a spring, and carry each of them a Cup. Two great Japon Cabinets,
Flowerdeluced within, set forth with Silver, and finely varnisht, Japon work.
Two small Trunks, set forth with Silver, Japon work. Two small Tortoise shell
Cabinets, set out with Silver, Japon work. A little Silver Cabinet, Japon work.
A varnisht Table, adorned with Silver, Japon work. Two Umbrellas, Japon wood,
containing six leaves, which is a Present sent by the Emperor of Japon to the
King of Siam. Another Silk one, wrought sinely with birds and flowers, made at
Siam. Another larger than the former, containing twelve leaves, and may serve
for a good shelter in the night. Two great leaves of Paper, in one of which are
all sorts of China Birds, in the other all kinds of Flowers. A Server from the
Emperor's Table of Japon. A field Server for a great Japon Lord, well
varnished. A Japon Cabinet. A varnished Table. Two small Coffers full of
varnished Cups. Two other small Trunks, Japon work. A great round Box. Two Silk
Lanthorns. Two other round Lanthorns. Two morning Gowns. A piece of Persian
Tapestry. A piece of red Velvet Tapestry. China Tapestry. Two pieces of
Indoustian Tapestry. Nine pieces of Bezoar of several animals. Two Trunks,
Japon work. Two kinds of Ablerdo's. Fifteen thousand and fifty pieces of
Porcelains, the best of all the Indies.
Mr. Constans's Presents to the King.
A great Gold Chain finely wrought. A Goblet covered with Silver, standing on a
Golden foot. Two small Silver Trunks, Japon work. Three Silver Chocholate
Dishes, Japon work. A great Silver Ewer. Two Dishes, Japon work. Two Dishes
standing on three feet with two Ears, of Japon. Two other Dishes of different
fashions, but of the same work. Two round Dishes of the same work. Two others
with Ears. A Silver Tea Pot. Two small Cups with Ears. Two Chocholate Cups.
Four several small Dishes to burn Incense after the China and Japon fashion. A
great Box the same work. Another, etc. Porcelains. Twelve fine Plates. Twelve
others. Twelve others of Japon. Six of another sort. Six small Dishes. Two
Plates. Two Plates of ancient China work. Six varnished wooden Plates. Three
extraordinary earthen Tea pots. A bird of Prey of Japon. Two Japon Ducks. Two
white well shaped Dogs. Another China Tea pot. Sixteen different sorts of
earthen ware of Patoine. Twenty five stone Figures. Two Umbrellas, Japon. Two
Cabinets of the same work. Two of another fashion. A Japon Box to put Combs in.
Four feet varnished for a Bed. A Ladies Server of Japon. Two Powder Boxes. Two
others. Another Server. Another. Two Boxes, Japon. A Screen. Two Aggot Spoons.
A Lady of Siams Mantle. A piece of Casinire Stuff. Two Tea pots full of such
Tea as the Emperor of China uses. A smaller. A Japon Trunk full of Birds
Nests. Seven great Porcelain Vessels. Two Chaplets of Calamba. Three Rhinoceros
horns. Two Birds of prey, of Porcelain.
The King of Siam's Presents to the Dauphin.
2 Calanes of Japon, set out with Tambac, which are two blades of large Swords
at the end of a long Staff. A Basin and Ewer, Japon work. A Golden Tea-pot A
Golden Goblet. Another Japon work. A Silver Chocholet Pot. 2 Silver close Pots.
2 Silver Scritores Japon. 2 Cups inlaid with Silver, adorned with Gold. A great
Silver Cup. 2 More of Japon. 2 Cups with their Dishes of Silver. 2 Others, etc.
2 Of another fashion. A Silver Japon Tobacco Box. A great Vessel with a Silver
Basin of Japon. 2 Japon Ladies, who carry each of them in their hands a little
Dish, with a Silver Cup in it, and when the Cup is full, the Ladies walk about.
A Silver Crab. A Goblet made of Stone. Another. Another of Stone. A China Lion
in Stone. A small Stone Basin. 2 Japon Gowns. Velvet Tapestry. Silk flowered
Tapestry of several Colors. Two pieces of Tapestry. 2 Silver Cabinets, and a
little Trunk.
With many other valuable Presents to Madam the Dauphiness, which I am weary of
relating. Also Presents from the Princess Queen of Siam to the Duke of
Burgundy, and to the Duke of Anjou. Neither do I mention those given by Monsr.
Constans to Monsr. the Marquis of Seignelay, nor those that were given to the
Ambassador, nor to Monsr. Choisy, which were very magnificent ones.

THE END.

