THE CHARACTER OF AN HONEST LAWYER.

By H. C. PHilnomion

Justitiae cultor, rigidi servator Honesti, in commune bonus. LICENSED. Aug,
29th. 1676. Roger L' Estrange

LONDON, Printed for Jonathan Edwin at the three Roses in Ludgate Street. 1676.

THE CHARACTER OF An Honest Lawyer.
AN honest Lawyer, is the Lifeguard of our Fortunes; the best Collateral
security for an Estate. A trusty Pilot to steer one safe through the dangerous
(and ofttimes Inevitable Ocean of Contention. A true Priest of Justice, that
neither sacrifices to Fraud nor Covetousness, and in this out-does those of a
higher Function, that he can make people Honest, that are Sermon Proof. He is
an infallable Anatomist, of Meum and Tuum, that will presently search a Cause
to the quick, and find out the Peccant humor, he little lurking-cheat, though
masked in never so fair Pretenses. One that practices Law, so as not to forget
the Gospel, but always wears a Conscience as well as a Gown; he weighs the
Cause more than the Gold, and if That will not bear the Touch, in a generous
scorn puts back the Fee. Though he knows all the Criticisms of his Faculty, and
the nice Snapperado's of Practice, yet the never uses them, unless in a
Defensive way to Countermine the plots of Knavery, for he affects not the
Devilish skill outbaffling Right, nor aims at the shameful Glory of making a
Bad Cause good, but with equal contempt hates the Wolves study, and the Dogs
eloquence, and disdains to grow great by Crimes, or build himself a Fortune on
the spoil of the Oppressed, or the ruins of Widows and Orphans, he has more
Reverence for his Profession than to debauch it to unrighteous purposes, and
had rather be dumb than suffer his tongue to Pimp for Injustice, or club his
Parts to bolster up a Cheat with the Legerdemain of Law-craft;

He is not faced like Janus, to take a Reteyning Fee from the Plantiff; and
afterward a Backhanded bribe from the Defendant, nor so double tongued, that
one may purchase his Pleading, and the other at the same or a larger price, his
silence. But when he undertakes a business, he espouses it in earnest, and does
not Follow a Cause but manage it. A mollifying letter from the adversaries
Potent Friend, a noble Treat, or the remora of a lusty Present to his Wife,
have no influence to make him slacken his proceedings, for he is so zealous for
his Clients interest, that you may sooner Divorce the Sun from the Ecliptic,
than warp him from his integrity, yet still is his Patron only usque ad Aras,
(as far as is just) for if once found he finds the business smell rank, St.
Marks treasure or the Mines of Potosi, are two small a Fee to engage him one
step further.

As his profession is Honorable, so his Education has been Liberal and
Ingenious, far different from that of some Jilting Pettyfoggers, and
Purse-milking Law-drivers, whose breeding, like a Cuckowes, is in the Nest of
another Trade, where they learn Wrangling and Knavery enough in their own
Causes to spoil those of other Men, and sweetened ingredients of mechanic Fraud
compound themselves (though simple enough) fit Instruments for any Villainy. Bu
his greener years were seasoned with Literature, and can give better proofs of
his Vniversity-learning than reckoning up the Colleges, and boasting his Name
in the Buttery Book, he understands Logic (the methods of right reasoning) and
Rhetoric (the Art of persuasion) is well seen in History the Free School of
Prudence) and no Stranger to the Ethics and Politics of the Ancients: he is
skilled in other Languages besides Declaration-Latine, and Norman Gibberish; He
read Plato and Tully, before he saw either Littleton or the Statute Book, and
grounded, in the Principles of nature and Customs of Nations, came ( lotis
manibus) to the study of our Common Municipal Law; which he found to be
multorum annorum opus, a task that requires all the Nerves of Industry, and
therefore imployd his Time better at the Inns of Court, than in hunting after
New fashions, starting fresh Mistresses, haunting the Play Houses, or acquiring
the other little Town accomplishments, which render their admirers fine Men in
the opinion of Fools, but egregious Fops in the judgment of the wise.

In his Studies, he Traffiques not only with the Infantry of Epitome's,
Abridgements, and Diminutive Collectors in Decimo sexto, but draws his
knowledge from the Original Springs, digesting the whole Body of the Law in a
Laborions and regular Method; but especially aims to be well vers't in the
Practice of every Court, and rightly to understand the Art of Good pleadings,
as knowing them to be most useful to unravel the knotty intrigues of the Cause,
and reduce it to an Issue, yet hates to pester the Court with Circuities,
Negative Pregnants, Departures and multiplied Impertinences; he peruses the
Year Books and Responsa prudentium, with an heedy and Reverent Eye, delights to
tread in the steps of the Ancient Sages, and thinks it is best sailing by known
and Experienced Land marks. And therefore uses Presidents not as Refuges of
Ignorance, But as the safe-guards of Wisdom, and yet rather than not keep
pace with Justice, will Dispense with a Formality, considering that what he
does grounded on Reason, if it want a President in past Ages, will be a
Laudable one to those to come.

He never goes about with feigned Allegations to cast a Mist before the Eyes of
Justice, that she may mistake her road, and assign the Child to the wrong
Mother; endeavors not to Pack a Jury by his interest in he Vndersheriffe, not
to Baulke an evidence with a multitude of sudden insnaring Interrogatories, nor
maintains any correspondence with the Knights of Alsatia, or Ram-ally-Vouchers;
he can prosecute a suit in Equity without seeking to create a Whirl-pool; where
one Order shall beget another, and the poor Client be swung round (like a Cat
before execution) from Decree to rehearing, from report to exceptions, and Vice
versa till his Forunes are Shipwrack'd, and himself drowned for want of white
or yellow earth to wade through on; he never studies delays to the ruin of a
Family for the Lucre of Ten Groats; nor by drilling Quirks spins out a suit
more lasting than Buff, depending a whole revolution of Saturn, and Entailed on
the third and fourth generation, he does not play the Emperick with his Client,
and put him upon the rack to make him Bleed the more freely, casting him into a
swoon with frights of a Judgment, and then reviving him again with a Cordial
write of error, or the dear Elixer of an Injunction, to keep the Brangle alive
as long as ever there are any vital spirits in the Pouch; he can suffer his
neighbors to live quietly about him without perpetual alarms of actions and
Indictments, or Conjuring up dormant Titles to every commodious seat, and
making Land fall five years Purchase merely for Lying within ten Miles of Him.

He delights to be an Arbitrator, not an Incendiary, and has Beati pacifici
oftener in his mouth than Currat Lex, he never wheadles any into endless suits
for triffles, nor animates them to undo themselves and others for damage
Feasant, or insignificant trespases, pedibus ambulado, but (as Telephus's sword
was the best cure for the wounds it made) advises people to compose their
assaults and slanders over the same Ale that begot them; nor does he in
weightier cases extort unreasonable Fees, for whatever the foul chapp'd rabble
may suggest, a Lawyers Profession is not Mercenary; the Money given him is
only an Honorary gratuity, for his advice and trouble, or a grateful
acknowledgment, of our Obligations for his well intended endeavors, and the
old Emblem of the Brambles tearing often the sheeps fleece that run to it for
shelter in a storm, can have no reflection upon him, whose Brain is as active,
and his Tongue as voluble for a penniless Pauper, as when Oiled with the aurum
potabile of a Dozen Guinnies.

In a word whilst he lives, he is the delight of the Court, the Ornament of the
Bar, the Glory of his Profession, the Patron of Innoceney, the Vpholder of
right, the Scourge of oppression the Terror of deceit, and the Oracle of his
Country, and when death calls him to the Bar of Heaven by a Habeas corpus cum
Causis he finds his Judge, his Advocate, nonsuits the Devil, obtains a liberate
from all his infirmities, and continues still One of the long robe in Glory.

FINIS.
The Authors Apology.
THere are a sort of Spider-pated-Animals that can suck Venom out of the most
Medicinal Flowers; mischeivous Drones! that have not only left off Laudando
Facere, sed etiam Laudare; so far from doing any thing praise worthy themselves
that they cannot endure the deserved Encomiums of others; if any such Vermin
should light upon these Innocent sheets and endeavor to turn Panegyric into a
Satyr, by a left handed comment the Author thinks fit to anticipate their
malice, by letting the World truly know, that there lives not a person whose
breast is freight with a greater Veneration for the Profession of the Law than
himself, who had the Honor of some mean education therein, and therefore
deserves to be Out-lawed by common sense, if he should go about to asperse it.
But as he knows no true Gamaliel's will wrong him with such a Groundless
suspicion, so he esteems the displeasure of Gripping Cause Jobbers, and green
bag Dablers, below his regards; it is their interest to be offended at the
Character of An Honest Lawyer for the very same reason, that hard favored
Ladies hate Handsome Chamber-maids, and may well imitate that Dawbers Policy,
who having drawn a most miserable Picture of a Cock, hired a Boy to pelt away
all live Ones from coming near, lest people by Comparing should discern the
horrid ugliness of his own Handy Work.

FINIS.

