A DISCOURSE CONCERNING UNCTION, AND Washing of Feet. PROVING That They be not
Instituted Sacraments, or Ordinances in the Churches.

By Isaac Chauncy, M. A.

LONDON: Printed for Nath. Hiller, at the Prince's Arms in Leaden-Hall-Street,
over against St. Mary Axe, 1697.

A DISCOURSE Concerning Unction, and Washing of Feet.
Sect. 1. IT has bin, and yet is a matter of Enquiry in the Churches, Whether
the Triplicity of Primitive Rites, viz. Imposition of Hands, Unction and
Washing of Feet, then in frequent Use, do yet remain Standing Ordinances by
Divine Institution?

Some think they be all so; but many judge only One so, viz. Imposition of
Hands, concerning which we Discoursed elsewhere.

Others take the other Two also to be such; and indeed I do not see how any of
the Three can be fairly excluded if any one be admitted. Therefore having seen
great Reason to Examine the grounds upon which such Apprehensions are built,
lest a Yoke should be laid on the Churches which Christ never laid, and lest in
casting off Antichristian Yokes we should reject the observation of any thing
which our Lord Jesus Christ has commanded; the two latter of the forementioned
shall here be spoken to. And it is the first of the two, Anointing the sick with
Oil, which we are most concerned in, there having bin of late something
Published in the Defense of this Assertion, That Anointing the Sick with Oil is
a standing Ordinance to Confirm the Promise of Healing unto Church Members.

The Author whereof having deservedly a Renowned Memorial among the Churches of
Christ, his Mistake in this Point (who so seldom mistook in Points of the
highest Nature) might be of ill consequence. Whether he ever intended the
Publishing of the said Paper, or ever practiced according thereto, is much to
be questioned; but it being now Published, it puts us upon a Necessity of
speaking something to this Point, according to the light which is given us
through God's Grace from his Word.

. 2. The Assertion is grounded on James 5.14. (...), etc. Is any one among you
weak, let him call for the Elders of the Church, and let them pray for him
[here lies the stress of the Command] anointing him with Oil [mentioning this
Unction as a known Circumstance then in Use] in the Name of the Lord. Our
Renowned Author here tells us, that the anointing here mentioned is not the
anointing spoken of Mark 6.13. by which the Apostles healed through a
Miraculous Gift. He should have said the kind of Healing was not the same; for
the anointing was the same, and applied for the same general End, viz. Healing.
And he should have told us where the Promise of Bodily-Healing is made
peculiarly to Church Members, and distinct from other good things promised,
Spiritual and Temporal. He says afterward, the Promise is here, And he shall
be healed: But is this bestowed distinctly and apart from forgiveness? Does
Healing come by Unction, and Forgiveness by Prayer? How comes the Promise of
Health to have a Seal annexed, any more than the Promises of Riches, or a
supply with Food and Raiment to a poor Saint; or the Promise of Honor to such
as suffer Reproach for Christ?

His Arguments are as follows, and do tend to prove mostly, That the Unction of
James was not extraordinary.

Arg. 1. Anointing with Oil was joined [Jam. 5.14.] with the Elders Prayers,
therefore it is a standing Ordinance.

Ans. Non seq. For extraordinary actions in the Primitive Churches were joined
with Prayer; As the choosing an Apostle Acts 1. Does it follow therefore, that
to choose Apostles is a Standing Ordinance? and so was laying Hands on the
Seven Deacons, chap. 4. The actions of Elders or ordinary Christians are all as
to this under a general Command, Phil. 4.6.

Arg. 2. All Precepts in this Epistle concern the Church for ever; Therefore
this.

Ans. The Antecedent wants proof, for one may not though the rest may. 2. The
Antecedent and Consequent may be granted, and yet the Question not concluded;
for the Precept here (rightly understood) may concern the Church for ever.

Arg. 3. From the Persons that were to be sent to, viz. The Elders of the
Church. 1. He says not, send for men who had the Healing Gifts, but for the
Elders of the Church.

Ans. There was no need of saying otherwise then, as in the next Age, because
Elders had ordinarily healing Gifts, either extraordinarily, as the Apostles
had, for they were indefinitely bestowed on the Church, 1 Cor. 12.9. and
therefore as on Brethren, so on Elders most especially. Or Elders had ordinary
healing Gifts, practiced as Physicians, from the example of Christ and his
Apostles, and therefore the Elders might rather than others be sent for, having
Abilities to heal the one way or the other.

The Elders during the Apostolic Times, and afterward, from the Examples of
Christ and his Apostles, exercised themselves in healing the Sick, as well as
in Preaching the Word, being qualified thereto by an extraordinary Gift, or by
an ordinary acquired Gift and skill Medicinal; so Luke healed, and undoubtedly
diverse Elders.

2. Who were standing Officers of a Church which was to continue?

Ans. Though Elders and Churches were to continue, yet it follows not that what
Gifts of Healing were in some, should successively continue to all that were to
follow.

3. The Elders in every Church had not that Gift.

Ans. That wants proof; its most likely the Elders in every Church at that time
had extraordinary or ordinary Gifts, and if all had not, the Apostle may
understand those that had; or that the Elders should come to assist by Prayer,
whenever the Healer came to heal, and they supervising it, its spoken of, as
though they did it.

4. The Gifts of Healing and Prophecy were variously bestowed, as to those that
were not Apostles and Evangelists, 1 Cor. 12.8,9.

Ans. They might be ordinarily so, but it follows not that it was so always;
there is nothing said to demonstrate that they who had the gift of Prophecy, had
not the gift of Healing, for there is as much to prove that such as had the gift
of Prophecy, had not the gift of Tongues and Interpretation.

Arg. 4. Is taken from the Persons to be healed. 1. If it had been
extraordinary healing, it would have extended further, to Blind, Leaf, Dumb,
etc.

Ans. How does it appear that it extends not to these; the Word (...) may take
in any Sickness, Weakness, or Infirmity of Body; and we know that many so
affected, as Deaf and Dumb, have been cured by Medicinal Remedies?

2. They were Members of the Church, not Unbelievers.

Ans. The Members of the Church were most immediately and knowingly obliged;
but undoubtedly if an Extra-Ecclesian had sent for the Elders of the Church
upon the same account, the Elders would have gone to him, prayed over him, and
anointed him, as if he had been a Member, and the promise of Healing, and
Forgiveness of Sins, is as much to such.

Miraculous Healing did extend to all sorts, Believers and Unbelievers.

Ans. Yea, so does all bodily healing of any kind.

Yea, to them chiefly.

Answ. But if Unbelievers be understood in the largest Sense, its a great
mistake, and contradicted by himself afterward; for he says, and its true,
That all that were healed by the extraordinary Gift of Healing, were to have
the Faith of Miracles. Its true, Tongues, and Prophesying, were for Conviction
of the Truths of the Gospel, and said to be Signs, but the immediate effect of
the Gift of Healing was to Heal; and its certain Christ and the Apostles did
Heal both Believers and Unbelievers, and a secondary Effect and End was, for
Conviction and Confirmation of Truth, Heb. 2.

Arg. 5. Taken from the generality of the extent of this Ordinance, If any
amongst you be Sick, which argues it not to be extraordinary; for when any were
healed by an extraordinary Gift, it was by a Faith of Miracles concurring.

Ans. Then they were not Unbelievers in the largest Sense; but when a Gift of
Healing is in the Church, the call to resort to it is indefinite, and the call
to wait upon God for any Good, is a call to exercise that Faith which is
suitable to those Ways and Means God calls Men to the using of.

Arg. 6. From the Means appointed, Oil, now the extraordinary Gift of Healing
was not confined to Oil, etc.

Ans. Its true, it was not, but being Oil was used in extraordinary Healing
sometimes, why might it not here also in the same manner?

Arg. 7. From the generality of the Command, [the same Argument with the First,
but followed a little otherwise] that if extraordinary Gifts were meant, then
none should have died.

Ans. Why will this follow any more than in Christ's and the Apostles times?
And yet it was free for all to resort to them, none was refused, as we read of,
that came or sent.

None of these Arguments conclude the Question, That its a standing
Institution; for they all run upon this Supposition, That the Unction mentioned
by the Apostle James, was either an extraordinary Gift, or it was a Standing
Institution; but it was no extraordinary Gift, therefore a standing Instituted
Ordinance, and the minor he proves by these Seven Arguments; how weak they are
in that regard we have made appear; so that for all that has been said, by
that worthy Man, it might be an extraordinary Gift that is here intended. But
we also deny the Disjunction, and say there may a third Reason be assigned,
that is intended by the Apostle, as we shall show anon.

3. Our Learned Author proposes diverse Objections, and returns Answers, which
we proceed to reply to.

Obj. 1. This is to make more Sacraments than two. Which he Answers by way of
Concession, only distinguishing betwixt Seals of the Covenant of Grace, and
Seals of other Promises.

Reply. There are no Promises made even of outward good Things to God's
Children but in Christ Jesus, and contained in the Covenant of Grace, and there
needs no other Seals but what are Seals to that. Circumcision Sealed the
Promise of Christ to Abraham, and all the Promises of the Land of Canaan, and
of External Blessings therein. He instanceth in the Rainbow, Genesis 9.11,12, etc.
But that was God's confirming Seal of the Covenant of Grace to Noah, and of an
External Good promised to the Church, and to the World, for the sake of the
Church, and accordingly applied by the Prophet Isaiah to the Covenant of Grace,
as a Confirming Sign to us.

But what is this Instance to our purpose? Whatever the Rainbow was, it was no
Instituted Church Ordinance, and cannot be called a Sacrament; for that is such
a Sign and Seal as is Instituted by Christ for our Obedience thereto, wherein
by some Acts of ours appointed by Christ, we show forth some Spiritual Thing
that our Faith is exercised on thereby.

Obj. 2. If it be a Seal its of Remission of Sins; for that is spoken of in the
Text by the Apostle.

Ans. Remission of Sins there, is not that general and eternal Forgiveness
promised in the Covenant of Grace, but the taking away of a temporary Guilt.

Repl. But is there any saving Remission but what belongs to the Covenant of
Grace? And must there be one Seal for Eternal Remission, and another for
Temporary? If a Seal of Remission must be carried to the Sick, it makes much to
justify a Popish Practice in carrying the Lord's Supper to them. It is true,
there is a Forgiveness spoken of in Scripture, which is only not to punish with
Temporal Punishments, and is not Saving, as to the Soul, as Psalm. 78.38. And
there is no Seal as I know of, belonging to such a Temporal and Negative
Salvation properly considered, remaining as an Ordinance in the Church.

Obj. 3. All Sacraments are Seals to absolute Promises; and when rightly used
in Faith, have certainly their effect: But this has not, for so none should
dye who in Faith should use it.

Ans. True, all Sacraments of the Covenant of Grace are such, -- but yet God
may have appointed another Seal for the Confirmation of the Promises of outward
Mercies: -- Of this nature is the Ordinance of Imposition of Hands.

Repl. We have no ground to believe that God has appointed any other Seals
than such as belong to the Covenant of Grace, which He has annexed thereto by
his Institution. He instanceth in Imposition of Hands, which he says is a
Sacrament for increase of Gifts. But, 1. Was it not used at first for bestowing
Gifts? How comes it now to be changed from the first Intention? 2. Whatever
Sacrament is for increase is to be often repeated, but so is not Imposition of
Hands, according to the zealousest Assertors thereof. 3. Sacraments, as Signs,
hold forth and signify, by way of Symbol, always some spiritual and inward
Grace; we never find they terminate upon common Gifts, and corporeal Benefits,
and we read of a Sacrament for increase of Grace, but none for increase of
Gifts. 4. Why should not Unction be for increase of Health, as well as
Imposition of Hands for increase of Gifts, and so to have a double use for
Recovery of Health, and increase or continuance of it after recovery? 5. What
is there in Imposition of Hands to increase Gifts? Is it naturally so, or by
Institution? None can say the former; if the latter, there is a Promise annexed
for increase of Gifts, and then the oftener used, the more Gifts will be
increased; but we find no such Promise annexed, neither is it reasonable to
say, that those Rites that were used in bestowing Gifts in the Primitive Times,
should be continued to ours for increasing them. 6. We read of a Sacrament to
signify the gift of Grace, and another for the increase of it, why not two
Sacraments in respect of gifts also for those distinct ends.

Obj. 4. This gives Countenance unto the Papists extreme Unction, and condemns
our Reformed Churches for rejecting it.

Ans. 1. The Church of Rome retains almost all Ordinances, only she has
perverted them, -- as she has perverted this from being an Ordinance of
restoring Health, and forgiving temporary Guilt of particular Sins, to become a
Sacrament of Justification and Forgiveness of all Sins, and so a Seal of the
Covenant of Grace, and that not for the Sick, but for all dying Persons when
past Recovery, in which case it should not be used.

Repl. 1. Though the Church of Rome make an Image of every Ordinance of Christ,
it cannot be said to retain all Christ's Ordinances, and its retaining some,
argues not that all their Ordinances are Christ's.

2. If the Church of Rome use Unction to a sick Person, though in articulo
mortis, how does she pervert it, for there is nothing in the Text that excludes
any sick Person from the use of it? And if the said Person may be Prayed with,
and for, why not Anointed too? For how many of such as are apprehended to be in
a dying condition do recover notwithstanding? And how much the rather should
Unction be used to such, if one end be for the removal of temporary Guilt, that
the Decumbent may not depart under it.

3. How come Sacraments for Forgiveness of Sins to be of two kinds; some for
Forgiveness of all Sins, and some for Forgiveness of some only? Where there is
a Sacrament for Forgiveness of all, there needs none for Forgiveness of some;
if Christ in his Wisdom had Ordained so, no doubt but He would have Ordained
the Repetition of Baptism as Temporary Guilt should be contracted.

4. If the Forgiveness here spoken of be Soul-saving from Guilt, it must belong
to the Covenant of Grace, and the Papists must be right in making it a
Sacrament of Justification, and must be of special use in articulo mortis,
allowing it to be instituted for the abovesaid end and purpose.

5. Who knows when a sick Person is past Recovery? If he be so, (1.) Is he not
to be prayed for, and with, by the Elders? (2.) May not he be under Temporary
Guilt? And is there not need enough of Forgiveness to him in that respect? (3.)
And why should not all means be used for Recovery, especially by an Ordinance,
whilst there is Life there is hope. (4.) Its becoming extreme Unction, is
praeter intentionem Agentis; some (as is here granted) do die, and so far the
Unction Administered by Protestants must be extreme Unction.

6. There will need in this case a Directory with a double Catalogue of
Diseases, to tell in which Unction should be applied, and in what Cases not; as
it may be Queried whether its to be used in Acute Diseases only, or in
Chronical also? especially such as are known to be incurable for the most part,
as in Pthisis, Gout, Stone, Dropsy, etc. And whether if used, it may be
repeated often, while the Patient is long under a lingering, languishing
condition? Whether so often as the Elders pray with the Patient they may
anoint? Whether if the Physician pronounce the Disease Mortal, any Unction at
all ought to be applied? What should be done in cases of Diliriums and
Distractions? In case also of Lameness, Dumbness, Wounds, etc. there will a
hundred Queries arise necessary to be resolved, when to Anoint, and when not,
if it may not be used in all Cases of Sickness.

Ans. 2. The Reformed Churches seeing that such a Sacrament could not be, and
this must needs be a perversion of it, did justly reject it as they used it;
only in rejecting it they went too far (as in some other things) even denying
it to have that use of restoring the Sick, as a Seal of the Promise, and an
indefinite means to convey that Blessing, which God in Mercy has appointed it
to be.

Repl. What is here acknowledged to be done by the Reformed Churches, in
rejecting Unction as a Sacrament upon all accounts, is most Justifiable,
neither have they gone too far herein, nor in laying aside Four more of the
Popish pretended Sacraments; neither does it appear by all that has been said,
that Unction has now any Sacramental use in restoring of Health, or that any
Promise here, or in the Scripture, is any more of Health, than of Food and
Raiment, etc. or has any Seal annexed to it any more than Promises of outward
Good have their respective Seals: Neither is there any real Forgiveness of Sin,
Temporal or Eternal, but what belongs to, and is bestowed by that Covenant of
Grace; therefore there can be no Seals of it, but what are Seals of that
Covenant; and if Anointing be a Seal of a Promise that belongs not to the
Covenant of Grace, it must be a Seal of a Promise made in the Covenant of
Works, or else quite out of Doors.

. 4. The Apostle James, in this Chapter, from ver. 7. Exhorting and directing
Christians to a holy and exact Conversation in all sorts of external
Conditions, Prosperity and Adversity; the things that he is particular in
especially, are 1. Patience in Suffering. 2. A due Reverence of the Great Name
of GOD in our ordinary Conversation, ver. 12. where he does not forbid all kind
of Swearing, but Swearing by any Creature, and Swearing in common Discourse,
according to the Words and Sense of our Lord Jesus Christ, Mat. 5.34. 3. He
shows what Duty is most suitable to an afflicted Condition, viz. Prayer; to a
prosperous Condition, Singing of Psalms; and insists more largely upon the
former of these two, viz. betaking our selves to Prayer in Affliction of any
sort or kind; [(...), does any among you suffer evil?] Its to be understood of
afflictive Evils of any sort; and because we are so incident to Sicknesses and
bodily Infirmities, which do most commonly of all others, unfit and indispose
us to Pray, he exhorts Christians as follows, either to send for the Elders of
the Church to Pray with the Sick, ver. 14. or Pray one for another, ver. 16.
Whence the Apostle's direction is, 1. General, in case of any Affliction, to
Pray. 2. Particular, in case of Affliction by Sickness, that a Person is
indisposed, and unfitted to Pray, to send for the Elders to pray with him, or
to get other Christians to pray with him, (in case Elders be not to be had) for
the fervent Prayer (says he) of any holy Man, prevails much. And this he
says, lest we should think that he laid all the stress of obtaining the sick
Man's Benefit upon the Eldership, he says no, for a Holy Christians Prayer
prevails much for his Brother or Neighbor, and in the same way and kind as the
Elders, both in respect of Healing and Forgiveness, ver. 16.

. 5. Now from the Text it does appear, That the Apostle James intends not an
Institution of any Sacramental Ordinance in the Church, 1. From the manifest
design of the Apostle, appearing from the Text and Context, which is to
recommend to Christians the use of Prayer in the Day of Affliction, performed
by our selves, or others for us in Faith, ver. 15. in respect of outward or
spiritual Wants, ver. 14. This Duty is first generally recommended as a great
and special means by way of Duty, to betake our selves unto, and most suitable
to the Day of Affliction, as Singing forth God's Praises is most suitable to
the Day of prosperous Enlargements.

2. That in Cases of greater Distress, especially in such of bodily Distempers,
when we lie under Pains, and Languishments of Body and Spirits, from which also
arise much darkness, and disquietments of Heart and Conscience, as also from
many Temptations of the evil One, as to our Spiritual State, insomuch that the
poor Decumbent says (when those about him press the Duty here exhorted to in
general, that he should betake himself to Prayer) I cannot Pray by reason of my
great Pain, or by reason of Unbelief, etc. you must Pray with me, and for me
[Pray one for another] v. 16. I confess I have been a sinful, unbelieving,
hypocritical Wretch, if God mark Iniquity, all this, and much more is less than
I deserve, and I have now many Fears and Doubts lie upon me, [If he have
sinned] i. e. Supposing that he labors under distress of Conscience for Sin in
general, or for any Sin in particular, then says the Apostle, in this case,
call in the best help you can, [its not said, as is suggested by our Author, if
his Disease be incurable, and he be near Death, then its too late] but let the
Sickness be what it will, curable, or incurable, threatening approaching Death,
or not; in this, and such like Distresses send for the Elders of the Church (as
well as for the Physician, which you are ready to do) that they may counsel,
comfort, and Pray with, and for the poor Patient, with this Caution, not to
neglect the use of lawful and ordinary Medicinal Means [Anointing him] one
Remedy is here specified by a Synechdoche, usual in Scripture, of a part for
the whole; for you should not use Medicines as Asa did, trusting to the
Physician more than to God, nor use them in a heathenish manner, without a
Solemn Application to the God of Health and Sickness, the Father of Spirits,
that casts down, and raises up, that kills and makes alive, therefore use
your Remedies in the Name of the Lord, according to Col. 3.17. In Obedience to,
for the Honor of, and in the Fear of our Lord Jesus Christ, waiting patiently
on his Will and Pleasure, in the use of all spiritual, and lawful outward
Means, for a Blessing upon them. The Motives that the Apostle uses to press
this Duty, (N. B.) are laid upon the account of Prayer, not upon the account of
Anointing, as the express end of the Patient's sending for the Elders, is to
Pray with him, Is any of you sick, what should he do, should he send for the
Physician? Yes. Or use any Physic? Yes. But let him in the chief place go unto
God, send for the Elders rather in the first place [not in the last, when the
Case is past Remedy, and hopeless, as is usual] that they may pray with the
Decumbent for a Blessing upon means; then use the Physician's Remedies, anoint
him, if he have a Palsy, and weak Limbs, or if the Case be otherwise, give a
Vomit, a Purge, a Cordial, etc. in the Name of the Lord: And this is to use
Physic as Christians ought to do, and then he says not, send to the Elders to
anoint him, or to give him Physic (though it may be they did, and its very
probable) but to Pray with him, and so Anoint him [(...)] Anointing him, or
applying suitable Remedies, in the Name of the Lord. So that the Application of
Remedies (whether by themselves, or others) is spoken of but as subordinate
Means to be used, but not to be depended upon, as any way effectual to answer
the Decumbents ends, without the Blessing of God.

. 6. Now for the Motives, they are annexed to the use of Prayer all along, not
to the use of Oil, I shall but briefly name them.

1. The great prevalency of Prayer (ordinarily) made in Faith to recover a sick
Person; he lays not the Efficacy upon Oil, or the Remedy, but says the Lord
being called upon, He shall raise him up. 2. The prevalency of the Prayer of
Faith to bring into the Soul the light of Pardon, and Forgiveness, and of
Spiritual Peace and Comfort. 3. Of all means it does upon Experience prevail
most, it is most Effectual when performed in Faith, with great Fervency and
Affection, by, or for a poor brokenhearted, humble, and afflicted Believer, by
the Elders, or Brethren, ver. 16. 4. And lastly, He uses the instance of
Elias, who was so eminently prevailing with God in Prayer, for great things of
a Temporal Nature, on the behalf of others, who lay under a Judgment, for the
reverse of the said Judgment and Salvation from it; which prevalency he does
not ascribe to Unction, nor seems so much to ascribe to his extraordinary
Prophetic Spirit, as to the Prayer of Faith, therefore fetches an Argument
therefrom, to provoke and incite them to Pray for one another, or send to the
Elders to Pray with such as were in Affliction.
. 7. The Second Argument to prove that the Apostle had no intent to Ordain any
Sacramental Rite, or Church Ordinance is this; If it had been so, he would not
have changed the Elementary Ceremony from what Christ had first Ordained to be
used after his Resurrection, Mark 16.18. where it was Laying on of hands: Which
Ceremony we read of to be twice used in Recovery of the Sick, once in Curing
Paul's Blindness by Ananias, and another time by Paul, in Curing the Father of
Publius, of a Fever and Bloody Flux, Acts 28.8. Now seeing all the Apostles
stood by the Elementary Part of Christ's Institution, which He Ordained both in
Baptism, and the Lord's Supper, it is not in the least probable, that the
Apostle James would make any such alteration in a Sacramental Institution, (nor
was led by the Holy Ghost so to do) so as to change the Elementary Part from
one kind to another, from Laying on of Hands, to Anointing with Oil.

Obj. The Twelve Apostles used Anointing with Oil in miraculous Curing,
therefore Instituted by Christ, Mark 6.13.

Ans. We find not that that particular Ceremony is there, or any where else
enjoined or recommended to them by Christ, neither is there ground enough to
think, that of Laying on of Hands was so, Mark 16.18. The words there are a
Promise of miraculous Gifts, some of which for instance are enumerated, as
Casting out Devils, speaking with new Tongues, taking up Serpents, without
hurt, and if they should drink Poison, it should not hurt, or if they did but
lay their Hands on the Sick, they should recover. Our Author is right in this,
that the working by extraordinary Gifts was not confined to the use of any one
Rite or Ceremony, or to some indefinitely, for sometimes those miraculous Works
were wrought without any, as in the Text of Mark 16. sometimes by only
Speaking, sometimes by Napkins, etc. Acts 3.7,16. and 14.10. and 16.18. and
9.17,34,40. and 28.8. And accordingly, when they wrought by this Gift, they
sometimes used some small Rite, such as touching with the Hand, or Anointing
with Oil, (as Christ did the Eyes of the Blind with Clay and Spittle) which
Judicious Persons could not think had any natural Virtue to produce the Effect,
that so all that were Witnesses thereof could not but acknowledge, that what
was wrought was immediately from God, and could not be done any other way.

Hence the Twelve Apostles, on their first Mission, in healing the Sick, took a
Rite that was in ordinary use among the Jews (as a weak and common Medicine
among them, and in those Eastern Parts, known to have no great Efficacy in it
to be admired, not so much as a Carduus Posset with us) and this is the
Circumstance demonstrating their Miraculous Gift, Mark 6.13. that as they cast
out Devils, whether by any Rite is not mentioned, so they Recovered the Sick,
only Anointing them with Oil. And herein Christ's Miracles, and his Apostles
differed from those seeming ones wrought by Charms, and by a Diabolick
Confederacy; that the Devil strictly ties up his Operators to all the
Circumstances of his Imposed Rites, but thus Christ did not.

. 8. The Anointing spoken of by James, does not appear by any, or all the
Reverend Author's Arguments, not to be a Rite attending an extraordinary Gift;
For it is manifest, that during the Lives of the Apostles, such extraordinary
Gifts were in the Churches, 1 Cor. 12.4,9,10. And it was during that time that
the Apostle must write these things; and if many ordinary Brethren wrought, and
spoke by them, then why not the Elders much more? And that some such were
bestowed on Timothy in the use of the Rite of Laying on of Hands is not to be
doubted, and if it was in use to lay Hands on all Elders of Churches (as many
say it was, and this Author making it a Sacrament) why should not all Elders
have this Gift, especially for the good of the Churches, a great part of their
Office lying in Visiting the Sick? It seems to be strange, what was the Reason
why the Apostles at their first Mission used Unction, and we read not of the
use of it afterward. I conceive it was because the Lord Jesus, before his
Ascension, mentioned another, Mark 16.18. though not enjoining it; but his
mentioning it seemed to intimate to them, that of the two, He rather approved
of that of Laying on of Hands in Healing of the Sick, than of Unction.

. 9. Yet we are not of the Opinion, that James intends Healing by an
extraordinary Gift: But therefore it follows not, that the Unction mentioned by
him was a Divine Institution, an Ordinance, yea Sacrament, (as our Author would
have it) to continue in the Churches, as we have abundantly evinced: But it was
a third Thing, only an Instance of ordinary Means, with Direction to a due
Christian Way and Manner of the Administration thereof.

That Anointing with Oil was frequently used by the Jews to Exhilarate and
Refresh, does appear by Scripture, and the not using it was a sign of Mourning,
2 Samuel 14.2. Psalm. 23.5. Mat. 6.17. And therefore they did use it to the Sick
as a common Medicine, that did at least refresh and revive the weak and
dispirited Patient.

Dr. Lightfoot tells us from the Talmud, (which upon search proves to be so)
That the Jews were wont to Anoint upon a threefold Account. 1. For Ornament,
which was forbidden on Days of Expiation, and was not used on Days of Mourning.

2. That they Anointed with Oil for Healing of Diseases; hence (says the Dr.)
the Apostles Counsel as referring to this Medicinal Practice, is, That it be
improved to the best advantage, and therefore advises to send for the Elders
of the Church to do it, not that there was any more in their doing it than in
another, but that with the applying this Corporal Medicine, they might Pray
with the Patient, and apply Spiritual Physic, etc. which is as much in our
Nation as if a Patient taking Physic, should send for the Minister to Pray
with him.

3. It was used also by the ill Jews, with Charming and Muttering over the
Patient, etc. whereupon the Doctor thinks it may be supposed also, That the
Apostle observing this Abuse in some, of an ordinary and good Medicine, directs
Christians to a quite contrary way, to send for the Elders of the Church, etc.
See Harmon. p. 333.



. 10. In a Word, If Unction of the Sick be used otherwise than the third of
them beforementioned, viz. Diabolick, it must be upon one of these following
accounts.

1. As a Rite annexed to a Gift of miraculous Healing: Thus its not intended
here, as our Learned Author would prove by many Arguments, but has fallen
short in his design, as has been proved; though we judge also it was not such
Unction, that the Apostle intends. 2. Or as a Sacramental Rite, or Symbol, to
continue in the Church. 3. To produce a natural Effect, as other Medicaments.
If it be said we are to use it in the first Sense, 1. There must be Faith of
Miracles, both in the Anointer and Anointed. 2. If so, it will have certain
effect on every one to whom it is duly Administered, for so we find it had in
the primitive Times, Mark 6.13. 3. The miraculous Gift being ceased, and the
Faith thereof, its much folly to use the Rite at all.

2. If it be pleaded for as our Author does, as a Symbolick and Sacramnetal
Rite Instituted for continuance in the Church, we have showed that it cannot be
grounded upon this place, nor on any other, and many Absurdities will follow on
such an Assertion. And it must necessarily follow, that the other Primitive
Ceremonies, viz. Imposition of Hands, and washing of Feet, are also Sacraments
to continue, whence we shall have Five Sacraments in the Churches, and come
within Two of the Papists number of Sacraments.

3. If Unction be used on the third account, as a natural Remedy, then it must
be used in such a measure and way, as that it may have a Medicinal Effect;
touching or crossing the Body with the Finger dipped in a little Oil will not do,
it must be rubbed, and chafed in to the part affected, or some principal Part
must be well suppled with it, and its without doubt, that its no Medicine in
our Country, there are many found to be much better, inward and outward, than
to Anoint the Body with Oil Olive, less or more.

. 11. Upon the like, if not greater ground, that Unction of the Sick, or
Imposition of Hands are pleaded to be standing Sacraments in the Churches, may
also Washing of Feet, it being professed to be such by the Papists, who also
plead (from a wrong Sense of Scripture) that it was Instituted by Christ's
Command, and Exemplary Practice, John 13.12,15. That it was a Symbol of inward
Grace, etc. and that it was afterward practiced in the Churches, 1 Timothy 5.10.
Notwithstanding all which plausible Pleas, it cannot be acknowledged to be any
Stated Church Ordinance Instituted by Christ. For washing of Feet was as
frequently used in that Country, as Anointing with Oil, it being a part of that
respective Entertainment which they usually gave to Friends coming to them
which they had honor for; when the Person of Esteem, or Guest came in, they
called the Servant to bring in Water to wash his Feet, and it being the
Servants business, it was looked upon as Inferior and Servile, and doing
thereof by any Person of Rank or Degree, was looked upon as a very great denial
of himself, and Humility. Accordingly the Lord Jesus Christ taught his
Disciples Humility thereby, so that it was used by Him as didactical, not by
way of Institution of it for a Standing Ordinance in the Church. For Jesus
Christ being in Bethany two Days before the Feast of the Passover, and Supping
there, Mat. 26.6. Mark 14.3. where Judas was, and from whence he went out to
betray Him: After Supper ( John 13.4,5.) He took Water and a Towel, and washed
his Disciples Feet, which they wondered at, that the Master should do that which
the most inferior Servants were wont to do, and knew not the meaning of it,
ver. 7. [which Christ would have told them, had He intended it for a
Sacramental Action, as He did always in that case] Peter in particular, in
honor to his Master, refuses to let Him wash his Feet, ver. 6. Christ tells
him, If He does not wash him, [meaning in his Blood, as to Justification and
Sanctification, according to that, Heb. 10.22.] he had no part in Him, [(...)
Imports in me sometimes, or of me,] whereupon Peter desires to be washed all
over by Christ at this washing; misunderstanding the meaning of Christ,
thinking He had spoke of his present washing, for Christ had said, ver. 7. Thou
know not now, but thou shall know afterward, i. e. after He had done washing
their Feet, ver. 14, 15, 16 And Peter seems to apprehend that Christ intended a
Sacramental Washing, signifying the washing away of Sin, therefore says he,
wash my Hands, etc. No, says Christ, He that is Sacramentally washed, its
significant enough if it be but of a part, it holds forth the cleansing of the
whole, and ye are as Individuals clean, but not every one; the reason of which
Saying is given ver. 11. he meant Judas was not clean. Now after he had held
Peter and the Disciples in an aenigmatical Discourse concerning this Action of
His, during the time thereof, ver. 12. He takes his Garments, sits down, and
acquaints them with the direct Reason, as if He should say, You are apt to
think this or that, but I will tell you the true and direct Reason is to teach
you Humility by my Example; you ought to do all Acts of Service one for
another, in all lowliness of Mind, as your Lord and Master has done, in taking
upon Himself the form of a Servant for your sakes, see ver. 13, 14, 15, 16, 17.
and concludes, saying, Now ye understand these things its well if ye do them,
as it were foretelling how much a Spirit of Pride and Ambition, which He had
often rebuked, would be too apt to prevail in them, and in Ministers of future
Ages, who would Lord it over the Churches, and one another, striving who should
be greatest. See Christ's full meaning of this place, by comparing with it Mat.
18.1,2. Luke 22.24,25,27. Mat. 23.8,10,11. Mark 9.34,36. Such another
Sacrament, the washing the Saints Feet, is numbered among the qualifications of
a Deaconess, 1 Timothy 5.10. because it was an Argument of her Humility and
readiness to serve the Saints in any inferior offices.

. 12. Finally, our Lord Jesus Christ, who is Lord over his own House, as a Son,
has not left his Churches at a loss about so great a concernment as his
Sacraments and Seals of the Covenant; what of all the Rites used, He has
Instituted as such, and what not; for if He has so left them, we labor under
this Difficulty, Whether Christ has Instituted Two Sacraments, or more?
Whether Baptism and the Lord's Supper be only Sacraments Instituted by Him, or
whether Imposition of Hands, Anointing the Sick, and Washing of Feet,
(significant Ceremonies also, used by Christ and his Apostles) be also
Sacraments now continued in the Churches? But Christ has been so far from
leaving us unresolved in these great Points, That of all the Symbolick
Ceremonies, or any that seem so, which were in use in the Primitive Times upon
any account, He has given certain Notes or Characteristick Signs by which we
know which of them He has Ordained to continue in the Churches to the end of
the World, and those are Three especially: 1. That the thing signified does
still remain, together with the necessary end and use of it to the Churches,
and all the Members thereof; and so it is in Baptism, and the Lord's Supper;
but it is not so in the other (two thereof especially) Conferring of Gifts, and
Miraculous Healing being ceased. 2. That in those which He has appointed to be
Standing Symbols in the Church, He has Ordained Solemn Words to be used
respectively, in the Administration and Application of the said Rites and
Elements, adapted to the distinct Significancy of each one; this is found in
Baptism and the Lord's Supper, and in none of the rest. 3. That which is a
distinguishing Mark beyond dispute, is this, That the Lord Jesus Christ has
expressly continued them to the end of the World, Mat. 28.19,20. 1 Cor. 11.26.
viz. Baptism and the Lord's Supper, which cannot be said of any of the other
Three forenamed Rites, and therefore we call them only Primitive Rites, used
only for some special Reasons appropriate to those Times, and not continued as
Instituted Ordinances, or Symbols and Seals of the Covenant. The Things then
signified by them being ceased, no stated and fixed Words of Administration
standing upon Record, and no express continuance of them to the coming of
Christ, or end of the World: Therefore we conclude as there remains but Two
Sacraments, so there are no more Symbolick Rites Instituted for Standing
Ordinances in the Churches, all the rest of Primitive Date and Use, being now
Obsolete.

FINIS.
Books Printed for Nath. Hiller, at the Princes Arms in Leaden-hall-street,
over against St. Mary Axe.
THE Righteousness of God through Faith, upon all, without difference, who
Believe, in Two Sermons on Romans 3.22. By the Late Reverend Mr. Nathanael
Mather, Minister of the Gospel. Batteries upon the Kingdom of Satan. By Mr.
Cotton Mather, Author of the late Memorable Providence of Witchcraft, and of
Earthquakes Exemplified. The Throne of Grace Discoursed of, from Heb. 4.16. By
Robert Trayle, M. A. Minister of the Gospel. A Learned and Accurate Discourse,
concerning the Guilt of Sin, Pardon of that Guilt, and Prayer for that Pardon.
By the Reverend Mr. Tho. Gilbert, lately deceased, at Oxford. Scripture Proof
for singing Scripture Psalms, Hymns, and Spiritual Songs. By E. H. The
Conquests and Triumphs of Grace, being a Narrative of the Success of the Gospel
among the Indians in New England. By Mat. Mahew. A Letter to Dr. Bates, in
Vindication of the Dr. and my self, necessitated by Mr. Williams Answer to Mr.
Humphreys. By Steph. Lob. Pietas in Patriam: The Life of his Excellency Sir
William Phipps, Knt. Late Captain General and Governor of New England.
Containing the Memorable Changes undergone, and Actions performed by him.

