A SERMON Preached before the Honorable Company of MERCHANTS Trading to the
Levant-Seas.

At St. HELLEN'S, January 16. being Sunday, 1697/8.

By EDM. CHISHULL, M. A. Fellow of Corpus-Christi College in Oxon: And Chaplain
to the Factory at Smyrna.

LONDON, Printed for S. Manship, at the Ship near the Royal Exchange in
Cornhil, School.

To the Right Worshipful Sir William Trumbull, Knt. GOVERNOR, And to the
Honorable Company of MERCHANTS Trading to the Levant-Seas.
Right Worshipful, etc.
THIS Discourse which was at first hastily Composed, whilst I was a Candidate
for your Favors, is now, with great reluctance, drawn into public view. I am
uneasy to think, how slender and imperfect a Piece is now put into the hands
of Those Men, who were always justly esteemed as a most Accomplished and
Excelling Part of the English Nation. But this being the first Command with
which You were pleased to honor me, I was willing to give You any, even this
imprudent Earnest of my future Observance. If Your Choice of this occasional
and peculiar Subject, cannot exempt my Performance from the Censures of other
Men; it will be my only Refuge to appeal to Your Protection. That I am now
happily Entitled to it, I can ascribe to nothing but the known Candor and
Generosity of the several Eminent Members that compose Your whole Society: Who
as They at first surpised me by Their unmerited unexpected Kindness; so They
now render me sollicitous by what degrees of Sobriety, Honesty, and Industry, I
may deserve Their Favors.

Give me leave Gentlemen to assure You; That I go Abroad with Courage and
Resolution to answer, as far as I am able, All those weighty Ends, to which
Your Free Choice, and Gods Providence, have determined my Endeavors. I quickly
hope to serve You in that Ancient Seat of Christianity, which will It self
constantly excite me to a Conscientious Performance of my Duty. And another
fresh Encouragement I shall receive from those great Examples, by which You
have there Honored and Adorned Your Native-Country. I am,

Right Worshipful, etc. Your most Faithful, and most Obedient Servant, Edm.
Chishull.

A SERMON Preached before the Levant-Company.
PSALM cvij. 23, 24. They that go down to the Sea in Ships, that do Business in
great Waters;
These see the Works of the Lord, and his Wonders in the Deep.

IT is the great Design of this Psalm to remind the several Orders and Degrees
of Men of their Obligations to Almighty God; and to recollect to them all that
variety of Gifts, of Encouragements, and of Mercies, that they have received
from Providence. A Consideration this, very highly necessary in our corrupted
Age, in which the Affairs of this World are apt to terminate even our highest
Thoughts, and teach us to forget God with whom we have to do. Whereas there is
nothing more certain than that the best of us here below are nothing but so
many Agents, or rather Instruments of Providence, directed and ordained by the
high hand of God, to act by his Commission, to make use of his Assistances, and
to fulfill his Purposes in our appointed stations. In the mean time, the only
true End we can propose to our selves, is to attain, as near as we are able, to
the Good of our own Souls, and the Glory of our Maker. And as the meanest
Peasant upon Earth ought not to do less than this; so the greatest Monarch can
do no more. However, the different Posts and Stations, in which we are all to
endeavor after this Common End, have given different names and degrees to
Virtue; and according as our Talents are more or less, so more or less
Improvement is expected of us. For some there are who can exercise little other
Virtue in this Life, except that of Patience and Submission to the Yoke of
Providence; and who are for the most part constrained to bring Glory to God by
their Sufferings only. Others again there are, who are indeed called to an
active state of Life, but that of so inferior a Rank, and so confined a
Compass, that the benefit of their Duty can hardly be derived to any besides
themselves. At the same time there is a Nobler part of Mankind, set up as
Lights in the World, and ordained to be the Blessings of their Age and Country;
Men adorned with Wisdom, Ability and Renown; dispensing the Gifts of Heaven to
all that are round about them. But however these may be again diversified in
the several degrees, and qualities, and circumstances of Life; there are none
either more happy in themselves, or beneficial to their fellow creatures, than
those whom God is pleased to employ on more than one Scene of the Creation;
those whom he leads, as it were by the Hand, over the Paths of the Watery Deep,
and whom he takes as Witnesses of his Power, his Justice, his Mercy, and of his
Immense Goodness even to the unconverted World. For whilst others are confined
at home to a more narrow sort of Observation, and have no other Notices of an
Universal Providence but such as are received by Report only; in the mean time,
They that go down to the Sea in Ships, that do Business in great Waters, These
see the Works of the Lord, and his Wonders in the Deep.

In Discoursing on which words, the Scope of the whole Psalm, the Import of the
Text it self, and that which is the Natural Inference from both, direct me to
do these Three Things.

I. To prove that the Glory of God ought to be the principal Aim of all our
Undertakings. II. To show that the Glory of God may more especially be promoted
by Travel, and Foreign Commerce. III. To consider what Duties are more
immediately incumbent upon those whom Providence has called to this important
Service.
First, Therefore I am to prove that the

When I say of all our Undertakings, I thereby directly exclude all that is
indeliberate, all that is idle and trivial, much more all that is vicious in
the Conduct of our Life. For these are so many Scandals of our Nature, and
blemishes to our Moral Prudence, that either indeed they do not, or at least we
could wish they did not, make up any part of our real Character: But in every
momentous and important Scene of our Human Life, in this or that considerable
Enterprise, in this or that hinge of our main End, and indeed every thing which
we think productive of our true and chiefest Good, in this we ought directly
and formally to intend the Almighty's Glory: and that not only according to the
Command of St. Paul, (1 Cor. 10. 31.) Whatsoever ye do, do all to the Glory of
God; but likewise according to the Example of our Blessed Savior, who sought
not his own Glory, (John 8. 50.) but in all his Desires, his Precepts, his
Endeavors studied the sole Glory of him who sent him: And though there is no
Name under Heaven, which in respect of Gods Glory, can bear any degree of
comparison with our Lord and Savior; yet because we all are parts of the
Rational World, endowed with capacious Faculties, and prescribed a large
variety of Duties, therefore as far as we are capable of arriving at any
Perfection in these, so far are we capable of promoting our Makers Glory; i. e.
of answering those remote Ends for which God created the World in general, as
well those immediate ones, for which he created us in particular. In the mean
time that it ought to be our concern so to do, or at least so to intend, will
appear from the Three following Reasons. And,

1. The Glory of God ought to be the principal Aim of all our Undertakings,
because this is a certain Method to be constantly secure of Success. For those
Men alone can be frustrated in their Undertaking who terminate their hopes in
Temporal Riches or in Worldly Honor; whereas he who first enters upon any
laudable Profession, and then dedicates his Services therein to the Glory of
Almighty God, that Person has done all, which in this uncertain Life, he was
capable of doing. Whether or no he shall execute his Designs, lies hid in the
Counsel and good Pleasure of him that made him; but that he intended well was
the free and deliberate Choice of his own Will. After which, though he be
oppressed by Envy, though he be frowned upon by Fortune, nay, though he be
intercepted by Mortality it self, yet he has taken an effectual Method to
ensure the Success of his Designs: He has approved his Resolutions in the Sight
of an All seeing God, he shall at length be admitted into his Master's joy, and
accepted under the Character of a good and faithful Servant. Mat. 25. 21.
But,

2. The Glory of God ought to be the principal Aim of all our Undertakings,
because the happyest Success we can promise to our selves is not due to us, but
to God alone. We are all the Servants and Vassals of our Heavenly Lord and
Master, Commissioned in our Earthly Pilgrimage to trade with that Talent which
he has entrusted to us; and therefore it is but Reasonable that the Gain and
the Credit of our Service should finally accrue to the great Proprietor. We our
selves are the Workmanship of his Hands; our Being he renews to us every moment
of our Life; he is pleased to concur with us in every Action that we undertake;
we live freely upon his Earth, and are daily fed by the Bounty of his Hands; we
act by those Faculties which he has lent to us; and we make use of such
Materials as are supplied by his Providence; and if after all this, we can
attribute any Honor to our selves, or can take Pleasure in our Productions, as
if they were the Works of our own Hands, what do we else do, but idolize the
Creature, and adore Dust and Ashes for those Perfections which we borrowed from
above? An eminent Presumption this, to rob God of that Glory of which he is
known to be so Jealous, and of which he has peremptorily declared, (Isa. 42.
8.) That he will not give it to another. But,

3. The Glory of God ought to be the principal Aim of all our Undertakings,
because the Glory of God is no other than our own Happiness. For though the
Glory of God, and the Happiness of Mankind are often represented to us under
distinct Characters, yet if duly apprehended they cannot but appear to be one
and the same thing. Whatsoever is the ultimate End of our best and honestest
Endeavors, that at the same time is sufficient to make Man happy, and to
glorify his Maker. As it is the end of our Labors, and is agreeable to our
Human Nature, so it is the Creatures Good; but as it is the Reward of our
Virtue, and is agreeable to the Divine Will, so it is the Creator's Glory. And
upon this account it is, that God who created Man on purpose to make him happy,
says likewise by Isaiah, that he created him for his own Glory. But if this
indeed be the Case, we need not then be directed to aim at the Glory of God in
all our Undertakings: for as we are Men, and Masters of right Reason, we shall
be sure so to do. It remains only, that as we are Christians we propose it to
our selves under that Notion, and that we terminate our Hopes in this or that
ultimate Reward, not for our own sake, but for the sake of our Creator. This,
if we could once practice it, would prove an excellent Rule for the Conduct of
our whole Life. This would be such a blessed subordination of our Human Nature
to the Heroic Spirit of Christianity, that we according to the Dictates of
right Reason, should in all things be made happy; and God according to the
Dictates of Religion in all things should be glorified. (1 Pet. 4. 11.) But
having thus far insisted upon the First General Head, and proved that the Glory
of God ought to be the principal Aim of all our Undertakings; I proceed now,

Secondly, To show that the Glory of God may more especially be promoted by
Travel and Foreign Commerce.

It having been already asserted, that the Glory of God is not really to be
distinguished from the Good of the Creature, it will here follow that those may
be chiefly Instrumental in promoting the Glory of their Maker, who either by
Nature, by Fortune, or Education, are fitted to be beneficial to their
Fellow Creatures. For the further illustration of which; We are to know that
God is a bountiful and indulgent Parent to the Universe. He no sooner had
created the World by his Power, but he plentifully endowed it by his Goodness.
He has provided not only for the Necessities, but also for the Pleasures and
Perfections of Life. He has furnished us with an inexhaustible variety of
Materials for the Goods of the Mind, the Goods of the Body, and the Goods of
Fortune; for Riches, for Pleasure, for Virtue, for Religion, and the like. In
the mean time, there needs only some large and exalted Spirits to be the
Dispensers of the Almighties Bounty: Men who are worthy to display, to
propagate, and to communicate the Gifts of Heaven: Men who by long Habits of
Industry and Resolution, have made it their familiar Province, to improve
themselves, and enrich the Public. But that these happy Opportunities of being
serviceable to the Glory of God, are in a great measure peculiar to the
Employment of Traveling and Traffiquing with Foreign Nations, is what I shall
endeavor to prove from no other than those Three Particulars, which are
plainly hinted in my Text; namely, 1. Because it advances our Native Country.
2. Because it acquaints us with the Works of the Creation. 3. Because it
acquaints us with the Dispensations of Providence. Therefore,

1. Travel and Foreign Commerce may be serviceable to the Glory of God as they
are a Means of advancing our Native Country.

When at first Providence distributed its Goodness to the several Inhabitants
of the Earth, to these it gave Fruits, to those Metals, and to others Precious
Stones: but on its Favorite and beloved People, It bestowed a Spirit and a
Genius to use these Treasures of the Creation. Treasures not sprung up amongst
them, lest they should administer to their Ignorance and Idleness; but rather
shown them at a distance, the better to encourage and to provoke their
Industry. These Men therefore receive Vigor and Activity from their own, but
Food and Raiment from other Climates. At Home they make Laws and erect a
Polity; but Abroad they ransack both the East and the West for Riches. Valuable
Blessings these; if we employed them to the Credit of Religion, and in the
Service of him, who first planted this Wealth in other Countries, and then
showed us the way to bring it hither. But whatever be the Ends to which they
are at Home converted, it is the Traveller and the Merchant to whom we are
beholden for those good things of the Earth, which others make the matter
either of their Vice or Virtue. These are they who bring us in the Fruits, the
Treasures, and when they too are laudable, even the Customs of our Neighbors.
These are they who have raised not only whole Trading Nations, but even lesser
Marts and Cities of Traffic, to be the Wonder of the World. Insomuch that
either in Sacred or Profane History, no Place of old was ever mentioned with a
Veneration equal to that of Tire: Tire, says the Prophet Isaiah, Isa. 23. 8.
the crowning City, whose Merchants are Princes, whose Traffickers the
Honorable of the Earth.

2. Travel and Foreign Commerce are serviceable to the Glory of God, as far as
they are the Means of acquainting us with the Works of the Creation.

When the Sea was as yet locked up from the Use and Observation of Mankind,
they were then strangely unacquainted with the parts of the Creation; and the
narrowness of that Sphere wherein they conversed, detained them from any large
and exalted Speculations. But when the Experience of Navigation had opened
another Scene, and the new World of Waters was added to that other of the
Earth, then the boundless Curiosity of Man was overcome with a variety of
Wonders. With Terror and Amazement he traveled over the trackless Ocean: and
the immeasurable extended Main led him by degrees to conceive the Infinity of
Him, whose way is in the Sea, and his path in the great Water. To say nothing
of those other surprising Objects that adorn the prospect of the Deep: those
raging Waves, those impending Rocks, that herd of monstrous Animals. Add to
this, those various Constellations, that different appearance of the Planets,
that new vicissitude of Days and Seasons, together with the innumerable unknown
Productions of distant Countries. All which when we reflect upon, we shall
think that the Psalmist had reason to cry thus Pathetically toward the Throne
of Grace; Lord, how manifold are thy Works! in Wisdom have thou made them all:
the Earth is full of thy Riches. So is this great and wide Sea, wherein are
things creeping innumerable, both small and great Beasts. There go the Ships;
there is that Leviathan, whom thou have made to play therein. (Psalm. 104. 24,
25, 26.) For these are all matter of Astonishment, even while they continue
under the ken of Reason only: but being once subject to the naked Eye, and
become the visible Objects of our outward Apprehensions, they then directly
lead us to the Contemplation of Things above, and fix our Thoughts on him, who
is the Author and Disposer of them all. So that viewing the Universal Cause in
this multiplicity of Effects, and taking some Estimate of God from the Grandeur
of his Works, we may presume with holy Job to make that familiar Exclamation; I
have heard of thee by the hearing of the Ear; but now mine Eye sees thee. (Job
42. 5.) But,

3. Travel and Foreign Commerce are serviceable to the Glory of God, as they
are a Means of acquainting us with the Dispensations of Providence.

To illustrate which Proposition, I need only cite that part of this exalted
Psalm which follows the Verses of my Text: They that go down to the Sea in
Ships, that do Business in great Waters; These see the Works of the Lord, and
his Wonders in the Deep. For he commands and raises the stormy Wind, which
lifts up the Waves thereof. They mount up to the Heaven, they go down again
to the depths; their Soul is melted because of trouble. They reel to and fro,
and stagger like a drunken Man, and are at their wits end. Then they cry unto
the Lord in their trouble, and he brings them out of their distresses. He
makes the storm a calm, so that the waves thereof are still. Then are they
glad because they be quiet; so he brings them to their desired Haven.

Lo, here a large description of Providential Goodness! Lo, here a mixture of
Judgment and Mercy, that will admit of no Comment or farther Illustration. It
is so lively, and so Poetical a passage; it so represents that Scene of Danger
to all who have had the least Experience of Maritime Affairs; it so recollects
to them the whole variety of their Fortune; it so urges them to remember, how
in the midst of these Fears and Uncertainties they have yet sailed securely
over that dangerous and devouring Element. But if we take a view of National as
well as of Personal Providence; It cannot but be entertaining to all those who
have been called into Foreign Parts, to observe the dealings of Almighty God
with those places which heretofore were the Seat of his true Religion. To see
that unworthy Land of Palestine, unworthy aforetime of the Prophets, the
Messiah, and the Apostles, now deservedly become a Shame, and a Desert, and the
Portion of an ignorant and unbelieving People. In the mean time, we who were
then a Nation overspread with Error and thick Darkness, do now enjoy the purest
Light and Profession of the Gospel. Nay, it has been the Fate of this very
Kingdom to have got to it self not only the Religion, but also the Trade of
those Eastern Countries. And as the greedy Vid.
Tyrians of old traffickt to these Isles for Tin and Silver, Bochar.
and reserved us as their peculiar Mart, Geogr.
unknown as yet to other Nations of the Earth; Sac.
so we who were then impoverished and exhausted by them, lib. 1.
do now by an happy turn of Providence, cap. 39.
fetch in our Stores and our Riches from the Land of Tire and Sidon. Wonderful
things are these, and not inferior to those other, of which it was once said
in a strain of Prophecy, Who shall live when God does this? (Numb. 24. 23.)
But having insisted thus far upon the Second General Head, and shown that the
Glory of God may more especially be promoted by Travel and Foreign Commerce; I
proceed now,

Thirdly, To consider what Duties are that important Service.

If what has hitherto been urged can convince any considerate and thoughtful
Person, 1. That the Glory of God ought principally to be endeavored after; and
then, 2. That it may thus happily be attained by Travel and Foreign Commerce;
it will here naturally follow that those, whose Lot is fallen in this so
Honorable a Service, are liable to many great and signal Obligations: Which
that they may the better be exemplified, with an eye to the several parts of
the foregoing Discourse, I shall endeavor briefly to comprehend them under
these Three General Heads. First, The Duty of Praise to God. Secondly, The Duty
of Example to our Neighbor. Thirdly, The Duty of Consideration with our
selves. Therefore,

First, Those who are employed in Travel and Foreign Commerce are obliged to
the Duty of praising God.

It is a confessed Principle, and that too even in Natural Religion, That as far
as we are possessed of the good things of this Life, so far we are Debtors to
the bountiful Hand of God. Which as it is true of all, so most remarkably of
that Order of Men, to which we are now addressing. For there is a wide and
palpable difference betwixt the Profession of the Husbandman and the Merchant.
The one is enriched by the ordinary Womb of Nature; but the other by the
immediate Care of Providence: The one grows fat in his own Land, but the other
in a Land that is not his: The one is wont to reap in proportion to what he
sows, but the other is often blessed with a much more abundant unexpected
Affluence. From all which Particulars the true and genuine Inference must needs
be this; viz. That if the Benefits which those enjoy are seven times due to
God, then these are indebted to him seventy times seven. But be it more or less
which Heaven has entrusted to us; As a Jew or an Heathen would repay these with
the First Fruits of his Temporal Increase; so a true Christian will prepare his
devout Acknowledgments in better Sacrifices than those. He will thank his
Almighty Benefactor, not in an air of Boasting, but in devout and mental
Adorations: Not in the Marketplace, but in the inmost privacy of the Closet:
Not for that he has made him Rich, but that of his Grace and Mercy he has
granted him enough. After which, he will be careful to employ the Overplus, to
the Honor of Religion, in the Education of his Family, or for the Benefit of
his Native Country. And doubtless, this is the most likely progress to complete
the several degrees of an Hearty and Religious Praise. For a truly generous
Mind is sensible of all its real Obligations; a sense of our Obligations will
remit us to the thoughts of Providence; the thoughts of Providence will
commemorate Gods Mercies; the memory of Gods Mercies will beget a Christian
Gratitude; and that Gratitude will break forth into the Ejaculation of the
Blessed Psalmist; Oh that Men would therefore praise the Lord for his Goodness,
Ver. 31.
and for his wonderful Works to the Children of Men. But,

Secondly, Those who are employed in Travel and Foreign Commerce, are obliged
to the Duty of good Example to their Neighbor.

As the Example of each single Person is always to be measured by the Character
which he bears; so in some sense it is true, that none bear a greater Character
than those, whom Providence has ordained to any Foreign Employment. For the
Charge which they carry with them is, in truth, a sacred and inestimable
Charge: no less than the Credit of their Religion and their Native Country.
They ought to approve themselves Abroad not only as Persons of sober and honest
Conversation; but what is much more, as becomes true Englishmen and sincere
Christians. So that if by means of those who shall travel from hence into the
Unbelieving World, this Nation is not esteemed as a Brave, a Generous and
Heroic People; this Faith as an Holy, Sincere and Heavenly Profession; the
fault will lie at their doors, whose Life and whose Behavior have
misrepresented either. But as these are the Circumstances of our Countrymen
Abroad; so being returned Home, the Case is not much altered. For these are the
Men who committed themselves and their Fortune to Gods immediate Protection;
these are the Men who have prosper'd in that state of Life; these are the Men
who have seen the Works of the Lord, and his Wonders in the Deep; and therefore
these too are the Men who stand obliged to a more exact performance of their
Duty. Otherwise there never will be wanting such weak and unwary Persons, who
being less acquainted with the Dispensations of Providence, will be led by
these great Authorities into the like remisness of Obedience. And then they, by
whose Example our most holy Religion is thus unhappily dishonored, will appear
at the great Tribunal, not only guilty of their own, but likewise as partakers
of other Men's Sins. (1 Timothy 5. 22.) But,

Thirdly and Lastly, Those who are employed in Travel and Foreign Commerce, are
obliged to the Duty of Consideration with themselves.

The Art of knowing ones self is what some Heathens have much talked of, but
what some Christians have better practiced. And in truth it is so desirable a
Perfection, that it is much to be wished that the several stations and degrees
of Men were acquainted with it: Especially the Merchant and the Traveller, in
whose Life there must needs be so great a variety of Accidents, so many
remarkable Events, and such a mixture of Joy and Wonder, as will be always
entertaining to themselves. To this end it would prove a Method of excellent
good Service, if each single Person preserved a faithful Register of all his
Actions, and as it were an History of his own Life. There it might be pleasant,
as well as useful to observe, what diversity of Men, of Things, or of Places,
they have seen; what Works of Gods Power, or what Dispensations of his
Providence; what Dangers they have escaped; what Difficulties they have
encountered by Sea or Land; with how little, or with how much, they at first
began; and finally, with what increase of Fortune God has blessed their
industry. After which it will be necessary to deal sincerely with themselves,
and to put to an Impartial Conscience these or the like Questions. Have they
been desirous to praise and to adore God for his manifold and repeated Mercies?
Have they been fair and just in all their Dealings? Have they improved the
Talent of Grace, as well as that of Fortune? Have they been Charitable to the
Distressed according to their Ability? Have they been studious to do Honor to
the Country from whence they came, but chiefly to that unblemished Religion
which they profess? In general, Have they approved themselves as wise and
faithful Stewards to their great Master, and managed the good Things of this
Life to the Glory of him who lent them? These are those only pious
Considerations which shall complete the admired Person, who is in Favor both
with God and Man: These are they which shall make him happy in himself, and
happy to his Fellow Creatures: These are they which shall lead him from Honor
to Honor, and from Virtue to Virtue; till by several gradations of Prudence,
his Character shall at length come up to that Idea, and that Desire of the Wise
Solomon; Happy is the Man that finds Wisdom, and the Man that gets
Understanding: For the Merchandise of it is better than the Merchandise of
Silver, and the Gain thereof than fine Gold. (Prove. 3. 13, 14.)

Now the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who accepts the Doers of the Word
and not Hearers only, bless, confirm, preserve, strengthen us, and establish us
in every good Word and Work!

The Peace of God which passes, etc.

FINIS.

