A SKIRMISH MADE UPON QUAKERISM: Being a Brief CONFUTATION OF A most gross
PRINCIPLE or Point of Doctrine:

Published and Maintained by one WILLIAM PENN, a Quaker;

In a certain Book, Entitled, Quakerism a Nickname for old Christianity,
Subverting Religion, and all Duty both to God and Man.

By J. C. a Minister of the Gospel.

LONDON: Printed for Richard Butler, next door to the Lamb and Three Bouls in
Barbican. 1676.

Imprimatur

Hic Tractatus, cui Titulus, A Skirmish upon Quakerisme, and cui nulla
praefigitur Praefatio.

Ab. Campion, Reverendissimo Domino Archiepisc. Cant. a Sac. Domest.
16 Sept. 1676.
A SKIRMISH MADE UPON QUAKERISM.
THere have risen up in these days of outs a Sect of People called Quakers,
about the Year, 1652. declaring themselves to be a People fearing God above all
the Families of the Earth, and that do Worship him in his own Way, viz. in
Spirit and in Truth; such also as do love God above all, and their Neighbors
as themselves, etc. (as we are told by their own Writers, Moderate Enquirer,
Page 3.) concerning whom and their Principles many are sufficiently informed by
their own Experience and Observation, and by the Writings which are extant; and
are sufficiently established in the Truth by the Grace of God in their Souls,
and are better able to overthrow erroneous Principles than I. Confessing my
own slender Abilities to any such Service, and relying only upon the clearness
of the Cause, I presume to tender to Christian People an Account of one Capital
Position and Fundamental Error of the Quakers, asserted by one William Penn,
who styles himself one of them, in a Book Entitled, Quakerism a new Nickname
for old Christianity, Chap. 7. Page 71. with a brief confutation of it. If any
one demand a reason of my doings in this case, I beg his candor and charity,
reason of I have in mine own breast, known and approved to others that know me,
I do not forbear to mention them, because I distrust them, but I think the
matter needs not, and I would not trouble the Reader with more than needs; if
God and Conscience approve me, thou may well rest in the matter delivered as
some reason to stay thy enquiry, and a little charity will serve for the rest,
I have by me sundry other of their Errors gathered out of their Books, very
gross and intolerable, with the constitation of them: but I forbear at present
to make them public; and shall only now present the Reader with one, but such
a one as may serve for all, and there needs no more to the subverting of all
Piety, Charity and Equity then this one, which I here set down in his own
Words: -- No command in the Scripture is any farther obliging upon any Man,
than as he finds a conviction upon his Conscience. -- It is conviction that can
only oblige to Obedience. -- When any Man is convinced, that what was commanded
another, is required of him, then, and not till then he is rightly authorized
to perform it.

For the confutation of this Position, I shall advertise and premise this, That
the Quakers are by us charged to deny and subvert the Scriptures; which Charge
they do deny, and account it a most vile and ungodly slander, and would not in
any wise be thought to diminish ought in the least from the just authority and
eminency of the Scriptures, and profess to be great honourers of them, and to
build their Religion and Hopes upon the Scriptures. So that by their own
confessions they give us ground to argue from the Scriptures against them. I
shall here manifest that for all their pretense and profession of just respect
to the Scriptures, they do quite subvert and undermine them, contradicting
their own concessions, and opening a Flood-gate to all Error, Atheism,
Impiety, and Wickedness; and that this Position of Penn's is the overthrow of
all Law and Government, a most intolerable and damnable Error.

I. Since they profess so stick to the Scriptures, and that the Scriptures do
in all Points make for them and against us, let them produce any one Text of
Scripture, containing any such assertion, or favoring it. Let Penn. produce
any one Scripture, which wills any Man to forbear Obedience to the command of
God and Scripture, till he shall be convinced thereof, or suspending the
Authority and Obligation of Scripture-command till Conscience shall be
convinced. Let the whole Bible be consulted, and view every Command, and see if
any such clause can be found. Instance in all the ten Commandments where does
God say, none of these Commands shall oblige any Man whose Conscience is
unconvinced, or contrary convinced. Instance in any the Precepts of the Gospel,
believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, repent and be converted, deny your selves and
take up the Cross, worship God in Spirit and in truth, and the like; where is
there any such clause as Penn's; None of all these Commands shall oblige you
further then you be convinced in Conscience? So when the Scripture forbids
Hypocrisy, forbids Sensuality, or other sin. Where does it say, as Penn
says, None of these Prohibitions are obliging further then there is a
conviction upon your consciences? I provoke him and all his partakers to
produce any Word of Scripture requiring Man's conviction as a condition
antecedent to the being and binding force of God's commands.

2. If this Position of Penn's be true, then sins of Ignorance are no sins; for
all conviction is by knowledge: where there is no knowledge, there can be no
conviction upon the conscience. So that this Position justifies all sins of
Ignorance. And whereas God in Scripture faith, It is a people of no
understanding, therefore he that made them will have no mercy on them, Isa.
27.11. by Penn's Position, it should rather be said, You want knowledge, and so
want conviction, and therefore God will have mercy upon you. And whereas God by
Scripture says, My people perish for lack of knowledge, Hos. 4.6. by Penn's
Position it should rather be said, Your want of knowledge disobligeth you from
obeying Gods commands, because without knowledge you cannot be convinced, and
without conviction the command of Scripture has nothing to do with you. This
does justify the Jews murder of Jesus Christ, for the Scripture says, they
did it ignorantly, Acts 3.17. and had they known it they would not have
crucified the Lord of glory, 1 Cor. 2.8. This does justify Paul's Blasphemy,
and Persecution, and gross sins against the Gospel, before his conversion,
because he says, be did it ignorantly, 1 Timothy 1.13. And whereas Paul does up
and down confess his sins, and acknowledges himself not worthy to be called an
Apostle, because he persecuted the Church of God; Penn's Position tells another
story, What needst thou accuse and judge thy self before all the Churches of
Christ by such confessions, for no command in Scripture is of any such force to
oblige ignorant unbelieving sinners: Thou did all this in thy ignorance and
unbelief, and therefore they were no sins and crimes, and if no crimes, they
were innocent, yea laudable actions proceeding from a mind acting according to
conviction.

3. If this Position of Penn's be true, then sins of error are no sins, but
virtues; and whatsoever is done through delusion, and a perverted hereticated
mind and judgment is laudable. I verily thought (says Paul) that I ought to do
many things contrary to the name of Jesus Christ of Nazareth, Acts 26.9. and
our Savior says, The time comes, that whosoever kills you, will think that
he does God service, Joh. 16.2. It it conviction (says Penn) which can only
oblige to obedience: does not this patronize the grossest crimes, where the
conscience is misconvinced and the understanding deceived? does not this
justify all erroneous Doctrines? and all erroneous Conceits, and practical
Misapprehensions, and whatsoever Vices lie in the understandings of Men? for
all conviction passes into the Soul through this gate of the understanding.
Now the understanding is naturally full of darkness, unbelief, and error;
every ungodly man is practically an Atheist, an Heretic, a false Teacher to
his own soul at least, and practical Ignorance and a perverted Judgment, are
the mother of all the sins and abominations in the world: and what does this
Position but justify them all? When wicked men kill the Saints, they look upon
them at wicked men, and so kill them; all that have been martyred by
persecuting Popes, and Pagan Kings and Governors, and all the Persecutions
that have been done to the Saints, have been through ignorance and practical
error. Penn's Position does justify the Irish Rebellion, the French Massacre,
the Mari^^ Persection, the ten Persecutions of the Primitive Churches, the
Gunpowder Treason, Judaism, Mahometism, Paganism, Popery, all erroneous Sects
and Parties in the World, with all their false Principles and Practices. Christ
says, it is life eternal to know God and Christ Jesus, Joh. 17.3. Penn's
Position says, if you are ignorant and unconvinced, no Law can lay hold on
you; if you be deluded, and practice according to the convictions of your
deluded mind, you are warranted by the command of God, which do all center in
conviction.

4. If this Position off Penn's be true, then conscience and conviction is God,
and whatsoever conscience says must be done, be it right or wrong, and it lies
in the power of conscience to abrogate and undo and make void all the Laws of
God, and to make new Laws in their room and stead, and do whatsoever it
pleases. If no command be of any force further then conscience shall assent to
it, and if conviction, and conviction only oblige to obedience, then whatsoever
conviction says must be done, let God and Man say what tehy will. If conviction
bid us murder, we must do it, if to commit Treason we must do it, and that
under pain of damnation.

5. Then also it will follow, that he is the most free from all sin who has
the most seared conscience, and that the ready way to obedience and salvation
is to debauch and sear the conscience, and and stuff it with the grossest
errors, and quite kill it with conscience-wasting sins, and make it so void of
life and feeling, that we may may do the most horrid crimes, and yet conscience
stand to stand to them, and not only not smite us for them, but approve us, and
praise us, and tell us we have done God good service.

6. If conviction be the ground of obedience, and the authority of Scripture
depend upon the rectitude and purity of conscience, then all rational Law,
Order and Government both Divine and Humane is over turned, and a stop is put
to all Religion and Piety toward God, to all Conscience, Honesty and Charity
toward Men, let God command what he will, conscience may come and say, I deny
this command, and him that commands it. I know no such God, as Pharaoh says to
Moses and Aaron, Who is the Lord that I should let Israel go? I know not the
Lord, neither will I let Israel go, Exodus 5.2. and as proud Nebuchadnezzar
says to the three Witnesses, who is that God that shall deliver you out of my
hand? Dan. 3.15. and as Sennacherib sent a railing Letter by his Captain
Rabshakeh, blaspheming the God of Jerusalem, saying, Who is your God, that be
should be able to deliver you out of my hand? 2 Chronicles. 32.14. No God of any
Nation or Kingdom was able to deliver out of my hand, how much less shall your
God deliver you out of my hand? v. 15. And his servants spoke yet more against
the Lord God, and his servant Hezekiah; he wrote Letters also to rail on the
Lord God of Israel, and to speak against him, etc. v. 16, 17. So also Princes
and Rulers may command and make never so good Laws, conscience may come and
say, I deny all these Laws, and the maker of them: Children may refuse to obey
Parents, and Servants their Masters, and Inferiors their Superiors, if
conscience shall be unconvinced, and if it be deluded, Subjects may murder
their Princes, Children their Parents, Servants their Masters, one Man another,
there can be no Law but Conscience, and whatsoever Conscience says must stand.

It is certain, that since the fall of our first Parents Conscience in every
man naturally is corrupted, and by custom in sin it b^comes twice corrupted. By
nature Conscience is dead in trespasses and sins, Ephesians. 2.1. and men live
without God and Christ in the world, v. 12. being without hope, and aliens to
the Commonwealth of Israel, and strangers to the Covenants of Promise: By
nature there is not one righteous consc^ence in all the world, Romans 3.10. There
is none that understands, there is none that seeks after God, they are all
gone out of the way, they altogether become unprofitable, there is none that
does good, no not one, v. 11.12. All the world is guilty before God of an evil
conscience, v. 19. The mind and conscience is defiled, abominable, disobedient,
and to every good work reprobate, Tit. 1.15, 16. Some men's consciences are
twice dead, Jud. 12. seared with a hot iron, 1 Timothy 4. 2. past feeling, given
over to lasciviousness, to work all uncleanness with greediness, Ephesians. 4.19.
hard as the adamant stone, Zach. 7.12. having a whores forehead, without shame,
Jer. 3.3. impudent and stiff-hearted, Ezekiel. 2.4. rebellious, v. 5. doing evil
with both hands earnestly, Mich. 7.3. insatiable, Ezekiel. 16.28. full of subtilty
and mischief, children of the Devil, enemies of all righteousness, not ceasing
to pervert the right ways of the Lord, Act. 13.10. and infinite more might be
gathered out of the Scriptures, reporting the wickedness of man, and the
corruptions of his Conscience, and all his powers.

Experience witnesses the same, what woeful consciences have many professing
Christians? Penn himself says of the Protestants, and them of the Church of
England, That they abound in evil, equalizing, if not outstripping Papists and
Heathens in all kinds of impiety, Truth exalted, p. 10. how then can such a
conscience be a law or rule to all the world, and suspend and make void the
obligation of all Gods Laws? the Quakers conscience says one thing, the Papists
conscience says another thing, the Pagans conscience, the Turks conscience,
Jews conscience, the Tyrants conscience, the Traitors conscience, the Heretics
conscience, the Worldlings conscience, the Hypocrites conscience, the proud
man's, conscience* the Adulterers conscience. How many contrary Conscience are
these? how many Gods shall we have, and how many contradictory Laws, if
Conscience and Conviction be the only thing which obliges to duty, and no Law
or Command of Scripture oblige, Conscience repugning and being unconvinced?

I would know of Penn or any man else, what conviction there is upon a
Drunkards conscience when he is dead drunk in his drunkenness, and yet Penn's.
Position is, that no Command in Scripture is obliging upon the Drunkard to
repent and be sober, supposing him in his drunkenness unconvinced. The most
godly Ministers find by sad experience, it is one of the hardest matters in the
world to convince an impenitent man of his impenitency, to convince a worldling
of his worldliness, to convince a sinner of heart-sins, such as heart-pride,
heart-malignity against God and godliness, heart unbelief, and Atheism, and
irreligion, and hardness, and earthliness, and other lusts and, vices. And if
Penn and his fellows shall lay the blame upon the Preacher, and say the fault
is in Preachers, and not in People, let him take heed lest he charge God and
Christ, and the Holy Ghost and Scripture, and Prophets and Apostles, who have
preached to sinners as well as we, and yet thousands have remained unconvinced.
Will Penn undertake to answer for all the crimes of an ignorant, blind, and
erroneous conscience against the commands in Scipture? Will he be an Advocate
at the day of Judgment to plead the cause of unconvinced consciences, and
maintain his Position then to the face of God, as now he does publish it to the
world, and pretend to write from the warrant of God, and from the sense of his
eternal spirit, Reason against Railing, p. 164. and crying down the observation
of the Lords Supper, and Baptism, as sottish, and that a spirit of whoredom
from God, gross Apostasy into Superstition and Idolatry, yea a spirit of
Hypocrisy, Persecution and Murder, and all manner of wickedness has got them,
and covered it self with them. p. 108, 109. And he testifies from the same
spirit, that Paul renounced Circumcision, that the Appellation, Ordinances of
Christ, and particularly Baptism and the Lords Supper are to be rejected.

Had this Position been, that every command in Scripture is not obliging upon
every man, it had been sound Doctrine, for we acknowledge, that every command
of God is not obliging to every man, but only such commands as it is Geds will
and intent that they should be obliging to all. Some commands of God are but
temporary, personal and local. Many commands in Scripture are long since
abrogated and null. The command to Abrabam to slay his Son, was extraordinary,
and not to be obeyed by any without the like warrant. The command to sacrifice
slain Beast, to Circumcise, the command of the Passover, these are ceased. We
may sufficiently collect Gods mind from his word, which commands are temporary,
and extraordinary, and concern but some particular men, and do only oblige in
certain cases, and which be perpetual, and oblige all men, at all times, in all
places, and the love of God and Man, innocence, holiness, godliness, faith,
fidelity, truth, temperance, self-denial, zeal for Gods glory, the commands
that Parents bring up Children in Gods fear, that Children honor their
Parents, that we do to all men as we would be done unto, and a multitude more
such like. Now Penn's Position is, That no command at all in Scripture is
obliging without conviction upon the conscience; and he makes conviction to be
the only thing obliging and authorizing to duty, and to be of such force, that
without conviction no command at all binds. For if that be the reason why
Gods command written obliges not, because the conscience in not convinced,
then ubi eadem ratio ibi eadem lex, an unwritten command of God obliges not
where there is no conviction. And since all Gods Laws are comprised within
these two of written and unwritten, Precepts written in Scripture, and Precepts
unwritten and contained in Nature, it will follow, that no Law of God is
further obliging any man than he is convinced of it, that it is Gods Law, and
that he stands bound to obey it. It will then follow, That if the Conscience be
blind, erroneous, seared, and corrupt, there must needs be a multitude of
things in Gods Laws most weighty and important duties, which the conscience
will be utterly ignorant of, and will call good evil, and evil good, and
justify that which God does condemn, and condemn what God does justify, and
will walk contrary to God, against which is the woe in Isa. 5.30.

For it is certain, that a carnal man discerns not spiritual things, and all
Gods commands are spritual; every command of God is holy and pure and
spiritual, whether it be written in Scripture or written in Nature, and without
a spiritual Principle in the conscience, the conscience being carnal and blind,
discerns not spiritual things; and so it will follow that all spiritual
obedience to Gods Laws is made void.

Can Penn answer this or confute it? let him. Let him demonstrate how a carnal
conscience can obey a spirtual command, every man by nature is earthly, Gods
commands are heavenly, we are by nature unholy, Gods Laws are holy. If Gods
Laws bind none but such as be convinced of them, and no further then they are
convinced, then it will unanswerably follow, that no man in the World is under
any Law of God to perform spiritual obedience. For instance, Gods command is,
Thou shall not murder. Now this command is a spiritual command, requiring the
subjection of the heart, and condemning all Murder both of Soul and Body, and
whatsoever is a degree of it, and tends to it. Now no unregenerate carnal
conscience does discern this command of God in its extent and spirituality, he
is no convinced of it, and by Penn's Position there lies upon him no obligation
to spirutal obedience.

Had it not behoved Penn to make good his Position by solid proof? it had,
especially when called to it by John Faldo, who charge the Quakers, and that
justly, for subverting the Scriptures. What says Penn for proof* why he
contradicts himself, or says something like a contradiction, which is frequent
in his Writings.

First he says, that no command of Scripture is obliging upon any man further
then he has a conviction upon his conscience; afterward he says, that such
commands as these, be holy, be just, be sober, and such like, together with
holy Examples are obliging upon all; Why? because they more or less meet with a
conviction in the consciences of all: for (says he) I am persuaded, none that
has a reasonable soul, who has not outlived their days, and on whom the night
is not come, among the Indians themselves, but would readily say, these are
true and weighty. And so he wipes himself and his Brother Buroughs as he
thinks clean, and acquits himself from all crime against the Scriptures, and
evades John Faldo's Charge. But not to stand answering every word, the sum of
Penn's Defense and come off (to give it the Reader in more intelligible words)
is this: That such commands in Scripture as be of universal and perpetual
obligation, such as holiness, purity, innocence and generally all that concerns
honest and godly living, all these be obliging to all, because there is no man
so sottish and impious but his conscience assenteth to these commands: But Mr.
Penn what do you say, if men be so sottish and impious as to be ignorant that
these are commands of God, and to live without God in the World, and to have
abominable and filthy and reprobate consciences? It is plain from your Position
and defense of it, that you make conviction the ground and spring of obedience.
So that where there is no conviction, there is no obedience due; where the
conviction is but partial, the obedience due is but partial; where the
conviction is erroneous, the obedience must be erroneous. It this Divinity? and
is this your Religion? Why then do you not speak out and say, fully and
plainly, Every man follow his own Lusts, every man follow his own conscience,
every man burn his Bible, and make Conscience and Conviction your Bible? For
this is the genuine product of your Opinion. It is a Rule in Logic, That what
is not in the premises cannot be in the conclusion, and that every redundancy
in the conclusion exceeding the Arguments laid down in the premises in vicious,
and that the conclusion is vertually contained in the two foregoing
Propositions. Now you make conviction one of your premises, and you lay down
this Proposition* That where there is no conviction, there is no obedience, and
that obedience can rise no higher than conviction.

Now may one not admire, that a man of your reading and bringing up should be
so persuaded of the holiness and goodness of Mankind, as to write and publish
to the World, That none that has a reasonable soul, no not among the Indians
themselves, can be unconvinced of that faith in God, and an holy self-denying
life are necessary both to temporal and eternal happiness. -- Quis ^alia fando
temperet a lachrymis? The Lord forgive me my want of compassion to this man.
Alas, how many thousands are there in the World that know not God, not what
faith in God is, that know not what a holy self-denying life is, that worship
Devils, that make the Belly their God, and with them a holy self-denying life
is to live as if the must never dye, and follow their pleasures; and Religion
with them is mere Epicurism and sensuality, let us eat and drink for to morrow
we shall dye.

You would have us to believe, that all the World is perfectly holy, and that
there is never a corrupted and defiled conscience in the World, and that Adam's
fall is no such thing, and that the redemption of Mankind by Christ's blood,
and regeneration by the Holy Ghost, and original sin, and hereditary
corruption, and man's deadness in sins and trespasses by nature, are no such
things. O mavelous! that you can be persuaded, no man that has a reasonable
soul, not a savage Indian, but he has a conscience within him assenting to all
the rules and precepts of holiness, self-denial, godliness, charity, and
heavenly conversation: or that no man in the World has a blind understanding,
a seared conscience, an impotent foul, needing no purgation and cure from Jesus
Christ, and his good spirit by the new covenant.

I do grant you this, that no man stands bound to obey any command which it is
utterly impossible for him to know and be convinced of. And by granting this, I
do sufficiently assoil and clear the justice of God. God does not enjoin any
man that which is simply and totally impossible. God and Conscience will never
smite and condemn for mere and total impossibilities. But where nothing hinders
a man from knowing his duty but his own neglect and wilful carelessness; and
where a man shall by sin debauch and sear his Conscience, and Conscience
misguided and seduced shall put him on to worship Idols, to bow to a wooden
God, to blaspheme the true God, to murder, persecute, commit all or any crimes;
will you excuse this man from sin for going according to his Conscience, and
exempt him from all, going against his erroneous Conscience?

If indeed the case were so that no conviction could be, or none that I could
any way compass, then I were in no fault: but where it is my fault, if I be
unconvinced, and I might know my duty were I not wanting to my self, and there
is no defect in the means, but all the defect is in me, in such case God may
justly charge me with the omission of duty, and the commission of evil though I
know not of it: for I might have known if I would; and my not knowing my duty
which I might have known, it cannot excuse me from sin, nor nullify the command
of God. If God should command a Beast to do him reasonable worship, it were an
unreasonable command, because the beast has no reasonable powers or capacity
thereto, the command to him is simply impossible. So if God should command a
man to reach the Stars with his hands, such a command would not oblige, because
it is naturally and simply impossible. But when God commands the Jews to
believe on the same Jesus, and own him for the true Messiah, this command is
reasonable, because Jesus Christ does abundantly testify by his doctrine,
life, and miracles, that he is the Christ of God. And if the Jews will not
believe, but contrariwise look upon Christ as a deliverer, and put him to
death, and all this in blind zeal, and think they do God good service, shall we
say, These men are excused, because they did it ignorantly and of error? In
all cases where God does afford due means of knowledge and conviction, there
ignorance and base want of conviction is sinful, and Gods command both written
and unwritten does oblige, though the sinner be never convinced. For man's sin
and neglect cannot make void Gods Law. It is true, I grant that without the
light within we could not at all come to the knowledge of the Scriptures. What
then? will it thence follow, That no command in Scripture does oblige without
conviction? Had we no light within we should be very brutes. Every man has a
reasonable soul, which soul does essentially contain a principle or power of
rational light, by which man, as man is differenced from a beast, and is Animal
rationale, by the help of his reason, or that light which is graven in his mind
by the Creator, and cultivated by education, he may know that there is a God
and a Life to come, and many things pertaining to Religion and Morality* Will
it hence follow, that because we are men and have reasonable faculties, there
lies no obligation upon us, to obey any command of God, further then our reason
shall acquaint and certify us, and further then the light shall inform us?
What if the light be negligent, idle, sleepy, unfaithful, and bribed, and shall
let the sinner sin, and dye in sin, is God unjust for taking vengeance? If the
Coachman sleep and the Horses run wood, or if he drive so that the Coach is
over-turned, does he not deserve correction? But Penn and all his partakers
conceit strange things of the light within, and set it above Scriptures, above
all written and unwritten Laws, and this is their very Principle, That the
light within in all things is to be, our Rule, and that the Scripture is
inferior to it, and to be ruled by it, and so God and Christ, and the Spirit
and Scripture and all Duty and Religion are made servants to the light within.
Whereas it is evident, That the light within gives the Drunkard leave to be
drunk, the Worldlng to be a worldling, and the impenitent man to be impenitent,
there is never a soul in Hell but he may have the light within, for if the
light within were faithful to God and the Soul, it would not suffer sin to
dwell in the soul, it would not suffer any man to live in sin and dye in sin.
God charges man to be holy in all manner of conversation, and man being so
charged by God does quire the contrary. The light within which should be his
guide, like a negligent drunken Coachman sleeps, and the Horses run wood, or
he drives into pits and bogs. So does the light within take part with the
flesh, and Satan against God, and suffers the soul to be sensual, worldly, and
ungodly, and so is at least a permissive cause of the sinners sin and
damnation; being charged to watch over the soul, and does not. Now comes Penn
and a Sect of people called Quakers, and cry, Up with this light within, and
tell us, that we must hearken to this in all things; and further then the light
within shall teach and lead us we are to give no harkening to any thing that
Scripture says; and if Scripture go, farewell God and Christ, and Heaven, and
all Law and Rule. This is that Penn whose zeal for Quakerism exceeds, that has
written sundry Books for it, and in the end of his Book, Reason against
Railing, page 185. does commend unto us his own with other his Brethrens Works,
for an account of the Quakers Principles, confessing, That they do contain much
of what can be said in behalf of their Principles and Practices, vaunting as
though they could not by reason be silenced, nor confuted by sober Argument,
page 186. I refer my self and what I have here writ to impartial censure,
warning and entreating all people, as they love their souls, to take heed of
Quakerism.

I would be glad to make the best I can of your Position, but I must protest my
Conscience and Conviction, I cannot find out what to say to solve your
Position, and make it but a tolerable Error. All this while I speak not
against you but your Error; you make bold and free to publish such matter to
the World, allow us the same boldness and freedom to detect your Errors, and
to do our best to save the Souls which be in danger to be subverted by your
Principles. Keep your poison to your self, and none will perish by it but your
self: but if you will needs vend it, and in the view of all the Nation, and
such at least as know the English tongues set up a Position subverting all
Religion, and all Law and Government, and levelling all holy and profitable
Rules and Commands to men's lusts, leaving no man in the World under any
obligation to any duty to God or Man further then he is convinced in his
conscience, be it known to you, that Jesus Christ has his servants abroad to
bear testimony for him against such God-baspheming and Soul-damning Errors,
and if you repent not, this that I have writ shall rise up in judgment against
you, and shall be an aggravation of your misery in that day.

Prepare to answer the righteous Judge, if your Conscience be blinded and
seared now, it will be open and awaken then.

Sept. 6. 1676.
FINIS.

