CHRIST IN THE CLOUDS, OR GOD's coming to Judgment.

A short Treatise, very necessary in these evil and dangerous times, for all
those which desire that the day of the LORD may be their day of Joy.

Mark 13. Ver. 35.36. Watch, for ye know not when the Master of the House will
come: Whether at Evening, or at midnight, or at the Cock-crowing, or at the
Dawning; least he come suddenly and find you sleeping.

LONDON: Printed for J. Clark, W. Thackeray, and T. Passinger.

Christ in the Clouds. OR, GOD's coming to Judgment.
Atheism and Epicurisme, are two Sins most heinous and deadly; the Atheist
believes there is no God: him David confutes, Doubtless there is a God, that
Judges the Earth. The Epicure believes there is no Judgment after Death: him
Solomon does seem to instruct, Remember that for all these things you must come
to Judgment. There is no Christian, I think, but believes that there shall be a
day of Judgment, Mat. 24.30. But when this day shall come, none knows: for of
that day and hour no man knows, neither the Angels of Heaven, but my Father
only. But although no man's reach is able to determine when that Day and Hour
shall be, yet may plainly be demonstrated and shown both from the Prophets and
Apostles, that this Judgment day is near at hand, and will most suddenly come
upon us.

It is the mercy of the Holy Ghost to men in Holy Writ, to insert these
Caveats, and to put Man in mind of the Judgment day, and that for three special
causes;

1. That we may be terrified from sin.

2. That we might be admonished to the true and sincere worship of God.

3. That we might be strengthened in our Faith, lest the great terrible day
should come upon us unawares, and so find us unprovided:

Since the Foundation of the World, we know the time, when the Dissolution of
the World shall be, we are altogether ignorant: yet we may justly Prophecy and
Presage thus much, since Sin and Impiety is now come to that height, that it
can by no succeeding Ages be aggravated, and that Virtue and Godliness are so
despised and villifyed among impious men, that they can never hereafter be less
esteemed: when cannot then perceive, or is so dust sighted, that is not able to
apprehend and foresee the Dissolution to be at hand? Now is that Prophecy of
Hosea verifyed: There is no truth, nor mercy, nor knowledge of God in the Land;
which appears by the Cursing, Lying, Murders, Thefts, and Adulterers, which
now abound: So that now as the Prophet Micah has it, The Godly man is perished
from the Earth, and there is no just man among the Sons of men. Thus Hosea,
Micah, nay, all the Prophets do agree in one, whereupon says St. Ambrose, When
Righteous men perish from off the Face of the Earth, the Earth must needs
perish also, because the godly are the Pith and Marrow of the Earth: For as the
Tree without Pith and Moisture soon dries up, so the present World must needs
decay, when the Righteous that should uphold it, are not to be found in it: For
this cause, as Esaias has it; In the City is left Desolation, and destruction is
in the gates thereof, because of their manifold iniquities.

Christ Jesus himself said, As in the Days before the Flood, they were eating,
and drinking, and Marrying, and giving in Marriage, till the day of the Flood
came, and took them away: So also shall the Coming of the Son of Man be, by
reason of the Profaneness, and too much Security. Suppose that this Prophesse
shall be fulfilled upon our present times, and that GOD will say to us as he
did to Noah, I will destroy you with the World: O how unhappy and miserable
shall that Man be then, that has not God for his Guide! But to the end we may
the better discern that we are they, upon whom the ends of the World must come,
there is no better a sign amongst those whom Christ himself gave before them
this, namely: For the Gospel of the Kingdom shall be Preached in all the World,
for a Witness to all Nations, and then shall the end come: which is as much as
to say, according to St. Chrysostom; To accuse and reprove those that would not
believe the Gospel. The same is that of Hilary: Then the Apostles being
dispersed, throughout all the World, and the Gospel Preached, then shall the
Fall of Jerusalem be. Nevertheless, there are both Learned and unlearned of
this opinion, that since the World, so long after these Prophesies, has
continued as before, that the end is not near, and that the World shall
continue still immutable. But let them persevere in their opinions; for since
S. Ambrose, Cyprian, Chry^ostom, and S. Gregory were of opinion, That since the
Gospel in their time was Preached to all Nations, long after their time the
World could not endure. Surely then it is most probable, that this is the Age
in which the end must come.

Now that we have some proof that the World cannot endure long, because the
Gospel is said to be preached to all Nations. Here St. Jerome, who was of
opinion that there was in his time no Nation that was ignorant of the Gospel of
Christ: For he says, Although they have no Preacher, yet they cannot but hear
the Opinion of the Faith of their Neighboring Nations.

This Prosper confirms: No part of the World is without the Gospel of Christ,
some of all sorts, and of all Nations, have knowledge of Christ. I could induce
a Cloud of opinions, but let Ambrose serve for them all: The Gospel is
Preached, the World may be destroyed. To conclude this point, since probably by
this great motive we are induced to believe that the end is at hand, and that
the day and hour thereof is uncertain, it shall stir us up to a more holy
course of life, least that our Desolation and Confusion overtake us unawares.

But to the end that we may the better understand and believe what has been
before showed, the Word of God is a most firm Argument to inform us of the
truth of Christ's sudden Coming, and that this present Age is the last Age of
the World; For the spirit expressly says, 1 Timothy 4. That in the later end some
shall depart from the Faith, giving heed to seducing spirits, and Doctrine of
Devils, speaking Lies in Hypocrisy, and having their Conscience seared with a
hot Iron, etc. And again, know this also: that in the last days perilous times
shall come; for men shall be Lovers of their own selves, Covetous Boasters,
Proud Blasphemers, disobedient to Parents, unthankful, unholy, without natural
affection, truth-breakers, false-accusers, Innocent, despisers of those that
are good; High-minded, Lovers of Pleasure more than God: having the form of
Godliness, but denying the power thereof. Thus far the Apostle; which-words St.
Cyprian handling, says, All things that were foretold are fulfilled, and the
end of the world draws near: the Prophesies are come to pass, both in respect
of the men and the minds; For now (if ever) is the perfection, or rather
imperfection of all the sins the Apostle names to be the forerunners of the
end. Why doubt we then, that the and is not at hand? Or why fear we not rather,
that a sudden end will prevent our procrastinated repentance? As bodies are
sick before death, and as Iufirmities and Sickness are the true forerunners of
a separation between the ^ody and the Soul: even so fares it with the World,
it now languisheth and is corrupt, it now lies sick, and therefore it must
needs come to Confusion, and to an end. For deadly sickness is a forerunner of
death; all things now suffer their defect, and let no man wonder at it; for man
is now born in such defect, in respect of the birth of man in former times: but
what is wanting in the present-condition of man's Body, is supplied in the
faculties of mind, and what is defective in the strength of his Members, is
complete in the ripeness of his understanding, which is for the most part
employed not in liberal, but in devilish Arts, not in the study of Learning,
but in pleasure. Only Wit and Maturity is resident in Man, the only Idea, and
representment of the Image of God in Man. What can we otherwise but think that
the Time is at hand, wherein Mortality shall put on Immortality, wherein the
burden of the flesh being laid aside the Glorious Body of the Church shall be
coupled to her Glorious Head. The Communion of Saints shall be consummate and
Christ shall enjoy his Spouse in continual Love and Union. In the mean time
with Paul, Unhappy men that we are, who shall deliver us from the Body of
death, that we may pass secure to the Body of Life.

Then let every good Christian in these Wicked times wherein destruction hangs
over our heads, with good Hezekiah Pray, Lord, I am oppressed, do thou
undertake for me: and since the day of destruction is so near us, we entreat
thee, since it is expedient for us, that thou would teach us, So to number
our days, that we may apply our hearts to Wisdom. And since thou have
pronounced that Servant happy, whom his Master when he came, found Vigilant and
Watchful* Grant Lord, we beseech thee, that since it is manifest, that long it
cannot be before the^ come, that we may be fitted and prepared for thy Coming;
and may be found with Oil i^ our Lamps, and so in Holiness enter the
Bride-chamber with Joy; And let us, good Lord, think the day most near, least
whilst the Day of Death or Judgment be thought to b^afar off, it prevent the
improvement, and while long life is expected, it quickly forsake the Wicked and
Guilty persons.

Our minds are very destrous if we could, to know the Day of Death and
Desolation. But if we could attain to the knowledge thereof, what would it
profit us? Suppose the Consumation of this World to be after Ten, Twenty, or
Forty, or an Hundred years, what is this material? Is not the Term of Life the
Consummation of each Man? Why then art thou so troubled about the last day of
Judgment? Since as thy end leaves thee, Judgment shall find thee: And how
suddenly Death shall find thee, thou art altogether ignorant: For as in other
things, no^regarding things pertaining to our Souls, we altogether are busted
in things common; saying, this man is an Adulterer, this man a Thief, this man
a false-hearted fellow, that man proud: But no man has a care far feeling his
own sins far worse.

So does every man neglect his own end, he would fain learn when the general
day of Dissolution shall be: Which Day, whether it be near or far off, it does
nothing concern us, so each man regard his several end, for since thou art
Born, it is most certain thou must Dye; And it is certain, after Death comes
Judgment, that may be far off, yet thy last day is at hand: Therefore prepare
thee for this day; For if this day find there unprovided, the day of Judgment
shall find thee so likewise, when thou shall rue for it.

Consider this, all ye that forget God, least he tear you in pieces, and there
be none to help: For our God shall go, and shall not keep silence; a Fire shall
come before him, and it shall be very tempestuous round about him; For God
himself is Judge, and the day of Judgment will quickly have an end, prevent the
speed thereof: It will speedily come, prevent it I say, be thou speedily
converted. And as the Prophet David advises us, Let us run before the face of
the Judge, with Confession of Our Faults, and true Contrition of the same; And
the reason why thou know not his coming is, that thou may always be
prepared for it: For it is in thine own power, now thou may expect his
Coming: He therefore deferrs his Coming, that when he comes, he may not daunt
thee. Behold, he is not yet conte he is in Heaven, thou art on Earth. He
deferrs his Coming, do not thou deferr this time of Repentance, lest thou for
ever, then too late Repent thee of his Coming, For in that day it will be too
late to Repent; Therefore pray not that his Kingdom come, which thou fear
coming; but rather correct thy self, that thou pray not against thy self. So
daily he calls upon thee, that he may not that day contemn thee. He that shall
then be thy Judge, is now thy Advocate, and he now calls upon thee, that thou
would lead a Godly Life.

Let us therefore set the day of Judgment before our Eyes, which way soever we
go, let us carry the Memory of it with us, and it will bring this profit with
it, that we shall not only meditate on the Horror and Destruction of that day,
but also wish for the accomplishment of the same, which makes the Wicked to
tremble when they hear it approaches. Thus S. Chrysostom says: Let us from
among our selves repeat these things and with others: There shall be a
Resurrection, a day of Judgment, and a Time of Examination of our Works,
whether good or bad. And this will cause the minds both of good and bad, be not
conversant in the Vanities and Pleasures of this World, and be not tempted to
any Wickedness, but rather to undergo any Thing to be imposed upon them here,
than to incurr the intolerable punishments of everlasting Fire hereafter.

This made David cry out: Establish my Flesh in thy fear, for I have been
afraid to hear of thy Judgments. To conclude this Point, since we must all
appear before the Iudgment-Seat of Christ, that every one may Receive the
things done in his Body, according to that he has done, whether it be good or
bad; and knowing the Terror and Justice of the Judge of all Men, that shall
Judge the world in Righteousness; and considering the punishment that then
shall be imposed on the Wicked, that shall be turned into Hell with them that
forget God: Let us hear and follow St. Hillaries Advice, in all the course of
our Lives: the Memory of the Last and Great Judgment, is to be planted and
grafted in our hearts: For happy is the man that does what he must do, in
Remembrance of the Last day: And why? Hear the words of Jesus the Son of
Sirach, Whatsoever thou take in hand, remember thy end, and thou shall never
do amiss.

Thus much shall suffice, that there shall be a Day of Judgment, and that that
day is near. Now somewhat remains to be spoken of the manner of this day, and
the Terror thereof, that the Wicked being touched with the understanding of
the same, might be driven nearer to God. In that Day, says St. Paul, every
man's Work shall be made manifest, for the day shall declare it, because it
shall be revealed by the fire, and the fire shall try every man's Work, what
sort it is.

The Time is now come when Judgment shall begin at the house of GOD, and if it
first begins with us, what shall the end be of them that Obey not the Gospel of
God? And if the Righteous scarcely be saved, where shall the Ungodly and
Sinners appear? Where will they hide themselves in that terrible Day, wherein
there shall be nothing but weeping and ^nashing of Teeth, Howling. Lamentation
and Repentance, too too late, when the Foundations of the Mountains shall be
moved, and the Land be burnt with Fire? When as St. Peter says, the Heavens
shall pass away with a great noise, and the Firmament shall melt with fervent
heat, the Earth also, and the Works that are therein, shall be burnt up. When
as God himself said in the Gospel, Mat. 24. The Sun shall be darkened, the Moon
shall not give her Light, the Stars shall fall from Heaven, and the Powers
thereof shall be shaken.

Where will the Wicked then betake themselves? Where will Adulterers,
Drunkards, where will Cursers, and Swearers appear? Where will the Luxurious,
Deceivers, Proud, Unclean and filthy Persons be found? What (imhappy as they
are) can they then plead for themselves, to appease the Anger of a Just Judge
of Heaven and Earth? Surely nothing. Howl ye therefore, O ye wicked that forget
GOD: For the day of the Lord is at hand, it shall come as a Destruction from
the Almighty; For the Lord shall lay the Land as desolate, and shall destroy
the sinners thereof out of it: He will punish the World for their Evil, and the
Wicked for their iniquity; He will cause the Arrogance of the Proud to cease,
and will lay low the Haughtiness of the Ambitious Worldling. What fear, and
what horror, what terror and amazement shall there seize upon and possess
those that are marked out for eternal Destruction? In the name of God let us
therefore while we have time, rouse our selves up while there is time; set us
correct and amend our selves, that were never brought to these tortures of Body
and Soul: Let us rather prefer the simplicity of the Dove, and the chastity of
the Turtle, the Spiritual feathers of Graces lift up your Souls up to Heaven by
your Prayers, that so we may be always ready to resign our Souls and Bodies
into the hand of our Redeemer, with Joy, and Alacrity of Spirit.

But that we may the better hear and understand the terror of that day to avoid
the same, we will hear the Prophets what they foretell: Gird your selves, and
lament you Priests; howl ye Ministers of the Altar: lie all night in sackcloth,
ye Ministers of my God, for the meat offering, and the drink offering is
withheld from the House of God. Alas, for the day of the Lord is at hand,
and as destruction from the Almighty, shall it come. Blow a Trumpet in Zion,
and sound an Alarm in the holy Mountain, let all the Inhabitants of the Land
tremble: For the day of the Lord comes, for it is nigh at hand: A day of
darkness and gloominess, a day of clouds and thick darkness: For great is the
day of the Lord, and very terrible: sure it is a great day wherein so great a
God, greatly to be praised, and to be above all gods, shall come to Judgment,
and to reward all men for their doings. It Is a great day, after which there
shall be no change of clime, no course of dates shall follow, which day in it
self shall contiue either everlasting Condomnation, or Salvation without end.

It is a very terrible day, and the Prophet Malachi seems to give the reason of
it; For behold the day comes, that shall burn as an Oven, and all the Proud,
and all that do wickedly, shall be as stu^ble, and that day that comes shall
burn them up, says the Lord of Hosts: Leaving them neither Root nor Branch.
And as the Prophet David has it, Our God shall come and shall not keep
silence, a Fire shall devour before him, and it shall be very tempestuous round
about him; he shall call to the Heaven from above, and to the Earth below, that
he may judge his People. For God is Judge himself; who therefore will endure
the fury of this day, where the Strong shall be thus weakened and oppressed, and
where the Proud, and all that do wickedly, shall be burnt us as stubble: When
wist not stand astonished, where the Root with the Branch shall de pluck^ up
and consumed? what wicked man, what sinner even dares to appear where the ^ust
shall scarce be saved, 1 Pet. 4.18. ver. But many men partly out of dull
Stupidity, and partly being oppressed with crosses and vocations of this Life,
do little esteem of the Tercour of this fast day; very earnestly to will and
desire the (...). But the Pronhet Amo. 5.18. does threaten these men, saying,
Woe unto you that desire the Day of the Lord, to what and is it for you? The
Day of the Lord is darkness, and nor sight; as if a man did fly from a Lion,
and a Lear meet him, or went into the house and le^ned his hand on the Wall,
and a Serpent hite him. You do says he, ^pery evil to your selves, in that you
do rashly desire the Day of the Lord, for ye shall not walk in the light of
God's countenance, because ye have not been Children of the light, but Children
of darkness. There noisome darkness shall come upon you, whatsoever you shall
then assay, you shall not shun Terror, you cannot abide Horeor. And if you may
shun the face of the Lion of the Tribe of Judab, that you render not account
for your sins, Yet that Bear the Devil, will run upon you, me^t you and punish
you for the same. Or if you escape this Bear and enter into the house of your
conscience to consider the Evils you have committed, and the Good you have
omitted, the tormenting worm will seize upon your conscience. The Worm that
Esaiah 66. spea^eth of, The Worm shall never dye: and the Evangelish Mark 9
did testify the same; The Worm dies not, there, Fire never goes ours,
there, torments are endless. Neither is there in that Day any Partiality to be
used: For the Kings of the Earth, Gentlemen Rich men, the great and chief
Captains the Mighty men, every Bondman, and every Freeman, shall hide
themselves in the Dens, and in the Rocks of the Mountains, and shall say to the
Rocks and Mountains fall upon us, and hide us from the Face of him that litteth
upon the Th^one, and from the wrath of the Lamb: for the great Day of wrath is
come, and who shall be able to stand? But when the Son of man shall come in the
Majesty of his Glory, and the Holy Angels with him, before whom all Nations
shall be gathered: he shall then separate them one from another, as the
Shepherd divides the Sheep from the Goats, and he shall set his sheep on his
Right hand, and the Goats on the Left Hand, and the Ring shall say to them on
the Righthand, Matt. 25. Come ye Blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom
prepared for you from the beginning of the World. But to them on the
Left Hand, he shall say, Go ye Cursed into Everlasting Fire, prepared for the
Devil and his Angels: And these shall go into Everlasting Punishment, but the
Righteous into Life Eternal. To Conclude, this point, hear the Counsel of our
Savior Christ, Luke 31.24. Take heed, least at any time your Heart be
overcharged with Surfeiting and Drunkenness, and cares of this Life, and so
that Day come upon you unawares. For as a Snare it shall come on all them that
dwell on the face of the whole Earth: Watch ye and Pray always, that ye may be
accounted worthy to escape all these things that shall come to pass, and to
stand before the Son of Man.

Since therefore all these things are fuddenly expected to be fulfilled, and
all that read the Scriptures may hear this both from Prophets and Apostles,
Nay, and Christ himself: That it is a terrible thing to fall into the Hands of
the Living God. It is a wonder, that since all things (as the Apostle says)
shall be dissolved, that now at length we become not pure, and walk in the Holy
conversation and Godliness; looking for, and hasting unto the coming of the Day
of God, wherein the Heavens being on Fire, shall be dissolve^, and the Element
shall melt with Fervert heat, 2 Pet. 3.2. It is a Wonder that we do not deny
all ungodliness, and worldly desires, and Lusts of the uesh, the Glory of the
world, the deceitfulness of Riches, and the choking cares of all Earthly
things, and exercise our selves in all Sobriety and Goodness, looking for the
Blessed hope, and the Glorious appearance of that great God and our Savior
Jesus Christ.

It ought therefore, to be our first and chief rate, in these dangerous and
wicked Times, not being drowned in the Imploiments of this World, to have a
care of our Salvation, and to make sure the Anchor of our hope and Faith: That
our Souls suffer not Eternal. Shipwreck, 2 Timm. 3 5. Let us no^perswade our
selves that the Lord is not near, let us not say with them that Peter
reprehended, where is the promise of his coming? For since the Fathers ^ell
asleep, all things continue as they were since the Creation; For how long those
things shall continue? the Lord of Hosts by the Propher Hagga^ does declare,
Yet once, it is a little while; and I will shake the Heavens and the Earth, the
Sea and the dry Land. Now the Apostle Peter gives the reason why he is not yet
come, Pet. 1.9. It Is his long-suffering (says he) to us ward, not (...) that
any should perish, but that all should come to Repentance: Wherefore account
that the long-suffering of the Lord is Salvation, and the diligent that you may
be found of him in fear, without Spot, and ^an^e^ess: We must be diligent and
watchful: The Gre^ians are gone aside, we have a Simon in us that will yield
the place to them: We must continually watch, and have always an Eye to the
watch, holding our Weapons (...) our hands, unless we be min^^d at all time to
be surprised, and yield at the pleasure of (...) Enemy. For, The Day of the
Lord comes as a thief in the Night, in which the Heavens shall pass away with
a great noise and the Element shall melt with, fervent heat. Therefore be ye
ready, for in such an hour as you think not, the Son of man comes. Now they
that defer the coming of the Lord, and say with that Evil servant, my Lord
delayeth his coming, let us Eat and Drink and be Drunken: Tell them, the Lord
will come in a day when they look not for him, and in an hour when they are not
aware, and will cut them asunder, and will give them their portion with the
Unbelievers and Hypocrites, where there shall be weeping and waiting and
gnashing of teeth, Luke 12.47.

Now they that know these things and prepare not themselves, neither do
according to the will of God, shall be beaten with many stripes, as the Apostle
St. Luke has in his Gospel pronounced.

Let us endeavor therefore, that when the last day comes, we may say with St.
Paul, Tim. 4.7. I have fought a good fight, I have finished my course, I have
kept the Faith; Henceforth there is laid up for me a Crown of Righteousness,
which the Lord that Righteous Judge shall give me that day; But is this Crown
laid up for thee alone? (O Paul) not only for me (says he) but also for them
that love the Lord Jesus, and expect his appearance.

O that this would take some impression in the heardest of hearts, that do sing
a temporal Requiem here unto their Souls, least while they think the Day of the
Lord is farthest from them, it on the sudden come unto them, and so they be
found in a condition too late to be amended, and by no means whatsoever to be
avoided.

To conclude all, gird up the Loins of your minds, be sober, and hope to the
end: For the Glory that is to be brought to you, at the Revelation of Jesus
Christ as obedient Children, not walking after your former Iusts of Ignorance;
Let your Loins I say be girded, and your lights burning, and you your selves
like unto them that wait for the Lord when he will return from the wedding,
that when he comes and knocks, you may open immediately. Luke 12.36. Blessed
is the Servant whom his Master when he comes finds so doing; Of a truth I say
unto you, he will make him Ruler over all he has. Take ye heed. Watch and
Pray, for ye know (...) when the time is? For the Son of (...) Man taking a far
journey, who left his (...) and gave Authority to his Servant, (...) every man
his work, commanding them wait. Watch ye therefore, for ye know, when the time
is, for ye know not when master comes? at Even, at midnight, of the Cock
crowing, least coming suddenly, find you sleeping, and so cast you into (...)
there to remain world without end.

From which the Lord Jesus keep^ all, and that for his Mercies (...) alone. To
whom be rendred^ Honor, Glory, Praise, and Tha^^ giving, now and for ever.
AMEN.

FINIS.

