A SHORT ADDITION TO THE OBSERVATIONS CONCERNING TRADE AND Interest of Money.

By the same Hand.

LONDON, Printed for Henry Mortlock, and are to be sold at the Sign of the
White Heart in Westminster Hall 1668.

A Short Addition to the Observations concerning Trade, and Interest of Money.
Objection I.
AS to that Objection, That the Low Interest in Holland, proceeds from their
abundance of money, and not the force of Laws:

I think I have sufficently answered it already in my printed Treatise: But
this further may be said, which I knew not then:

Laws have done it here, as has been proved; and Laws did do it there: For the
very next year after Intrest was brought from ten to eight per cent. in
England, the Dutch brought it by a Placart or Law to six per cent. in Holland;
and the same year that the Long Parliament were about to bring it to six, they
brought it to five per cent. This I have from an unerring hand: And I presume
they have since brought it by a Law to four per cent. but of that I know not.
However of this I am certain, Let the Law bring it to five or four at this
time, and the People of themselves, by increasing the Riches of the Kingdom,
will bring it to a lower ra^e* which is manifest in all the Progressions of
Nature. As for Example: A poor man that by his Labor can but just maintain his
family, with much care and diligence; if he have the good hap to light on a
small stock of 50 or 100 l. or have so much given him; upon that small
Foundation he may arrive to an Estate of 1000 l. it may be 10000 l. and so i^
often falls out: Whereas without such an opportunity, he might have labored
all his days for Bread only. So it is in diseases in the Body natural; remove
but the cause, take but away the Shackles of Nature, and she will soon recover
strength and flesh: so take off the Burden from Trade (whereof none is so
heavy as that of Interest) and the People will work out the rest to the
prodigious increase of their Riches, as the Dutch have done.

Objection II.
Another Objection I have lately met with, is, That Holland is but a small
Tract of Land, and consequently Land is dear there not because Interest of
Money is low.

I answer, This is a gross mistake: For Land and Interest of Money are, all
over the Universe, like two Buckets; if one go up, the other must go down, and
the contrary, whether it be a great or small Territory; as is evident in our
own Plantations, as well as in all other places of the World mentioned in the
former Treatise. ( Viz.)

Barbados is a small Te^ritory, and the richest in the World, ordinary Land
being worth there 10 l. per ann. the Acre; Use of Money by Law is 15 l. per
annum, and their Plantations sell but at seven years purchase at most. New
England is a Country where the Legal Interest is eight per cent. and I am told
they are now about bringing of it down to six per cent. There the Plantations
will sell at fourteen to fifteen years purchase, though it be a vast Continent.
In Virginia Interest is at fifteen per cent. and Plantations sell not at above
seven years purchase at most, And, which is more observable, all those Places
are not rich or poor according to the goodness of their Soil, but exactly
according to the Rate of Interest. Barbados the richest Land, has the poorest
People; Virginia the next best Land, but a much poorer People than the
New-English. New England incomparably is the worst Land of the three, and yet
the richest People of them all, and increasing daily to a miracle, unto those
that know not that by their Laws about Interest of Money, they must necessarily
suck the Blood of the other two places, with whom they have a constant
intercourse in Trade; which in effect is the same as if they lent them money.
And the consequences of this to that Island of Barbados, are so visible and
fatal, that if all the Planters or Owners of the Territory of that Island
should now make up their accounts with the City of London, they would be found
so much indebted to this City, that the sale of all their Lands and Goods to
their very Shirts, would not pay one half of what they owe. This I have reason
to know, having as much experience of the Trade of that place, and the
condition of that people, as most Merchants in London: And this I have asserted
in the company of many of the most considerable Barbados Planters now in
London, who have ingeniously confessed it to be true: Although most certain it
is* That the late Sir James Drax, Sir Thomas Muddiford, Colonel Birch now of
Giddy-Hall in Essex, and some few other Planters, have arrived there to very
great Estates, after they could bring their affairs to such a consistency as to
stem the desperate current of that interest, and row with the stream, by
ceasing to borrow, and becoming Lenders: It being the necessary and
never-fayling consequence of a high Interest all the World over, to enrich a
very few, and impoverish all the rest of the Nation: Which was the true reason
that we had in former times about half a dozen such as Gresham, Sutton, Craven,
and Spencer; but besides them, not one man of 10000 l. Estate, for a hundred
which we have now.

Objection III.
To that Objection, That Usurers will call in their money if it be now brought
to four per cent. whereas if it be brought but to five per cent. it is hoped
(by some Gentleman) that the Usurers will be more favorable.

I think that Objection is likewise fully answered in the Printed Treatise. But
to enlarge a little further upon it, I premise the Common Usurers
qualifications; for of such only I speak in this place ( viz.) He is always a
Sly, Subtle, Wary, Covetous, Timorous Thrifty ( alias, Miserable) Person, and
commonly well stricken in years; and if this Character be true, which I submit
to the Judgment of those that are better acquainted with them; Then I say it is
impossible for the generality of Usurers to call in their Money, though it be
brought to four per cent: To demonstrate this, I suppose the Usurers to be of
two sorts ( viz.) the Country Usurer, and the City Usurer. Suppose likewise the
Law were past to reduce Interest to four per cent, and see what the Country
Usurer will do? Very angry doubtless he will be; but what then? No question but
he will threaten and talk of calling in his Money, but being no Fool but a
subtle Person (as has been said) his prudence will prompt him to consider how
to mend himself, by being possessed of his Money, and what to do with it when he
has it. Trade, or run it by Exchange he cannot, being too old to learn; and
too wise to be cheated; as he must be sure to be; if he precipitate himself
into Business he understands not: Let it lie dead by him he dares not; being
possessed already with several qualifications that will inhibit him; Insomuch,
that if he should do it, he must never after think of Sleeping quietly; his
natural timerousness being such, that every noise he hears will put him into a
panick fear of Thieves come to rob him; and his Covetousness is such, that upon
the very thoughts of having no Use-Money coming in, it will almost, if not
altogether, break his heart; and then his miserableness is such, that upon the
frightful Apparition of no Income, or more properly the Disappearance of all
his Incomes at once, it may be feared he will go near to starve himself. What
other course then can he take? I say there are but two left him in the world,
Viz.

Either to purchase Lands, or improve those he has.

All Lands after such a Law will certainly advance six years purchase: So that
New Purchasers shall never, by buying Lands, make 3 per cent. of their Money,
and in consequence, the Usurers great subtilty that now directs him to t^ke 6
per cent. for his Money, rather then buy Lands at Eighteen and Ninteen years
Purchase, will then advise him to continue his Money at four per cent, rather
then buy Lands at twenty six years Purchase, which he must give after the
making of this Law.

For Improvement of his own Lands, if he take to that, I will not offer a word
to hinder him; he may certainly make the best profit that way, after this Law:
but what shall be called in to that purpose, I know, cannot much affect
Gentlemen in Debt, because the Use-money the Usurers receive, will be
sufficient to carry on that Work, being a gradual Expense without calling in
the Principal.

The City Usurer differs from the Country Usurer only in this, that he has
formerly had some Experience of Trade, and has now the opportunity of laying
out his Money by Building, which the Country Usurer has not.

For the first ( viz.) Trade, they have been so long out of it, that very few
of them will now settle to it again themselves, but they will bring up their
Children to it, which otherwise they would not have done.

For Building, I know many of them will be doing in that, but that likewise is
a gradual Expense, somewhat like improvement of Lands, and the great Usurers
may Build annually as much as it is convenient for one man to have in hand at
one time, upon the receipt of their growing Interest only, that is let out upon
Personal Security.

Further, I do affirm Catigorically, That in all Parts of the World where-^ver
Interest of Money is lowest; Securities are safest to the Lenders, and easiest
to the Borrowers, and were-ever Interest of Money runs high, they are more
dangerous to the Lenders, and difficult to the Borrowers. Whither this be true
or no universally, I appeal to the Experience and Observation of all Travelers
and Merchants, so far as the Teder of my Conversation has suffered me to
range, I am sure it never failed.

For Instance; in Barbados, it is a more difficult thing to take up 100 l.
Vallew in Sugar (which is the Money of that Country) at 15 per cent. then it is
to take up 1000 l. at 6 per cent. in England; the like is in Tobacco in
Virginia. In Ireland the like, at the rate of that Country; with this also that
whoever can be credited for 1000 l. there must give 4000 l. worth of Land for
Security; whereas 2000 l. worth of Land is esteemed in England a good Security
for 1000 l. Money at 6 per cent.

In Holland, likewise any man that is a competent good Husband, Prudent and
Careful in his business, may take up 500 l. or 1000 l. at 3 per cent. upon his
own Note only, whereas in England where the present rate is double, the Usurers
require three good Men's Bonds at the least, for 500 l. at 6 per cent. which
safety to the Usurer and ease of giving Security by the Borrower, must needs
proceed from the Lowness of the rate, because the Usurer being a crafty Fox,
knows that 6 per cent, will certainly Impovrish the Gentlemen; and weaken the
Merchant and Tradesman, if they take up much at Interest, and the rather,
because he knows the Merchant must beyond the Seas meet with a Dutch
Competitor, that has his Money at 3 per cent. and therefore is so wise as to
have two or three Securities, that if one be undone, he may have time enough to
force in his Money from the rest before they be all ruined: Whereas when Money
is here at four per cent, the Usurer that has his Money out at present upon
Mortgages, will find his Security he already has bettered, and therefore it
will be his wisdom to continue it, that Land being then worth 2600 l. which is
now worth but 2000 l. and the Merchant or Tradesmen tha^ he knew six per cent.
would ruin, may subsist under four per cent. and consequently the Usurer will
not be so jealous of his standing, as it appears they are not in Holland,
because that at a low rate they may live comfortably, that must break at a high.

Objection 4.
There is another Objection, which I may properly call the Usurers Objection,
for I commonly meet with it from them (viz.) They say all the Money in the
Nation is employed; and although they employ it not themselves, they lend to
others that do, and more cannot be employed then we have, though Interest were
at three or two per cent.

I answer, That no Money is employed to the advantage of any Kingdom; but that
only which is Employed in Foreign Trade, or by Artificers, and in Manufacture,
or Improvement of Land. And that no Money is or can be Employed in those
profitable ways, but so much only as we can make above six per cent. of, as for
example: A Merchant in London that has an Estate of 30000 l. or 40000 l. can
hardly Employ with all his Art and Skill above one fourth, or half at most of
his said Stock in Foreign Trade to make above six per cent. because all other
Trades that afford a less profit (all hazards considered) are supplied by the
Dutch, and must necessarily be so till Interest of Money be abated.

Whereas, were Interest of Money here at four per cent. Merchants Own Wisdom
would induce them to Trade with all their Stocks; or at least so much as they
could make a greater gain of then four per cent. which would be just one third
more then is now employed in Foreign Trade, or those other profitable
employments to the Kingdom.

Objection, 5.
Another Objection I frequently meet with, which I may not Improperly call the
Merchants Objection, because it generally comes from them (and their Language
and Designs I may pretend in part to understand, if I understand any thing at
all.)

The said Objection is, That we have already so many Traders, and so much Stock
employed in Trade, that we can scarce live by what we do; and if we should
bring a greater Stock into Trade, which the sequel of this Law will do; and
multiply Traders, no Trade will be worth the following.

Before I answer this Objection, I must do right to my fellow Citizens and
Merchants, in confessing that although at the first starting of this
Controversy in public discourses; above ninetenths of all those I conversed
with were against it; yet that since, upon reading and hearing what has been
said and printed for it, above three fourth parts of all those I have had
communication with, are come over to acknowledge. That the abatement of
Interest from six to four per cent. will be a real advantage to the Kingdom in
general.

But further, To satisfy such as are yet in doubt, I say, Those Merchants that
have great Stocks, and would have Interest continued at six per cent. if they
prefer their own private Gain to the Common Good, they are in the right as to
themselves; for the abatement of Interest will certainly and necessarily
increase Industry and good Husbandry; it will as certainly multiply Traders and
Stock in Trade, and in consequence the gain of the present Merchant who employs
his own Stock, and lends to others, will be the less. But he must be wilfully
blind that cannot see the advantage of the King and Kingdom will be the more,
by the multiplication of Merchants, and increase of stock in Trade, the effect
and success whereof in this particular (as already it has been) will be
Mathematically the same as in the advance of Land, viz. All the Land of this
Kingdom will be advanced one third in value; and the very same properties will
the gain of the Kingdom be advanced by the increase of Trade and Traders: Only
with this difference: Every individual Gentleman now possessed of Lands will
receive his proportional benefit thereby presently; Whereas the benefit by
Trade will redound to the King and Kingdom in general, and not to the
particular advantage of any of the present Merchants, except such only as pay
Interest for all or part of their Stock in Trade. But the rest of Merchants who
receive not a present benefit, will partake of the future advantage thereof to
themselves and Children in common with their Country: Which when well weighed
and meditated upon, I am persuaded will convince those worthy Merchants that
are yet unreconciled to this Principle.

Query.
But here it may be said, How shall we increase our Trade, when we cannot get
by what we have already?

If it be seriously considered, this question is answered in what I have before
said. But further to explain it:

The Dutch drive a great Trade in Salt from Rochel, St. Walls, and other
places, to the Baltic Seas; by which, if they can get eight or nine per cent.
they are very well content: We, while Money is at six per cent. cannot live on
so small a profit as is the surplusage of that above the Interest and in
consequence we look not after it, but rather choose to put out our Money at six
per cent. Whereas were Money with us at four per cent. we should then be
content with the surplusage of that profit, and follow it closely.

But if it be here objected, from what I formerly published, That we have no
such Bulky Ships to sail with little charge as the Dutch have:

I answer, We are composed of the same Elements as they are, and have hands and
heads as well as they; and that a Low interest is the cause of these and many
other profi^able Engines, which they work withal. And that he has not half
considered this point, who does not know infallibly, That a low Interest is a
Spur to Invention as well as Industry and Good Husbandry: Nay further, That it
multiplies men, as well as increases Trade in any Nation, the latter naturally
generating the former.

FINIS.

