Mr. Chillingworths LETTER TOUCHING JNFALLIBILITY.

LONDON, Printed by D. Maxwell for Timothy Garthwait at the Kings Head in S.
Paul's Churchyard, 1662.

Good Mr. Leuger,
THough I am resolved not to be much afflicted for the loss of that which is
not in my power to keep, yet I cannot deny but the loss of a Friend goes very
near to my heart; and by this name of a Friend I did presume, till of late, I
might have called you: because, though perhaps for want of power and
opportunity I have done you no good office, yet I have been always willing and
ready to do you the best service I could: and therefore I cannot but admire the
affected strangeness which in your last Letter to me you seem to take upon you,
renouncing in a manner all Relation to me, and tacitly excommunicating me from
all Interest in you. The superscription of your Letter is to Mr. William
Chillingworth, and the subscription John Leuger; as if you either disdained, or
made a conscience of stiling me your Friend, or your self mine: If this proceed
from passion and weakness, pray mend it, if from reason, pray show it; if you
think me one of those to whom St. John forbids you to say, God save you; then
you are to think and prove me one of those deceivers, Who deny Christ Jesus to
be come in the flesh; if you think me an Heretic, and therefore to be avoided,
you must prove me (...), condemned by mine own judgment, which I know I cannot,
and therefore I think you cannot: If you say I do not hear the Church, and
therefore am to be an Heathen, or a Publicane, you are to prove then that by
the Church, is meant your Church of Rome, and yet when you have done so, I hope
Christians are not forbidden to show humanity and civility even to Pagans: For
Gods sake Mr. Leuger free your self from this blind zeal, at least for a little
space, and consider with reason and moderation what strange Crime you can
charge me with, that should deserve this strange usage, especially from you: is
it a crime with all my understanding, to endeavor to find your Religion true,
and make my self a Believer of it, and not to be able to do so? Is it a crime
to employ all my reason upon the justification of the Infallibility of the
Romish Church, and to find it impossible to be justified? I will call God to
witness (who knows my heart better than you do) that I have evened the scale of
my judgment as much as possibly I could, and have not willingly allowed any one
grane of worldly Motives on either side, but have weighed the reasons for your
Religion, and against it with as much indifferency, as if there were nothing
in the world but God and my self, and is it my fault, that the scale goes down
which has the most weight in it? That the building falls, that has a false
foundation? have you such power over your understanding, that you can believe
what you please, though you see no reason? or that you can suspend your belief
when you do see reason? if you have, I pray for old friendship-sake, teach me
that trick; but until I have learned it, pray blame me not for going in the
ordinary way, I mean for believing, or not believing as I shall see reason: If
you can convince me of wilful opposition against the known truth, of
negligence in seeking it, of unwillingness to find it, of preferring temporal
respects before it, or of any other fault which is in my power to amend (that
indeed is a fault) if I amend it not, be as angry with me as you please; but to
impute to me involuntary errors, or that I do not see, that which I would see,
but cannot, or that I will not confess that, which I do not believe; certainly
this is a far more unreasonable error, then any you can justly charge me with.
But let me tell you, that imputing Socinianism to me, (whosoever was the Author
of it) was a wicked and groundless slander: Perhaps you will say (for this is
the usual song of that side) that Pride is a voluntary fault, and with this I
am justly chargeable, for forsaking that guide which God has appointed me to
follow: but what if I forsook it, because I had reason to fear it was one of
those blind guides which whosoever blindly follows, is threatened by our
Savior, that both he and his guide shall fall into the ditch? Then I hope you
will grant it was not Pride but Conscience, that caused me to do so: for as it
is wise humility to obey those whom God has set over me, so it is sinful
credulity to follow every man, or every Church, that without warrant will take
upon them to guide me: Show then some good and evident title, which the Church
of Rome has to this office, produce but one reason for it, which upon trial
will not finally be resolved and vanish into uncertainty; and if I yield not
unto it, say if you please I am as proud as Lucifer. In the mean time give me
leave to think it strange, and not far from a Prodigy, that this doctrine of
the Roman Churches, being the guide of Faith (if it be true doctrine) should
either not be known to the four Evangelists, or if it were known to them, that
they being wise and good men, should either be so envious of the Churches
happiness, or so forgetful of the good work they took in hand, which was to
write the whole Gospel of Christ, as that not one of them should so much as
mention, so much as once, this so necessary a part of the Gospel, without the
belief whereof there is (as you would make the world believe) no salvation and
with the belief whereof (unless men be snatched away by sudden death) there is
hardly any damnation. It is evident they do all of them with one consent speak
very plainly of many things of no importance in comparison hereof, and is it
credible or indeed possible, that with one consent, or rather conspiracy, they
should be so deeply silent concerning this Unum necessarium, this one very
necessary thing? You may believe it if you can, for my part I cannot, unless I
see demonstration for it: For if you say, they send us to the Church, and
consequently to the Church of Rome, this is to suppose that which never can be
proved, That the Church of Rome is the only Church; and without this supposal,
upon the division of the Church, I am as far to seek of a Guide of my Faith as
ever.

1 As for example, in that great division of the Church, when the whole world
wondered (says S- Jerome) that it was become Arian, when Liberius Bishop of
Rome (as S. Athanasius, S. Jerome, and S. Hillary testify) subscribed their
Heresy, and joined communion with them: Or in the division between the Greek
and the Roman Church about the Procession of the Holy Ghost, (when either side
was the Church to it self, and each part heretical and schismatical to the
other) what direction could I then an ignorant man have found from that Text of
Scripture, Unless he hear the Church, let him be unto thee, as an heathen (...)
a Publican; Or from another Text, Upon this R^^k will I build my Church, and
the gates of hell shall not prevail against it. 2 Again give me leave to
wonder, that neither S. Paul writing to the Romans, should so much as intimate
this their privilege of Infallibility, but rather on the contrary, put them in
fear in the 11 th Chapter, that they, as well as the Jews, were in danger of
falling away. 3 That S. Peter, the pretended Bishop of Rome writing two
Catholic Epistles mentioning his departure, should not once acquaint the
Christians, whom he writes to, what Guide they were to follow, after he was
taken from them. 4 That the Writers of the New Testament should so frequently
forewarn men of Heretics, false Christ's, false Prophets, and not once arm
them against them, with letting them know this only sure means of avoiding
their danger. 5 That so great a part of the New Testament should be employed
about Antichrist, and so little, and indeed none, about the Vicar of Christ,
and the guide of the faithful. 6 That our Savior should leave this only means
for the ending of Controversies, and yet speak so obscurely and ambiguously of
it, that ^ow our Judge is the greatest Controversy, and ^^e greatest hindrance
of ending of them. 7 That there should be better evidence in the Scripture to
entitle the King to this office, who disclaims it, then the Pope, who pretends
it. 8 That Saint Peter should never exercise over the Apostles any act of
Jurisdiction, nor they ever give him any one title of Authority over them. 9
That if the Apostles did know that S. Peter was made Head of them, when our
Savior said, [ Thou art Peter, and on this Rock, etc.] they should still
contest who should be greatest, and that our Savior should never tell them,
that S. Peter was the man. 10 That S. Paul should say, that he was nothing
inferior to the very chief of the Apostles. 11 That the Catechumeni or Novices
in the Primitive Church, should never be taught this foundation of their faith,
that the Church of Rome was the guide of their faith. 12 That the Fathers,
Tertullian, S. Jerome and Optatus, when they flew highest in commendation of
the Roman Church, should attribute no more to her, then to all other
Apostolical Churches. 13 That in the Controversy about Easter, the Bishops and
Churches of Asia should be so ill catechized, as not to know this principle of
Christian Religion, the necessity of conformity in Doctrine with the Church of
Rome. 14 That they should never be pressed with any such necessity of
conformity in all things, but only with the particular tradition of the Western
Churches in that point. 15 That Irenaeus and many other Bishops
notwithstanding, Ad hanc Ecclesiam necesse est omnem convenire Ecclesiam,
should not yet think that a necessary Doctrine, nor a sufficient ground of
Excommunication, which the Church of Rome thought to be so. 16 That S. Cyprian
and the Bishops of Africa, should be so ill instructed in their faith, as not
to know this foundation of it. 17 That they likewise were never urged with any
such necessity of conformity with the Church of Rome, nor ever charged with
heresy or error for denying of it. 18 That when Liberius joined in communion
with the Arrians, and subscribed their heresy, the Arrians should not then be
the Church and guide of faith. 19 That never any Heretics for five Ages after
Christ, were pressed with this Argument of the Infallibility of the present
Church of Rome, or charged with the denial of it as a distinct Heresy; so that
Aeneas Sylvius (who was himself as Pope) should have cause to say, Ante tempora
Concilii Nicaeni quisque sibi vivebat, and parvus respectus habebatur ad
Ecclesiam Romanam. 20. That the Ecclesiastical story of those times mention no
Acts of Authority of the Church of Rome over other Churches; as if there should
be a Monarchy, and the King for some ages together, should exercise no Act of
Jurisdiction in it. 21. That to supply this defect the decretal Epistles should
be so impudently forged, which in a manner speak nothing else but Reges atque
Monarchas, I mean the Popes making Laws for, and exercising authority over all
other Churches. 22. That the Africane Churches in St. Austins time should be
ignorant that the Pope was head of the Church, and judge of Appeals, Iure
divino, and that there was a necessity of conformity with that Church in this
and all other points of doctrine. 23. Nay that the Popes themselves should be
so Ignorant of the true ground of this their Authority, as to pretend to it,
not upon Scripture, or Universal Tradition, but upon an Imaginary, pretended
non-such Canon of the Council of Nice. 24 That Vincentius Lirinensis seeking
for a guide of his faith, and a preservation from Heresy, should be ignorant
of this so ready a one, the Infallibility of the Church of Rome.
All these things and many more are very strange to me; if the infalliblity of
the Roman Church be indeed and were always by Christians acknowledged the
foundation of our Faith: and therefore I beseech you pardon me, if I choose to
build mine upon one that is much firmer and safer, and lies open to none of
these objections; which is Scripture and Universal Tradition, and if one who is
of this Faith may have leave to do so, I will subscribe with hand and heart.

Your very loving and true Friend, W. C.

Imprimatur, M. FRANCK, R. in Christo P. Dom. Episc. Land. a Sacris Domesticis.

Sextil. 5. 1662.


