THE Glorious REWARD OF Faithful Ministers Declared and Improved. IN A SERMON
UPON The Occasion of the Funeral of that Excellent Minister of Jesus Christ
HENRY NEWCOME, A.M. Late Pastor of a Congregation at Manchester in Lancashire.

By JOHN CHORLTON.

LONDON: Printed for T. P. and are to be Sold by Zachary Whitworth Bookseller
in Manchester, 1696.

To the Worthy and much Honored Lady The Lady MERIEL MOSSLEY.
Madam,
YOUR long and intimate Acquaintance with Reverend Mr. Newcome of Blessed
Memory, the Relation in which he stood to you, and the High Esteem which he
always found with you, together with your many Generous Expressions of Kindness
to his Person and Family, give you an undoubted Title to this Memorial of him.
I am very sensible that what I have here done, or am able at any time to do,
can neither be Worthy of his Name and Memory, nor merit your Ladyships
Acceptance. But, your Candor, Madam, is equal to your Great Judgment; and
therefore I despair not of your Pardon where I am liable to Censure, nor can I
doubt your Favorable Reception and Patronage to what is any way capable of
Approbation. I know your Prudence and Humility would dispose you to an extreme
Resentment, should I dilate upon those many Virtuous and Honorable Endowments,
which render you a most Conspicuous Ornament of your Sex and Quality.
Therefore, instead of displaying your Ladyships Exemplary Goodness, which is
already so Universally acknowledged, I shall pray that it may have a most
diffusive and powerful Influence upon others; may it convince them how vain the
Attempt is of arriving at true Greatness, unless they first become truly Pious
and Religious. And may it please the God of all Grace, to Sanctify all his
Dispensations to you, and to enrich you more and more with all Wisdom, Grace
and Felicity, that after a constant Perseverance in his Blessed Fear, you may
be joyfully translated to his Everlasting Kingdom and Glory. So Prays

Your Ladyships Most Obliged Humble Servant in the Gospel John Chorlton.

TO THE CHRISTIAN READER, Especially such as lived under Excellent Mr.
Newcome's most Fruitful Ministry.
TWO things come under present Consideration. The following Discourse, and the
Occasion of it. There is nothing to make the former unacceptable, but the
latter. You have, here, a most Sublime Portion of Scripture very aptly
explained, and usefully applied, so as to Minister Light, and Warmth, to them
that read. That only in the whole, which is Grievous, is, That we are told
Worthy Mr. Newcome is Dead! This is a gloomy Theme! and is only capable of a
more Lightsome, Pleasant Aspect from the Brightness of the Firmament, and the
Luster of the Stars, into which so Wise and Powerful Preachers of the Glorious
Gospel are at length transformed, as this Discourse excellently shows. In the
mean time, this is a Loss which few can estimate, though they that suffer it
are very many. It may be truly said of such a Man, as unknown and yet well
known. They that knew him best, could know but a small part of his true and
great Worth, and might always apprehend when they knew most of him, there was
still much more that they knew not. His most sincere and inartificial Humility,
still drawing a Vail over his other Excellencies; Which it hid, and adorned, at
once. So as the Appetite of knowing more, must always meet with a Check and an
Incitation at the same time. There was in him a large Stock of Solid Learning
and Knowledge, always ready for use; for Ostentation, never. Conscience the
most strict, and steady to it self, and the remotest from Censoriousness of
other Men. Eloquence without any Labor of his own, not imitable by the
greatest Labor of another. O the strange way he had of Insinuating and Winding
himself into his Hearers Bosoms! I have sometimes heard him, when the only
thing to be regretted was, that the Sermon must so soon be at an end.
Conversation, so Facetious and Instructive together, that they who enjoyed it,
if they were capable of improving it, could scarce tell whether they went away
from him more edified, or delighted. He was a burning and a shining Light. O
Manchester! Manchester! that ancient, famed, Seat of Religion and Profession,
May Capernaum's Doom never be thine! May thy Heyrick, Hollingworth, Newcome,
and thy Neighbors Angier, Harrison, and diverse more, never be Witnesses
against thee! They are Dead! And all Flesh is Grass, but the Word of the Lord
endures for ever, Even that Word of the Gospel which has by them been
preached to you. It never dies. And may it still abide with you, and in you. O
labor to hold forth the Word of Life, that such as have labored among you,
may rejoice in the day of Christ, that they have not run in vain, nor labored
in vain. Let it appear you are the Epistles of Christ, ministered by them, to be
known and read of all Men; So what there appeared of Christ in them, will, as
in another Edition, be seen in you. And thus will the Memory of this your Last
deceased Pastor, be best preserved among you, when you shall every one discern
Mr. Newcome still, in each others Savoury Speech, pleasant and composed Looks,
becoming Behavior, and regular well-ordered Conversation. This will make the
Love of him live still in your Hearts, which will no doubt appear and be
exercised toward any of his, you have yet surviving among you, to whom you may
show kindness for his sake. Thus you may let the World know your Love to him
did not die with him, nor was buried in his Grave. You will by real Proofs
testify your value of him, whose Circumstances, at last, gave real Proof, that
he sought not yours, but you. I pray God a double Portion of Elijah's Spirit
may rest upon your remaining Elisha. And am,

Yours in our Common Lord J. HOW.

The Glorious Reward of Faithful Ministers declared and improved. In a Sermon,
etc.
Daniel 12.3. And they that be wise shall shine as the Brightness of the
Firmament, and they that turn many to Righteousness, as the Stars for ever and
ever.


THIS is a Consolatory Passage annexed to a Dismal Prophecy, wherein the
Divine Messenger relates under several Mysterious Figures, the many Strange and
Various Revolutions that should Influence the Affairs of the Church in future
Ages. After which he proceeds to disclose the final Result of all those mighty
Changes; And thereby to obviate the Discouragements which would arise from the
Foreknowledge of them. And first there is a Consolation propounded generally to
all that are Holy and Good. Such shall awake at the Resurrection to everlasting
Life, when all Ungodly Men (but more especially all Persecutors, and those who
through their Brutal Violence, or base Flatteries, became Apostates from the
true Religion) shall be covered with Shame and everlasting Contempt. But as
Ministers have commonly the largest Share in the Calamities which befall the
Church; so they have for their better Support and Encouragement, an Eminency
and Preference assigned them in that Glory, the very least and lowest Degree of
which, far transcends the Value of all their Labors and Sufferings.

There are different Degrees of Glory to be conferred upon Persons in the other
World, in a just Proportion to the different Measures of Personal Holiness and
Public Usefulness, whereby they have signalized and distinguished themselves
in this.

By those that are Wise, some understand Religious Persons, who are subject to
the Instruction and Conduct of their Teachers. But I shall wave this Sense, and
consider the Wise in the former Clause, as importing the same with those that
turn many to Righteousness in the latter.

The word here translated Wise, is also rendered Teachers, and Chap. 11. v. 33.
both Phrases are put together as Equivalents, or at least filling up the same
Character; They that understand among the People shall instruct many.

Those that make a difference between the Wise, and they that turn many to
Righteousness, are likewise obliged to distinguish between the Brightness of
the Firmament, and that of the Stars; whereas it is (more probably) one and the
same Metaphorical Resemblance under a grateful Variety of Expression. So that
the Phrase appears to be doubled, that it might be more Emphatical, and the
better amplify and set forth the matter intended.

The Wise, then, are the Ministers of the Church, considered as the prime
Vessels in which (under the Mediator) the Treasures of Divine Wisdom are
reposited; that by them a Supply thereof may be regularly and statedly conveyed
to the several parts of God's Holy Church. Those that turn many to
Righteousness, are still the same Persons considered as Faithfully and
Successfully employing the Gifts and Graces they have received, To turn the
Disobedient to the Wisdom of the Just. It Is not Men's being qualified with
Gifts, nor their being obliged by their Office and Profession, to turn many to
Righteousness, that will entitle them to any Reward at all, much less to one
that is so Superlatively Excellent. There must be, at least, when those are
supposed, a Sincere Desire, manifesting it self in fervent and importunate
Endeavors, to open the Eyes of Sinners, and to turn them from Darkness to
Light, and from the Power of Satan unto God. For, should we suppose a Person
devoted to the Sacred Office, not only to pretend to it, but to be really,
under God, the Instrument that effects this great Work of Conversion, it would
avail him nothing, if at last it appears that this Change was never wrought
upon himself. Where the Success is owing only to a Form and Appearance of
Sanctity, which the Minister assumed and managed with much Artifice; the very
Persons that such an Hypocrite has turned to Righteousness, will bear a
Substantial and Irrefragable Testimony against him. And on the other hand, He
that sincerely performs his part, shall not lose his Reward, whatever the
Success be.

Though Israel be not gathered, yet shall he be glorious in the Eyes of the
Lord, and his God shall be his strength, Isa. 49.5. The Promise in the Text, in
the letter of it, does most expressly belong to those whose Labors are
succeeded with answerable Fruit; but the Intent of it undoubtedly extends to
all Faithful Ministers. The Matter is thus ordered, that we may have a more
natural and ardent Breathing toward the Success of our Labors, and that our
Pursuits after this great End may be more Vigorous. If we understand by The
Wise Holy Faithful Teachers in general, and by those that turn many to
Righteousness, the most eminently Laborious and Successful among them; all that
are qualified for this Reward, will be included in the Letter of the Promise,
and this shadow of an Objection clean removed. Their Shining as the Brightness
of the Firmament, and as the Stars, etc. implies, That as the Luminaries in the
Firmament are the greatest Ornament in the visible Heavens, so are Faithful
Ministers of the Intellectual World; where they shall shine with incomparable
Brightness in the Mansions of Glory, amongst the Societies of Glorified Saints.
The Celestial Splendor to which they shall be advanced, will exceed all
earthly Glory, as much as the pure Azure Sky does this dull and dirty Clod of
Earth. The Glory of the Stars may be alluded unto in this place rather than
that of the Sun (to which this Reward is elsewhere compared) upon several
Accounts. Christ Jesus, the Son of Righteousness, will ever be the chiefest
Glory of the Church, both whilst Militant and when Triumphant. The brightest
Constellation of Ministers shines but with a diminutive as well as derived
Luster in comparison of him. Besides which, it more aptly refers us to
Multitudes of these Holy Instructors; and may intimate to us, that even amongst
these, One Star differs from another Star in Glory. This shining is said to
be for ever and ever. They shall not only shine in Fame and Renown through a
long course of time upon Earth, but in the Perfection of Light and Glory in the
Heaven of Heavens for ever more.

The words are an entire Proposition of themselves, importing thus much, That
all Wise and Faithful Ministers, that turn many to Righteousness, shall possess
an eminent degree of Heavenly Glory for evermore.

In the Prosecution of which, I shall do these three things: 1. Describe the
Subjects to whom these high degrees of Glory are promised. 2. Demonstrate the
Certainty of this Truth, and unfold the Reasons why Ministers shall be so
plenteously rewarded. 3. I shall attempt a Manifestation of that excellent
Glory, in part, and so far as will suit with our present Design; and then apply
the whole.


1. The Subjects to whom these high Degrees of Glory are promised, are Wise and
Faithful Ministers, that approve themselves to be such, by turning many to
Righteousness. They themselves first turn to Righteousness, and are thereby
prepared and disposed to employ all their Abilities and Opportunities to
convert others. Such are not satisfied with Upbraiding and Daunting wicked Men,
or Shaming and Restraining them from their manifest Impieties. It does not
suffice them to reclaim Notorious Offenders, only so far as to reduce them to a
more Moral and Decent Behavior. It is natural to Faithful Ministers to
endeavor the Propagation of the same Vital Principle of Holy Living, and the
same Union with the Lord Jesus, the Head and Fountain of it, which themselves
believe and Experience. Faithful Ministers covet most earnestly to change the
very Tempers and Dispositions of Men, from their natural Probity, to an Holy
Aptitude and Sufficiency for Gracious and Heavenly Operations. They rejoice in
every Advance that is made toward the Divine Life; but that Divine Life it
self (in Sincerity at first, and afterward in the Progress and final
Consummation of it) is what they press after themselves, and above all things,
with the most assiduous Application, endeavor to promote in their Hearers and
People.

Their business is to illuminate the Minds of Men, to convince their
Consciences, to rectify their Judgments, and persuade their Wills, to a sound
and deep Repentance for their past Miscarriages, to a present Reformation of
what is amiss in their Hearts and Lives, and to a fixed Resolution of walking
with God and their Fellow Creatures (especially those of the same Holy
Christian Profession) in all Purity. It Is to make Men impartially and
universally Good: Pious toward God, Just and Charitable toward their
Neighbors, Sober, Chaste and Humble in their whole Deportment. It Is to render
them Useful and Exemplary in their particular Stations; and by all this to make
Men Blessings to themselves, the Church, and the World; that having Served and
Honored the God that made and redeemed them, in this their Pilgrimage, they
may arrive in his due time at the fullness of Joy, which is in the Presence of
God, and the Pleasures for evermore which are at his right hand. Nor is it
their Business, only to inform Persons of the Necessity of a Personal Inherent
Righteousness, but also to acquaint them with the Person, the Offices and
Righteousness of the Mediater, the Lord Jesus Christ, God blessed for ever: On
the account whereof, and for whose sake all their Sins are pardoned, and their
Sincere, though Imperfect Performances shall be accepted, their Persons
justified, and their Souls and Bodies eternally Saved. The means whereby they
carry on this great Work, are principally Holy and Powerful Preaching of God's
Blessed Word, and the Exemplary Innocence and Purity of their Lives, together
with their Patient and Constant Suffering of Reproach and Perfecution, when
called to it, for the Vindication of those Truths which they preach, profess
and practice. If by these and all other instituted means, they prove
instrumental (through the Cooperation, and principal Efficiency of the Holy
Ghost) to turn one Soul to Righteousness, it is matter of greater Joy to them,
than all other Acquests could be. But there is not a Faithful Minister in the
Church of God, that desires not, above all things, to gain many and many Souls
to Christ, whatever the Foolish World think of it, or may make it cost them for
so doing. Every such Minister would be glad to have that fulfilled in himself,
which is prophesied of John Baptist, Luke 1.16. And many of the Children of
Israel shall he turn to the Lord their God. Converting Sinners being the first
and great Work of a Minister, is here put for all that is subsequent upon it.
They are also careful to preserve and perfect the Work of Grace in the Souls
that are turned to Righteousness by them.

2. The next Particular I am to account for, is to clear the Certainty of this
Truth, and to unfold the Reasons of God's proceeding in this manner with his
Faithful Ministers. The Certainty of it is evident both from this and other
places of Scripture: They shall shine, etc. They are qualified for, and have a
Right to an Extraordinary Reward in Heaven, a more bright and massy Crown of
Glory than others must expect. This is and ever has been the Privilege of
Ministers, under all God's Dispensations to the Church, by virtue of the
Constitution of the Kingdom of Grace. And as all such Rights are now already
ratified above, so by the Constitution of that glorious Kingdom, all that die
possessed of them, shall be solemnly invested with, and admitted to their proper
and peculiar Rewards immediately upon their Dissolution. The Holy Angels
themselves will assist at their Inthronization, and the whole Heavenly Host
will cheerfully join their Applauses to it. To this Consideration we may in
part ascribe it, that Heaven it self is styled Abraham's Bosom, Luke 16.22. And
that the sitting down with Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob, in the Kingdom of
Heaven, Matt. 8.11. is an Expression setting forth the Felicity of that State;
as if it were the presence of such prime Ministers that made, and must
therefore denominate and describe the Glory of it. Hence it is that Twelve
Thrones are promised to the Twelve Apostles, Matt. 19.28. and their names
inscribed on the Twelve Foundations of the New Jerusalem, Rev. 21.14. And as
this proves the Apostles dignified above others, not only Christians but
Ministers, so it genuinely infers, that those who succeed them in the Office of
the Gospel Ministry, and in the Fidelity and Diligence wherewith they
discharged that Holy Function, shall be joined with them in the Participation
of an extraordinary Bliss. But most clearly is this distinction laid down in
that Promise of our Savior, He that receives a Prophet, etc. Matt. 10.41.
where the Rewards of a Prophet, and of a Righteous Man, are as clearly
distinguished as their Persons and Stations. And as it would be too bold a
Restriction to confine either of them to this mortal State, so there can be no
doubt but the difference lies in the Excellency of that which is first
mentioned above the other.

Thus it appears that Faithful Ministers shall enjoy an eminent Reward in Glory
from the Tenor of Holy Writ. But because all the Works of God carry the
Signatures and Impressions of his infinite Rectitude upon them, and are
Harmonious, and conform both to his Perfections and to each other: I shall
further endeavor to show the Wisdom and Justice of the Divine Proceedings in
this case. And first we may note in the general, that nothing is more becoming
the Wisdom and Justice of Almighty God, than to dispense Rewards agreeably to
the Meetness and Capacity of the Receivers. Now the turning of many to
Righteousness, is a Work of such Heroical Virtue, that it is highly rewardable
in it self, and more pleasing to him to whom the Dispensation of the future
Glory belongs, than any other Service whatsoever. Therefore though there be no
Merit of Equivalence in the Work, that might claim a Reward in the way of
commutative Justice, yet it is greatly expedient to the Ends of Divine
Government, that such a Reward should be propounded and promised to, and
expected by Faithful Ministers; and if so, it must certainly be just that it
should be conferred on them. That the Service we are speaking of, is so highly
rewardable, will appear from this Consideration. Besides its being an Act of
Obedience to God, and the Mediator (which it partakes in common with all other
Acts of Evangelical obedience and Duty, to make it rewardable) it obtains a
vast Pre-eminence of all others, in regard of its Intrinsic Excellency, its
grand and universal Importance, and the amazing and almost insuperable
Difficulties that attend it; than which, there can scarce be more proper
Qualities thought of, to recommend any Service, or to render a Person the
meetest and most capable Subject of a Glorious Retribution.

Reason 1. That this is a Work of great Excellency and Worth in it self,
appears from many Considerations. First, The Endowments and Qualifications
which it supposes and requires. What Knowledge of the Mysteries of Religion,
what Acquaintance with the Deceits of Men's Hearts, and the Wiles of the Devil,
what a firm Belief of Divine Revelation are indispensably required, to
constitute a full Capacity for the Work and Office of a Gospel-Minister?

What Love to God, and seeking of his Glory, what a Thirsting after the
Salvation of Men's Souls, what Faith in God, and the Promises for Assistance and
Protection are necessary to a serious and deliberate Undertaking of this great
Work?

What Zeal and Courage to surmount all Opposition; what Prudence to manage
abstruse and difficult Cases; what Patience and Meekness to bear with Affronts,
Calumnies and open Injuries from Adversaries; what Candor to decline Mistakes,
and prevent Misunderstandings, and a great many little Surmises and Jealousies
amongst their Friends and Favorers; what Vigilance to nip Mischief in the Bud;
what Moderation and Self-denial in beating with the Infirmities of the Best;
what Tenderness and Fidelity to treat those that offend, so as to recover them
to Repentance; are visibly necessary to carry on the Ministry?

What unwearied Diligence and Constancy in public and private Exercises,
Preaching, Praying, visiting the Sick, reproving Offenders, resolving Doubts,
etc. must he exercise, that would be a Minister to purpose? and what resolute
Contempt of the World, and all that savours of it, must he manifest that would
turn many to Righteousness?

Besides all that exemplary Holiness which is necessary for all Christians, and
will be most carefully attended to, and strictly exacted from those that
pretend to this great Office. Secondly,

The Excellency of the Work is manifest from the subject matter about which it
is conversant: The precious immortal Souls of Men; their Understandings, their
Hearts, their Consciences, their Lives, are under its Inspection and Government.

To Ministers it belongs to proclaim the glad Tidings of the Gospel; to expound
the Oracles of God; to speak to Men in the Name of the Lord by Authority
received from him, about matters of everlasting Concernment; to present the
Confessions, Supplications and Thanksgivings of the People unto God; to apply
the Seals of the New Covenant, to admit Persons into the Communion of the
Church, and upon just occasion to exclude them from it by righteous Censures,
and again to absolve them and receive them to Favor upon their Repentance.
Thirdly,

The Excellency of the Ministerial Work will be further illustrated and evinced
from the relation they stand in to God, as the principal Agent that employs and
gives them Success; under him they Minister for the Demonstration of his
glorious Power and tremendous Justice, the Displays of his unsearchable Wisdom
and inviolable Truth, the Communications of his ineffable Goodness and Love to
most Unworthy Sinners, and for the Impressions of his Divine Purity. Thus
Ministers are Workers together with God, 2 Cor. 6.1.

They officiate in that grand Design of Saving Elect Souls, which God from all
Eternity framed, and will accomplish through all the Periods of time. In
Subordination to God as Creator, they endeavor to bring Souls back from their
original Apostasy, to the Fountain of their Beings, and of all Felicity. In
Subordination to God as Redeemer, they publish the Heavenly Mission and
Doctrine of the Lord Jesus, together with the Evidences that confirm both; they
promulgate his Laws, and declare the Terms of Salvation unto Men, and so help
to apply his Sufferings, together with all the Virtues of his glorious
Resurrection, Ascension, Intercession and Dominion at God's right Hand. Whilst
they address the Faculties of Men's Souls by outward Ministrations, the Holy
Spirit inwardly and more immediately and effectually touches and moves them
with a secret vital Energy, impregnates them with Godlike Dispositions, and
replenishes them with a victorious Strength and Activity for God and Glory.

Which infers a fourth Consideration enhansing the value of the Ministry; The
Consideration (I mean) of the Sublime Excellency of the Work which their
Endeavors tend to, and terminatein. And what is that? But the Pardon of Men's
Sins, and a mutual Reconciliation between God and Sinners, together with the
restoring of God's Image upon Man, and the Glory of Man's Allegiance unto God.
Than which no Success can be more Blessed, no Service more Rewardable. Which
leads us to the second General Consideration.

Reason 2. Turning Souls to Righteousness is therefore highly Rewardable,
because it is a Work of grand Importance, and of universal Consequence. So St.
James speaks of it, Chap. 5. 19, 20. Brethren, if any of you do err from the
Truth, and one convert him, Let him know that he which converteth the Sinner
from the Error of his way, shall save a Soul from death, and shall hide a
multitude of Sins. How nearly is the Glory of God interessed in the Success of
the Ministry, and how much does the Eternal Happiness or Misery of Immortal
Souls depend upon it? It Is this whereby God ordinarily enlarges his Son's
Kingdom, and drives Satan out of his Usurped Dominions. If we consider the
Church, either as Militant on Earth, or Triumphant in Glory, we shall find that
it is the Success of the Ministry in turning Souls to Righteousness, that daily
adds new Members to both these Illustrious Societies. Whether we only respect
the Family, or particular place and Vicinity whereto we belong; or the
Congregation of professed Christians into which we are incorporated; or whether
we enlarge our Thoughts to the State of the Nation or Kingdom where God has
cast our Lot; or even to that of the World and of Mankind in general; it will
soon appear how necessary and important the Work is, on which all these so far
depend, as to become every day liker to Heaven or Hell, as it either prevails
and prospers, or is obstructed and frustrated.

Reason 3. As it is a Work of great Excellency and Importance, so it is
extremely difficult. How hard is it to persuade Men to change their Judgments,
Affections, Resolutions, or Practice in any matter whatsoever, about which they
have been long fixed and determined? But to turn Men from one State, Temper,
and Carriage, to another directly contrary, and that not in one instance or
two, but in the main bent of their Souls, and the Tenor of their Lives, must
certainly be one of the hardest Tasks in the World.

He that turns many to Righteousness, must persuade them to despise, abhor and
reject those sinful Vanities and Pleasures which heretofore they esteemed,
loved, pursued, embraced and even adored above all things; so difficult this
Work is. And yet it must be accomplished principally by the Representations of
Spiritual and Invisible Objects; by proposing distant and furture Rewards;
instead of present palpable Entertainments, which have already made very
violent and prevailing Impressions upon the Mind, and strangely corrupted and
depraved the Imagination, Senses, Appetites and Passions that have been all
along caressed by them.

This leads us to consider the manifold Opposition that is constantly made to
this great Work; every part of which is sufficiently formidable, but the
Combination of all Adversaries together is most wonderful and terrible. There
is not a Sinner converted, but Satan, the World and the Flesh, are conquered
and baffled in their most furious Efforts; and all their Politic Machinations
defeated. How many Devilish Suggestions must be rejected? How many
Solicitations from wicked Companions repulsed? How many evil Habits, that are
founded in the very Constitutions of Persons, must be extirpated? How many
plausible Temptations, that are interwoven with Men's Callings and Civil
Circumstances in the World, must be vanquished and trampled under foot? Every
Soul that is converted is like a Brand plucked out of the Fire. But if we
consider the Imbecility of the best and ablest Instruments, the Difficulty is
yet greater.

We have this Treasure in earthen Vessels; and that ever so frail a Composition
should dash in pieces the Strongholds of Satan, does greatly increase the
Wonder. Both the Gifts and Graces of the most eminent Ministers are far from
being pefect; their bodily Strength is limited within narrow bounds, and they
often meet with Distractions and Avocations which unavoidably interrupt their
greatest Assiduity. Nay, so obstinate is the Difficutly of turning one single
Soul to Righteousness, that upon a just Computation it will be found vastly to
exceed all Humane Power; so that the Attempt were vain and hopeless, and fit
only to be buried in despairing Thoughts, were it not for the promised
Concurrences of a Divine Power, infinitely superior to all Difficulties
whatsoever.

But as this Divine Power is not less to be magnified, because it attains its
end by the Ministry, so the Difficulties which Ministers conflict with, are not
therefore to be made light of, because this Divine Power interposeth it self.
Since he that works by the Ministry as his Ordinance, works by the utmost
Industry of Ministers, as that Creature-agency, by means whereof he will make
the Ordinance effectual.

Thus it appears, that turning Souls to Righteousness, is a Work highly
rewardable, through the alone Merit and Intercession of the Lord Jesus Christ.
Paul (though a chosen Vessel, and one that had as much to plead in his own
behalf as any Man, Yet) counted all things but dung, that he might win Christ.
And be found in him, not having his own Righteousness, which was of the Law,
but that which is through the Faith of Christ, the Righteousness which is of
God by Faith, Phil. 3.8,9. Ministers must not be exalted in way of Derogation
to the Merit and Glory of the Redeemer; for whatsoever Gifts, Graces,
Authority, Success or Honor can be justly attributed to them, are primarily
his, and their Glory is his Glory. I shall only add this further Remark, to
clear the Wisdom and Justice of God in this case, That and extraordinary Degree
of Heavenly Glory, bears but a just Correspondence to the Trust that is reposed
in the Ministers of Christ, and to the Honor that is put upon them in this
World: They are styled 2 Cor. 5.20. 1 Cor. 4.1. The Ambassadors of Christ,
Stewards of the Mysteries of God, etc. And it is but equal that those should be
highly rewarded for discharging this Trust faithfully, who must have suffered
(not only the Vengeance of Eternal Fire, but) greater degrees of Shame and
Torment than others, if they had perfidiously betrayed it.

Having showed what it is to turn Sinners to Rightousness, and how reasonable
it is, that so excellent, so necessary, so difficult a Work, should be crowned
with an extraordinary Recompense; I shall next proceed to open the nature of
that Recompense, as it is here compared to the brightness of the Firmament, and
the shining of the Stars for ever and ever. But, if Eye has not seen, nor ear
heard, neither have entered into the hearts of Man, the things which God has
prepared for them that love him; If the lowest degree of Glory, do so far
exceed the Comprehension of the most raised and refined Intellects here below,
How shall we hope to describe the heights of that excelling Glory, which shall
be the Portion of those that turn many to Righteousness?

All therefore that I shall attempt, is to declare so much of it, as is fairly
deducible from this rich Similitude.

Concerning which, I observe, first in the general, that there is a tow-fold
Congruity in this Comparison, between the Work of Ministers, and their Reward.

First, As the Reward of Faithful Ministers is compared to Light; and Secondly,
as it is compared to the Light which is Celestial.

First, The Comparison of Light in general is apt, because it refers clearly to
their Office and Work. What more suitable than that those who shined in Wisdom
and Holiness, who bare witness to Jesus Christ the true light, which lights
every Man that comes into the World, John 1.9. In whose hearts God has
shined, who commanded the light to shine out of Darkness, to give the light of
the Knowledge of the Glory of God in the Face of Jesus Christ, 2 Cor. 4.6. That
these, I say, should be crowned with Rays of everlasting Light.

Nor is it less observable, in the next place, that it is an Heavenly Shining
that is made use of to represent the Rewares of Faithful Ministers. They are
the Heavenly Regions that most abound with Light, and in which all the great
Springs and Fountains of Light are situate. Well then may our Minds be
abstracted from this Earthly State, and instantly elevated to the Superior
Mansions, when we are called to contemplate the future State of those that turn
many to Righteousness.

Those that were Stars both for their Light and Influence, whilst they only
assisted and adorned the Church on Earth, shall not fail to emit more, and more
glorious Beams, when fixed in an higher Orb, when moving in a larger Sphere in
the Firmament of Glory.

A more particular account of what is here intended, we may gather.

First, From the Opposition between the State here expressed, and the Blackness
of Darkness for ever, in which all the Devils and Damned Souls (and especially
those Ministers that wretchedly neglected the Duties of their Function) shall
be eternally inveloped. Those Prisons and Chains of Darkness, into which they
are cast, and in which they are fast bound until the universal Appearance at
the Great Judgment Day, cannot be more Black, Confounding and Dismal, than the
Robes of Light with which Faithful Ministers must Shine, will be Radiant and
Dazzling.

Secondly, From the Difference there is between the State of Ministers of
Earth, and that which is here spoken of.

First, As the latter entirely excludes the many Infelicities and Imperfection
of the former.

Secondly, As it far transcends all the Brightness and Glory it can preten to.

1. The State signified by the brightness of the Firmament, etc. is a State
that pefectly excludes all the Imperfections and Disadvantages which cloud the
Faithful Ministers of Christ here in this World. The Heavenly Light is not only
opposite to the thick Darkness of Hell, but perfectly banishes all the Shade
and Gloominess of this mixed terrene State.

That which is affirmed of the Righteous in general, shall be most eminently
verified in those that turn many to Righteousness, they shall shine forth as
the Sun in the Kingdom of their Father, Matt. 13.43.

1. They shall shine forth; First, out of those Clouds that their Sinful
Frailties have cast about them. Here they are Frail Sinful Men, encompassed
with diverse Infirmities, the very best of them not excepted; and this is more
visible in them, by reason of their Station, and more notably obscures them,
than any other sort of Men. But in the Heavenly State there shall not be the
least Scar or Footstep of any such Humane Frailty.

2. They shall shine forth, from the Penal Consequences of these Sinful
Frailties, whether more immediately affecting their Persons, or attending their
Conditions and outward Circumstances. There shall be no more Curse, Rev. 22.3.
no more Sickness and Pain upon the Body, no more Doubt nor Discomposure of the
Spirit. Here Ministers may be exercised in any kind of Affliction as well as
others, and often do meet with sharp Trials in one kind or another above
others. There they shall be no more obscured by the Privacy of their Stations,
nor by the Meanness of their Appearance, by which many Ministers of great Worth
are either in a manner quite hidden from public Notice, or valued at a lower
Rate than otherwise they would or ought to be. Calumnies and Persecutions shall
blacken them no more; They shall shine forth of those Mists which are raised
about them, by the Scandals committed in their Flocks, which are often
construed to their great Disadvantage, though they have endeavored never so
much the preventing and healing of them. They shall likewise shine forth out of
those Obscurities, wherein their mutual Jealousies, their unaccountable
Distances and Alienations, and their interfering one with another have involved
them.

2. As this shining like the brightness of the Firmament, etc. excludes the
Imperfections of the present State, so it eminently includes, and every way
excels all the Glory wherewith they or any other Persons do or possibly can
shine in it. All the Secular Shining, the outward Grandeur that Constantine the
Great, and all other munificent Princes, have either annexed to the Ministerial
Function, or themselves enjoyed, is absolute Darkness to that Brightness where
with the poorest Faithful Minister shall one day shine and eclipse it all for
ever.

And for the Spiritual Glory with which they shine in this Life, it shall be
fully perfected, and as much exceed it self, as the Flower and Fruit do the
Seed and Root; or as the Abilites of Manhood do those of the Infant State; or
as a perfect Masterpiece does the rude Draught and first Lineaments of the
Picture.

Thus having discoursed concerning the Glory here described by way of
Opposition to the Darkness and Horror of the contrary State, and likewise in a
way of Distinction from this present mortal State; I come now to treat of it as
it is in it self, which we shall find to include all that is perfect and
glorious.

Here we may note, first, What is the Subject of this Shining. Secondly,
Wherein it consists. Thirdly, To whom the Ministers of the Gospel shall shine.
Fourthly, How long it shall continue.

To the first of these, 1. The entire Person, consisting of Soul and Body,
shall shine as the brightness of the Firmament, and as the Stars for ever and
ever. Both were here Sanctified, both labored and suffered in the Service of
our Redeemer, both were the Subjects of that Right and Claim to this Glory,
which was spoken of before; and therefore both shall partake of it. The Body
without the Soul is not at all capable of Glory as a moral Retribution, the
Soul without the Body is not capable of complete and consummate Bliss; both
together therefore must be the adequate Subject of it.

2. As to the second Enquiry wherein it consists, it must be confessed, the
formal nature of the Glory is but very imperfectly understood by us: Only this
much, the Metaphor of Brightness and Shining does import,

1. Life and Vigor: Darkness is as the shadow of Death, but Light (when
applied to a rational subject) ascribes an Excellency of Life to it. 2. Wisdom
and Knowledge: Nothing that is Corporeal can more fully represent that which is
Spiritual, than Light does Knowledge: For that which the one is to Bodily
Agents and Objects, that the other is to Agents and Objects Spiritual and
Divine. 3. It is a Symbol of Purity: Those that shall shine as the Stars
(according to the vulgar Acceptance) shall be Pure and Immaculate. 4. Dignity
and Honor are implied in it: Darkness is a Resemblance of Debasement and
Dishonor; but Light is an Emblem of Advancement and Glory. 5. It signifies
Beauty and Amiableness: Truly the Light is sweet, and a pleasant thing it is
for the Eyes to behold the Sun, Eccl. 11.7. How pleasant then will it be, to
see each of these Stars out shine the Sun in its Meridian Luster. 6. It very
properly signifies Joy and Felicity, as Darkness is used to express Sorrow and
Misery, Psalm. 97.11. and frequently accompanies them.
If we apply these Notions to the glorified Soul and Body, we shall perceive
what manner of Shining is here ascribed to them.

1. The Soul shall shine with all Intellectual Perfection: Every Faculty shall
be exalted and refined to the highest pitch of which it is capable, and shall
shine in the Glory and Splendor of its natural Excellency. Besides which there
is yet an higher Glory wherewith the Soul shall shine, and that is Moral
Purity; or the Moral Rectitude of each Faculty in it self, and of the several
Faculties as they respect each other; whereby they are rightly disposed, and
regularly exert themselves toward the Objects with which they converse. O what
a glorious Shining will there be, when all the Gifts of Ministers shall resolve
themselves into one prefect Intuition, and all their Graces (such as
Repentance, Faith, Hope, etc.) shall yield all their Vigor to that final Grace
of Holy Love, and be wholly swallowed up in delightful Fruition?

2. The Body shall shine with an admirable Corporeal Splendor: What shall be
the Brightness and Beauty of the Celestial Body, we may partly apprehend from
the shining of Moses his Face when he had been with God, Exodus 34.33. which was
such, that a Vail was necessary to fit him to converse with the People, from
the Glory in which our Savior appeared upon the Mount with Moses and Elias at
his Transfiguration, which was too great for the choicest and most eminent of
his Disciples to bear, and could not be equalled by any Humane Skill or
Artificial Glory. Somewhat we may gather from the falling of a few Rays of
Heavenly Light about Saul when he was going to Damaseus (which probably were
Emanations from the Glorified Body of our Lord Jesus.) How did this sudden
Effusion of Heavenly Light overcome both the Light of the Sun at Noonday, and
the Sight and Spirit too of Persecuting Saul!

3. Respectively each to other, the Soul and Body shall shine in a Sweet and
Harmonious Accord: The Glory of the one is fitly Subservient to the Glory of
the other: The Soul is enshrined in the Corporeal Light and Splendor of the
Body, and the Body is animated all over by the Intellectual Light and Glory of
the Soul: The Glory of the Soul shall shine through the Transparent Brightness
of the Celestial Body: The Soul shall not abase the Body, nor that seduce the
Soul any more for ever. There shall be an equal fitness in the one to command,
as in the other to obey, and in both to glorify and enjoy the God of Glory.
The Spiritual Union and Agreement for the Services of that Holy State, between
Soul and Body, shall be more exquisite and intimate than now the Natural; and
both shall be yet more Sacredly united to God, than they are or can be to each
other. Both shall live, and move, and have their Beings in God, and together
with Being, Life and Acting; in him they shall possess the Prefection of Glory.
The Soul shines in the Celestial Body, the Body in the Celestial Society and
Regions, but all in God, and God in them all, and infinitely above and beyond
them: On him they all depend as the original Light; to him they are all
Subordinate as the supreme Light; to him they all conform, as to the grand
exemplar of Purity. To God (and to the Lamb as immediately Subordinate) there
is a constant Subjection and Resignation of Persons, Possessions and Powers,
with a constant Reference of all Acts and Archievements to his Glory. Hence all
the Beauty, Dignity and Felicity of the Heavenly State result eternally. This
will be further explained in the next Head, in which (having considered the
Subject of this Glory, and the formal nature of it) I come to enquire,

3. To whom they shine. Shining is a term partly relative, something is
supposed to be irradiated, where there is any Exhibition of Light: And surely
that which is true concerning the meanest kind and lowest degree of Light, will
not be found wanting in the highest Instances of the most excellent kind of
Light that the Universe affords, the Light Celestial. The following Particulars
will show what various and endless Reflections and Repercussions of Light the
Heavenly Mansions are filled with.

1. They shine to God in his Holy Abode and Presence. They shine with the
Approbation and Acceptance, and to the Honor of God the Father as Creator: He
will have Complacency in them, as those who have Ministered on Earth, not to the
Recovery only, but even to the Improvement and Advancement of lapsed Creatures,
above the Felicity of that State from which they fell.

God the Son our Redeemer, will be glorified in them, as those who have
received Authority from him, and acted under him on Earth, as he was a Prophet
in revealing the Will of God; as a Priest in offering up Spiritual Sacrifice;
of Prayer and Praise, and making Intercession for the People; and as King, in
governing the several parts of the Catholic Church over which they did preside.

The Holy Ghost, as the Sanctifier and Comforter of Souls, will be glorified in
their Glory: Because they improved the Gifts and Graces received from him, in
illuminating and converting the Elect of God, in Quickening, Comforting,
Strengthening and Edifying them to Salvation; and in vanquishing and expelling
all his and their Enemies. Thus does the Light of these Stars reflect back to
the Source and Center of Light and Glory.

2. They shall shine to the great Satisfaction of the Angelick Orders, and of
the whole Heavenly Host. We all know how the Angels rejoice at the Conversion
of a Sinner, and how gladly they officiate in conveying Souls to their own Calm
and Blissful Regions, upon their Separation from the Body. With what Applauses
then will they receive the Souls of Ministers, that were nor only Sanctified
themselves, but successfully employed about turning others, many others, to
Righteousness, so as none of the Angels ever were. What special Interviews may
be between Ministers and the Souls they have converted, and whether any
extraordinary Intercourse amongst these Stars themselves, I pretend not to
determine. Only it seems no less, probable that these Spiritual Relations, as
they stood on Earth; should be recognized in Glory, than that those should
which are founded in Acts purely Natural, and which were most immediately
accommodated to this earthly State.

3. Those that turn many to Righteousness, shall shine to themselves. Every one
of them shall be a Mirror of Divine Glory to himself; and shall find ineffable
Complacency in the Views and Surveys he takes of his own perfect Rectitude and
Glory.

4. They shall shine to the Devils and Damned Spirits. With what Regret and
Anguish will they behold Ministers ascend to that Glory from which they long
since irrecoverably fell. How will their Malignant Rage and Envy torment them,
when they shall see poor despised Ministers arrayed with everlasting Light; and
that too for the Service they have done against the Prince of the Kingdom of
Darkness! Yea, and how will wicked Persecutors gnash their Teeth to see those
very Men triumphing in Glory, whom they insulted, and basely entreated as the
Offscouring of all things, and would not suffer to live quietly on Earth. How
will all those Wretches be confounded for ever, that shall see the self-same
Ministers, as Stars shining with so transcendent a Luster, whose Counsels and
Admonitions they rejected, and whose Authority, perhaps, they disputed and
disdained to stoop to!

4. The fourth and last general Head concerns the Eternity of this Glory. Here
the brightest Stars shine but for a very short Season, and presently Death
comes with his Dismal Shade, which not only eclipses but quite extinguishes
their Light. The Prophets, do they live for ever? Zech. 1.5. but after they
once come to shine above, as it will be without Imperfection, so it will be
without Intermission, and with out end. Sooner shall all the Stars in the
visible Heavens be disrobed of their Light, than one of these brighter Stars
shall suffer the least Diminution of its Splendor. Both the Glory it self, and
the Eminency of it, shall last for ever: They shall be ever Glorious, and ever
Superlatively so: Those that are once admitted into the Presence of God, and
united to him as the Fountain of Glory can neither be separated from him, nor
fail of Supply, whilst that Fountain of Light is ever overflowing. It is a
Glory that not only exceeds the Merits, and is adequate to all the Capacities
of its Possessors, but also is commensurate to their Immortal Duration, and
runs parallel with the Line of Eternity.

This may suffice to be spoken concerning the Glorious Reward of Faithful
Ministers in the other World: There indeed is the principal Reward of all
Virtue, but it is not without all Reward in this present State. Pleasure and
Honor the most Pure and Genuine, are truly inseparable from all virtuous
Actions; but they do most visibly and sensibly attend us when we are employed
in doing good to others. And the greater the Good is, the more Ravishing the
Delight that accompanies it. He that does good to the Bodies of others, finds a
secret Exalting upon it in his own Breast, and is ready to confess that he has
more obliged himself by becoming a Benefactor, than those to whom he was so,
and that it is more Blessed to give than to receive, Acts 20.35. It is not only
the more honorable Station and Office amongst Men, but has more of a God-like
Grandeur and Felicity in it. How much greater cause have they to rejoice who do
good to the Souls of Men, by delivering them from the most Savage and Merciless
Tyranny of the Devil, and their own wicked Lusts, whose Vassals they have been,
and bringing them into the glorious liberty of the Children of God. Thus
turning Souls to Righteousness is its own Reward, because it includes the doing
of the greatest good to Mankind, to which all other good Works are but remotely
subservient.

This may be looked upon as an earnest and fore-tast of that surpassing Glory
and Happiness which is here promised. And so I shall close the Doctrinal part
of this Discourse.

It remains that we make the best Practical Improvement of which the matter is
capable; which surely is very great.

1. I would humbly offer to my Reverend Fathers and Brethren in the Ministry,
the clear Indications which the Text gives: 1. Of our Work: 2. Of our Reward.
And thence I would infer Directions to guide us in, and Motives to quicken us
to the Performance of the Duty, that we may not fall short of the Reward.

1. We see our Work. It is not what many Ministers aim at and busy themselves
about, and what we are all apt enough to affect: It Is not, I mean, that we may
gain Applause from the Populace or even from the Learned World; not to flourish
in Riches, or in Pomp and Splendor; not to intrigue till we obtain a Dominion
over our Brethren; not to Lord it over God's Heritage; not to live in ease and
fullness, whatever becomes of our Work and Charge. Much less is it to please
Men to their own unspeakable Prejudice, by favoring them in their evil
Courses, and nourishing the Lusts that will prey upon them for ever. Such ends
as these are only fit for the Ministers of Satan, and those that serve the God
of this World, to seek and labor after. They are as repugnant to the Sacred
Office, as they are inconsistent with Sincere Piety.

The true and proper end of the Ministry, as instituted of God, and embraced
and exercised by every Serious Christian duly called and separated to it, is to
turn many to Righteousness. Other Subordinate ends we may lawfully propose to
our selves, but they must be no further sought, than they are truly
reconcilable with the Management of our Ministerial Work in the most effectual
manner. So that if it should become necessary thereto, we ought to forego all
external Privileges and Emoluments; rather than renounce or frustrate it.
Whatever Men account Wisdom now, there will come a time when that Scripture
shall take place, Prove. 11.30. He that wins Souls is wise. He will be found
to have employed his Time and Talents to the best Advantage for his own
Comfort, the Glory of God, and the common Good of the World (which is the
height of Wisdom) that gains Souls, which otherwise had perished eternally.

All Proud, Sloathful, Sensual, Worldly Ministers, that have gained no Souls to
Christ, but perhaps hardened them in their Impieties, shall one day wish, that
they had chosen the meanest and basest, the most servile and loborious Calling
that could be found, rather than this Holy and Honorable Office.

2. We see our Encouragement. It Is an eminent Degree of eternal Glory: All our
precious Light and Influence which we shed on others, during our momentary
Labors upon Earth, will return to us again, and ennoble us for ever in Heaven.
How Poor and Contemptible is all the Tinselbravery of Popes and Cardinals, of
Prelates and Princes, in comparison of this excellent Glory? This shall be
Verdant and Flourishing, when theirs is laid in the Dust. It Is a hard thing to
be a good Minister, but then it is a blessed thing to shine in Glory for ever.

Let us then apply our selves to the Work of the Ministry, as those that
design, above all things, to promote the Salvation of many, by turning them to
Righteousness. We know, that without Holiness none shall see the Lord; we know
that Men are begotten again, to a lively hope ordinarily by the Preaching of
the Gospel; we know that if Men perish through our Neglect, their Blood will be
required of us; we know also that God works ordinarily according to the
Suitableness of the Means, and that there is much Duty incumbent on us, to fit
our Endeavors to the end we would attain by them.

First then, Let this guide us in our Studies and Preaching. He is not the best
Preacher that makes the loudest Noise; nor yet he that makes the finest
Flourish, and garnishes each Period with the Flowers of Rhetoric; nor he that
ostentatiously abounds with needless Subtilties, and strives to show all the
Learning he has, whether the Subject require it or no. Such preach themselves
really, while they profess to set forth Jesus Christ to the People: Those that
would turn many to Righteousness, must choose to treat upon Subjects which
their Auditors most needs, in a clear convincing manner, with Gravity and
Seriousness: They must feel the Power of those Truths upon their own Souls,
which they would impress upon others. Men of high Parts must deny themselves,
if need be, for the good of others, by condescending to the meanest Capacities:
They must not think it below them to use familiar and plain Expressions, where
those will serve best to convey a clear Idea of the Truths of God to the
Hearers. Those whose Gifts are more slender must double their Diligence, that
they may not fall too much below the Dignity of the Subjects they treat, and
thereby render themselves Contemptible to the more Understanding and able sort
of Christians, or to the more curious part of the Auditory.

2. This should guide us in our Prayers for our People, and our Conversations
with them. How earnest should we be with God for some Fruit that might abound
to our account? How careful should we be, not to admit any Scandalous Levity
into our own carriage, nor to give countenance to it in others with whom we
converse. We are doubly separated from the World, as Christians, and as
Ministers; and there is a general Expectation that our Carriage be doubly
strict and refined, even from those Freedoms which are more allowable in
Persons of a different Character. If God shall help us to demean our selves
with Wisdom, Sobriety and Godliness, our Conversations will doubtless
conciliate a Reverence for our Persons and Labors; besides the direct
Influence they will have upon the Minds of those that are no further acquainted
with us. If the design of turning many to Righteousness govern our Behavior,
it will make us Patient toward all, Free to converse with the Poorest of the
Flock, and Vigilant to lay hold on all Opportunities that may facilitate the
Success of our Endeavors upon them.

Surely our Encouragement is every way proportionate to the Difficulties we
have to encounter. We serve a good Master, our Work is pleasant, even when it
is most painful to the Flesh. We have a Promise of the gracious Presence of our
Lord with us, Matt. 28. ult. to assist our Endeavors, to protect our Persons,
and prosper our Labors, to the end of our Lives, and to the World's end. But
above all, let the Consideration of our Reward Invigorate us, when we begin to
relax our Pains, and to intermit our Labors. Let us all fire our Hearts with a
noble Ambition of shining like the Stars for ever and ever. The more any of us
are barred and excluded from Secular Honors and Preferments, let us so much
the mote ardently aspire after the Heavenly Glory. We have (if I mistake not)
some Advantage this way above others; since the less of Favor and Privilege
we enjoy in this World upon the account of our Ministry, others have the less
occasion to suspect the Sincerity of our Intentions, and we may with the more
Assurance wait for a Glorious and Unfading Crown. Wherefore, Holy Brethren,
partakers of the Heavenly Calling, consider the Apostle and High Priest of our
Profession Christ Jesus. Who was faithful to him that appointed him, as also
Moses was faithful in all his House, Heb.3.1,2.

Our Blessed Redeemer was not only a Pattern of all Christian Virtues, as they
are common to every Station, but particularly of Ministerial Prudence, Zeal,
Patience, Meekness, Fidelity; Diligence, and all under the greatest
Discouragements from that Polity under which he lived, and from the Grandees of
that People with whom and for whole Benefit he spent his Labors and shed his
Blood. His gentle treating of those that were weak, but willing to learn their
Duty; his gradual discovery of Christian Verities as they could be born; his
sharp and plain rebuking of those that strutted in a Garb of Pharisaical
Sanctity, but malign'd his Person and Design, and made it their business to
seduce others; his Compassion to Souls, and easiness of Access to the poorer
sort, were all intended and are all recorded for our Imitation.

Let us also confider Daniel and all the Holy Prophets, with the Apostles and
Primitive Bishops; Let us consider the many Holy Lights that adorned the Church
since the Reformation, and particularly the British Churches. Let their Zeal
and Constancy live in us, and be transmitted by us with all Advantages to those
that shall succeed us. Let us consider the Example of our Reverend deceased
Brother, whom if I reckon amongst the chiefest of those Modern Worthies that
have turned many to Righteousness, and do now shine as the brightness of the
Firmament, and as the Stars for ever and ever, I doubt not to have the
Suffrages of all that hear me, and of all that knew him.

He was a Person of good natural Parts, one that had enough of a Genius to
master what he applied himself to, and to make up the Figure of a great Man:
These natural Abilities were cultivated by extraordinary Industry, which begun
very early, and continued all his Life; witness the many Volumes which he has
left behind him written with his own hand. He was most conversant in those
parts of Learning which are directly Subservient to Divinity, and made great
use thereof in all his Composures; but with so little Affectation, that the
Unlearned were never amused with it, and yet the Judicious part of his Auditory
had no lack of it. His Parts and Learning were both admirably set off by a
singular Fitness for Friendship and Conversation, in which he was amiable above
many. His Temper was Sincere, Candid, and Generous to and beyond his Power: His
Discourse was Ingenious, Innocent, Pleasant, and Profitable to a high degree.
His Deportment was Grave, yet Sweet and Obliging. These Virtues were lodged in
a Soul truly Christian. I know we must make some Allowance for Humane
Infirmities, from which none are exempt whilst they are in the Body. He was but
a Candidate for the State of Perfection, and was a Man subject to like Passions
as we are, which he has now put off, together with Mortality.

But certainly this notwithstanding, He had a truly Christian Spirit, and did
abound in choice Experiences of God's Dealings with himself and others. His
Life was filled up with a Uniform Series of Faithful Services to God and to his
Generation. He did not load Men with heavy Burdens, which he would not touch
with one of his Fingers; but put his own Neck into the same Christian Yoke,
which he exhorted others to take upon them.

Besides his Exemplary Behavior as a Christian in general, designing and doing
all the Good he was capable of to the Souls and Bodies of Men, he was highly
imitable in his Domestic Relations. He was (and will ever be acknowledged to
have been) a most kind and tender Husband to his Yoke Fellow, a loving and
faithful Father to his Children, a gentle and just Master to his Servants, and
most precisely Regular in the Religious Conduct of his Family.

But the greatest and best part of his Character (his Christianity supposed) is
this, That he was an Able and Faithful Minister of the New Testament, not of
the Letter but of the Spirit. He reflected Honor to the Sacred Function, as
well as received Honor from it. He was Faithful to his Ministerial Vow, and
did not Sacrilegiously alienate himself from the Work to which he was solemnly
devoted. When the Law deprived him of the Temple, and public Maintenance to
which he stood related, he quietly gave place. But he judged not that this did
or could either discharge him from his Ministerial Vow, or dissolve the
Relation betwixt him and his People.

Accordingly, with all Meekness and Simplicity, and without any Spirit of
Opposition, he proceeded in his Work amongst that People to which he had so
clear and universal a Call; paying all Deference to the Civil Magistrate, so
far as he could, without violating his Conscience. In this way of Sober
Conscientious Non conformity to the English Diocesan Prelacy, Subscriptions and
Ceremonies, he cast himself and his Family purely upon Providence, and lived
upon it all his days. Nor was the Divine Providence wanting to raise him up
many kind Benefactors, whose Liberality supplied the Want of a Legal
Maintenance. These were his Sentiments, and this his Practice. But he was,
nevertheless, a Person of singular Moderation: He had both a large Charity and
great Veneration for those that differed from him, if they were Men of Worth,
and Unblameable in their Lives. They can testify this, that know what a fair
and amicable Correspondence he maintained with many of his Reverend Conforming
Brethren, to several of whom this Good Man's Name was perhaps as Precious, and
his Society as grateful, as if he had been one of their own Stamp. But his
Moderation toward those that dissented from him, was not more Eminent, than
his Condescension to the Juniors in the Ministry, and to those that were, upon
many accounts, much Inferior to him. He took great Pleasure in Conversing with
Hopeful Young Ministers, and never failed to give them all the Respect and
Encouragement that was either due to them, or convenient for them. He was very
Free and Familiar with those of his more intimate Acquaintance, and upon all
Occasions would express both a Paternal Care of them, and Affection to them.
How may I and some others cry out upon this occasion, as Elisha did when he saw
the Translation of Elijah, My Father, my Father, the Chariot of Israel, and the
Horsemen thereof, 2 Kings 2.12.

Our Reverend and Dear Father is taken from us, whose Authority we revered, and
whose Indulgent Care over us was one of our greatest Supports. Nor was he only
an excellent Minister at large, but a Prudent Vigilant Pastor to a numerous
Flock that dearly loved him, and was no less dearly beloved of him. How
Solicitous was he for the Peace and Holiness of his People? How was his Soul
grieved, and what an Holy Solicitude seized him, when any Scandalous Sin was
committed amongst them; and how Tenderly and Faithfully, and (through the
Divine Goodness) how successfully did he treat with Offenders, to recover them,
by Repentance, out of the Snare of the Devil? Yet though he was a Person of
such Wisdom and Sufficiency, as we all knew him to be, yet none could be more
Diffident of himself, or more disposed to ask the Advice of others. He rarely
came to a Resolution about any momentous Affair, till he had first consulted
with his Brethren in the Ministry, or the more Intelligent part of his own
Congregation. By this means, and the good Service he did amongst them, he had
so great an Interest in his Peoples Affections, that they scarce knew how to
refuse any thing that he thought fit to urge them to. The ample Contributions
of his Hearers, at his Motion, to all the great occasions of Charity that have
been of late propounded, are public and undeniable Evidences of this Truth.

But his particular Excellency is yet behind. He was one of the most Powerful
Profitable Preachers that ever these Parts were acquainted with: In other
things he exceeded most others, but in this he exceeded himself. There be many
Excellencies belonging to a Preacher, each of which singly might be sufficient
to render a Person Useful and Eminent, that were all combined in him. His
Matter was solid and weighty, and of a Practical Tendency to change Men's
Natures and Reform their Lives. He was not for novel undigested Speculations.
He studiously declined Controversy at all times, but especially in the Pulpit.
Nor did he make it his business to reflect upon the different Parties amongst
Protestants: Instead of that, he endeavored, with all his Strength, to declare
Divine Truths with so convincing an Evidence, and to enforce his Exhortations
with such irresistible Arguments, and with such poinant Expressions, as might
leave the Hearers under strong Convictions concerning the Necessity of
Holiness. And O how had God fitted him for this great Work, and how did the
Lord own him in the Prosecution of it? How would he lay open the Deceits of
Men's Hearts? How would he expose the Devices whereby Satan commonly deludes and
destroys Sinners? He often penetrated so far into the secret Recesses of the
Soul, and described the Conception, Birth and Progress of Sin in such lively
Colors, that one would have thought he had not only been present at the
outward Commission of it, but that he had lain in Men's Bosoms, and inspected
all the most secret Transactions there. And yet I know not whether he was more
Happy in this, or in opening to Penitents a Door of Hope, when they were once
thoroughly awakened, and pouring the Oil of Consolation into their Bleeding
Wounds. He was a Messenger, an Interpreter, one among a thousand, to show unto
Man his Uprightness, Job 33.23. His Sermons were plain and discoursive, and
full of Holy Zeal and Fervor; but withal so embellished with notable Maxims
and curious Observations, so illustrated with pat Similitudes and Examples, and
delivered with such a Propriety, Facility, and Fluency of Expression, and with
so graceful a Mean and Gesture, as rendered the plainest Matter no less
acceptable than it was necessary. Nor did he only entertain his Hearers with
that which was good in it self, but with what was seasonable and proper. He was
very Inquisitive and Observant about the State of his Country, and the
Providence of God toward it, and about the Condition and Carriage of his
Flock; to both which he did accommodate his Discourses with singular Judgment
and Dexterity. In this he was most Impartial, and would inveigh with equal
Freedom against the Faults of the Rich as of the Poor. Nor was he only an
excellent popular Preacher; he was also an able Expositor of Holy Scripture.
The Solutions he produces to the Difficulties of the Text, were clear and
Satisfactory; the Expositions sound and weighty; the Observations fine, and,
many times, such as do not ordinarily occur; and the whole performed with an
Ease and Elegancy peculiar to himself. What Method soever he followed, he spoke
with Authority and Majesty; His words were as goads and as nails fastened by the
masters of Assemblies, which are given from one Shepherd, Eccl. 12.11.

I am well assured under his Ministry, if ever in these latter days, that
saying of the Apostle received a blessed Accomplishment in many Instances
(allowing for the Disparity between the Gifts bestowed in such distant Ages of
the Church) But if all Prophecy, and there come in one that believes not, or
one unlearned, he is convinced of all, he is judged of all. And thus are the
Secrets of his Heart made manifest; and so falling down on his face, he will
worship God, and report that God is in you of a truth, 1 Cor. 14.24. Many that
have come to hear him accidentally, or out of Curiosity, have both experienced
and declared much of this nature.

It pleased God to honor his Ministry with such abundant Success, that great
numbers, wherever he resided, were at least visibly reclaimed by it; and many
of those (we have great reason to judge) really changed into the Divine Image;
concerning whom he might say with the Apostle, Though ye have ten thousand
Instructors in Christ, yet have ye not many Fathers; for in Christ Jesus I have
begotten you though the Gospel, 1 Cor. 4.15. For the Truth of all this I appeal
to you all, and to all that knew him, or almost ever heard of him. I appeal to
that universal Esteem and Reverence that was paid him by Persons of all Ranks
high and low; of all sorts, good and bad; of all Opinions, Conformists and
Nonconformists.

I do not present you with this account of this Eminent and Faithful Servant of
Christ, as if it were a full and perfect Character of him, No, that would
require a larger compass, and an abler manage than I can give it. This may
suffice to be spoken at the present, to the honor of Divine Grace, manifesting
it self in so useful an Instrument. May it also provoke us to bless God for
him, and kindle in us an Emulation of his Seize, and of the Success that
attended his Labors.

2. The second Inference concerns the surviving Relations. A just Sense all
ought to have of this great Loss, and therefore it may well be indulged to you
that are the greatest Sufferers by it. But let us not mourn as those that have
no Hope, but rather as Persons assured, that his Soul, whose removal we lament,
does already shine as a Star of the first Magnitude, and enjoys the Blessed
Reward of all his Labors.

The Stroke indeed is heavy, the Breach is wide, and never to be forgotten,
never (I fear) to be repaired upon every account. But seeing our Loss is his
Gain, why should not his Gain be our Comfort? He is exalted to an higher Orb,
and moves in a more glorious Sphere than ever. And if God receive Glory from
him in a more excellent way, and he also be dignified and made Happy after a
more excellent manner than was possible on Earth, Why should you or any of us
Repine? It was a removal that must be at one time or another, and God has
determined this to be the fittest Season; Do you therefore acquiesce in what he
has done, and study to improve this Providence to a greater Fitness for your
own Change. Though his presence be withdrawn, his Example, his Instructions,
and his Prayers, I hope, will be always beneficial to you, and in some measure
supply the want of it. The same God that made his presence useful, can make his
absence so, and he it is that must do all.

3. The third Inference respects the People from whom he was taken: And they
are of two sorts; First, Such as have not turned to Righteousness,
notwithstanding all the earnest Calls and Invitations which this Ambassador of
Christ has given them. They have been like the deaf Adder that stops her
ear; which will not hearken to the Voice of the Charmer, charm he never so
wisely.

I must needs say, you have lost one of the most promising Seasons that ever
any enjoyed, for the Conversion of your Souls. You shall hear the Voice of this
powerful Orator no more for ever: He must solicit, warn, exhort you no more. O
recollect the moving Language, the Holy mellifluous Oratory wherewith he would
have conquered your obstinate Hearts, that he might espouse you to one Husband,
Jesus Christ. How did he pursue you from time to time, longing to see Jesus
Christ formed in you. Are you not ashamed and terribly afraid what will become
of you, when you consider how many he prevailed upon, and yet you remain in
your Sins? O that the remembrance of these things might so revive upon you,
that being dead, he may yet speak to the awakening and saving of your Souls?
Nay, How Happy would it be yet for you, and what an Alleviation to your present
Grief, if the Sense of God's Displeasure, in taking away this great Light from
us, might cloth his Funerals with the Virtue of an Ordinance, so as to effect
that Blessed Change upon you, which was in vain attempted by all other means?
Know you not that you must give a strict account of all the Sermons you have
heard, and of all the Convictions you have had under his Ministry?

Hear, all you that are Drunkards, Fornicators, Unrighteous, Sabbath Breakers;
all that are Covetous, all that indulge their Furious Passions, or that live in
any other Notorious Sin; and know, that you, even you, must turn unto
Righteousness, or perish everlastingly. O dare not, then, to meet this Servant
of Christ at the great Judgment-day, in an unconverted State; for, if you do,
he will be a swift and terrible Witness against you. How will he be ready to
say, Lord, these are the Wretches, that I so often, so long, and so earnestly
treated with, about the Salvation of their precious Souls, and all in vain. I
required them in thy Name, and in obedience to thy Authority, to repent and
turn; I besought them; I conjured them by the Mercies of God, by the
Meritorious Bloodshed of Jesus Christ, by the invaluable Worth of their own
Immortal Souls; I opened the Gospel Covenant to them; I showed them the terms
of Life; I set the Promises and Threatenings, Life and Death, Heaven and Hell
before them; I directed them to seek the Aids of thy Holy Spirit; I told them
of this very day, when they and I should meet at this thy Tribunal, to receive
an irreversible Sentence, but they believed not my Report. I traveled over
them, I spent my Labors and Life upon them, to have broken their Adamantine
Hearts; I sought to find out acceptable words, even words of Truth; I
endeavored to show them their Misery, and to discover the Remedy provided in
the Gospel. But all that I could obtain was a verbal Commendation. Lo I was
unto them as a very lovely Song, of one that has a pleasant Voice, and can
play well on an Instrument, for they heard my words, but they did them not.
Sinners, when this comes to pass, (lo, it will come) shall you not then know,
to your Cost, that a Prophet has been amongst you? Ezekiel. 33.32,33. What will
ye do in the day of Visitation, and in the Desolation which shall come from
far, to whom will ye flee for help? and where will you leave your Glory? Isa.
10.3.

The other part of the People from which he is taken, consists of those that
have turned to Righteousness. Many such went before him to possess that Glory
which was revealed to them, and for which they were prepared by this Blessed
Instrument. These have already experienced the Truth of what he told them, and
are Partners with him in the Sacred Pleasures of Paradise. My business,
therefore, is with those that are left behind in this Vale of Tears: And of
such I say, Blessed are ye of the Lord. You have cause to praise God, that ever
you saw his Face, or heard his Voice, and shall praise the Free and Rich Grace
of God to all Eternity. You sustain a mighty Loss, in that you must not be
brought up under his Wing, whose Labors first begat in you the Seed and
Principle of the Divine Life. I know you will be more sensibly affected with
this Loss than others, because of the Love you bare to him as to a Spiritual
Father, and that you will (as you have just cause) honor his Memory whilst you
have a day to live.

But this is not enough for Persons in your Circumstances: Your Dear Pastor is
ravished from you, Death has silenced him, and bereaved you. But should not
you and I then search our Hearts, and be humbled for those Sins which have
provoked God to make this sore breach upon us and the whole Church, after
several others, each of which was very deplorable; but all together much more
are and ought to be for a Lamentation.

Have we not cause to apprehend some Judgment approaching, and that these Dear
Servants of God are taken away from the evil to come? O labor after
Perseverance in the Profession of the Truth, and to make good Proficiency in
the ways of Godliness. So shall you see the Face of your Pastor again to your
mutual Joy, and shall be a Crown to him in the day of Christ, when he shall
stand forth and say, Behold I, and the Children which the Lord has given me.
Encourage and strengthen each other; your being deprived of so considerable an
Help, should put you upon the more diligent Improvement of those Advantages
which remain: Your Concord and Harmony, your Holy and Unblamable Deportment,
your humble Supplications to Almighty God for the Aids of his Holy Spirit to
your selves, and for a double Portion thereof upon those that succeed in the
room of this once gracious and now glorified Saint and Minister, may be a
propitious Token to us, that our God will not utterly forsake us; that he has
Mercy in store for us, and will give us a Nail in his Holy Place.

I shall remit you for a concluding Passage to Heb. 13.7,8,9. Remember them
which have the Rule over you, who have spoken unto you the Word of God, whose
Faith follow considering the end of their Conversation. Jesus Christ, the same
yesterday, to day, and for ever. Be not carried about with diverse and strange
Doctrines, for it is a good thing that the Heart be established with Grace, not
with Meats, which have not profited them which have been occupied therein.
Verse 17. Obey them that have the Rule ever you, and submit your selves, for
they watch for your Souls, as they that must give account, that they may do it
with Joy, and not with Grief; for that is unprofitable for you. Verse 20, 21.
Now the God of Peace, which brought again from the Dead, our Lord Jesus, that
great Shepherd of the Sheep, through the Blood of the everlasting Covenant,
make you perfect in every good Work, to do his Will, working in you that which
is well-pleasing in his sight, through Jesus Christ, to whom be Glory for ever
and ever. Amen.

FINIS.
Books Printed for Tho. Parkhurst at the lower end of Cheapside.
MR. Baxter on the New Testament. 1. The New Creature: Opening the Nature,
Properties and Necessity, of that great Work of the New Creation upon the Souls
of Men. 2. Family Altar: A Treatise to promote the Worship of God in Private
Houses. 3. The Best Intall: Or Dying Parents Living Hopes for their Surviving
Children. 4. Meetness for Heaven: Discovering the Nature and Necessity of
Habitual and Actual Meetness for Heaven here. By Mr. Oliver Heywood Minister of
the Gospel. Above Thirty Discourses on several Doctrinal and Practical
Subjects, just finishing from the Press, in large Follo, of the late Reverend
and Learned Divine David Clerkson. Annotations on the whole Bible, by Mr. Matt.
Pool, and several other Learned Divines, the third Edition, with large Contents
to the Chapters, and a Concordance Mr. Baxter': Life, written by his own Hand,
published by Mr. Silvester, is at the Press. A Body of Practical Divinity, in
about 176 Sermons on the Assemblies Catechism, by Tho. Watson formerly Minister
of St. Stephens Walbrook An Earnest Call to Family Religion: Being the
Substance of eighteen Sermons. By Samuel Slater Minister of the Gospel.

