The Admirable and Glorious Appearance of the Eternal God, in his Glorious
Power, in and through a CHILD, of the Age of betwixt Eight and Nine Years, upon
her dying Bed, opening her Mouth to speak forth his Praise, and Extol his
Reverent Holy Name and Power: A short Relation whereof, together with her
Exercise throughout her Sickness, is hereafter collected, or so much thereof as
was by us certainly Remembered.
UPON the 13th day of the 7th month, 1682. did the Lord Visit Sarah the
Daughter of Thomas and Ann Camme of Camsgill with Sickness, the which for about
two days was but gentle upon her, but afterward grew more hot and extreme,
increasing almost continually, till she was in Mercy taken to rest with the
Lord.

Many sweet and comfortable Expressions passed from her all along in her
Sickness, when she was sencible, being satisfied she should be taken away,
often signifying the same to us; saying also, That she was neither afraid nor
unwilling to Dye, but freely given up thereto in the will of her God; desiring
us many times to be Content; and if at any time she saw us her Parents or
Sister so concerned as to weep, she would cry, Oh! do not so, do not so; and
take us in her Arms, tenderly Kissing and Embracing us*

About an hour and a half before her departure, the Lord in tender Mercy was
pleased to give her a time of ease, and perfect sense; and also, in a wonderful
and more especial manner, in opening her mouth to speak forth and declara his
high Praises, who out of the Mouth of Babes and Sucklings can perfect the same,
and verily did at that time through this tender Child, to the admiration of all
that were about her, and unspeakable Joy of her Parents and Relations; part of
those Memorable and Weighty sayings, that through the Operation of the Power
and Spirit of Jesus, through her were uttered, were presently written down, as
spoken, and the rest added thereto, as brought to our Remembrance, for that end
chiefly, that God may have the glory of his own Work, who is worthy forever.

The abovesaid 13th day, being the 4th day of the Week; and the day following,
her Sickness was not so Extreme, as afterward it grew to be, but more mild and
gentle, as beforesaid; but upon the 6th day of the Week, being the 15th day of
the Month, her Distemper increased to a great height of Extremity, so that her
Pain and Exercise was great; yet notwithstanding she was very patient under the
same, only many Deep Sighs, and Heart-afflicting Groans, proceeded from her;
wherefore her Father asked her, If she could not breath and pray to the Lord
for Help and Assistance? Her answer was, She could and did; and further said,
It was her Belief, that the Lord, the great God of Heaven and Earth, he would
keep her and preserve her Soul, whatever might become of her Body; and often
she sweetly supplicated the Lord for his Assistance and Help, and also blessed
and praised his Holy Name,

And thus she continued in exceeding great Pain and Exercise, yet very patient
under it, and sensible, till about the middle of the first day of the Week
following, not having slept above a quarter of an Hour, all those several days
of her Sickness so that through want of Sleep, and the violence of the
Distemper, her head grew light, and she was at several times not so sensible in
her Expressions, yet very Harmless and Innocent; for she still retained so much
sense as to know all that were about her, earnestly desireing and begging to be
helped home to her own Bed; saying, That she could not Rest nor Sleep till she
came there, and the like, and thus she lay till about the middle of the morrow,
being the second day of the week, and the 18th day of the month, only weakened
and spent very much; and then as we were helping her a little up upon the Bed,
she on a sudden (as we thought) fainted, her head bowing down into her bosom,
whereupon we lifted it up, but perceiving that she did not faint, but lay still
in her Fathers arms, we waited by her a little while, her Father being
sensible, and signifying the same to the Family that was standing by, that
there was a more then ordinary Exercise upon her Mind and Spirit,
notwithstandi^g she lay so quiet and still, yea, more then she had done for
four days before, for her Extremity had been so great, that she turned every
way, and removed her Head, Hands, and Feet often from place to place, before
that time; but after a little space, through the power of an endless Life, she
was revived both in Body and Spirit, and bore up her head, and sat upright in
the Bed, as if she had been well, looking upon her Parents, Brother and Sister,
with several others about her, with an exceeding Cheerful and Beautified
Countenance, being overshaddowed with the Glory of the Eternal God, and his
living precious Power filling her Soul, by the Operation whereof her Mouth was
wonderfully opened in many weighty and living Expressions, many of which, as to
the Substance and sense, as near as we could remember, are inserted as
follows, viz.

My Sins are forgiven me, and I shall have a Resting Place in Heaven. Then
looking upon her Mother, she held out her Arms to her, and renderly Embraced
and Kissed her, saying, Oh! my Dear Mother! there is also a place prepared for
thee in Heaven, and thou shall as certainly enjoy it as any here: I do not,
said she, desire my Mothers death, or to be removed from you; yet we shall meet
in Heaven (whether she said in a short time, or in Gods time, we could not
certainly understand; for her Voice after a while speaking grew low and weak,
and then she would pause a little, and lie still, till the Lords Power again
revived and gave her Utterance, in the time of her Stilness) seeing her Mother
and most about her weep, she said, Oh! do not weep; do not so; you should not
do so; I am well, I am well; never better since I had a day; and kissed most
about her one by one, saying, Do not cry, but be content in the will of God,
for I am so.

Her Father perceiving that 'twas an Exercise to her, to see those about her to
sorrow, desired all besides himself, who were on the Bed with her, to withdraw
for a while; but quickly she called them in again, and began to speak on this
wise: Shall I go down to the horrible Pit? nay; the Lord has redeemed my Soul
to praise his Name on High forever: Oh! Praises, Praises to the Lord; Bless his
Holy Name, O my Soul; and so went on in many sweet Expressions of Praise, and
sweet melodious Sounds, for a pretty time; then she called her Brother unto
her, and said, Ah! John, What has it profitted thee, that thou have so grieved
thy Dear Mother, that has so tenderly brought thee up? with more words to that
effect, together with tender advice, not to do so any more, which we could not
exactly take from her, because her voice grew low; so paused a little, after
which she called for her Sister, and Embraced and Kissed her often very
tenderly with great Affection, and a very Amiable Cheerful Countenance, beyond
Expression, and bad her Sister be content; for it is and will be well with me,
she said, and I must go to a more fine place then ever mine eyes beheld, it
will be well with me, and all that fear the Lord; for we shall have everlasting
joy in Heaven, when the Wicked shall be tormented in Hell; and seeing her
Sister full of Sorrow and Weeping by her, she pulled her unto her, and Embraced
her, saying, Do not so, Dear Mary* do not cry, lest thou grieve the Lord; be
subject to the Lord, will all things, and love and be faithful to the Truth;
and do not forsake the Religion, whatever thou may suffer for it; though thou
should (...) be burned, thy Flesh fried, or be cast into the Sea; If thou do,
said she, it will not be so well: Then she spoke to the Maid Servant, and bade
her also be Faithful, and not forsake the Truth, and her Riligion, when tried;
for they will try thee, said she, but whom she meant, when she said, they will
try thee, we understood not.)

Further she said, I am satisfied in the Truth, and with my Religion; I would
not forsake it, though I should be fed with the Bread of Adversity, and the
Water of Affliction; Oh! Praises, Praises, to my God, my Father, and Our
Father, which art in Heaven, Hollowed be thy Name, etc* to the end of that
Prayer twice over, with a low voice, yet might be heard; and then the third
time begun it with a more audible Voice, and went on to that Sentence, [Thy
will be done in Earth, as it is done in Heaven.] which she spoke very weightily
and deliberately; and then signifying unto us, that we were all to mind that;
for I am freely given up, said she, to his blessed Will in all things; Praises,
Praises, to my God; bless his Name, Oh! my Soul; and so pa^sed a little, being
in her Fathers Arms, and in a little time looked cheerfully upon him, and
kissed him often, saying, Oh! my dear Father, thou have been very tender and
careful over me, and have taken great pains with me in my Sickness, but it
avails not, there is no help nor succor for me in the Earth; it is the Lord
that is my help and Physician, and he will give me ease and rest Everlasting.

About two days before we had sent for a Doctor, who came twice to her two
several days; the first time she asked, Whether he was a Friend? if so, she
would take what he prescribed; othewise she would not willingly: at his second
coming, one came and told her, Her Doctor was come; My Doctor! said she, he is
not my Doctor, he can do me no good; its not he, nor any thing in the Earth
that can help me.

But to return to what was further declared by her; she called to all the
Family to come unto her, and they came, and some others also that were come
into the House; and then she Kissed her Father and Mother, Brother and Sister,
Grandmother and others, and took leave of every one in particular; saying
Farewell, Farewell, with an exceeding pleasant and cheerful Countenance, as if
she had been overcome with joy and gladness, her Brother being gone out of her
sight to write down part of her words above written, she called him by name,
and kissed him again, and spoke several words to him, but her voice was so low,
that we could not take them exactly; but tended to Advice, to Fear God, Love
Truth, and Obe his Mother; and then paused a little, and lay still; after a
little time she reached to us again, and kissed us one by one with great
Affection and Cheerfulness, and biding every particular of us Farewell,
Farewell, then looking round about upon all that were about her, she said,
Farewell unto you all, only Farewell, Amen, Amen; signifying thereby that she
had no more to say to us, but to bid us Farewell; so went on sweetly Lauding and
Praising the Lord, saying, Oh! Praises, Praises, to the Lord, O my Soul, Bless
and Praise thou his Holy Name for Ever, and for Evermore; and spoke few or no
more words, but continued a pretty time in a sweet and harmonious Sounding
forth Praises, making Melody in her Heart to the Lord, very comfortable and
refreshing, tendering all that were about her into Tears, being as cheerful in
her Countenance as ever, nay, far beyond what it was in her perfect Health; the
glory of God overshaddowing and resting upon her, the sense whereof gladed our
Hearts abundantly, and the Remembrance thereof is sweet to us beyond all
Expressions, being thereby raised in a great measure over the sense of sorrow
for the loss of her, and we acknowledge it to be an especial Kindness which our
God in mercy blessed us with, not only in restoring her to perfect sense over
the violence of her Malignant Distemper, which had for some time, as aforesaid,
made her unsensible in her Expressions; but also in his Wonderful Appearance,
in giving Mouth and Wisdom to this tender Child, to speak forth such weighty
and admirable things, his favor herein we hope shall by us never be forgotten;
but he shall by us have the Praise and the Glory of his own Work, who is
Worthy, God Blessed for Ever.

In the end of that Melodious Sounding, which continued near half an hour, she
seemed to faint; so that we supposed she would presently depart; yet
notwithstanding continued half an Hour longer, and passed through several sharp
Pangs; but in the end finished very sweetly, and our Spirits were sensible of
her Ascending into endless Glory; and there she rests with God the Father of
Spirits in Joy Everlasting, being taken from the Evil to come, and freed from
all Sorrow and Pain, and Tears forever wiped from her Eyes, Amen, Amen.

From her Cradle she was a Child of a weak Constitution of Body, afflicted with
several Sicknesses, by which she was kept low and tender in her Spirit,
exceeding sober, never addicted to any Evil; we know not of any that ever heard
her speak any unsavory word; tenderly affected to all, but especially her
Parents and Relations; delighted much in reading the holy Scriptures, and
especially such places as had relation to God's Appearance and Providence to
Children; she also took great Delight to read the Testimony of Friends to the
Appearance of God's Power in Young Children, whether in their Health, or on
their Dying Beds; and had got several printed Books that had relation thereto.
Furthermore, She had great delight in reading of the faithfulness of such as
had suffered for Truths sake, whether in this Age, or Ages past; and before she
could speak plain, or read perfectly, she had got off Book by heart most of
those sensible Letters, written in Verse by Robert Smith, Martyr, to his Wife,
Brother and Children, as they are inserted in the Book of Martyrs.

Great Pity she had to Poor People, that came to seek Relief, especially
Children, that she would not only have fed them, but many times would have
brought them on their way, and sitten down with them in the Fields; and often
when she had seen plenty of Victuals, Oh! would she say, that such a Poor Child
had this, or that; how glad would it make them?

In fine, She was one in whom we her Parents had great Delight and Comfort ^lso
tender and obedient was she at all times, that her Father had never occasion
given to use the Rod. The Loss of so good and hopeful a Child, in whom we might
have expected so great Comfort, often comes near us; yet with true Submission
to the Will of God, where we find Peace and Rest, knowing that our Loss, in her
being removed from us, is her Everlasting Gain.

Her Distemper was supposed to be the Smallpox, and a Fevour accompanying
them, although there was but little appearance of the Pox; for they came little
out, only some small ones about her Face and Hands. She Dyed in the Ninth Year
of her Age, wanting about Eleven Days of Nine Years, being the 18th day of the
7th month, in the year 1682.

And inasmuch as we have a hope in the Lord, that there may be a service (in
publishing in print what is above written) to many, especially such as are
young in years; and also that it may tend to the Glory of the living, eternal,
powerful, wise God, who is wonderful in his Works o^ Praise, we were made
willing in the discharge of our Duty, to publish the same in print, being also
much pressed thereto by many Friends, who have heard and seen the same; and now
leave the Issue to the Lord, who is worthy of all the Praise, Glory and Renown,
World without End, Amen.

Camsgill in Westmoreland, the 12th of the 8th Month, 1682. Thomas Camme, AND
Anne Camme. Father and Mother of the said Sarah Camme

LONDON, Printed by John Bringhurst at the Sign of the Book and Three
Black-Birds in Leaden-Hall-Mutton-Market, (who formerly lived at the sign of
the Book in Grace Church Street.) 1684.


