AN ESSAY ON WOOL, AND WOOLLEN MANUFACTURE, FOR The Improvement of Trade, TO
The Benefit of Landlords, Feeders of Sheep, Clothiers, and Merchants.

In a Letter to a Member of Parliament.

IMPRIMATUR, December. 31. 1692.

Edmund Bohun.

LONDON: Printed for Henry Bonwicke, at the Red Lion, in St. Paul's
Churchyard. 1693.

AN ESSAY ON WOOL, AND Woollen MANUFACTURE.
FOrasmuch as Wool and Woollen Manufacture, is of very great Concern to every
Landed Man, and that your Honor is no less desirous to join in such Measures,
as may conduce to the Benefit of the Nation in general, and that place for
which you serve in particular, as of your own Estate, I hope with all humility,
that you will entertain this Paper with the same Candor, wherewith you have
always accepted my Labors for the Public; and the rather, because your Honor
will easily believe, that I have no Private Interest to serve, in relation to
this Subject.

It has been observed by Men of the greatest Experience, that the
Undervaluation of English Commodities abroad, has been the first and most
considerable detriment we have suffered in our Foreign Dealings.

And although at first the Dutch and the Easterlings did all they could to raise
the Price of our Woollen Manufacture, to the end, that they might the better
sell their own, yet having now established their own to a great and dangerous
degree, they begin to run down our Cloth, as fast as before they hoisted it up,
and care not how cheap we sell, provided they can assign for the Cause of that
Cheapness, the false making of our Cloth of late, and the exacter care that
Foreign Manufactors take, for the Accusation now is not, that our Cloth is
dear, but false made.

And it appears, not only by the Confession, but by the Complaint of our
Clothiers in general, that this suggestion of Foreign Dealers has but too
much ground; they complain very justly, That Dutch Chapmen, and private
Merchants, who have of late Years exported our Cloth, having not been able to
give the full Price, have had great Quantities of Cloth made to that Price that
they can afford to give, and though the honest Clothier does make such bad Ware
with great regret, yet he is forced to make such as he can vend, since the
Societies of Merchants, who always gave a good Price (for which they had such
Ware as Foreign Manufactors cannot imitate) do now buy very little, being
under-sold abroad by petty Chap-men, who, of late Years, have forced a Trade.

This sudden and unnatural Trade has for diverse times been experimented, to
make the Price of Wool for a while rise; for that low Price, at which
Foreign-Merchants have set this false-made Cloth, has caused many Buyers
abroad, to take advantage of that cheap Opportunity of stocking themselves with
English Drapery; and such a Trade has lasted for Three or Four years, whereby
much Wool has been here manufactured, and the Price of Wool accordingly
raised; but at length, when the Baseness of this Manufacture has been
discovered, and the Markets abroad clogged, as sudden a Fall of Wool must in
all likelihood be expected to have ensued, and by this Opportunity the Value of
foreign made Cloth has been raised, our Cloth discredited, Merchants of
Societies discouraged, Clothiers had little to do, Growers to pay, and
Landlords to receive. So that with Submission it seems absolutely necessary to
the Good of this Kingdom,

I. That our Woollen Manufacture be raised to its former Credit and Esteem
abroad. II. That the Balance of Trade be set evener, and and that neither too
much nor too little be every year exported. III. That it may be put not only
into a flourishing, but into a lasting state.
For, First, If the Price of our Cloth be low abroad, it is impossible that Wool
should continue to bear a good Price at home: If Cloth falls, the Material it is
made of must fall with it, and consequently the Labors of the Card-makers,
Breakers, Combers, Carders, Spinners, Weavers, Fullers, Shearmen, Clothiers,
Dyers, Cloth workers, Packers, etc. must be beat down, if these be discouraged,
we must more and more lose our Manufacture, for who will breed up their
Children to a discouraged Trade? And in the end we shall as effectually lose it
as the Dutch have already gained it.

Secondly, If the Balance of Trade be not kept even, not only in reference to
Goods exported and imported, which the Foreigner never observes, but in
reference likewise to Foreign Markets, that one be not over-clogg'd with that
Commodity which another wants, and that Times and Seasons be duly observed, we
shall put the Chapmen abroad, that are to take off our Cloth to such
Uncertainties, that there will be no dealing with us, for they will find in
many places, that private Merchants have supplied those Retailers, whom they
used to furnish, they will find Cloth cheap where they expect it to be dear; so
that they cannot sell, and Cloth dear where they expect it to be cheap, so that
they cannot buy; so when they buy, it shall be Dutch Cloth, and when they sell
ours, it shall be for what they can get.

Thirdly, It Is of no advantage to the Nation to have a Fit of good Trading, if
it cannot continue; nay, in this Instance of Woollen Manufacture it is
injurious; for if a Purchaser buys Land, or a Tenant takes a Lease, or a Grower
increases his Stock, upon the consideration of Wools bearing such a Price, each
one of these is a Loser when it falls. And so if the Clothier increases his
Number of Apprentices, Looms, Stock, and the like, upon a false Supposition, he
is like to be ruined. The Condition things are in at present is not only to be
minded, but that which they must necessarily be in hereafter.

Wherefore it is humbly proposed, in the first place,

I. That Care be taken, that our Cloth be made so good, that it shall bear a
considerable Price abroad, and yet be cheaper to the Buyer than foreignmade
Cloth; for if at the same time it be not cheaper in proportion to the Goodness
than Dutch-made Cloth, it is impossible that we can keep the Trade from them.
It Is natural for every Man to make the most of his Penny, and since our Growers
and Clothiers cannot live upon their Profession, at the price of Cloth which
the Dutch do now afford it at, we must make our Cloth truer and better than
they do to outsell them. For though the Wool be of our own growth, and
Fuller's-Earth peculiar to us, yet they have so many ways of getting the
former, and so much Store have they got from us of the latter, that they can
continue the Manufacture many years without us. And if inferior Workmen with
them are to be had so much cheaper than with us, the Advantages of our Native
Commodities do but little more than compensate for the dearness of our Workmen.

But something they do, and something we surpass them when we please in
Workmanship, to which if a little good Policy and State-Encouragement were
added, we may still retrieve a Languishing Trade, by suffering no Cloth to go
out of England, but of such a standard Goodness, according to such and such
Marks.

II. Secondly, That our Cloth-Trade may be divided all over the World, into
particular Cantons proportioned and balanced, as may seem best upon due
Information, to the Wisdom of Parliament, who may perhaps think fit to
constitute of their own Members an Annual Committee, with fixed Allowances and
Pensions out of a public Bank, who may alter and rectify the Proportions of
each English Corporation of Merchants, and place of foreign Sale, according as
Times and Occasions alter.

III. Thirdly, That such a certain and definite number of Cloths be every year
exported necessarily, without any abatement for any pretended Contingencies, as
may keep the Price of Wool, and the Manufacture of it to such a height, as that
the Clothier shall know it his Interest to make so many more Cloths than now he
does; the Grower to increase his Stock of Sheep, and the Landlord to raise his
Rent and Value of Land.

Concerning the first of these three Proposals, diverse Acts of Parliament are
still in force, which may be revived and amended as may seem good to the
Legislative Powers; the other two are liable, so far as I can see, to no
Difficulties and Objections, but what may be obviated by this Method, viz.

There being so many Societies of English Merchants exporting our Woollen
Manufacture to foreign parts, they may be obliged, coming under such
Regulations as the Parliament shall think fit, to export every Year each
Company such a proportion of Cloth as altogether may leave us but bare enough
for our own use, and that at a round price. Thus supposing the Cloth-trading
Merchants to be the Merchant-Adventurers, the Turkey Company, the East India
Company, the Eastland Company, the Hudson's-Bay Company, the Russia Company,
the African Company.

And suppose there be, in all England and Wales, (according to the ingenious
and accurate Mr Houghton) 39938500 Acres of Land, and one Third part of it
unfit for feeding of Sheep, as Woods, Parks, Fens, Mine-pits, etc. or otherwise
employed; and that one Sixth-part of the Remainder be good Meadow; and such
Land as will maintain two Sheep on an Acre; and that all the rest be plowed
Land, barren Downs; Wastes, Commons, Orchards, and the like; which may, one with
another, maintain one Sheep on an Acre, this will amount to 31063257 Sheep in
the whole Nation: Allow then 75 Fleeces to a Pack of Wool, there will be 414176
Packs.

One Pack weighing 240 l. all Detriments, Wast and Tare rebated, will make
Three Pieces of Broad-Cloth, Thirty Yards to a Piece; and if we make yearly in
all England 150000 Broad-Cloths, they are supposed to take up 50000 Packs of
our Wool, and of the Spanish Wool imported, we may, at the most, reckon Ten
thousand Cloths more; in all 160000.

One Pack of Wool will make likewise six Pieces of lesser Drapery, as Kerseys,
Bays, Flannel, Serges, Perpetuano's, Says, Frise, and the like, one with
another of thirty Yards a Piece; and, I reckon, that we make 1600000 of these
lesser Draperies, (I may call 'em altogether) yearly, which will spend 266666
Packs, their's 316666 Packs disposed of; and suppose such Uses as shall be
hereafter mentioned, to take up the remaining 97510 Packs, here is the whole
Product of Wool in the Land, which by the former Computation of Acres, amounts
to 99402240 Pound.

Grant then, that in England there be 7000000 of Men, Women, and Children, of
which 1000000 to be Infants, and their Wear not reckoned, Two Millions more to
wear old and patched Clothes, Lindseywoolsie, and the like, and but One in
Seven to wear Broad-Cloth, and no more each than three Yards a piece for a
whole Year, this amounts to 100000 Cloths: And that Three more in the Seven
wear only lesser Drapery, and but 5 Yards each to a Year's Wear, (which in
Norwich, and suchlike Stuffs, will not go far) this comes to 500000 Pieces;
then to every Piece of Cloth, allow one Piece of Stuffs in Linings, Wastcoats,
Breeches, etc. and we have but 1000000 of lesser Drapery, and Sixty thousand
Cloths yearly to Export.

Then for 97510 Packs of Wool remaining, allow to every one of the Six
Millions, One pair of Stockins a Year, and Four pair to a pound of Wool, and a
quarter as many exported, amount to 25000 Packs; then for Hats, that of Three
Millions, each wears one Hat in two Years, and four Hats to one Pound of Wool,
amounts to Five thousand Packs more.

Upholsterers Ware, as Blankets, Curtains, Hangings, Skreens, Linings of
Coaches, Chairs, and the like, to be a quarter-part of the Stuffs that are
made, spends Fifty thousand Packs; and if one thirtieth part of our Wool be put
to such Uses as are here omitted, and otherwise wasted in dressing and working
it, what is left will be too little for burying Shrouds, and other Funeral
Occasions.

And now we have none left but what is to be Exported, viz. Sixty thousand
Cloths, and One Million of lesser Drapery.

First then, The Merchant-Adventurers being restored by Queen Elizabeth, upon
the Petitions of the Growers and Clothiers, to all those Privileges, which in
the Twenty-ninth Year of Her Reign they had been deprived of, flourished so,
that about the Year 1600, they Exported Sixty thousand White Cloths, besides
all manner of Stuffs every Year, the White Cloths alone valued at 600000 l.
Forty Years after they Exported about 50000 Broad Cloths, 1000 Bays, and 20000
Stuffs a Year: And the Reason they give, why of late they have not Exported a
quarter so many Broad-Cloths, and little more than half so many Stuffs, is,
that Foreigners who understand not the Trade, have brought Quantities of false
made Cloth here, and Exported it, and not only glutted and mistimed Foreign
Markets, but brought the Commodity into disesteem. Now if the Wisdom of the
Parliament shall think fit to put a stop to that private Trade, and restore the
Merchants to their former State, they cannot think themselves ill used, if it
be upon Condition. That they every Year Export Fifteen thousand Broad-Cloths;
and seeing the Stuff-Trade, and especially of new Draperies, is quicker of the
two, 250000 of them.

The Turkey-Company may likewise be obliged to Export yearly Twenty eight
thousand Broad-Cloaths, and Five thousand Stuffs. The East India Company Five
thousand Broad-Cloths, and 45 thousand Stuffs. The East-land Company Three
thousand Cloths, and Ten thousand Stuffs. The Hudson-Bay Company Five hundred
Cloths. The Russia Company Four thousand Cloths, and Four thousand Stuffs. The
African Company One hundred and forty thousand Stuffs.

So that now we have but Four thousand five hundred Broad-Cloths, and Five
hundred forty six thousand Stuffs remaining.

And the Portuguezes, who would take off at least. Three hundred thousand Pound
a Year in our Woollen Manufactures, if we would deal with 'em for Wine, do
nevertheless take off about 180 thousand Stuffs a Year. Spain, about Two
thousand Cloths, and Three hundred thousand Stuffs. Italy, Five hundred Cloths,
and Forty thousand Stuffs. Barbary Six thousand Stuffs. The Western
Plantations, Ten thousand Stuffs. Sweden, and Norway, Two thousand Cloths, and
Ten thousand Stuffs; without any Obligation, but the Necessity of their Trade.
These Proportions I insist not upon, the Wisdom of Parliament will find out
better.

But if the Merchant-Adventurers, or any other Fraternity, shall, after the
Proportion is set out, think themselves hardly dealt with, by being obliged so
to increase their Dealings, they have a Remedy at hand, and can ease
themselves, by enlarging their Company, and making more Members of it Free upon
easy Terms. In King James the First's time, they had Three thousand five
hundred Freemen of that Company; and since that, they have had Six thousand
Free at a time: Now suppose they admit but Four thousand Freemen, and that but
one quarter of these are Dealers, and that one with another, they Export each
for himself, but Fifteen Cloths, and Two hundred and fifty Stuffs a Year, which
is no great Merchandising, it will do; and accordingly the other Companies, if
they think fit, may take the like Measures.

I proceed therefore to the Advantages that we may expect to reap by such a
Method.

I. First, This will keep the Cloth-Trade altogether in the hands of the
English; I mean, the Profits of Trade in English Manufacture, in which
Foreigners at present have too great a share, as English Merchants and
Clothiers well know to their sorrow.

II. There will be less Danger and Loss upon the Seas. Societies of Merchants
trading in strong and well manned Vessels, and not adventuring, as petty
Merchants do, without Convoys, to the enriching the Enemy, and impoverishing
our selves.

III. This will encourage the Building of great and able Ships, which may be of
Service to the Public in Times of Necessity: for Societies will not hazard so
valuable a Commodity as Cloth, and in such great Parcels, as doubtless they
will send out at a time, in ordinary Vessels: for one of the Mysteries of
Merchandise, being the right timeing of Markets, they will not send over in
Driblets, as independent Traders do, but send sufficient Quantities at a time,
according to the Occasions and Fashions of the Places they deal with; besides,
their Bylaws oblige 'em to Export only in English Bottoms.

IV. The Nation's Credit abroad will by this means improve, and those Societies
yearly bring to such and such Places, so great a quantity of our Manufacture,
as will be a Security to any Town or State we deal with, and each Society will
be more able upon any great Exigence, as by taking up Money, or engaging
Themselves, and their Effects, for the Service of their Country, to do the
Nation, especially in time of War, some signal Offices; as the
Merchant-Adventurers did, about the time of the Spanish Invasion.

V. Exportation of, Manufactured Wool will be never attempted: for when the
Manufacture is so much encouraged, Wool will bear a better Price at home, than
now it does abroad; here will be Ready Money without danger, and variety of
Markets; whereas the Exportors run great Risques, are forced to sell where they
first Land, and sometimes, to take Words instead of Money. For,

VI. The Price of Wool must necessarily rise and keep up, if every Year so much
is Exported, as not to leave enough for our home use.

VII. Our Cloth will bear a constant good Price abroad, when no body can much
undersel another, because all Wares of such and such Marks, will be of like
goodness, the Price at the first Penny will not be much different, the Charges
and Hazards almost equal to every one, and no Merchant will be over or
understock'd, to the unspeakable undervaluation of our Ware.

VIII. 'Twill prevent our Clothiers, and other Manufactors, transporting
themselves into Holland, to the irreparable damage of this Nation, as 140
Families did out of Norfolk and Suffolk, in the Years 1635, 1636. and when Two
or Three thousand of our English Clothiers settled themselves in the Palatinate.

IX. The Orders for Overseeing and Sealing Cloth will be more strictly looked
after, by public Officers; and indeed every Member of these Societies: Whereas
the Foreigner, looks no farther, than to get so many Yards overplus, in
consideration of the want of Breadth* and Goodness, provided he has it at his
own Terms, beating down by that means the Price of Cloth here, and underselling
it abroad: So that the Retailers abroad, that buy it of us, do only look upon
the Muster and Outside, and finding themselves afterward cheated, they change
their Chapmen, and deal with the Honester Dutch; which might be prevented by
Public Officers, and a Public Seal.

X. This will make the Commodity more staple and more considerable all over the
World; whereas now the proffered Sale of it makes it contemptible, and they
that accept the Bargain make good the Merchant's Proverb, That there is Twenty
per Cent. difference between, Will you Buy, and Will you Sell.

XI. Greater quantities of Cloth will be here made than now is, when the
Clothiers are morally sure of a certain Market, and Ready-Mony before the Year
goes about, and that make as much as they will, it shall be all taken off their
Hands.

These Benefits I have enumerated regard the Good of the Nation in general, and
those belonging to the Merchant and Clothier in particular, are likewise worth
consideration. For,

1. Wealthy Merchants will not be able to Engross so much the Trade to
themselves as now they do, but every Member will have a Share in the
Circulation proportionable to his Abilities. The Great Ones shall not have too
much upon their Hands at a time, nor the lesser Merchants too little, but every
one shall have so many Lots as his Trade requires, which may be known and
attested by Certificates from an English Public Notary abroad, which will make
every ones Factor industrious to drive as good and as speedy a Trade as he can.
Nor will this be any Wrong to great Merchants, or exposing their Effects or
Abilities, since every one has Liberty to be of more than one Society, as we
see diverse Merchants belong at the same time both to the East India and African
Company, and so others.

2. Again, Young Traders would hereby have Assistance and Direction in their
Dealings, and not be suffered to Ruin themselves, as they do, by wading out of
their Depths. They would not find a way easily of Trading without a Stock,
whereby they often ruin themselves and dishonor the Nation, it being a
Reflection upon us abroad, that our Young Merchants engage themselves too deep,
and when not governed by a Society too extravagantly:

Young Merchants, and those that cry out so much for free Exportation, do often
take up Goods upon Credit or Exchange to Ten or Twelve per Cent. Loss, and
afterward upon some sudden Pinch being forced to Sell, they undersell others
to keep up their Credit, to the disparagement of our Commodities and ruin of
themselves, as well by losing in the Cloth they sell, as buying Foreign Ware
at too dear a rate, enhaunsing the Price of our Neighbor's Commodities, and
lessening that of our own, to make quick Return. So the Merchants of York,
Hull, and Newcastle send young men over with their Cloth (too young indeed to
deal with Hollanders, Hans-towns, and Jews) who having engaged themselves to
relade their Ships at a certain day with Foreign Ware, before they can sell
their Cloth they buy of Foreigners upon Credit, and having a Day of Payment
set, are forced, be the Market how it will, to sell their Cloth at any rate, to
keep up their Credit; which wild way of Traffic makes the Price of Cloth so
uncertain to Foreigners, that the Retailer knows not when and how to buy, and
so grows weary of the Trade.

3. This will be a Means to hinder the raising of Tolls and Imports abroad,
each Company having Influence and Authority where they reside, especially in
such a Town as Hamburgh, where the Trade has maintained 20000 Persons at a
time; and be able likewise to contravene all fraudulent Dealings and
Combinations against the Trade.

4. This will not only keep up, but increase the number of Public Places of
Sale abroad, where our Cloth is exposed in an open Market, and all the Sellers
are obliged to attend with great Plenty and Variety; which Method is known by
long Experience to forward the Sale of any Ware: And such public Places and
Markets can no more be settled abroad by Private Dealers, than it could be
practiced here at home by Foreigners, who though they had upon misinformation
of Queen Elizabeth's Council, the George in King Street, Westminster, assigned
them for a public place of Trade, yet could never bring one Waggon-load of
Clothes to be unloaded there: And if under the notion of Buyers, People in a
foreign Country cannot without being incorporated make a Public Place of
Trade, much less can they under the Notion of Sellers.

Beside that, public Places of Sale are more for the Honor of the Commodity,
and of the Merchant, than private bartering and pedling up and down, as those
straggling Merchants did in the year 1565, who went up and down at Narve in
Lisland, with English Cloth under their Arms, and a Measure in their Hands,
bringing the noblest Commodity of England into the greatest Contempt.

But most Advantage of all will by this means accrue to the Clothier, and by
consequence to the Grower; for there will be so current a Price, and such
certain Dealings for this Staple Commodity, that Broakers, Wool-Iobbers, and
the like, will not henceforth eat out the Clothiers Profit, (a great cause of
the dearness of Manufacture in England) but the Merchant and Draper will be
forced to employ Factors to go about the Country, and buy Cloth at the
Clothiers home, paying ready Money: At least the Clothiers bringing their
Cloths to Market every week, will find Customers enough: So the poorest
Clothiers, which have but a little Stock, may Trade for themselves, which now
they cannot do.

I could enumerate many more Conveniences both National and Particular;

As, That it would be a means to prevent the King's being defrauded in his
Customs.

That Taxes upon Stock and Effects may hereby be more easily laid.

That Trade will be judiciously varied according to Emergencies and Alterations
abroad.

There will be less quarreling with our Merchants about Tare and Rebatements.

This will raise the Price of Corn throughout the Nation; for Wool keeping
hereby certainly to a round price, Stock will be increased, and a great deal of
Land laid down in Pasture, so that there will be less Corn-Land, and less Corn
sowed.

But what I have said may perhaps suffice to satisfy your Honor, That however
I succeed, I think it my Duty to study the good of my Country.

I will not now trouble your Honor with an Account of the great Damages this
Nation sustains, by the Exportation of that which is not full Manufactured, I
leave that to another Hand.

I am, etc.

FINIS.

