A WORD TO ISRAEL In the WILDERNESs. Or the Arraignment of UNBELIEF. Showing
The evil of Distrurst, though in time of the greatest Streights: Wherein
Unbelief is tried and found guilty of great Provocation. By John Chishul,
Minister of the Gospel.

Psalm. 78.19. They spoke against God, they said, Can God furnish a Table in the
Wilderness? London, Printed for Francis Eglesfield, Bookseller in S. Paul's
Churchyard, 1668.

TO THE MOURNERS IN ZION.
Dearly Beloved,
I Am not Insensible that there are many who Sympathize with you; and have been
ready to pour in Balm into Bleeding Wounds, to comfort you in the midst of your
sorrows; and blessed be the Lord, the God of all Consolation, who has stirred
up any to this Work. But it has been matter of wonder to me, that amongst the
many Tracts that have been written to the Afflicted, so little has been done
to Obviate that sin, which most in that condition fall into, and few lament. It
being taken for granted with most, that Streights and Troubles, will, if not
justify, yet greatly extenuate the evil of Distrust.

Having made a serious and narrow inquiry into the Scripture, I find that this
Sin is otherwise spoken of, then the most (yea, and I fear the best) think of
it.

We deem it such a failing, as God will easily wink at and pass over, but after
due search, I perceive there is nothing that God sticks more at then this. We
reckon it among the common infirmities of the Saints, but the Lord sets it in
the highest rank of Provocations.

Considering how prone we are to run in this evil, and how greatly provoking it
is, and what dangerous consequences of it are; I judged a word of Caution,
might be as seasonable, as needful, and a few things suggested, might through
Grace, prove an Antidote against this Contagion.

And until some other person be awakned to speak more fully to so useful a
Subject, I hope a plain Proposal and serious Consideration of what is here
offered, may prevent much sin and sorrow.

I judge it a more noble task to endeavor the preventing of trouble that it
come not, then to remove it when it has taken hold of us.

The only sure and safe way to keep off sorrow, is to lay a Bar in the way of
sin.

As sin is the Womb out of which all troubles do proceed, so Unbelief is
especially both Mother and Nurse, of all the sorrows of the Godly, not only as
it procures, but improves them.

The sins of Gods people have been very great in former times, which have
provoked the Lord to inflict many sore evils upon us: But if to all our other
sins, we should add a sin of our afflicted condition more provoking, than all
those of former times; what can we expect, but that God should swear that we
should not enter into his rest, and that the Lord should bury (at least) all
this Generation in the Wilderness.

I know many are the fears, if not the settled thoughts of some wise and good
men, that this present Generation will not see the good which has been
earnestly prayed for, and is affectionately expected.

I do not pretend to know the reasons that many have for this conjecture, but I
think I may without presumption conclude, that if the Lord cause us to fall in
our wilderness, as he aid that Generation which come out of Egypt, it is
because we have been too like them in that which was their Provocation,

I must confess, I am not satisfied how this kind of Unbelief (which denies or
strongly disputes against the Providence of God over his people, in time of
distress) came to be so favorably thought of, as to be reckoned amongst the
infirmities and weakness of Saints; since it was of old counted, The
Provocation. I cannot apprehend that the accession of more Light, and the
addition of new Experience can lessen that which was so great before.

Let those who will not t^ke pains to read this little Tract purposely written,
to discover the provoking nature of unbelief; yet be entreated to behold it as
in a Glass, in the History of the Children of Israel, whom the Lord slew in the
Wilderness for this sin; can you think for a small thing, for which God cut off
above six hundred thousand men?

But especially consider and wonder at the Lords proceedings against Moses, and
that but for one offense of this kind. He was not admitted to go into Canaan,
though he did affectionately desire it, and pleaded earnestly with God.

Number. 20.12. And the Lord sp^ke unto Moses, Because you believed me not to
sanctify me in the Eyes of the Children of Israel, ye shall not bring this
Congregation into the Land which I have given them.

Though Moses is taxt but this once of unbelief, and doubtless his unbelief did
not show it self as theirs did in murmuring; all that seems in the Story to be
charged upon him was his not expressing his faith and confidence in God, and
endeavoring to vindicate his Providence, and stay the murmurings of the
people. His omitting to sanctify God before the people, and to profess his
dependence upon him, is here condemned as a not believing him. And for this
kind of unbelief once charged upon him, Is there such a ^ r laid in his way to
Canaan, that all his Interest could not remove? He that could obtain any thing
of God in other ^ases, could prevail for a whole Nation at once, Exodus 33.
could not be heard speak for himself in this case, Deuteronomy. 3.26. The Lord was
wroth with me for your sakes, and would not hear me; and the Lord said unto m^,
let it suffice thee, speak no more unto me of this matter.

And can we hope that we shall fare better than these? Surely no. Our unbelief
cannot but be much more provo^ing, in as much as it is much more in^xcusable.

It is indeed a day of many fears, and they are not groundless, if we consider
the subtle and unwearied attempts of Enemies, or the incorrigibleness of this
Nation, under unusual judgments. But though we may fear sore evils both from
God and men, yet let us banish sinful fears, and remove far from us all
distrustful thoughts of Gods Providential care over his people, in all the
evils that may come upon them.

Let us never fear that God will leave his Children in the Wilderness, into
which he has led them, and out of which they might find a way if they could
leave him; But rather conclude that God h^^h brought us under a sentence of
Death, th t we might not trust in our selves, but in him that raised Jesus
Christ from the dead.

He that raised him will raise his Witnesses, whose dead bodies have layn in
the open Street^, and if the Spirit of the Lord enter into them, and they stand
upon their feet, Deliverance will hasten.

If any thing suggested prove an Antidote against unbelieving fear, and do any
way contribute to the begetting ^f a Sp rit of Courage and Fai h, to keep cl^s^
to God, to depend upon him, and wait for (...) in all the streights that we may
be brought into, I shall rejoice as having attained my end.

We do not know what days we may yet be cast upon, or what troubles may abide
the people of God, if we meet with none but what have been in former Ages, we
have reason to believe from Experience, but if we should fall under such trials
as never any Age of the Church did produce, yet we have reason to believe from
the promise, so that Distrust would then have no excuse.

The Apostles way of Reasoning is observable, and oh that we could learn of him
in this particular, 2 Cor. 1.10. Who delivered us from so great a death, and
does deliver. We are able to go thus far with him, who sees not that God has
done great things for his people, and for this Nation, to deliver it from
Popish designs, and Plots against it; the Lord has disappointed Enemies of all
sorts, and we must acknowledge that he does still deliver. Our fears (through
mercy) are not come upon us, nay, our Peace and Liberties are continued beyond
our expectations; Let us learn to go a little farther with the same Apostle,
and say as he did, In whom we trust, he will yet deliver us.

If our Fears do but awaken our Faith, and we can say with David, Psalm. 56.3.
What time I am afraid, I will trust in thee. Having learnt to depend upon God
in difficulties, we shall in a little time be able to rejoice in Tribulation;
and say as he did, ver. 4. In God I will praise his word, in God have I put my
trust, (and remarkable is what follows) I will not fear what Flesh can do un o
me.

Fear calls in Faith to succor him, and Faith soon casts out those fears which
did affl ct him. Oh that we could imitate him, and in the day of our fears,
call in our Faith, and our ancient Experiences, and encourage our selves in the
Lord our God, and wait quietly for his Salvation.

How sweet such a frame of Spirit would be to our selves, how much it would
contribute to the making the Name of God glorious; what convictions it will
leave upon the Spirits of men concerning the Power of Godliness, a little Time
and your Experience will evince.

Heb. 3.8, 9, 10. Harden not your hearts, as in the Provocation, in the day of
Temptation, in the Wilderness, etc.


SHould I take notice of the Context, I could not pass by many things which
would present themselves to our consideration, nor avoid such an expense of
time, as would prevent what at present I intend. Let it suffice to know, that
the people to whom the Author directs this Epistle, were a professing and
afflicted people. The great design that he drives at, is to establish them in
the Faith, and to comfort them in their Sufferings: Insisting upon the former,
he lays the great Example of Israel before them, for their Caution: in which is
considerable,

First, The persons propounded, Israel your Fathers.

Secondly, The Stage upon which they are presented, in the wilderness.

Thirdly, Gods Dispensations to them-ward, they saw his works.

Fourthly, Their carriage under and after all this, They tempted and proved me.
They would not believe upon all the proofs and experiences that they had, but
would still be putting God upon new proofs.

Fifthly, Gods resentment of this, He was provoked, and grieved; He was angry,
because of such unworthy carriage; and he was grieved because it was from a
people so near him, and so much beloved.

Sixthly, We have the aggravation of their sin, and the reason of this
Provocation; it was for a long time, and after large experience of Gods ways.

Seventhly, We have a Comment upon this by the Holy Ghost, discovering the rise
of the Sin; it is charged partly upon their wills, and partly upon their
Understandings; Perverseness in the one, and Darkness in the other. They err in
their hearts, and they have not known my ways.

That I may make a plain way to the Doctrine I purpose to insist upon, take a
brief Explication of some terms in the Text. I will touch no more, than I must
of necessity; and these no further then to make way to the Doctrine: The rest
of the particulars will fall in, in the handling of this.

It is needful to know, what every word imports in this Clause. In the
Provocation, in the day of Temptation in the Wilderness.

These all relate one to the other: If you ask what the Provocation was, he
tells you it was the Temptation: If you demand, how this must be understood,
and where fixed; he tells in the Wilderness.

But you will next inquire, What particular Time and Action this points at, in
the Wilderness?

Some would have it to intend the whole Forty years, in which they did often
provoke the Lord.

But others judge, that the Holy Ghost points at some special Provocations in
their passage through the Wilderness, and they fix them principally upon Exodus
17.7. They tempted the Lord, saying, Is the Lord among us, or not? And upon
Numb. 14.11. How long will this people provoke me? how long will it be ere they
believe me?

The surest and safest way is to follow the Scripture it self, in expounding
these Terms: We shall find that David, from whose 95. Psalm, these words are
taken, does himself explain them, Psalm. 78. verse. 17, 18, 19, 20.40, 41.

In which he plainly tells us, How the Israelites tempted, provoked, and
grieved the Lord in the Wilderness. Their sin, he says, was unbelief, and what
kind of unbelief also he informs us, viz. a Distrust of his Providential care
of them, and Fatherly provision for them in that Wilderness, and of his Power
and Truth; whether he could or would lead them through it to the good Land he
had promised them. They said verse. 19. Can God provide a Table in the
Wilderness? Thus, says the Holy Ghost, they speak against God. You cannot speak
worse of God, nor more to his provocation, than, when things run low with his
people, to question, whether he can, or will provide for them.

God observes this of those Hypocrites, in Mal. 1.33, 14. Your words have been
stout against me, says the Lord.

He insisteth again upon this, v. 20. Can he give Bread also? Can he give Flesh
to his people? But how does the Lord resent this? When he heard this he was
wrath, ver. 21. This was an evil not to be born withal any longer; and as men
that are offended will over with the matter of offense once and again, so does
the Holy Ghost repeat their sin again and again, ver. 22. Because they believed
not God, and trusted not in his Salvation, and ver. 40, and 41. How often did
they provoke him in the Wilderness, and grieve him in the Desert; yea, they
turned back and tempted God, and limited the holy One of Israel. In all which
we see plainly, that this great Provocation was Unbelief, and a distrustful
bounding of Gods Power and Goodness; and this is such a sin, that God will not
pass it by in his people, without special notice taken of it, and expressing
just indignation against it. So that we have a very plain and easy path to
this Truth;

Doct. God is highly provoked, when his people distrust his Providence, though
they be in a Wilderness.

For the proof of this, I need not say much, the referring you to what God said
and did upon Isreal's distrust is enough to confirm it (thoug^ they had as much
ground and color of reason for what they said and did, as it is possible for
any after them to have). I have given you already an account of what God said
upon this, and you see, his language is like that of one greatly incensed; and
if that be not proof sufficient, see what he did, he slew all that Generation
in the Wilderness; nay, he would not let Moses and Aaron, go into Canaan
because they had not been careful to sanctify his Name before them, in bearing
witness against this their Distrust of God at the first appearance of it.

To make this Doctrine look more toward us, let us consider; that it refers
not so much to a Place, as to a Condition. Wheresoever a people are, if their
Condition resemble Isreal's in their passage from Egypt, they may be said to be
in a Wilderness.

God sets out the afflictions and troubles of his people in the latter days,
by this Allusion, Hos. 2.14. I will bring her into the Wilderness; which
imploys two things, First, A condition which shall be very barren of all
ou^ward Comf^^^s: This is noted, Hos. 2.12, 13. I will destroy her Vinyards and
Figtrees, and make them a Forest, etc. God would make her Land like a
Wilderness, a Land that was not sown, Jer. 2.2.

Secondly, It was a place, through which was no beaten path. So that, as there
was no comfortable Being in it, so there was no ready way out of it, Psalm.
107.40. He causes them to wander in the Wilderness, where there was no way.

He brings even Princes and the great ones of the Earth into such streights,
that they are at a loss, and can find no way out. The meaning of this Doctrine
is this, That if God should bring his people into such a condition through
trouble and affliction, that they should see no way of Supply in it, nor any
probable way out of it, yet it is a Provocation for them to distrust God. No
streights can excuse, much less justify the distrust of Gods people. What ever
plea Unbelief may seem to have, it will be found a great Provocation. And the
Reasons of this are evident.

Reason the first. Distrust of God, though in streights, is a denying him to be
God; it is a bringing of him and all his Actions, to the proportion and
standard of the Creature. It is in effect to say, he is like one of us. And, as
God could not bear this language, when it impeacht his Holiness, (Psalm. 50.21.
Thou thoughtest I was such a one as thy self)* So he will not digest it, when
it denies his Almightiness. When we limit the Holy One, and shu^ him up in the
bounds of former Experiences, or present Probabilities; we do plainly deny him
to be God. If we will own him to be God, we must expect from him things suitable
to his Almighty Power and Goodness, I mean where we have the Concurrence of his
promise. We should say to any Difficulty that lies in the way of any promised
mercy, as Zechariah says, Zech. 4.7. What art thou, O great Mountain? When
carnal Reason would come in, and proportion our hopes and expectations to the
probabilities on the one side, or difficulties on the other, we should answer
it with those words of the Lord, Isa. 55.9. As the Heavens are higher than the
Earth, so are my ways (says God) higher than yours. Indeed, were not his
ways above ours, wherein would he appear to be God? If we could expect nothing
from him, but upon the terms we expect them from others, how should we keep an
awe, and dread of him in our hearts. Remember this, Unbelief has a mixture of
Atheism in it, and must needs provoke.

Reason the second. It is a secret questioning, sometimes an open Reproaching
the Attributes of God. It sets up Carnal Reason, and Man's wisdom in the
Judgment Seat, and brings all the Attributes of the Blessed God to the Bar,
where they are censured and sentenced at the pleasure of these* blind and bold
Inquisitors. Sometimes they fall fowl with his Power, Psalm. 78.19, 20. Can God
furnish a Table in the Wilderness? At another time they reproach his Wisdom, as
if he knew not How to save; either to prevent misery, or bring deliverance,
Psalm. 73.11. How does God know? is there Knowledge in the most High? And his
Truth and Faithfulness seldom escapes them: David himself stumbled upon these,
1 Samuel 27.1. And David said in his heart, I shall now perish one day, by the
hand of Saul.

And this Distrust is commonly accompanied either with a denial of former
Experiences of Gods providential Actings, or else with a loading them with
false and unworthy Imputations. Either we say that all the good which God has
done his people was by chance, the Finger of God was not in it; and so that
Grave which buries our present hopes and expectations, swallows up all our past
experiences, and we become in a moment as if we had never known any thing of
Gods Providence: Or, if we come not to a denial of the Providence it self, we
arrive at something worse, to put the basest Constructions upon the best
Dispensations; as Israel in their Provocation did: who said of that glorious
Deliverance out of Egypt, that they were brought into the Wilderness to be
slain there, Exodus 14.11, 12. and Exodus 17.3. Now such Reflections as these
which are frequently the attendants upon distrust, must needs be greatly
provoking.

Reason the third. It casts a visible Dishonor upon God before men. Distrust
and Diffidence are seldom carried so secretly, but they find some vent, and
are often in their workings exposed to the observation of others, yea, and they
the enemies of God and Religion; and before these God is dishonored two ways.

First, The very name of God suffers. For when his enemies see those who have
followed God, and professed to know him to fall in their hopes, and to sink in
their spirits, they believe God himself is fallen in these men affections and
esteem; they begin to think that there is no profit in serving God, and that
these men do now repent their choice. But when men can walk cheerfully, and
keep up their hopes and comforts at a high rate in times of trouble and
affliction, it glorifies God before men, and testifies to all that God is
worthy to be chosen and loved for himself, and that it is good drawing nigh to
him. When men see us walking as the Prophet did, Hab. 3.17, 18, 19. rejoicing
in God when all outward comforts fall; it leaves them convinced that there is
an excellency in God, which they are not acquainted withal. Nay, when we can,
not only comfort our selves in God, and content ourselves with him in a
Wilderness, but go into a Wilderness for him as Moses did, this tells all the
world that God is worth enjoying: But when we are sad and dejected because we
are brought into some streights, it makes men conclude that there is little
comfort in walking with God, and that God alone is not enough for a man to live
upon.

Secondly, God is dishonored by this distrust through that reproach which is
cast upon Religion, and the power of Godliness.

When men can bear up no further than the power and strength of Reason will
carry them, and those who profess Godliness walk by common rules and carnal
Principles, their observers say; Either these men are not Godly, or Godliness
is no such thing as they would make it. By your profession of Godliness, your
enemies are brought to an expectation of some singular thing from you,
something to which their Principles will not reach, or else they will not be
convinced that there is any great matter in Godliness; they expect that it
should carry you on in difficulties when they should pause, if not retreat, and
that it should bear you up where they should sink: And if you can do this, and
the frame of your spirits be singular as your actions, you may regain some of
that honor that Religion has lost; and you will make it manifest, that the
same spirit is in you which was in the Apostles and Primitive Christians. It
was easy for an ordinary eye to see an extraordinary spirit in them, Acts
5.41. 2 Cor. 6.10. Col. 1.11. But if in times of trial you sink into a lowness
of spirit, and walk by beggarly Principles, who have talked of and professed
higher, men will conclude this was all but talk, and that Godliness has
nothing in it but Pretensions, and Positions suited and accommodated to the
Interests of those that profess it, and that it has no inward principles
fitted to the Doctrines and Assertions of its Professors. Now what a
Provocation must this be, to help such a base Opinion as this into the world,
or to confirm and strengthen it, where it has taken some hold in the minds of
vain men.

Reason the fourth. It speaks plainly the heart to be naught, and is a
Demonstration of the unsoundness and insincerity of it, under all former
professions. It tells us, that all that was done before, was but in Hypocrisy:
And what is more abominable than this? We find nothing so much insisted on by
the Holy Ghost in aggravating the m scarr ages of Israel, as their distru^t of
God, Psalm, 78.32. For all this they sinned still, (and he adds, as if they had
no other sin) and believed not for his wondrous works. Hence he argues their
Hypocrisy, ver. 35, 36, 37. As if he had said, Sometimes they would be brought
to some acknowledgment of Gods Goodness to them, and Care for them, yet this
was but lip-labor; and he infers from hence, that their hearts were not right
with him, nor were they steadfast in his Covenant.

There is noth^ng more certain than this, that those who do but* feignedly
close with God in times of prosperity, will start in times of trial; and such
falterings then are pregnant testimonies of their flattering with God before.

Departing from God in affliction, gives the lie to former Profession, and
tells us that such a one never took God for his chief good, for then he would
be content with him alone: Such a one never yet entered into Covenant with God
as Almighty, and All-sufficient; never looked upon God as Abraham did, as his
Shield, and his exceeding great Reward, Gen, 17.1.

No, he took God to be a Servant to some Interest, which he thinks will best
stand now without him; and finding no further use of his Profession, he would
fain find some plausible reason for the dismissing of it. Therefore he
aggravates every Difficulty and Hazard, and makes them unanswerable Objections,
as if God had led him into manifest Inconveniences, and had made no Provision
against them. Thus it was with Israel, they would take every occasion of
quarrelling with Moses from pretended Difficulties, and Inconveniences which
did arise, and they deemed these to be Insupportable and Incurable. But what
was in the Bottom of all this? They hankred after the Garlic and Onions of
Egypt, they would fain go back to these. It is very hard to keep a man steady
in his Profession under streights, whose heart is not right with God.

Therefore the Apostle cautions us, to take heed of the unbelief of the heart,
Heb. 3.12. Take heed lest there be in any of you an evil heart of unbelief, in
departing from the living God. If the heart be not right for God, it will
surely cause a man to dep^rt from him at one time or other. The Holy Ghost
notes this in the Text, as the ground of all their Distrust: They are a people
that do err in their hearts. Their hearts are not right with me, therefore
they Distrust me.

Reason the fifth. It speaks us grossly ignorant of the ways of God; which must
needs Provoke, after frequent Opportunities and Advantages given us, of
acquainting our selves with them. This was the Aggravation of Isreal's sin in
this place, that they who had seen so many of Gods wonderful works, and had
been so disciplined in Egypt, and in the Wilderness, should yet be ignorant of
the Ways of God. What should be expected at last, but that God should lay them
by as a company of unteachable Dunces? God is not only provoked but grieved at
this, that he should be so long teaching them, and they learn so little.

Obj. But you will say, Is it possible that Israel could be ignorant of the
ways of God, who had seen all his wonders in Egypt, and at the Red Sea, and
afterward in the Wilderness?

Answ. Israel was not simply ignorant of these things, but they were not
mindful of them, at least; at such times when they should have improved them
for their Faith, and Hope ^n God; they carried themselves unworthily after such
experiencies, even as if they had never seen or heard of any such thing. When
they met with any new d fficulty, they behaved themselves as if that were the
first, and they had never been carried through any before.

We shall find Israel acting and reasoning at sometimes, as if God had never
done any thing extraordinary for their deliverance; as if they had never seen
so much as a little Finger of Providence put forth for them; as if they had
been preserved from the rage of the Egyptians, and from the ruin and misery to
which they were often appointed, only by some Accidents, or Chances, and God
had stood Newter all the while, Psalm. 106.21, 22. They forgot God their
Savior, who had done great things in Egypt, wondrous things in the Land of Ham
and terrible things at the Red Sea.

They were as Distrustful and Unbelieving, as if God had never appeared in
bringing them out of Egypt, and they had seen nothing worth their Observation
in that Wilderness, but the Discouragements which lay before them.

Now do you think that God can bear this, that those who had seen so much of
the stretched-out Hand of God, and contributed to the making his Name fearful
with praises (as they had done, Exodus 15.11.) should after all this, walk and
act as if these things had been only some Dream or Fancy? No, God will not bear
it, Psalm. 106.23. Therefore he said, he would destroy them, had not Moses his
chosen stood before him in the breach; to turn away his wrath, lest he should
destroy them. Now as Unbelief is accompanied with an Unmindfulness of what he
has done, so also with a great and palpable Ignorance of what God is doing.
There are certain ways of Providence, in which God walks toward his people,
which men that are not skild in, are discouraged from, and filled with fears,
but those who understand them are not troubled at. And indeed, the most of the
troubles and fears of Gods own people do arise, from the too little
acquaintance that they have with Gods ways. The laying a few of these before
you, may be a great cure to unbelief, and prevent a great deal of sinful fear
which Israel run into, because they had not known his ways.

The Ways of God here intended, may be such as these:

First, It is Gods way, to suffer great Enemies and Oppositions to arise
against that work and people, which he intends signally to own. It has been
thus in every Age, and is like to be so to the end.

When God chose Israel from among all the Kindreds of the Earth to be his* and
intended to bless them above all others, and put his Name upon them; What
Enemies did appear against that people? In Egypt, how was Pharaoh set upon
their ruin! then in the Wilderness Amaleck endeavors to cut them off; and in
Canaan, they had all the Nations round about them, Psalm. 83.6, 7, 8. The
Tabernacles of Edom, and the Ishmalites, of Moab, and the Hagarens; Gebal, and
Ammon, and Amalek, the Philistines, with the Inhabitants of Tire.

I might multiply Instances in every Age, of the Potent and Formidable
Adversaries of the people of God. In the first planting of the Gospel, what
opposition did appear against a Company of poor Fishermen, when they began to
Preach Christ crucified and risen from the dead. Some by Authority endeavored
to silence them, some by Subtilty to ensnare them, others Combined to destroy
them; that it is a wonder that the Rage of the Enemy has not prevailed all
along to root up all the godly.

And as great Enemies have risen up against Gods people: So also, against the
work which God has set a Foot in the world. Pharaoh did not only hate the
Israelites, but the work which God was doing among them. He would have bin rid
of them, but he would not let them go to serve the Lord. When God had them in
the Wilderness, and was about to set up his Worship and Ordinances amongst
them, what hindrances do arise from among themselves? How often do they quarrel
with Moses, and resolve to make a Captain to carry them back again, and instead
of promoting Gods instituted Worship, how prone are they to run to Idolatry?

When afterward they were Captives in Babylon, and the time of their
deliverance from thence drew nigh, the Day dawned toward it, God had raised up
eminent Instruments, as Ezrah, Nehemiah, Zerubabbel, and Zechariah; what
Opposition does this work meet withal, from Sanballat, Tobias, and others; so
that the Prophet takes notice of a Mountain, yea a great Mountain that lay in
the way of those men whom God used in his work, Zech. 4.7.

And when the Lord sets on foot the Reformation in the latter days, and is
about to bring out his Church from Mystical Babylon; we find great difficulties
do occurr, such as threaten to swallow up the Man-child, as soon as he is born,
Rev. 12.4. Now this has been Gods way, and constant course, to carry his
people, and his Work through great difficulties. He could keep down Enemies as
easily as cast them down; he could make every man kind and fair to his people,
as he did Esau to Jacob; and help forward his work, as he did Cyrus: But, to
glorify his Name, and exercise his peoples Faith, he will carry his work
through the thickest of his Enemies, and their strongest opposition. This being
known to be Gods way from the beginning, his people should prepare for, and
expect these things: And they have no reason to be discouraged or to despond,
because things fall out according to former experiences and their expectations.

Secondly, It is a usual way of God after he has given his people hopes of
some special Mercy, to bring them to a great loss before he gives it in to them.

When he has brought some Good very nigh them, and raised their expectation,
he suddenly crucifies all the means leading to it, so that they see the Mercy
lying dead before them; and if they go round about it, and view all the means
which might render it probable, it seems to them to be like those dry Bones
which the Prophet saw, Ezekiel. 37.2.

God made a promise to Abraham of blessing all Nations in his Seed: but before
he sees this made good; Sarahs womb is dead, and Abraham's body is dead also.

Joseph has Prophetical dreams of his Honor in his Fathers family: but before
this is made good he is sold, and when he gets a little Credit and Respect in a
Strange Country, he is cast from thence into Prison, and all probabilities of
his preferment lie buried in a Dungeon.

David had promises of the Kingdom after Saul, and he rises fairly toward it
for a time, he comes to be a great Courtier, a Favorite with Jonathan and the
people: but before he comes to enjoy this, he must be driven from Court, and
from his own House, yea out of the Kingdom, and forced to serve a strange
Prince.

Thus when God promises to restore his people Israel, and to unite Judah and
them together, he says, he will first bring them into the Wilderness, Hos.
2.14. He will lose them as to their own apprehensions, and bring them into such
troubles and distresses, that they shall not see the way out of them, nor
perceive any way leading to that good which he intends them. Gods way is to
crucify Mercies as they are in the hands of every Creature, that we may look
only to him for Salvation. Wicked men are watchful to stop everp gap, where any
good might come in, and by this means they help forward the Mercy, for they
drive us more to God, and so nearer to the Mercy which they would prevent. Now
they who know this to be Gods way, will yet keep Hope alive, though the means
leading to the good they hope for, be dead.

Thirdly, Gods way is, not to carry on great works for his peoples good,
without great Intermissions, suffering them to fall back by some notable
Relapses. If he do not altogether crucify the means, yet he suffers the work
it self to receive some deadly Blow for a time. Thus it was with Israel, and
that work which was to give them both the Land of Canaan, and the Instituted
Worship of God. How fairly and smoothly does this go on for a long time
together God instructs them concerning his Ordinances, furnishes them with
Laws, and Statutes, carries them through the Wilderness, so that they were come
to the very borders of Canaan, and seemed even ready to enter; Spies are sent
out on purpose to discover the Land and they wait but for their return. But
when it is come thus far, what a strange Relapse does it suffer; and for their
Unbelief, they are carried quite back again into the Wilderness; as if the Lord
intended to carry them back to Egypt. If you peruse the History, you shall find
that they recovered not this, in less than Forty years: After so long a stop,
it was in the same posture in which we find it, when Caleb and Joshua, with
others were sent out to spy out the Land: And as it was in the bringing them
out of Egypt, and the first settling of his Worship among them, so it was in the
restoring it unto them, when he called them out of Babylon. How did the Work
begin to flourish in Ezra's time? what progress did he make in it, so that
things were like to go on without any rub? Yet what a blow did the Work of
building the Temple receive, so that it was hindered in the Reign of Cyrus,
Ahashuerus, and Artaxerxes, to the second year of Darius, Ezra 4:5, 6, 7.

If we look nearer home, we shall find a Confirmation of this truth. The
Reformation, begun in England by King Edward the sixth, suffered a Relapse in
Queen Mary's days, and we were carried back again into the very same darkness
out of which we were ascending.

This is a truth so plainly asserted in the Records of all Ages, in which any
thing of Reformation has appeared, that it must be confessed to be a Way of God
in all times, to suffer eminent works, to meet with eminent stops: and where
this is known and considered, it cannot be thought ground of Distrust.

Fourthly, Gods way is to carry on his own work while it seems to be at a
stand: Though it may meet with many stops, yet it never stands still. Though
some of the Wheels seem to be fixed, yet others are moving which we see not. In
those Intervals and Pauses which appear, God is still about his work. Perhaps,
He lays-by some visible part of the Deliverance of his people, and of the
Destruction of Antichrist; he suffers that part to stand still which our Eyes
are most upon, but some part of it is still in hand; He is either preparing the
Enemy for ruin, or fitting his people for Mercy. The sins of the Amorites must
be filled up before Abraham's seed can possess the Land, and Israel must be
fitted for Canaan, ere they can enter it. Now those very Providence which seem
to retard general Mercies to the Church, do in a secret way hasten them; for
they do prepare and make ready some things which do necessarily conduce to them.

Fifthly, Gods way of working is such, that no difficulties can stand before
him when he will appear. What can lie in the way of God, and the Salvation
promised to his people, but Dust and Ashes? And what is all the opposition of
the world before him; more than Chaff before the Wind? or Stubble before the
Fire? Bring the strongest Thorns of the Wilderness, and make the stoutest Fence
you can, and see whether you can hedge up his way, Isa. 27.4. Who would set the
Thorns and Briars against me in Battle, I would go through them, and would burn
them together. I would first break through and despise their opposition, and
then return and chastise their folly in their destruction. Thus God dealt with
Pharaoh: he raised as much opposition as he could against God, but He led his
people through the midst of all their Opposers while their hands were bound,
and then he let them loose again to follow Israel into the Red Sea, where he
buried them under the walls which sheltered Israel.

And were those great Oppositions which were raised against the building of the
Temple, more succesful? Zech. 4.7. Who art thou, a great Mountain, before
zerubbabel; thou shall become a plain. Who art thou? It is answered, A great
Mountain. But what is a Mountain, yea a great Mountain, or all the Mountains of
the world before him? But as the small dust of the balance, Isa. 40.15.

All Oppositions and Difficulties, will seem Inconsiderable in the way of that
work which we look upon as Gods, to him that knows his ways.

Sixthly, It is Gods way to increase his people, by those Providence which are
likeliest to destroy them. Those Afflictions and Persecutions which have
befallen the People and Church of God, have threatened the ruin of the whole;
but indeed have not only added to their stature in Grace, but to their increase
in numbers. Thus Israel did increase under a cruel bondage. It is said in Exodus
1.12. The more they afflicted them, the more they multiplied. And it is
observable, that there was no considerable increase of Abraham's seed, till we
read of their oppression. God promised to give Abraham the Land after four
hundred years, and we find 200 of these expired before their coming into Egypt,
and they were then but seventy souls, Genesis 46.27, a small increase: But after
Joseph's death, and their oppression in the last two hundred ^^^rs, they were
grown to a vast Number, so that there went out six hundred thousand men of war,
besides Levites, Women and Children, Exodus 12.37. The same way has God taken
to raise a Gospel-seed, he has multiplied the Professors of the Truth, by the
Oppression and Rage of their Enemies. Therefore to despond, as if the Interest
of Christ were sinking in the world because Persecution arises, is a gross
piece of Ignorance of the ways of God, who multiplies his people by their
troubles.

Seventhly, Another way of God, is to work by those whose Interest seems to lie
most against his work. Rather than God will want instruments to deliver his
people, and to set up his Instituted worship among them, he will make use of
men much interested against it.

It is the policy of Satan to twist as many potent Interests together, as he
can to hinder the Kingdom of Christ, yet when the Lords time is come to deliver
his people, he often makes use of those whom we judge most engaged against it.

This is manifest in Isreal's deliverance from the Babylonish Captivity; Israel
was then as the dry Bones, no visible means left for their enlargement: They
were weak and unable to rescue themselves, they had no potent Allies, nor
Friends to make terms for them. It was the Interest of the Babylonians, to keep
them under in their Captivity; and if it could be hoped that they would part
with them, yet they were never able to compass the building of the Temple in
their poverty; neither could they hope for assistance in this, from those who
had spoiled the Temple of all its Ornaments, and been enriched with its
Treasures: Yet when the time comes for the building of the Temple, Cyrus shall
let the Jews go; and rather than such a work shall want Encouragement, he
himself shall animate them in building, and furnish them with all things
needful for this work: Nay (which is matter of Astonishment) he shall give up
all the Treasures of the House of the Lord, though they were great, and were a
considerable increase of the Persian wealth and greatness. Nay, which is yet
more stupendous, he shall fetch them out of the House of his gods, though
consecrated to them, and give them back to the God of Israel, Ezra 1.7, 8, 9,
10. And although this work met with Obstructions; and evil Counselors had
suggested to the King. That it was against his Interest to suffer such a work
as this to go forward; yet God inclined the hearts of the Kings of Persia, to
favor and further it: As you may see, Ezra 6.8, 9.10. Ezra 7.15.20, 21. Neh.
2.8. Now if we consult their ^nterest, this could not be rationally expected
from them: How could we ^ope that they should advance the Worship of a God they
did not profess to serve? Who could expect that they should encourage Israel,
in that which would make them a distinct people from all the world, and thereby
raise them, from being useful Servants, to become formidable Enemies? Yet when
God will make use of men to help forward his Work, he will make them Blind, and
Deaf to their own Interests; they shall serve the Interests of God, while they
seem to destroy their own.

Thus it shall be in the Deliverance of the Church from Mystical Babylon: God
will work by those whose Interest that Antichristian Whore has twisted
together with hers against Reformation, and the Liberty of the Saints, from her
cruel Bondage. For they who did agree together to give their power to the
Beast, to support and uphold his Kingdom, shall also agree together to hate the
Whore, and make her desolate, Rev. 17. v. 12. compared with the 16.

It is matter of Discouragement to many good men, to consider how many Powerful
Interests are united, against the Interest of the Gospel and Reformation: But
alas, when God will work, he can engage those to assist, from whom in the Eyes
of Reason, we have most cause to fear. And doubtless it is Antichrist's great
security, (...) he sits upon many waters, and has many considerable ones in
combination with him: And though these seem to be inseparably fixed to him, so
that they are in danger of sinking if he fall, or they start; yet will God not
only pluck these away, but also strip him naked by those who have helped to
adorn him.

To despond therefore, and say, Jacob is low, By whom shall he rise? is to
forget, that God can and will raise him (rather than he shall sink) by those,
whom we fear most will keep him down. When the Church is fit for Deliverance,
rather than she shall want help, God will work by his Enemies.

Last of all, It is Gods way to appear for the Salvation of his people, when
their hearts and hopes are lowest. He comes at their Midnight, when they have
no Light of Sense, and perhaps few have the Light of Faith. That of our Savior
is remarkable, Luke 18.7, 8, and shall not God avenge his own Elect, that cry
Day and Night unto him; I tell you he will avenge them speedily. Nevertheless
when the Son of Man comes, shall he find Faith on the Earth? Though there
shall be found a spirit of prayer among the Elect, and I tell you (says Christ)
God will avenge them, and that speedily too, and this I leave upon Record for
their comfort; yet, when I come to deliver, I shall scarcely find Faith
concerning my Coming, and Avenging, amongst my praying people.

The Scripture is full of Instances to prove this Truth, When Abraham is called
to offer up Isaac, (and in him the great Blessing promised to all Nations) the
Lord does not appear for his deliverance, till the Knife be lifted up over him
to slay him; and Abraham sets a note of Observation upon this Providence, that
it may be for Instruction and Comfort to all the People of God, who shall meet
with the like difficulties at any time, Genesis 22.14. He calls it Jehovah-Jireh
(and the Proverbial Gloss upon this is very good) In the Mount of the Lord it
shall be seen. It is not said, In the Mount God has been seen, looking back to
what God had done, but it looks forward to what God should do, and his people
might expect in after Ages. Moses leaves this Gloss as a Prop to the Faith of
Gods people, that when they are in as great streights as he was, they may be
able to say; In the Mount, God will be seen: And this indeed has been
confirmed by Instances of great Note.

When Israel was in Egypt, and her bondage great, God sends Moses with a
Message of Deliverance, and the hopes of this, refresht their hearts a little.
But we find more Load laid upon their backs, which were ready to break before;
so that the people beg^n to be angry with Moses, judging that he had made then
Condition worse: Hereupon God begins to plague the Egyptians; this moves
Pharaoh and his people, and they seem inclinable to let Israel go, and begin to
treat about it; they treat and break, and renew their Treaty again; the
Israelites are between hope and fear concerning the issue of this; but at last
Pharaoh grows resolute and desperate, and not only refuses to let them go, but
threatens Moses and Aaron with death, if they come any more in his sight, Exodus
10.28. Now you may conceive the hearts of the Children of Israel are sinking,
and they reason thus with themselves; If all this will not work our
Deliverance, then woe unto us; we see Pharaoh is resolved not to let us go; we
must prepare for suffering and perpetual slavery, yea, and to bear what over
the wrath of an enraged Enemy can inflict upon us, who will surely be revenged
for all that Egypt has suffered, and so all these plagues will in the
Conclusion and in Effect, fall on us. Thus dark in all probability were their
apprehensions; but now the time is come to fulfill the Promise, and God appears
at their Midnight, and brings them out with a high Hand.

Let us follow them into Canaan, where we find them sinning away their Freedom,
and God gives them up into the hands of the Philistines, from whom he does not
deliver them till they are brought exceeding low. Their enemies we shall find
were very high, and they as low, 1 Samuel 13.5, 6. they were dispirited, their
hearts failed them; so that many hid themselves in Rocks, Caves, and Thickets,
high Places and Pits: they who had so much courage to assemble with Saul,
followed him trembling, ver. 7. and these were but a very few, v. 15. about six
hundred men, and these also unarmed, v. 22. and that their affliction might be
pressed down and running over, their King and General had received a dreadful
Check, a sad Message of his Rejection; and the Prophet that brought it was gone
away, as if he would not stay to see the ruin of him, and that handful of men
that followed him. Surely this people seem to be as near to destruction, as
Isaac in the Mount; yet here was God seen, and Deliverance comes when it was
never less expected or hoped for by a people.

Let us view them in their Captivity when they were in Babylon, and their
Condition was as desperate as ever, Ezekiel. 37.1, 2, 3. Israel was like a company
of dry Bones, yea, like Bones which had not a Grave afforded them; they were
scattered, Bone from Bone, and very dry; so that the Lord asks the Prophet,
this Question; Can these dry Bones live? Probabilities of their Deliverance
cease, and the Possibility comes now to be a Question, and it is so great a
Question, that God only can resolve it: Lord thou know, says the Prophet: He
only can tell what can be done in this Case, who can do what he will in any
Case. Now when things are brought to this Extremity, then the Lord begins to
work, ver. 4, 5. Again the Lord said unto me, Prophecy upon these Bones, and
say unto them: O ye dry Bones, hear the Word of the Lord. Thus says the Lord
God unto these Bones, Behold, I will cause breath to enter into you, and ye
shall live, etc. And as it was then, so it will be at the last and great
De^iverance of the Church, from the Tyranny of Mystical Babylon. The Beast so
far prevails over the Witnesses, that they Prophecy in Sack^loth a great
while; but a little before the ruin of Antichrist, he overcomes, and kills the
Witnesses, and insults over their dead Bodies, Rev. 11.7, 8, 9. But now, when
their dead Carcases have been exposed to the view of all the world, and the
scorn of Antichrist has been sufficiently manifested in Triumphing over them,
and making merry for their Destruction; even then shall God raise up these
Witnesses, and his Work and Cause in their Hands, to the Astonishment and
Terror of their Adversaries: And then, when the Whore thought she had gotten
all, shall those Voices be heard; The Kingdoms of the World, are become the
Kingdoms of our Lord and his Christ. And indeed, this is that which the Lord
foretold long since, Deuteronomy. 32.36. The Lord will judge his people, and repent
himself for his Servants, when he sees that their power is gone, and there is
none shut up or left. Gods people have been too high, but never too low for him
to work by: Therefore the lower and faster they fall, the sooner we shall
expect their Deliverance, if we judge as people that understand the Ways of God
toward his people. But if we shall stretch our measuring Line over the Path of
the Almighty, we shall afflict and perplex, our own spirits, dishonor and
provoke God, and give up our hopes upon every Cloud that arises, and all
because we know not the Ways of the Lord. Thus I have shown you that Distrust
of God in streights, is a conviction of Ignorance concerning the Ways of the
Lord, which he walks in toward us.

I may add also, It is a Demonstrat^on of our Ignorance, touching the ways
which we ought to walk in, toward him. For the ways of our Duty, as well as the
ways of Providence, are called the Ways of the Lord in Scripture, as is evident
if we consult, Psalm. 18.21. 2 Cor. 11.6. Psalm. 108.5. And this is certain, he
that is not mindful of one, seldom understands the other; they who do mistake
Gods ways of Providence toward them, commonly fail in their Duties to him.
When Israel did misinterpret his Providence, they presenly talked of going
back into Egypt; and those Hypocrites in Malachi, when they saw that things
went contrary to their expectation, cry out, Mal. 3.14. What profit is there in
serving the Lord, they are carried back again to their old Profaneness. Such
persons show an Ignorance in the ways of God, in three particulars: They know
not, or consider not,

First, That it is our duty to hold on in the VVays of God, notwithstanding all
the difficulties or darknesses that can arise. This is that which the Apostle
exhorts unto, Heb. 12.13. Make straight steps to your feet, let no Affliction
or Trouble that you meet withal in the ways of God, turn you out of the way, or
make your paths crooked; to make you pick and choose for your selves, the way
which is smoothest and safest, and make you leave the way which is nearest; and
to this purpose he sets the Example of Christ before them, who went strait on
in his way, though the Cross, the Shame, and Reproach of men lay in it, Heb.
12.2.

If thou know not the way in which God walks in toward thee, yet thou
know the way in which thou art to wa^k with God. If there be not a Path of
Providence visible, yet there is a way of Duty. Be sure thou keep close to
this, and step not out of Gods way to avoid trouble; it is better to meet w th
danger in our Duty, than doubts about it. If now thou art careful to keep close
to Gods revealed ways, when his Providential w^ys are Dark and Intricate; He
w^ll set a Ma^k of Honor upon thee, as he did upon those who kept close to
him, and their duty, when it was dangerous, Mal. 3.16, 17. Now Distrust carries
men out of their way, and while they are judging of Providence, they are
forgetful of their own Duties.

Secondly, We should not only hold on in our duty, under the greatest
difficulties and discouragements, but we should continue with hope, when we are
lowest; God would have us plough in hope, and work as those who serve a good
Master. Therefore, Hope is not only commended as the Privilege, but commanded
as the duty of Gods people, Lam. 3.26. It is good that a man should hope, and
quietly wait for the Salvation of the Lord. And 1 Pet. 1.13. the Apostle speaks
after this manner, Gird up the loins of your minds, be sober, and hope to the
end. Now there be three things which we should hope for, in the troubles which
befall the Church: First of all, We should hope that God will in our days fulfill
the Promises which he has made, for the Restoring and Delivering of his
Church. God would have us not only bear our part in the Afflictions which befall
it, and pray for her Deliverance, but rejoice also in the hope of her promi^ed
Salvation, Romans 12.12. Rejoicing in Hope, patient in Tribulation. Secondly, We
should hope, that if the Mercies which we wait for, are not ready for us, yet
our patient and prudent bearing of Trouble, may ripen and prepare them for the
next Generation. Thirdly, If e w see not any of the Promises fulfilled, which
concern the good of the whole Church, yet we should expect good out of these
troubles our selves, and hope for to receive benefit from our Afflictions.

Thirdly, We should not only hope, but rejoice always in God; this is as
positively commanded, as any duty, both in the Old and New Testament, Psalm.
33.1. Rejoice in the Lord, oh ye Righteous. And Psalm. 97.12. Joel 2.23. Be
glad, ye Children of Zion, and rejoice in the Lord your God. Phil. 4.4. Rejoice
in the Lord always, yea again, I say rejoice. If thou art a Believer, thou art
called to rejoice in God, what ever thy condition be; and thou art bound in
every thing to give thanks, and if thou have no other consideration to make
thee thankful but this, it is enough. Thy case, neither is, nor ever shall be
so bad, but thou shall have ^omething to rejoice in; and God who best
understands thy Condition, bids thee rejoice. But a wicked man was never called
upon to rejoice, by him who understands h^s Condition; and when he comes to
know himself, he will confess that he has been joyful without a cause, whereas
thou art never without cause of rejoicing. Therefore do as Job did, when he
could not rejoice in the Providence of God, he rejoiced in his Name. Blessed
be the Name of the Lord, says Job: Though the Providence of God were full of
Darkness, his Name was full of Light and Comfort, when a view of Providence
makes the heart sink with fear; a sight of this by Faith, will raise it again
to a frame of Blessing: And certainly, the dejections of Gods people, do most
of them arise from an overlooking, or forgetting of the blessed Name of God,
which is made up of Loving Kindness, Mercy, Goodness, and Truth, to all that
are in Covenant with him; and speaks nothing but Consolation and Encouragement,
whatever may be the Language of his Providence. Thus you see Unbelief speaks
our Ignorance of Gods ways, whether they be ways of Providence in which he
walks toward us, or ways of Duty in which we are to walk with him. I have been
large upon this, because the Holy Ghost insisteth upon this, as the reason why
Israel miscarried, and God was provoked.

Use of the Point.
IF Distrust in our streights be so great a Provocation, then let us search and
try our ways, and make narrow inquiry into our hearts, and we shall find upon
the Observation of their Frames and Carriages under the streights which we have
met withal, more sin to be humbled for, than we have yet been sensible of. God
has many ways to bewilder a people, sometimes in their Personal, sometimes in
their Family Concernments; sometimes by bringing private sometimes public
Interests to loss; sometimes by clouding our Civil, and sometimes our Spiritual
Comforts; and sometimes again, He brings dark Providence upon us, and even
frustrates our Expectation in every Creature: He takes away those who might
have been Props to us, and perhaps hides himself, and we grope in thick
darkness for the way.

Now it is observable, that Affliction makes us look back upon former
Conditions, and inquire what has been the sin of them; as David, in his
trouble sees the folly of his prosperity, Psalm. 30.6, 7. But our Prosperity
seldom leads us back to consider, and mourn over the miscarriages that we have
been guilty of, under Affliction. Notwithstanding we murmr, and express much
Impatience, at least are full of Distrust, and Desponding thoughts, touching
God's Providence and gracious Care over us: Yet we seldom recall those to judge
our selves for them, and the reason is, we think these are Lapses of easy
pardon, and that there is reason to be fetched for these things from our
Condition. We think our streights will justify our distrusts; and we reckon
these among the Frailties of Gods people: But what we have excused as frailties
and Infirmities, the Holy Ghost condemns as Provocations. Wherefore if you
recollect your thoughts, you will find cause to bewail those things as great
Provocations, which you have slightly passed over as ordinary weaknesses.
Therefore let us judge our selves, for our distrust of God under former trials;
let us say as David did of himself, in the like case, Psalm. 73.22. So foolish
and ignorant was I, and as a beast before thee. A sound and through humbling of
your selves for these things, may prevent the like miscarriages for time to
come.

Use 2.
The next and principal use of this point, is to caution Professors of
Godliness, that they provoke not God as these Israelites did. Take the very
words of the Apostle, and I hope you will give the more heed to this Use, as
being proper and genuine, such as the Holy Ghost makes of it, ver. 12. Take
heed lest there be in any of you an evil heart of unbelief.

If God should bring you into a Wilderness, and you should meet with the same
streights that Israel met withal, if you should see no way out of them; yet
take heed of their sins: Remember, that all their streights and troubles did
not justify their distrust. God would not pass by their Unbelief, though they
were his own people, and the only people he had in the world; and they were the
first that were so exercised, and so might plead Ignorance more than we can.
And if he will not spare them, much less us, who have their experiences and the
addition of many Ages beside to confirm us in our depending upon God. If he
punished their distrust sevenfold, he will punish ours seventy times
sevenfold.

Now, It being my great design to prevent this sin, to which Israel of old was
so inclined, and to which (if I may judge by my own heart) we are still too
propense. I shall lay a ^ew Considerations before you; and Oh that God would
speak so effectually by them, to every one of our hearts, that this sin may be
prevented.

First, Consider, It is a provoking sin: Its called in the Text the
Provocation. Israel was guilty of many and grievous sins in the Wilderness; but
none provoked God as this did. He expressed his displeasure against other sins,
as their Idolatry, their whoredoms with the Daughters of Moab, their lusting
after strange flesh, yet he did not set any such note of his Indignation, upon
any of these, as as he did upon their Unbelief: This sin bears the name of the
Provocation.

In other cases he did show Mercy, and past by the Transgression of his
Heritage, but because of this sin he retained his anger, till he had consumed
them in the Wilderness. Yea, Moses who had given such notable proof of his
Faith and Courage in Egypt, for one Act of unbelief, mus^ be debarred from
going into Canaan, Deuteronomy. 32, 51, 52. And though he could prevail for the whole
Nation, when they had transgressed in making the Golden Calf, Exodus 33.17. Yet
he cannot prevail for himself, to go up into that good Land, no, though he
prayed for it, and reasons from all the kindness that God had shown him
already, Deuteronomy. 3.24, 25. Yet he can get on other Answer, but this; Speak to me
no more of this matter.

Surely, God is angry with this sin, for which he will not be entreated by
Moses, and for himself, and for one Act of unbelief. Any thing that savours of
Infidelity, displeases God more than many crimes of Morality, God will note
more, and visit your unbelief, and distrust of his Mercy, Goodness, and Truth,
than all other your miscarriages under Affliction; and the reason is, because
it is most opposite to that frame of Spirit, which should honor God,
especial^y in time of trouble. For nothing does so express the Life and Power
of Grace in times of Temptation and Affliction, as Believing, Hoping, and
Rejoicing in God; this does most eminently please him, and give him glory, and
the contrary must needs as much displease and provoke him; and if we will not
believe this to be a truth, God will make us feel it.

Secondly, Consider, You will not only provoke, but you will grieve the Lord by
this sin: I hope, you will weigh this well, because it is also a Consideration
in the Text, and shows how God is affected with the miscarriages of his people,
when they distrust him. The word which we render grieved, is observable, (...)
which comes of (...) which signifies the Bank of a River, because grie^ makes
the heart swell, as a Rive^ does when it overflows it Banks.

This Passion is attributed to God to show what offense he takes at thi^ sin;
It is compounded of Anger Love, and Pity. When we meet with that which is
offensive in those we love* we are the more troubled, not at the Act simply,
but because it is the Act of one whom we love.

It is observed, that the word here used, is not used any where in all the New
Testament, save in this Chapter, to express Gods distaste at Isreal's sin. But it
is frequently used in the Old Testament; by this word the offense which
Rebeccah took at Esau's hating of Jacob is expressed, Genesis 27.46. She was angry
with him for hating his Brother, but this was not all; to her anger was added
grief and trouble of spirit, because it was her son Esau that hated him. Thus
God is highly offended with the sin of unbelief, but he is grieved when this is
the sin of a people so near him; so that we see such a Passion is attributed to
God as is given to Parents, or Governors, when they see those whom they love,
and have under their charge, running into ^^e and dangerous courses,
notwithstanding all their care to reclaim them. Now a Child that has any
Remains of good nature in him, though he has no grace, and will not be stopped
in his full Career of sin, by all the Instructions and Corrections of his
Parents, but grows regardless of their anger and displeasure, and has born
many a Check, Reproof, or Blow, without relenting; yet has melted when he has
seen his Father or Mother mourn for him, and lay his Condition to heart.
Christian, Can thou hear that God is provoked, and not fear? Yea, Can you
hear that he is grieved, and not melt? Surely you cannot: Grace is the most
ingenuous thing of the world. It is the best Nature, for it is the Divine
Nature: Let it suffice to tell you, that unbelief will go very near the heart
of your Father; if any thing could be said to break his heart, it would be
this. His Enemies, the Profane ones of the world, do vex and anger him, but
you are the people that grieve him; your sins do trouble him, at a higher rate
than theirs, and, of all your sins; unbelief most of all. Oh therefore, if God
have any considerable Interest in your hearts, let unbelief have none. Oh do
not grieve the Spirit of God that would comfort you; If you sadden the Spirit
of the Lord by your Distrust, how shall he comfort you in your Distress?

Thirdly, Consider, You will lose the most glorious opportunity of honoring
God and Religion, that ever was put into your hands; nay, perhaps thou may
never have the like again: God has brought thee into a Wilderness, that thou
may give thy Testimony, and set to thy Seal, that God is true. Men will
observe, and, if ever, now they will believe it: they take little notice what
thou say of God in prosperity: the Devil excepted against Job's Testimony in
this case: But, says he, put forth thy hand and touch all that he has, and he
will curse thee to thy face.

It is no proof of sincerity, to speak well of God, while he does well to us;
or to follow Christ while he has the Loaves: but, to follow him in a
wilderness, in a Land not sown; yea, to follow him cheerfully too, will make
men take notice of, and regard our Testimony that we bear to his Goodness,
All Sufficiency, and Truth. He that runs may read in thy cheerful behavior
under streights that God is good, because thou speak good of him at all
times; that he is All sufficient, because you can be contented, yea, full, and
abound in the want of all things, having him; that he is True and Faithful
because you can embrace the Promises, and live upon them, when all Providence
run contrary to them. Oh Christians, If ever you would have the world believe
that God is good, yea, the Chief Good, that he is to be chosen for himself,
that he i^ your Portion, and enough when alone; and that you have chosen him
so, and do not repent your choice. If ever you would convince men that God is
True, and that he never fails those that seek him; bear your Testimony to these
things in a Wilderness; then men will believe you. Walk but evenly and
cheerfully in the streights that he brings you, and his people into; and you
will persuade men more, than a thousand Sermons possibly will do; but if you
lose such an opportunity, never look to honor God at that rate while you live.

Fourthly, Consider, Distrust of God has no excuse. Though men have many pleas
for it, yet when thy eyes are opened, thou will have no cloak for it. It is
impossible for a Child of God to be brought into any straight, or to experience
any trouble or difficulty in any condition, for which God has no^ p^^^^ded
some surable word of (...) woe ld be too long a work (...) to und ^take, to show
you what provisions God has made for the Comfort and Support of his people in
all estates. If I should descend to particulars, I should not know where to
stop: I shall only hint what care he has taken for the general Interest of his
people, when he brings his Church into a Wilderness, as he did Israel.

This is a certain truth, that God never calls his people into a Wilderness,
but he gives them Bread in their Hands, or sends it thither before them, that
they may live and feed upon it in their streights. As God sent Joseph before to
provide for Jacob, and to keep him and his family alive in the Famine: So does
he send Provision before, for the Faith of his people, Psalm. 74.14. Thou
brakest the heads of the Dragon in the water; thou brakest the head of the
Leviathan in pieces, and gave him to be meat to the people, inhabiting the
wilderness. Israel was, but ^ust now, entering into a barren howling Wilderness;
and that he might not faint for want of Provision for his Faith, he gives him a
miraculous Deliverance from the Red Sea, and Pharaoh; the experience of which
was enough for their Faith to feed upon, in all the Difficulties they should
afterward meet with: Had they understood and improved this Deliverance, they
would never have provoked God by Distrust in the Wilderness.

Object. But you may ask, What Provision has God made for his people, now in
the wilderness?

Answ. First, You have the Prophesies of the Troubles which shall befall the
Church of God, and the Persecutions which should arise. If we be surprised at
any time, it is our own fault, God has warned us, and furnished us with all
his Armor, he has bid us put it on, and be always shod with the preparation
of the Gospel of Peace. Now expectation of evil, is a great preparation to the
bearing of it: This Christ intimates, when he says, John 16.1. These things
have I told you, that you might not be offended. What an unreasonab^e thing is
it to distrust God, because his Word is true? He has told us that through many
Tribulations, we must enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, and if we will live
godlily, we must suffer Persecution: now when we find what he has foretold of
this, proves true; why should we not believe all the Promises which he has
joined to these Predictions? Are not his Promises as true, as any part of his
Word? Are has not he that foreto^d our Troubles, promised to bear m^ up under
them, carry us through them, and to do us good by them*

Secondly, You have all the Promises of the good which God has to br^ng upon
his people in the l^^e^ days and the^e^^ so made, that you may exp^ct^^^^
^u^fi^ling in the darkest times, and this present Age is not exemptech from
seeing the glory of them.

Though many have been too bold to fix upon the time, and have mis-carried in
their Conjectures, asserting, the time to be come, for the making good of such
and such Promises to the Church, and for the utter destruction of Antichrist;
yet this we may confidently affirm, this Generation is not excluded from hoping
to see those things. Now the consideration that God has made glorious Promises
to his Church, and that we are allowed to hope for the Accomplishment of them
in our days, is enough to carry us patiently and cheerfully through all
intervening Difficulties, Nay, had we a promise only of many years yet to come,
as Abraham had of Canaan, yet it should be a mavelous support to us, to think
that it should be well with the Church of God, in the Generations to come.

Thirdly, We have all our own and the Churches Deliverances, in former times.
What ever God has done for any of us, or for his people in time of trouble, or
for the preservation of his Church under Persecution, or Deliverance of it from
Captivity, it is all our meat in the Wilderness.

Fourthly, We have many choice and precious Promises made to such a state. No
Condition has so much of Succor or Comfort promised to it, as this.

For Support, I Will name but two, which are sufficient to bear up our hearts,
Isa. 43.1.2. But now thus says the Lord that created thee, oh Jacob, and he
that formed thee, oh Israel, Fear ^ot: For I have redeemed thee, I have called
thee by thy Name, thou art mine. When thou passest through the waters, I will be
with thee, and through the Rivers, they shall not overflow thee; when thou
walk through the fire, thou shall not be burnt, neither shall the Flame
kindle upon thee: For, I am the Lord thy God, etc.

When was this promise made? Now, says the Lord: If we look to the close of
the precedent Chapter, we shall find, it was when Israel was given up to
Robbers, and Jacob to the Spoil: But wherefore was this perhaps it was only for
trial? No, it was for their Disobedience, because they would not walk in his
ways, Chap. 42.24. But, possibly, this was but some light transitory
Affliction: No, it was accompanied with all Expressions of Dread and Terror.
Here is Anger, yea the fury of anger, and this poured out upon him; here is the
Battle, and that made strong against him: Here Is fire, yea Israel set on fire,
and that round about, compassed in with trouble on all hands; and, which is
worst of all, he not laying this to heart. Israel sins, and God visits his sin,
yet he sins under this V sitation* yet, which is wonderful, Israel must not
fear; God will be with him to support him under these troubles. What an
Argument is here, for the Faith of Gods people, when they suffer for
Righteousness?

Will God succor those who suffer for disobeying h^s w^l^? how much more
those, who suffer for observing it? If he will be with his people under
Afflictions which he brings upon them, for not walking in his ways; how can he
forsake them in troubles, which men bring upon them, for observing his
Commands? Surely, God will go through fire and water with these: As he was with
the three Children in the fire, and wit^ Israel in the water; so will he be
wi^^ his people in all their streights: An^ what is fire and water when God is
(...) them, with us?

We have a promise in the New Testament, which confirms all this to us, Heb.
13.5. He has said, I will never leave thee, nor forsake thee* The Apostle
improves this against al^ the occasions of Distru^t, which are either outward
wants, or suffering^ and Persecutions from men. To the first, he says, Be
content with such things as you have; for he has said, I will never leave
thee. What can he be said to want, who is sure of having God, and knows what it
is to enjoy him. Against the second, He reasons from the same Foundation: So
that we may boldly say, the the Lord is my Helper. If God be with us, it will
not be as a Spectator, but as a Helper; and he may be bold in any trouble, that
can be bold to say that God is with him. He need not fear what man can do to
him, who is assured that God will stand by him, and strengthen him.

Secondly, As God has promised great Supports, so he has provided as great
Comforts for his people, in their Suffering low estate. See Mat. 5.10. Blessed
are they which are persecuted for Righteousness-sake, for theirs is the Kingdom
of Heaven. They are blessed in their Afflictions, under all their Persecutions;
so that where ever you see such a man or woman, how ever miserable their
present Condition may seem in the eyes of others, let them not seem so to you;
say you, There is a blessed man, or a blessed woman: There is the Kingdom of
Heaven. It is not only sure to them notwithstanding their Troubles and
Sufferings, but they are the more assured of it by them. God gives the greatest
and clearest Evidences of their Interests in Heaven at such a time; God opens
the Heavens to them, as he did to Stephen, Acts 7.55, 56. Then, if ever, God
pours out of the abundance of his Spirit, upon his people. The Apostle
therefore does not lay down as a Promise, or speak of it as a Futurity, but
asserts it as a thing present; it is as sure to be so; as if you felt it so in
this instant of time. The like Expression we have, 1 Pet. 4.14. If ye be
reproached for the Name of Christ, happy are ye, for the Spirit of glory
rests on you. Mark it Christians, You shall not only have the Spirit of God,
but it shall be a degree reaching to Glory; it is above the measures of Grace
and Comfort, commonly attainable in this state of Imperfection: He says not,
This shall come in, or after troubles, but he speaks of it as present; if one
comes, so does the other: If ye be reproached, happy are ye, etc. If reproaches
for Christ come, then glory comes with them.

Nay it comes not to leave you suddenly, it comes to abide with you; if
Reproaches and Disgrace stick fast upon you, the Spirit of Glory will rest upon
you also.

Fifthly, God has promised all the outward glory and prosperity of his Church,
to such a Condition. It shall be given her in a Wilderness, and from thence she
shall ascend glorious, Hos. 2.14, 15. I will allure her, and bring her into the
wilderness, and speak comfortably unto her. And I will give her her Vinyards
from thence, and the valley of Achor, for a door of Hope, and she shall sing
there as in the days of her youth, as in the day when she came up out of the
Land of Egypt. It is very plain from hence, that God will take a course with
his people, in the fulfilling his Promises to them, much like the way he took
to bring them into Canaan. He will first carry them into a Wilderness, and from
thence will God give them those great mercies which he has reserved for them,
Cant. 3.6, 7, 8. There we find the Church coming up out of the Wilderness, and
presently we find her furnished with able and expert Guides, and adorned with
all that may render it lovely.

Now, considering all these things, Predictions, Experiences, and Promises:
Have we not Meat to eat in the Wilderness, and will it not be shameful and
inexcusable to faint, when God has made such Provision to live upon?

Fifthly, Consider, Unbelief will be your Affliction, as well as your Sin; it
will be a grief to your own spirits, as well as to the Lords you will be your
own Tormentors, and contribute more to the making your selves miserable, than
all your enemies: We have enemies enough to afflict us, let us not afflict our
selves Goebal and Amon, etc. let us not be against our selves, and add
affliction to affliction. For it will make all possible evils, probable; those
which are uncertain, certain; those which are far off, to be near; and those
that are future, present. Avoid therefore Distrust, as the greatest affliction
that can befall thee.

Sixthly, Consider, Your unbelief will not only be your own affliction, but it
may be so to those who are not involved in the same guilt with you; you may be
the Instruments of hindering the good that may come upon the present Generation;
your unbelief, may hinder many believing souls from the Mercy which they are
fitted for; they may wait a great while longer, because you are not prepared
for it; as we see, the unbelief of Israel kept Josuah and Caleb, out of the
Land of Canaan Forty years. They were ready and prepared to enter into Canaan,
when they first spied out the Land: but Isreal's unbelief hindered them from
entering, and they also must wait Forty years, till another Generation is made
ready. Take heed therefore of that which will afflict thee, and make thee an
affliction to many others.

Seventhly, Consider, That Distrust does of all sins, deny thy Christianity.
What is a Christian, but a Believer? One that walks by Faith, and not by Sight?
Thou art of a contrary frame: How will thou prove thy self a Christian, without
following Christ? And how will thou follow Christ without believing? Thou may
follow Providence, by Sense; but thou can not be said to follow Christ, but
by Faith* Therefore resolve, either to lay by thy Christianity, or cast out thy
unbelief.

Eighthly, Make provision against this sin, yea, all the Provision you can, and
you will find all little enough. For Consider, That you will surely meet with
Temptations to this, more than to any other. Your way to Heaven lies through
difficulties and stre^ghts; your way lies not among Drunkards, Swearers, or
unclean Persons; you may not meet with Noah's, or Joseph's Temptations, but
your way lies through the Wilderness, and you will surely meet with Isreal's
Temptations, to distrust God. Through many Tribulations you must enter into the
Kingdom of Heaven. Expect Temptations suitable to your Condition; and a thousand
to one, if you find not your heart very ready to close with Temptations of this
Nature: for there is nothing more natural to us, than to walk by Sense and to
listen to the Dictates of Carnal Reason. Expectation of evil puts us upon
making suitable provision for it. And that you may the better stand against such
Temptations when they come. Mind these few things,

First, Possess thy self fully of God's Providence. If he take care for the
Ravens, how much more for his people.

Secondly, Believe firmly that there is not a Providence to thee, but comes
through the Covenant of Grace.

Thirdly, All the Providence of God, do serve his Promises, and tend to the
Accomplishing of them, though they seem otherwise.

Fourthly, View often the Experiences that thou have had of Gods Mercy and
Goodness, and labor to fortify thy confidence in God from thence, As David,
Psalm. 23.6. And Paul, 2 Cor. 1.10. It is a good Argument, He that has
delivered, will deliver, if we depend upon him, and plead former Mercies with
him.

Fifthly, Reason with thy heart, when thou find is beginning to sink; say,
Why art thou cast down, oh my soul. Resolve never to suffer thy heart to be
unreasonably disquieted, and thou shall never find a Reason; for a Distrustful
Sadness, or Dejection.

Sixthly, Be sure to make God thy Portion, take him for thine Inheritance;
account him alone enough for thee. Do not reckon any thing besides him, needful
to make thee happy, but esteem thy self sufficiently blessed in thy Interest in
him, and Communion with him. A heart brought to this, will live in a
Wilderness: and, as less than this, will not give us comfort, so it will not
prove us Christians.

Seventhly, Lay this upon thy heart, as a duty to be thankful in every
Condition. Study what thou injoyest, as well as what thou want; what matter of
Thanksgiving, as well as of Petition; and if Prayer and Praise go together, see
what will follow, Phil. 4.6, 7. If your wants do not swallow up your Mercies,
but you make your Requests known with Thanksgiving as well as Supplication, the
Peace of God which passes all understanding, shall keep your hearts and minds
through Jesus Christ. You shall have a mavelous calmness and sweetness of
Spirit, which shall keep your minds quiet and stable, in the midst of all your
troubles.

Use 3.
The third Use of this Point is for Direction, to teach us how to carry our
selves whenever God brings us into a Wilderness.

First, Labor to secure God to you be sure make him yours; renew your choice
of him, and perfect your resolutions of cleaving to him; i^ you be clear in the
justifying Acts o^ Fa th, the Comforting Acts will be more easy and rational.
It is sad being without God in a Wilderness doubts about thy Interest in him,
can never meet thee more unseasonably than now. Moses understood this so well,
that he would not stir out of the Wilderness without God, Exodus 33.15. He knew
it was better being in a Wilderness with God, than in Canaan without him: And
if Canaan that flowed with Milk and Honey be so uncomfortable without God, what
then will a Wilderness be, which is barren and destitute of all other Comforts.

Secondly, Have an eye constantly upon God, to direct your way. The Children of
Israel were to have an eye upon the Cloud in the Wilderness, and to move as
that moved, and to stand still, when that stood still. Acquaint your selves
with the Word of God, this will give Light to your Paths, in the darkest times.
Labor to know your Duty, and be found in ^t, so shall the way of Providence be
comfortable to you, though you understand it not at present.

Thirdly, Carry your Bread in your hands with you. The Israelites took their
Dough in their Kneading-Troughs with them, when they went out of Egypt, Exodus
12.34. But this was soon spent, but God gave them Bread at the Red Sea, which
was for them to seed upon during their Travels, Psalm. 74.14. This Bread which
is your experience of Gods Mercy and Truth, you must be sure to keep with you,
else you will be apt to faint. And beside this, Take the Bread of Sincerity and
Truth, 1 Cor. 5.8. this Bread will not only sustain, but comfort your hearts;
it will be a continual Feast, Prove. 15.15. By a merry heart is meant here, an
upright honest heart; for none beside this can be truly merry, and this ought
always to be merry and joyful.

Fourthly, Beware of Presumption as well as Distrust; As you must no^ be
discouraged because you can seen^ way in it; so you must not presume to make
your own way out of it.

If God bring you into a Wilderness, let him alone to bring you out; only
follow him, go his way, wait his time. Take heed of presuming upon your own
strength, and running before the Lord: It cost Israel dear for presuming to go
up without warrant, out of the Wilderness against the Canaanites in the
Mountains, Number. 14.40, 41, 42, 43, 44, 45.

Fifthly, Look upon the Mercy you desire and wait for, not through the
Providence of God, but through the Promises, for they may represent it as a
thing afar off, when the other will tell you it is near. As for the ^all of
Antichrist, we would think it ^ar off, if we look upon his Pomp, Power,
Interests, and Councels; but ^et us look upon the Word of God, and it will tell
you, he shall fall in an ^our, suddenly, when he is not a^are of it.

Sixthly, Study Faith and Patience, ^e very Exercise of these are of great
advantage to you, if God have no other design but to prove and improve these,
it is worth your going into the Wilderness, 1 Pet. 1.7. It is a precious thing,
to have our Faith tri^d, though it be by fire, says the Apostle. But why is it
so? Because God intends highly to honor the Faith of his people at last: He Will
praise it, yea, which is more, he will honor it; nay, he will put the highest
honor upon it that can be; for he will put a glory upon it. When God shall call
the whole world together, he will then tell the story of your lives, before men
and Angels; and that which He will insist upon, to magnify and extol in your
lives, shall be your Faith. Lo, here is one that followed me in a Wilderness,
in a Land that was not sown, that would believe my word against all that Men or
Devils, could suggest to the contrary; nay, all that I could do, could not make
him distrust what I said. Thus will God honor Faith, when it is found in a
Wilderness. I might press you to study and exercise this, from several
Considerations. But I Will but add two,

First, God will take it kindly, yea, exceeding kindly, if thou followest him
believingly in a Wilderness. I do not know any thing that is more acceptable
to him, than this: See this in Israel, Jer. 2.2. I remember the kindness of thy
youth, the Love of thine Espousals when thou wentest after me in a Wilderness,
in a Land that was not sown. The Lord took this so kindly, that he is mindful
of it many Generations afterward; yea, he would not forget this at a time,
when he was highly provoked, and was about to remove them out of their Land for
their Iniquities. Show kindness to God this way, and thou have engaged him to
be kind to thee, as long as thou live; nay, it may be remembered to thy
Childrens Children.

Secondly, You will not only find God kind to you, but in so doing you will be
kind to your own souls. You will find a believing frame of spirit exceeding
comfortable: Faith will fetch in those comforts which you want, and put you
into the possession of those Mercies which you wait for. It will make your
Comforts real, and your wants but seeming: Mark the Expression of the Apostle,
2 Cor. 6.10. As sorrowful, yet always rejoicing; as poor, yet making many rich;
as having nothing, yet possessing all things.

Our wants and our troubles, seem to be great and many, but they are but
Shadows and Phantasms; they exist most in opinion of others: but our Comforts
and Enjoyments are substantial. While we seem to be sorrowful, we are always
joyful, and while we seem to have nothing, we do really possess all things, He
injoys God in Christ who is all in all, and in Patience he possesses his own
soul; and he is content with those things which he has, and so has as much
comfort, as if he had the actual enjoyment of all the world. A Believer's
enjoyments under wants, are more real than an Unbeliever's are in the midst of
all his plenty and fullness; for an unbeliever's comforts and enjoyments are but
seeming; he is as if he had al things, but his wants are real, he possesses
nothing. Therefore walk by Faith, and you will have more comfort in your
streights, than other men have in their greatest abundance.

And as you must study Faith, so be sure to let Patience have her perfect work,
Jam, 1.4. for if any thing will perfect you, this will do it; Patience nourishes
and cherishes every grace in the soul, and raises them to the greatest degrees
of perfection attainable here. God often times does that by streights and
troubles, which would not be effected by all our Liberty and Prosperity, and
all other means.

Seventhly, Draw no Conclusion from any Providence, till thou have looked over
former times, and compared it with things which are past, whether it be Public
or Private, whether it respects the Church of God, or thine own Person or
Family. Suppose thou should see the Church of God in great affliction, yet
look back and see how it was when Moses was born: Had thou lived in those
days, would not thy heart have sunk with fear much more? There was a design to
root out Israel. Look to the present Generation, they were Slaves to the
Egyptians; they were wearied with making Bricks, and in the next Generation,
their Names were like to be blotted out. The Male-Children must be all killed,
and because the Midwives would not do it, the common people must be
Commissioned for that purpose, Exodus 1.22. Wha^ fears and cares must they needs
have whose Children lay at the mercy o^ every Villain, who might at their
pleasure snatch them from their Mothers Breasts, and dash their Brains out
against the stones: Here was nothing but Death to be expected for their little
ones, and miserable slavery for themselves. Here was no hope of Freedom from
hence; a Banishment, though it had been into a howling Wilderness, would have
been counted a Mercy. These were troubles indeed, yet God delivered his people
from these; though the Bush did burn, yet it was not consumed.

Had thou lived in Jezabels days, What would thou have said concerning the
Lord's Prophet, when she hunted after Elijah's life? Surely they will be all
cut off. When the Prophets were to be found in Caves only, (1 Kings 18.13.) hid
to secure their lives; yet God preserved them, and fed them with Bread and
Water. Or had thou lived in the days of wicked Haman, when the Decree was
gone forth against all the people of God, and the time to destroy and to kill
them, was appointed and fixed by an unalterable Decree; and these poor people
had great and potent Enemies, who waited for the Execution of it, who thirsted
for the blood of these poor Jews: Would thou not now, have given up all for
lost? Yet, then God steps in, and by wonderful Providence delivers them, and
brings their Enemies in their room.

Or for thy own particular; were thou ever brought lower than Joseph was in
Egypt? That from a Slave was made a Prisoner, and had, beside h^s Irons, the
weight of a great man's Displeasure laid upon him, and this in a strange
Country, where he had none to pity, or to help him? Yet see what Issue God
gave to his troubles.

Or was it ever so bad with thee as with David who was banished his own Country,
and in a strange Land; is at once stripped of all he has; his wives, Children,
Goods at once taken away, and that which added to his Affliction, none of the
people pity, him, but loaded him with their Curses and Threatenings; they
talked of stoning him, 1 Samuel 30.6. But David encouraged himself, in the Lord
his God.

What ever thy Condition be, upon inquiry thou will see, it is no other than
what the people of God have passed through heretofore, and the consideration
that others have past through it before, is matter of hope to thee. He that has
delivered, can still deliver, his Arm is not shortened. Nay, should thou
find any thing that should make thy Condition more sad and dismal, than any
that thou can think upon, yet it will not justify thy Distrusts; for
doubtless Israel had no Precedents of any people delivered from such a Bondage,
as Egypt, or provided for in such a Wilderness as they were to pass through; yet
their Distrust was a Provocation. But if thy Condition could be singular from
all that ever were in the world before thee, then to depend upon God were an
honor to your Faith; whereas Dependence in this cause where we have
Precedents, are but the nobler Exercises of Reason. Believe once for thy
Justification, and ^hou may reason out thy Comfort and Pro^ection; for this
follows undeniably, Romans ^.32. If God has given thee Christ, how shall he not
with him, freely give thee all things. When thou have closed with Christ, and
interested thy self in God by Faith, it is the work of Reason to shake off all
doubts and fears. Thus did David, Psalm. 42.5.11. reason with his heart against
D^j^ction.

Ask but a Reason of thy heart for being troubled, and thy trouble will vanish;
for thou have no more reason for thy fears, and disquiets than a wicked man
has for his hopes and joys; they both arise from want of consideration, Psalm.
116.11. I said in my haste, all men are liars. A Christians fears arise through
haste, and a due and right exercise of Reason will quell them all, because
there is no Reason for them; they cannot endure a strict Examination: And how
much better is it to have fears, that are groundless, and hopes that are
reasonable (as the Godly have,) than groundless hopes, and reasonable well
grounded fears, as every wicked man has.

Eighthly, Do not only labor against Unbelief and Distrust, but strive for
the highest acts of Faith, endeavor not only to hope, but to rejoice; not only
to be patient, but thankful; think it not enough that thou do escape those
Rocks upon which the people of God, have been ready to stumble in thy
Condition; but strive to imitat^ those that have excelled, and done worthily in
the like case: the 11th. to the Hebrews, will afford you many glorious
Examples. Remember that God expects more from you, then he did from Israel in
the Wilderness, he calls you to higher and more noble duties, because he has
revealed more Grace, and given greater helps to you: Two things especially God
expects from you more than he did from them.

First, All patience, and long-suffering with joyfulness, Col. 1.11.

Secondly, To give thanks in every thing, 1 These. 5.18. These are difficult,
yet these are your duties, especially who live under the Gospel. It was well if
Israel could bear some of Gods Providence, for them to hold up under them
without murmuring, was much; but God requires of you not only to submit, but to
be thankful, not only to bear Affliction patiently, but joyfully.

Look not therefore on your Afflictions and Troubles, as a way to Heaven, but
look for Heaven in them; let your expectations of Glory increase with your
increase of Troubles in the world; look for, labor for, and express a Spirit
of Glory resting upon your spirits.

To Conclude, Stand still and consider, and considering admire the goodness of
God, who has so provided for thee in this world, that thou may be Afflicted
and Persecuted, but thou can not be miserable; there is no Condition in which
thou have not cause of rejoicing: If thou art without Comfort, it is thine own
fault, God has made provision that thy joy may be full. Thou can not fall so
low, but thou may hold fast on the Lord who is able to raise thee up; and
whatever thy Condition be, it is not only no Presumption, but it is thy Duty to
hope in him, he has not only allowed, but Commanded thee to hope in him: And
believe Christian, a commanded confidence cannot miscarry; such a hope will not
make thee ashamed.

FINIS.

