Mr. Chillingworth 's Judgment OF THE RELIGION OF PROTESTANTS, etc.
The PREFACE.
SInce the Parliament is now upon a Bill of Comprehension, and another of
Indulgence or Toleration, I cannot but think it seasonable to publish these
Passages, which I have collected out of Mr. Chillingworth's Book, entitled,
The Religion of Protestants a safe Way to Salvation. Not but that I suppose
there are few Lords, or Members of the House of Commons, that were so little
concerned in the Controversy between Papists and Protestants, as not to have
read so famous a Book of that Subject; which in order to printing, had the high
Approbation of the then Vice Chancellor, and both the King's and Margaret
Professors of Divinity in the University of Oxon; and since its publication,
has had the highest Commendation of most, if not all Learned Protestants, as
the most learned and judicious Book of any that had been published before upon
those great Controverted Points; yet even to such it will not be unpleasing to
be reminded of these few useful Things.

Here the Reader will find, in brief, what the Religion of Protestants is; what
Errors are dangerous, what not: That differing Protestants agree in all Things
necessary to Salvation; that it is Unchristian to use Force in Matters merely
Religious. What is the Fountain of all the Schisms of the Church, and the
Calamities that have infested Christendom about Opinions of Religion; and that
Universal Liberty, well moderated, is the way to reduce Christians to Truth and
Unity.

This Book was first printed in the Year 1637, and dedicated to his Majesty
Charles the First, and reprinted 1663; and for more common Use made shorter, by
leaving out personal Matters, printed again Anno 1685.

Of the Religion of Protestants.
CHap. 6. Nom. 56. Know then, Sir, that when I say the Religion of Protestants
is in prudence to be preferred before yours: as on the one side I do not
understand by your Religion the Doctrine of Bellarmine, or Baronius, or any
other private Man amongst you; nor the Doctrine of the Sorbon, or of the
Jesuits, or of the Dominicans, or of any other particular Company amongst you,
but that wherein you all agree, or profess to agree, The Doctrine of the
Council of Trent: So accordingly on the other side, by The Religion of
Protestants, I do not understand the Doctrine of Luther, or Calvin, or
Melancton, nor the Confession of Augusta or Geneva, nor the Catechism of
Heidelberg, nor the Articles of the Church of England, no, nor the Harmony of
Protestant Confessions, but that wherein they all agree, and which they all
subscribe with a greater Harmony, as a perfect Rule of their Faith and Actions;
that is, the Bible, the Bible, I say the Bible only is the Religion of
Protestants! Whatsoever else they believe besides it, and the plain
irrefragable, indubitable consequences of it, well may they hold it as a matter
of Opinion, but not as a matter of Faith and Religion; neither can they with
coherence to their own grounds believe it themselves, nor require the belief of
it of others, without most high and most schismatical Presumption. I, for my
part, after a long (and as I verily believe and hope) impartial search of the
true way to eternal Happiness, do profess plainly, that I cannot find any rest
for the sole of my foot, but upon this Rock only. I see plainly and with mine
own eyes, that there are Popes against Popes, Councils against Councils, some
Fathers against others, the same Fathers against themselves, a Consent of
Fathers of one Age against a Consent of Fathers of another Age, the Church of
one Age against the Church of another Age; Traditive Interpretations of
Scripture are pretended, but there are few or none to be found: No Tradition
but only of Scripture can derive it self from the Fountain, but may be plainly
proved, either to have been brought in, in such an Age after Christ, or that in
such an Age it was not in. In a word, there is no sufficient certainty but of
the Scripture only, for any considering Man to build upon. This therefore, and
this only, I have reason to believe; this I will profess, according to this I
will live, and for this, if there be occasion, I will not only willingly, but
even gladly lose my Life, though I should be sorry that Christians should take
it from me. Propose me any thing out of this Book, and require whether I
believe it or no, and seem it never so incomprehensible to Humane Reason, I
will subscribe it with Hand and Heart, as knowing no demonstration can be
stronger than this, God has said so, therefore it is true. In other things I
will take no Man's Liberty of Judgment from him, neither shall any Man take
mine from me; I will think no Man the worse Man or the worse Christian; I will
love no Man the less for differing in Opinion from me; and what measure I meet
to others, I expect from them again: I am fully assured that God does not, and
therefore that Men ought not to require any more of any Man than this, To
believe the Scripture to be God's Word, to endeavor to find the true sense of
it, and to live according to it.

N. 57. This is the Religion which I have chosen, after a long deliberation,
and I am verily persuaded that I have chosen wisely, much more wisely than if I
had guided my self according to your Churches Authority; for the Scripture
being all true, I am secured by believing nothing else, that I shall believe no
falsehood as Matter of Faith: And if I mistake the sense of Scripture, and so
fall into Error, yet I am secure from any danger thereby, if but your Grounds
be true; because endeavoring to find the true Sense of Scripture, I cannot but
hold my Error without pertinacy, and be ready to forsake it, when a more true
and a more probable sense shall appear unto me: And then all necessary Truth
being, as I have proved, plainly set down in Scripture, I am certain by
believing Scripture, to believe all necessary Truth; and he that does so, if
his Life be answerable to his Faith, how is it possible he should fail of
Salvation?

Scripture the only Rule whereby to judge of Controversies.
Chap. 2. N. 11. -- To speak properly (as Men should speak when they write of
Controversies in Religion) the Scripture is not a Judge of Controversies, but a
Rule only, and the only Rule for Christians to judge them by: Every Man is to
judge for himself with the Judgment of Discretion, and to choose either his
Religion first, and then his Church, as we say; or as you, his Church first,
and then his Religion. But by the Consent of both sides, every Man is to judge
and choose; and the Rule whereby he is to direct his choice, if he be a natural
Man, is Reason; if he be already a Christian, Scripture, which we say is the
Rule to judge all Controversies by, yet not all simply, but all the
Controversies of Christians, of those that are already agreed upon this first
Principle, that the Scripture is the Word of God. But that there is any Man, or
any Company of Men, appointed to be Judge for all Men, that we deny; and that I
believe you will never prove.

Every Man to judge for himself in Matters of Religion.
Chap. 2. N. 16. In Civil and Criminal Causes, the Parties have for the most
part so much Interest, and very often so little Honesty, that they will not
submit to a Law though never so plain, if it be against them; or will not see
it to be against them, though it be never so plainly: Whereas if Men were
honest, and the Law were plain and extended to all Cases, there would be little
need of Judges. Now in Matters of Religion, when the Question is, Whether every
Man be a fit Judge and Chuser for himself? we suppose Men honest, and such as
understand the difference between a Moment and Eternity; and such Men, we
conceive, will think it highly concerns them to be of the true Religion, but
nothing at all that this or that Religion should be the true: And then we
suppose that all the necessary Points of Religion are plain and easy, and
consequently every Man in this Cause to be a competent Judge for himself,
because it concerns himself to judge right as much as Eternal Happiness is
worth, and if through his own default he judge amiss, he alone shall suffer for
it.

Chapter 3. N. 81. -- If they [Men] would be themselves, and be content that others
should be, in the choice of their Religion, the Servants of God and not of Men;
if they would allow, that the way to Heaven is no narrower now than Christ lest
it, his Yoke no heavier than he made it; that the belief of no more
Difficulties is required now to Salvation, than was in the Primitive Church;
that no Error is in it self destructive and exclusive from Salvation now, which
was not then; if instead of being zealous Papists, earnest Calvinists, rigid
Lutherans, they would become themselves, and be content that others should be
plain and honest Christians; if all Men would believe the Scripture, and
freeing themselves from Prejudice and Passion, would sincerely endeavor to
find the true sense of it, and live according to it, and require no more of
others but to do so, not denying their Communion to any that do so, would so
order their Public Service of God, that all which do so may without Scruple or
Hypocrisy, or Protestation against any part of it, join with them in it; who
does not see that (seeing as we suppose here, and shall prove hereafter) all
necessary Truths are plainly and evidently set down in Scripture, there would
of necessity be among all Men, in all things necessary, Unity of Opinion? And
notwithstanding any other differences that are or could be, Unity of Communion,
and Charity, and mutual Toleration; by which means all Schism and Heresy would
be banished the World, and those wretched Contentions which now rend and tear
in pieces not the Coat, but the Members and Bowels of Christ, with mutual Pride
and Tyranny, and cursing, killing, and damning, would fain make immortal,
should speedily receive a most blessed Catastrophe. But of this hereafter, when
we shall come to the Question of Schism, wherein I persuade my self that I
shall plainly show, that the most vehement Accusers are the greatest Offenders,
and that they are indeed at this time the greatest Schismatics, who make the
way to Heaven narrower, the Yoke of Christ heavier, the differences of Faith
greater, the Conditions of Ecclesiastical Government harder and stricter, than
they were made at the beginning by Christ and his Apostles; they who talk of
Unity and aim at Tyranny, and will have Peace with none but with their Slaves
and Vassals.

Pres. N. 30. -- For what one Conclusion is there in the whole Fabric of my
Discourse, that is not naturally deducible out of this one Principle, That all
things necessary to Salvation are evidently contained in the Scriptures? Or
what one Conclusion almost of importance is there in your Book, which is not by
this one clearly confutable? Grant this, and it will presently follow, in
opposition to your first Conclusion, and the Argument of your first Chapter,
That amongst Men of different Opinions, touching the obscure and controverted
Questions of Religion, such as may with probability be disputed on both sides,
(and such are the Disputes of Protestants) good Men and Lovers of Truth of all
sides may be saved, because all necessary things being supposed evident
concerning them, with Men so qualified, there will be no difference; there
being no more certain sign that a Point is not evident, than that honest and
understanding and indifferent Men, and such as give themselves liberty of
Judgment, after a mature Consideration of the matter, differ about it.

Of Disagreeing Protestants.
Ans. to Pref. N. 26. 1. The most disagreeing Protestants that are, yet thus
far agree, that these Books of Scripture which were never doubted of in the
Church, are the undoubted Word of God, and a perfect Rule of Faith. 2. That the
sense of them which God intended, whatsoever it is, is certainly true; so that
they believe implicitly even those very Truths against which they err; and why
an implicit Faith in Christ and his Word, should not suffice as well as an
implicit Faith in your Church, I have desired to be resolved by many of your
side, but never could. 3. That they are to use their best Endeavors to believe
the Scripture in true sense, and to live according to it. This, if they perform
(as I hope many on all sides do) truly and sincerely, it is impossible but that
they should believe aright in all things necessary to Salvation, that is, in
all those things that pertain to the Covenant between God and Man in Christ;
for so much is not only plainly but frequently contained in Scripture and
believing aright the Covenant, if they for their parts perform the Condition
required of them, which is sincere Obedience, why should they not expect that
God will perform his Promise, and give them Salvation? For, as for other things
which lie without the Covenant, and are therefore less necessary, if by reason
of the seeming Conflict which is oftentimes between Scripture, Reason, and
Authority on the one side, and Scripture, Reason, and Authority on the other;
if by reason of the variety of Tempers, Abilities, Educations, and unavoidable
Prejudices, whereby Men's Understandings are variously formed and fashioned,
they do embrace several Opinions, whereof some must be erroneous; to say that
God will damn them for such Errors, who are Lovers of him, and Lovers of Truth,
is to rob Man of his Comfort, and God of his Goodness, it is to make Man
desperate, and God a Tyrant.

Ib. N. 27. That it is sufficient for any Man's Salvation, that he believe the
Scripture, that he endeavor to believe it in the true sense of it as far as
concerns his Duty; and that he conform his Life unto it, either by Obedience or
Repentance: He that does so, (and all Protestants, according to the Dictamen of
their Religion, should do so) may be secured that he cannot err Fundamentally,
so that notwithstanding their Differences, and your Presumption, the same
Heaven may receive them all.

Ib. N. 29. Who can find fault with him [Dr. Potter] for saying; If through
want of means of Instruction, Incapacity, invincible or probable Ignorance, a
Man die in Error, he may be saved: But if he be negligent in seeking Truth,
unwilling to find it, either does see it and will not, or might see it and will
not, that his Case is dangerous, and without Repentance, desperate.

Chapter 1. N. 11. Methinks, with much more Reason, and much more Charity, you must
suppose that many of these Controversies which are now disputed among
Christians, (all which profess themselves Lovers of Christ, and truly desirous
to know his Will and do it) are either not decidable by that means which God
has provided, and so not necessary to be decided; or if they be, yet not so
plainly and evidently, as to oblige Men to hold one way: Or lastly, if
decidable, and evidently decided, yet you may hope that the erring part, by
reason of some Veil before their Eyes, some execusable Ignorance, or
unavoidable Prejudice, does not see the Question to be decided against him, and
so opposes not that which he does know to be the Word of God, but only that
which you know to be so, and which he might know, were he void of Prejudice:
which is a Fault, I confess, but a Fault which is incident even to good and
honest Men very often; and not of such a Gigantick Disposition as you make it,
to fly directly upon God Almighty, and to give him the Lie to his Face.

Of the Necessity of a Visible Judge in Controversies of Religion, as well as in
Civil Matters.
Chapter 2. N. 17. -- In Civil Controversies we are obliged only to external
Passive Obedience, and not to an Internal and Active. We are bound to obey the
Sentence of the Judge, or not to resist it, but not always to believe it just.
But in Matters of Religion, such a Judge is required whom we should be obliged
to believe to have judged right; so that in Civil Controversies every honest
and understanding Man is fit to be a Judge, but in Religion none but he that is
infallible.

5. In Civil Causes there is Means and Power, when the Judge has decreed to
compel Men to obey his Sentence: otherwise I believe Laws alone would be to as
much purpose for the ending of Differences, as Laws and Judges both. But all
the Power in the World is neither fit to convince, nor able to compel a Man's
Conscience to consent to any thing: Worldly Terror may prevail so far, as to
make Men profess a Religion which they believe not, (such Men, I mean, who know
not that there is a Heaven provided for Martyrs, and a Hell for those that
dissemble such Truths as are necessary to be professed) but to force either any
Man to believe what he believes not, or any honest Man to dissemble what he
does believe, (if God commands him to profess it) or to profess what he does
not believe, all the Powers in the World are too weak, with all the Powers of
Hell to assist them.

7. In Civil Matters it is impossible Titius should hold the Land in question,
and Sempronius too; and therefore either the Plaintiff must injure the
Defendant by disquieting his Possession, or the Defendant wrong the Plaintiff,
by keeping his Right from him. But in Controversies of Religion the Case is
otherwise; I may hold my Opinion, and do you no wrong, and you yours, and do me
none. Nay, we may both of us hold our Opinion, and yet do our selves no harm,
provided the Difference be not touching any thing necessary to Salvation, and
that we love Truth so well, as to be diligent to inform our Conscience, and
constant in following it.

Concerning Errors Damnable, or not Damnable.
Chapter 3. N. 52. I Answer, that these Differences between Protestants concerning
Errors Damnable, and not Damnable: Truths Fundamental, and not Fundamental, may
be easily reconciled; for either the Error they speak of may be purely and
simply involuntary, or it may be, in respect of the cause of it, voluntary: If
the Cause of it be some voluntary and unavoidable Fault, the Error is it self
sinful, and consequently in its own Nature damnable; as if by negligence in
seeking the Truth, by unwillingness to find it, by Pride, by Obstinacy, by
desiring that Religion should be true which suits best with my Ends, by fear of
Men's ill Opinion, or any other worldly Fear, or any worldly Hope, I betray my
self to any Error contrary to any Divine revealed Truth, that Error may be
justly styled a Sin, and consequently of it self to such an one damnable; but
if I be guilty of none of these Faults, but be desirous to know the Truth, and
diligent in seeking it, and advise not at all with Flesh and Blood about the
choice of my Opinions, but only with God, and that Reason that he has given
me: If I be thus qualified, and yet through humane Infirmity fall into Error,
that Error cannot be damnable. Again, the Party erring, may be conceived either
to die with Contrition, for all his Sins known and unknown, or without it: If
he die without it, this Error in it self if damnable, will be likewise so unto
him; if he die with Contrition (as his Error can be no Impediment but he may)
his Error, though in it self damnable to him, according to your Doctrine, will
not prove so.

Of using Force in Matters of Religion.
Chapter 5. N. 96. But they endeavored to force the Society, whereof they were
parts, to be healed and reformed as they were; and if it refused, they did,
when they had Power, drive them away, even their Superiors, both Spiritual and
Temporal, as is notorious. The Proofs hereof are wanting, and therefore I might
defer my Answer until they were produced, yet take this beforehand: If they
did so, then herein, in my Opinion, they did amiss; for I have learnt, from the
Ancient Fathers of the Church, that Nothing is more against Religion, than to
force Religion; and of St. Paul, The Weapons of the Christian Warfare are not
Carnal: And great Reason; For humane Violence may make Men counterfeit, but
cannot make them believe, and is therefore fit for nothing, but to breed Form
without, and Atheism within. Besides, if this means of bringing Men to embrace
any Religion were generally used, (as if it may be justly used in any place, by
those that have Power, and think they have Truth, certainly they cannot with
reason deny, but that it may be used in every place, by those that have Power
as well as they, and think they have Truth as well as they) what could follow
but the maintenance perhaps of Truth, but perhaps only of the profession of it
in one place, and the oppression of it in an hundred? what will follow from it,
but the preservation perhaps of Unity, but peradventure only of Uniformity in
particular States and Churches; but the immortalizing the greater and more
lamentable Divisions of Christendom and the World? And therefore what can
follow from it, but perhaps in the judgment of carnal Policy, the temporal
Benefit and Tranquillity of Temporal States and Kingdoms, but the infinite
Prejudice, if not the dissolution of the Kingdom of Christ? And therefore it
well becomes them who have their Portion in this Life, who serve no higher
State than that of England, or Spain, or France, nor this neither, any further
than they may serve themselves by it; who think of no other happiness but the
preservation of their own Fortunes and Tranquillity in this World; who think of
no other means to preserve States but humane Power and Machiavilian Policy, and
believe no other Creed but this, Regi aut Civitati Imperium habenti nihil
unjustum quod utile! Such Men as these it may become to maintain by worldly
Power and Violence, their State, Instrument, Religion: For if all be vain and
false (as in their Judgment it is) the present whatsoever is better than any,
because it is already settled: An alteration of it may draw with it change of
States, and the change of State the subversion of their Fortune; but they that
are indeed Servants and Lovers of Christ, of Truth, of the Church, and of
Mankind, ought, with all courage, to oppose themselves against it as a common
Enemy of all these.

They that know there is a King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, by whose Will and
Pleasure Kings and Kingdoms stand and fall; they know that to no King or State
any thing can be profitable which is unjust, and that nothing can be more
evidently unjust, than to force weak Men by the Profession of a Religion which
they believe not, to lose their own Eternal Happiness, out of a vain and
needless fear, lest they may possibly disturb their temporal Quietness, there
being no danger to any State from any Man's Opinion, unless it be such an
Opinion by which Disobedience to Authority or Impiety is taught or licensed;
which sort I confess may justly be punished as well as other Faults; or unless
this sanguinary Doctrine be joined with it, That it is lawful for him by human
Violence to enforce others to it.

Chap. 4. N. 16. This presumptuous imposing of the Senses of Men upon the Words
of God, the special Senses of Men upon the general Words of God, and laying
them upon Men's Consciences together under the equal Penalty of Death and
Damnation. This vain Conceit, that we can speak of the things of God better
than the words of God; this deifying our own Interpretations, and tyrannous
enforcing them upon others; this restraining of the Word of God, from that
Latitude and Generality, and the Understandings of Men from that Liberty
wherein Christ and the Apostles left them, This Persuasion is no Singularity of
mine, but the Doctrine which I have learned from Divines of great Learning and
Judgment. Let the Reader be pleased to peruse the seventh Book of Acont. de
Str^t. Satanae, and Zanch. his last Oration delivered by him after the
composing of the Discord between him and Amervachius, and he shall confess as
much.
is, and has been the only Fountain of all the Schisms of the Church, and that
which makes them immortal: The common Incondiary of Christendom, and that which
(as I said before) tears in pieces not the Coat, but the Bowels and Members of
Christ; Ridente Turca, nec dolente Judico, take away these Walls of Separation,
and all will quickly be one. Take away this Persecuting, Burning, Cursing,
Damning of Men for not subscribing to the words of Men, as the words of God;
require of Christians only to believe Christ, and to call no Man Master but him
only; let those leave claiming Infallibility, that have no Title to it; and let
them that in their Words disclaim it, disclaim it likewise in their Actions. In
a word, take away Tyranny, which is the Devils Instrument to support Errors,
and Superstitions, and Impieties, in the several parts of the World, which
could not otherwise long withstand the Power of Truth.

I say, take away Tyranny, and restore Christians to their just and full
Liberty of captivating their Understanding to Scripture only: and as Rivers,
when they have a free Passage, run all to the Ocean; so it may well be hoped by
God's Blessing, that universal Liberty thus moderated, may quickly reduce
Christendom to Truth and Unity. These Thoughts of Peace (I am persuaded) may
come from the God of Peace, and to his Blessing I recommend them.

FINIS.
Printed for Fr. Smith, at the Elephant and Castle in Pope's-head-Alley in
Cornhill. 1689.


