CHOICE NOVELS, AND Amorous Tales, WRITTEN By the most Refined Wits OF ITALY.

Newly translated into English.

London, Printed by T.N. for Humphrey Moseley at the Prince's Arms in St.
Paul's Churchyard. 1652.

To the READER.
THE Academici Incogniti are known to be of the best wits of Italy, who having
published a Collection of their Novelle Amarose, easily persuaded a Gentleman,
for his and thy divertisements to Translate some of the choicest; who is so far
from being ashamed to be of the unknown, that it is his ambition; since the
Illustrious Author, whose name thou shall not be ignorant of glory's in the
same Title, as Loredano, Pallavicino, etc. Boccace, and others, though they
have written the same way before them, and have been universally received, may
now give place and acknowledge themselves outgone. For the Subject, its Love,
and so cannot but be grateful. Be but favorable, and enjoy in the reading but
as much pleasure, as I am confident the Contrivers of them did in compiling
them: And so farewell.

A Table of the Novels, with the Names of the AUTHORS.
OCtavio, the first Novel, written, by Signior Giovanni Croce Bianca. Aleria,
the second Novel, by Signior Giovanni Francesco Loredano. Amasia, the third
Novel, by the same Author. Leonora, the fourth Novel, written by Signior Pietro
Pomo. Armidoro, the fifth Novel, written by Signior Girolamo Brusoni. Aurelia,
the fixth Novel, written by Signior Giovanni Francesco Loredano. Niarpe, the
seventh Novel, by Signior Ferrante Pallavicino. Deadora, the eighth Novel,
written by Signior Giovanni Francesco Loredano. Emilio, the ninth Novel,
written by Signior Gio. Battista Fusconi. Limisinda, the tenth Novel, by
Signior Gio. Battista Settimo. Irlando and Armando, the eleventh Novel, by
Signior Ferrante Pallacino. Epidoro, the twelfth Novel, by Signior Gio.
Francesco Loredano.
OCTAVIO.
NOVEL I.
The ARGUMENT.
Octavio finds an amorous correspondence in Florida, which his Father Odoardo
perceiving, sends him to the University at Bologna: Horatio, Florida's Father
in the mean time promises her in marriage to Don Fernando. The Lover being
advertised, returns to Parthenope. They both confess their resolutions to their
Fathers; whereupon Florida is imprisoned in a Monastery where her sister
Bellaria was, who deceiving Octavio, instead of Florid, was ravished by
Fernando, whose wife she became; as also Florida did Octavo 's.

PARTHENOPE being one of the principal Cities of Italy, enjoys a Heaven which
is always so clement, that its neither vexed with the excesses of the Frosts in
Winter, nor of the heats of the Summer: She kindly affords the Tyrene Sea her
breasts, who being not ingrate makes profitable returns, and enricheth her with
pleasures: Plenty feasts at all times in the fields of its territory, and
delight, triumphs in such a manner, that Heaven, the Sea, and the Earth seem
rivals in rendering this City beyond others incomparably wonderful. Its
inhabited by very tractable people, yet cunning and of a quick wit for
invention; It breeds a many Cavaliers, amongst whom one of the first was called
Octavio Franci a noble man, conspicuous for wealth, and illustrious for his
valor and person: He as the only One was brought up with carresses, which
usually disposes minds to the love of luxury, whence he hardly had completed
his third luster, but he submits himself to the Tyrany of Love. Florida
Albinelli dwelt near his house, a Lady of a great birth, but of a slender
fortune; her father loving appearance more then reality, having vainly consumed
those riches which maintain titles and dignities. Florida was as liberally
privileged by nature, as she was hardly persecuted by Fortune; She had such
beauties, that the attributes of celestial and divine seemed rather proper then
Hyperboly. With these prerogatives she daily acquired such a number of Suitors
as Penelope never had so many wooers: Neither could any other Egyptian Lady
boast of more lovers: but amongst the crowd of her servants none was more
passionate, and more hearty then our Octavio. He a long while courted her as a
neighbor, and then beholds her as the Paradise of his eyes, but at last she
proves a hell to his mind, observing himself to be equally happy in beholding
her, and tormented by desiring her. They legitimate their loves amongst
themselves with promises of marriage: so that sense being incapable of a bridle
to restrain it, raised them in a short time to a very high passion. Octavio
frequented more then usually a Chamber which overlooked Florida's Chamber,
where he often waited as full of thoughts, as he was often full of grief; yet
he never mist an occasion, seeing her appear on the Balcony, silently to
signify his affection to her, neither did she forbear watchfully to receive it
with pleasure, but her discretion feigned it unawares, for that civility did not
oblige her to show her self perverse: a thousand times was he about to speak to
her, but never durst; possessed with a youthful bashfulness, at last after a
great contest with himself he let fly a letter, the blackness of the ink hiding
the blushes of his modesty: The letter succeeded well, since Florida gladly
received it, graciously read it, and answered it (appearing at the window) with
a kind smile; 'twas a lamp which like St. Hermo's fire cheered Octavio's
heart, which beat on the Sea of his affection, whence taking a good omen he
began easily to hope for the calm of his contentment: being fully pleased with
a devout acknowledgement, he thanks his goddess who so kindly consolated him,
the neerness of the dwelling so fully favoring him, to make himself readily
understood. She already caught with the good qualities of Octavis, perceived
her self to be a lover, before she knew she was so cordially loved, neither did
she want the will to make it appear, so that from their mutual correspondence
both their affections increased unmeasurably. The Lady gave way to the words of
Octavio, she (having put by all other respects) received them the more
gratefully, the more endearing they were. They vowed matrimony together with a
mutual consent. Octavio thereby getting a glorious Alliance, and to Florida
accrewed the hopes of a great fortune. Besides they both begged Heaven for a
happy conclusion of their Nuptials. When Odoardo (for so was Octavio's father
called) observed his sons flames, which as it is ordinary for young men, were
hotter then they were wary. He greatly disdained it, not that she displeased
him for his daughter in law, but that he was afraid of her parents, who from
her Cradle had designed her for another. Yet without seeming to take notice of
any of his sons practices, that he might not oblige himself to resent it
unto him, he commands him to make ready to transfer himself to terminate his
commenc't studies at Bollogna.

The Father hoping that Pallas being industrious, would there unloose that knot
which had by Venus been knit in Parthenope. This paternall decree was a fatal
blow to Octavio, who already conceived his departure as the passage from life
to death: He afflicts himself, sighs, laments, curses his Fortune, his
studies, even his Fathers Genius, finds a thousand excuses to delay his
journey, but they nothing prevailed since our Lover must obey. Florida remained
astonished at the news of this sad separation, and then burst forth into so
high a resentment of grief which the tenderness of a Woman, and the folly of
a lover could possibly suggest. She with a good will would have followed him,
had she not feared to have ruined him by the ruins of her self in repute and
honor: Yet she remained like the Heliotrope, altogether mortified, when the
Evening divorceth it from the Rays of the Sun. Octavio being gone, who went
away immerc'd with grief, bathing with his tears the earth he stamped on with
his feet. Being arrived at Bologna, in the pleasing quiet of Letters, he finds
the war of his affections still the more cruel; whence he concludes it
false, That absence cures the infirmity of love. His own thoughts became his
executioners, always martyrizing him with the memory of his so much regretted
felicity, then which nothing was more dear. The Lectures and Scholastic
Conferences so grateful to the virtuous, to him who was oppressed with grief,
and whose soul was in an agony, seemed like Funeral Songs, and study appeared
truly the sepulture of the living. He tasted not the Nectar of Wisdom, since
spirits weakened by dissoluteness, usually suffer the disrelish of all good
things. He then remained in Bologna, and though in appearance he frequented the
Schools, yet in effect he heard the Masters as an Asp, and profited like a
stock: He lived a Scholar in name only amongst students without study, idle at
their exercises, and so desperate that he even lost his life in that place
where others render it immortal with the glory of Learning. Octavio was at
last in the midst of so many afflictions, consolated by Fortune, who by the
hands of certain Merchants caused his Fathers liberality to fall into his
hands, converted into showers of gold. So that being richly provided with
money, he ravisheth himself to Parthenope to visit his Florida, the sweet
cause of his cruel torments. Being arrived unknown without going to his
Father, he so orders the business, that she has notice of his arrival, so
that through the favorable darkness of the night, he came to adore her at a
little window of her house. It Is superfluous to relate the Complements which
past, or how many tears were shed out of tenderness, since any man knows what
affections an unthought-of accident will raise in two hearts tenderly loving
one the other, and so long tormented with such longing desires to review one
another. But these pleasures lasted but a few nights, for that Octavio refused
treacherously to tempt his Fortune, having already experimented, that with
velocity she turns her wheel in felicity, but slowly in time of misery. He
therefore parts burthening himself by this his new departure with new griefs,
and being scarce come to Bologna, and having hardly furnished himself with
necessaries, that the business might not be discovered, he retakes his journey
back again to Parthenope. So that for the space of a whole year he
alternatively traveling and resting, lived betwixt torments and contentments.
The year being almost at an end, Octavio being at Bologna, falls fick of a
Fever; which though it was without danger, yet was long, and many great
perplexities of mind befell him, because it diverted him from his journey. In
the mean time Horatio (for so was Florida's father called) concludes her
marriage with Don Fernando Marquess of Tuedos, she having been from her infancy
designed for him: He was of Arragon descended from Dukes, a Cavalier of a small
Fortune, of great parentage, and for pretenses at all. He presumed that he had
a greater wealth then truly he possessed, that he was more valiant then indeed he
was, and yet more Gentile then he seemed; of a short stature, of a proud port,
of a brown complexion, and lame; so that to give the fair Florida to Fernando,
was the same thing as afresh to grant a Venus to a Vulcan. This was the
Bridegroom which Horatio had prepared not to accommodate his daughter, but to
advantage himself in the Court of Castile. Cursed interest! cruel and perverse
Numens! which necessitates men to sacrifice even their own children unto you.
Florida having heard the conclusion of the marriage, became sad, yet seemed
pleased to her Father, and dispensed tears, which seemed of joy, but were of
grief. After a day she feigns herself ill, and begs that all public or private
solemnity might be suspended till her recovery. In the mean time she
dispatcheth a Letter to Octavio, which included this following sense.

My Lord;
MY Fathers authority forces me to break my faith with you, to violate my
genius, and to be no more yours. He has promised me to the Marquess Don
Fernando a Cavalier, whom I wish a Monarch, that I might show my self the more
constant to you by despising a Regal match for your sake. I fear my fathers
Anger will become murtherous, when I shall have discovered him our loves:
Therefore come my Octavio, but come quickly to see your Florida, who is
inmoveably disposed either to live with you, or dye for you. Come and hear my
mournful Nenias instead of Epithalamiums. And to see how contentedly I shall go
to my grave, if Fate consents not to join me to your bed. Remember your self
then, my Lord, (if I shall see you no more) of your oaths and of our mutual
affections, and live happy, since what ever happens, I shall be sure to die

Your most faithful FLORIDA.


THis Letter was an enchantment which would have ravished Octavio out of Hell
as well as from his bed. He who already was bettered in his health rose as soon as
he had read it, and no sooner got to horse, but away for Parthenope, guided by
fury and accompanied with despair. Sometimes with a raging heart he wished
himself alive only to be revenged of his Rival, and sometimes with a desperate
voice he begged Heaven to thunderstrike him, that he might not see Florida
either subject to death, or Fernando's Spouse. But Fortune, which equally
preserves both fools and desperate persons, happily brings this unhappy man to
Parthenope; being arrived at his Father Odoardo's house; and before he lighted
from his horse having seen the fair Florida appear at the Balcony, he salutes
her with a joy mixed with grief of heart, as ignorant whether he honored her as
his own, or as the spouse of another man. Fortune would have it so, he finds
his Father's house without his Father, who was newly parted for some Domestic
occasion, whereby he had the opportunity to speak from his wonted apartment to
his dearest, who thereby testified inexplicable signs of contentment. The
first complement past, she confirms him the great danger of her life, how far
greater her faith was, and that toward him her affection was supreme: She also
added, my Octavio did you know with how much satisfaction for your sake I shall
encounter death, perhaps without swearing you will believe me, that I pretend
not thereby the least jot of merit toward you. So that if your civility in its
own respect, affords me any power over you, I will not that it should extend it
self farther then to beg of you that you should never suffer grief to afflict
you, for whatever fatal accidents happen to me: Forasmuch as if the knowledge
of the actions of the living is granted to the dead, believe me, that your
torments will for ever be my hell. Octavio was violenc'd with so sensible an
affection; but profering an answer, he was hindered by his Fathers arrival. So
that he parted readily to meet him: Odoardo tenderly embraced his son, which
being with excess it shall suffice to speak, it was fatherly: He doubly
rejoiced to see his son recovered of his fever, and believing him wholly cured
of his amorous passions, he esteemed himself the happiest that lived.
Unsatisfied with kissing him, and asking him of his health and journey, related
him the news of the City, amongst which he told him he was in good time come
to enjoy the Festivals which were preparing for the marriage of Florida. Truly,
Sir, answered Octavio, in the house of Horatio you perhaps may sooner see a
Funeral then a Bridal; and thereupon discovered the whole success of his
love, Florida's resolution, with his own intention to enjoy her, to the venture
of his life and honor. The Father was astonished at so strange a relation, and
bold a proposition, being afterward quite enraged, he went about beating the
ground with his feet, and wringing his hands. Patience (exclaimes he) O
Fortune! I my self in begetting a son have provided my self an instrument of
mortification to afflict me. Which having said, he retires himself into
another Chamber, leaving Octavio alone in great confusion. If Odoardo's
distemper were great, the fury of Horatio that very night was far greater,
forasmuch as Florida having been as much inspired by the presence of Octavio,
as she had been disheartened by his absence, boldly confessed her amorous escapes.
But what above measure enraged his paternall mind, was her sixth resolution
never to have Fernando for her Husband. Horatio at that instant would have run
her through, had he not thought to have pleased her, when she with artificial
tears begged of him, rather to give her into the hands of Death, then into the
Spaniards. He afterward railed on her with a thousand injuries, and threatened
to correct her as a Girl; but the remedy appeared too vulgar for so desperate
a case, so that he the more labored with disdain, by reason he found no means
to qualify it. He consumed all the night in studying vengeance, which is the
legitimate child of fury, and the illegitimate satisfaction of a generous
spirit. The following day which succeeded this troubled night, he imprisons
Florida in a Cloister, yet in the same where was her sister Bellaria, who was
in time to be made a Nun, and be obedient to that vocation which her Fathers
avarice and cruelty had inspired. Octavio having heard the news of her
imprisonment, he could neither retain his tears, nor remit his grief: The
counsel of his friends, nor the prayers of his parents, were sufficient to
consolate him, so that his unhappy Father confidently believed that his sons
health would shipwreck on the rock of despair, yet did he not forbear to
persuade him to desist from that passion with well-season'd admonitions of
wisdom; but he well perceived he had sown salt, since he reaped no fruit.
Fernando on the other side rampant with rage, swore to be revenged of Octavio,
threatens murders, marshalls defies, and chalenges Duels; but in such a
manner, that that fury which ought to appear in action, vanished in words,
imitating Heaven, which the more it thunders, it intends the less to lighten.
Horatio who had truly bound the hopes of his advantages with the bond of this
Marriage, seeing them fled away to his loss, in tends his revenge, providing a
bravo snare to murder Octavio. But wiser advice restrained him, persuading him
to make use of dissimulation, which is the ordinary net wherein without noise
we may ensnare our enemies. Having therefore feigned it fit for him to change
air, by reason of an accustomed indisposition which befell him, he parts from
Parthenoye, having for a while suspended his intentions. In the mean time
Odoardo, that he might not lose his son, who was already fallen into a high
fit of melancholy, resolved to lose himself with him, promising all his
endeavors for the success of his desires. With these promises Octavio
respires again from his troubles, and having already provided himself of armed
men to attend him, he begins to walk about the City, Fortune leads him to the
encounter of Fernando, who at that time stirred not at all, whether it was that
the poor Cavalier had forgot the oaths he had sworn, to be revenged, or that
he remembered that Oaths of doing ill are not obligatory. Octavio thus seeing
himself victorious without Fighting, puts by all suspicion, and begins to
frequent the Monastery of Florida, using a faign'd Devotion, as if his Object
were Idolatry, not Adoration. There he daily entertained himself to see the
fair Prisoner, but she appeared not, being guarded by her Superiors; so that
the miserable man would willingly have changed his Nature with that of the
Lynx, so as he might have gotten Eyes whose looks would pierce the walls which
hid his Fairest from Him. At last having tempted much, and desired more that he
might but be introduced to speak with Bellaria, who being as 'twas thought
within a while to be a Nun, had liberty to appear at the Grate to take her
leave of the World: Octavio relates the series of his Love, and with so much
passion exagerates his Affections, that the Maid was forced to show her self
pitiful, least she should discover Her self inhumane. She was of such
corrected Manners, that she rather would have chosen death, than to engage Her
self in an action any ways dishonest. Yet she thought that to serve Octavio
in his Love, was the same thing as to serve Justice it self; since Florida
appeared due to Him who had purchased her with so many Pearls of his Tears and
Sweat. So that she modestly offers it; protesting. That it was as detestable
for her to have Fernando for her brother-in-Law, as he was abominated by
Florida for a Husband.

Octavio thanks her, darting forth by a treacherous Joy a most affectionate
sense of the obligation, but confused He then begs her to kiss for him his
Florida's Hand; which being readily executed by Her, gave our Lover means
afterward to trust her with his Letters, Ambassies, and Presents to her Sister.

The curious Inquisitiors of Parthenope, discoursed the reasons of Florida's
Imprisonment, to the wonder of all, and delight of those, who (always making
an ill interpretation of other Men's actions) use the least occasion they can to
give cause of speaking ill, and to divulge Satyrs. But the common Friends of
HORATIO and OCTAVIO, perceiving that there was a fire kindling betwixt the two
Families, which without blood could not be quenched, thought to suppress it
at its birth. Whereupon they wrote to Horatio, obliging him to return far
sooner then he intended; and being come, they calmly treated a Reconciliation,
and Horatio although He were very perverse was at last content. So as Octavio
would renounce Florida to Fernando, and in her stead take Bellaria to Wife. The
Party was proposed to Octavio, who discovering nothing, seemed well satisfied,
as the only way whereby he hoped to release his Lady out of her Prison. The
peace was thus concluded, and the Weddings appointed by the false promises of
the Lover, who deferred not to come according to his Custom to the Monastery,
to acquaint Florida with his incorrupted Faith; delivers a Letter to Bellaria;
she, who was already advised of his promises upon the Treaty of Peace,
believed her self to be his Spouse, denies the Delivery, desiring him to excuse
her, for she resolved to serve him hereafter no longer then under the notion
of his Wise. Octavio sighed, and esteemed himself unhappy at the news, but
laments Florida as more unfortunate, believing her self betrayed, and supposing
her self scorned by an Idolatrous Lover. Wherefore he despaired as one without
a Remedy, forasmuch as 'twas impossible for him to speak with his cruel Dear,
and to write to her was denied him by Bellaria, who was already become her
Rival, diffident and jealous of her.

Being thus at a loss, she went about the Cloisters, bewayling her desperate
hopes, and cursing her own Fortune which had induced her to preserve her Life
for so ungrateful a Person, and so long to lose her Liberty: But above all,
the memory of her Octavio most of all tormented her; Dear, although she even
esteemed him a Traitor. Fernando was then at Rome, when the reconcilement was
made, which nevertheless was treated with his consent: So that when all men
expected the solemnizing of the Weddings, Octavio freely frequented Bellaria
with his Visits, still importuning her with entreaties to induce her to favor
him as she had formerly toward Florida. Nevertheless Bellaria resisted the
temptation, for as much as her interest rendered her constant, although even
she was a Woman. But at last, when she saw she could not with hers, resist
the others perseverance, she changed her resolution; whence being become kind,
she afresh carries his salutes to her sister, embassies and letters: the lover
sweetly respired in this calm of fortune, which lasted no longer then the
coming of Fernando to Parthenope; who being come, Bellaria in all have sends
for Octavio, and tells him; that Florida in despite of fortune, being resolved
to have him only for her husband, prayed him to expect her that night near the
gate of the Convent, for that she resolved that very night to fly away with
him. The glad Lover, as any man may imagine, as he who had long expected
happily to reap the fruits of his pains, parted, having trusted his design to a
confident servant of his, with whom that night he comes to his determined post.

It happened that Fernando that very day arrived in Town (the same which
Bellaria had appointed) who had not visited his spouse, being hindered by
Domestic affairs, and diverted by a kinsman, who forcibly led him away with
him to dinner, and detained him even the supper; it being then late, and having
taken leave of his kinsman; so that to guard himself from the sinister
encounters of the night, for his own security he had with him a train of armed
servants: His way necessarily was by this Convent, so that seeing Octavio stand
immovable near the gate, he knew him, but was undiscovered by him: and then
imgining that he stayed there for some amorous booty; he curious to know the
truth, to that end watches behind the corner of the wall: He had not long with
great silence expected, when he hears the door opened, and advancing a step or
two he sees Octavio, who was coming away with the Lady; when with a raging fury
having unsheathed his sword, he assails him treacherously, pursues him, so that
the miserable man was forced to forsake his prey, that he might not lose his
life. Fernando being very well pleased with the victory, follows his way being
highly obliged by fortune who had brought him so happily to be revenged of his
rival, by ravishing his pretended spouse, even out of his arms. But being come
home, holding the Lady by the hand, who sad and pensive went along with him, he
saw by the light of a torch, that he handed a deceit, forasmuch as it was
Bellaria and not Florida which ne had gotten. He was astonished! Changed
countenance! And with disdain having demanded the reason of her which obliged
her to fly; She answered, That finding her self despised by Octavio, contrary
to the obligation of his promise, she had endeavored to gain by deceit what was
denied her by his rigid obstinacy; whereupon she faign'd her self the beloved
Florida, and so was flying away with him. Fernando then answers, Madam, Revenge
your self once more of your despiser by despising him; and since Fortune has
given you, as a prey, into my hands, do you make a prey of me, binding me with
the bonds of marriage and matrimonial faith: Bellaria thanked him, and (being
uncertain of Octavio's life, and fearful to remain without a husband) she soon
grants his offer, and the same night concludes the wedding, although without
her Fathers consent. Octavio on the other side being full of gref, and the
fright being over, he finds his body without wounds, but his mind was doubly
transfixd with jealousy and shame. What furies that night tormented him, his
resolution may witness, which was to fly from Parthenope, that he might behold
that heaven no more which had been so cruel to him in his loves: Florida, even
she also having understood of her sisters departure, was already grown wild,
holding it for undoubted that she was fled with her disloyal Octavio; So that
abominating the fallacies and treacheries of this world, she resolved with her
self to abandon it, and to become a Nun, and willingly would that very night
have cut off her hair, but that the action required a public solemnity; but
the succeeding day banished those shadows, from both Lovers, stopped their grief,
and bridled their resolutions; the fame of the deceit being rumor'd about the
City, and withal of Fernando's Nuptials: Horatio to whom it equally imported to
gain Fernando for his son in law, as well by Bellaria's as Florida's means, was
nothing moved at that nights accident: but accommodating himself to the
necessity, granted Octavio his long lamented, and dearly beloved Florida; so
that both Marriages were joyfully Solemnized. And Fate witnessed in the person
of Octavio, that by unknown ways she directs Men to the acquest of those
felicities, whereto they could never aim by the Conduct of humane prudence.

ALERIA.
NOVEL II.
The ARGUMENT.
Aleria being immovable to the prayers and services of the Marquess Arderico,
was persuaded only to love him, by her husbands commendations. The Marquess on
the other side, as he was going to reap the fruit of his Love; being assured
thereof by her, leaves off his design.

IN the noble City of Vicenza, amongst other Ladies which ravished the Eyes and
Hearts of all Men, the beauty of Aleria, descended from the Counts of Malo, was
singular amongst the rest, so that she gave way neither to flattery nor Envy.
The fairest Fair yielded to the Charms of that Face which would have been
believed Divine, and adored with continued devotions, had it not glorified her
Humanity; So that being pretended to by those who despaired of gaining her; she
obeying only those affections which yield only to desert, marries with the
Count of Sancta Croce, who both by birth and Virtue was chief amongst the
greatest. He had no Conditions, but those which were desirable; neither had He
any thing in him which did not beget admiration.

The Wedding was celebrated with as much solemnity as was requisite for their
Nobility and Wealth. Those who in the common Joy lamented the Funerals of their
own Hopes, did not forbear to come to the Wedding: They in the Joys of another
saw their own Sorrows; Music and Dancing which have the power to ravish
Hearts, even out of the hands of Melancholy it self, could not sweeten the
Grief of those Minds which even lost the hopes of Life with the beauty of
Aleria. Many submitting to the Laws of Necessity, according to the variety of
their genius, when they could not resist their own affection, they dedicated it
to other objects. Others knowing that their eyes were the instruments of their
pleasure, would also oblige them to be the Messengers of the longing desires of
their hearts. Some flew from that heaven, where the Sun shone but in favors of
others; Others observing the precepts which the art of Loves remedy prescribes,
they observed a heaven of beauty in her looks, which could not be without
shaddows. Arderico only the Marquess of Castel-Novo in the impossibility of
the undertaking enlivening the more his hopes found in that days solemnity,
his flames increased, where others had found the remedy of their passion: He
did I believe, stupefied with grief, assist at all the ceremonies, imitating
the Fly, who to enjoy the light cares not to lose its own life. He suffers
this torment with so much impatience, that his least dotings were to forget
himself. The feast ended, he found his fire more enflamed, absence from the
beloved object exstinguisheth not love, but foments it. This Arderico proved
his ardor being so much the more violent, when he could not recreate himself
with the fight of his Aleria. She on the other side, so Idolized her husbands
countenance with such continued demonstrations, that any hope would have
despaired, but that of Arderico which was vowed to obstinacy. The more he was
despised, the more he loved; He let slip no occasion to discover his wound; He
being continually in her sight, assaulted her with sighs, and begged pity from
her with his looks.

In fine, following her every where, and waiting diligently upon her at the
ball; no accident happened which he did not signalize with some show of respect
and testimony of love.

Aleria not believing, or not caring to be loved, never regarded him but with
indifferent looks. And although the obligations of civility forced her to
return him the favor of the ball, and to correspond by way of salutes, yet,
did she never privilege his affection with the least token of acceptance;
Arderico have ing no other means to insinuate his love into Aleria's mind, had
recourse to the benefit of his pen; with much trouble he dictates this Letter
his tears even washing away his ink.

Fairest;
I Should fear to deserve the rigours of your disdain, by discovering my
flames, did I not know that all hearts are obliged to the love of divine
things. The rays of your beauty have introduced such a fire in my breast, that
I should rather think it an effect of stupidity then of virtue. Aleria, I love
you, and if the laws of love were as powerful as those of Religion; I would say
I adore you. But what the pen silenceth the heart licenceth, so as you will not
disdain the obsequiousness of

Your most humble servant ARDERICO.


The letter being sealed, he sighs for the means how it might be securely
conveyed to Aleria's hands. The servants although they were all gained by the
excess of his liberalty durst not assault their Ladies affections, so much the
chaster, for as yet she gave no leave to be tempted. To use other persons,
might prove both scandalous and dangerous, so that he resolves to be himself
the bearer: Having fitted a day when she was at Church, perhaps more prayed to
then praying; getting near her, cheating the suspicion and observation of many,
he puts his note in Aleria's Offices, when she casually had laid them behind
her, to intend her mental private prayers. No body was ware of it. Aleria her
self, although she took up her Offices, did not presently perceive it. Scarce
did she find it, but she was presently overtaken with blushing, more disdained
against her self, that she had given the boldness to any man to tempt her, then
that she was displeased at the temptation. The prudence of this Lady knew well
that she did not deserve the name of chaste, who did not resist the flatteries
of Lovers; whoever is chaste out of necessity is unworthy the title. Aleria
having quieted her mind from the first confusions, which had stolen the blood
from her heart, and had left the Characters on her face: when she thought it
fit overcoming her curiosity, which is natural to women, she tears the letter
in a thousand pieces, as if that had been guilty of the fault, which his
audacity deserved who had given it her. Ar. derico felt his own heart torn in
pieces, with the tearing of the letter, despairing ever after of any invention,
whereby he might make known his affection. He was lost in a confusion at her
behavior, who being adored, not only took it ungratefully, but seemed as if
she would not know her adorer; yet the miserable man continues his servitude so
much the more unhappy, as his hopes were far from their reward. It so happened
that Aleria accompanied with her husband retires to a Villa to enjoy that
season, which bearing more fruit then the rest, flatters with the more pleasure
the gust of men: Arderico who was this Suns Heliotrope, follows her, not
without hope that the pleasures of the Villa might bring him to what he was
debarred off by the divertisement of the Town; he thought more easily to
corrupt the people of the Villa; the minds of men being the more vile, the more
they are interested. He was seen to come thither, but he begins to go the round
about Aleria's house, faigning to plant nets to catch birds, and to hunt wild
beasts; Whilst his heart was in the nets of love, and continually disturbed
with the sense of his own passions. One day being carried either by chance or
choice, he enters her Palace, pretending the recovery of a Hawke which he had
lately set off his fist. The Count of Sancta Cr^ce, Aleria's husband, receives
him with all kind of civility usual amongst Cavaliers; after having commanded
his servants to look after the flight of the Hawke, he leads Arderico to his
wife; I can say nothing of this encounter, but I remit it to your imagination;
its sufficient that Arderico blushed, grew pale again, sweat, and freez'd at the
same time: He with a courteous violence was constrained to eat some fruit; but
whilst his eyes fed on those beloved beauties, all other food was noisome. At
last having recovered his Hawke, after some Complements he parts with a greater
passion then he brought: He never saw Aleria's looks so favorable, neither had
he so experienced her so officious as then: Aleria being pleased with the
fashion of Arderico, demands of her husband the Cavalier's name, who had
deserved from him such a friendly treat. The Count smiled at the proposition,
and says, What do you not know Arderico, the Marquess of Castel-Novo? Is it
possible you should be so blind to the splendors of the Sun; Pardon me, if you
trouble me not, passing by a subject so worthy to be known; one must
necessarily judge, that your heart is hard, or your mind deviated, since you
want eyes to know the deserts of such a Cavalier. Perfection, which in all
other things regrets its wants, in this Lord all wishes are at full. Who with
an unerring prudence causes those to love, who even should hate him with a
disinterested strength, never arms himself but in favor of what is just, with
a moderation of practice he has overcome envy: In fine he has no equal in
arms, no superior in letters, and in Nobility is without a fellow; he enjoyes
all privileges of the Mind and of Fortune; there is no Lady in Vicenza, who
would not believe her beauty fortunate, were she honored but with a look from
that noble Cavalier; do not show your self so careless in knowing the
prerogatives of others, if you will have me have worthy thoughts of you. Aleria
coldly excuses her self, repenting in her own heart, that she had so long past
by the service of a man, who for his singular conditions deserved the
affections of all: Being thus filled with his praise, she grows so fervently in
love with Arderico, that she quite rebels against the laws of honesty. That
honesty which could not be overcome by a continued obsequiousness, which awed
the persuasions of her servants, and repugn'd the treacheries of her lover, the
combats of sense, and the power of love, now postitutes it self to ordinary
words, betrayed by his tongue who should have guarded it: That heart which
could not be fully vanquished by the eyes, finds it self betrayed by the ears:
Carried thus away with the furies which agitate the mind of one in love. The
Count being called to Vicenza by the necessity of some affairs, she signs a
paper with these Characters.

Marquess ARDERICO;
IF the demonstrations of your affection do not deceive the boldness of my
desires, I resolve to hazard my self, that I may serve you; I must condemn so
precipitate a resolution, but I desire reality, since my crime makes me yours;
I would say more, but Love being a child cannot speak. At three this night I
shall expect you in my Chamber near the Garden Gate, which you shall find
open; consolate therefore with your presence

Your most devouted servant ALERIA.


She sends the letter by a girl whom she had exceedingly obliged, so that she
no ways misdoubted her fidelity. She brings it to Arderice, who believing it
the deceit of a dream, knew not what to answer. But at last he takes his pen
and writes these words.

Beloved ALERIA,
I Should thank that benignity which has enriched the poverty of my hopes, if
divine favors did not rather oblige silence, then the return of thanks. I
shall according to your appointment at three this night, sacrifice my heart to
you; I am glad it is at night, the night magnifying all things, will perhaps
greaten the smalness of my being, besides that in the dark the nakedness of my
merit will pass undiscerned: Yet you may please to esteem me, what I am.

Your most devouted and unboivel'd Servant ARDERICO.


Having dispatched the letter, he begins to long for the night, with those
amorous desires which usually tyrannize lovers. He suffers not the appointed
hour to pass one minute, but he moves presently to Aleria's house; Carresses
and Complements are remitted to the consideration of those who have been
subject to the like accidents. Aleria was already got to bed, expecting the
amorous wrastler to quench those desires which torment the minds of Lovers.
Arderico ashamed to see her prevent him, begins quickly to unclothe himself;
Whilst with an amorous impatience he pulls off his clothes, he demandes the
reason of Aleria, why after so many disdaines against the proofs of his
affection, she so unexpectedly condescended to his desires, at that very time,
when he had resigned all his pretenses to despair: My life answered Aleria, the
praises of your merit so lively expressed by the tongue of my husband, did in
such a manner wound my soul, that without having been yours, I believe I could
not have lived; And thereupon relates all what her husband had spoken of him:
Then replies Arderico, neither my affection, nor my service had the power to
violence your heart, had not the Count your husband's voice by the sound of my
praises enchanted your mind. It Is very true replies Aleria; God forbid then
says Arderico, re-aparelling himself, God forbid that I should do an injury to
him who favored me with such worthy Characters, that I should violence the
chastity of one most truly noble: Aleria, pardon me, I cannot prejudice his
honor, who by his praises increases the merit of my condition. Having said so,
he readily goes out of the Chamber, teaching worthy men by this action the
bounds of true gentility; To husbands, that they ought not to fill their wives
ears with the commendation of other men; and instructing women, especially the
married, not to trust the affections of man, who by the least occasion, may be
in a moment changed.

AMASIA.
NOVEL III.
The ARGUMENT.
The Countess of Castle Novo upon an urgent occasion of hers, has recourse to
the Marquess Oliverio, who was desperately in love with her, for her supply,
which having obtained: with a handsome cheat in the darkness of the night, she
saves her own honor, and satisfies the indiscretion of the Marquess.

IN a City of Alexandria della Paglia, situate on the confines of Montferrat,
was a generous Lady, whom I shall title Countess, who was so singular for
beauty, that she caused love in all the men, and envy in all the women that
beheld her. The contentment Lovers received to see those admirable graces in
her countenance, they paid withusury, by the loss of their liberty. In fine,
this Sun blinded hearts, no less then eyes, and he was rather esteemed stupid
then prudent who could escape so sweet a Tyranny, and he was called
sacrilegious, who sacrificed not his heart to the Idol of her Beauty. This
treasury of Natures richness was possessed by way of matrimony by the Count of
Castel-Novo, a Cavalier endued with all the favors which Fortune could
dispense, or Virtue merit. But he was thought not much beloved by the Countess,
because he commonly was abroad in Princes Courts, or in the wars, excercising
himself in arms more then in love: Which was easily believed by the desires of
many, who thought to subdue that Fort, which was only guarded with beauty,
which was easily to be corrupted with presents, or overcome by the violence of
services and entreaties, but they soon found themselves deceived, finding such
opposition from the virtue and shamefacedness of the Lady, that some were
forced quite to abandon the undertaking; others to raise the siege, and others
to expect occasion, which is the daughter of time; only the Marquess Oliverio,
the first amongst the proudest, both for Wealth and Nobility, abated nothing of
his resolutions. But followed the assault with so much the greater ardor, by
how much the more desperate he thought the Victory: He had overcome denials,
repulses, and disdains, which instead to exstinguish, made the fire of his
heart still the greater: And although he hoped for no further advance in
conquering the pudicity of that Lady, yet did he omit no means possible, which
might make him deserve the title of a true Lover, since he could not prevail to
be loved again; and so much the more, for that with gifts he had possessed
himself of the good will of all those who served her, so that the poor Ladies
ears were continually befieg'd with this Cavaliers praises, the whole Family
being never weary of celebrating his valor; sometimes his birth, his bounty,
his wealth, his person, and his magnaminity. And although these commendations
being often repeated, moved her to admire such rare qualities, yet this obliged
her to no other love, but that which virtue begets in a noble breast: But what
Oliverio could not achieve with all his love, treacheries; he still did believe
that in process of time a moment of Fortune would gain. The Countess had a
young brother, and rich, which is sufficient to speak him insolent; There was
no scandalous business in the City wherein he shared not, or was not principal;
night which brings rest and quiet even to the insatiable fury of wild beasts
disquieted him, then he usually went about the City offending equally all he
met: but ill actions brings at last to a just punishment; when one night he
would by force have entered the house of a Lady of honor, and already began to
use violence on the doors and windows; whereupon being taken prisoner, by four
Companions he had neither time nor boldness enough to resist; the threats
wherewith he had also injured the Lady having also raised the neighborhood
against him. His imprisonment was no sooner known, but bills were so multiplied
against him, that his life was even called in question. The Countess who loved
him as being her brother, and could not endure to see him suffer a public
punishment, having no money in a readiness, quickly procured from certain
Merchants 1000. pistols, giving them the best part of her jewels in pawn; with
this money she so deals with the Lord Governor, whose eyes being blinded with
the splendour of the Gold, looked justice like. The young man with his
Companions escapes by the conivence of the Commander, who fearing least his
avarice should be discovered, would have the guilty fly far away, to estrange
those testimonies which might convince the Judge of guilt. The Countess enjoyed
not much by her brothers deliverance, having received a letter from her husband
which reduced her to despair; the Count commanding her that without delay she
should with all her costliest apparel come to Millan, to wait on the
Imperatrix, who was hourly expected to pass there. The poor Lady being agitated
with many thoughts, knew not what resolution to take, which might neither be
dishonorable, nor dangerous. To go to Millan without her Jewels which are so
requisite in such occasions, it would very much have prejudiced the reputation
of her greatness: To discover the freeing of her brother she could not without
incurring her husbands anger, there being betwixt them particular digusts.
After many things which floated about in her mind, she forces her heart to
the law of necessity; and taking her pen, she writes these Carracters.

Marquess OLIVERIO.
SHould I say I did not love you, truly, I should lie, since the confidence I
have in you, acknowledges it self the ligitimate daughter of Love. I love you
Marquess Oliverio, and so that with the blushes of my reputation, I have
recourse to your favor. I want a thousand Pistols to release my Jewels, being
obliged to go for Millan to wait on the Emperatrice; if you can furnish me till
my return, my heart shall oblige it self to you by a perpetual correspondence.
But Cavaliers like you move, but with gentleness, and then what can be
promised from that heart, which till now was awed with the opinion of the
World, and a Nuptial Faith; Besides, I assure my self that the greatness of
you spirit will not disdain to give me leave to be

Your most devouted servant. AMASIA.


The letter being sealed she caused a Staffeer to carry it to the Marquess,
faigning as if it had been sent from her Husband, unwilling by obliging any to
silence, to venture her self on the fidelity of her servants. Oliverio had
scarce looked over the paper, but he thought himself deluded by a dream. He
could scarce believe himself, so much the greater a felicity, as it was less
hoped for. His consolation was so great that confining with grief it fetched
tears from his eyes. His first disturbance being past, in which a Man within
himself is out of himself; he answers after this manner.

Madam,
I Would have the possession of a thousand souls, as well as I have of a thousand
pieces, that I might satisfy them all to pleasure you; I ought truly to thank
you for the honor you do me, desiring with so much sweetness what is yours;
but the confusion of my heart is so great, that I cannot express its joy, nor
its obligations but by silence: Yet I rejoice with my self that you are pleased
to ciment my faith with gold, and so much the more, for that desiring the
riches of the Earth, I hope the treasures of the Mind will be doubly grateful;
I would that you should argument from these double Pistols, that my love is not
double; and my only glory is, to be acknowledged.

Your most humble and more obliged Servant OLIVERIO.


Without delay he caused the Letter with the Money to be delivered into the
hands of the Countess; who having recovered her Jewels presently goes for
Millan; arriving just at the Emperatrix's coming, she made so pompous a show of
her own beauty, that the Emperatrice thought her much self honored by those
people who had sent a Sun to meet her: The envy of the Ladies was changed into
admiration, and it seemed as if Nature had robbed beauty from all other persons
prodigally to bestow it only on her. The Emperatrice parts from Millan, having
presented her with a very fair Neck-lace, and she presently returns into
Alexandria, where Oliverio expected her with those impatiences, which are
furies which continually agitate the Mind of Lovers. The Marquess would not
appear in Millan at this occasion; that he might cause no suspicion to the
observation of so many eyes, or to shun the obligation of serving the
Emperatrice. He no sooner knew of her return, but he sent to congratulate her
arrival, and to beg her favor. She gave him to understand, that that very
evening after midnight she would be at a grate, which looked on a little
unfrequented street; Oliverio obeys, and at the hour appointed hears himself
called by the Countess: At this first meeting I cannot express the passions of
Oliverio; he sweat and freez'd in an instant; he in a manner confounded,
praises with thanksgivings with so much change, that he was hardly to be
understood. The Countess corresponded to all with such affectionate and
discreet language, that at the same time she no less witnessed her discretion
then her affection. All their thanks terminated in this Conclusion, that the
next night he should enter by the Garden Gate, with an express condition, that
he should be brought in without light: whereto the Marquess prettily returned,
that there needed no light where his Sun did shine: Being gone, he spent the
rest of the night with a thousand amorous passions; he no sooner sees the
springing of the day, but he desires the night; he a thousand times accuses
the Sun of slowness, for that it accelerated not its course according to his
wishes: He even blamed the shaddows, disputing command, that they were so long
before they occupy'd the dominion of the Air. At last the long sighed for hour
came, when he softly comes to the Garden; finding the door open, he goes
directly to the Countesses lodgings. She who expected him, taking him by the
hand, tells him; Friend, if you love my reputation and my life, it will become
you to sacrifice this night to silence: My women are so near my Chamber, that
the least word would cause a high suspicion; neither is my love so unworthy,
that I dare trust it to a servile maid; and the rather, because the greater
enjoyments admit of no words; she permitted him no answer, but led him into a
Chamber, and then having told him he might pull off his clothes and go to bed,
whilst she would see whether her women slept. He was no sooner dispoyl'd of his
clothes, but he finds himself in the arms of a beauty, so much the more
singular, as she was the less subject to the censure of the eyes. My pen dares
not describe what they did, least it should profane the secrets of the night;
Its sufficient to say, that he being ravished with the sweetness of those
embraces, blessed all the labors, all the sights, and all the torments which he
had till then suffered; since his past pains served for no other use, but to
highten his present contentment. Fearful least the light should discover their
amorous theft: Oliverio departs before the coming of Aurora; and being forbid
to use words, he takes his leave with a multitude of kisses. Being retired to
his own habitation, with rest and sleep he procures the release of his past
labors, which yet had succeeded so sweetly, that he thought only how he might
repeat them. Being risen about dinner time, one of his servants brings him a
thousand Pistols with a letter, which having opened with a strange trouble, he
sees these words.

Marquess OLIVERIO;
I Send back the money which out of your great civility you were pleased to lend
me, having made use of it so long as I had need. I do not this to disoblige my
self from your affection, but that I may not be wanting to my self: assure your
self therefore, that the obligation shall never terminate, but with my heart
till the end of the last period of my life; its for your glory, that you have
introduced subjection into that spirit, which never before knew any; be pleased
therefore with

Your most affectionate and most obliged Servant. AMASIA.


This letter did so distract the Marquess his Mind, that believing it a
deception of his sight, he would often read it: he knew not what to think,
forasmuch as the vivacity of kisses, and the embraces of the precedent night,
ought not to beget such universal conceptions, nor such cold words. After a
Chaos of agitations and thoughts, he writes this Letter.

Fair,
IT is with reason said, that money takes a way our rest; Your Pistols having
reduced me to a mortal disquiet: you should not, Madam, have sent me what was
yours, under pretense, that it had been mine: and if either my demerit or the
slenderness of my Fortune required it: why do you not likewise send me back my
heart, which I have sacrificed to your beauty. It a cruel liberality to send
Gold, a vile excrement of the Earth, and retain the Soul which is the first
Essence of Man. That I may lighten my grief, be pleased to take the pains, that
I may find you at the grate, at the same hour as formerly. To conclude, forget
not

Your most humble and most obliged Servant OLIVERIO.


Having sent the letter, and with a thousand imprecations having expected the
night, he comes to the appointed place, where having found the Countess; after
salutations past, the Marquess hegins to reprove her for sending the money;
which he did with such a lively sense, that tears interrupted him, which
permitted him not to evaporate his grief by his mouth and eyes. The Countess
answers with a sweet smile; And why would you not have me restore what was
yours? Because says Oliverio, after I had received the honor of your good
graces; I have nothing which is not absolutely yours: Pray therefore bitter not
our past sweets. And pray what sweets were those, replies the Countess? Is it
possible, says Oliverio, that the interposition of a day only should have so
eclipsed your memory, that you have forgotten those delights which were both
given and received. Is it possible that those kisses which were altogether
animated carrying continually love on the lips, should instill the water of
Lethe in your heart; I should sooner lose the remembrance of my self, then the
delight I have from the memory of such sweets as those. The Countess
interrupted him, telling him, My Lord, I shall undeceive you, it being
unreasonable, that your opinion should stain my honesty, which is hitherto no
otherways guilty, but by what it may receive from your desires or belief. I
thought to please you with a deceit, in some manner to correspond with my
obligations, and your love. The love practices of the other night were with my
Chambermaid Aleria, I being forbid both by the advantage of my birth, and my
husbands honor: She is here present to give testimony of this truth. Oliverio
expected not that she should proceed in her discourse; but full of malice,
returned home machinating in his mind, a thousand precipices against the
reputation and life of the Countess. At last reason having gained the field,
admiring the prudence of the Lady, who without prejudice of her own honor had
so prettily deceived her lover; he changed his sensuality into friendship and
respect. Hence may Ladies of honor learn to shield themselves from the dangers
of necessity, without hazarding their reputations. And Cavaliers may learn not
to tempt the chastity of a prudent Lady, since they may gain only cheats, or
reproaches: It being not blamable sometimes to use deceit, to shun the Tyranny
of necessity.

LEONORA.
NOVEL IV.
The ARGUMENT.
Gernando and Anselmo love two Gentlewomen, whom after several accidents they
enjoy; which their wives having discovered, occasion by their jealousy, an
unhapy Tragedy.

NAPLES is a City delightful in all seasons; the flattring accents of the
inhabiting Sirens turns with the reeling lubricity of Fortune: if the truth
prevail, their minds are to be preferred to all others, like those of
Paradise. Many years since in that place, as in a Theater amongst others, the
chance of two most noble Cavaliers was presented; who qualified with that air,
fruitful in titles, were called most excellent Princes: The one Gernando, the
other Anselmo; the vicinity of their Palaces, the likeness of their years, the
sympathy of their minds had in a manner so united their wills, that having
inseparably ingrafted their hearts, they possessed nothing amongst them
imcommunicable, but their wives. Gernando was married with the Princess
Leonora, who mixing in her most beautiful countenance, sweetness withseverity
and majesty, represented only a lively transmutation taken from the most
exquisit excellencies of Venus and Bellona. Anselmo was wedded to Celinda, a
Lady, who with her sweet behavior, and with her winning fashion, was thought
worthy to be preferred to the Graces, to suckle and nourish most tender loves;
Both the one and the other lived a whole age deliciating themselves with the
legitimate sweets of exquisit pleasures; their world would have been believed a
Heaven, had their happiness but constantly wheeled about; they often left the
City to disport themselves amongst the delightful Groves of their pleasant
Villa's, where fully enjoying the prerogatives of a Golden age, each did enjoy
in their own amorous possessions the redoubled contentment of the others
legitimate enjoyments; jealousy did not sour their sweet, the least cloud of
grief did not disturb the tranquillity of their contentment; They usually went
out to enjoy the fresh air of the clear morning, and what beyond measure was
Leonora's sport, which had a bizar capricio to shoot birds, incredibly bragging
at every shot she made, of her prey, whilst Celinda intended more tender
pastimes, gathering the Flowers of the field; she weaved Garlands to crown the
triumphs of her conquering companion; neither did they with less pleasure pass
the remainder of the day, for Rosalba Celinda's Gentlewoman did harmoniously
sing, whilst Do^illa Leonora's, sweetly played on her Lute: with their singing
and playing making so ravishing a melody, that from the loving breast of their
hearers, by the treachery of pleasure, their souls had fled away, could they
but one moment have been released from their adored beauties. Amongst the rest,
one day Rosalba having let loose her voice to the singing of a wanton song, she
lighted on such affectionate notes, upon the lasciviousness of some amorous
accident, that she awakened the soul of Gernando to admire her good grace and
facility, he began like those who dote, accusing himself of sacrilege, for
that till then he had not contemplated in that most beautiful singer, the
excellency of the noblest Seraphin in Heaven; whereupon his heart being
encouraged by the reverberation of murdering accents, he the more lively
imprinted that likeness, which condemned him to the sufferance of such a
grievous martyrdom: where the wretch at once being bloodless and liveless, his
motion and speech being taken away, he lifts up a languishing look with a dying
sigh, you would swear that he retained not the least spirit of life; the Lass
observed it, and joggs Dorilla, perceiving that her finging had wounded his
mind, and coloring her cheeks, with rosy blushes, with which she had bereft
the miserable dying man, of accusing the murtherous wound, yet she thereby
forbore not the more spitefully to pursue it; so that with the tone of her
voice lifting up the lamp of a smile, she lightened so sweet a look, that
fascinating him with a wonderful Magic, she took him quite away from living
any longer to Leonora, and brought him to live a fresh, but a painful life in
her own bosom; from that time the unhapy man felt so unmesurable a fire to run
about his heart, which inwardly burning him, sends up the ashes into his face
to accuse the burning, as inextinguishable: Thus did this miserable man burn,
and silence it three whole months. Being brought to Town he was visited by the
Physicians, and afterward forsaken; whose opinion was, that he was oppressed
with an unknown disease, and that his ill was incurable; Leonora aflicted her
self at the sickness of her beloved consort, and no less, amongst themselves
suffering the like, did Anselmo and Celinda lament; so that daily frequenting
visits, and Anselme with much familiarity did sometimes stay by the by, to jest
with Dorlla, with cunning slights, who being taken I know not how with him,
suffered not one to pass without giving him an answer; yet she one day resented
a piece of pungent treachery: when Anselmo told her, I perceive very well now,
Dorilla, why you are so coy toward me, why do you not love me; why do I not
love you, said she, for my part I could wish to see you languishing as Gernando
is; whereupon with a wink her cheeks blushing, she added, then should you not
find me so cruel, as Rosalba is: these last words seemed to Anselmo as the
words of an Oracle, revealing the secret of Gernando's hidden infirmity:
whereupon without any more to do, running quickly to his bed, he finds him
ravished in Rosalba's eyes, who stood by Leonora and Celinda, who were to no
purpose on either side of him, comforting him to take away that strange
melancholy from his heart, which for his unknown passion occasioned in them so
manifest a grief, and attentively observing him, he clearly verified Dorilla's
enigma: whereupon having made the motion that all should go out of the Chamber,
he begins: Is the love then of Anselmo so little known to thee, that out of
idle respects, thou doubtest to discover it to me; at last I have found it out,
thy heart is wounded, the shaft comes from Resalba, and it shall be my care,
that she who gave it shall cure thy wound: be comforted therefore my friend,
restoring thee to thy self, keep us with you for your usual comfort: the soul
of Gernando being vanished at his words, was in great danger to be drowned in
love, which rose up from the bottom of his heart, swelling, and changing the
languishing man's countenance. He blushes, grows pale, trembles, freezeth; but
at last having recovered his spirits, he with a trembling voice answers. Out of
respect that I would not violate, not even in my thoughts the Religious bonds
of our friendship, I have thus silenced my self even to death. Why alas were
you so scrupulous, replied Anselmo; Resalba is a servant, not a wife, and do
you believe that I should take to heart a vain opinion of her honor, more then
you, who are a part of my self, who perhaps with an imaginary fancy inwardly
laughs at it. At a call Resalba comes in again with the Ladies, when he goes
out purposely to bind the practice of his undertakings with Dorilla the
stronger and descending in short, to desire of her a proportionable help to the
needs of Gernando; he had Dorilla's answer, that if another should languish for
him, whether by another persuasion would you your self gratify her: well then
replies he, I now understand thee, Dorilla, and find my self so obliged by the
dear pawn of thy love to love thee, that I wish thy desire, so as Rosalba by
thy means may but relieve Gernando. Thee, Dorilla resplendantly for the reward
of her suffered love, every moment seemed to her an age, to ciment the
undertaking, to gain Rasalba's consent, that rock wherein she knew she should
find the living life of her heart: So that having taking the first
opportunity, she afar off, of her self begins to detest the miserable condition
of their servitude, which destinated them to deny their own, for to follow the
will of others, which not only the indiscreet commands of their Mistrisses
witnessed to them, but of others also, who would have precedence over them, and
indeed ought rather to be their companions then servants; whereupon with
disdain, she said, Anselmo, Anselmo thy Master, O Rosalba, rebelling yesterday
against the obligations of due modesty, grew to that boldness as to desire me.
And what weighs as much with me, he has pressed me to pass civility with thee,
forasmuch as forgetting thy honor, that thou thy self should give thy self to
Gernando, who truly dies languishing for thee. God forbid that I should ever do
it, I would rather for ever part from this house. Thou growest angry, Dorilla,
replies Rosalba, and art not aware that our Masters do it to try our
constancies, they do it to make sport with us, and thus they treacherously
pitch their nets to catch the foolishest, when they brag they suffer most, and
die for love; when they intend to tyrannize it over another, they point the
line another way, they countersigne with Characters of gold, the first
expression of their loves, with griefs, O Dorilla, not with words, they give us
an assured testimony of the gift which they say they have made of their hearts:
and trust me sister, who gives not presents certainly he loves not. Upon this
scandal Dorilla seemed for the time satisfied, as having steered to that port,
where was the principal traffic of her hopes. And suddenly with Anselmo, who
was at the catch, not far off; glowing with desire, she communicates the
avaritious sense of Rosalba, with solid pretenses, that she would be gotten
with three hundred pieces of gold, for the first pawn of Gernando's amorous
affection, and the sooner to gain her by example, she tells her from the
beginning, the carriage of her loves with Anselmo: Rosalba seeing that she had
already sold that at a great rate, which in her heart she very willingly would
have given, begins by degrees to decline from her feigned rigor, and more
freely to contract with Dorilla; the business of her love proposition, and
covering with a cloak of charity the impurity of her affections, she protested
she would come as a victim to the Altar, to expiate the crime, and implore his
favor, whom she had so much offended for his loving of her. And having
expressly made the agreement, there was no more to do. By this promised comfort,
Gernando being recovered, they were so to order the business, that their
amorous theft might be hid. Neither could Anselmo any ways fail to afford
Dorilla her promised reward, that he might not lose his own satisfaction, who
even also, longed to be in the lists of his hoped for delights. He at once was
a lover, and a procurer; So that if by his means Gernando enjoyed the love of
Rosalba his Gentlewoman, he by way of exchange was to enjoy Dorilla,
Gentlewoman to Gernando: whereupon with their beloved taking advice, they
consulted on the best means, what way they might the most secretly enjoy one
another; several councels intervened, but amongst others it was believed to be
the best; that Anselmo and Gernando, faigning business or sport, should go out
of Town, and at night secretly return, and changing the keys of their garden
doors, should thereby get access into one the others house, and going up the
back stairs to their loves, they every one, might hapily enjoy till morning the
fruits of their amorous conspiracy. At this only remedy (O the great miracle of
love) Gernando grew quickly well, and went about this practice with so much
wariness, that neither Leonora nor Celinda, although at the return of the day,
they stole and took turns, yet they were not at all awares. At last their
husbands new delights increased, in prejudice of their abandoned wives, and
whether it be a defect of our humanity, that it prizeth not long, what it
possesses in abundance, or whether it be the vice of sense which finds a
greater pleasure, where love has more of the impudent. Their wives at last
grew so disgustful to them, that when out of cunning they visited their
marriage beds, yet they brought with them such a coldness, and inofficious
conversation; which forced them to reflect on their great losses, they could
not but at least be induced to believe that some impudent wenches, fascinating
their husbands, had with their impure lasciviousness turned their hearts in
their breasts; so much were they changed from their first loves: whereupon
Leonora, who was of a more resenting and wary genius then Celinda, looking on
it with a nearer application, first in all Gernando's actions, it seemed as if
a certain treating or cipher, a kind of speaking by signs, which he daily
held, under cover of a youthful familiarity with Dorilla, might if it were well
understood, take away the Curtain from the Tragedy of all her contentment:
whence one day observing, tha according to his wonted presence he was with
Anselmo, to go out of Town, Gernando practiced more then usually with Dorilla
their misterious language, whence presently entering into a high suspicion, she
thereupon resolves to watch her all that night, carefully observing her ways,
whose chamber by a narrow door communicated a passage into hers; having gotten
that opportunity which she most desired, so that intending all her motions at
the passage, she perceived that about midnight a person entering in the dark,
was dearly, but silently received by Dorilla; attentively giving ear at the
door, it seemed with an unhappy equivoke, she took it to be the voice by that
amorous reception, although very low, of Gernando, and by the alternate murmor
of kisses, and sighs, which by degrees from their more fervent carresses the
lovers resounded, thinking she had sufficiently found out the thief, who
unworthily robbing her of her husbands love, transfixed her through the most
sensible part of her bowels, burning wholly with jealousy, the enraged woman
sometimes raised her self against Gernando, and then against Derilla,
machinating revenge. A thousand times she was going to discover them, and show
forth their shame; but then again being counseled by all kinds of respects,
she was disturbedly tormented, unresolved in the atrocity of the most desperate
distractions; at last having not courage enough any longer to hear the others
sports, to publish the loss and breath of her dearest joys. She went off
confused and grieved, and fell on the neighboring bed, where till morning
precipitating her self like a fury, her agitation suffered her not to close her
eyes, yet weariness had at last overcome her, had not Celinda unexpectedly
knocked at the door, and called her afresh to the grievous sense of her first
grief, with her accustomed familiarity, she enters the Chamber, and desires her
not to stir from her bed, and withal entreats her kindly to admit of the
importunity, which their mutual confidence imbolden'd her at that time to give
her; and then begins, Madam, my heart is so full of horror, that did I not fly
to clear my doubts to the tranquillity of your dear conversation, I believe
truly my heart would have broken. But now sleeping, I dreamed, that as you were
delighting your self in a thick Forest, according to your custom with your
gun, courted by your Gernando, and my Anselmo and my self, when with the
greatest delight we applauded your triumphs: Behold! The heaven obscures it
self in a tempest! And out of the shades, behold a Lion issues! And falling on
my Anselmo, throws him down, whence turning to Gernando, who too, assaulting
him, threatening to glory in his death, when you readily coming to his relief,
struck boldly against the beast; but alas, your self wounded Gernando to death;
whereupon the firce beast disdaining to fight with the dying, furiously
assails, and kills you; So that whilst I smote my breast and was crying out for
help, half dead I did awake. But so troubled and confused, that still floating
betwixt truth and doubt of this unhappy success; I have been thus, and perhaps
too importunately carried hither to you: Praised be Heaven O Celinda, answered
Leoncra, that the slaughters are vanished, and pray God with them all sinister
presages may do so too; but alas, there remains far more grievous images, more
lively imprinted in my breast, then you ever had sleeping in your dreams, which
I have had watching all night, and which I have heard with mine ears. We are
betrayed, Celinda, I know that the impudent Dorilla ravisheth my Gernando from
my bosom. As on the other side, I conclude that Rosalba takes away from you
your Anselmo: Let Us up and think of a remedy on some sharp revenge, and then
from the beginning relating the History of her first suspicions, and the manner
how she certified her self, of their practice she instilled so much disdain in
Celinda's breast, that maturing it with judgment, she renders her an inseparable
Companion to any undertaking: They went to very strict ways, and at last
concluded that dissembling their inward rankor, they should both prepare at the
first night of their husbands feigned departure, to change upon some color
their own beds with their shameless servants; not only that they might in the
dark with the more savory carresses enjoy by this innocent cheat their own
husbands with the sweeter contentment; but that either of them at parting
should gently discover themselves, convincing their disloyal husbands, with the
like approved delights, that they had no reason to counterpoise by this amorous
recreation, dearly obliging them thereby to cast off their injurious rivals.
Five days were scarce past, when the desired night came. The two Cavaliers
parted that they might soon return to their appointments, when their wives
pesently began to bring about their designs. Celinda commands Rosalba that
changing beds for that night, she should go lie in hers, for that she being
desirous of rest, intended to get far from the noise of the street, but finding
some difficulty in being obeyed, she was faign to use her authority: Dorilla
obeyed more then willingly too Leonora, arrogating so much to her self the
affection of Anselmo, she doubted not at all to loose him for the love of
another; but rather thought to legitimate her escape by her Ladies fault, and
efficatiously went to effect it to that end, that at last being freed from fear
of her reproofs, she might enjoy them under that protection. At midnight the
Lovers according to their custom came, and believing as they conceived to enjoy
their wonted embraces, they found themselves after such a manner carressed with
so much advantage that they found themselves obliged to correspond with far
more expressions then usual. For that their wives knowing the persons they were
to act, put by the seriousness of marriage, and let themselves loose to the
excesses of an impudent lasciviousness, not only by not contradicting any
amorous proposition, but by invitation, fore-runing every way what they thought
would most augment the pleasure of their supposed Husbands. To conclude, they
would give them proofs of the knowledge, that 'twas not the substance of truth,
but an heretical opinion which persuaded them they found more pleasures in
others, which made them transgress the legitimacy of their loves.

Now the course of the hours toward morning run apace, when Gernando seeking
on the white flank of Rosalba with his hand the rise of a certain pretty mole
she had there, which was the incitement and delights of his highly prized
pleasures; not finding it as he was wont, he awhile remained astonished with
wonder, where revolving certain perticulars in his mind, he thought that as it
was, without a voluntary crime, if instead of Rosalba he might have enjoyed
Celinda Anselmo's wife; so Anselmo by a studied perfidiousness, instead of
Dorilla, perhaps did enjoy his wife Leonora; whence upon the urgency of so
weighty a suspicion, hardly suppressing the grinding of his disdain, without
even bidding her farewell, he clothes himself and away; Celinda perceived it,
but penetrates not the Occasion of his alteration whom she truly believed her
husband, whence she thought it not much to hazard that office with him which
Leonora and she had preordained, that they might regain their husbands lost
affections. He quickly goes with his naked sword to the Chamber where Anselmo
used to use Dorilla, and finding the door shut, stopped a while at the threshold
to certify himself the better, the Chamber was enlightened with the full rays
of the Moon, and sent forth such a doubtful light, acknowledging the
pre-dominion of darkness, so that he could not so clearly see, but yet
distinctly hear. Believing her husband sufficiently disposed, by her treatment
amorously discovering her voice, she began; perhaps thou have wanted nothing
this night my dear that thou should seek contentment abroad, I am thy
Leonora. Gernando was no longer in doubt, but furiously precipitating himself
in the Chamber, he cries; what am I thus betrayed? And at the same time with a
furious thrust he runs Anselmo through, who till then was stupefied at
Leonora's unexpected language, being risen up to sit on the bed, falls again,
expiring on the ground; and whilst in the uncertainty of the shades he seeks to
kill him; Behold! Leonora, who believing the wounded's voice, that of the
wounder, and from the opinion she had, that she had certainly lain with
Gernando, and that he was betrayed; having taken up a scru'd gun, which was hung
on a nail near the bed for their use, she strikes a fatal blow to revenge
Gernando's death, and therewith kills even her Gernando: She strikes him to
death in the midst of his forehead; They both suffered the pangs of death, and
she remained bloodless and even without a soul. When Dorilla being awakened by
the noise, takes the Candle which burnt for an Offering before the improvident
Tutelac Goddess, and running to the Chamber she shows out of the darkness to
Leonora her complicated errors, which witnest her that night both an
Adulteress, a Murtheress, and Traiteress, although unvolontarily of the honor,
of the Faith and Life of her dear Gernando. Being immovable at the horror of
this Spectacle, as if she had been of Marble, retired into her self, that it
might be Eternized with her; Her Grief and Lamentations filently meditated, and
resolved I know not what of fierce and formidable: when on a sudden she takes,
like Lightning, the Sword out of her dying Husbands hands, and laying the Pomel
against the ground, furiously Crying out, O Gernando, Gernando! She falls on
the Point, yet reaking with Anselmo's Blood, thus run through, she also expires.

From this sad cause occasioned by the concourse of so many unhappy deceits.
Celinda being imform'd, she dies not of Grief; yet at least dies to all
Comfort, leading still a most miserable life in Naples. And who knows, If
Heaven by her long Agony would not still intimate to Mortal Men, That all
Friendship, although bred from honest pleasures, ends in Tragedies, if it
happen that passing the bonds of Virtue, it be but once accompanied with Vice.

ARMIDORO.
NOVEL V.
The ARGUMENT.
Armidoro being one night invited into a house, finds his life in danger, but
having escaped it, meets another; valiantly defends himself, and afterward
becomes the means to make up a happy marriage betwixt Riccardo and Lisetta.

ARMIDORO a young man of Palermo, was about some business of his own at Pisa,
who upon an evening, it being the hottest season of the year, when men are
fore'd to make day of night, goes abroad, taking a Spanish Gittar, playing upon
it, according to the custom of his Country; having a while after this manner
walked about the Town, at the head of a street which ended on the Banks of the
Arno, he heard himself called from a house, with these words; Is it you?
Armidoro, who was a capricious young man, and thought it might be some love
trick; Yes that it is: then she entreated him to come up; the heedless young
man without thinking of harm, comes to the door, which he finds open, enters
the house, and being come up stairs into a great Hall, persently found himself
encompassed by three young men, which were brethren, who assaulting him with
their naked swords, said, O thou villain, now shall we reward thee for
violating our sisters honor; Armidoro, although he was somewhat startled at so
unlooked for an accident, yet perceiving that he was taken for another man, he
takes heart and says: Hold! Sirs, for I am not the young man you seek: The
young men thereupon withheld their hands; and one of them said, what art not
thou he which did com to shame our Family, introduced to serve our sisters
lechery? I (replied Armidore) am a young Silician, who stay here for some
affairs of mine, and am within a few days to return to my Country; I know not
who you are, nor who is your sister, I came up here because I was called, and I
thought I might with security come in a Country, where there is no wrong done
to to any man. An old man coming hereupon in, the young men's Father; Let
Lisetta says he, be called. She comes: She was a most beautiful young Lady, of
about fifteen years of age. To whom the old man turned, saying, Is this that
wicked fellow that lies with you? Lisetta at this question, her looks were
enflamed like a burning firebrand, and looking steadfastly upon Armidoro,
answered, that she had never seen him: whereupon the old man was going to make
excuses and send away, Armidoro, but that one of the young men said, it ought
no ways to be done: If says he, he goes alive from hence, he will discover our
shame to the world; let him therefore die, and let his blood cover our fault:
But the old man giving his son good words, said, that they could never cover
their errors with the blood of innocents; for that as many drops of blood as
the innocent's wounds should bleed, they would prove as many tongues, which
should call the Divine Justice to vengeance, and to the discovery of their
wickedness: whereupon, Armidoro, without any more to do was licensed, being
only persuaded to secrecy. The young man being come out of doors, and having
perceived that he had escaped a great danger, was resolved for that night to
adventure himself no more, taking his way to his own lodging; where being
arrived, and his hand already on the door opening it to go in, he unexpectedly
felt himself assaulted, by a blow behind, which hardly mist his head, followed
with these words; Traitor, hold, Traitor. Armidoro, who was a resolute young
man, and of a great courage, presently draws his sword, and turning upon him
who had wounded him: Thou lie, he cries out, What Traitor was I ever? Thus
the dispute began equally betwixt them. The unknown man happened to be deeply
wounded in the throat, and in the flank, so that thinking himself dead, he cast
away his arms, and begged Armidoro's pardon. He that knew not why they fought,
not only gave it him, but desirous to know who he was, went himself to find
the next Surgeon, to come to his cure. Now when the Surgeon was searching
the wounds of this unknown Cavalier, he was found to be Riccardo, a noble young
man of Pisa; Armidoro demanded him the reason, why he had after that manner
provoked him? The reason was, replied Riccardo, an amorous Jealousy; I ought
that night, says he, to have gone to the house where you were, for the interest
of Love; by my Mistrisses appointment I was to pass through the streets
playing, after the same manner as you did; now having seen you pass before my
house, out of curiosity I followed you, and seeing you enter and stay a good
while in Lisetta's house, I thought you had enjoyed her; whereupon, being
enraged, I resolved in my heat to murder you, but Fortune would not second the
malignity of my will; forasmuch as you had reason on your side, every man
having reason to take the good things which occasion offers. Armidoro knowing
by Riccardo's discourse, the true occasion of what had befaln him, and
thinking, that perhaps it might draw out of trouble a whole family, if he took
the way which Fortune afforded him for its deliverance. He tells Riccardo, that
if he loved Lisetta, as it seemed he did, why did he not ask her in marriage?
Riccardo answered, that he thought to have done it, but since that she
committed with other men, he would see her no more. Armidoro having handsomely
got him to his home, which was not far from Lisetta's house, his wounds being
already dressed, promising a sudden cure, he relates to him what had befaln him,
and withal the danger wherein he had seen Lisetta, unless she were presently
helped by some speedy resolution, and that if he thought well of it, hewould go
and demand her of her parents for him to wife, which being granted, all
occasions of distaste would immediately cease. Riccardo being very glad to hear,
as well that Lisetta had not falsified her faith, as above measure he was grieved
at the discovery of his love practices, answered Armidoro, that he wholly
remitted the whole managing of the business to him. Now as Armidoro was going
his way to the house of Cosmo, for so was the old man Lisetta's father called,
he meets a maid, who was secretly gotten out of the house, to find out
Riccardo, to advertise him of Lisetta's danger, and to entreat him, as guilty
of those practices, to relieve her. He knew from her that Lisetta's eldest
brother, Anastasio, had that day entered her Chamber, and found her reading a
letter, which he snatched out of her hand; wherein was written, as follows.

My Soul,
YOu shall see me this night playing according to my custom; May it but please
love, that this, as it is not the first, may not be the last of my felicities.


Anastasio having showed this to his father, and to his brethren, they argued
that Lisetta had fallen into the sweet sin of love, and were resolved to punish
her with death, but when by neither threatening, nor flattering they could
extort nothing from her, they resolved to expect till he came by playing, whom
inviting up, they intended to kill; whereupon they were cheated by Fortune, who
caused Armidoro to go by instead of Riccardo; so that they were all in a
confusion, but that they were resolved to send the unhappy Lisetta out of this
world. Armidoro being the more inflamed, hearing of the young Ladies danger to
procure the reconciliation of this funeral broyl, in four steps reached Cosmo's
house, to whom in presence of his sons, he relates the accident happened to him
with Riccardo, and in his name demands Lisetta for him to wife, which said he,
if you do, you will take away al dangers wherewith this Family is threatened, and
all blemishes which you can pretend might defile i^. Cosmo presently having
called Lisetta, would from her know, whether Riccardo was truly the man that
enjoyed her, which she being secured by Armidoro, at last confessed. Since there
remains, says the old man, no other remedy to wash away this stain of dishonor
from our blood, contracted by thy fault, I am content that Riccardo be thy
husband. Armidoro having giving thanks to Cosmo, flies quickly back again to
Riccardo, who in a Sedan was soon brought thither; for by any means he
presently would be at Cosmo's house. To Lisetta, who was come from death to
life, every moment seemed an age, till she saw her Riccardo; although hearing
that he was grievously wounded, it very much disturbed her contentment. He at
last being come, and after having begged pardon of Cosmo for his past errors,
he espoused her in the presence of all her parents, changing the appearance of
death into the pomps of jollity. After which these Lovers lived long,
Felicitated by Heaven with a fair Progeny.

AVRELIA.
NOVEL VI.
The ARGUMENT.
Aurelia carefully observes the behavior of her daughter the love sick
Ermelina; and at last finding a love letter about her, falls in love with her
Lover, whom (faining her self Ermelina) she invites to her bed; but deceived by
another, gives way to her daughters, being enjoyed; whereupon, finally they
both marry.

AURELIA was daughter to the Prince of Ancastle, and so highly endued with the
goods of the Mind, of the Body, and of Fortune; that she scarce attained to
her thirteenth year, but she raised the hopes of many, who pretended to aspire
to the possession of so great a treasure: And although her Fathers wealth,
moved the avarice of some to seek her in marriage; besides the beauty of her
countenance, which tiraniz'd over the affections of all, so that favored by all
the Graces, she was reckoned their inferior in nothing but number.

The ascension to this amorous heaven was granted to Edoardo, the noblest, but
oldest of all her pretenders. The fate of those Aurora's, who are only possessed
by the Titons. This union appeared to the world monstrous, which did believe
Edoardo fitter for his grave, then a Nuptial bed. He was in his three and
fiftieth year, which with the winter, which he wore in the wrinkles of his
face, and on the snow of his hair, to the belief or all, rendered this union
necessarily harsh with this spring of beauty, which was without fruit or
flower. Aurelia readily applies her self to the cold embraces of an old man,
and their age affording them no higher desires, she placed the comforts of her
marriage in the riches of her habit, the choice of her jewels, the abundance of
her treasure, and number of her servants, with her continual attendance on her
husband. Who already grown jealous, thought himself never secure of her, when
she was but out of sight. This continual practice obliged Edoardo to many, and
often endeavors, and taskes beyond his strength and age; so that the
consummation of his marriage terminated with that of his funeral. Edoardo's
death was accompanied with such sensible expressions of his loving wife, that
weeping, sighing, mourning, and tearing her hair, were the least arguments of
her grief. She would even have gone with him to the grave, had she not been
conscious, how near she was to the time of her delivery, which flattered her
with the hopes to revive him again in the birth of a son. But her desires were
betrayed by the birth of a girl, who yet (in her very swath-bands) forced all
who beheld her to a hight and singular opinion of a threatening beauty. Aurelia
would not so much as give ear to any, so far was her heart, from believing, but
that all those who could ever felicitate her, were dead with her Edoardo. She
voluntarily buried her self in her house, intending nothing but the instruction
of her daughter, but with so strict a discipline, that she was already advanced
to the thirteenth of her age, and could not yet brag to have seen, or to have
been seen by any other men, but those who were of the Family. She never went
abroad but twice or thrice in a year, and then so covered and watched with such
a care, least even the air only might ravish her. Her chamber scarce gave
admittance to the Sun, so far was it from the eyes of mortal men. And then the
continual company of her mother, permitted no other divertisement, but some
sometimes childish pastimes.

Fortune the ordinary helper of Lovers, operated so, that Aurelia and Ermelina,
for so was the daughter called, were violently carried to the window, by a
great noise, which by how much the more violent it was, by so much it rendered
them the more curious. They saw the life of Alexio their neighbor assascinated
by the swords of many, whilst he defended himself with a courage far beyond his
age. The youth and beauty of Alexio moved a fudden pity in the breast of
Aurelia; so that commanding her servants to let him in, they freed him from
the hands of the others; who having wounded him in one hand, and grievously in
the flank, were even ready to murder him.

Alexio after some short complements, was easily invited to rest himself in
bed. Hither was his mother brought to attend his recovery; the Physicians
denying him to stir from that house, least motion and air might the more
exasperate his wounds.

Ermelina altogether ignorant of love, whose name was even unknown to her; lost
her self at the first sight of Alexio; being altogether ignorant of love, she
falls in love; neither could she contend against the first struglings of love;
so that now with a curious ear she attends the discourse of the Physician, and
now she enquires of the servants; and sometimes, though very often reproved by
her Mother; she slips into the Chamber, masking under pretty pretenses, the
desire she had to see him. The nights increased her disquiets, sleep wanting
strength to still her agitations; that at last her mind is tiranniz'd by a
confusion of thoughts; and if at any time, her eyes overcom with watching, not
with sleep yielded, they presently opened to them other fantasms, which
tormented her even more slumbring then waking. Ermelina entertains her self for
some days in this amorous frenzy, till Alexio upon his recovery, recovers
his own house. He had often observed in the Girls eyes some pretty testimony,
rather of love, then of Pity. But being little practiced, he condemned all
those thoughts as suspected, which persuaded him he was beloved. But fed with
the incitements of that beauty, which would render all undertakings excusable,
and keeping house the better to confirm his recovery, he continually recreated
himself at a Window, which answered Ermelina's Chamber. There she readily
discovered, how he moved by a thousand impatiences, made no other vows, but to
see her: Finding a way to open a window opposite to her lovers, which had been
advisedly shut up by her Mothers jealousy, she took occasion to see him at her
pleasure; but was forbid to speak with him, either by her own modesty, or the
fear of her Mother. He also by his treacherous love, being rendered mute, gave
his eyes theliberty of all the functions of his tongue. At last overcoming
himself; he in Paper exhales his Passions: Thus expressing himself.

Lady,
LOVE who violently ties my tongue, with the same tyranny moves my hand, and
forces me by these Characters to acknowledge the vassalage of my heart,
already contracted and sworn by my eyes: These violences were very necessary to
oblige me to this testimony, which in respect to your singular merit cannot be
but temerous: Beauty which is the splendour of Divine light, disdains to be
adored and worshipped with ordinary terms of humanity. I know it well; yet can I
practice no other way: Let these expressions, fairest Fair, be grateful to you,
which issues from a soul, which gloryes more in being subject to you, then in
its own being Refresh these hopes with your Answer, which is only able to save
the life of

Your most devoted and most obliged ALEXIO.


This letter was convoyed to Ermelina without difficulty, for having expected
the occasion, as she was looking out of the Window he darted it gently to her
breast. The Girl no less curious then amorous, took liberty, and strait her eyes
ran to the reading of it; whilst her soul was ravished with these Characters,
she minds not her Mothers observing her, who every moment examined and censured
the actions and passages of her daughter. The first effect of Aurelia's
despite, was, to snatch the letter out of her hand, adding so many injuries
and threatenings, that tears and sighs were the least witnesses of Ermelina's
sufferings. The loss of her Letter, prognosticating the shipwreck of her love
and hopes the greatest of her passion. Aurelia leaving her in a deluge of
tears, withdraws her self into another Chamber to read the Letter, and to
discover how it had been conveyed. Scarce did she know it to be Alexio's, but
her mind was agitated with a thousand thoughts. Youth and Beauty made way for
desire to gain possession. Repentance assaulted her, to have so many years
neglected her life from the enjoyment thereof; all other pleasures were too
apparent, besides those which a conjugal love produces. On the other side, she
misdoubted the free censure of the world, in taking such a resolution, after
thirteen years stay; She feared her daughters temerity, and the tender youth of
Alexio; and considered that a second Marriage, after having so long regretted
the first, was but to incur the bold censure of fame, and a voluntary loosing
of her liberty. That part prevails in our affection over which sense is most
predominant; she resolves to lose all, rather then the love of Alexio. Taking
her Pen; in her daughters name, she thus invites him.

ALEXIO,
WHo yield at the first encounter, discovers the more weakness, and cannot shun
the censure of base, and rather deserve hate then love. But for all this, who
loves ought not at all to disemble: Love is a fire, the more it is suppressed,
opperates with the greater force: These therefore come to assure you that I
heartily love you; and had I not been moved by the doubt that I should have
incurred your disdain; your letter should not have prevented mine. Now if you
have a thought to legitimate our love by matrimony; I shall this night expect
you at our garden gate, which you shall find open: Otherwise, condemn your
affection as temerous, and put far from you the hopes ever to possess

ERMELINA.


This letter having been subtly conveyed to the hands of Alexio, instead to
rejoice him, raised a confusion of thoughts in his mind and bereft him of his
rest, were it either out of his little practice in love matters, or that he saw
the possession of the fair so easily granted him, which he valued by so much
the more, as he supposed the access difficult, he confessed himself penitent to
have advanced so far. Whilst without resolution he was thus solicited with a
thousand doubts, the Count of Bellombra came to visit and entertain himself
with him, a youth of a great birth but of a mean fortune; at first encounter
having discovered Alexio agitated with some passion, he with some resentment
and extraordinary commotion enquires the cause. Alexio with a like facility
both in being disturbed, and in discovering of it, communicates all the motives
to the Count, which engaged him in those troubles of his mind, desiring him as
a friend by his advise to reduce him to the best resolution. The Count
persuading himself that it was a good occasion to better his own condition, and
coveting that for himself which was offered to another, admonishes Alexio not
to venture on the invitation of a child, rather deserving disdain then love,
since with so much facility she prostituted her self to the will of a lover;
that to introduce one at night, whom she intends for a husband, gave an evident
sign that she had admitted others: Besides he being not assured of the il which
might happen, he run the hazard to lose himself, if following the lusts of his
sense he should accept of the offer: he added thereunto so many considerations,
which meeting with Alexio's little courage, easily persuaded him to resolve
absolutely to abandon the enterprise; and so much the more for that with so
much difficulty and displeasure her mother had denied him leave to go from
thence. The Count a while after taking leave pretending some employment, and
the night being come he goes to Aurelia's Garden door, who received him with
open arms believing it to be Alexio; he being no less deceived, supposing her
to be Ermelina; after some short complements with a low voice, both fearing to
be discovered, without light they retired themselves to a ground Chamber, where
on a narrow pillow they gave their senses liberty to enjoy the fruits of love.
At last Ermelina believing her mother drowned, not in pleasures, but in sleep,
gets out of her loathed bed, by reason of her struglings for sleep, and goes to
the window at the very same time when Alexio was come thither, disturbed with
no less agitations. Ermelina sometimes sighed both for the injuries she had
received from her mother, and for that she despaired the end of her loves,
since they had had so unfortunate a beginning. Alexio persuaded himself that
these sighs proceeded cause he had not answered her defires, and not without
violence to himself, told her, Madam, I know not whether I should complain of
Fortune or of my little merit which renders me unworthy to receive the favors
of love. Ermelina thinking he reproved her for not having sent him an answer,
replies; Love is the greatest of all things, and since for my satisfaction he
is unlike himself, I know not what to criminate but destiny, which will that I
should love without hopes. He answers, there is no love without hopes, since
from them alone he acknowledges the true substance of his being. And what
would you, says she, have me hope, since all accidents conspire my mischief to
render me desperate. He replies, to be fully answeredin love, is it not then
enough to quit you here in a full calm. But who assures methat, says she, the
promises of Lovers are the frisks of the wind. I, replies Alexio, who dedicate
my self unto you. These, said Ermelina, are words which lose themselves in the
air where they are fomr'd. You shall see the effect, says he, did I not fear to
be too temerous. And what would you do said she. I would get into your Chamber,
and there conclude our loves, and save my heart from the shipwreck of hopes and
fears. Hereat Ermelina paused a while, doubtful whether she should refuse or
receive this offer, and then she tells him, to so great a proposition I have
not courage enough at this time to answer. He who by the virtue of love had
cast off all fear, and clothing himself with boldness, which was the more
hightned perceiving himself passionately loved, Answers her. Who will be wary,
loves, not love admits of no consults, and in love matters all that is deferred
is lost: there was no way left, either she must grant his demand, or confess
she loved him not. Ermelina answered, although my desire to be yours is far
beyond my expression, I can never consent that you should resolv to enter this
casement to bring equally your reputation and my life in danger. Alexio
considering these words were rather injurious, although they seemed denials; by
the help of a stool climbed to Ermelina's window, and so enters the Chamber:
there after some faign'd disdains and repulses, which the more incited him,
Ermelina was content he should reap those fruits which Lovers most defire.

In the mean time Aurelia had partly satisfied those itchings, which proceed
from no other reason but that of fense, when fearing least her action might be
discovered; leaving the Count to his rest, she softly visits the house, at last
she arrived at the furthest parts, which was her daughters Chamber, at that
time when with a struggling murmur of kisses the Lovers were preparing
themselves to new amorous assaults. It seemed strange to her that her daughter
being in so tender an age durst be so bold as to give her self up to the
embraces of a lover: But considering that errors of love deserved all
indulgence, and also knowing her self guilty of the same escapes, she resolved
in her self, to dissemble the faults of others, that she might not discover her
own: Yet for all this she would needs know who was her daughters choice,
whether with a fit election she in some sort civilized her bold resolution.
Scarce did she perceive him to be Alexio, when being deceived, believing him
her Lover, she sacrificed her self to fury, rendering her self like those who
are tormented with a legion of Spirits; she tears her hair, beats her self,
strikes her breast, neglects no demonstration to discover her disdain and
express her grief; and at last with injuries and reproofs she thus declares her
passion.

Perfidious man! After having enjoyed the mother, must thou contaminate also
the daughters innocence. Why did Nature or Fortune render this wicked deceiver
so lovely. Are these the promises of the love you made me, but now are these
treacheries, the testimonies of thy Faith. O Heavens! I shall believe your
motions insensible, and your influences hid if you do not thunderstrike this
wicked and sacrilegious fellow. Ermelina at the hearing of her mothers words,
and believing her self abused by Alexio; gives her self over to tears, and
crying with such lively declarations of grief, that it would even have
entroduc'd pity into insensible things, saying.

Why, O cruel man! Have thou betrayed the simplicity and innocence of a girl?
Why did thou deceive me with a treachery, so much the more execrable, as
being masked with love? When, where, O wicked wretch, have thou learned these
inhumane manners, not used even by those creatures which heaven endu'd not with
reason. Pardon these effects, dear Mother, where sensuality did never believ it
should have offended the reason of nature, and hindered the satisfaction of her
who gave me my being.

She would have continued, had not Alexio, who till then remained, like a
stone, immovable, interrupred her: My Ermelina, who misdoubts my Faith, may as
well doubt whether I live or no: I declare my self thine, and offer my self
ready to authenticate the promise of this vow by marriage, where I will make no
delay, but what may arise from your want of courage. The disdain of Aurelia
increased the more at these words, whence redoubling her cries, with her hands
she flew to satisfy the desire of her passion. Ermelina's love permitted her
not so much forbearance to see Alexio injured without defending him,
interposeth her self to quiet her mother, but she at every moment receiving new
alterations, was ready to take some strange resolution, had not the Count's
unexpected arrival stopped and silenced them. He having staid with impatience a
long while the return of his mistress, but not seeing her appear, he went out of
the Chamber to meet her, not without some doubt that her stay portended him
some disaster: scarce did he hear the outcry, but he the more credited the
suspicion; whereupon with celerity he came where Aurelia with tooth and nail
vented the fury of her disdain. All were amazed at the sight of him, and the
Count terrified at that of Alexio. Whence Aurelia took time to ask him how he
came into the house: He answered, invited by Ermelina. Its a lie, answered the
Girl; and besides Alexio, there is none can boast either of my love, or of the
loss of my honesty. The lie in the mouth of a Girl, replies he, injures not:
Besides the carracters declare you guilty. Saying so, he draws out the letter,
and beginning to read it, was interrupted by Alexio; who told him, faithless
friend that letter is mine, Its true said the Count; but you refusing to come,
I came in your steed and have enjoyed her with promise of Marriage. Then
answers Alexio, must Ermelina have two husbands; having been upon the same
pretense enjoyed by me. Aurelia finding that she had been deceived, intending
to deceive, and unwilling that the publication of this accident should serve
for the idle entertainment of public discourse, tells the Count and Alexio;
Sirs, if with actions worthy of Cavaliers you will keep your words to marry, I
will do so, that who you have enjoyed shall be yours. I replied the Count,
confirm what I have promised, and esteem it as an honor. Alexio said the same.
Yet with change of countenance in both, knowing that Ermelina could belong but
to one. The wonder ceased when Aurelia discovered that she had writ the letter,
and been enjoyed by the Count supposing him to have bin Alexi^. The Count
pursuing his end which was to enrich himself, made no distintion between the
mother and the daughter, and so was satisfied. Thus the weddings were with a
common joy concluded; making them know, that the love of sense, when it
surpasses not the confines of what is just, has always a good end.

NIARPE.
NOVEL VII.
The ARGUMENT.
A Dream imprints in the mind of Euridea, that Niarpe attempted to murder
her; whereupon she changed the love she bore him into hatred. He exposing
himself to death to deliver Euridea, makes himself found guiltless, and so he
is received again into her favor.

ON The River of Genuoa, there dwelt a Lady of a mean beauty, but endew'd with
so many good graces, and such sweetness of manners, that she ravished the
affections of all who beheld her, together with their liberties. She was wooed
and courted by many Cavaliers, which if they were not satisfied with a complete
correspondence, yet were they answered with a discreet rigor: she rendered her
self even lovely in her refusals, her severity being clothed with so gracious a
modesty, obliged minds, even in tormenting them.

Niarpe only, a youth of a most lively spirit, and of high blood, was favored
by heaven to deserve her love, which was longed for by many, even with
Idolatry. Whether it were his happy destiny, or the sweet violence of the
sympathy of his Genius: he at first, scarce without seeking it, gained the
reciprocal affection of Euridea, for so was the Lady called. Sighs lasted not
long, their air wanted none, since he scarce entered the Sea of Love, but he
happily arrives at the port: He was raised to pleasures before he was sensible
of pain, tasting honey without wormwood, which usually prevents or accompanies
the contentment of Lovers. A long time was spent whilst he deliciated himself,
causing the envious to murmur at his fortune, and at the partiality of Love,
who directly contrary appeared so cruel toward them. Now they being guided by
prosperity, so ordered their days, that with extraordinary delights their life
did flow away in amorous dalliance.

But at last Fortune who is Loves companion, to give trial of her wonted
changeableness, with an unthought of accident, disturbed the happiest peace of
these blessed Lovers. Whilst one night amongst others they slept together,
having buried their senses in so much the more profound a rest, the
satisfaction of their desires had the more opened their breasts to enjoy a most
sweet repose, the fantasms of Euridea were disturbed by melancholy humors which
engaged her mind in the horrors of a dream.

Which presented her with a frightful treachery, which made one appear before
her, who with his Steel threatened to murder her; all was troubled in her
spirit, which easily gave credit to those shaddows of terror, which solicited
her tongue to call for help with outcries. Aloud she casts forth these accents.

Alas, I am betrayed. Who will help me? Her Lover being suddenly wakened with
the noise, yet his waking gave him not leave so well to discern the original of
these complaints, but he quickly obeys his affection, which was the life of his
motion; now by the vigor thereof, having even sleeping known the voice of his
beloved, so that at first impulse he was only solicited to her defense, he
takes up his Dagger which always lay at his beds head.

At which very instant the Lady distracted with the fright, whilst at first she
could not distinguish whether the accident were true or a dream, casts her eyes
on her beloved, and seeing him by the light of a little lamp, which was in the
Chamber, with his naked Dagger, which he held in his hand as to strike a blow
toward her, it being suggested her by the deceit of the dream, she believes it
a vision rather then the fright of an immaginary appearance. His words, which
might have discovered the fraud, saying; What troubles thee O my dear, were not
heard by her, or if heard, not observed, or believed effects of his
dissimulation, wherewith he thought to hide the discovered perfidiousness of
his treachery.

At last with a sudden fury intoxicated with prejudiced thoughts, which
persuaded her that her Love had an intention to murder her. She raging throws
her self out of her bed, and with a cruel disdain seems greedy to tear him in
pieces with the same hands wherewith formerly she thought she could never be
satisfied to embrace him; and then with her tongue she sends forth her shreeks,
exagerating her exclamations against Niarpe. Perfideous, perverse, and horrid
mutherer, could thou find no better way to despise the faith of a Lady
besotted with thy fictions; had thou no other means to bring thy treacheries
to pass, but in the current of my blood; with thy Dagger did thou intend to
imprint the Charracters of the disdain wherewith thou loathest me, perhaps, for
being too faithful, and therein unlike unto thee; would thou thus felicitate
our love, and remunerate my fidelity, ungrateful Traitor, fiercer then furies,
inhumanity in human likeness! What! Assault a woman with such Arms; a woman
sleeping, thinking she might securely rest in her Lovers arms; a woman who
loved and served thee, thinking to discover the value, or at least to deserve a
reward for so much love. Whence, where have thou learnt examples of such
cruelty? Who has prescribed rules of so much ingratitude? Tell me cruel
Infidel infamous that thou art, when did I ever offend, but in loving thee too
much, whereby have I acquired the proofs of so great a treachery, unless for
being too kind to thee? I thank the Gods that by an oportune advise they have
delivered me from thy wounds, if on the other side I should not wish to have
lost my life, that I might not outlive so high an impiety.

The young man was confused, astonished, nay, confounded at this accident, and
both in his color and immobility seemed of Marble; but that someimes he would
open his mouth to make his excuses, and with truth undeceive those false
conceptions. But the unbridled rage of Euridea, tenacious of the conceived
belief forbad it him; ever when he endeavored to license his accents out of
the prison of his lips. Peace she cries out thou base man, dare no more to
profanate me with thy lying words; in vain thou seek a cloak for thy fraud,
thy treachery can no longer be hid.

Those of the house were already come at her outcry, to them she relates the
occasion of her complaints. He has attempted quoth she to kill me whilst I
slept, the hand of heaven has only delivered and defended me from death. At
last cries out upon Niarpe, get thee thou wretch out of these gates
contaminated with excecrable mischief; out of this house, and never even with
thy imagination persuade thy self thou shall be suffered to reentre; be
perpetually banished my presence, and may thy exile be punishment enough for
thy perfidiousness.

And redoubling these orders, commands him away, while he either heard not,
being stupefied, or disliked, as contrary to his hopes. The Assistants observed
how Euridea grew more furious in her rage, her fires increasing which enflamed
her, as the others ashes reduced him pale; so that to shun worse encounters
they led her to the remotest rooms of the house, that she might neither hear
nor see the object of her fury, which formerly had been the subject of her love
delights.

Thus the poor Lover remained I know not with what a sentiment, if the effect
of so strange a success rendered him not insensible, it must be thought
impossible in a heart which was not petrified. In an act of ready defense,
thinking to deserve well, he saw the Catastrophe of his fortune, to the ruin
of his felicity, even where otherwise he thought to secure himself. He could
not hate the Lady, since she was guiltless only in being tenacious to such
false suspicions, a want to be ascribed to the imperfection of her sex; so that
he durst not vindicate himself against that disdain, which though unjust did in
appearance partly justify her. After many thoughts, at last that he might not
raise higher outcries to raise the neighborhood, he resolves to obey Euridea's
fury: He departs, hoping that the knowledge of the truth would quickly
reconcile him with his beloved.

In this condion he expected; two days banished by this unlucky accident,
confused and stupefied with this addition, that he despaired to receive any
relief. At last the thoughts of belief being risen up, the fervor of anger
being abated; he tempts her by means of a message, with a letter which bore
this sense.

Dearest MADAM,
GIVE me leave to believe that your mind being cleared, I shall be free from
fearing the thunder which your rigor threatens me withal, I desire to be
absolved from the duty of obeying your commands, which you prescribe me to
absent my self from your sight, that is to say, from my Paradise, from Justice
if not from Pity; I pretend leave to present my self to you, to witness the
reasons I have, why I may still pretend to enjoy your favors: I expect an
opportunity to abolish the conceits of sacrilege, which thought as if I had
intended to offend that Diety, which I always adored; give me leave only to
speak with you, that I may but discover unto you in what manner Fortune was
pleased to deceive you, and betray me. Then I assure my self that my
incorrupted faith will regain your lost affection; which is most ardently
regreted by

Your most Faithful Lover NIARPF.


At the only sight of the subscription, Euridea renews in her looks the pomps
of disdain, and her heats makes proof thereof. Faithful and Lover, she
exclaims: What Faith, what Love dares this impious fellow yet boast of!
Whereupon quickly tearing the paper, wherewith her madness was not content, but
with despite she must even tread it under her feet: an ill presage for the
young man, who could not hope that his desires should be granted, that paper
being kicked away wherein all his hopes were included: as under a torch he
receives the characters of a new impression, wherein he reads the sentence of an
unretractable refusal. Running afterward over a flood of reproofs against the
woman who carried the leter, he begins to believ that he was only to condemn
that fate which had imbarrass'd him in such an undertaking. After repeated
injuries which he loaded the poor woman withal, she returns to tempt, if at
least she might procure some ease to the fury of his distracted passions;
relating the passages, she tells him of the immutable state of her cruelty,
despairing of any more procuring any means able to relieve his desires, and
succor him in his urgency, whence consequences of death were like to succeed.
Yet he again tempts by other letters to make his reasons appear, which by
several deceits he gets delivered into the hands of Euridea. But she being
deluded by appearances, judged him the more inexcusable, and the treachery the
more true, refusing for ever to admit of any excuse of his, in his behalf; on
such terms, that she refused all letters whatsoever, or receives them with
great wariness, least they should come from him, that she might not be troubled
with his noysom importunities: she even hated his name with the sinister
thought of a Traitor; and her soul being free by the frauds of deceit, she
forbore not to love him, abhorring those violences which obliged her to
disdain. Whence her mind was plagued, leaving no remembrance which subjected
her not to double torments; the one of the remembrance of his perfidiousness,
the other of her impossibility of hating him, who still appeared lovely.

The afflicted Lover got persons of her familiar acquaintance, which undertook
to undeceive her. To them he so expressed his grief, that he even violenc'd them
to compassionate him, and urged his entreaties with so much efficacy, that he
obliged them to grant his requests. The restraint of his prayers was the
compendium of his desires, to clear his innocence, the witness was sufficient,
showing himself still so passionate a Lover, that they could not imagine him a
Villainous Homicide. They all promised to move for him, to insinuate in their
discourses intercessions in his favor, which might prove grateful: yet were
the issues of his hopes vain, the Lady remaining pertinacious in her rage, who
at the least word at a suspicion only which her imagnation suggested in favor
of Niarpe, denied to hearken to it, and flew away that she might not hear it;
so that she obliged them all to silence: so that in conclusion she would admit
of none to come in her presence, whose first protestations were not absolute
promises, never to speak of him; crying out of him always with the title of
ungrateful, with attributes of treachery. You may imagine to what a condition
of sufferings the miserable man was reduced, meeting so obstinate a fierceness:
The state of the damned, as inferior judges the right of this, describing the
tortures of that scorned soul, by such an accident which pricking him to the
life, made the most spiritual part of his heart resent it. In this desperate
condition he would a thousand times have dyed, had not even death appeared
horrible, not as to other miserable persons desirable, since it must have been
accompanied with the unabolish'd thought of his infidelity. He forced himself
to live, because he hoped to see Fortune once glutted with her pastimes, when
that tempestuous sea would become calm, wherein there now appeared nothing but
rocks and wracks. Two months were past, the greatest part whereof was spent in
fruitless endeavors, which opened the gate to a total despair. Heaven at last
commiserated the extremity of his torments, subministring an occasion and a way
to discover the unchangeable purity of his affections, as far from treachery,
as they were truly near the extremity of love.

There dined with Euridea a Lady, a familiar friend of hers, with the height of
all the delights which usually second conversation, especially at meals. The
table was not costly, yet full served with all sorts of meat, exceeding the
terms of ordinary moderation, although they out went them not in ceremony. The
courses of fish and flesh were double, in respect that its the custom of some
who observe such a day, with a particular devotion, to abstain from all but
lent meats. Euridea was so accustomed, and therefore did not accompany her
friend in tasting of every dish, who indifferently fed on all: but most of all
fed upon a dish of Mushroms, which that very noon were (as he who brought them
said) sent by some Nunns. In that Country they dress them several ways, as if
a great quantity privileged with a singular goodness, were not sufficient,
unless the diversity of sauces did not change their forms, and render them
grateful to the pallat. These were dressed with eggs and cheese, and such like
things, which caused Euridea to forbear them: the chance was that they had an
inward malign quality which produced strange effects in this Ladies stomach. A
while after dinner being come home, she was assaulted with mortal pains,
griping of the guts, oppression of the heart, which sent forth over her body a
cold sweat, which usually denotes the last endeavors wherewith Nature resists
the violences of death: the tumultuous humors of her stomach swelled up her
belly, caused her eyes to stare, made her lips pale, and her mouth foam; all
usual effects of venomous food, she being unable to speak, could not express
the truth, nor the suspicion of her unexpected sickness. The women about her
giving her remedies, as against poisons, forced down her throat Treackle
dissolved in Wine.

The remedy operated according to its proper virtue expelling the matter which
burdens the complexion, by drawing it to the last center of its corruption.
The women cry out the louder that their Mistress was poisoned, inculcating the
same opinion in her, who approved it as true. Being stupefied with faintings,
occasioned by the excess of her disease, she till then was exempt from thought;
the mind easily admits of false suspicions upon such an occasion. So that
condemning Euridea, as she who would have poisoned her; not distinctly
remembering what the meat was, she only sensibly found her self offended,
remembering also, that she had not accompanied her in the eating of that dish,
although she had fed on many others, although it were under pretense of a fast.
Her mind did not forbear to suggest some woman quarrels which happened betwixt
them, although of slight concernment, yet of much force in her thoughts, which
resolved her to vengeance, to enforce her suspicions, her observation concurred
in marking diverse gestures, and some words she then remembered, as discoveries
of a hidden dissimulation; and testimonies of an ill affected mind. Being at
last forcibly enough confirmed by the assurance of the women about her, of all
the effects of most powerful poison, and finding her agony continue, it rendered
her belief unchangeable.

Being herewith enraged, she breaks forth into exaggerations, fit to thunder
out her disdain against a Traitress, who under color of disguised friendship,
had made her prove such grievous torments. That she might not aggravate her
grief, the agitation of the humors being not yet settled, she was desired not
to disturb her self more, but quiet her offended heart, by making a victim of
her treacherous enemy to her revenge. In conformity to the advice, they accuse
her of the crime to the Justice, informing him of the fact, and soliciting her
deserved punishment. The cause being heard by the Magistrate, Euridea was by
his order imprisoned in a dark Dungeon, that there she might be proceeded
against, and receive the sentence which the Judges should decree against her:
she in vain demands the cause of her imprisonment, in vain she witnessed her
own innocence, since where its necessary to obey the violence of so many, it is
bootless to produce excuses for her deliverance. The fame was soon spread
abroad, that Euridea was imprisoned for poisoning this Lady at her table; the
public voice added that she was already condemned to death, as that liar when
it cannot offend truth, in the substance of the fact, yet at least it will
prejudice it with false additions. Niarpe heard of this accident, more
confusedly then others; so that in repeating it, he even confounded it in
himself, by reason of the dangers wherein his beloved enemy was.

This, says he to himself, is the time to terminate thy pains; here is the
opportunity of a certain death, together with a most indearing deceit to make
my faith and affection appear; let me but encounter this capital sentence,
instead of my Mistress, and I shall make it appear that the intention was always
impossible in me of killing her when we loved, when even now, when I ought to
hate her, by my own life I shall free her from losing of hers. Arise O my
heart, run boldly in this occasion to witness thy fidelity; to live is no ways
desirable, since a fallacious dream alone, is able to disturb thy contentment,
even to despair: Have thou suffered so many torments, not to yield to be
thought an unhappy Traitor: unloose thy self from these bonds, that thy soul
may be at liberty, and happily fly away without the weight of such grievous
passions which clog it.

He consulted in this manner with his own thoughts, without being aware to what
end these counsels directed his resolutions. He confounded himself in the
vehemence of his desire, which aspired to repacifie him with his beloved, which
inconsiderately precipitated him in the arms of every occasion which his hopes
represented favorable. He goes to Euridea's house with these revolved thoughts
in his stupefied mind, to gain a perfect notice of the fact: the servants were
astonished, no less in seeing, then in hearing him so perplexed for their
Mistrisses deliverance; they knowing of his former passages, esteemed him as a
perfideous enemy. They which served her said in confirmation of the relation,
which he had already heard, adding with multiplied oaths that she was innocent
of the imputed crime: that they had seasoned all the meat without the least
poisonous ingredient, or their being any ways offended by the taste thereof;
were the accusation true, they doubted only of the dish which was sent for a
present, yet that excluded the fault from those of the house, as being a
recevi'd deceit. They the more provoked him, lamenting the sudden and eminent
danger of their Lady, since, without defense, she was to maintain all what her
incensed Accuser did instance; they thought they might move Niarpe out of pity
to afford her some assistance; although they durst not entreat it, believing
his disdain against Euridea, to have been equal with what she did believe of
his cruelty; observing besides, that her safety was urgent; they solicited him
further, telling him, that all remedy would be fruitless, unless suddenly
undertaken. And according to the property of women, easy of belief, when moved
by fear, they thought even that their Lady was already brought to the Scaffold,
and her head was cuting off by the Executioner.

The distempered mind of the young man could no longer hold at that
impression; taking the danger far greater then in truth it was; and so ravished,
away he runs to the Tribunal, where his love was to be condemned, and according
to his belief unquestionably to be executed. Presenting himself to the Judge; I
am come, says he, to deliver the innocent from death; the poison which
criminates Euridea, as that she had prepared it for her friend, was sent by me
in the meat, which (as I perceive) was brought to her table at dinner, I sent
it to intoxicate Euridea her self, but baffled by Fortune, I see my self
betrayed by my own designs: repenting to have machinated her death, I correct
my error, neither will I double the crime, unjustly suffering that which now
lies on her by virtue of a false accusation.

What say thou, O foolish Niarpe? Thou hazardest thy self to regain the
affection of thy dear, and to abolish the thought of being a Traitor, thou
accusest thy self that thou would have poisoned her? Do thou think to
discriminate thy self by a sinister belief, with this fraud of thine thou
castest down thy hopes, and rather confirmest her belief, by confessing to have
endeavored to poison her? The more envenomed against thee, at this thy
redoubled attempt, instead of a lover, thou will render her a fury; thou shall
die infamous, hated by her, detested with perpetual ignominy, which will follow
the assurance of thy twice repeated treachery; a wise resolution, a prudent
counsel! What thou did design to shun, thou estrangest thy self from the end
which thou did prescribe to thy amorous resolution.

But it is no wonder that he should do thus who trusted a blind guide; spurred
on by love to this action, he went on without thinking what would become of the
business, weaving a black mantle of guiltiness for his own innocence; wherein,
in speaking, he made his tongue the nurse of his love, as he had before
followed his steps. The Judge admits of his voluntary accusation, exchanging
the Accuser for the Lady whom he declares innocent, and taking her out of
prison, satisfied her curiosity, by relating the success which was the occasion
of her unlooked for deliverance. She at first wondered at the guilty persons
true heart; but afterward understanding that it was Niarpe, who had confessed
that that poison had been designed for her death; those affections then
preceding it, which will suffer no bridle, to wit, disdain; she exclaimes
against his perfidiousness, who the second time discovered his designs of
treachery against her life.

Assuredly, said she, remorse of conscience has forced thee for such
treacheries to condemn thy self? O God, how can a soul, although perverse,
conceive a hatred against me, which seems insatiable, even to my death? I who
loved him with so sincere a heart, answered him with such a ready compliance,
and so courteously, that (I dare swear) I never had but amorous desires for him.
Let Ladies learn to be free to their young Lovers, that they may gain so
grateful a reward, even for the testimonies of tolerable cruelty. Believe not
now, that if there were a man more faithful then he, that even I could procure
my self, to overcome the inconstancy of my sex, to parralel him in affection.

Exaggerating after this manner her passion she comes to the presence of the
Judge, and doubly makes Niarpe guilty, discovering his former attempt to kill
her in her sweetest rest, in her quiet sleep. One fault confirms another;
Euridea having aggravated his fault, departs assured that he should be severely
punished by a mortal sentence: she gladly returns home, no less for her own
liberty, then for her assured revenge.

Amongst the encounters and affectionate congratulations of her servants, she
was advised by their discourses with Niarpe of the information he had taken,
and the reason of her imprisonment: but above all of his anguish, and how
grievously he took her danger. The Lady having heard, though unwillingly, these
expressions, contrary to her will, which was intoxicated with finister
thoughts; yet she began to reflect on her thoughts, how he by his own election
had exchanged himself to suffer her danger, which did no ways confirm a
perverse intention, but a constant affection. She observed what was said, being
obliged to believe him guiltless of any crime in this accident, which before he
had had no notice of; she could not judge her self desirous of his death, who
had discovered himself, by what was told her, in danger for her deliverance.

Nevertheless, this was not sufficient to remove from her mind the remembrance
which the first impression made, which was rendered indelible, if her eyes did
not lie, which had seen him with his unsheth'd steel armed against her breast.

The words of a Lady, with whom she had many contests, cooperated to introduce
a contrary belief; Niarpe's resentment being by Euridea's fury hightned, who
refused to hear his excuses: being at that time to give her a visit, from her
astonishment bred from the confusion of her thoughts, she took occasion to
insinuate in her discourse Niarpe's constancy, fomented only by an indiscreet
rigor, witnessing, she had seen him despair at her feet, for the loss of her
good graces, and a supplicant, with prayers, to regain them; she forms a
distinct Narration of all his words, his sighs, and his desires to undeceive
the fraud of a simple dream, with the continued attestations of an exviscerated
passion, making the truth appear by reason of the accident, which that night
happened unhappy to their loves, which still had been hid under the obscurity
of a mistake: she remembers the precedent proofs of his singular faith, with
the following testimonies; following it with an extreme grief of heart, as with
an uninterrupted care to pacify her anger; and then this last action confirmed
the immutability of his extraordinary affection, since he hazarded his own
innocence and his life, to deliver her from an imaginary danger.

Say no more, say no more, said Euridea, whose heart was already awakn'd with
the knowledge which arose from these discourses, that she had unjustly ill used
her lover; yet she persever'd in her contest, the obstinacy of her old belief;
till at last she was cast down by the testimony which Niarpe witnessed, even to
the hazard of his life, by a voluntary accusation made by himself, to afford
her the means to get out of the labyrinth of her prison, the center whereof
perhaps was death. He said, he had sent the poison, with the meat which arrived
at dinner time. Now whether whilst she was pondering in her mind, either of
the felicities, or the despair of her Lover, he coms who had brought her that
meat, to fetch back the dish; from this distinct information, she got full
notice of the fact, knowing that the present came from the civility of certain
Nuns; (as he related it) and not corrupted by the fidelity of the messenger,
who carried it. The ground of the design failed whereupon Niarpe had made
himself guilty: The building fell which his sinister Fortune had built under
the credit of treachery. Amongst a thousand troubles his Lady bitterly repented
hereof, for having unreasonably punished him with so much fierceness. Doubting
to be the cause of his death, she saw the despair enterchang'd, whereto the
necessity of her indiscreet rigours had often reduced him; but being blinded by
the fury of the deceit, not discerning his faith, so blind did love make her,
that she was heedless of her own sufferings.

She returns to the Tribunal, and as carried away with doting, she demands the
restoration of her Lover, that Niarpe should be set at liberty; if justice
required a victim, she alone was fit for the Executioner's hands, since she had
been sacrilegious, having violenc'd the temple of Faith and Love. Those who not
long before had heard her enraged against the same person, begging cruelty for
his punishments, were astonished to see such a change; she who had accused him
of double treacheries, now with so much vehemence, endeavored to cry him up as
innocent: The Judge had a competent satisfaction for his curiosity in the
relation made of the success, which might discipher the enigma's of so unlooked
for a change. They who admired Euridea, related the whole business, who from
her stupidity being reconcentrated in her self, discovered no less her own
confusion in her very accent; yet from time to time she replicated her instance
for the recovery of her Lover.

They witnessed the countersigns given of the unvariable affection of the one,
and of the innocence of the others deceived belief; so that the cause was
suspended with the deliverance of either, till the Judge had more apparent
motives to satisfy the demands of the Accuser, who complained as having been
poisoned. She was yet kept in her bed by reason of her weakness, which followed
the violence of the accident more then the necessity of any ill. Skilful
Physicians were sent, who by a diligent disquisition of all what she had eat
that day, and weighing the effects flowing from thence which she called poison,
they made a punctual scrutiny in search of the truth, and from one head to
another, they concluded the original of this agitation, which they did believe
came from nothing, but the malign quality of the Mushroms, which being not well
purged, had the force not only to weaken, but even to have killed her. A
particular reflection having denied the first impulses of grief or disdain,
which enforced them to hear, that al of the family had cried out that she had
been poisoned, now made the sick Lady of their opinion; she perceived that all
her suspicions were groundless, since neither in Euridea, who was accused, nor
in Niarpe, who had made himself guilty, she could find any occasion for such a
treachery. So that from the satisfaction of the one, and the sworn testimony of
the Physicians, a Decree of liberty was granted to our lovers. This revolution
of Fortune was unexpected by the young man, who betwixt the thoughts of death,
could not promise himself the enjoyment of so much felicity, unless by being so
near death, he might promise himself a future beatitude. He saw himself in his
beloved's arms, when he thought to go to his execution, and receive amorous
kisses from her lips, when he thought to hear the rigorous sentence of his
death. He knew not who to thank for such a happiness, unless that very hour
which had occasioned all his torments. His heart being restored into its former
sweet ardors, softly melts it self away, to make an inextinguishable lamp for
the light of his joys.

The Scaene being thus changed in his beloved, there only appeared
representations of tenderness, who repented not only her own mistake, but also
the torments she had occasioned: when she had reheated him, so that he could
no more be changed, as she thought by the cold of her rigorous correspondence,
she resolved on an amorous peace, and invites him to negotiate it himself with
greater advantage of his gust, then he possibly could have desired.

Were we not, said she, subject to fail, we should not remember our humanity;
and were we not subject to obey our passions, our souls would soar up too high,
were they not depressed by that tyranny; yet shall I not blush to confess my
fault, for having thought you unfaithful I will with a sincere chastisement
correct it if you please; I shall alone punish my self, did I not think to
offend your love, which I have experienced so constant, with my death, or with
my torments. Return therefore to my house, that between your arms I may know
your will either to enjoy or destroy me, as it shall be your pleasure, with a
dominion over me gained by the merit of your unchangable constancy, you shall
have the liberty to follow what you shall think most agradible.

Our Lover would have answered these kind invitations, or rather loving
mistrusts; but she hindered him, saying, It is no time nor fit place for amorous
expressions, otherwise superfluous, when the testimonies of love were so quick,
it concerns me to witness my gratitude, and its my obligation to exviscerate my
self to correspond with your affection; Its I ought to dye, either for the
delight I shall take to please you, or by the excess of my pains in
chastisement of your so ill rewarded a desert.

Niarpe held his peace at her command, and his debility being reinforced
preparing his arms to cement their joys; He goes with Euridea to her house, and
with embraces and kisses the peace was concluded, before it was treated by
words of mouth. They lived afterward regretting only their lost and fled
delights, confirming by experience; that the Water of Disdain sprinkled on the
Furnace of Love, reinvigorates its ardor instead of extinguishing it.

DEADORA.
NOVEL VIII.
The ARGUMENT.
At the burning of a house the love of Lovanio to Deadora commenced, who
gratefully corresponds with his Love, and to give her self the more freely to
him, she suffers her husband to enjoy her Maid Aleria, whilst she enjoyes her
friend; the Maid falls in love with Lovanio, betrays her Mistress, whose
jealousy causes the ruin of them all.

IN the most noble City of Bologna, pretending his studies, lived Lovanio, the
Count of Roccabruna's son, a youth, who with the comlines of his person, and
the affability of his manners, won the love of all those who had the happiness
of his acquaintance. As he was one day going toward the walls to take the air,
he was stopped by the voices of some, who crying out Fire, fire, pitifully begged
help; amongst others who despairing out of fear, had bedewed her cheeks with
her tears, was a Lady, although the roses of her face were fled, yet she might
brag it still enclosed a Garden of beauties; who although with the greatest
despite of danger, she nothing lost her courage; yet unable to remedy the
business, and abandoned of all help, was obliged to fear; Lovanio observing
that no body moved, the neighboring houses being empty of inhabitants; there
being some few poor little untoward women, who multiplying their outcries,
increased but the fright and confusion. He resolves to go himself with his
servants to quench the fire; which already in triumph had raised it self up to
heaven: Entering the palace where the flames furiously turned about, after
having wished Deadora, for so was the Lady called, that she should quiet her
fears, whilst he would endeavor to secure her from danger, he with his
servants and some others, who came at the cry, went up to the top of the house,
and there labors so with his hands and orders, that the fire was in a short
time buried in a thick cloud of smoke: He scarce was come down, when Gelasio
the Ladies husband meets him, who having had notice of the danger, was come
running thither. Their words were many, and full of civility, Gelasio even
offering him the house as Padron, since he had saved it from the fire; Deadora
came also to these thanksgivings, with so charming a behavior, that Lovanio
finds his heart enflamed with worse fires, then those he had lately quenched.
He had seen her at first with a sense of pity, when oppressed with fear, she
could do nothing, but weep and cry, the extinguished colors of her face had
not then the power to inflame a mind. Her heart having now restored the honors
it had robbed from her face, and the beauty of her eyes being no more troubled
with her tears, his pity was raised to love; Lovanio vowing all his affection
to the fair Deadora, who soon observed it, and the more, for that at his leave
he sent her his soul in a sigh: Yet she faigns her self careless, whether to
set the higher value on her honesty, or that she would not so soon venture on
the faith of a man; and although Lovanio continued to serve her, both at
Church, and at Bals, yet he gained nothing but salutes and indifferent looks,
which signify no more, as may be thought, then obligation, and not Love. The
young man when he could no longer resist the violence which tormented his
mind, sends out his passions on his paper, after this manner.

Madam,
THE flames which burnt your house, were destinated to torment my mind: I would
hide them, but the fire being shut up tears me with the greater violence, and
renders my relief untimely: I would extinguish it, but being supernatural, my
tears have the power only to render my grief the more sensible. I therefore
beg of you, O my fair, to quench my ardors, with a like compassion, as my heart
was filled withal at your first call; you have reason to pity me, knowing by
experience the hurt and danger of fire; I hope that a Lady of your conditions
would not offend her good name with the stain of ingratitude. Help me then, if
for no other cause, yet that you may not lose a servant, who loves you as much,
as he can, and as much as he knows, if not as much as you deserve. The honor of
your answer is the hopes of my life; the nourishment of my Being, is the
favor of your good Graces.


The letter being written and sealed, he solicited Fortune to favor him in the
delivery. He thought in himself that the most resolute means would prove most
dangerous: to use women of that profession were to stain the reputation of the
Lady, and would provoke her disdain, instead of procuring her affection: at
last that he might overcome all hindrances which resisted his desires with a
bold action; he comes one day to Church, when Deadora intended the Divine
service, and wrapping up the letter in a round, he so prettily casts it into
her bosom, that no body observed it. Deadora taking it unawares, and perceiving
that to make show of it, were but to publish her own shame, having dexterously
hidden the letter, goes home agitated with a thousand thoughts. She was no
sooner alone but her curiosity, or perhaps even her affection sent her looks to
the reading of the note; before she had made an end of it she gave her self for
lost: those characters were too powerful against the weakness of a woman's
heart, which is soft to all expressions. Being tyrannized by amorous
affections, she found no rest, but in her disquiets. She brought all her
affections to confult in her mind, which at last gave sentence in favor of
Lovanio: Whereupon being forced by the power which knows not reason, and
operates with the greater impetuosity, the greater refistance it sindes, she
commits her thoughts to the paper, which contained these conceits.

LOVANIO,
DID I not believe I should move your despite by declaring my self so easily
overcome by your entreaties, I would freely tell you I love you, and that I am
yours: but because I know the inconstancy of humane minds, which nothing
esteems what is gotten with ease and possessed without pains; I resolve to
entreat you to forbear your undertaking, which can never succeed without the
hazard of life and reputation. I have a soul so full of gratitude, that I could
not but venture my self for the satisfaction of one who with so much civility
was not wanting to help me in my need. I therefore assure my self, that so
worthy a Cavalier, who has merited all the favors of Nature and Fortune,
would not disquiet the repose of my heart, nor torment the affection of a
woman, who in despite of her self must yet confess her self to be yours. You
are with so much tenderness interessed to quench fire, which excerciseth its
fury on senseless things; That you ought not now to nourish it in my mind,
least it consume my life and reputation; could I have shaken off this so
grievous a yoke, which proceeds rather from my destiny, them my will, your
letters should not have prevented mine. Pardon me, if I unhandsomely trample on
the honesty I owe my sex, and the laws of marriage, since the first thing
which Love cancels is reason. But I have discovered my self too much, to one,
who perhaps laughs at my infirmity.


This letter being secretly conveyed into Lovanio's hands, fills him with so
much joy, that he could scarce contain himself, knowing that Deadera would not
belie these characters, these repulses being invitations, and these doubts
assurances of love. Whence argumenting that the Ladies affection was greater
then he ever hoped, he so operates, that without communicating his affections
to paper, he gets the opportunity to speak to her at a little grate, and there
to concert the accomplishment of their amorous pretensions. Gelasio, Deadora's
husband, was so given to all kind of love, that with the Camelion, who assumes
all the colors which comes near it, he at ever object changed his love and
affection. To satisfy the vanity of his lust, he made no distinction of
nobility or beauty; He confessed himself as well enchain'd with silver hairs,
as with golden looks; and was equally tyrannized over by a Lady of honor, and a
common Courtesan. His affection triumphs as much over that fair one, who was
without blemish, even from the observation of envy, as over that beauty which
was offended with a thousand, and metamorphosed by an infinity of
imperfections. Deadora, who knew her husbands genius, thinks on a means to
enjoy her Lover: she knew that her Chamber maid Aleria was solicited by him
with promises, gifts, and often with threats to satisfy his lustful desires;
whereto occurred that Aleria was naturally tormented with all kind of
dishonest desires, so that nothing bridled her, but the fear of her mistress:
who with Argus eyes watched Gelasio's immoderate affections. Deadora therefore,
that she might accommodate her self with her Lover, was content that Aleria, in
the mean time, should entertain her husband: which very often happily
succeeded, the warm season of the year concurring in favor of their loves.
Gelasio and Deadora slept in two several Chambers, so that Lovanio being let
into a ground Chamber, whilst Gelasio enjoyed Aleria, who at the same time
guarded her mistress, satisfied her master, and recreated her self: But because
the felicities of love are but as flies, which live and die in a day, Fortune
with the same facility would precipitate those she had lifted up. Lovanio was
one evening let in by Aleria, somewhat sooner then was usual: She after having
received him with a thousand caresses, expresses of love, which her breast
nourished, tells him, that Deadora would be a while busy, having not yet ended
her supper, and that in the mean time she had commission to entertain him.
Lovanio kindly thanks her, saying; That it was not the first of his
obligations to her. Aleria suffered him not to proceed, but taking him by the
hand, she says, Signor Lovanio, There can be no greater infelicity, then to see
others reap the fruits of ones pains: I have suffered so much that at last I
might get your love, and I have gained nothing but dangers and fears. Is it
possible, that least out of gratitude, if not out of love, I may deserve the
favor of your good Graces? Truly, I do not so much envy my mistress in
possessing your whole heart; I only lament the miseries of my fortune, which
has placed me in a condition to be despised, even by those whom I continually
pleasure: which having said, she begins to kiss his hand, which she held fast
in her own, with so many tears, that Lovanio, who at first laughed at her folly,
being unable to resist, gave himself over to sense: The more readily, because
the beauties of Aleria were so singular, that he would rather have deserved the
title of stupid, had he not taken the occasion of enjoying her. Lovanio and
Aleria were ingulf'd in the sweets of Love, when Deadora grew impatient that
she was not called, and perhaps not without jealousy (since it is the usury of
the pleasure of those that love) having seen her husband in bed, she silently
comes down into the ground chamber; and there having found her Lover in the
amorous lists, carried away with an unspeakable impetuosity, without
considering the danger of her life and honor, she at once furiously begins to
move both her hands and her tongue, saying, Traitor, do you thus triumph over
my shame? Is this the reward of my confidence, and of my faith; I will so treat
you, that I shall rejoice to see you buried in my precipice, that my ruin may
not be the more funeral by your laughter or lasciviousness. She accompanies
these words with so many blows and bitings, that Aleria bled in several
places; Lovanio, in the mean time, casting himself at her feet, begged of her
with the sweetest words, which would have introduced pity, even into
insensible sensible stones. Sometimes remembering her of the danger their lives
were in; sometimes excusing his own error, promising repentance; sometimes
protesting his body had sinned without the consent of his heart. Deadora being
deaf to his entreaties and humiliation, continued to injure them both in word
and deed. When with a face which carried horror and terror in his eyes, Gelasio
appeared; who without sleeping, had long heard Aleria, and rising to seek her,
he comes to a place where he hears, although indistinctly, Deadora's rage,
Aleria's tears, and Lovanio's requests. Gelasio having taken a Dagger,
furiously runs to the noise: Scarce sees he Lovanio embracing his wives knees,
but he knew him guilty of having ravished the honesty and reputation of his
house; whereupon he runs to him, and strikes him such a blow on the head, that
he being disabled to sustain himself, falls to the ground with the pangs of
death, which were more terrible then ordinary, seeing that his sensuality had
prepared a sepulcher as well for Deadora, as for himself; Gelasio observing
Lovanio in a dying condition, unable to defend himself. turning to his wife
with a tone of voice, which would have begot horror in a breast of Marble,
tells her; Woman, thy crime is so great, that to pass by it without punishment,
would rather be an effect of weakness then of mercy: yet since I preserve in my
mind the characters of my first affection; I shall pardon thee; but on this
condition, that this Adulterer, having thy heart, thou shall herewith stab him
in the breast. Deadora having taken the Dagger, with a greater undauntedness,
then is to be found in a feminine heart, says; Sir, The sins of love deserve
some pardon, because they oftener come from destiny, then from eslection, Yet I
confess my self unworthy of it, for that I could not regulate my dissoluteness.
Saying these words, and faigning to strike Lovanio, she sheathes the Dagger in
her husbands bosom; who scarce could say, Cursed, woman, thus at once to rob me
of my life and honor; but he lost his speech with a many lowings, as if he
would rather threaten death then dye, so he unhappily ended his days. Deadora
having executed that endeavor, with but too much courage, and but too little
justice; runs to fetch the last breath from the soul of Lovanio; who having
violenc'd himself, said; My dear, Deadora, I dye content, since I dye not
unrevenged: Pardon me, and suffer that the chastisment of a humane error may
terminate with him who committed it: I beg of you, that with your disdain, you
make not my ashes unhappy. But, alas, this is the last period of my life:
Consolate, O my dear, the miseries of its passage, with the last of thy kisses.
At the end of these words he ceased to live. Deadora stupefied with grief, was
rendered immovable, like a Statue; after she had said, crying out with a deluge
of tears. Stay, O the Soul of my Dearest beloved Lovanio: Its not fit that thou
should go to the Shades alone. Which having said, she strikes the Dagger
through her own Heart; whence her Soul soon issues with her blood.

Aleria, who in the representation of this Tragedy, had suffered the torments
of a thousand deaths, flying from the sight and enquiry of those, who in great
numbers came to the noise: hating at the same time the light and her self,
retired into the uppermost parts of the House; and there having fastened a
Halter, she miserably throws away her life, giving a just reward to her own
dishonesty.

Hence may be comprehended, That all the Pleasures of unlawful Loves finally
terminate Tragedies; and that impudent Affections can have no other but an
unhappy end.

EMILIO.
NOVEL IX.
The ARGUMENT.
Emilio a Genuoess retires to Lucca, where using to hunt together, he contracts
a friendship with Hippolito, and afterward with his wife. Hippolito grows
jealous, and becomes his enemy; but being assured that Emilio declared himself
servant to Silvia, and repenting himself of his jealousy, he causes his wife
to lead him into a Chamber to reconcile them; His wife obeys, and enjoys
Emilio, Hippolito knows it, and being discovered, and threatened, is pacified.

GENUOA was the place where Emilio was born, whose unprosperous successes,
confirm the opinion, That a man's natural Climat is commonly most unhappy. He
observed how the treacheries of hidden enemies plotted his death, in conformity
with his malignant destiny; whereupon he retires to Lucca, where his passions
had no other release from his estrangment, from that heaven, where that star
shone, which was the very Sun of his felicity, but the pleasure of hunting;
spending the greatest part of his time amongst those Hills which surrounded the
City; he rendered himself as formidable to the wild beasts, as he was pleasing
and grateful to the Ladies and Cavaliers, who in those Villa's enjoy the
delights of the Autumn: According to the custom of Hunters, he often frequented
a Coppice which extended it self over a little Hill, which the thicker it was,
appeared the more delightful. He never entered it without bringing away store of
game. In those parts there was one, who being invited by the delights of the
situation and civility of the Inhabitants, whose name was Hippolito, being a
lover of the sport, professed a singular friendship to Emilio; So that Cleria,
Hippolito's wife contracted also so great a familiarity with him, that upon all
occasions of invitation, he discoursed, and past the time with her, with such
sports as the diversity of the season and place afforded; so that Cleria and
Emilio were the promoters of all pastimes. The modesty and civility of Emilio,
although a stranger, made way for him to any kind of familiar conversation. He
so served the Ladies, that there appeared no partiality in him, more toward
the one then the other; Cleria, above all, was endued by Nature with all those
good Graces which are desirable in a Lady; besides, she was singularly courted
by Emilio, and differently from the rest; acknowledged with a particular
affections not only for her qualities, but also for the obligations he professed
in consequence of the favors he had received, and for the strict friendship he
had with her husband. Emilio, amongst these delights, enjoyed a calm life,
which was afterward troubled by Love, the occasion of all ill, which was
raised in Cleria toward him. Emilio being given to hunting and other honest
sports, thought those demonstrations, which upon many occasions Cleria used in
her discourse, which her flames sent forth, sprightly jests from the
familiarity of their conversation.

Now it happened, that a day being appointed when the Cavaliers and Ladies were
to meet at a Feast in a place, somewhat distant, whereby the Lovers had leave,
modestly, to make the resentments of their minds appear.

On that day's morning, the youth appeared in extravagant habits, and various
desires, to witness by those colors the secrets of their hearts. Emilio, on
the other side, dispoyld himself of all which might seem to show any partiality
in his thoughts: The Company having met at Hippolito's house; Cleria being full
of caresses, began to discourse now with one, and then with another, turning to
Emilio, she favors him with a smile, and says; It displeases me, to see that
your Lady suffers you to appear so poor in favors. Emilio answered, That he
wanted one; but the following day he hoped to make prize of one; and showing
the manner how he intended to pursue his design, he shows her the gun he had
one his shoulder. Then says Cleria, you would have a dead Lady. To whom Emilio
replies, That he followed his deer, but to cast her down: Cleria adds, That
since he had such thoughts; there was no Lady but would be proud of his
service. I know very well, replies Emilio, That a Lady has no greater
pleasure, then to fall before those who desire her, and though she flees, she
desires to be taken and overcome. I says Cleria, but by other means. For me,
replies Emilio, at this time I know no other more proportionable means, then
this for to compass my ends. At this answer, Hippolito, jestingly, says, Signor
Emili, I shall resign you my wife for your Lady, assuring me that you will
willingly quit me of the trouble; Cleria turning to her husband with a
disdainful smile, says; I thank you with so good a heart, that perhaps you may
repent it. They fell upon other discourse, till they all took their way toward
the appointed place: Emilio walked along with Cleria, and led her by the hand,
introducing by this opportunity, several discourses, whereto Cleria always
concluded, That she indeed was his Mistress. Hippolito has given me to you, now
it belongs to you to cast me down, but believe me, I will not dye alone; and at
last, she said, she resolved to live hereafter, but only in and for him. These
discourses assured Emilio of Cleria's heart, to his great displeasure;
forasmuch, as her husbands friendship permitted him not so maliciously to
offend him in his reputation. He answered her with ceremony, seeming not to
understand the end she aimed at. The day past with infinite solace; Emilio was
only troubled, that he could not correspond with the Love of Cleria, whose
beauty forced all hearts to adore her. After a few days, winter drawing near,
Hippolito retreats to the Town to the great grief of Cleria, who thereby was
deprived of the opportunity, so frequently and familiarly to commerce with her
Dear. Before her departure she importunately exacted from him promises, with
oaths, whereby she obliged him every day to let her see him in that street,
where she lived, that at least she might be consolated with the sight of him.
Emilio inviolably observes his promise, and thence forward, about the shutting
up of the evening, his ordinary walk was by Cleria's window, who constantly
expected him, giving him multiplied signs of Love; which being observed by many
(neither can it happen otherwise, in what public place soever) raised the
general opinion: That although very secretly, yet Emilio and Cleria were
contented Lovers.

There lived in Lucca, banished from his Country, Millan, one called Diego, a
Gentleman of Spanish blood, who having observed the mutual looks which past
betwixt Cleria and Emilio, and concluding, that they secretly enjoyed the
fruits of Love, he resolved to tempt his fortune with the Lady. And giving way
to such thoughts, flies out in words; saying; that he even also would enjoy
her, since she felicitated Emilio with an amorous correspondence. A Cavalier
hears these words, and answers him: You have a very base esteem of Emilio; I
know that he is not of such a humor, that he will either suffer a rival in
love, or abandon the Lady. If he forsakes not his beloved, answers Diego, he
must abandon his life. This his arrogance displeased the Gentleman, so that he
could not at least, but discover it to his friend, who, burning with disdain,
was resolved to make trial of his pride. He prays his friend that he might do
it alone; and presently going toward Cleria's street. He went not far, but
Diego comes thither; Emilio orders it so, that he meets him under the window
where Cleria was; and with a loud voice, says, Signor Diego, this is the place
where one of us must leave his life, or his Lady, and his hand accompanying his
tongue, he at the same time draws his sword. Diego does the like, who although
he behaved himself gallantly, yet he remains mortally wounded, and his death
had suddenly followed, had not Cleria with her crying out, obliged Emilio to
retire: Diego was carried home, and knowing that himself had been the cause of
his mischance, was easily reconciled; so that their peace was soon made. The
success was divul^'d in Lucca. The love of Cleria was found guilty, who by her
husband who threatened to kill her, was sent away to his Country house. This
opinion was noised about the Town, struck Emilio to the heart, since it covered
her with shame, who was the soul of his soul, and that himself was accused, as
having broken his faith with his friend Hippolito. He was afflicted so that he
gave all up to despair, and thought on nothing, but to find out a way to
undeceive the people, and recover the Lady her honor, and restore his own
reputation. Being thus agitated in a Sea of trouble, he continued his
accustomed walk through Cleria's street, to show that he had not yielded to
Diego. Fortune had obliged Leonello, a Neapolitan Gentleman to love Silvia, by
way of marriage, who lived just over against Cleria's house; He began to
frequent that street, which suggested to Emilio's mind, that he might take
this occasion to abolish the suspicion of those who persuaded themselves, that
he for love of Cleria had fought with Diego. He hereupon resolves to quarrel
with Leonello, and brings his intention to pass at such a time when Hippolito
was looking out of the Window: and stopping him there; Emilio says to the
other, with a lofty voice: That if he valued his own life, he should
voluntarily banish himseelf from that street; nor any longer pretend to Silvia:
Leonello, although a youth, encouraged by the presence of his Lady, who then
looked on him, made ready to answer him with his sword, and boldly defends
himself against Emilio: Yet he remains wounded, the other being a perfect good
sword man, and at that time seconded with his own natural fury, reduced
Leonello to beg his life of him, who as he was retiring wraps himself in his
own cloak and falls. Emilio gets him up and leads him to his house, where, by
the intercession of friends, they were soon pacified.

Hippolito, who had seen all, was confused, and divulging the sequel about the
City, firmly concluding, that both disputes had been for the love of Silvia;
neither was there any who now doubted otherwise; forasmuch, as in both the
written agreements, which were already published in Lucca, Emilio had always
declared, how he drew his sword, out of his jealousy, for Silvia. Hippolito
had no sooner thought himself an Acteon, but he had shunned the company of the
Hunter, and fled from Emilio, as a Buck from a Hound; speaking ill of him, and
covertly threatening revenge. Emilio slighting his disdain, began to think,
since he was free from the laws of friendship, how he might pursue his loves
with Cleria, being continually sensible of the flames her beauty had caused,
which obliged all his thoughts.

Hippolito, on the other side, repenting his past suspicions, every hour
condemning his folly, for having yielded to so salfe a belief; he resolves to
bring his wife to Town again; who had notice of all what had past in Lucca;
whereupon she conceived so great a hatred against Emilio, that her desires
machinated nothing but his ruin, as absolutely believing Emilio enamored of
Silvia; Hippolito endeavors to reconcile their former friendship, refused by
the other, who now aspired to be of his kindred. Emilio continued to pass
before Cleria's house, faigning always to court Silvia, who giving credit to
the appearances, with an amorous corespondence favored the demonstrations of
his affection, as far as the terms and limits of civility permitted her.
Hippolito at last thought on all those means which might be fit to procure
Emilio to be again friendly with him, and to that end, commands his wife to do
the best offices she could possibly in his favor toward Silvia. It being
Carnevale time, he appoints a ball to be danced in his own house, whereto he
also invites Silvia, hoping that the love of her, would likewise bring thither
Emilio So it was, taking the opportunity of disguising himself in a masking
habit, he embraces the party and comes: He was known by Hippolito, who orders
Cleria, who was masked, to speak to him of Silvia, offering her assistance,
kindly forcing him to enter into a certain chamber to drink, imposing on her,
besides, that she would not suffer him to depart before she had pacified him,
and reconciled them as they were before, familiar friends. Cleria quickly
executes her husbands commands, and going out of the Feastival Room, invites
Emilio to dance, and danceth with him after the custom of Lucca. She begins to
discourse with him, and asks him of his Mistress; Emilio foons discovers her,
and with a languishing sigh answered her, That from her alone, he could hear
the most desirable news. They both pressed on the others hands, speaking rather
with their sighs, then with their words. The Ball being ended, Cleria goes out,
having Emilio by the hand, and brings him into a Chamber joining to the Hall,
under pretense, that who she had with her would unmasked themselves to drink,
but would not be known, and therefore sends away the servant, who kept it. The
door being shut, and she alone with Emilio, presently takes off the vizard from
both their faces. Then she draws out a Dagger, and tells him; To vindicate the
injuries of thy perfidiousness, Traitor, I should sheath this in thy heart, but
that I know one death is not sufficient to revenge the outrages thou have done
me. At these words Emilio kneeling down opens his naked breast, saying; Satisfy
then, O my dearest, thy desires, although I have erred in nothing, but in
loving thee too much. Thou lie, says she; Thou have to my shame and despite
loved Silvia. Kill me then, replies Emilio, that in those characters engraven
in my heart, you may have a sufficient testimony, that I always adored none
but you. Would you have me then kill you, replies Cleria? so I resolve; arise,
and come with me, for even now I will deliciate my self in thy death; which
having said, she opens the door of another little Chamber, wherein there was a
bed, and there knitting her arms about his neck, she unloosed them not, till
she breathed her soul into him. Hippolito expecting to know to what end his
wife had brought her undertakings, thought well of her stay: and with this hope
he went merrily and boldly about, believing that his desires would be
felicitated by his reconciliation with Emilio. The good man knew not that his
Ascendant was then entering into Cupricorn by means of Gemini. Cleria and Emilio
at last retired to the dancing Room, diverting the toylsom pastimes of the
others, in comparison of the private dance they had had. He dancing with
Silvia, whilst retiring aside, she sets her self down. None observed Emilio's
return, but Hippolito, who being curious to know what had been done, quickly
accosts his wife, enquiring of the success: She remits the relation to a fitter
time; tells him only, That if another night she might repeat the endeavors
she had made on Emilio's stubbornness, she was confident she should gain him.
He was pleased at the motion of another feast for the following night, the
better to effect the business which was advanced, being already disposed.
Hippolito gladly appoints it, and thereupon they renew the invitation. All
succeeding according to what had been ordered the precedent night. Cleria
invites Emilio into the Chamber, which was the Theater of their delights. But
before them, Hippolito, to secure himself how his wife managed the business,
retired secretly into the little Chamber, hiding himself under the bed. Without
any suspicion, the Lovers shut the door, and on the Down they solace
themselves, with the sweetest expressions of their loves. Hippolito being
astonished at so unexpected a success, durst even scarce breath; He was
disarmed, and on the otherside, saw Emilio well provided with Pistols; so that
he thought, if he should discover himself he should certainly expose himself to
death: What his sense was in so rude a necessity, to be a witness of the sports
and pleasures of the Lovers, let him imagine, who can believe that he was not
confounded with various passions. At last the amorous wrastlers being weary,
aband on'd the Field, and going out of the Room, they heard I know not what
russling under the bed. Cleria being curious to know what it was, finds that
it was her husband who was there; then she cries out, Alas, O Emilio, we are
lost; The Lover moved at these words, and animated at the accident grew bold,
and with his Pistol in his hand, he commands Hippolito to come forth, who,
being afraid, would not raise his knees from the ground, before he was secured
they would not take away his life, which he submissively begged from Emilio. He
freely offered, both to him and to his wife, pardon for the injuries they had
done his reputation. Cleria observing her husbands cowardliness, took heart,
and interposeth her intercessions to divert the other, who always showed
himself unresolved in the thought of killing him: he faigns to yield to her
prayers; and deposing his disdain, he accepts the oblation of Cleria's pardon,
praising Hippolito's prudence, for that resolution; showing, that such like
errors are the more compatible; forasmuch, as there are commonly but few women,
who inviolably observe the faith they ow their husbands. He said that silence
and carelessness were forms fit in such matters, that a man need not be obliged
to live continually disquieted with his arms in his hand, that in this present
exigent all should sleep in perpetual oblivion; that even himself, as he had
judged this occasion as a dream, so he should put it out of his remembrance. He
promised that he would never commit the like with his wife; which she for her
part also authenticates, assuring him, that she intended ever hereafter to live
according to the laws of honor. Afterward he protests with threats, that if
for this occasion he should ever disgust Cleria, with the least sign of
remembering this escape, he would reserve to himself a notable revenge. The
other promises what was required of him, with the greatest Oaths and
Assurances that his Mind could think; Obliging himself never more to trouble
his thoughts with the remembrance thereof.

With the truest Acts of a sincere affection this Agreement was made, of a
peaceable Union: Neither was the peace ever broken; neither did they fail in
their promises. Hippolito was obliged by the natural baseness of his mind, and
the fear he conceived from the Lovers threatenings; Cleria being warned by this
danger, was persuaded to keep her replicated faith, knowing that it is always
dangerous to violate it. And Emilio returning to his own Country, opposed
absence to Love, whose Laws otherwise, perhaps, would have forced him to
despise all other obligations.

LIMISINDA.
NOVEL X.
The ARGUMENT.
Gelindo to gain the love of Limifinda, secretly kills her husband; she
suspecting it, and desirous to revenge it, invites Gelindo to lie with her; and
instead of enjoyment, sacrifices him to her disdain.

WOMEN have not always, as some would persuade, bin unfaithful to their
Husbands; many examples are read of their imprudence, and very many may be
related, which serve for Rules of Chastity; one among others which comes in my
mind to discourse, certainly, may be numbered amongst the most laudible, worthy
to be recommended to Posterity.

In that City which after the destruction of Troy was built by Antenore, on the
most famous River of Brent, after that Limisinda and Eusebio had loved with a
singular correspondence of affection; They attained from the courteous favor of
the Stars, and from the concordant will of their parents the desired end of
their Loves: Being both bound together in the bonds of Matrimony, their
affectionate union was not diminished, but so powerfully day by day increased,
that they were singularly admired by all good husbands, and by all kind wives,
but paralelled by none; although many at that time, by their example, obliged
themselves to illustrate their marriage, with an access of affection. But
Heaven is not always Serene; neither do Rivers always run with pure water.
The beauty of Limisinda was of such a temper, that it made even such as
Senocrates know themselves to be men, although without ornaments borrowed from
Art, although seldom seen, although looked upon with curiosity by those eyes
which beheld them, and desired by all hearts, innocently murtherous they bound
to themselves, amongst others, the good will of Gelindo; a youth to be
respected amongst the first of his Country, both for the Nobility of his Blood,
and for the Gentility of his Manners. He so fiercely loved the Lady, that he
gave himself over to pursue her, with all manner of serviceable diligence.
After a long succession of time, Limisinda was at last aware of the importunate
solicitation, wherewith her new Lover pursued her; nevertheless, either she
would not see, or cared not for him, but so despised him, that the miserable
man, by reason of her honest behavior, was often falling through despair into
an excess of phrensy; he tempts by the force of prayers and presents, to
possess himself of her servants, that at least he might procure them to present
her with his service, or his letters; but none of them (knowing the Ladies
disposition) durst take the boldness to offer it, being confident to incur
only shame, and perhaps danger. The poor young Gentleman knew not what to do;
he did his best to free himself from those chains; but all his endeavors were
vain; Many many months were past, yet in vain, he could not dispense with his
love, having not, as yet, received the least sign, upon which he might ground
the least hope, at any time of being loved again. Being agitated with all, and
the greatest furies which can overwhelm the mind of a desperate Lover, The
miserable man often thought even to bereave himself of his own life, that
withal he might free himself from his torments. In these perturbations of mind
he grew so weak, that every man thought he was even at deaths door, and that
with his loves he would cease to live. He had not, although he had a long time
been a lover of Limisinda, discovered to any the secret of his heart: but
seeing himself reduced to such a condition, that he had no more hope of safety,
he resolved to desposit it in the bosom of a friend of his, whom, before
others, from his childhood he had singularly preferred. To him he discovered
what had been so long time hid in his breast, and in his words fell even to
these expressions, that his ill was derived from no other cause, but from his
love, and that he could attribute his death to nothing but the cruelty of
Limisinda, thus being blinded with passion, did he wrongfully call the Ladies
chastity, cruelty: not knowing that a man cannot dye unless at the fatality of
the determined time, he should believe that his death was caused by the beauty
of a woman's face. His friend, who cordially loved him, and who would not have
spared his own life to preserve Gelindo's, having reproved him, that he had not
before discovered this secret to him; comforts him, persuading him to expect
the health of his body, if he did but intend his cure, and so find a certain
remedy for the sickness of his mind. Our Lover having received some ease from
his friends words, and hoping that some time or other he would tell him some
easy and secure way to gain the end of his desires; he with patience received
the application of remedies for his disease, and after a few days (although
his infirmity past) slowly, yet he found himself freed of his indisposition,
and scarce had he recovered but a part of his strength, when he had recourse to
his friend, that the hopes which from him he had conceived in his mind might
not be defrauded, desiring him to teach him the easiest way he could devise,
whereby he might enjoy his Limisinda. His friend, who knew the Ladies virtue to
be such, that it admitted of no parallel, and discovering in Gelindo an excess
which might rather be called a foolish fury, than an amorous affection, with a
free discourse seeks to reclaim him; showing him, that in following the vanity
of his Cappricio's, or rather in persecuting the praise worthy constancy of
Limisinda, he behaved himself like a mad man, who would plough the Sea, and
catch the Wind in a Net; and finally, after a long discourse, concludes, That
if he would not retire from his undertaking some ill accident would certainly
befall him; That the Lady would either resolve to put him from his importunity,
either accusing of him to her husband, or making it known to her kindred, who
assuredly would not let pass unpunished so foolish a temerity, which
endeavored to stain, with notes of infamy, the honest reputation of another
man's Family: Love admits of no advise; he acknowledges the truth of reason in
his friends words, but it being not possessed by him, the words were but cast
into the air; and with this answer, only, leaves he him. You shall soon see,
says he, whether I, or who else it is that shall be lost. His friend was
astonished and afflicted, that he could nothing move him from avoiding those
dangers, which threatened him if he should obstinately pursue his intentions.
Many days were not past, when Eusebio going to a Villa of his, was shot in the
flank with a brace of bullets, he knew not from whence; and having enmity with
no man, he could not imagine from whom it should come. This hurt made him fall
to the ground from his horse, so that he could not help himself, til some
Country men passing by, who knew him, put him on their Cart, which was loaded
with Corn, going for the City, and brought him home to his wife, who for the
disaster which had befaln him, was unmeasurably afflicted. The Physicians and
Chirurgians were sent for, who knowing the wound to be mortal, gave him over;
yet they did not forbear to apply the best remedies they knew, which were but
all in vain; the miserable man, at the end of the seventh day, was forced to
leave his life and his wife; I should say his wife first, since by him she was
preferred before it. What sighs and complaints she made; how she toar with her
white hands her golden locks, and beat her candent breast, cannot be expressed;
the excess of them was so great, that men would hardly find faith to believe
the truth of them. The last day of the month was scarce at an end, the fair
having performed the obsequies of her deceased Husband, when Gelindo was
observed, more then he was wont, frequently to go about the Ladies house, and
with words and gestures to discover himself more enflamed then ever with her
unparalleled beauty. He often tempts by means of a neighbor of hers, that she
might procure her for him to wife; causing her in his name to make as generous
offers, as could be made from a heart which loves immoderately. But all vainly
succeeds, for she was resolved never to consent to any: the rather, for that,
although she was not assured, yet she very much doubted, that her husbands
death had been effected by none, but by Gelindo; so that she did not only deny
to exchange love, but she returned him one of the fiercest hatreds that ever
woman bore a man. Women as well in hatred, as in love, have no bridle but have
both in excess. The most beautiful Widow nourishing the fire of this disdain
within her heart, against Gelindo who adored her, often meditates to revenge
her wronged and murdered husband: and because she could find out no way more
secure, then one, which was to execute it with her own hands, she deliberates
with her self, to dispatch it after this manner. It was about the end of the
year of her mourning widowhood; when on a day she calls one of the most faithful
amongst her maids, and having shut themselves up together in a secret Chamber,
she speaks to her after this manner. Fosca, for so was her name, My long
experience of thy fidelity toward my person assures me that I may confide in
thee, even one of the highest resolutions which I ever made in the whole course
of my life: but before I discover it, think well upon it, whether you can be
sure to keep it secret, for if you find that you have not resolution enough to
silence it, tell me that I may not speak it, and I shall take another expedient
for to accomplish my thought. Its needless to relate what Fosca answered, its
enough that her words were such; that Limisinda pursued her already began
discourse. I have always heard say, that its impossible for a young woman
that's handsome, and that has tasted the delights of her husbands embraces, to
live long after his death without the company of a man; I have proved the truth
thereof from the affections of my mind: I have endeavored a long time since
the death of my dear Eusebio (who is now amongst the Stars) to violence my
self, and to repress the heat of youth, which a fresh fomented my desires of
those amorous pleasures: but because I perceive it impossible any longer to
overcome the force thereof, I have taken a resolution, that I will not live
altogether the rest of my life, unaccompanied of a man: Its true, I would not
subject my self to that Noose which is not to be unloosed betwixt man and
woman, unless by the death of the one or other of them: Other thoughts, and
other desires possess my mind. The Maid remained a while suspended at these
words of her Mistress, who observing it, continued, Wonder not, my Fosca, at
what I am to tell thee, and if you see me changed in my opinion, which in the
esteem of all was of an unparalleled honesty, I must hereafter live otherwise.
Resolve therefore on what I shall impose upon thee, for I am confident you will
one day praise me, when you shall entirely know the end of these thoughts which
revolve in my mind. Servitude, fidelity, and the importunity of a Lover, with
the time, overcomes the most obstinate rigor of a woman's breast: I am not the
first who have been subdued: If thou had ever found thy self in the like
case, thou would compassionate and help me, so that what thou art to execute
may be effected with all possible secrecy, that it at no time may be known by
any, but by us two and Gelindo, whom at the shutting in of the Evening thou art
to expect at a window of the lower room; and when he according to his custom
passes by, cast him out this paper, wrapped up in this sarsenet, and then
presently retire thy self, that he reading it, may think upon what he is to do.
The wench takes the letter from her Mistress, and full of astonishment, by
reason of the novelty of the accident, wonders at so unexpected a resolution:
Yet she promises diligently to perform what was commanded her, and so departs
to go about her other house affairs, till the hour come wherein she was to
execute it.

The Evening being come, Gelindo passes the street, and whilst he cast his
eyes toward the uppermost windows of Limisinda's house, where sometimes he had
had the fortune to see her, there comes to him, thrown by the Maid, who stood
hid behind the glass of a Balcony, in the lowermost part of the house, this
letter involved; and having observed him to take it, she presently returns to
her Mistress, to acquaint her with the success. The discreet widow showed some
tokens of joy in her countenance, (women can faign at pleasure) and a fresh
commands Fosca, that she should go into one of the lower Rooms and prepare a
convenient bed, for that she was confident her Lover would that very night come
to find her alone, and there she intended their amorous enjoyments. All was
executed. Gelindo having opened the letter, reads it, and finds these words.

GELINDO,
BECAUSE it often happens that those women who easily give themselves in prey
to young Lovers, find themselves quickly deceived and penitent: I, that I
might not fall into the like error, would from length of time have experience
of your faith, and affection; whereof being assured, I cannot deny you the
reward of the excess of the love which I know you bear me. If it please you
therefore about midnight to come to my house, where my Maid shall expect you,
to let you in to the place where you may be happy: we will either contract
marriage, or otherwise, as you shall think fit; Since I desire nothing more,
then to be for ever

Your Servant LIMISINDA.


He was astonished at the reading of this Letter, and gave Love and Fortune
thanks, that they had showed themselves so favorable toward him: Retiring
himself full of thoughts to the others dwelling, expecting with impatience, and
grievously sighing after that midnight, which was to be the last of his life.
The hour came, and he departs, and alone goes to Limisinda's house; behind the
door, which was half open, he finds Fosca, who with a small light in a little
Lantern, stood there expecting him. He enters, and is presently led into the
Chamber, which he fancied should be the Theater of his Pleasures, but proved
afterward that of his Tragedy. O how ill does a man oppose himself to what
must happen! Alas, with what blind steps Love guides us to precipices.

The Maid leaves him in the Chamber with some Candles lighted, and goes up
Stairs to give notice to her Mistress. She having taken some Comfits, and some
costly Wines, though sleepy; sends back the Maid, telling her; Bid Gelindo,
from me, refresh himself with these Junkets, the better to prepare himself for
those delights, and then come back and I will presently come to him. Fosca
goes, and returns. The lovesick Gelindo, forced himself although against his
will, to taste a part of them, and having taken a cup of Wine, he sends it down
his breast, sending to his heart the advertisement of his own death. He had
scarce drunk, but he finds his eyes out of measure possessed with a heavy sleep.
He sits himself down on a Chair, and scarce was settled, but he falls profoundly
asleep.

When Limisinda imagined that the Poison began to work, she comes down Stairs,
and enters the Room where Gelindo was asleep. The young Lady was in a
confusion, and almost repented that she had before taken such a resolution:
Nevertheless taking up her Heart with a Courage, and although she had hid a
Dagger in a Corner of the Chamber, yet would she not take it; but takes from
the young man that which he wore by his side, and striking it often through his
throat, he not stirring at all, otherwise then streching out his last with his
Legs and his Arms.

Thus dyed this unhappy man; and thus she sacrificed his Soul to the Soul of
her dead Husband. Having executed this, she goes up and brings Fosca with her
to terrify her with the horror of this miserable Spectacle. The Maid says
twice or thrice with a loud voice, and with actions as of a desperate person.
Alas, O God! Alas! And had follwed it with other words, had not Limisinda cried
out, and threatened to call out for the Neighborhood, reversing all the crime
on her. Poor Fosca was thus forced to be quiet, to fly her own shame, and the
danger of punishment, which the Justice might have inflicted. And being helped
by her Mistress, they silently carried the body to a place; where they buried
it, that none ever knew any thing of the Fact, till many years after it was
known from Limisinda her self a while before the hour of her death.

Let the unwary Youth learn by this History to Regulate his Immoderate
Affections: Nor so much trust Women, as to believe they may not at last be
deceived.

IRLANDO and ARMANDO.
NOVEL XI.
The ARGUMENT.
Irlando and Armando love Rosalia, and Rosalia and Emilia love Irlando, and
after many various deceits and turns of Fortune: finding fidelity in their
Lovers, the Ladies fix a constant and sincere affection.

IN Padua, a City the more noble, by how much the more ancient, the compendium
of beauty was to be seen in the likeness of a most graceful Lady, who might
have boasted to have debauched the graces from Venus, to get a glorious train
for her self: Whenever she made show of her self to the eyes of others, 'twas
necessary to believe, that heaven keeping open Court did abundantly disperse
its splendors. Who with a chance look could steal away pledges of Love, she had
a perpetual light in her mind, which rallied up in the thoughts of all the
hight of the greatest beauties which possibly could be admired in a created
object: Glances need not be repeated in that face, which lightning with
Majesty, obliged the errors of a timorous boldness to correct themselves with
modesty. Sitting sometimes at a window, she sent abroad Love her son to hunt
after hearts, born from her eyes, and bred in the cradle of her lips, and
reigning in the throne of her countenance. There were bound with the chains of
her looks the souls of a thousand Lovers: With an extraordinary violence, being
so near the sun, every one was constrained either to have the tenderness of his
heart melted, or burnt with the bait of affections. In fine, the rays of
Divinity could find no fitter sphere, then that most beautiful face, when it
would make it self visible to mortal eyes. It was once gazed on by two
Cavaliers, born in France, but following their studies, inhabitants of that
City.

The conjunction of their minds had unanimously led them out of their Native
Kingdom, and indissolvably linked them together with the tie of a singular
friendship; inviolably observing the laws thereof, they never suffered their
always regulated affections to disturb their mutual contentment. They were
unanimous in their apparel and diet, inseparable in conversation, and
indivisable in love; so that they it seemed agree^ together to lose their
liberties, the soul willingly following the looks, fled away to imprison it
self (if we may call Heaven a prison) in the bosom of so eminent a beauty. They
unanimously Courted the Idol, who on the Altar of her Window, received the
victims of their hearts: they sometimes fixed their eyes on one another; I know
not whether to move a mutual pity toward eithers ardors, and to testify the
excess of that beauty, which silencing the tongue, rendered the eyes talkative:
yet was it superfluous for the eyes to speak the language of admiration, since
all the visible species which that face represented, were as many Characters,
which circumscribed the necessity of astonishment.

It was needless also for them to communicate alternatively the kindled flames
of their inward affections; since either of them had in him a living fire,
wherein the most vital spirits of the mind were cousumed. But perhaps those
looks were with more truth to be called effects of the already conceived
jealousy of their hearts, for those beloved beauties, so that they would spy
one the others countersigns parallel with their own, whereby they might
conjecture the others love.

The wind of a concordant sigh at last blows away the ashes which hid the
fire of love; whereupon not to belie the truth, they both confessed themselves to
be Lovers. A remedy for ills, which might have been bred with the discontent of
their wills, in consideration of their ancient friendship, which ought not to
suffer prejudice by this improvident fury, rather then affection; both of them
did glory to yield this object to the other, which the more estimable it showed
it self, it so much the more authenticated the excess of their faith, whereby
they corresponded with a voluntary privation to felicitate his friend with the
possession; with the touches of a gentle affection, they mutually consecrated
to eithers contentment; the enjoyment of that beauty, which although it was the
life of their hearts, was willingly renounced by them, whose minds were the
will and pleasure of his friends; this strife lasted long, till by an absolute
protestation they both denied themselves to be Lovers.

The like contest at the same time happened with the beloved Lady and a neighbor
and friend of hers, who by accident was there at the same time when the two
Cavaliers were looking on them. The beauties of her face were not despicable,
but worthy of a public esteem, had they not been prejudiced by the vicinity of
those which exceeded in beauty, even the ordinary power of Nature. They both
observed the Cavaliers looks, wherein they saw the sparks of Loves fire, which
cannot be hid when they transmit flames from the heart to the eyes. They were
both also only pleased with Irlando, who was inferior in age, though
superior in that desert, which by youth and beauty prevails with Ladies. In
the course of their praises, they discovered either of them unawares their
inward affections the more freely, having as yet not known the knot of their
rivalship: but they were no sooner advised of the consent of their thoughts,
which harmoniously agreed to the love of the only beauty, but they obliged
themselves to repentance, least they should go too far in their discourse.
Emilia most of all, fearing a treacherous prejudice to her practices, being
inferior to the other in beauty, thought to dissemble the inclination of her
mind, absolutely denying to love Irlando, to retreeve the error she had before
committed by the liberty of her discourse; yet within her self she resolves to
outgo her with excess of favors, and forerun the others endeavors, who
presumed the victory from the excess of her beauty. After some discourses, she
taking leave, seeks to confound the remembrance of Love; yet with a sollicitous
diligence by countersigns, she sends to enquire that Cavalier's lodging, and
writes him a letter to this purpose.

SIR,
I Cannot withhold my self from acquainting you that I am your Lover: 'twere to
offend the singular merit of your condition, to think it hard for you to
believe your self adoreable, even from one who has learnt it but by the
knowledge of a look only: I invite you to enjoy me, not to return me your love,
for I dare not pretend such a reward, being obliged to sacrifice my self, since
my affections have already destined me your victim; Besides, that I know no
qualities in me worthy of you, I hope only that I may acquire with a flood of
delights, the fertility of your love. I shall this night expect you, preparing
a Room for you in my besom, where you shall receive the Caresses of that heart,
which to please you would exviscerate your

EMILIA.

With these invitations she thought to catch the young man, who commonly loves
but to enjoy. Sense predominating, causes that violence with is attributed to
affection: The end of his amorous thoughts are a bed, although he fancy a
Celestial beauty for the Sphere. The offer of enjoyment was the fittest bait to
make a prey of his heart, which sooner might be caught by the hook of once
delights, then colored appearances. Emilia being thus persuaded, resolves to
be thus prodigal, to triumph over the other, whom she supposed to preserve the
pride of her beauty in its hight, would be more moderate of her favors, yet it
even subdues the pride of that love which suppresseth Majesty, as contrary to
its laws. She acknowledges the necessity of submitting to that power, which
bragging of his triumphs over the Gods themselves, it might more reasonably
carry away trophies from her, although she had a part of Divinity in her looks.

Having long strugled with her thoughts, she at last yields, giving way to a
wounded quill to distill floods of ink, with the like sentiment of her heart.

SIR,
THAT heart which persuades me that it was no temerity to love you, has
emboldened me to discover my self your Lover: I shall not multiply attestations
to make you believe the truth of my Affection? My sudden resolution is a
sufficient testimony with your singular desert: Your being a man, and in the
quality of a Cavalier prescribes you the duty tomake you know this love I shall
expect effects rather then promises; Resolve to answer me with your sight, and
consent but to will what ought secretly to be approved by the desires of your

ROSALIA.


This Letter Rosalia writes, for so was her name, she using Emilia's Mesenger,
who was also to deliver the other, wherewith she was already trusted: Their
express charge to bury in silence these loves, weaved the net, the business
chiefly consisting on the mutual secrecy of these Lovers. They were Rivals
without discordity, concurring even to prevail by the same means, which they
had one way commenced, and on the other estranged themselves, from the
pretended end.

The like in the mean time happened to the two before-nam'd Cavaliers. The
revolution of thoughts dissolved, the promises they had made to love the Lady
no more, least their concurrance might break the union of their amity; either
of them being assaulted with an army of passions, which warred under the same
Ensign of that admired Beauty, was forced to hazard their friendship, that they
might not vilify their love. Their inseparable conservation gave them no other
means, but that of letters to instance their affections to their beloved, which
required for their servitude the reward only of their Mistrisses graces. So
that unanimously, although disjunctively they resolve to put their hopes in
bywaies, that the tract of their Characters might secure the following steps of
their hopes. Irlando writes thus.

Fairest Lady,
I Cannot exaggerate the quality of my ardors, which are even exstinguish'd by
the ink, discredited by the Hiperboles which a pen can afford: Prohibit but
these, and I am denied to express the truth of my affections; yet nevertheless,
if the reflection of your countenance will illuminate the obscurity of these
Characters, you will know what the fire is, which is enlightened by the rays of
so much beauty. Admit me but to your presence, the tongues of my flames shall
speak in my eyes, to witness that my heart is a living furnace; my blood shall
assure you, that the wound of my affections is made by your looks; so that as
its usual, in presence of my Murtheress, my face will show you a blushing
mantle, to testify it worthy of a kiss; Besides, I shall show my heart not
only wounded, but torn; whereby you cannot but be obliged out of pity to the
duty of a civil correspondence.

Your Servant and Lover IRLANDO.


To testify his amorous thoughts he recommends this Letter, having sealed it
up, to a faithful servant of his; commanding him to conceal, especially from
his friend this love negotiation, affirming that secrecy was the chiefest part
of his hopes. Who in the same manner, and with the same orders had received a
Letter from Armando, for so was the other Cavalier called; In which, this was
written.

Fairest Lady,
AFfection has no bridle to restrain it within those limits, which bound the
knowledge of my small merit unruly in Love's carriere from that point where it
received the impulse of its violence, which being from your beauty, its now at
last reduced to this resolution; considering that all wills guided by reason
are obliged to love what is fair; whereupon I ought not to fear the discovery of
the excessive love of this heart, which were guilty, if it should not love you;
If it act then conformable to its duty, it deserves no punishmen: forbid your
cruelty therefore to punish me with rigor, since I love you, and rather let it
acquit me the reward of an amorous correspondence, obliging me to serve your
merit with the weight of those sufferings which love begets; which you your
self knowing, may assure your self that my affections lie not, but you ought
also to consider it injust to suffer for me the fallacy of my hopes. Its
sufficient, I say I love you, for your knowing what your beauty deserves, will
also know what your affection owes to

Your Servant in Love ARMANDO.


Both these Letters come to Rosalia's hands almost at the same time, when those
of their Messengers were delivered Irlando from the two Ladies. The soul of
this Cavalier ran with its most vital spirits, to honor with gratitude that of
his beloved. In the tenderness of his highest Jubily the affections extended
themselves, that they might the more actively rise to the Sphere of so much
contentment, and to shun the necessity of being carried away by the violence of
so great a joy. Finding himself gratified with a correspondence which he
desired, he thought he might presage, that his love would most happily succeed,
when graces ran before the very flight of his desires, 'Twas fit for him to
moderate the effects of so much sweetness in reading Emilia's Letter, whose
civility rather invited, then enticed, that heart which rejoiced only in its
effects, for the beauty of the other.

Armando comes in when his eyes and his mind were attentively examining those
Characters; to whom, smiling, he shows the Letter, discovering those heedless
loves; but hides Rosalia's, esteeming, that confidence without judgment, might
ruin the interest of his felicity. When Love will be alone, all his laws are
contrary to those precepts which conversation or friendship has established.
The remembrance of Love raises suspicions, original even in him from his own
knowledge, they having unanimously adored that Lady. But although they had had
no occasion to doubt rivality, yet he might fear least he might fail of such a
beauty, who was so apt to afford favors and love: So that in discoursing of
Emilia, he showed himself, even in his memory far from thinking on the other,
naming her only when it was necessary to circumscribe this comparison of hers.
The Gentleman, who thought this occasion fit to felicitate his thoughts, used
all the efficacy possible to persuade his his friend not to refuse the favors
of so loving a Lady; which if he could have obliged him to, he pretended that
it would be free for him to seek Rosalia's love.

Extending his discourse in her praise, celebrating her singular merit to show
him how unjust the refusal of his affection would be. He tells him, that the
fairer a woman is, she is so much the prouder, and less tractable then another,
who being inferior in beauty, would be wanting as much of pride, which usually
checks the delights of love. In a fair woman, quarrels and contests were
ordinary, forasmuch as knowing the power her looks have over hearts, she
always pretends such an Empire over her Lovers, that it often deserves the
title of Tyranny. He added, that it was the common course of Nature, that where
beauty was wanting, she supplied it with abundance of graces, which give the
best relishes to amorous delights. At last he concluded; That when we aspire to
the highest pitch of prosperity in love, a man never ought to make choice of a
Lady of excessive beauty. It being sufficient, so she be not deformed to that
heart which seeks true and continued enjoyments: In obliging them by the
interest of higher contents, a man might perhaps presume to make the observance
of that duty inevitable, whereby he was bound not to refuse the invitation of
so much civility. And in fine, That his persuasions were not ill grounded: That
as Emilia's beauty was not in excess, yet was it not far short. Yet all this
could not pervert Irlando's thoughts, who treacherously glorious, applauded in
himself how he was lifted up by his towering hopes to a heaven far more sublime:
He could not have prejudiced his fortune by changing his proposed election for
all the treasures of the world: yet on the other side, he fancies, thinking he
might gain a greater liberty in his love with Rosalia, could his dissimulations
but be credited, as made to Emilia. The other remains so fully deceived in
believing these appearances; whence concluding that he could not offend their
friendship, he designs to follow the ways of love with that Lady who wholly
possessed his mind.

Nevertheless Irlando advances to enjoyment, before the other procures himself
to be loved. He writes back to both the Ladies with a diverse sense, according
to the pleasure of his affections, or according to the little correspondence of
his mind. Those he sent to Rosalia were thus expressed.

Fairest Lady,
THE showers of your civilities, which dissolves in deluges of grace, might
justly threaten tempests of disdain, should I not come to enjoy the presence of
that sun, from which there distills a dew of delights. To night I shall come to
sacrifice my life with a sweet death on the Altar of your breast. I beseech you
to appoint the shelter of my felicity in your friends and neighbors house,
retiring your self thither for this night, I have already understood by your
Messenger, that there is a door which affords the commanding of a mutual
passage, whereby it will without difficulty succeed. You shall from me
understand the reasons hereof: Expect till I authenticate with more devout
obsequiousness the excess of my affection and obligations, who now only
reverently incline to that heaven, which so prodigiously has dispensed the
influence of so many favors.


He gave another form to the Letter directed to Emilia; wherein he thus writ.

A Treacherous liberty makes a man sometimes believe himself abused, even when
he is favored; so that the excess of your civility in loving me, being
superior to any desert of mine, is esteemed by me as the pleasant sportings of
your affection; and for such I receive them, so that I esteem my self
disobliged to a true correspondence in Love: besides, that I am altogether
incapable of such a Ladies favor, which being so ill placed, would on the one
side be too much slighted, or being on the other side too heavy, would oppress
me: Besides, I refuse not your favors to withdraw my self from the burden of
your obligations, but that I may not appear a Monster by the union of so much
grace with so little merit. Reserve those Treasures to honor more worthy
Subjects, since from the obligation only, I am already gained to your service;
I shall indelibly preserve my part of such a debt to repay it, by serving, if
not by loving you.


These Letters being sealed, he distinguished them only with a mark, of which
he gave the bearer notice which he was to give Rosalia, and which to Emilia.
The chance was, that the servant either forgetting the marks, or mistaken in
the knowledge, in the delivery, betrays his Masters will, yet not Fortune.
Emilia looking on the letters which were written to Rosalia, presenting the
readiness of an affectionate correspondence, was possessed with the extremities
of an unspeakable joy; the satisfaction of her desires, was the hight of her
greatest contentments which she presumed she could taste at the table of earthly
delights, with a perfect complacency, thinking she had gotten her own will, she
rejoiced in her self in the sublimity of those conceits which might cause her
to see her self no less fortunate, then she was reverenced.

Rosalia's thoughts were otherwise divided, disdaining those refusals which she
thought impossible for any who had eyes to see her beauty. Her fury machinated
a rigorous revenge; but her pride commanded her to vindicate her self by
disdain only. That beauty which presumed it self envied by heaven, provoked
her to treachery, seeing it self slighted by a man; yet could she not contain
her self from witnessing the sense of her mind, which committing to paper, in
these words she presents to the knowledge of Irlando.

HE knows not how to adjust himself to receive favors, who knows not how to
deserve them: He who will not receive from heaven the fecondity of Rain, let
him expect the cruelty of Thunder. I condemn you to a perpetual exile from my
presence, from the place where I dwell; you shall know me for an Enemy, since
you would not enjoy me as a Lover; Thus I intend not to punish you, but to
correct my own error, which was committed, in loving you, by

ROSAlIA.


These Characters had been much more grateful to the Gentleman, if as they were
a bar to the felicity of his contentment, they had brought with them the end of
his life; grief wrought not his death, it went farther, it stupefied him. He
esteemed this torment a punishment, for having treacherously been lifted up
with boldness on the foundations of her civility; knowing no other crime in
him, but his speed to run to the offered bait: He judged that this sudden
rigor, was a penance for having been contrary to the condition of her sex,
too liberal of her favors: He confiders that the efficacy of humility, the
force of prayers and of conspiracies might remove the sinister influence of
this his Star. Whereupon he resolves, either with art, or with the importunity
of prayers to gain admittance into her presence, and then his tongue being
animated with accents from the interest of his heart, would move the instances
of an affectionate pity. That very night he resolves to have recourse to the
Tribunal of Love, where the justice of Reason would not be excluded; if they
were not exalted.

Emilia in the mean time, by the stealth of chance, enjoyed that prosperity
which was the others due. In conformity to the order received in her Lovers
Letter, she entreates Rosalia for that night to change houses with her, and
civilizeth the demand with the excuse of an abusive deceit happened to a Maid
of hers. She obtains her desire without opposition, which their friendship
prohibited and the opportunity of gratifying required. In these walls she
fancies that hight of enjoyment which her thoughts expected from the embraces
of a young Lover. All her Affections were vows directed to the Temple of Love,
in gratitude for that prosperity which so singularly favored her. Had time
moved according to her importunity, hours would have fled like minutes rendered
swift by the wings of her desire.

Irlando also with the air of his sighs solicited the Sun to take his lodging
in the Sea, so that the succeeding obscurity of the night might favorably
bring him to Rosalia to quench her disdain. He had a thousand Chimera's of
punishments, fancied new forms of humiliations, extraordinary sings of
penance, that he might last of all conceive the request of her lost favor. He
pants to get to that gate, on the threshold whereof he resolved to terminate
the course of his life, could he not find means for his hoped for pardon. He
goes to the very house of Rosalia, thinking that her disdain would not have
suffered her to second his demands, by the change he had intimated in his
Letter.

He was little less then stupefied, when in appearance he seemed deluded from
the like fear, seeing himself courteously introduced by the servants, who as it
seemed had stayed long waiting for him, and hearing his name they presently
freely admitted him: which was by Emilia's order, who impatient of delay, had
sent them to meet and receive him. He could not believe that such like honors
proceeded by their error of not knowing him; It being so, that the more they
confirmed themselves in knowing him to be Irlando, with so much the more
courteous obsequiousness was he respected. At the enquiries he made of the Lady,
under the name of their Mistress, he was answered, that she expected him with
troubles, for his stay had been intolerable, had he prolonged the enjoyment of
his presence. He was astonished within himself unable to conceive affections of
wonder equal to that accident, hearing attestations of love, when to himself he
had only received Characters of assurances of hatred.

He then would by several replies be certified, whether that were Rosalia's
house, he could not but believe himself deceived, thinking it impossible, that
he should be come thither to receive favors, when he purposely came to beg
pardon. When at last he was undeceived of all error, either from himself, or
the servants, he begins to doubt least those incitements of security were not
directed only to betray him: He suspects least snares to revenge herself were
hidden under that faign'd appearance of love, and that heaven appeared serene
the more grievously to punish him with the thunder of her disdain. Having
pulled up his courage, he went up the stairs, considering, that he ought not to
abhor to fall a victim immerc'd in his own blood in her house whom he had
adored.

Being come to the top he meets Emilia, who taking him fast by the right hand,
without saying any thing to him, leads him alone with her into a Chamber. At
this action the Gentleman had a greater occasion to ground his suspicions. He
with reason doubted, that she being offended by his refusals, and thereupon out
of disdain had with the other conspired his ruin. He condemns the fallacy of
such thoughts; when the door being shut, Emilia begins with sweet kisses and
affectionate embraces to express the tenderness of her exviscerated passion.
His civility was confounded with these replicated encomiums, professing to
gratify his favors; so much the more did these move Irlando to astonishment,
not knowing what obligation of gratitude she could have, unless she was of his
race, who esteemed offenses, and slights favors. The Lady seeing this sullen
starchness in her Lover, and appropriating the cause to a coldness of Nature,
even to a chilness, she thought to warm him with using the more carresses and
courtships, the exhalations of an amorous fire. Yet he stifning himself the
more at this heat, instead to liquifie a sweet tenderness of heart, she
touches him with the iron of reproof to try of what stuff he was made, since
he obstinately resisted the flames, which every way issued to fire him; since
he neither restrained the knot of her embraces, nor returned the strokes of her
kisses, nor counterchang'd the words of her carresses. Perhaps, says she, I am
a Medusa, since with the shield of my looks I change them who look upon me into
stones? What novelty renders you insensible? What change renders you immovable
to my amorous effects? Did you then so courteously consent to my invitation, and
do you now despise the gift: Did you admit into the breast of your civility my
offers, and now do you refuse the favors.

Let it not invigorate your passion (answered Irlando) that you see your self
deprived of your preceded contents, since your hopes are unjustly clothed with
the spoils of my affection; I am astonished, that the denials I sent you in my
Letters, advised you not what a correspondence you might expect in the most
evident expressions of love.

What denials, says she, (with the signs of astonishment) do you speak of?
what Letters? Rather because I credited yours now I may say scorns, which
before I thought the acts of a Gentleman, whom I have but too much favored. In
saying so, she shows him the Letter, which discovers the deceit to his
understanding. In looking over those lines, which were paths of love, made for
his heart to make way to Rosalia. Do you call these, said the Lady, denials?
Are these demonstrations of love importunate and unfit? Alas, either the
remembrance betrays the intention to have scorned me, or the pen in writing
betrays the heart which refuses me.

Afflict not your self, Madam, says Irlando, as despised by me, who may rather
complain as having been abused by Fortune. There is no crime in this, that your
hopes should rise where the accomplishment cannot succeed. Mine was to give
flight to these amorous Characters, that they might nest my affections in
Rosalia bosom. Chance brought them to yours, which was his mistake to whom I
trusted my Letters for their safe delivery. You are not therefore to think your
self offended, since he does not despise the desert of a Lady whom he cannot
love, chiefly because his affections are obliged to another. This passion
naturally knowing no curb or rule, thinks it its property to run whether its
genius or sense inclines it: I am forced by your civility and love to be
obliged to you, though I cannot be a Lover. Love, as an act of free will, knows
no other laws but election. If this gratify not your desires, condemn Destiny
or Cupid, and not me who respect and admire in you your admirable qualities.

Emilia's thoughts being undeceived, she obliged them to aspire to another
sphere, for that there they could not fix the Center of their felicities. She
lets him go, faigning a disdain with all possible appearance, that she might
not be seen in a necessity to beg a man's love. The Gentleman goes out of the
house, thinking he went out of hell, where his stay every moment had increased
new griefs. The cause being already understood of the revolution of Rosalia's
affections, had fixed in his thoughts the recovering of the loss of her love, by
assuring her, that not his own despite, but the abuse of Fortune had provoked
his disdain. He assured himself of regaining her favor, when from the quality
of the accident she should acknowledge the bonds of his sincerity. Her fury not
suffering her to attend to words, he determines to discriminate himself in a
Letter, wherein he described what happened by another, and not by his fault.

Yet they came not in a prosperous time according to his desires; Rosalia being
solicited by these recriminations to her believed disdain, at the coming of
Armando's Letter, she was persuaded to give her self with her affections to
him; since by his refusal, Irlando had already rendered himself undeserving. To
oblige these, she considered, that there resplended more in him the conditions
of a complete Cavalier, and consequently, that he more deserved to be loved.
Resolving at last to employ her thoughts, which being kept idle, might perhaps
reconcentrate again in Irlando, she wrote for an answer to his, as follows.

SIR,
BEing honored by your favors, I ought to be grateful by my correspondence.
Should I refuse to be loved by you, I should prejudice my self by depriving my
self of a greater glory then I can pretend to deserve. If even it were grateful
to me to be beleved without returning you love, it would be unjustly to enjoy
those graces without exchange of obligation. Be therefore assured of my
affection, for a pledge of which, I to night invite you to the Chamber of
Emilia my Neighbor, where the comfort of your presence shall be expected by

ROSALIA.


The news of so much felicity came late to Armando, yet he speedily transports
himself to take possession. Whereupon at the same time, wherein Irlando
contested with Emilia, he enjoyed his practice with Rosulia: Being pleased with
her fashions, he long entertains himself with her, who flattring him with the
others refufal, which had necessitated her, to apply her affections in such a
change, to so worthy a Cavalier. Taking leave, he returns home, commencing to
prove those impatient longings, which obliged him to expect the evening of the
following day, when he was to continue his amorous conversation. He runs
quickly to his friend, to whom he imparts the excess of his joy, relating the
fortunate success of his loves. He a great while holds him doubtful, jeastingly
relating him, how kind and courteous the Lady was, till at last he discovers
her to be Rosalia, courted and admired mutually by them but a few days before.
He shows the Letter wherein he received the invitation, conformable to which he
swore the effects of her civility were.

Its easier to fancy then to describe, what conceits this relation produced in
Irlando's mind. Its to be believed that the grief of his heart corroded his
bowels, as well as it desperately tore his heart in pieces. Knowing that the
occasion of all this, was only the miscarriage of the Letter, cursing him that
had been the cause of his torment. The certainty, which on the otherside, his
beloved enjoyed, was not an ordinary vexation, for one who excessively loved.
He protested he was troubled with an inward grief of heart, that he might take
himself off from the necessity of an affectionate congratulation, for the
contentment of so good a friend. No less could faigning form effects of joy,
where the heart was over whelmed with the abundance of intolerable grief: His
bed was all that night a hell, his soul being distracted in the confusion of
his turbulent thoughts, shipwrack'd his quiet, even in the depths of despair.

The next day he resolves to send a Letter, the contents whereof were to
signify the injustice of those chastisements which the cruelty of his beloved
inflicted; when he had never the least way undeserved her good graces. He was
glad to make the sincerity of his soul, appear in hope, that upon the knowledge
of the truth, her affections would change. So it happened, because that by the
mistaken countersignes, Rosalia was assured that there was no fault in Irlando
deserving her disdain; she soon changes her hatred into love, priding of it to
have reacquir'd that happiness which she thought she had lost by his
discurteous rigor. This change was nothing difficult, besides, being
necessitated by the proper volubility of her sex, she took occasion not to be
buried, but only asleep toward him in affection. To have loved Armando, as
they say, for a divertisement, which yet hindered not the inclination of her
heart, to him who first was possessed of the Center. Whereupon she thus writes.

YOU and I being equally deceived, we can convert our reproofs and complaints
against none but Fortune. I perceiving my self scorned, was obliged to
vindicate my self with rigor. Now being undeceived, I restore you to the
place, even to the throne of my affections, where your desert rules and
comands; I shall be so much the more affectionate in rewarding your faith, as I
was rigid in cashiering you out of my breast; Come therefore this night to my
house, to reap the fruits of your sufferings, and of my repentance, to your

ROSALIA.


He who carried this Letter, had withal order to give into Armando's hands a
note, in which the same Lady had thus written.

FOR what happened happily for you yesterday you are obliged to Fortune and not
to love. Now being to obey him, I am obliged to please others. I forbid you
therefore to pretend to me any more, retracting all promises, whereon you might
build your hopes: Remember no more what is past, and think no more of me for the
future.

I am no more yours, It Is sufficient to let you understand, that you may live
content with what Fortune has already given you, without seeking any longer
what you cannot obtain.

ROSALIA.


These Characters changed the Scene both in the mind and countenance of the
two Gentlemen, Armando, who gloried to have surmounted such a felicity, seeing
himself at once cast down from that hight whence he thought he could not have
been removed, never thrown down, changed his mirth into an equal grief of heart
and vexation; Irlando, on the other side, who being afflicted, tormented
himself for having been too severely used from her, who had authority to
condemn his heart by a mortal sentence; seeing himself invited to enjoyments,
clears up with the splendour of so much contentment the heaven of his offuscated
mind, from the clouds of his grievous torments. A man might read in both their
faces this change unexpectedly cast about, not known by what accident.

Armando could not conceal his complaints, which proceeded from a mind full of
grief; there came to light from his tongue, which feeding with a friendly
confidence, with a long discourse in dispraise of the inconstancy of women, he
begins to publish the arms which had wounded him, till at last he discovers the
wound which was the original of his grief. He shows those Charracters the
unhappy messengers of his infelicity, and the foundation of his grief. He
vehemently exaggerates against the treacheries of women, who faigning high
excesses of love, at last discovered frauds and snares. Being at last carried
away with the current of a grievous heart breaking, he flew into words, which
came from the predominancy of his passion, till at last he concluded, that he
would go to her house and reprove her for her treacheries, if by the justice of
his complaints he could not obtain the turn of her affection.

These last words the fortunate Gentleman particularly observed; whereupon,
that he might have no disturbance in his enjoyment, he advised his beloved of
his rivals intention, ordring her to expect his coming in Emilia's house.

Rosalia at last relates to that friend of hers the entertainment she had the
night before with Armando, adding singular encomiums of his grateful behavior,
which invited even hearts of stone to love him. Emilia, whose memory
represented to her the proofs of a rigorous severity in Irlando, was quickly
taken with such like informations. Her desires approved those effects, to
felicitate themselves with a most civil correspondence, which supposing out of
her former experience of the other, would surely be in Armando. The buds of
such a desire could not but disclose themselves in her words; whereupon Rosalia
making use of the occasion, yielded him for her satisfaction for that night.
The terms of ceremony wherewith she refused that too courteous offer, could not
stop the way of executing the others thoughts, who faigning to satisfy her
gust, served also her own interest. She brought her to the change again of
houses, as where she might enjoy him, who was by her commands obliged to com
thither about two of the clock at night. She finally fits every thing in hope
to make way to the despite of Irlando, by the favor of the other Gentleman,
from whose civility she pretended her heart-burning love would be assuaged.

With these imaginary comforts she solac'd her grief, whilst with the assurance
of real contentment, the other confirmed her mind with her desired
consolations. Irlando at last goes to her enjoyment; Armando, at least as he
thought, to contention. Both were civilly admitted, not without the
astonishment of the one, who thought his admittance prohibited by disdain;
seeing his way made plain by love. His heart leapt at this incredible novelty,
which before was sunk with despair: Fancying a happy omen to himself, he
thought to resolve those words in thanksgivings, which like clouds thickened
with fury, threatened to fulminate reproofs. The reception of Emilia forewarning
him of a cheat renewed the tumult of his thoughts; which afterward conspired to
torment him; when having inquired after Rosalia, she answered him, That she was
there in her steed, she her self having made the change. Hence she went to
speak of love, promising to act that person in all degrees of complacency which
might satisfy a Lover. And thereupon with carresses and other love tricks, she
began to weave those delights, which alone captivate the sense.

Yet did his affection spume away, even those powerful motives of sense,
obstinately obliging him to continue his vassaladge to the others beauty, who
although she was ungrateful, yet she did not forbear to be adoreable;
nevertheless the bridle of consideration imposed rules to this disorder,
suggesting as unreasonable to despise the favors of so kind a Lady, in hope
to aspire to the others favors, who even loathed him. So that with his genius,
and with his consent, he inclined to that part, which with reason predominated
even to enjoyment. He was not inferior to his friend in running through the
lists of delight, whose bounds and carriere, were her fair breasts. These two
fortunate couple of Lovers will have no cause to envy one the other, both being
equally in the road of contentemnt, if not of old of newer loves, and far more
vehement affections. Thus Emilia and Armando revolved the sails of their
thoughts fitted to the wind, their hopes being already undeceived to find
harbor whereto their desires had at first steered. The dispute of Rivalship
being thus taken away, the practice of these Lover was free, between whom
mutually there was a strait knot of friendship. Yet the flight of this liberty
a fresh transports the affections to the shunned post of their election,
Irlando loves Emilia, and Rosalia Armando. The cause of this change was, either
the usual property, to find that loathsome which we have long enjoyed, or the
ordinary condition of our desires, which always more ardently aspires to the
possession of that, which we may acquire by depriving our selves of the other.
Others things seem always better to us then our own; forasmuch, as being
obliged by our being to be always content its necessary, that not vallewing
what we enjoy, we desire what we see another possess; principally in love,
which the likeness of fire shows whose common condition is to aspire to new
objects.

This element the greater nourishment it receives, as it were to glut the pride
of its ardors, raising its flames so much the higher seems to demonstrate the
voracity of its appetite, greedy of making new prey.

As novelties most delight, so the thoughts began to suggest hopes of more
grateful felicities in these new Lovers. Irlando to whom these desires shut the
fight to the beauties of Rosalia, considered in the other the excess of such a
good grace, that it engraved in his heart the adorable idol of his affections.
The Lady also who saw that Emilia was had in greater esteem of Armando, whom
she thought far inferior to her in desert, resolved presently subjection of
love to him, who could acknowledge it with the greater tribute of reverence.

This change of their own wills was conceited with looks, carresses, and jests,
which being the effect of a friendly union, degenerate into affectionate
accents. Emilia was satisfied with the behavior of her Lover, and gave way to
no thoughts which bore not the marks of her being consecrated to him. Even
Armando also remembering the great kindeness, with which his Lady at first
confirmed the excess of love before she revealed it, had obliged his heart to
preserve his affections, that he could not mix them with those which carried
any other image but that of Emilia. So that those two lost the field, being
excluded from any correspondency, who first of all entered loves Capital in
triumph. To continue it amongst themselves, it seemed impossible, for their
luke-warmness was soon converted into coldness, and that into ice, so that at
last disdain and loathings sprung from corrupt dispositions, each of them
thinking themselves obliged to revenge the others infidelity, or at least
inconstancy, which begot an exceeding hatred to parallel the punishment with the
crime.

The assaults were revolved against the true Lovers, who in opposition to their
discord rendered the indissolveable union of their affections the more strongly
fortified: mutually confessing their genius transported out of the center of
themselves, and locked up within the circumference of their amorous wills,
agreeing to cast off the love of their two friends, although to their disgust.
With faign'd fictions they persuaded the more highly to fix these roots in
their hearts, which used to breed affectionate correspondence, that jealousy
might not move the others to suspend or prohibit them this commerce, wherein
these rivals equally found acquest of enjoyments. Familiarity sometimes
permitted a kiss to be snatched, whereof these Lovers took an usurious interest,
considering the penury of other pleasures. The occasion of a jest obliged a
carress, and those endearments without offending those minds with suspicions,
who thinking even that the others hearts were interchangeably knit, they
doubted not that aspiring to any other object, they would by their rivalship
disturb their contentment.

Rosalia at last being importuned by accidity, with the more pleasure to
terminate these deceits, renders her friend jealous, with a faign'd jealousy
of her own. She seems to doubt that the Lovers being tired with their long
possession, were equally traitors of their obliged faith. She said, that she
knew very well, that Armando's mind was inclined toward her, as one the other
side, she perceived her Lovers heart aspire toward her. Being thus persuaded
to discover the proof of this truth, they should one evening fraudulently
exchange the Gentlemen: and by this occasion, the liberty of amorous
demonstrations would discover to whom their affections most inclined. They
promised one the other to revenge the the others offended faith with rigorous
reproofs; when the vayl of dissimulation was taken off, and the stains of
treachery appeared. The other being after this manner imbued with suspicions,
consents to the experiment, to assure her self of this relation, of her
pretended faithful friend.

Thus Rosalia with Armando, and Irlando with Emilia were in posture to complete
the web of their own contentments, brought about by this cheat. The two Ladies
one evening invited their two Lovers to a private treat every one at her own
house. And afterward by the ordinary change they betrayed the effects of their
promise, whereupon the success answered the design. The true Lovers being
disturbed at the change, Emilia and Armando, with signs but little grateful,
soon stifled the others hopes. And made it appear, that the contentment of the
mind was not pleased to change its sphere, that it might not vary the motion
of affections. At last with all the art they could use, they could never stir
that constancy, which being rendered invariable, knew no accident whereby it
might overturn or overthrow it self; So that least these temptations might be
converted into fury, against her or of disdain against themselves, they
protested it was only a mistrust of faith, exposed to the ciment for that they
doubted they wanted the triumphs of perseverance.

The beauties of Rosalia blushed, finding that being prostrate, they could not
obtain love: Besides, these blushes were acknowledged for signs, that her mind
was wounded with remorse, for a punishment of her being so changable, when
another by the force of her beauty, and violenc of her carresses could not be
persuaded to be inconstant. Warnd of her error she recollects her thoughts and
refixeth them on Irlando to preserve the quiet of her mind, by the
immutability of her will. She considered that the election made at another time
on the value of his grateful qualities, confirmed by his not loving her, that
she was rather insatiable then voluble. Having at last fixed her resolution, she
resolves never to be moved by the impulse of unbridled desires. Irlando being
assured of these thoughts, resolves to keep her as the only miror of his
felicities, from whose looks alone he drew the image of his contentment. He
could not but glory in the possession of so fair a Lady, the life of whose
glory drew breath from the air of the sighs of those who desired her;
correcting the error of his corrupted gust, for having not esteemed what others
Idolized; he afresh obliges himself to her in an amorous conjunction, with
oaths to maintain the knot undissolveable. Thus both these two couple of
Friends and Lovers, happily hung the vows of their own affections in the Temple
of Faith, and erected an Altar to Love on the Pillar of Constancy.

EPIDORO.
NOVEL XII.
The ARGUMENT.
Epidoro a young Florentine, being deceived by a Masker, whom he believed to be
Leena a Lady of honor, is found in the embraces of her Chambermaid, and for
his own safety is forced to marry her.

TO enjoy the delights of the Carneval there resided in Venice, Epidoro a young
Florentine of a very mean birth, but his fathers avarice had gained him a kind
of reputation. He by the death of his progenitors was gotten into an estate,
which did not only enlighten the obscurity of his birth, but moved his desires
to the prosecution of those pleasures which are often longed for by great ones.
So that in Venice there was no public feast, game, or recreation, whereto he
did not come. One evening his heart was ravished by an imaginary, the dress and
behavior of a Masker represented such fancies to his imagination, that he
confessed himself the lover of a face, before he had seen it; and the follies of
his mind ended not there, so that having warily followed her as she parted
from the ball, he saw her go into the house of one of the prime Gentlemen of
the City, to whom amongst other things, which concurred to make him humanely
happy, his wives beauty not a little contributed: It fell out in his thoughs,
that the Masker must be Leena, forso the Lady was called, which the more
enflamed him, and which the more invigorated his new desires, he the next day
knew Leena with some of the same garments, wherewith he had seen the Masker
adorned. The difficulty of the enterprise hightned his spirits which encouraged
him to tempt all means; neither was Fortune wanting in showing her to him; when
the same evening the Masker came to the Ball; he having been very officious,
seeing no small correspondence in her looks, the concourse of the people not
giving way to observation; tells her; Madam, Did not my tongue fear the crime
of temerity, I durst dicover the fire which is nourished in my bosom, and
should offer you the use of that love, which is the greater, the more hid it
is. Did you know, answered the Masker, who was hid under this habit, your heart
would repent what your tongue foments. My heart, Madam, replies Epidoro, bears
no desires, but from the knowledge of the desert which your singular beauty
has begot. To gain the name of lover, then says the Masker, you care not to
have the repute of a Glasier. Tell me, How can you form a judgment on the
beauties of that face, which you never saw but hid under a vizard. A man may,
replies afresh Epidoro, make a judgment of the Suns splendour although it be
covered with a cloud. But my eyes too much force myheart to sacrilege, by
introducing therein the image of your beauty. Madam Leena, is it possible to
hide the affection of a Lover who has Arus his eyes, To say, I adore you, is
the greatest testimony that a mouth can utter, but the least resentmenta heart
can express. Its you may felicitate me; great undertakings are not without
great difficulties. Love who can snatch the thunder, even from the hands of
Jupiter himself, can make plain the very mountains of impossibility. He would
have said more had not the Masker, with some trouble, cut off his discourse, by
telling him, When you spoke to me without knowing me, I bore with your
ignorance, now knowing me with the greater presumption of your boldness to
tempt me, I cannot but blame your insolence; Did I not fear to prejudice mine
own honor, by having been a subject to subminister such thoughts, so inferior
to my condition, I would cause your penance to be the least ill you should
suffer for you temerity. But whilst she uttred these words, her hand and her
eyes betrayed her tongue, and assured Epidoro, by all possible favors, that
those resentments were endeavors of civility, and not effects of disdain. Thus
the Feastival ended, so that Epidoro was forced to retire with all the
disturbance which assault the youth and indiscretion of a Lover. Having
expected the following night, which was the last of the Carneval, with all
those vows which use to accompany the impatience of an amorous heart. Scarce
did the stars begin to glory of the light which they borrowed from the Sun, but
he came to the accustomed Ball: Not far from thence he meets the well known
Masker, although with all art she had thought to hide her self from the
curiosity of Epidoro. He taking her by the hand endeavors by these words to
make her believe his affection. Fair Leena, you may by your change of habit
deceive the eyes of other men, but never my heart, which by united means, and
diffused heat to all my parts acknowledges, and adores you as a Divinity. I
wish that with last nights garments, you may have deposed some of your coyness,
which rendered you so adverse to my love: Know besides, that cruelty is an
improper attribute to the Divinity of your beauty, and beauty which is not
communicable to all, opposes it self directly to the will of Heaven. Should
Heaven replies the Masker, command me to love you, perhaps the laws of honesty
the danger of my life, and the inconstancy of men would not be bridle
sufficient to the debility of my affections. The beauty of your looks, answers
Epidoro, is a record of Heaven; which admonishes you not to be avaritious of
its favors, when enriching you with beauty, it has impoverished of praise the
Fairest conceptions. Lets forbear hiperbolies, replys the Masker; I as I know,
I am not fair, so I could wish my self so, that I might be the more grateful to
those that love me: but your craft, and my simplicity have made me deposite my
secrets in the heart of a person, who laughing at my folly, perhaps meditates
how to deceive the felicity of my thoughts. I ought not to hazard my reputation
to so evident a danger. I have spoken too much, were my face discovered, my
blood should bear witness by my grief and repentance; the blushing my heart
has sent thither are the reproofs of my soul, which threaten the seerity of
those chastisements, the thought alone of which terrifies me. Saying so, she
retires amongst the Maskers, leaving Epidoro in the hight of his thoughts,
where a long while he would not have been removed, if Love, who commonly is not
wanting to the necessities of Lovers had not relieved him: so that having again
taken the Masker by the hand, he so much entreated her, so much promised, that
at last he gets leave to speak with her the following night, which was the
beginning of Lent, at a little window which looked on an unfrequented street.
With this hope he pleasantly passes the rest of the night, expecting the other
with a thousand imprecations against the stars for staying so long from
celebrating the obsequies of the day. Scarce had the light given place to the
dark, but he comes to the appointed window; although he thought he had
anticipated the hour, he finds himself prevented, his beloved expecting him,
accusing him in her self for want of love, that he had not prevented her. The
complements which past amongst them were many, and the amorous conceits
numberless. They discoursed of constancy, fidelity, and severity with so great
an insatiety, that the darkness seemed weary to hear them, which even for the
cause invited the light. The day coming they part, with promise to meet every
time when Epidoro should see a cloth hang at the grate, which succeeded twice
or thrice a week, with so great a contentment to Epidoro, that in respect of
that, all other entertainment seemed but his anoyance: and then thinking that
felicity full without participating the rest, he grew to that impudency, to
trust the mouth of many with the secret of his loves; he bragged that he
possessed Leena's heart, who had made the patience and love of a thousand Lovers
despair. He vaunted himself a possessor of that fair one, who had obliged to
adoration, even those minds which were incapable of love, unless it were that
of themselves. This rumor past from the ears of one, who filled with
incredulity and envy would spy Epidoro. He hearkens to him one night, when he
had appointed to get the possession of the fruits of love. Having no patience
to suffer the felicities of one, who was no ways his superior, by the favor
of Fortune; carried by envy, which conspires always against the satisfaction
of men, he vomits forth in a paper the effects of his madness, conveying it
afterward to Leena's husbands hands. Opening the Note, he saw this written.

CORDELIO,
NOT to discover to you treachery, is to be a complice in the guilt; I who by
the excess of your favors, and by the obligations of my heart am called to the
protection of your honor, cannot filence it in the hands of dishonesty. The
night when the infamy of your reputation is to be practiced, has not darkness
to hide your shame: My zeal implores the testimony of your eyes, which confess
Leena unchaste, and my self a loyal friend; I remit to you the discovery of the
truth. It troubles me to disquiet the repose of your mind, with so unthought
of an advise. But he deserves praise only, who discovering it, leaves you the
means to think on the remedy.

Your faithful Friend.


This raised an infinite many thoughts in the mind of Cordelio, and all cruel;
nothing was in his heart but blood, slaughters, and murders; yet being
persuaded by the love he bore Leena, and like a wise man, knowing the fruits of
malice, he condemned all other testimony, but that of his own eyes. He faigns
that he was hastily called away by his business into the Country, and parts not
without Leena's tears, who regreeted for every moment of his absence. Cordelio
lay hid all the remainder of the day, and at night he goes to observe who it
was that betrayed his honor. Leena in the mean time had given her self in prey
to a most sweet sleep, not without being disturbed by her Nurses voice; who
told her, that Cordelio was to return in a short time to the embraces of
Cinissa her Chambermaid, and that she her self had told her so, that she would
not be her hinderance. Leena's mind soon gave credit thereto; knowing her
husbands genius, and her servants little honesty; and the sooner, having been
before jealous, not without some affliction. She quickly clothes her self, and
would not be followed by the Nurse, that with the more liberty she might blame
Cordelio's inconstancy. She goes near her servants Chamber; and there she meets
her husband, who with naked sword in hand, came against her to kill her: He did
it not, either that she might first see her Lovers death, or the pity of
Heaven permitted not that her innocence, although suspected guilty should
suffer: Leena, though full of disdain, yet thought entreaties fitter then
reproofs for her own safety. Casting her self at his feet, mixing her words
with her tears, she thus bespake him. Sir, If the dishonest embraces of a
servant please you more then those of your wife, I oppose not my self against
your pleasure, I would offer my self to procure your pleasures, would you but
do me the honor but to command it me: but when with the loss of my own due, I
see my self in danger of my life, I cannot but complain at the rigor of my
destiny, which has caused me to be born unhappy. The unbeseeming dishonesty of
a wench can then do more then the chaste delights of a wife, who has no other
desires but those which are subject to your beck. Alas, how has Cordelio
forgot himfelf? Alas, how has Heaven, to torment me, changed the temper of the
man? Cordelio interrupting her, telling her, The falseness of thy lips and
tears, O thou impudent woman, would have introduced some persuasion in my
heart, had not these eyes been witnesses of thy dishonesty: Prepare therefore to
die, for it is unreasonable that she should live, who has prepared the funerals
of my reputation. But first of all tell me, Where have thou hid that wicked
wretch, who had the boldness to defile my bed. Leena being unable to suffer
such words as those, which wounded the most sensible part of her soul. Sir, To
excuse your amorous thefts make not my honesty guilty with faign'd pretenses;
it is unbecoming your prudence, and my love; I am yours, and I am chaste;
Malignity and Envy can find no color to criminate my thoughts, so far are my
actions from wronging your honor. I appeal to your self, whether the
treacherous desire of enjoying a servant, or the displeasure of having been
interrupted, have not now the possession of your mind. Cordelio grew the more
disturbed, and with violence asks her, of what maid, or of what love she
talked. Whereto Leena answered all what her Nurse had told her, and having
understood as much from her mouth also, he runs without delay to seek the
Chambermaid, and finds her in the wrastlings of love, fast clasped with
Epidoro: He was going to sacrifice them to his fury, but his wives persuasions
diverted him. So that at last he was content, that Epidoro should marry
Cinissa, who was a servant, rather by the injury of Fortune, then by the
condition of her birth. Whereto Epidoro without more to do consents, the fear
of death making him yield to any agreement. Cordelio then embraces Leena;
excusing himself of what he had done out of zeal to his own honor; having heard
Epidoro called with a whistle from the grate, and seeing him afterward
introduced his house. Leena's discretion was satisfied with these
justifications, glad to have escaped the danger, which was the greater being
hid, which at the same time threatened both her life and reputation. This may
serve to warn husbands not to run precipitously to suspect their wives of
unchastity. And to teach wives not to allow a treacherous liberty to their
maids. And finally its an example to all those who voluntarily seek to betray
the honesty of other men's wives.

FINIS.

