A DISCOURSE OF THE Nature, Use and Advantages OF TRADE.

Proposing some Considerations for the Promotion and Advancement thereof, By A
Registry of Lands. Preventing the Exportation of Coin. Lowering the Interest of
Money. Inviting Foreign Families into England.


From Slender Hints, Men serious and discerning,
May gain Experience that is worth the Learning.
LONDON: Printed, and are to be Sold by Randal Tailor, near Stationers' Hall,
1694.

A DISCOURSE OF THE Nature, Use and Advantages OF TRADE.
WHEN fallen Man was driven out of Paradise, the heavy Charge imposed on him
was, that in the Sweat of his Face he should eat his Bread: And he who first
was made of Clay, must receive his Nourishment and Sustenance from the Earth.
His Body must be daily coveting the Necessaries of Life; and his Mind as
earnestly pursuing the Vanities and Superfluities thereof.

Thus through the whole Course of Humane Life is mankind destined to Labor and
Trouble, as the sparks fly upward; And all his Industrious efforts after the
good things of this World, determined in Vanity and Vexation of Spirit.

It Is true, in the Infancy of the World, Men contented themselves with the
Natural produce of the Earth; and it sufficed them to enjoy such Fruits and
Benefits thereof, as that Portion of Land where their Lot fell did properly
afford them. But when the Inhabitants of the Earth began to Increase and
Multiply; those who had first gained the Possession thereof, and assumed to
themselves a distinct Propriety and Right therein, had excluded the succeeding
Race of Men, from all other Livelihood and Subsistence, but what was
subordinate to, and dependant on such Proprietors, who having Power and means
to support them, did thereby claim a Right of Dominion over them.

Then Men began to build Cities, and constitute Societies, and propose to
themselves established Laws, and Rules of Government and Commerce. And as Men
were more and more dispersed over the Face of the Earth, they discovered, That
the Productions thereof were various in some Places and Countries, from those
of others. That some Countries abounded in Corn, Cattle and Woods: Some in
Drugs, Spices and Balsoms: Some in Minerals, Gems and Precious Stones; and
severally produced things of different kinds and Natures.

And hence Man's restless mind became Transported, with a fond desire of
possessing and trying all things. And though an easy Portion of Natures Bounties
did suffice to Answer the ends of Life; yet the Treasures of the Universe were
not sufficient to satisfy the Pride of Life, or give content to the
unaccountable desires of boundless imagination.

What Men could readily possess and enjoy, were of little Esteem, and soon
became indifferent; but things Novel and of difficulty to be acquired, were
accounted valuable; even Apes and Peacocks, if but far fetched and dear bought,
were thought Creatures of Ornament and Diversion. And those Commodities which
one Country did most readily part with, were as earnestly coveted and sought
for by another.

Men's Curiosities increased with their discoveries, and their Inventions were
wrackt, to find out Arts and ways of Building Ships, wherewith to Plow the
Ocean, and descry the remotest parts of the Earth, and searching after the
hidden Treasures thereof. The Use and Nature of all those Secrets, were
industriously inquired into, and Men's contrivances were set on Work, to make
those things desirable for Ornament or Luxury, which were no way needful for
common Use.

Kings and Princes had their Crowns and Scepters beset with Gold and Precious
Stones; their Palaces and Thrones supported and Adorned with Marble, Ivory and
Cedar; their Chambers Beautified with the Choicest Paintings and Carvings;
their Beds and Furnitures enriched with the costliest Tapestries and
Imbroideries, and their Clothes and Linen sweetened with the Noblest Perfumes;
their Tables Replenished with all those Delicacies, that Art and Nature could
contribute, to indulge and gratify the Nicest Appetites.

Every subordinate degree of Men in proportion to their Abilities studied to
imitate, if not outvie each other in profuseness: And those of the meanest
condition, were only deficient in Power, not in good Will, to be as vain
Glorious and Extravagant as the greatest.

Nevertheless, There are excellent ends in all the instances of Natures
Varieties and Productions thereof, differing in so many several Countries, from
each other; and the indefatigable Labor of Men, in their Anxious Endeavors,
to possess and enjoy them. And all those excellent Arts and Inventions that
have been studied, to improve and apply them, to the several purposes of
Curiosity and Delight; have Created most infinite and profitable occasions of
Traffic and Commerce: And the various measures and methods of making all
things subservient to Man's Use or Pleasure, are so many Providential
circumstances of susteining those Millions of People, that might Starve for
want, had they not opportunities of Ministering to those that abound in Plenty.

There is much of Innocence and Ingenuity in many Arts and Sciences; in the
various Manufactures and painful Employments, whereby the greatest part of
mankind support themselves, in the Exercise of their several faculties; their
business keeps them free from Passions; they are generally sedate and composed
in their minds; and in their Recesses from their Labor, they eat their Bread
with cheerfulness.

Since therefore Man is placed in a Sphere of Activity, and either of Choice or
Necessity, will always be contriving and acting something, more or less
significant, to busy or profit himself withal. I hope it may not be improper,
to offer some short Reflections upon a Subject matter, wherein the greatest
part of mankind are so industriously concerned and employed.

Now the great Ends and Use of Trade and Commerce, are for our mutual
accommodation, whereby such occasional interchanges of one thing for another,
become a just measure of property, betwixt Man and Man; the chief inducements
and motives thereto, being created from a desire of Pleasure or Profit.

Thus, when Men are possessed of some things, wherewith they are satiated; they
either sell them for Money, or exchange them for some other thing, without
regard to any gain thereby, or any other end, but that of pleasing their own
fancy. Sometimes Men part with such things as they can well spare, for what
they have a greater need of, for their present accommodation; but without any
design of enriching themselves thereby; but the principal part of Trade,
consists in such sort of Commerce, in the disposal whereof, men propose to
themselves some gainful advantage. And from the various opportunities of Men's
ministering to each others pleasures or necessities, is the great Concern of
Trade, supported and maintained.

And the Principal Advantage and Foundation of Trade in England, is raised from
that Wealth which is gained out of the produce of the Earth. The Proprietors
whereof having a greater proportion of Lands, then they alone can manage to
advantage, are thereby induced to let out the same to Tenants, who by Contracts
and Stipulation with their Landlord, do render some certain Rent for what they
Hold and Enjoy.

Hence the painful Husbandman becomes interested and concerned to employ his
utmost labor in the Cultivation of the Earth, and improving every species that
may be gained thereout, and turning the same to profit. The Surplus and Benefit
whereof beyond the Rent reserved to be paid, being properly his own, and
becomes a competent Livelihood to Himself and Family.

And from this Labor of the Husbandman, are derived many other Improvements of
Trade, in the disposal of those Treasures which he has raised out of the Earth
by his Industry and Pains.

His Corn gives Trade and Employment to the Miller, the Baker, the Maulster and
the Brewer; besides his several other Grains, and Seeds, and Fruits, and Herbs,
which employ and support as many several Callings: By his Grass he increases
and nourishes all sorts of Cattle, and they support the Butcher, the Tanner,
and many other Trades; His Wool gives Trade to the Clothiers; His Milk, and
Cheese, and Butter supply the Markets with necessary Food; His Timber is
employed in Building; His Clay in making Brick and Tile; His Mines of Iron,
Lead, Tin and Coals, besides many other particulars, too tedious to be
enumerated, give maintenance to an infinite variety of Trades and Manufactures,
that in a wonderful manner depend upon, and are subordinate to each other; All
which are to be accounted as so many flourishing Branches, derived out of this
Principal Stock of good Husbandry.

Thus we see how great a part of the People of this Nation, who have no
Propriety in the Soil thereof, yet by Cultivating and Improving the same to the
best advantage, and applying the produce thereof, to be employed in
Manufactures, and transferring the same from one to another in a way of
Traffic and Commerce, obtain a distinct and peculiar Interest in the General
Wealth of the Nation, by the several Benefits accruing to themselves, and
greatly contribute to the Weale-Publick.

As Land therefore is so principal a Fund of Trade, it may not be improper to
consider, whether it be not the Interest of England, That the Lands of Ireland
should be improved as much as may be, that out of the produce thereof, the
great advantages of Trade and Commerce may be equally encouraged, and promoted
there (...) here. And that England and Ireland should have one joint Interest,
and by uniting the strength of both, they should become thereby considerably
more powerful. For this is certain, that England has sustained no prejudice by
uniting the Dominions of Wales to it; Nor is London the poorer, because several
Towns in England have fallen into a great way of Trade, and thereby grown Rich;
For in the one case, the Wealth and Trade of England is greatly increased and
advanced, by the addition of so much more Land to it, and of so much more
Traffic and Commerce that is gained out of the produce of it; and so many more
Hands and Purses are thereby rendered contributary on all emergent occasions, to
the assistance and support of the Public Government. And in the other Case,
London, as it is the Metropolis, and the Principal Seat of Majesty and
Government, of the Administration of Justice, and directing the Laws and
Methods of Trade, it is sure to partake in a plentiful measure of all the
Benefits and Advantages that may arise from the increase of Trade in any other
places under the same Dominion and Government: But Time and Experience only can
be able to remove and overruled the mistaken prejudices, and private interests,
that too unhappily obstruct at present so just an undertaking.

Another Foundation of Trade is created from the Fishery of the Seas, the
particular advantages whereof, having been truly represented in several
Discourses set forth on that Subject; I shall only make mention of it in this
place, and could wish that so certain and continual employment for Seamen, and
so great an occasion of Trade and Commerce, may receive a public and lasting
Establishment.

And from these Two Fundamentals of Trade, is derived the great opportunity of
Traffic from mutual Commerce, where Merchants buy Commodities purely to sell
again, or exchange the Commodities of one Nation, for those of another, for no
other end, but that of their own private Benefit and Profit.

By which medium of mutual Commerce, the Riches of our own Country are not only
communicated to infinite numbers of Families at home, through whose hands our
Native Productions and Manufactures do pass, before they are finally disposed
of, but the Surplus, which is transported to the remotest parts of the
habitable known World, does not only maintain a Correspondence with Mankind,
and tends to the civilizing the unsociable Tempers of many barbarous People,
but accommodates our own Nation with much of their Treasures, and very much
helps to support our Navigation, wherein consists our greatest Safety, Strength
and Honor.

From hence it is observable, how unprofitable the institution heretofore was
of lazy Monks and Friars in this Nation; How little of Religion, and less of
Charity there was in such Endowments, where the fat of the Land was devoured by
a Generation of People, that were no way serviceable, or instrumental toward
the Public Good, whereof every Man's Experience cannot but be a
Self-conviction And whoever compares the State and Condition of England,
Holland and France, since they have applied themselves to Trade and Navigation
with that of Spain, or any other Nation that is less conversant in Merchandise,
cannot but acquiesce in this Truth, that nothing can so effectually maintain
and support the Power and Glory of a Nation, as Traffic and Commerce.

The intent therefore of this Discourse is not to instruct Men in their
particular way of Trade, how to manage the same to the best advantage; for
every Man's own Experience, is the best director for such purposes; and every
Man's private Interest is the strongest persuasive to the promotion of his own
Concerns.

I shall only propose Three General Considerations wherein Foreign Trade may be
beneficial, or injurious to the Nation. The Chief Design of this Treatise being
to represent several Instances, whereby the great advantages of Trade in this
Nation are obstructed and prevented, for want of such provisions in the Law, as
may be reasonably wished for, and endeavored toward the promotion of so great
a Concern.

And First, it must be allowed, that all sorts of Commerce that incourages the
Manufacture, or at least, the disposal abroad of such Commodities as are of our
Native Growth, and are not necessary to be consumed at home, are of General
Benefit, and ought to be promoted

Secondly, All such Commerce as brings in no more than is carried out, though it
do not enrich the Nation, yet it is beneficial, in respect to those Families
that gain a profitable Livelihood by transferring so many Commodities from one
hand to another.

Thirdly, Such Commerce as in it self is unprofitable to the Nation, yet if it
procure to us collateral advantages that are profitable, it may be allowed; but
such Commerce as serves purely to the support of Luxury, and tends in all other
Respects to the impoverishment of the Nation, is as much as may be to be
restrained by Law.

Trade, therefore having such peculiar Excellencies, That it is a just and
certain measure of acquiring a Property in any thing, and is communicable to
all, in proportion to their Qualifications of Industry and Ingenuity. That it
is a an Universal Method of transferring Wealth from Hand to Hand, whereby
Millions of People are employed and sustained; and Men's necessary Occasions
are thereby mutually supplied, without the violent and inhumane contrivances of
Rapine and Force; And that it is the greatest Security and Preservation of our
Public Honor and Welfare.

It may not be improper to reflect on such Impediments as have obstructed
Trade, and propose some Considerations, whereby the same may more effectually
be advanced. Now as the produce of Land is a principal Foundation of Trade; And
the good management of Land gives the greater Life and Vigor to Trade: So it
must be considered, that Money is the common Standard and valuation of most
Commodities in Traffic and Commerce; And if such Money be wanting when
Commodities are exposed to Sale, a great part of Trade is prevented thereby;
the Command of ready Money giving more easy and quick Dispatches and Returns
in Trade, then can possibly be effected without it, wherefore it is our Public
Interest, that Coin should be continually passing from one to another; in the
disposal whereof, there is always something of Gain to both Parties, having
their ends in Traffic, though in different Respects.

And since all Men cannot employ their Money in Trade, but that the impediments
of Birth in some that are above it; Of Age in some that are past it; Of Sex in
others; And in some that of Sloth and Idleness render them incapable of
disposing their Money in a way of Commerce; it follows of consequence, That
unless some proper encouragement be contrived for such to lend their money to
others, that can and will Trade therewith; so much Trade will be wanting in the
Nation, by how much money lies hoarded up in Chests from those impediments.

So that, notwithstanding the great advantages of Trade, whereby all Persons
are under a possibility of improving their Fortunes, in proportion to their
Parts and Industry; yet there will be a great deficiency in Trade, where Land
cannot be safely transferred from one to another; and Money cannot as freely be
laid out, or lent, without Men's apprehensions of being Cheated and defrauded.

Thus, a Person being indebted, but not being able to Sell or Mortgage his Land
for payment of such Debt, may under such circumstances, be compared to one of
the Wheels of a Clock that is Rusty, and thereby impedes the whole Motion.

As where a Gentleman may owe 1000 l. to several Tradesmen? to pay which, he
would gladly Sell, or Mortgage his Estate; and a third Person, who has a 1000
l. lying by him Dead, would readily lay it out in a Purchase or Mortgage, could
he do it safely. In this Case here are three Evils: The Person indebted would
gladly pay, could he be able to Raise the Money; but by reason of the
disparagement and distrust that is upon him and his Estate, he is forced to
fence with his Creditors for two or three years; in the mean while, his
Creditors Prosecute him with chargeable Suits; and having extended the
Gentleman's Estate, he is forced to break up his House and abscond, his Family
Ruined, his Estate Wasted and Untenanted by mismanagement; and so much Trade as
would have arisen from the Produce thereof, wholly lost, and that Estate which
was worth 2000 l. at first, will not perhaps suffice at last, to pay the
Creditors their Debts and Charges.

The Creditors are likewise injured, for want of their present Money; which in
two or three years time, in a course and circulation of Trade, might have
passed to some advantage, more or less, through the hands of a thousand Persons.

The Monied Man is no less injured, having so much Money lie Dead so long,
without making any Benefit thereby.

So that, unless some Provision in the Law may be found out, to make men safe
and easy in their Purchases; so much Trade will be lost in the Nation, as
shall from time to time be obstructed; where Men cannot readily dispose of
their Estates to Answer their conveniences; since all Sales and Mortgages imply
a necessary occasion of laying out so much Money; no Man ever parting with Land
for Money, on purpose to hoard it up; though many hoard up money, for want of an
opportunity to dispose of it.

And here it may be considered, for promoting the Credit, and securing those
Privileges which Land is justly Entitled to; whether Public Taxes that are
laid on Land, might not much better be laid on the produce thereof, by way of
Excise, and by easing those few that are the Proprietors of Land, to lay it on
those many that raise their Estates out of the produce of Land, since every
Burden that is supported by few hands, feels much heavier than what is
sustained by a Land Tax; being like the digging and cutting up the Roots of
Trees for Fuel, which might more safely and conveniently be gained from the
Branches.

For, suppose a Tax were laid on Iron, Lead, Tin, Salt, Wool, Leather, Tallow,
Corn, Hay, and on Plate, Glass, Brick, Earthen Ware, Paper; and many
Manufactures in this Nation, which pay no Customs or Taxes. [The Burden of
such an Excise would be sustained by so many Persons, that it would be
insensible; and the Price and Credit of Land being hereby supported, Men would
more readily bestow their Money in the Purchase, as well as their Labor and
Pains in the improvement of it.

Another Consideration may be concerning money, which is not only the just
valuation of all Commodities, but it is also valuable in it self, upon its
certain and constant intrinsic Worth; and is to be accounted a part of the
Wealth of the Nation.

Every occasion therefore, of exporting it in Specie, without bringing in as
profitable a Return of money in a circulation of Trade, tends to the
impoverishment of the Nation, and brings a manifest decay on Trade; Money being
as necessary for the carrying on of Trade, as Nerves and Sinews are for the
motion of the Natural Body. For, if there be a scarcity of Money, there will be
a deadness of Trade; even amidst the greatest plenty of Commodities; as may be
seen in those Countries, that have no other accommodation for disposing their
Commodities, but by Exchanging and Bartering one Merchandise for another;
wherein there is much of difficulty and trouble, with little Profit; and is
mostly undertaken for necessity sake.

And it is an unhappy mischief, where the intrinsic value of our money, by
exceeding of other Countries, gives an encouragement to such Exportations; as
if our money being three pence in the Crown better than in other Countries. A
Foreign Merchant should export a thousand pounds of our Coin into France, and
by New coining it there, get five per Cent. and then bring over a thousand
pounds worth of Wine, and having sold it here, he then exports another thousand
pounds, and by new coining it there, should get five per Cent. more; hereby two
thousand pounds are exported, never to be retrieved; and one hundred pounds are
gained thereby, besides the Profits in the Commodity sold here; so that, unless
some Provision may be made to prevent such advantages in exporting our Coin, a
great part thereof, will inevitably be drawn into Foreign parts.

From whence it may be questioned, whether it be not of public concern; when a
proper opportunity presents to new Coin all our Money; with such regard had to
the Allay of other Countries, that it shall not be the Interest of any to
export it, for the sake of new Coining it elsewhere.

It may likewise be considered, whether the Advancement of Trade is not greatly
prevented, by the unaccountable humor of having so much Plate in every Family;
which if turned into Coin, would infinitely promote the General Trade; but
while it remains in Plate, is of no more public Benefit, then if it were
Buried in the Bowels of the Earth; while so many other Manufactures are
neglected, that would otherwise be employed to supply the Use and Ornament of
Plate.

Another consideration may be concerning the interest of Money; which with
great Reason and justice, ought to be limited to such a Rate, as may be
consistent with the circumstances of Borrowers; whereby they may be enabled to
Answer their own ends in borrowing, as well as the others gain in Lending.

As if it be, a Country Gentleman that borrows on a Mortgage; his end is,
chiefly to prevent the present Sale of his Land, in hopes of some favorable
opportunity, to pay the Debt some other way; and having occasion to borrow one
thousand pounds, sets out threescore pounds per annum; which he could have sold
for so much Money, and lays by the Profits every year, to pay the Interest.
Now, if he pays but four per Cent. for Interest; perhaps, he may raise forty
pounds per annum, clear of all charges, out of the sixty pounds per annum,
wherewith to pay the Interest; but more than that, he cannot hope to clear out
of threescore pounds per annum: Nor if the Lender had purchased the same
Estate, could he have made clear of all charges, more than forty pounds per
annum; so that, it is plain, that four per Cent. is the full value of the
increase of money, with respect to Purchases and Mortgages; and consequently,
if he pays two per Cent. more than he can raise by the benefit of the money
borrowed, he must run insensibly in Debt; and the Cankered excess of Usury
shall devour the Gentleman's Estate in a competent time, at two thirds of the
real value, be the Gentleman never so Painful and Industrious to prevent it. It
is therefore most clear, that no Man can with a good Conscience take more
Interest on any Security by Mortgage, then the Profits of Land will answer on a
Purchase.

Or if One thousand Pounds were lent to a Trader, unless he can have it at 4 l.
per Cent. as it is Lent in other Countries, he can neither afford to buy so
dear by 1 l. per Cent. nor Sell so Cheap as foreign Merchants if he pays 2 l.
per Cent. more for his Money, and consequently, must either be beat out of his
Trade, or forgo so much of his reasonable Profits, as upon any contingent
Losses, may hazard his Undoing, while the Lender secures a certain exorbitant
Gain out of the unprofitable Returns of the unsuccessful Merchant: Or if the
Trader by purchasing his Money at too high an Interest, do therefore inhance
the price of his Commodity, the Generality of the People become the Sufferers
thereby.

Such a dead weight, and of so pernicious consequence, is the payment of 2 l.
per Cent. more than the common Interest in Foreign Countries; that in bearing
too hard upon the Merchant, it overwhelms his Trade, and destroys all that
Traffic in his Ruin, which might have been carried on by him, and by his
means, derived with good advantage to many others, or else inforces him to
inhance the price of his Commodities, to the oppression of the Subject, which
is a public Grievance, and ought in no sort to be indulged for the particular
Benefit of the Selfish Lender.

Nor will there be any Severity or Injustice in restraining the Interest of
Money to 4 l. per Cent. since Foreign Nations that cannot pretend to have more
plenty of Money than England, do constantly Lend at 4 l. per Cent. or under, as
being convinced, that it is an adaequate Interest for the Use of Money, where a
proportionable share of the Profit of such Money, is as justly due to the
Borrower, employing the same in Trade, as to the Lender for the usu-Fruit
thereof.

Live and let Live, is an honest and usual Saying in Trade; And if the
unconscionable Usurers, insatiable Thirst after ungodly Gain, will not permit
him to say so. The Law may with great Justice compel him to do so; For wherever
common Convenience or Necessity requires any thing to be done for the Public
Welfare, every Man owes a conformity thereto, and many be restrained by Law
from doing otherwise.

Upon this Reason is grounded, the Statute directing the price of Bread and
Beer, to be limited from time to time according to the price of Corn. And all
Ingrossers, Regraters and Forestallers are prohibited to Trade in a way so
injurious to the Public; and one Weight and one Measure is required to be
observed in Buying and Selling, to prevent the crying Evils of Extortion and
Oppression, whereby Men are inhibited from making any private Gain to
themselves, that is inconsistent with the common Convenience of the Public.

There are many Arguments that may be brought against the cursed Vice of
Extortion, whereof excessive Usury may be accounted a principal Species; but
such as will not be convinced by these two plain Instances of Lending upon
Mortgages, or in Trade, will be very deaf to any other persuasions with, but
the compulsory obligation of Law, which is well known to have had a good effect
in reducing Interest from Eight to Six per Cent. For which benefit the Nation
might have waited long enough, if the Usurer's Conscience had still remained a
Law to himself.

And since the General Use of Trade was never intended to be an occasion of
enriching one Man by the impoverishment of another, but to be a universal
support to Mankind, by a medium of Traffic and Commerce, to communicate and
impart to each other, the conveniences of Life, the Law has frequently
interposed to oblige perverse and refractory Men to comply with such Rules and
Measures in Trade, as have been thought most conducing to the General Good of a
Nation.

Nor will it excuse to say, Men are not compelled to take up Money at Interest,
and if they find they cannot afford to give 6 l. per Cent. for Money, they may
forbear to carry on a greater Trade then their own Money will enable them to
undertake; for the Government having an Interest in the promotion of Trade, is
consequently interested in the welfare of every Person that may be instrumental
thereto; and is concerned to see them, not only accommodated, but as much as
may be, encouraged in all things tending to the advancement of Traffic and
Commerce.

Thus the Law requires Innkeepers to accommodate Travelers at a reasonable
price; and the like constraint is by Law on Butchers, Brewers, Bakers, and
others, to Sell their Victuals at a reasonable Price; and yet these Persons
have as much, and as good a Propriety in their respective Commodities, as any
Man has in his Money; And it might as well be said, that Men are not under a
necessity to buy of the Butcher, for that they may kill their own Victuals, if
they please: But Money being as Essential to Trade as Victuals are, to the
support of Life; and the Public Interest, being alike concerned in the
circumstances of both Cases; they both fall under the same Reason in the Law,
and are equally subjected to the same Considerations and measures of Justice.

A further Consideration for the improvement of Trade, may be by a reasonable
endeavor, to multiply our People; For as Land cannot yield its utmost
increase, but through Men's Labor and Pains; Nor can such increase be improved
to the best advantage, but by the application of many hands: And since there
are many parts of England uncultivated, that would maintain Thousands of
Families in way of Farming; And Ten times as many Thousand Families would be
maintained in Subserviency, out of the Trade and Manufacture that would
necessarily arise from the produce of such Farms. It follows then of
Consequence, that the Nation is deficient in the want of so much Wealth and
Plenty, as might be gained by the increase and assistance of so many Thousand
People.

To effect which great advantages, the Gentry of England may please to bethink
themselves, how much it is there Interest to reside in those Countries where
their Estates lie; and may, if they please, consider how much it is their Duty
by a tacit condition annexed to that Estate, that is descended on them from
their Ancestors, by their Example: Authority, Encouragement and assistance, to
preserve good Government and good Husbandry among the many inferior People in
their Neighborhood, by which means, and by repealing such rigorous Laws, as
drive our People beyond the Seas; and by putting the Laws in execution against
those many that live idly in and about London, and elsewhere, who subsist
mostly by Stealing, or Cheating, or such like indirect Courses, many such
persons would be glad to forsake their present Habitations, and wicked course
of life, and returning to their own Countries, betake themselves to a way of
Husbandry.

Another defect, is the Imprisonment of Men's Persons for Debt, which seldom or
never procures the payment of what is owing, and yet many an unfortunate Man,
who by reason of his Poverty, could no longer continue a Master, might, if he
had his liberty, become a useful Servant, and thereby contribute something to
the Public; But while he continues in Prison, he is not only unserviceable to
himself and his Creditors, but unprofitable and buthensome to his Country, in
respect of that Charity that is thereby diverted from the Sick and Infirm, in
relieving these Walking Ghosts, or Men half buried alive, while the Nation is
deprived of the Service and Benefit of those Thousands of People that Labor
under such hard circumstances, to which they are subjected by a barbarous
Inhumanity, indulging Revenge, purely for Revenge sake. But I rely not on
either of these Expedients, for I fear there is too much infatuation in the
World, to expect any such Conduct in the one Case, and too little Charity to
expect so much good Nature in the other.

The most effectual Remedy therefore may probably be this. To Grant one General
Freedom and Privilege for all Persons and their Families, to come into this
Kingdom, and enjoy the benefit of our Laws, equally with all other our Native
Subjects, upon some solemn Declaration to be by them subscribed, and to be
enrolled, whereby they shall promise an entire submission and subjection to
this Government, and take the Oath of Allegiance, which would be a sufficient
Caution and Ceremony to introduce them amongst us, without imposing any other
Test upon them; That being principally intended and provided to secure us
against those that were to be admitted to Offices of Trust, wherein they might
have some Influence on the Government: But as to the Trading part of the
Nation, it was never apprehended necessary to apply a Caution so extraordinary
toward such; Nor can it be prudential to create Difficulties, that may
obstruct the Trade and Welfare of the Nation, where there is more of Humor
than Necessity requiring it; And perhaps it is not without great Offense, that
so mysterious and Religious a Duty should be made subservient to Secular Ends
and Purposes.

From what has been thus represented, in as short a Discourse as the Subject
matter could be well comprehended; may be drawn these Observations.

That Trade does contribute in a very great measure, to the Honor, Strength,
Wealth and Preservation of our Government.

That the principal Foundation of our Trade, is derived out of the Land and the
Sea.

That the produce of the Land and of the Sea is improved by Manufacture and
Merchandise.

That the Multiplicity of People increase Manufacture and Merchandise.

That Money is the principal medium, whereby People promote Trade.

That Land which is a Substantial valuable and lasting Fund; being made a safe
and ready security, whereon Money may be borrowed at a reasonable Interest: A
great part of the Coin that lies Dead, would more freely be dispersed, in a
Circulation of Traffic and Commerce.

FINIS.

