A TREATISE Wherein is Demonstrated,

I. That the East India Trade is the most National of all Foreign Trades. II.
That the Clamors, Aspersions, and Objections made against the present
East India Company, are Sinister, Selfish, or Groundless. III. That since the
discovery of the East Indies, the Dominion of the Sea depends much upon the
Wane or Increase of that Trade, and consequently the Security of the Liberty,
Property, and Protestant Religion of this Kingdom. IV. That the Trade of the
East Indies cannot be carried on to National advantage, in any other way than
by a General Joynt-Stock. V. That the East India Trade is more profitable and
necessary to the Kingdom of England, than to any other Kingdom or Nation in
Europe.
By (...).

LONDON, Printed by T. I. for Robert Boulton, at the Turks Head in Cor^^^, 1681.

A TREATISE Concerning the East India Trade.
BEfore I enter upon the particular proof of the Propositions in the
Frontispiece, I shall desire the Readers leave to mention some few general
Opinions of my own concerning Trade, which I have long since entertained; and
the older I grow in Experience, the more I am confirmed in them.

1. That Trading Merchants while they are in the busy and eager prosecution of
their particular Trades, although they be very wise and good Men, are not
always the best Judges of Trade, as it relates to the Profit or Power of a
Kingdom. The reason may be, because their Eyes are so continually fixed, and
their Minds intent upon what makes for their pecuiiar Gain or Loss, that they
have not leisure to expatiate or turn their thoughts to what is most
Advantageous to the Kingdom in general. This I am told was the Opinion
anciently of M. T. Cicero, and also Boden, that learned French Author, and
lately of the Lord Chief Justice St. John, who was a principal Engineer in the
first Act of Navigation. But whether it was their Opinion or not, I am sure
it is true by manifold Experience; of which I could give pregnant Instances in
the Age we live in, and former Councils of Trade since his Majesty's happy
Restoration, but that I design brevity, and to avoid all Personal reflections.
The like may be said of all Shopkeepers, Artificers, Clothiers, and other
Manufacturers, until they leave off their Trades, and being Rich, by the
purchase of Lands, become of the same common Interest with most of their
Contrymen.

2. And upon the same reason I am of Opinion, and have found by Experience,
that a mixed Assembly of Noblemen, Gentlemen, and Merchants, are the best
Constitution that can be established for the making Rules, Orders, and Bylaws,
for the carrying on any Trade for the public Utility of the Kingdom.

3. That all Domestic or Foreign Trade, to any Place or Country, that does
not in the Result and Consequences of it, increase the value of our English
Lands (the good plight whereof is the main Basis of our Wealth, Freedom, and
Safety) ought not only to be discouraged, but totally rejected.

4. That all Monopolies, of what Nature or Kind soever, are Destructive to
Trade, and consequently Obstructive to the increase of the value of our Lands;
and that therefore, if there be any thing in the East India Company's Charter,
or any Charter of Incorporated Merchants; that hinders any of his Majesty's
Subjects of England, Scotland, or Ireland, from coming into that Trade, upon as
good Terms as others of his Majesty's Subjects did, or yet may, it would tend
to the general good of the Kingdom, that such Bars or Hindrances were removed.

5. I am clearly of opinion (be it said without offense) that if all Strangers
inhabiting in any of his Majesty's Kingdoms (so they be not suffered to be of
Government) had as free liberty to enter into any of our Incorporated Foreign
Trades, as any of his Majesty's Native Subjects, as is practiced in the United
Netherlands, it would greatly increase the Trade of England, and improve the
value of Land.

6. That those narrow Clauses in the Turkey Companies and other Charters, which
limit the Traders to be Freemen of London, and not to be Shopkeepers, or other
than such as they call Legitimate Merchants; as also the practice of admitting
no Man to be free of the Turkey Company under 25 l. if he be under 25 years of
Age, or 50 l. if above, are to the prejudice of the Nation in general, tho they
may be for the advantage of the particular Traders, for which I suppose they
were calculated.

7. I am of Opinion, the Dutch, Nationally speaking, are the wisest People now
extant, for the contriving and carrying on their Trades for the public
advantage of their Country. If any shall here object, that if it be so, I am
mistaken in my former Notion, That Merchants are not always the best Judges of
Trade; for the Dutch have most Merchants in their Councils. The Honorable Sir
William Temple has already answered for me, that their Councils are made up of
very few or no trading Merchants, but of Civilians, or Sons of Merchants, that
have long since lest off their active Trades, and have only now Stocks in their
East and West India Companies, or in their Banks and Cantores, or other public
Fonds.

8. That tho the Dominion of the Sea may be obtained by Arms, and fortunate
Battles at Sea, it can never be retained, preserved, and maintained, but by the
Excess and Predominancy of Foreign Trade.

9. That Domestic and Foreign Trade do (as we vulgarly say of Twins, but more
truly of Trade) wax and wain together; and if it were not an impropriety of
Speech, Land might be coupled with them.

10. I am of Opinion, that Silver and Gold, coined or uncoined, tho they are
used for a Measure of all other things, are no less a Commodity than Wine, Oil,
Tobacco, Cloth, or Stuffs; and may in many Cases be exported as much to
National Advantage as any other Commodity.

11. That no Nation ever was or will be considerable in Trade, that prohibits
the Exportation of Bullion.

12. That though it may be best to be left free and indifferent, it is more for
the public advantage to export Gold or Silver coined than uncoined: By the
former we gain the Manufacture, and something of Honor and Magnificence it is,
to have his Majesty's Royal Stamp pass current in all parts of the World.

13. I am confident, whatever Nation has the lowest Interest, will certainly
have their Lands in highest esteem and price; and that no Nation shall ever
over-match the Dutch in Trade, till they mate them in the rate of Interest of
Money.

14. That the Dutch gain much more by Bullion and Foreign Commodities exported
from their Provinces, of which the chief are Wines, East India Goods, English
Herrings, Greenland Oil and Fins, than by all their own native Productions and
Manufactures.

15. That it is as probable an attempt to wash a Blackamore White, as to hope
that ever we can cope with the Dutch in White Herrring Fishing, Salt-droaging
from St. Uvals to the East-Land, or the Russia or Greenland Trade, till the
Interest of our Money be as low as theirs.

16. I always bear that deference to the consent of Nations and Numbers, that
whenever I see wise and great Nations, having different Interests, and various
Forms of Government, yet conspire, as it were, in the same means, to accomplish
the same ends of Profit., Power and Honor, I conclude, they are nearer the
right way to those ends, than the wisest and best private Men living, that hold
contrary Opinions, swayed by personal Profit or Loss, Pique or Prejudice.

17. I am of Opinion, with submission to better Judgments, that there is just
as much need of Companies of Merchants in England as in Holland, and no more.
Where Companies are necessary the Dutch have them; and in such manner as is
most necessary to the Nature and Commerce of the Countries, for which they are
incorporated. And I never heard of any Companies of Merchants there, but those
of the East and West Indies, and both in Joint Stocks; protected and defended
by the Laws of the Provinces, which are of the same force as Acts of
Parliaments with us.

18. That there is a necessity of a Joint Stock in all Foreign Trade, where the
Trade must be maintained by Force and Forts on the Land; and where his Majesty
cannot conveniently maintain an Amity and Correspondence by Ambassadors; and
not elsewhere.

I shall now return to what was proposed to be proved in the Title page, viz.

I. That the East India Trade is the most National of all Foreign Trades.
Which I prove thus: Viz.

1. WHat the Dutch, French, Danes, Portugals, and which, not long since, the
Swedes, and now the D. of Brandenburgh, have with so great Charge and Expense
attempted, and hedged about with Laws and Encouragements, must certainly be a
Matter of the greatest National Consequence.

2. This Trade employs more great Warlike English Ships, that may carry from 50
to 70 Guns a-piece, than all the Trades of the World from England besides.

3. This Trade alone furnishes us with Saltpetre, a Commodity so necessary,
that in the late Kings time the Nation suffered greatly by the want of it; as
is too well known and remembered.

4. Above four fifth parts of the Commodities Imported by this Trade, are again
Exported into Foreign parts; by which the Navigation and Trade of this Kingdom
is vastly increased into Turkey, Italy, Spain, France, Holland, and other parts
of Christendom; by the Returns of which, more than treble the Bullion is
Imported, that was first Exported to India; and the Wealth of this Kingdom is
as greatly increased, as by the direct Trade to and from the East Indies.

5. Most of the East India Commodities are of so small bulk, that if the Trade
of the East Indies were not in English hands, the Commodities, notwithstanding
any Laws to the contrary, would come in from Holland (as the French Silks now
do) with this difference only; then we should pay as much for Pepper, which we
now sell for 8 d. the pound, as we do for Nutmegs, Cloves, Mace, Cinnamon which
is from 6 s. to 15 s. per pound; tho some of them are cheaper at the places of
their Growth than Pepper is at Bantam; but enhaunsed to that price by the
Dutch, having the sole Trade for them. By which I conclude this saves the
Kingdom in that respect only, 500000 l. per Annum, that otherwise they would be
outwitted of.

6. All Riches and Power in Nations, as well as private Families, consists in
comparison. A Gentleman in the Country may be accounted Rich, if he be much
richer than other Gentlemen, his Neighbors, tho but of moderate Estate. So
England may be said to be Rich or Strong, as our Strength or Riches bears a
proportion with our Neighbor Nations, French, Dutch, etc. and consequently
whatever weakens or depopulates them, enricheth and strengthens England. And
most certain it is, That no Foreign Trade does so work upon the Manufactures of
our Neighbor Nations, as this Trade of the East Indies; for the Staple
Countries for Silks and Fine Linen, are Italy, France, Holland, Flanders, etc.
insomuch, as it is reasonably computed, those Countries, by the Importation of
East India Silks and Callicoes; not only into England, but from England into
their own Countries, are abated in those fine Manufactures above a Million of
Pounds Sterling per Annum.

7. And which is a consideration of great weight, and may be of immense
advantage to the strength, populousness and riches of this Nation in a few
years. England has already the principal Trade of Woollen Manufactures, and
now a quicker vent and export for them than ever it had in the memory of any
man living. But throughout Christendom I have ever been of Opinion that
generally speaking, there are more Men and Women employed in Silk Manufactures
than in Woollen: of which likewise England has obtained a considerable part,
considering the short time since our Silk Broad Weaving began; which was but
since Mr. Burlimach brought in Silk-Diers and Throwsters, toward the end of
the late King James, or beginning of King Charles the First's Regn. And I am
credibly informed the number of Families already employed therein in England,
does amount to above 40000. Now what should hinder, but that in a few years
more, this Nation may treble that number in such Manufactures; since the
East India Company have of late years found out a way of bringing Raw Silk of
all sorts into this Kingdom, cheaper than it can be afforded in Turkey, France,
Spair, Italy, or any other place where it is made. Insomuch, as with East India
Silks, we serve Holland, Flanders, and some other Markets from England.

8. This Trade pays his Majesty about 60000 l. per Annum Custom; aad carries
out of this Kingdom yearly, about 60 or 70000 l. in Lead, Tin, Cloth, Stuffs;
and other Commodities, of the Production and Manufacture of England: Which is
not so considerable, with respect to the quantity, as in this, That what we
send to the East Indies of our own Manufactures, would not be sent at all, if
the English Nation were deprived of this Trade; because neither Dutch nor
French would enure the East-Indians to our English Manufactures: Of which we
have clear instance in the Dutch Trade to Japan; where they industriously avoid
introducing our English Cloth. Which Country being exceeding large, rich and
populous, and lying in such a Northern Latitude, might vent as much of our
English Manufactures, as Spain and Portugal, if we could gain a footing into
that Trade: in the endeavor whereof the Company have already lost above Fifty
thousand pounds Sterling.

9. Tho the Company have lost so much in the attempt of the Trade with Japan,
they have lately got an Entrance into the Trade of Couchin-China and China: and
have, for a few years past, settled Factories in three Ports thereof, viz.
Tywan, Tonqueen and Amoy, to their great Charge and Expense, without reaping
any Profit thereby to this time, but a certain and constant Loss, which they
did and do continue notwithstanding, out of a Zeal they have to promote the
Consumption of our Woollen Manufactures, in a Climate not altogether so hot as
most parts of India are. Which probably may in some time turn to the public
advantage of this Kingdom, when those raging and bloody Wars are ended between
the Chinese and Tartars.

II. That the Clamors, Aspersions, and Objections made against the present
East India Company, are sinister, selfish, or groundless.
BEfore I engage into the Discourse of Objections against the present
East India Company, I shall not stick to declare (though it be against the
Sense of most of the now Adventurers) that in my judgment I am for a New Stock,
provided we can come honestly by it, that is, without Injustice to the now
Adventurers (who will be found to have deserved worthily of their Country,
when their Actions and Themselves shall come to be impartially considered) and
without Detriment to the Kingdom in general. Which notwithstanding is a Matter
of great difficulty; it being in Trade, as with Trees; great care is to be
taken in removing an old one, least upon the removal it die, or at least suffer
a shrewd stunt. Yet if the Wisdom of our Nation in that august Assembly of
Parliament, now convened, shall incline to any a teration of the present
Constitution, I think this time may be as opportune as any. 1st. Because our
Neighbors are not now at leisure (the French being very low in India and the
Dutch not altogether so Rampant as formerly) to make their Advantage of our
Unsettlement, during the Transition from one Stock to another. 2ly. Because the
Profits of the East India Trade were never so much cried up as now they are: So
that, I hope, the Subscriptions may prove the larger to the ensuing Stock. And
yet I must desire to be excused, if I think those that complain most of the
Old, will not be found the forwardest Subscribers to a New Stock. 3ly. Because
when we tell Gentlemen or others, they may buy Stock, and come into the Company
when they please: They presently reply, They know that, but then they must pay
280 l. for 100 l. And when we say the intrinsic Value is worth so much; which
is as true as 2 and 2 makes 4, yet it is not so soon Demonstrated to their
apprehensions, notwithstanding it is no hard task to make out, that the quick
Stock of the English East India Company is at this time more than the Dutch
quick Stock proportionable to their respective first Subscriptions; and yet
their Actions now are current at 440 l. or 450 l. per Cent. In truth, I that
have reason to inspect and know as much of it as any Man, had rather buy in
this Stock, now it is, at 300 l. for 100 l. then come into any New Stock at
even Money. Therefore, for general satisfaction, I could wish the Experiment of
a New Subscription were tried. 4ly. If a New Stock were now established, to
please the Generality of the Kingdom, I should not despair but that such New
Stock would have a Parliamentary Sanction; which this only wants, to be as
strong in its Foundation, as it is in all other Nations; and which being
obtained, I am persuaded would in less than an Age, render his Majesty as
indubitably Sovereign of the Ocean, as he is now of Great Britain, and Ireland,
and the Seas adjacent. 5ly. If an English Company were settled upon such a
Foundation, there would be more Encouragement to maintain and defend some
Trades by Arms, which cannot otherwise be enjoyed or secured: Which no Company
built upon an uncertain Basis, can be supposed to adventure the Charge or
Hazard of; while they are not sure to enjoy their Acquests in case of Success.

But to return to my Theme, and muster up all the Objections I can remember to
have heard against the present Company.

Object. 1. The first that comes to my Mind, is that of some of the Turkey
Merchants: They say, The bringing in of so much Silk and so cheap, is a public
Nuisance, and destroys their Trade, which depends wholly upon the Exportation of
Woollen Manufacture, whereas the East India Company send out little Manufacture
and much Bullion, etc.

Answ. 1. Lanswer, First, That it is strange Doctrine to any sort of Men skilled
in the Political part of Trade, That the making of a Material cheap, that is to
be Manufactured at Home, or Exported again into Foreign Countries, should be to
the public Damage of any Country.

2. That the Turkey Merchants do Ship out much Cloth, I deny not; but as true
it is, that they have Shipped out more Yearly since the great increase of the
East India Trade, and since themselves have made this Complaint, than they did
in former Years. So that in Fact it does not follow that the increase of the
East India Trade, and particularly of their Importation of Silk, does hinder or
diminish the Exportation of Cloth to Turkey, but rather the contrary.

3. The question is not now, Which Company sends out most Woollen Manufactures,
but which is the most profitable Trade to the Nation: Which I hope, I have
proved the East India Trade to be; especially if the beforementioned
Consideration be taken in, that what English Commodities the East India Company
exports, would not be exported at all, if the English had no Trade thither:
Because other Nations that Trade thither are under Joynt-Stocks, and Political
Councils, and consequently would send none of our Manufactures. But as long as
there is a Market for our English Cloth in Turkey, if the English did not send
it thither, the Dutch would; because in Holland there is no Turkey Company; but
any Man, Native or Foreigner may send what Commodities, and when they please,
for Turkey, except they be stayed for Convoy by some Act of State. And where
all Men have liberty to Trade at Discretion, they will naturally deal in those
Commodities they can get most by, be they Foreign or Domestic.

4. If Bullion be exported, and that hinder not the exportation of our English
Manufactures, as in fact does appear: And if for every 10 s. value sent out, 30
s. be brought in Bullion at the long run, which is most evident in the course
of the East India Trade; who can doubt but the exportation of Bullion in such a
Trade, is a real and great advantage to the Kingdom.

5. Besides their Cloth, the Turkey Merchants do send out a great deal of
Bullion themselves; as appears by their Entries at the Custom-House: In which
they do well for themselves and their Country, but not well in complaining of
others at the same time, for the same thing.

6. The truth of the Case at bottom is but this, The Importation of better and
cheaper Raw Silk from India, may probably touch some Turkey Merchants profit at
present, though it does benefit the Kingdom, and not hinder the exportation of
Cloth. What then? Must one Trade be interrupted because it works upon another?
At that rate there would be nothing but confusion in a Nation ad infinitum. The
Italian Merchants may quarrel the Portugal Merchants, because they do now in a
plentiful Year Import from Portugal 4000 Pipes of Oil per Annum; as formerly
they did not use to import above 100 Pipes annually. The Shoemakers pull down
the Cobblers; those that make Red Herrings destroy those that dry Sprats,
because quantities of the latter pull down the price of the former. Of the same
kind was the late project of the Innkeepers to pull down the Haokney Coaches;
and so might peradventure with much more probability of truth, the Portugal
Merchants pretend that our Plantation Sugars spoil their Trade, and hinder the
exportation of our Woollen Manufactures to Portugal. Of which in reality the
first part only is true. Our Plantation Sugars have brought down their Lisbon
Sugars from 8 l. 10 s. per Cent. to 2 l. 10 s. per Cent. within my memory: and
yet the exportation of Woollen Manufactures to Portugal, is now greater than
ever it was since England was a trading Nation. Just as it is and will prove in
the Turkey trade; the Similie holds, and will hold thorowout.

7. If those Turkey Merchants think the East India Trade so good, why do they
not come into it themselves. The door is open always to them and all the Kings
Subjects, buying and selling there is daily; and some Noblemen, Gentlemen, and
others of quality and place, have lately bought Stock, and the East India
Company have taken nothing for their Freedom. The most they can take is 5 l.
But if any East India Merchants desire to trade for Turkey, they must answer
several hard questions before they can be let in. 1. How old are you? 2. Are
you a Freeman of London? 3. Are you no Shopkeeper, or a Legitimate Merchant?
When you have answered all these questions to their content, if you are above
25 years of age, there is 50 l. to pay before you can trade; which is a great
deal of money to part with, before one knows whether he shall get or lose by
the Bargain.

Obj. 2. They say there is not above 80 Legitimate Merchants in the East India
Company.

Answ. First, I answer, First, By Legitimate Merchants, I suppose they mean
such as have served Apprenticeships to Merchants, in the number whereof I
believe they reckon short above half.

2. That it matters not two straws to the Kingdom, whether they be legitimate
in their sense, or illegitimate. In the whole they are now Five hundred fifty
and six which is more by a great many than the Turkey Merchants, and more by
above half then they would be, if the Trade were not managed in a Joint Stock.

Object 3. They say the Company have half the known World in their Charter, and
that is too much for any Company, etc.

Answ. I answer First, This Company have no more in their Charter, than all the
East India Companies in Christendom have in their Charters: and from thence
infer, that either so much as is in the Charter ought to be for public
Utility; or elle all Christendom, except those few Gentlemen that complain, are
mistaken in their Politics.

2. Tho the Charter run in the style of, The Merchants of London trading to the
East Indies; yet in truth the Company is a Company of all, or so many of the
Kings Subjects, as did desire to be concerned in that Trade, or yet do; they
buying the Stock of any dead Person, or other that is willing to sell.

Object. 3. But its dear buying at 280 l. per Cent.

Answ 1. It Is less than the intrinsique value, if the Stock were now to be
broke up, if I can calculate aright.

2. If it be too dear, I know not but any Man may be as justly compelled to
sell his House or Land at the Buyers price, or else be disseized of it, as his
Stock in the East India Company.

Object. 4. They say the Charter has exorbitant and illegal Clauses in it.

Answ 1. I believe no Charter in Europe has less of that kind.

2. It Is absolutely necessary for the Public Good, that who-ever governs a
Trade so remote from England, and by such a multitude of hands as the Company
are forced to employ, should have some extraordinary Power committed to them.

3. Whatever is in the Charter, I never knew or heard of any arbitrary Act that
ever the Company did; nor any Ships or Goods that ever they seized by virtue of
their Charter, tho they have had cause often.

Object. 4. They say the Company has imposed and exacted great Fines, Mulcts
and Forfeitures, to an immense value.

Answ. I never knew them take any Fine or Forfeiture, but what any man might do
in the same case, without a Charter: What they do take in any case, being
either by submission of the party, by agreement with the Master and Owners in
Charterparty, or by Arbitrations; and always in pursuance of Legal Obligations,
sealed and delivered. The manner whereof is briefly this: They agree with all
their Factors and Servants, and also with Masters of Ships, before they
entertain them into their Service, that they shall not carry or bring home
prohibited Goods; and if they do, they shall subduct out of their Freight a
certain rate for each piece or sort of prohibited Commodities: which they do
accordingly subduct out of the Freight; which in effect is from themselves: for
most of the Owners of the Ships, employed by the Company, are East India
Adventures: Which I know by experience, being a Part-Owner my self of a
considerable number of Ships, employed by them. And yet, to do the Company
right, I must acknowledge that the Ships employed by them (such deductions
notwithstanding) make better Voyages and gain more Mone^jeor their Owners, than
any Ships whatsoever, that sail out of England: And the Commanders and Officers
of such Ships, generally grow much richer in a short time, than any others, of
any Trade or Nation whatsoever.

And so indulgent are the Company to common Seamen, that they allow every Man
or Boy that will, in their several Ships, to bring 5 pieces free of stated
Damage, erroneously called Mulct. And if any Seaman happen to bring 10 or 15
Pieces, the Committees entrusted with that Affair, commonly stretch that Order
to the allowing the Seaman 5 Pieces for himself, 5 Pieces for his Wife, and 5
Pieces for his Child, if he have any; and if he have none, they usually ask the
party whether he have not a Father, Mother, or other Relation: so that they
invent ways to favor him, above the Companies Rule aforesaid, of only 5
Pieces to one Person.

To encourage likewise the importation of Gold from China, from whence small
quantities do come every year, and very great quantities will come in a few
years; the Company do not only permit the entrance of it free of stated Damage,
but give the Freight of it gratis.

The Company do likewise allow to all their Commanders, President, Agents,
Factors and Servants, all kind of Trade in India, from and to any Port or Place
within the Limits of their Charter, except to and from Europe: Whereas on the
contrary the Dutch, tho they are a People known to be as tenacious and as
obstinate defenders of their Liberty, as any People in Europe, do restrain all
those that serve them in India, from all the most profitable trades from place
to place, within the limits of their Charter; and indulge no kind of private or
permissive trade whatsoever, to or from Europe.

Now let any indifferent Man judge, besides that whatever the Company does in
the case of stated Damages, every private man may do, that can Freight a whole
Ship by himself and Partners; whether it be not highly reasonable, that seeing
the Company are at above 100000 l. yearly charge in East India and England,
that whoever participates of that Trade, should proportionably contribute to
the Expenses that necessarily attend the preservation of it.

Object. 5. They say, besides Raw Silk, the Company imports Wrought Silk, to
the prejudice of the Silk Manufacture in England.

Answ. 1. This Objection lies as much and more against all other Wrought Silks,
imported into England from Italy, Holland, or any other part of the World.

2. The Silks, which the Company commonly bring in, are, the main part of them
Taffaties, and other plain or striped Silks and Pelongs, such as are not
usually made in England, but imported from France, Italy, and Holland; where
lately, when Pelongs were scarce, many were made and imitated at Harlem, and
from thence imported into England. So this importation works upon our
Neighbors, preserves the balance of our Trade; and consequently increases
the Capital of our Nation.

3. And which is beyond all contradiction, as will appear by the Entries at the
Custom-house, a great part of the Wrought Silks, imported by the East India
Company, are again shipped out to France, Holland, and other foreign parts; which
is a great and growing advantage to the King, and Kingdom in general: to the
King, because for all Foreign Goods re-exported, his Majesty has in
consequence, the half Custom paid him by strangers, without taking a penny out
of his Subjects Purses: and to the Kingdom, by preserving and meliorating the
balance of our Trade, as aforesaid: Besides the gain of Freight, Portage,
Wharfage, Ware-house-room; and all other petty Charges: amongst which may be
reckoned the advantage accrewing by the expense of such Foreigners, while they
stay here, as the Companies Sales do necessarily draw over hither.

Object. 6. Some Clothiers complain that the East India Company hinders the
vent of Cloth.

Answ. 1. This indeed is a fine practice, and deserves a through inspection. 1.
Who they are that complained. 2. When and how they began to complain. 3. Why
they complain. 1. For the time when; it was in the year 1674, or 1675, as I
remember: Then they had the confidence to tell the Parliament, the Company
would spoil the trade of Cloth; and bring the price of Wool to nothing. But in
fact, the Company has now stood Five or six years since that time, and much
augmented their trade for India, but Wool is advanced in price above 50 per
Cent: and such a trade there is and has been for woollen Manufactures, as
England never see in any former Age. 2. Who they were that complained; not the
poor Kentish Clothiers, that have lost their Trade; nor the Suffolk men, that
have lost their Manufacture of Blew Cloth; but the Worcestershire,
Glocestershire and Somersetshire men, that do now make and vend above twenty
times the quantity of Cloth, which they did before this Company was erected. 3.
How they began to complain; which, as I have been informed, was thus: Their
first Petition was drawn only against the Turkey Company, for making but one
Cloth Shipping in a year: but entertaining a certain Council (since famous for
other matters) he told them, for some reasons best known to himself, they
should draw their Petition against the East India Company likewise; which
accordingly they did: but whether they were Dutch or English that paid the best
Fees, that I could never discover. 4. Why they complained. That I believe few
of them understood: It could not be because their Trade sunk; for that was
manifestly and wonderfully increased. It could not be because the East India
Company, as a Company, sent out less Cloth than was sent for India in the open
trade: for the Entries at Custom-house will evidence, that the Company, since
their last Incorporation, have sent out in some one year, above ten times as
much Cloth, as was ever sent out in the time of open trade. But why then did
they complain? Really I cannot tell; but peradventure their Council aforesaid,
or some Turkey Merchants, their Customers, might inform them, that if the Trade
of India were open, there would be a new world for Cloth, that would vent as
much as the old World. And if they had any Dutch or French Customers, no
question they would not be backward to encourage so good a work.

Object. 7. They complain that the present Stock is engrossed into a few hands;
some single Adventurers having 16 or 17000 l. principal Stock in their own
names.

An. 1. If this be true, the Complaint of it would sound better out of the
mouth of an old Leveller, than a Merchants, living under a free and Royal
Monarchy. And yet to give the maddest of men their due, neither the late
English Levellers, nor their Elder Brethren, the Tribunes of the People of
Rome; nor yet the more Ancient Lacedaemonians or other Greeks; none of them had
ever that Excess of Indiseretion, as to pretend to Stint, much less to Level
Personal Estates: Which if they could be made even at noon, would be unequal
before night.

2. If there were any thing in this Objection, certainly the Dutch, being a
Republic, would have found a Remedy for it before this time: Whereas on the
contrary they think whoever adventures most in their Joint Stocks, does most
oblige the Commonwealth, tho he be a stranger; insomuch as one Swasso a Jew,
now or late living in Amsterdam, I am Informed has had at one time in their
East India Stock above the value of 300000 l. Sterling.

3. The more any Adventurer has in the Stock, the more he is engaged to study
and promote the good of it, by all possible means within his power. An
Adventurer that has the smallest interest, may be as just and true to the
Stock, as he that has the greatest: but I can never believe that a small
interest will awaken a man so often in the night, nor keep him so long from
sleeping, in the meditation of any business; as a very great and principal
concern may do.

4. Notwithstanding the largeness of any of the Adventurers Stocks, there are
yet Five hundred fifty six Adventurers: which is a greater number than are to
be found in any trade, that has not a Joint Stock.

Object. 8. There are many other Ports and Places within the limits of the
Companies Charter, where English Commodities would vend, which the Company do
not trade unto.

Answ. 1. I believe there can never be any Society that will more industriously
expatiate and enlarge the Trade of this Kingdom in those parts of the World,
than this has done, by all peaceable means. I am sure 100000 l. will not
excuse them for the losses they have sustained in such attempts. Many Factories
they have settled, and after a vast loss have been forced to withdraw them.
Tywan, Tonqueen, Siam, and Amoy, beforementioned, they settled within these
Six or seven years past; and lost a year or two before, 50000 l. in their
attempt of a settlement at Japan.

2. As there be many Ports in England, but a Foreigner that trades to and from
London, may if he will, participate of all the English Trade, without having
particular Factories in the Out-ports: So in East India, a Factory at Suratt,
will share in all the Trades of the Red Sea, as well as Moca, and other parts
within the Correspondency of that Presidency. The same may be said of Bantam,
and many other places, as well as Suratt.

3. In very many places of India, where the Company do prudently avoid settling
English Factories; they do notwithstanding carry on a Trade and Correspondency
by Bannians, Vakeels and other Natives. By which means they avoid the charge of
Presents to Governors, and that ostentatious expensive way, which the
Companies Factors are necessitated to appear in, in all places where they
settle, according to the mode of that Country, and for the honor of the
English Nation, and the East India Company.

Object. 9. It is said, if the Company were not in a Joint Stock, many more
Ships might be employed in India, from one Port to another in trading Voyages.

Answ. 1. The Company want neither Stock nor Skill, or will, to employ as many
Ships as they can gain by: and have almost doubled the quantity of their Stock
and Tunnage within these ten years, and are like yearly to increase, to the
Nations greater advantage; if they be not interrupted.

2. The Company have now 25 Ships and Vessels trading in the East Indies, from
Port to Port, besides 11 great Ships sent out last year, hereafter particularly
mentioned; which are abundantly enough to answer all the Companies occasions of
that kind; the rather, because the Company do generously allow, not only to
their President, Agents, Factors, and Merchants, but to all the English Nation
living in any places within their Charter; being the King of Englands Subjects
(of which there are many hundred of Families) free liberty of Trade, to and
from all Ports and Places in India; and in any Commodities whatsoever without
exception. By which means many scores of small Ships and Vessels are employed
in those trades; and the trade fully supplied. By this means our Native
Commodities are dispersed; and all India Goods collected from the several less
considerable Ports of India, do at length center in the principal Ports; where
the Company have Factories, Forts, Cities and Garrisons: and from thence do come
for Europe, in the Companies returned Ships. And if this be not directly after
the Dutch mode, I am apt to think, in a few years more, if the Company be not
interrupted, it will be found to be a better. And I have been told, their late
Ancient, Learned, and Experienced General of Batavia, Matsuker, did before his
Death, write to the Committees of the Dutch East India Company, to this or the
like purpose:

Obj. 10. Since the East India Company was Incorporated, Coinage has abated in
England.

Answ. This is a mere groundless Chimaera, and will appear so, if the old
Mint-Master as well as the new ones, be Examined. The proportion of Coinage
(except when we Coined the King of Spains Money for his Wars in Flanders)
having generally in my observation, born a proportion to, and followed the
Price of Corn in England; viz. when Corn was dear, we had little Coinage; in
all cheap years of Corn, the Mint has been greatly supplied.

I can remember no more Objections against the East India Company or Trade, and
therefore must proceed to the next particular, viz.

III. That since the Discovery of the East Indies, the Dominion of the Sea
depends much upon the wain or increase of that Trade; and consequently the
security of the Liberty,
Property, and Protestant Religion of this Kingdom.

THe first part of this Proposition is merely Historical; and so well known to
all that look beyond the present Age we live in, that the proof of it will
require little pains. While the Spaniards had Portugal, and with it the Trade
of India, they were able to invade England with a Navy, by them called
Invincible: and so it was, as to man's understanding, if the strength of it be
barely considered; but their Skill was not good, nor their Ships of a Fabric
fit for our Seas: their Cause was naught, and the Providence of Almighty God
blasted them. The Dutch, since the Portugals sunk in the East India Trade, have
grown so potent in and by the Trade of the Indies, that they have in three
great and bloody Wars, contended with us for the Dominion of the Sea; and yet
secretly do not allow us the predominancy. Tho they are not now at leisure to
try the fourth War for it, yet if through the folly or madness of a few
unthinking or self-interested men, we should deprive our selves of the Trade of
the East Indies (which God in mercy to England forbid) we should certainly save
them the experiment of fighting with us the fourth time. They would carry the
Dominion of the Sea clear, and hold it for ever; or until their Commonwealth
should be destroyed by Land force, or intestine Broils.

If any man shall say, Why then? Are the East India Ships of such a mighty
auxiliary Force, that without their aid we cannot overbalance the Dutch in
Naval Power? I answer, Those Ships, and the Men in them, are of very great
Force; as will hereafter appear. But he that looks no further than into the
bare force of the Ships and Men now employed by the Company, does not see the
tenth part of the way into this great Business: For if we should throw off the
East India Trade, the Dutch would soon treble their strength and power in
India, and quickly subdue all other European Nations in that Trade; as they
lately did the French, notwithstanding their great strength at Home; and have
since, I hear, quarrelled the Danes. By means whereof they would become sole
Masters of all those rich and necessary Commodities of the East; and make the
European World pay five times more for them, than now they do; as they have
already done by Cloves, Mace, Cinnamon, and Nutmegs. Which would so vastly
increase their Riches, as to render them irresistible. All Wars at Sea, and in
some sense Land-Wars, since the Artillery used, is become so chargeable, being
in effect but dropping of Doits; that Nation that can spend most and hold out
longest, will carry the Victory at last, with indifferent Counsels. If it be
said, Where shall they have Men? I answer, If they have Trade and Money enough,
they cannot want Men. Seamen are Inhabitants of the Universe; and where ever
they are bred, will resort to the best Pay, and most constant Employment;
especially in a Country where they cannot be pressed or compelled into any
Service against their Wills.

But it must be further considered, That all other Foreign Trade in Europe,
does greatly depend upon East India Commodities; and if we lose the Importation
of them into Europe, we shall soon abate in all our other Foreign Trade and
Navigation: and the Dutch will more than proportionably increase theirs. The
proportion of our Decay and their Increase, in such a Case, would indeed be
exactly the same; but that the excess of price which they would make the
European World pay for East India Commodities more than now they do, would
cause a disproportionable and greater increase of their Riches. The
augmentation whereof would further enable them to overballance us and all
others, in Trade, as well as in Naval strength.

If it shall be said, Admit all that is writ upon this Head to be probable, is
not the Consequence (viz. the security of the Liberty, Property, and Protestant
Religion of this Kingdom) far fetched, and brought in as popular phrases, to
gain and please a Party, as the Clothiers and Artificers Petition was formerly
on the other side. I answer, I cannot hinder Men from thinking their own way:
but God Almighty, that knows my Heart, knows that I scorn to use any such
sacred terms to or for any such sinister or selfish respect, or to please any
sort of Men living. All that I have or shall write in this Treatise, is what I
do really and steadfastly believe, upon very long and serious Meditation, and
many Years conference with almost all sorts of Men, English and Strangers: And
if notwithstanding I do err in some things (as humanum est) it is for want of
better understanding. But to return to the Matter, Can any man that looks
abroad into the World, doubt of the truth of that Observation, viz. That Trade
never thrives in any Country that is not Protestant; though not in all that
are so; for reasons which I could offer, but that they are not necessary here.
Is it not obvious to every Man's understanding, that since Queen Elizabeth's
time, our Customs are increased from 14000 l. per Annum, to above 700000 l. per
Annum? Is it not evident that the People of the United Netherlands, since their
being Protestant, are increased more in Trade and Wealth in 100 Years, than the
ancient and fortunate Romans did in 400 Years after the foundation of their
flourishing Commonwealth? Have not the French, since they were but Party par
paile, part Protestants and part Papists, increased more in Trade and Shipping
in 100 Years, then they did in 500 Years before? I once discoursed a Popish
Lord, soon after his Majesty's happy Restoration, who is since dead, who told
me it was never well in England, nor would be, while we kept such a stir about
promoting of Trade. I confess I liked his Lordship the worse for that
expression, but I thought the better of his Parts. A Naval Power never
affrights us; Seamen never did nor ever will destroy the Liberty of their own
Country: They naturally hate Slavery, because they see so much of the misery
of it in other Countries. All Tyrannies in the World are supported by
Land-Armies: No absolute Princes have great Navies, or great Trades: very few
of them, though they have large Territories, can match that little Town of
Hamburgh in Shipping. The Kingdom of France is powerful and populous, and is
arrived to the height of Military Virtue; by which they are become formidable
to us, as well as to our Neighbors. Who do we fear may destroy our Liberty,
Property and Religion? (which three are one in substance) but the Papists and
the French; which likewise are two names for one thing; and so we should have
found it, if God Almighty had not disappointed them. Now under God's
Providence, what can best secure us from them but our Naval Strength, and what
does especially increase and support that, but our East India Trade: which I
think I have sufficiently proved to the conviction of every impartial and
unbiassed Englishman: And if so, the Consequence in this Proposition is most
natural and irrefragable.

But if notwithstanding it shall be replied upon me, that in the former part of
the Discourse on this Inference, I say, That Trade thrives in Protestant
Countries; therefore the Protestant Religion is the cause of our so great
increase in Trade and Navigation, and not the Trade of the East Indies. I
answer, First, That the great increase of Trade, is not a constant and
infallible consequence of the Protestant Religion; because it proves not so in
all Protestant Countries: But whatever Nation increases in the East India
Trade, never fails proportionably to increase in other Foreign Trade and
Navigation. Secondly, Admit that our Reformation to the Protestant Religion,
were one principal cause at first of our advance in Trade and Navigation; yet
now it is manifest, that the increase of our Trade and Navigation, is a great
means, under God, to secure and preserve our Protestant Religion: Foreign Trade
produces Riches, Riches Power, Power preserves our Trade and Religion; they
mutually work one upon and for the preservation of each other: As was well said
by the late learned Lord Bacon, though in a different Case, in his History of
Henry the 7th, That that Kings Fortune worked upon his Nature, and his Nature
upon his Fortune.

IV. That the Trade of the East Indies cannot be carried on to National
Advantage by a Regulated Company, or in any other way than by a Joint Stock.
BEfore I engage in this Argument, it will be necessary to explain, What Is the
Constitution of a Regulated Trade, such as the Turkey Company, and other like
Companies of Merchants of London are. 2ly. What a Company United in a
Joynt-Stock is. To begin with the first, A Regulated Company is hard to define,
and harder to resemble. Its the Confinement of a Trade to a certain number of
the People, exclusive to above 99 parts of 100; with power in the major part to
hinder the lesser, from shipping out any Goods, but when the greater number
think fit; and to levy a Tax upon the Trade at the discretion of the greater
number of Votes. In brief, it is a Heteroclite, unto which (out of England)
there is nothing now in the World like, in any other Kingdom or Commonwealth
whatsoever, that ever I could read or hear of: All those Trades that are
regulated and confined to certain Persons in England, being open and free to
all People, in all other Kingdoms and States. Their Courts are perfect
Democracies; where one that trades but for 100 l. per Annum, has as good a
Vote as another that trades for 20000 l. per Annum. In those Courts they
appoint the time of Shipping, choose their Ambassador and two Consuls; settle a
Tax, which they call Leviations, upon the Trade. And although I have a profound
veneration for all things then settled in Church and State, and for those wise
and worthy Counselors that assisted Queen Elizabeth in those infant times of
our Reformation and Trade; and am apt to think, when those Constitutions were
made, they were useful and proper to that time: Yet I must acknowledge that in
my opinion, if all those Trades that are Regulated, that is, Confined to
certain Persons only* were free and open to all the King's Subjects, as they
are in Holland and all other places, it would be infinitely more for the
general good of the Kingdom. Neither do I see any reason why the Trades of
Turkey, Hamburgh, East-land, Russia, and Greenland, which in England are
Limited or Regulated, as they call it, should need such Limitation, or
Regulation, more in England than they do in other parts of the World; or more
than other Trades to Italy, France, Spain, or any other part of the World. And
if something might be alleged for a Regulation, what can be said why it is not
for the public Utility, that all the King's Subjects might Trade to any
Country if they please; whether they be Noblemen, Gentlemen, Men of the Gown,
Shopkeepers, or whatever they be: the more the better for the Common Good. To
enforce which, much more might be said; but that is not my Business now.

A Company in Joynt-Stock are a Corporation by Charter (and if it were by Act
of Parliament, it would be much better for the Kingdom in general, as has been
said) into which Stock all the King's Subjects, of what condition soever, have
at the foundation of it, liberty to Adventure what sum of Money they please.
The Stock and Trade is managed by a Select Council, or Committee, consisting of
a Governor, Deputy, and 24 Committees, chosen annually by the Generality; in
which every Adventurer does not Vote a like, but proportionably to his Stock,
viz. Every 250 l. Original Stock, has one Vote; 500 l. paid in, has two
Votes, etc. After the first Stock is settled, no Man can come in but by
Purchase; which every Englishman has an equal liberty to do; and for which he
pays nothing if he be a Freeman: if unfree, never above 5 l. In England the
Company has, by reason of our late Civil Wars and Confusions, been interrupted
several times, and there have been new Subscriptions: But in Holland, since the
first settlement thereof, in Anno 1602, there has been no interruption or
breaking up of the Stock, or new Subscription; and such continuance is
certainly best for the Public.

Having described the nature of these two sorts of Companies of Merchants, I
shall now descend to the proof of the Proposition, viz. That a United Stock is
absolutely necessary to the carrying on the East India Trade to National
Advantage.

Arg. 1. My first Argument I shall draw from the Practice and Experience of all
other Nations. Certainly all the World are not weak in their Intellects
whatever those Gentlemen think that complain of the East India Company. If any
shall tell me, this Argument will not hold universally; for the Portugals have
a Trade for East India, and yet have no Joynt-Stock. I answer, under those
Gentlemen's favor, I know there is a Joynt-Stock for this Trade in Portugal; or
else there could have been no Trade worth speaking of. But true it is, that
Joynt-Stock in Portugal, is the King's Exchequer, who reserves Pepper,
Diamonds, Silk, Callicoes, and all other considerable India Commodities to
himself; and leaves only some few Toys and trivial Commodities to his Subjects:
and yet for want of a more perfect National Constitution, we have seen how the
Portugal Trade in India, notwithstanding the great Roots it had drawn in a long
uninterrupted course of time, dwindled to nothing, when it came to be
confronted and outdone, by the more National and better constituted Joint
Stocks of England and Holland.

The French Nation peradventure, were never governed by wiser Counsels for
their own good, than under the present King. They were some years past,
zealously set upon the East India Trade; and I am assured, spared for neither
pains nor cost, to arrive at the best method; but gave immense rewards to any
that could give them any rational light or information, to lay such a
foundation of Trade, as might be proper for those Eastern Countries. See what,
how, and why they did resolve at last by the printed Translation of the French
Treatise, relating to that settlement; which will save me the labor of
enlarging upon this Argument.

Arg. 2. The English East India Company, have now (as every body knows) their
money at 3 per Cent. interest. Every English Man that trades in an open or
regulated Trade, must value his own money at 6 per Cent. at least (or pay so
much if he takes up money) because he can gain so much by it sleeping or
playing: Those that work, or run hazards, hope to do better. Now if the
Company, with their united Stock and Counsels, and money at 3 per Cent; have
much a do to hold up against the subtle Dutch; what shall poor private
Merchants, of divided, various, and contrary interests, do with their little
separate Stocks at 6 per Cent. per Anuum.

Arg. 3. Suppose the Trade of India might be carried on in an open or regulated
way, if other Nations did so (which is never to be granted) yet in regard that
all other European Nations, do at this time trade there in Joint Stocks; is it
not as great madness to enter raw and private Persons, against such compacted
and united Constitutious of experienced Counselors, as to fight a disordered
undisciplined multitude, against a well governed Veteran Army, supported with
an inexhaustible Treasure; or, as it is to imagine, as some men fondly do, that
we can maintain and defend our Protestant Religion against the Church of Rome,
without a National Church in England.

Arg. 4. If the Company should be destroyed, and the Trade left open, the
Companies Privileges and Immunities in East India would be lost; which have
cost this Company, as well as their Predecessors, vast sums of money to
maintain and retrieve, after they were almost ruined in the late three years
open Trade. If I am asked what those Privileges and Immunities are? They are
so many and so great, as is scarce credible to any not acquainted with the
Trade of India. For public satisfaction, I shall mention some few of them; all
would burden me to write, as well as the Reader. We have the liberty of Coining
Money for our selves, and all other Nations; which passes current in all the
King of Gulconda's Countries. We are Custom-free in almost all places, and in
some, where the Dutch and all other Nations pay a constant Custom: particularly
in all places of the Bay of Bengall, and up the great River of Ganges. At Fort
St. George and Bombay, we have a right, and do impose a Custom upon the
Natives, and all other Nations.

In the Empire of Persia we are Custom-free, and have yearly from the Emperor
1000 Tomans, which is above 3000 l. per Annum, in lieu of the half Custom of
his own People, and all other Nations that trade thither. Of right it should be
the full half Customs of that Port, which is more in value; and we should have
an Officer in his Custom-house to receive our half part; but we rather content
our selves with the 1000 Tomans aforesaid, than fight with him again for a
right, which we are uncertain how long we may enjoy, by reason of groundless
Clamours against the Company at home.

At Bantam we are at the set rate of 4000 Dollars per Annum, for all our
Customs, tho we increase our Trade never so much. In most places in India, we
are in effect our own Lawmakers, and can arrest and imprison any Natives that
deal with us, or owe us money; and can inflict corporal punishments upon them
(without control of any of the Native or Moor Governors) till they pay or do
us right, if our People there see cause for it.

All our Black Servants there, which are very numerous, and all others employed
by us, or trading with us, are free and exempted from the jurisdiction of the
Native and other Governors.

We are in all places free in our Persons and Goods, and all employed or
privileged by us, from all Inland Customs and Duties, in the Towns and
Provinces we pass or bring our Goods through: which are very great in those
Countries, and paid by the Natives.

Arg. 5. My fifth Argument is drawn from the great Losses, Damages, and
Depredations, that this Nation sustained in that short time of three years open
Trade, which are sufficiently known, besides the loss of Privileges, increase
of Presents to Governors, lowering our English Commodities, and advancing the
Indian Commodities to such an odious excess, that at length the very private
Traders themselves, were the forwardest Petitioners for a return to a Joint
Stock; of the truth of which, there be many yet alive that can attest.

Arg. 6. This I draw from the nature of the Eastern Governments. There are
above 100 Kings and Raja's, which are Gentu Princes, but governing with
absolute Power in their own Dominions; and as many Ports and Places of Trade:
whereas in Turkey there are but two or three principal places of Trade and one
Prince; with whom his Majesty by his Ambassador may conveniently have his
Subjects there vindicated and righted, if there were no Company; as the French
King, the Venetians, and the Dutch do. Whereas in India there would be need of
Forty Ambassadors; and all must have Instructions, and carry large Presents.
The Companies Agents, etc. in India, do many times find cause to send
Embassies, Instructions, and splendid trains of Attendance and Presents, before
the Committee in England know of it.

Arg. 7. This is drawn from the distance of the places. Letters do pass freely
to and from Turkey in a short time: and in case of injuries done the English,
his Majesty's Men of War may soon go down from Tangier to revenge them. But
India is at a far greater distance: no certain return of a Letter to be had
once in Twelve months: and the Princes and Ports there, are at a wider
distance one from another, than it is from England to Turkey; and much more
difficult to maintain a Correspondence by Letters in India from Port to Port;
by reason of the set Monsons or Trade-winds, that blow six months together one
way.

Arg. 8. Wherever the English or any Europeans settle a Factory in India,
they must presently build them large Houses, Warehouses, etc. take many
Servants, and maintain the appearance and splendor of a petty Court: and in
many places where the Company have not fixed Garrisons, they are forced to
fortify their Houses, or else they will be despised and trampled upon by the
Natives. If it be said, this may be done by a regulated Company. I answer,
First, How shall they raise a Stock to buy those the Company have already; with
their Lands, Islands, Towns, Garrisons, Guns and Ammunition: which I am sure
(their Privileges being put in likewise) have cost the Company above 300000 l?
Next, How shall they maintain and defend them? By Leviations upon Goods. What?
before there are any Goods to tax. No, they shall raise a Joint Stock, to make
the first Purchase; and after, take only a Tax upon Goods to maintain them.
These are absurd, incongruous, and impracticable Notions; for in a time of War
and Danger, Men will forbear trading; as has been ingeniously observed by the
Author of the printed Letter: So that there will be no Goods to tax, when
there is most need of Money. Whereas the Governors or Committees, have always
in their hands a real Fond of above a Million of Money; and can borrow so much
more in India in a few days, if they want it, their Credit there, being as
current as ready Gold: having never been so much as stained. I shall say no
more upon this Argument, in regard the printed Letter, aforesaid, has so
copiously and convincingly cleared this point, beyond all contradiction, that I
have no room left me to enlarge; but have reason to beg the Authors pardon, for
what, in this, I have borrowed of him.

Arg. 9. The East India Company of England, Holland, and all European Nations
that trade to India, have power, by their Charters, to make War upon any Nation
in India, at their Discretion; but not upon any European Nation, without his
Majesty's consent. This power they must and ought to have for the well carrying
on of their Trades. This power the English Company have sometimes, but not
often exercised: but if it were not known in India, that they have such a
power, they should be continually affronted and abused by the Natives. Now who
shall this Power be delegated unto, in a regulated Company? To all English Men,
or to a single Ambassador, or to many Ambassadors and Consuls?

V. That the East India Trade is more profitable and necessary to the Kingdom
of England, than to any other Kingdom or Nation in Europe.
FIrst, This is so as we are an Island, and have our principal Security, as
well as the increase of our Riches from our Trade and Strength at Sea.

Secondly, And which I take to be a main consideration, The Trade of India is
to England not only a great, but an unmixt Advantage: Whereas to all our
Neighbors, though the Trade of the East Indies be a great Advantage, and
accordingly courted and coveted by them; yet they cannot have it without some
mixture of Loss in other respects; because some of them have the growth and
production of Silk among themselves, as Italy and France. They have likewise
the sole Manufacture of plain Silks, such as Taffateis, Sarcenets, etc. which
are brought from India cheaper than they can make them at Home. Whereas in
England, our Silk Manufacture consists not in those plain Silks, but in Flowred
Silks and Fancies, changed still as often as the Fashion alters. Holland,
Flanders, (and France, in some measure) have their principal Manuctures in fine
Linnens, Cambricks, Lawns and Hollands; which only Callicoe works upon, to the
putting them very much out of request, in their own Countries and and all other
parts of Christendom. Whereas the Linen we make in England is of the strong
course sorts, generally used by the meaner People; which Callicoe does not
prejudice to any sensible degree. Neither is the Linen Manufacture in England
a matter worth taking notice of (whatever a few Gentlemen's opinion is) But in
Holland, Flanders, France, and some parts of Germany, it is their main Concern;
being the subsistence of the Majority of their People, as the Woollen
Manufacture is in England.

Thirdly, The Dutch have a standing Contract with the King of Persia for all
his Silk; which may amount to 600 Bales yearly. Now in regard Bengall Silk in
the East Indies, can be brought to Europe cheaper than Persia Silk: the Dutch
by bringing Silk from Bengall, must of necessity in some kind prejudice that
Contract in the price of Silk; though it be the Dutch Companies own Contract,
as well as the Turkey Merchants. Whereas we having no such Contract in Persia,
do not work upon our selves, as they must of necessity: And yet they are wiser
than to slight the Trade of Bengall for that cause. This Argument concerning
the Dutch Contract in Persia, is so fully confirmed by the Companies Advices
lately received from Persia, that the Dutch there did lately desire to be
excused from receiving their Quota of Silk, which is 600 Bales yearly, upon
pretense of their want of Money to pay for it; which notwithstanding was forced
on them by Sheeke Ally Cawne, the Emperor's Governor there. If it be here asked
me, Why the English East India Company, seeing Persia is within their Charter,
are not as wise as the Dutch, to make a Contract likewise with the King of
Persia? I answer, The Dutch got the start of us in that long before this
Company was constituted; and we cannot possibly retrieve it yet: The Persians
being a People most difficult to remove from any thing they have once
determined. If it be here further retorted upon me, That by my own confession,
the Importation of Silk from India, does prejudice the English Turkey Merchants
in the price of their Silk here. I grant it: But what is that to England in
general? It Is the interest of England that we should have Silk here (being a
material to be Manufactured) cheaper than in any other part of Europe, where it
grows: and so we shall infallibly, if the Company stand. But at the same time,
I do expressly deny that the making of Silk cheap in England, does hinder the
Exportation of our Woollen Manufacture to Turkey: The contrary being as evident
as the Sun at Noonday, to any Man that has not the mist of private Gain or
Loss hanging before his Eyes; as before is demonstrated in those two pregnant,
experienced, unanswerable Instances, viz. That as the price of Portugal Sugars
has abated (in which formerly almost all our returns from that Country were
made) we have increased exceedingly in the Exportation of Woollen Manufactures
to that Country; and even in the Trade of Turkey it self for many years: And
to this very time, as the price of Turkey Silk has abated, the Exportation of
our Woollen Manufacture has increased: and so it will still, though Silk
should come to half the price it bears now in England. Upon the proof whereof,
by time, I dare hazard all that little I have in the World. Besides, when all
is done, and if the Turkey Merchants might have their Will, to the irrepairable
damage of their Common Country; what would they be the better? Except by an
Act of Parliament we could as well hinder the French, Dutch, and other
Neighbors from trading in East India Silk, as we can the English East India
Company. Is not this dealing our Childrens Bread to Strangers? Weakening our
Selves, and strengthening our Enemies, whilst they laugh and stand amazed at
our Indiscretion?

For a Conclusion, That the present and future Ages may know in what Condition
the English East India Trade stood, when the Company was assaulted by the
private designs of parcicular Men; I shall add an Account of the present
posture of their Affairs, viz. Last year the Company sent out (which are not
yet returned) for the Coast of Cormandel, and the Bay of Bengall, Four three
Deck-Ships, viz. The Eagle, burden 590 Tuns, and 118 Seamen, besides
Passengers. The Sampson, burden 600 Tuns, 120 Seamen. The Berkley-Castle,
burden 530 Tuns, 106 Seamen. The President, burden 550 Tuns, 110 Seamen.

For Suratt and the Coast of India, three Three-Deck Ships, viz. The
Williamson, burden 550 tuns, 110 Seamen. The Lancaster, burden 450 tuns, 90
Seamen. The Johanna, burden 530 tuns, 106 Seamen.

For Bantam, two Ships, viz. The Society, burden 600 tuns, 100 Seamen. The
Nathaniel, burden 600 tuns, 100 Seamen.

For the South Seas and China, two Ships, viz. The Faulcon, burden 430 tuns, 64
Seamen. The Barnardiston, burden 350 tuns, 69 Seamen.

And in all of them the Stock of 479946 l. 15 s. 6 d.

This Year the Company are sending out for the Coast of Cormandel, and the Bay
of Bengall, 5 Three-Deck Ships, viz. The Bengall, burden 570 tuns, 114 Seamen.
The Ann, burden 460 tuns, 92 Seamen. The Golden Fleece, burden 575 tuns, 115
Seamen. The Caesar, burden 520 tuns, 104 Seamen. The George, burden 580 tuns,
116 Seamen.

For Suratt, and the Coast of India, three Ships, viz. The Josia, 600 tuns, 120
Seamen. The Massingbird, 480 tuns, 88 Seamen. And the Success, 460 tuns, 92
Seamen.

For Bantam, three Ships, viz. The New London, 600 tuns, 100 Seamen. The Scipio
Africanus, 360 tuns, 74 Seamen. And the Persia Merchant, 360 tuns, and 74
Seamen.

And for the South-Seas and China, one other great Ship, which is not yet
resolved upon.

And in all of them the Stock of above 600000 l. Ster.

Note that the Ships are generally bigger than they are let for, and the
Company employ none but English-built Ships; and that besides what they sent
out last Year, and are sending this, they have always a considerable Stock left
in the Country, to make and provide Goods beforehand. Besides, likewise their
Islands, Towns, Garrisons, Houses, Buildings, Ammunition, etc. The just number
of their Adventurers now, is 556, and new ones daily coming in: The Companies
Doors being never shut against any of his Majesty's Subjects, as Regulated
Companies are. And they have what Money they will at 3 per Cent; which will be
the worst News of all in Holland.

If, notwithstanding all that has been said, the Company must be destroyed,
Gods Will be done. To write what I have, I thought my Duty to my Country;
which having satisfied my self in the performance of, I am not careful for
events: being always confident, that whatever the Parliament does, they will do
it justly; and so wisely as to make the best of a bad Bargain. I am persuaded
the Dutch, to have this feat done, would ease our Lands a while, by giving us a
Million of Pounds Sterling, if they knew where to find Chapmen (which God grant
they never may); and I am sure, if they did pay two Millions, they would have
too good a Bargain of it.

FINIS.

