THE Childrens Petition: OR, A Modest Remonstrance of that intolerable
grievance our Youth lie under, in the accustomed Severities of the
School-discipline of this Nation. Humbly presented to the Consideration of the
Parliament.

Licensed,

November. 10, 1669. Roger L'Estrange.



London, Printed for Richard Chiswel at the two Angels and Crown in
Little-Brittain, 1669.

The Childrens Petition and Remonstrance to the present Parliament.
IT is the happy advantage of the excellent Government of this Nation, that
when we lie under any oppression of general importance, we may have our
recourse to this Great Council for Advice and Relief; Neither is there any end
more intrinsical to such an Assembly, or any honor more desirable.

We the Children of this Land, who look upon our selves as no small part of the
Nation, while there is scarce any House or Family whereof we make not our
share; nor our interest inconsiderable, while the good of us, as to you whose
we are, is of the nearest concernment that can be; are emboldned to this humble
Supplication, not so much of your pity and tenderness, as Fathers, as of the
scrutiny and holiness of Censors, and a just indignation and redress of that
evil, which shall appear to you, upon mature consultation.

There is not any thing hardly of more moment in a Commonwealth, then the
Education of Children, and yet is there generally nothing left more at randon,
and besides the public care. It is the custom ordinarily of our Schools, which
being received from our Ancestors, and used upon our innocent years (that are
not sensible either of our Masters vice, or our own injury) does pass
uncontrouled, to commit to a person who has got a little Greek and Latin, and
nothing else perhaps to live upon, and so is chosen to the Office (without any
qualification otherwise many times, either of real worth or virtuous life, it
is well if it be but so much as of sobriety in age, and modest inclinations)
the liberty to use such a kind of discipline over us, as that the springtime
of humane life, which in all other Creatures is left at the greatest freedom to
be sweet and jocund, is defloured and consumed with bitterness and terror, to
the drying up the very sap which should nourish our Bodies, and those more
lively spirits which should animate our minds in our future life, unto brave
Actions.

And if it were only the evil of our suffering we had to complain of, seeing
our unadvertent Parents do give us up to this Carnage, we should bear it: But
when our sufferings are of that nature as makes our Schools to be not merely
houses of Correction, but of Prostitution, in this vile way of castigation in
use, wherein our secret parts, which are by nature shameful, and not to be
uncovered, must be the Anvil exposed to the immodest eyes, and filthy blows of
the smiter; We are confounded with the horror, and could wish we had some such
way, as by turning up the soal of our Shoe, (which they use, they say, among
the Turks) to present to you our Grievance. For we are persuaded, if modesty
will suffer the thing to be debated, it will be found certainly, to be (...),
that is, a matter to be adjudged amongst the Apostles (...), and those (...)
which are not to be named. Ubi sunt pueri qui ingressi sunt? Fac ut prodeant,
ut cognoscamus eos.

Indeed one would think that this kind of punishment should have been first
invented on purpose, that an aversation to it, as an ugly sordid and abhorrent
thing, should deter ingenuous persons from inflicting it, so that nothing less
then some very grievous crime should ever wring a stripe from them; but when
our contrary experience does tell us how every light occasion is taken, with
what appetite they come to it, as soon as the flesh is bare, these Jarfalcons
are perching over us, their letting so few faults escape, and attending our
construing, for the most part, no longer then till they obtain this end, we are
convinced with the sad and insufferable resentment, that the invention has
been fetched originally, not from the Closet of Mercury or Astraea, but from
the more powerful Goddess of Cyprus, being a certain trick of hers, to
alleviate the pains and killing Crambee's; the Master otherwise could never
perhaps endure, if beyond the encouragement he has in most places from the
Founder, he had not this sly allowance underhand from her withal, as
Benefactrix to that function.

It is disputed against the Stoics, who condemn all anger, that some passion
is necessary to the chastizement of Youth; and so is Ira defined by Lactantius,
Motus animi ad coercenda peccata insurgentis. A definition indeed very fitting
the profession of that Father, whose Latin doubtlesly is smoother then his
spirit througout his Works. Plutarch in his Tract about Cohibition of Anger,
has laid down a Rule of a contrary importance, with excellent deliberation,
which is to this sense, That punishment should never be inflicted out of
self-pleasing; and consequently from the examples, of that of Archytas,
Vapulares nisi iratus essem, and others, when a man is at present enraged, he
is first to correct his own passion, before he is fit to punish the fault of
another under his intuition. To this same effect, Qui esurit is cibo utitur
secundum naturam, qui punit is nulla ad hoc impelli debet cupiditate, says
Seneca. Those that administer punishment, (says Cicero) are to be Legum
similes, quae ad puniendum non iracundia, sed aequitate ducuntur. That is, He
that is hungry, uses his meat according to Nature, but he that punishes, ought
to be like the Laws themselves, that are moved to it with no sort of desire at
all. Plutarch indeed speaks cleanly, imagining nothing but of the pleasure of
revenge, and satiating ones anger; But what would he say of that punishment
which is made to serve a viler affection? Et de virtute locuti, Clunem agitant,
as Juvenal has it.

If punishment come from self-pleasing, Then will it not be in measure; Then
will it not be just; Then the punisher will be glad of a fault; Then will it be
remediless to the sufferer, seeing the cause of the punishment lies in the
punisher, and not in the punished to help it; Then every little occasion, or
none at all, shall be enough for the inflicter to give himself pleasure. And
then shall the innocent, who are little ones, and not able to conceive of this,
be intollerably miserable, being brought many times almost to their wits end,
and ready to make away themselves, rather then endure the iteration of those
torments, whereof they can see no reason, and wherein they can hope no end;
having some cognation in this to those of Hell, that they arise from an
unquenchable fire, in the appetite of the Master.

Sir Philip Sidney, that excellent Person, in his Arcadia, has thought good to
set forth this evil to public view, and so to animadversion, we may suppose
and emendation, under the person of Cecropia, dealing thus with her Neices.
Cecropia (says he) employing her time in using the same cruelty on Pamela, (as
on Philoclea) her heart grew not only to desire the fruit of punishing, but
even to delight in punishing them. This very ingenuous Gentleman had observed,
belike, this growing humor in those that use it; but having a Soul in which so
foul a thought never entered, as might direct him right into the cause of it, he
expresses the practice, complaining tragically of the cruelty, but searches not
to that rottenness which lies farther at the core of it. Will you hear that
shrewd Author of Hudibras make the discovery?

The Pedant in the Schoolboyes breeches,
Does claw and curry his own itches.
By this little, we need not wonder if the Tyrant of old, who being expulsed
his Kingdom, got to be Master of a School, should choose that, for the more
voluptuous dominion. Nor that any present Rabbis of the function in our
Nation, should not, when time served, be won, to change this province, for any
other, tendered to them, by the highest bounty.

Fronti nulla fides. Quis enim non vicus abundat
Tristibus obscaenis? Castigas turpia, cum sis
Inter Socraticos notissima fossa Cynoedos.
And indeed if there were not some such thing, and that this at the root, how
should we meet still with such doings as we do almost in all Schools? How could
men, who have the face of gravity and discretion, be so highly, and so readily
offended at all turns with innocent Children, as they make themselves to be?
What think you? when a Boy shall be hoysed perhaps at first for the missing of
a word, and then be held on in the asking more questions (which fear alone
shall disable him presently to answer) until he receive so many stripes, or so
grievous ones, if fewer, as the Rogue who is whipped for petty-larceny, comes off
very gently many times in comparison of this Lad; Who can think, if the
punishment were not suffered to be on those parts, that it were like to be so
much? The blood which followed any where else, could not but make the bowels
yearn, and the hands relent, when the Child is so little, and the fault less.
The blows could neither be so frequent or so sore, if compassion were not
choked with something else. For this is the misery and plague above all, that
when those appetites, which are natural, have their end, and receive a
completion and redress in the attaining of that end, the appetite which is
unnatural, is infinite, and it is a thing the thoughts whereof is intolerable
to us, that our sufferings and smart must increase according to the ebb and
flowing of those desires, which have no current this way in nature to
satisfaction and a surcease. Indeed if there be need for us to be stricken, for
the ease and impatience of the Master, without any profit to us, let them not
be the blows of a premeditated villainy, but of his present wrath, such as a
blow upon the shoulders, or a flirt on the ear sometimes may be; we shall
acknowledge it but a part of due humility, and gratitude to bear with him, in
recompense of his bearing so much with us: But if there be some other incentive
to our beating, more insatiable then that of anger in the case, we cannot but
think it high time that the matter be looked into a little better then has
been hitherto, whether indeed it be any longer to be endured in the Nation. We
shall be sorry heartily, if no reward but this can be sufficient to hold the
Able to this employment, yet must not any be so gratified, nor Learning it self
be rated at the price of what is wicked. Dissoluti est hominis (says one of
the Fathers) in rebus seriis, voluptatem quaerere.

It is not unknown how the Jesuits govern: their Schools beyond the Seas, nor
what they have delivered some of them on this matter in their cases of
Conscience; Neither would it be any dishonor to us to change our customs for
the better, though we borrowed them of other Countries. It cannot therefore but
be a wonder to us that ever we should have Parliaments in England, wherein are
so many Gentlemen of excellent parts, and ingenuous reflections, and who some
of them are not so old as to forget what was unhandsome, and yet we never hear
of something tendered for the regulation of Schools, and what is practiced
there. Is it because you can indeed remember no stories? Or, that the
impressions do yet last, that you must not tell tales from thence? And why must
we tell no tales of our Master or Dame? If there were no consciousness of what
is ugly in the fact, what need of this privacy? Why is the Boy or Girl retired
from their fellows, and why so long a preachment then made over the Bare in a
Corner? The end of virtuous punishment is for example, and such symptoms as
these do inform us, who indeed do most need to be amended, the Punisher or the
Punished, the Punished or the punishment it self, which will be found the
greatest delinquent. It may be said, There is a necessity of some castigation
sometimes upon some occasion, and this is most safe, or least dangerous, that
Children receive no hurt by it, and therefore is chosen and used. But this is
but one thing well considered, and those that look but on one thing in their
deliberation upon what is to be done, are easily misled into a wrong or shallow
determination. There is more then this one thing in so momentous a matter, as
the institution of Youth, to come under consideration. You may easily provide
for our security, that no bones be broken, and yet without the neglect of
honesty and virtue.

In truth, it is a Question rather worthy the most mature deliberation, whether
Children should ever be beaten at all about their Books. That chastizement is
fit for this Age upon desert, we deny not, and the holy Scripture asserts: But
as that is a chastizement which is meet, so is it we suppose to be for sin, or
some moral fault. The understanding will never be enlightened, the memory
healed, or the invention quickened by stripes upon the flesh. There are many
dulled, we are sure; many discouraged, and some that have been undon by this
means. Quintilian, that most famous Institutor of Youth, though he would have
Lads brought up hard, to be able to endure any thing, as the lying on boards,
eating the coursest fare, and the like, yet is herein express; Coedi vero
discentes quamquam receptum sit, and Chrysippus non improbet minime vellem. But
by no means (says he) would I have those that learn, to be beaten,
notwithstanding it is so commonly used. There are these Reasons he renders; In
the first place, It is a servile thing that becomes only slaves or bruits, and
so unworthy of any that are freeborn, and much less such who are the Sons of
Gentlemen and Nobles. Besides that, if you change the consideration of the Age,
for the most part it is most manifest injury and wrong. In the next place, If
there be any whose disposition is so illiberal, as that it will not be amended
by reproof and ingenuous notices, it is to be expected it should become but the
worse for blows, and grow the more obdurate. In the third place, There will be
no need of castigation, if the Master be so diligent as he ought, to see the
task which he sets to be done, by his own sedulity and inspection. Nunc fere
negligentia paedagogorum sic emendari videtur, ut pueri non facere quae recta
sunt cogantur, sed cur non fecerint puniantur. That is, The matter now adays
is ordinarily so carried, the Boy is beaten to make amends for his Masters
carelessness and sloth. Add unto this, that there is many times a hared brain, a
stammering tongue, or the like very grievous ill habit or gesture introduced
through terror; or there may be, at least, according to this same Author, some
deformed passages, or uncouth words, which do fall from, or happen to those
that are beating, which leave such impressions of shame and surprise on the
more ingenuous and bashful, that no advantage which can be obtained by any
Master, is able to recompense the mischief already suffered, if it be only in
the debasing the Spirit, and rendering themselves vile in their own
imaginations. Above all, in the last place, he has these words; Jam si minor in
deligendis custodum and Praeceptorum moribus fuit cura, pudet dicere in quae
probra nefandi homines isto coedendi jure abutantur. Non morabar in part hac,
nimium est quod intelligitur. We will not English this last of his Reasons,
because it is the very fore upon which we touch, and the rise of this Address;
only thus far, It is too much already (says he) which is understood.

The habitation of the Muses are fancied by the Poets to be Amoena Loca,
pleasant Groves, delightful Hills, crystal Fountains, where Joy, and
Gladness, and the Graces dwell. And what is it these signify? Has their
Pernassus, and such fictions, no meaning? Is it the steep toil only Learning
requires in those that will climb to it, or the refreshing prospect they intend
by it to entice us up? What is it the Ancients here would represent? Are their
high Hills nothing indeed but Difficulty, and their Groves Birch? Is Helicon
the Boys Tears, and Pegasus the blind Horse? Alas, that when we should be
invited to Learning, as to a Banquet, a pleasant Feast, and the desire of our
Souls, it is presented to us never but in torment and dread! Alas, that the
Muses should be put thus in the shape of Erinnis, and Thalia's Lute-strings be
made to yield no Sounds but Screeches and Cries? That when we go to School, we
should be driving to the Shambles; when we go to our Books, we should be
carrying unto pains. Et ubi tor quentur, jam non membra, sed vulnera, in
Cyprians expression. Alas! how wide must the World needs be here, to think that
Children, in their tender Nature, should be made to love that (and who would
not have Children love their Books?) which is never offered them but with hate?
You should imbitter to us our pleasure, and our sin that will do us hurt; but
you should sugar to us our learning, which is for our good. The Nurse should
never put Wormwood on that Breast from which she would not have the Child to be
weaned. We read of Marcus Portius, in the Roman Story, who established a Law,
That no Roman Citizen should be beaten by the Magistrate with Rods. He should
be a Tribune of the People by our Vote, that could prefer a Lex Porcia in our
Schools, and some Workhouses, where poor Children are employed, in this
Nation. If Solomon will have the Boys beaten, and the Maids beaten, let it be
with a Wand, or such a way as becomes the Virtuous, as well as the Severe. If
Solomon will name a Rod too, it is a Rod for the Back: Let it be a chaste
stripping; but what need is there for making the Child good, to have the Master
made naught? Solomon's Corrections are spoken to Parents, which he advises too
toward Children for their faults, and not Masters for their Books; Furthermore
we have bad Parents (says the Apostle) that have chastned us after their own
pleasure; signifying, that we are yet to be in subjection as to them; but if we
have Masters that do so, it is a thing to be abhorred, seeing God does not, and
the Good consequently should not, correct any but only, for their profit.
Especially seeing moreover, Quod aetatem infirmam and injuriae obnoxiam (as the
aforesaid Quintilian farther has it) nemini debet nimium licere.

It is a thing here orderly worth the enquiry, what that power the Master has
over his Scholars is, and whence he has it? All power we must know is either
natural, or derived. The power of the Master is not of Nature; For what has
one man of himself to do with the Child of another? The power which is derived,
is either Supreme, or Subordinate. The Supreme Authority, is that which lies in
the chief Magistrate, whether it be derived to him immediately from God, as in
this state; or by consent of the people, as in some others. The Subordinate
Power, is that which is derived from the Supreme to the inferior Officers, who
act in his Name, and from his Authority. The power of the Master now is no such
power neither, deriving from the Magistrate, or the Laws of the Nation; for he
acts not over the Boys in the Kings Name, as the Justice and the Constable,
and the like Officers do. What then is this adventitious strange power? Why,
this power the Master has over the Scholar, is that right of ruling him, which
is given him by the Father. It is no power therefore Supreme, but Subordinate;
and not natural, but derived from that which is natural; and consequently is no
other, nor no more, or to any other purpose, then what the Parents do allow
him. If a Father therefore shall commit his Child to a School for Learning, but
shall not give the Master leave to strike him, or if he does, yet not use this
sort of coercion upon him for the reasons mentioned, The Master cannot serve
any such Child in this said fashion, but he is unjust; not to say also what is
worse, because he usurps an authority, he has not committed to him, and so is
accountable both before God and Man for such an action. Let not him that is
unjust be unjust still; let not him that is filthy, be still filthy.

Not that we intend by this, to diminish the least tittle of that reverence
which is due to our Masters. For when we derive their Authority from this
Fountain, we do think it a part of the piety we owe to God and our Parents, to
render honor to their Persons, and obedience to their Instructions.

Dii Majorum umbris, tenuem and sine pondere terram,
Spirantesque crocos, and in urna perpetuum ver,
Qui praeceptorem sancti voluere parantis
Esse loco. --
It is our Parents, we know, from whom we derive our being in the World; and it
is our Masters many times to whom we owe our more happy being, in regard of
that shape and fashion wherein they cast us for the serving our Generation, or
living more to purpose in it. There is not therefore any veneration or
gratitude we can pay them, nor any gifts or gratuities according to their
abilities from our Friends, no nor any Revenues that have been bestowed on some
Schools by the pious Erectors of them, which we think too much for the care
and labor of any such men who are but a little faithful in this charge. We
humbly think it were good that the stipends and emoluments of Masters were
augmented. But there is a certain payment which they give, and not receive; a
salacious pay of theirs, which they take of us, and not from us, whereof we
crave an abatement; and about which, as neither worthy nor: innocent, or at
least whether it be so or no, according to the common usage of it, we are
vvilling to come to some account or argument with them.

One Boy has happily a good understanding and no memory; Another has a ready
memory and no judgment; A third has neither memory nor judgment. The Boy
whose memory is quick, looks over his Lesson once or twice, and goes to play;
the other two ply their Book as hard as they can, and are not able to get it.
The Master comes now and puts the Boy who follows his play, to say his Part, he
says it, and so passes: The other two cannot say for their lives, and are
beaten. Here is Nature in these Lads, and no fault punished. If the Boy who has
the memory, had been put on some other task requiring pains and judgment, he
should have suffered, and one of the other escaped. Thus Fortune, not desert,
is encouraged or reproved. And what if the Master, who knows the difference of
their abilities, shall purposely set each of them to such tasks, unto which he
knows their parts most defective; how easy is it for him, as often as he is
willing, to serve himself of any of them? Let us yet press this a little
farther, It is the custom of some Schools, or rather of some Masters, to set
their Boys a Law, That if we miss such a number of words, as suppose just three
words, we must be certain of what follows: And herein must they appear very
righteous men to us, that they impartially execute their own rule, and none be
spared. Now what unreasonable dealings are these with us? For one Boy to answer
but three words in the whole, and miss all the rest, is more then for another
to answer all the rest, and miss but three words. What is it whether a Boy miss
three words, or thirteen? It is his care or negligence, his diligence or
disobedience is to be regarded. It is the Will and Endeavor which alone
renders him culpable or blameless. And what shall we judge then of such School
Edicts as these, but that either the Master is one that follows others in his
Methods without discretion, or that these Rules of such who do invent, or
execute the same, are but fine Devices to give themselves opportunity under the
pretense of justice, (which will go among the Boys) to satisfy those
inclinations, which the tribe of these men, for ought we see generally, (if
they be still suffered) are sure to catch (as fast as we Boys that come but
together, do our itch) of one another.

Uvaque conspecta livorem ducit ab Uva. There are no persons of innocent
apprehensions, who see a Master taken with their Child, as more pretty, sprack,
and ingenuous then others, can but be apt to think, that sure this Master who
so likes that Child, will be Ioth to beat him. But when we that come to School
together, shall see this Lad taken out by his Master, and have about half a
dozen, or half a score lashes given him, by authority of that sentence, Non
castigo to quod odio habeam, sed quod amem, rung in his ear, with repetition of
the Quod amem, at every lash; What shall we think of such liking? When these
lashes farther shall be with a Weapon of that length and sharpness, as when the
Boy is set down, he is made so raw, that he is not able to sit, what shall we
think of these Quod amem's, in the Lashers Mouth? And what then if the reason
be enquired for this, there be nothing found, but only a Head perhaps uncomb'd,
a Band not put on aright, a word or two missing in his Part, a pair of
Stockings down at knees, or a Shoe that has taken dirt. Certainly if this be
the effect of the Masters greater affection, how well were it for any of the
rest (so long as it would but make him thereby, not to endure to meddle with
them) to be rather the Objects of his utter detestation and hate? Here is a
love toward Children, like that indeed of a Canibal toward humane flesh. Here
are Butchers, unto whom our Parents should send their Calves to be flead,
rather then Masters, unto whom they should send their Children to be
instructed, and corrected with moderation. It may be perhaps a lighter matter
in some others of this Robe, who many times have taken up a company of us, as
we do Points, by the dozen, only to make themselves merry, to divert their
thoughts, or catch them a heat; and so long as they do it but gently and
indifferently, and with innocence otherwise, we may be apt to think little of
it, when there is a difference to be made as to the affection and execution of
what kind it comes. It may be only of laughter, or of wrath, or of something
else. For what is that concupiscence in humane nature, which is depraved and
foul? What that vile thing (if we may call Evil, Evil, as we do Fire, Fire, in
its own name, when we would get it quenched) which men call Lechery in any, but
an unclean Curiosity, that is, A desire of knowing what is hidden, to wit, the
pleasures, the secrets of another; and so intermedling with those parts which
nature and shame have retired, and should be fore ever kept accordingly, but
that the desperately busy iniquity of man's heart, can leave nothing free from
the contamination of it self with it? And what reason is there then to have
this Discipline of our Schools supervised, that our Correctors, and their
Rules, may be corrected; That our Teachers may be taught to be better. Away
with such doings from among us, which are so vile and brutish! Let the Horses
be slashed with a Whip to be learned to draw; Let the Dogs be beaten with your
Cudgel, to teach them to crouch, or lie down: But let Children be instructed in
learning of their Books, by those means as are suitable to Creatures endued
with understanding; and those Seeds of Reason as are sprouting out, and ought
to be suckled with a tender cultivation. It is a preposterous course doubtless,
that Children should be, as it were, supposed all born mad, and so sent to
School only as to Bedlam, to be made sober by cruel handling; Minimum sane
libere, istum decet, cui tantum licet.

As for the training up of Children to virtue and good literature; it is beyond
doubt a noble thing in its own nature, and might be an employment of grandeur,
for the most nobly born and qualified, the most generous minds, and bravest
spirits; and none else should be admitted to so excellent a service for the
Commonwealth, were it not for these barbarous customs, as being received of
some degenerate Nations (in so filly methods of teaching, and this sordid way
of punishing) have dishonored that Profession, and rendered the Schoolmaster
by so filthy a practice (unto which yet use does ordinarily reconcile him) an
office no more hallowed, then that of the Roman Lictor, or Beadle in other
Nations. Not but there have been some Masters of that ingenuity and modesty, as
they could never once find in their hearts to use this sort of punishment to
any that ever they brought up; Nor but there are some others who have taken up
the common usage without reflection, and their hearts cannot reproach them, that
they have ever exercised it from any instigation whereof they should be
ashamed, but only out of Righteousness for their Scholars sake altogether, in
the amendment of their manners, or quickening them in their Books. These are
such, cujus praecordia ex meliore luto finxit Titan, and consequently such, as
we have too much reason and experience to convince us, they are not the most.
We dare not condemn a whole Generation of men that have used this practice, but
we must condemn the practice, because if all be not, so many are, abused with
it. And in regard that young men ordinarily, who are in the heat of their
blood, as of their parts (which if it were not for this dark allowance, and the
effects of it, were for the fleshing them in the Greek and Latin a few years, a
thing most advisable) are received to the office; We cannot but believe it a
dangerous permission, which brings men's corruption, and temptation so
unheedfully together; knowing too sensibly, how some persons corruption leads
them into temptation, and some persons temptation into corruption.

-- Ita ingenium est omnium
Hominum, a labor proclive ad libidinem.
It is indeed but a folly and presumption for men to take on them an office,
which they have not ability to manage. That employment will be unprofitable,
those men uneasy. There are several abilities must go to make a man a perfect
faculty to breed up Scholars; among the which, these two are the chiefest, a
temperate Mind, and unwearied Diligence. That person, who by sweetness and
gentleness, or by the gravity of his deportment and countenance; or else by
prudence and contrivance, is not able to awe and keep a company of Youth in
obedience, without violence and stripes, should judge himself no more fit for
that Function, then if he had no skill in the Latin and Greek; and such should
never be admitted to this charge, by those who have the nomination or election.
For when we would have it looked upon as a dignity (which was now said) or a
matter of honor, (as really it is) like the being sent into a Province, for a
man to be esteemed so prudent, so virtuous, so worthy as to be chosen Prefect
of the Children of a Town, in his admittance into a public School, and made
Ruler over a hundred, over fifties, and over tens; We cannot but desire, that
thing may be suffered no longer, which does bring it in dishonor; And that, as
there may be an Inscription now set up to that Person (like to the (...) in
Rome) who has but discharged this Office virtuously; so may it be as rare a
thing for the future, to find any that do otherwise, or whose Acts are ever any
more unbecoming ingenuity and learning.

Our Schools, we know in the Latin, are called Ludi, Ludi Literarii, and our
Masters, Ludi Magistri. From hence we may take the indication, that the
erudition of Children, among the wiser Ancients, was thought best to be carried
on in the way of Sport and Exercise. As the young men went to their Games to
get the Garland in the exercise of their strength, the Children were to go to
their Books to exercise their wits. There would be no need of the Parents
solicitude, or the Masters str pes, to bring the Child to his learning; if the
Methods of it were cast into that mould, as should make all their Lessons
appear only as so many Plays and Recreations, from which they should be kept
oftentimes as by the reins, to raise their minds into more earnestness, rather
then be spurred, as we are commonly, and galled only to the same. Let the Boys
be set a running, as it were, with one another, in getting without Book; Let
them be set a wrestling, in Construing and Parsing; Let them in the whole
business of the School, be cheerfully striving with themselves and fellows in
understanding, who shall excel, and wear the Wreath of their Masters
commendation. If any Boy shall be negligent, or do unworthily, le him be turned
out of the School to Trap in the Fields, or to Nine-pins in the Streets,
amongst those rude and illiterate Boys who are no Scholars; being made to
account so heavily of that, as to know his total exclusion, were indeed the
extremest punishment. But if any are diligent, and deserve encouragement, let
them not only be admitted to higher degrees of exercise, but to some more
intimate converse of their Master in reading of History, or other delightful
studies; which he should so illustrate and apply, as may both tend to their
progress in knowledge, and fashioning their spirits to honor and virtue. It is
not the Boys warm Bed, or Breakfast, not the necessaries of his Meat and Drink,
no not his Balls and Boundingstones, his Top and his Bandy, would be so
delicious to him, as the time he was thus suffered to be with his Master, if
our Schools were but so ordered, as every where they should be, that the
matters there performed, were made to become in effect only the Boys
Olympicks, or so many Games of the Muses, unto which they had recourse for
their delight and glory.

Not that when we write this, it may be ever expected any thing in this World
should immediately be perfect. There will be some Masters, and some Boys bad
enough; and there may be some faults, which not only deserve, but are fit to
receive exemplary Correction. Let that chastisement therefore, which is
tolerated in our Schools, have an ingenuous administration. Let no Child at any
time be punished in the Masters heat or passion; If it be a fault now, it will
be so an hour hence; if it appear not a crime to morrow, it was not so heinous
as he thought it to be yesterday. Let the Boy then undergo a solemn kind of
Judicature; If it were by a form of the same Boys as Assessors together with
their Master, it were but like the Lacedemonian Institution of their Youth,
whereof the chief point lay in this, To enable them to judge aright of the Good
and Evil, or of what was praiseworthy, and what to be condemned, in humane
Conversation. Whatsoever the Criminal can allege for himself, by way of
justification, or extenuation of his Fact, it ought to be heard both with
patience and candor. If his Fault may be forgiven, without prejudice to the
rest by the impunity, it were best: If not, Let the Doublet be plucked off, and
that part which may chastely lie naked, be stripped; Let the number of stripes,
according to the merits of his delinquency, be allotted, and the Boy brought
before the face of his Master for seeing just execution. This is after the
manner of the Hebrew Judgment, The Malefactor was to lie down before the
Judge, and so receive the stripes he appointed. Let one of the vilest Boys
then, he that has behaved himself worst of any that day in the School, be
picked out for Executioner; which may serve for a shame and admonition to him,
as for his fellows suffering. If the Master will do it himself, it shall be
reckoned only to the severity of his virtue; for so long as he may not lay his
stripes any more on those parts which stir his original corruption, and he
stays still the passing of Judgment, till he is calm in the point of
Indignation, there will be no fear any farther of those extremities which have
been used: But we should see how cool these men would become to the Work for
hereafter, unto which they are to be led only by Righteousness, and not by
affection. For if there be not now twenty and twenty faults of ours observed or
made by them, to bring us under their unclean stripes, unto one, that they
would judge then worthy of their just severity in a slow and chaste punishment,
we dare forfeit the benefit of this Petition.

We must confess, we are perhaps too much engaged in our own Cause. We find not
these lines flow from us, neither carelessly, nor very easily, but with
solicitude and much reflection. We know the attempt is singular and momentous.
The issue we know not. The Tempers, Judgments, Affections and Resentments of
People, are various; and many will make a matter of jest, the most but a talk,
of that which others will lay to heart. The Lord Almighty, who knows the
thoughts of all, and their Actions, and what is Good or Evil in the Earth; does
know what need there is of such a Suite. We have many times had our
apprehensions filled with terror, our mouths with crying, and our eyes with
tears for the present smart which has vanished; but the abiding evil upon such
Acts, (or many such) when they are done, and the allowance of the same, does
affect us with apprehensions of another rank. It does afflict us really, that
there should be so much obliquity in humane nature, that is, that there should
be so much corruption as there is, in the World (according to Saint Peter)
through lust. It afflicts us much more, that the seeds of the same corruption
which is practiced in the Earth, should not be unsown in our own hearts. We are
grieved at our very souls, that a thing so holy as the Discipline of Children,
and the Correction of them ought to be, should by any means be liable to abuse,
and much more to be made a procurer to vice. We are grieved yet, that this evil
more particularly, having a root more deep perhaps in the flesh then is seen,
and through the toleration and use, appearing under the show of Good, or
palliated at least so, as to remain undiscerned; it is so hard for any to come
ever to a meet repentance about the same. And that which adds to this, is, That
if some of our more sagacious Friends become sensible of somewhat by our
complaints, and so send for, or go to our Masters to reprove what is amiss;
they are not able to call the thing by its name, but in modesty speaking a
little against their over-rigour, or the like, they leave the beam untouched;
and so the person, for want of plainer rebuke, is but the rather hardened by it;
Which, if the living in the least sin with full consent of will unto death, be
a matter so dangerous as all hold, must be of a consequence no less then
damnable to them, who make it so deplorable to us.

These premises therefore considered, we cannot but make our appeal, in this
sixteenth Century, and seventieth approaching Year of the Christian World,
(seeing it has not been done before) to the Heads of our Nation now Assembled,
and to Caesar, against this Obscaenum triste (if we may use Juvenals
expression) which has been mentioned. That is, We humbly implore the Higher
Powers, that this impure practice, which has continued in our Schools
hitherto, without control or detection, (unless what has been private only)
may come under public censure, and consequently prohibition, and
extermination; as a thing, if examined in the source and effects of it, not
only what all know it, Malum triste, but Malum turpe, and an iniquity to be
punished by the Judges. Et fecit Asa quod rectum videbatur in oculis Jehovae,
nam abstulit moritorios e terra, and amovit Deos stercoreos quos fecerant
majores sui.

FINIS.

