NOTES Upon the Lord Bishop of Salisbury's Four late DISCOURSES To the CLERGY
of his Diocese.

PARTICULARLY Upon the Last, relating to the DISSENTERS. In a LETTER to a
Friend.

Right Prelating is busy Laboring, and not Lording,

Bishop Latimer's Sermon of the Plough. Wherefore lift up your Heads, Brethren,
and look about with your Eyes, spy what things are to be Reformd in the Church
of England! Is it so hard, is it so great a matter for you to see many Abuses
in the Clergy, many in the Layety*

His Sermon before the Convocation. LONDON, Printed in Usum Sarum. MDCXCV.

ERRATA.
Page 1. line 2. blot out the, p. 7. l. 17. for acted upon read acted by, p. 31
l. 7. in some of the sheets the words in meter should be put in after psalms.

NOTES, etc.
SIR,
I Thank you for Obliging me with the sight of my Lord Sarum's four late
Discourses to the the Clergy of his Diocese, the last of which your self must
needs own the worst timed, and the worst linkt of any thing in the World.

For what reason his Lordship was pleased to reflect upon the Dissenters as
Separatists at this time of day, when by Act of Parliament they enjoy (though not
Equal Advantages) an Equal Establishment with his own Constitution, I will not
pretend to determine: Nor perhaps can he himself give any better Account of his
tacking a Discourse against them to the rest, than that the same Spirit of
Contention which his Lordship has before now discovered, had in that Moment an
Unconquerable Ascendancy over him.

His Lordship, it must be confessed, writes with one singular Advantage which
the poor Noncons must never expect, he has the Civil Government for his
Security, and free Liberty to vent whatever he pleases; though it is true, He must
have a care how he Misrepresents the Foundations of our Government, his
frequent remembering a Vote of Parliament, and Mr. Johnson's most ingenious
Notes on a Pastoral Letter, with what the Common Hangman was once employed
about in his Lordships Service, will be of admirable Use to him in this Case.
But in Spiritual Matters he may even talk all that is in his Heart, and
whatever else he finds agreeable to his Interest; for being himself a Spiritual
Lord, one of the six and twenty Lights of the Nation, and a chief among the
Guides of the Church, he may hold himself safe from any Contradiction,
especially Now he knows the Press is entirely at the devotion of his own Party,
and they must very much expose themselves who would get in but one Word against
a whole Volume of his Lordships: Though methinks an Ecclesiastical Peer of all
others should be of too generous a Temper, either to call the more Names
because he wears a Protection, or to take any Advantage against his Brother of
lower degree, that mildly jogging him by his Lawn Sleeves, may happen to tell
him, An't please you, my Good Lord, in this thing I humbly conceive you were
not a little overseen.

A great Champion it must be confessed the Prelatical Church has in this
Salisbury Bishop, and no doubt both He and the Cause he pleads will flourish
Eternally, if the Greatness of their Circumstances can but deter all others, as
it does their own Underlings, from questioning their Pastoral Oracles.

What success Our Prelate will have against his other Antagonists, I will not
Divine, but the Dissenters (I make no question) will hold themselves obliged to
him for the Episcopal Confirmation which his weak Management of his own has
given to their Cause, to the Goodness of which this must be imputed, unless
this Right Reverend Author has incurred the same Unhappy Fate from which the
great Livy himself was not wholly exempt, that the Last part of his Works
should be a sufficient Disgrace to all the rest.

These four Discourses coming out together in a body, afford us a Notable
Specimen of his Lordships Abilities; but the Learned World has been long
acquainted with his many Productions, and has already given them an Universal
Applause; yet I am apt to believe they have not at any time seen a more
pregnant Instance of his Cunning and Dexterity than appears in his uniting
these last Compositions into one Volume, where most Invidiously, and with a
strange kind of Impartiality the Atheist leads the Van, and the Dissenter
brings up the Rear.

It will be no just Cause of Offense (I hope) to this Noble Prelate or his
Party, if in our own Vindication we take the Liberty to requite his Lordships
Kindness with a few just and serious Reflections on each Subject of his several
Discourses; and I shall choose Sir to begin with that against the Atheists!

First then let us Enquire, What is it has First Discourse against Atheism.
given the greatest Occasion to the Rise and Progress of Atheism in the English
Nation? Is it not that Men have made Religion, and
the Sacred Function of the Ministry, truckle to the Gratification of their
Lusts, especially their Avarice, Pride and Sensuality? But a few will be
Convinced that there is any solid Foundation for that Belief, which they see
made use of to such vile and sinister Ends! Many are mistaken, if the
extravagant Grandeur of Prelates, and other Church Dignitaries, has not
exceedingly contributed to diffuse this horrible Contagion.

It would make a Man sick to hear our Prelate declaim against the Poverty of
the Inferior Preface, p. 11.
Clergy, as a Crying Grievance, and a Scorn put upon the Gospel, when those
that enjoy some Thousands a Year (among whom I do not say his Lordship is one)
shall yet behold their Poor Brethren who Minister in Spiritual Preface, p. 11
things, so slenderly supplied in Temporals, that nothing but extreme Necessity
can induce them to serve in such Cures, who are put to wrestle still with the
same Necessity, especially if they have Families that grow upon them.

Nor is it less ridiculous, and Criminal in our Prelate, to tantalize them with
Hopes of Relief by New Methods, whilst the true Cause and Remedy are so
obvious, and yet so much slighted, and in effect renounced. Our Lawmakers (I
am of Opinion) will be so kind, to try how far a more equal partition of the
Ecclesiastical Revenue will go toward the supply of the poor Clergy, before
they lay any more Burdens upon the People on that account.

There will be no want of Atheists so long as Churchmen are thus desperately
enamored of Great Benefices, and so Careless of their Cures; while they heap
one Steeple upon another 'till their Heads grow giddy, and they can scarce look
low enough to Converse with their Inferior Brethren.

They may Preach up Humility and Mortification long enough in their cold,
formal, florid Discourses, before they persuade one Atheist that themselves are
convinced of its Necessity, while they Vye in Fullness and Gaiety not with the
Gentry only, but with the Nobility too.

How should Atheism but thrive in a Land, where Men can Declare, and Swear, and
Preach, ay, and print Dialogues too, for such a kind of Vide Dr. Burnets
Dialogues
Loyalty, as when they are tried they perfectly leave in the lurch, to be
redeemed by those that can find in their Hearts to submit to a suffering State,
which they might avoid at the same Easy but Unconscionable rate as these Men
do.

It cannot but be a mighty strengthening to the Atheistical Party, that some
Men who Preach up Piety, will not endure the strict exemplary Practice of it,
no not in others, whether of their own or a different Communion, much less in
themselves, but make it the subject of scorn and ridicule when they are out of
the Pulpit.

Nor does it want a share in this malignant influence, that there are so many
prints and footsteps yet visible, of those more than Heathenish Barbarities
which have been all along acted upon one sort of Christians upon their
Protestant Dissenting Brethren.

From all this it is undenyably evident, that the Faith, Humility and
Self-denial of the Nonconformists, in parting with their Livings, and casting
themselves entirely upon Providence, their stedfastness in refusing the Oaths
and Subscriptions by them judged unlawful, their Sobriety, and endeavoring to
practice what they have preached to others, has been a standing (not to say the
only) Witness to this Generation, That there is a GOD, and that the Convictions
of his Being and Government lie at the bottom of some Men's Actions.

Secondly, Concerning his Discourse against Second Discourse against Socinians.
the Socinians, give us leave to observe what have been the fruits of the
Church-mens overvaluing the Rational way of Preaching, as if all Points were
capable of being comprehended, and explained by it to a demonstration: It had
been better in this respect, if our Rational Divines had contented themselves
in many Cases with the direct affirmations of the Scriptures, and paid some
more deference to the simple act of believing them; for whilst every thing must
be brought down to our Reason, and levelled to our Capacities, they have
conjured up the Evil Spirit of Socinianism,
which will exercise all their Skill to get down again.

It has been the constant way of this Church to let in the worst of Evils upon
the Witness opposing the Bill of Exclusion.
Nation, (as in the late Reigns Popery, and Socinianism now in this) and when
they have made themselves and others abundance of Labor, and grievously
exposed the Nation, then if they have helped never so little to extinguish the
Fire, which but for themselves had never flamed out, nor consumed so many
worthy E of Essex, Ld. Russel, Col. Sydney, etc.
Patriots, to set up their Crests, and loudly to proclaim their own
Atchievments, and that too when their Victories are not so complete, nor the
Enemy's Defeat so absolute as they themselves do represent.

And here, Sir, by the way, I hope you will not forget to enquire in what
Communion Atheists and Socinians do most abound: And further, I wish all to be
cautioned against Arminianism by the prevalency of Socinian Errors; for those
who magnify the Power of Man's Will, and those that exalt his Understanding
beyond the measures of Truth and Sobriety, are not very far distant from each
other.

Thirdly, As for Popery, we are sorry to see Third Discourse against Papists.
the Church of England so much symbolizing with it, and so hard put to it to
defend its self upon its own bottom; our concern on this account will appear
very just, by making use of the Instance before us: Here is a renowned
Prelatical Bishop discoursing vehemently against Infallibility, and at the same
time pleading with Might and Main for the power of the Church, in imposing
symbolical Ceremonies; but can any thing be more absurd, than that Men who
confess themselves fallible, and prove it too both by Word and Deed, to the
satisfaction of all the World, should obtrude their Sentiments and Composures
(Forsooth) as if they were as Infallible as his Holiness at Rome pretends to
be, or our blessed Savior and his Apostles really were? And is not this done
to the height of Arrogance, whilst all that will be beneficed among them, are
forced indispensably To Declare, Assent and Consent, to all and every thing
contained and prescribed in and by the Book of Common Prayer: And all that have
refused to comply with their Modes (how much soever against their Consciences)
have been Prosecuted with the utmost Severity! How laudable and consistent,
when compared with our Prelatical Platform, is the Popish way of first
asserting the Infallibility of the Church, and then erecting a Court of
Inquisition to defend it?

How will this, or any other Prelate, be able to overthrow our Popish
Adversary's Arguments for Salt, Oil and Spittle, when their Ceremonies stand
upon the very same Foundation? and will they nill they, our Churchmen shall be
constrained to admit them, whenever their Good Lords and Masters shall think
sit to follow the Romish Prelates in the Imposition of them.

The Truth on it is, when the Protestant Prelates have to do with the Papists,
they are forced to the Dissenters Arguments against themselves, by magnifying
the sufficiency of the Scripture Rule; but when the same Men encounter the
Dissenters, because the Scripture-sufficiency is but an unpromising Topic, and
sure enough to fail them, they shift Hands, and wield the same Weapon against
us, which they will by no means allow the Papist, (viz, The Power of the
Church) this is no very good sign of a good and defensible Cause; but who can
blame the Patrons of it, that attends to the Vide p. 286, 287.
Straits and Necessitys to which they are sometime reduced, not excepting the
Bishop of Sarum himself!

And thus by degrees have we traced our Prelate Fourth Discourse against
Dissenters.
down to his fourth Discourse, wherein he is pleased to charge the Dissenters
with the Guilt of a needless Separation, we hope presently to make it appear
that his Lordship is Guilty of a much more needless Clamor; but that we may
the better discover the unreasonableness of that whole Party, which raises such
a dust about Separation, and how unjustly they appropriate to themselves the
Title of the Church of England, we shall in few words attempt an impartial
stating of this Case.

The Church of England is a threadbare term, that may signify many things of a
very different Nature, which therefore ought not to be huddl'd up under one
Name, without some little Explication; and since our Author has not thought it
at all advantageous to his Cause to give us any, for your clearer insight into
the present Controversy you may please, Sir, to take the following just
distinctions.

First, The Church of England may very properly signify that part of the
Catholic Church of Christ which is resident in England.

In this Sense the Church of England is neither one Sect of Christians nor
another among us, but every Man that has given up himself to God in Christ by
Baptism, or has been warrantably devoted by others in his Infancy, and leads a
Christian Life, is truly a Member of it: From the Church of England in this
sense, we neither do nor can separate, but upon such Grounds as would Separate
us from the Body of Christ.

The only Separatist here then is He that is No Christian, and any one with
half an Eye may see to whose share the greatest part of Separatists of this
sort will fall.

Secondly, The Church of England may signify the Christians of England, as
formed into distinct Societies for the Worship of God, and presential Communion
with each other therein.

Now that the Dissenters are formed into such worshipping Bodies, and
consequently not of this sort of Separatists, is more visible then many would
have it, and therefore it is undeniable they are a part of the Church of England
in this Sense also.

The Separatist here then is he only, that though he professes Christianity,
does not ordinarily worship God publicly, or with an Assembly united to that
End, and of this sort of Separatists the Loose Devotees of the Titular* Church
of England are all that we know.

Thirdly, The Church of England may signify the Christian Congregations of
England as united under the same Civil Government, and submitting to it; and
the Separatists from the Church of England in this sense are chiefly the
Jacobites, the generality of whom are so far from belonging to the Dissenters,
that they arrogate to themselves the sole Honor of being the True Sons of the
Church of England.

Yet here indeed it must be confessed, that though the Dissenters have approved
themselves the fastest Friends to the Civil Government, they are really
separated from some very Considerable Advantages, which it has thought fit to
bestow upon the prelatical Party; for, whereas the Dissenting Ministers and
People enjoy no more than the bare Protection of the Civil Magistrate in their
Religious Worship, from the Rage of malignant Persecutors, the Prelatists have
a very considerable part of the profit of the Land assigned them by Law, for
the Maintenance of their Ministry, vastly exceeding in proportion what is left
to the poor Layity: The Clergy having a Tenth of the profits of the Land,
though it is probable they are not one Man to a thousand.

All the Separation then that can be found under this Head, among the
Dissenting Clergy, is, a Separation from Tithes and Maintenance, from
Archbishopricks and Bishoprics, from Deaneries, and Archdeaconeries, from
Prebends and Parsonages, from Masterships and Fellowships, and from other such
fat Benefices.

Our Layity too are chargeable with a Separation of this very kind, they being
separated from all Civil and Military Offices, whether those of Justices or
Mayors, Sheriffs or Recorders, Generals or Admirals, Colonels or Captains, or
whatever other honorable or profitable Posts can be thought upon: The
Sacramental Test having secured all such places to the Members of a distinct
Communion.

This Separation we doubt not but the Conformists (though they are never like
to be guilty of it themselves) will have the Charity to pardon to us, because
it redounds so very much to their own Advantage.

Fourthly, The Church of England may signify the Christian Congregations of
England, thus united under one civil Government, as agreeing or disagreeing
with each other in Doctrine, Church Government, or Worship; for there can be no
Separation (but that which is local and unavoidable to all) farther than they
differ in some one of these.

And here, Sir, you must own (1.) As to Doctrine, Doctrine
that the dissenting Ministers by their Subscriptions plainly show there is no
Separation on their part; and indeed, those that are acquainted with the
preaching and writing on both sides, will easily judge who keep closest to the
doctrinal Articles.

The Separatists from the Church of England then in this sense are on the one
hand the Socinians and Arminians, by what Names or Titles soever dignified or
distinguished, and on the other hand the poor deluded Quakers, and such like
Enthusiasts.

(2.) In the Business of Church Government Church Government.
the Dissenters are not ashamed to own a Separation, rather do they think they
should have great Cause to be ashamed of themselves, and their Churches, if
herein they separated not from the prelatical Party.

The Dissenters say there is a great deal of Reason, why the power of Governing
a Church should be vested in the same person that has and exercises the power
of Teaching, and administering the Sacraments therein; and who can this be but
its proper Pastor? who best knowing the Diseases of the People, is therefore
most fit to apply the Remedy: The power of the Keys is certainly essential to
the Office of a Gospel Minister, and whoever ordains him to that Office, must
of necessity invest him therewith; and though he should express a contrary
Intention, either that Act or the whole Ordination must be a Nullity.

Every Minister of Jesus Christ has Authority from him to govern no less than
to teach, but through the Influence of the Ceremonious Party, the Laws of the
Land have debarred the Pastors of single Congregations in their own Communion
from the Exercise of this Power, and have made them miserable Vassals to the
Hierarchy.

Here then our Separation is from the Prelates as Creatures imposed upon the
Church, and engrossing to themselves that power which belongs to the Pastor of
every Congregation, and which it is naturally impossible duly to apply while it
lodges in so few Hands.

And together with the Prelates, the Dissenters acknowledge a Separation from
Lay-Chancellors, Officials, Surrogates, Proctors, and the whole Gang of
Spiritual Court-men, whom they look upon (as having no Authority from Jesus
Christ but) as the Spawn of a monstrous Prelacy, and the most intolerable
Grievance that the Nation this day groans under.

And as the Dissenters separate from the subjects of this Church Government
(the Prelates, Lay-Chancellors, etc.) so also do they own a Separation from the
Exercise of it, as it proceeds from them, and is managed by them.

Themselves in the Preface to the Commination acknowledge their want of a Godly
Discipline, and since they have the Front to own this Defect, and never had the
Grace to reform it, in all the time that is run out since Edward the sixth's
Reformation to septimo Gulielmi tertij, it would be no less then High Treason
against Jesus Christ, the head of the Church, not to disown and separate so far
at least from this imperfect Church as to supply this want, by a godly
Discipline among our selves.

There is this further Disorder among them which will very much account for our
Separation, that whereas they distrust, and dishonor the Ordinance of
Excommunication, by putting all their Confidence in the carnal Sword, the
Dissenters think the Discipline of Christ sufficient to its own End, without
such a Supplement as quite enervates the Virtue, and obscures the Luster of it.

This constrains them to separate from many of the prelatical Canons,
particularly from those wherein they Excommunicate Persons for saying, That
Vide 4, 5, 7. Canons.
there is any thing in the Government of the Hierarchy, or in their Articles,
or in the Book of the Common Prayer that is repugnant to the Word of God: And
above all, the Dissenters hold themselves bound in Conscience to abominate that
Canon which excommunicates all those Vide 9, 10, 11, Canons.
that shall say such Assemblies as theirs are true Churches.

(3.) As for what relates to Worship, let it Worship.
be considered, that the whole body of the Dissenters Worship is either found
among the Church party, or is generally owned by them as lawful.

Free Prayer, Reading the Scriptures, and Expounding them, Praising God by
singing of Psalms, Celebrating the Sacraments according to Christ's Institution,
with the Gesture which his own Example has warranted, (in all which ways the
Generality of the Dissenters worship the God of their Fathers) are clearly
unexceptionable.

As for the Ceremonies and the new Gestures, and the prescribed Forms, as they
are still used by the prelatical Party, which are the things in this Worship
from which we separate, they are at best questionable, and certainly very far
from being essential to Gospel Worship.

The sum of what has been said on this head is this,

In Doctrine there is no Separation at all on the Dissenters part, rather are
they the truest sticklers for the doctrinal Articles.

In Church Government they are so far from Separating from the true Scriptural
Episcopacy, that in defense of it, they disclaim that Diocesian Prelacy which
is inconsistent with it, and has only made use of its Name to destroy the
thing: It Is (in a word) no more but a noxions antescriptural prelacy from which
the Dissenters separate, together with the pernicious Rabble of its
ecclesiastical Dependants, (and if we'll take their own Words for it,) there is
nothing among them that deserves the Name or bears the Face of true Christian
Discipline.

In Worship our Separation is not from the Object, or Medium, or Matter, or
End, which are professedly the same in both Parties: We worship the same God,
through the same Mediator, in the same Evangelical Duties, in order to the same
great End (the Glory of God; and our own Salvation) we separate only from
certain dubious or sinful Forms and Ceremonies, of humane devising and imposing.

So that here they cannot with the least Truth or Modesty accuse us of any
Separation, seeing our worship is the very same with theirs, unless they are
disposed to speak improperly, and will mean by their Worship the Ceremonies
that clogg it, which upon Occasion they themselves have discarded from being
any parts of their Worship.

This mighty Separation (the Noise of which has for so many years filled the
Pulpits, and which the Prelate of Salsbury is so fond of buzzing afresh into
his Clergies Ears) being thus dwindl'd into a Separation from nothing in the
World but from humane Forms, from certain devised Rites and Modes of no value,
from usurpation and Church-Tyranny, give me leave, Sir, to enquire how the
cause of the Separation (as our Prelate phrases it) does reflect upon the
Prelatists themselves.

And First, They are the Authors of that Separation, Vide Troubles of
Francksort.
be it more or less, which they condemn in us, it is most notorious that
themselves both began and continue it, and theirs it must be more than ours,
because it is not in our power to change our Sentiments about the things
imposed, but it is evidently in their Power to forbear the imposing of them,
which they may well afford to do, as being (according to their own Confession)
no matters of Necessity or good Importance.

We do not desire to ravish their Ceremonies etc. from them, (not we truly,
even let those that are fond of 'em keep 'em all to themselves, with all our
Hearts,) we only wish to enjoy our own Christian Liberty, either in joint local
Communion with them, or in distinct Assemblies, according to our present
Posture, without being persecuted as the vilest of Men, or (if such a Favor
could be granted) without being scandalized with the odious and unjust Titles
of Schismatics or Separatists by any English or Scotch Prelatists, whenever
the Testy fit takes 'em.

Secondly, They are Guilty of a Separation peculiar to themselves, of a very
high Nature, and of a Mischievous Tendency: Some are so steeled with Hellish
Impudence as to deny Our Ministry and Sacraments; and others there are who
refuse to join with us Occasionally, when it might be done without slighting
their own Church Order. If any be so wise and charitable to desire the Liberty
of Testifying their Agreement with the Dissenters in all that is of absolute
Necessity to Salvation, by joining with them Occasionally in their public
Worship, it is great Odds but he loses their Favor as much as if he quite
relinquisht their
Party; such irreconcilable Enemies are some Men to Union, while they would be
thought the great Promoters of it: Certainly the Union of which These are
ambitious is plainly, that all Men, yea, even the Ark of God its self should
bow to the Dagons of their own setting up.

Thirdly, The Prelatists are full of Schisms and Separations among themselves:
Let them never boast either of their Unity or Uniformity, unless instead of all
their Jarring Discords there were a more Harmonious Consent in their own
Worship.

And here, Sir, I shall take the Liberty of diverting you with two or three
Instances of their Good Agreement, which are the more remarkable, as being
peculiar to the prelatical Constitution, and which therefore cannot be
recriminated upon the Dissenters, in Defense of whose minuter Differences it
may be said, that they are the less to be Condemned, for that they were never
imposed as absolutely necessary, nor have the Dissenters ever had the Impudence
to pretend to that Unity and Uniformity which these men make so much their
Boast, with what Reason or Justice
let the following Instances of their own particular Dissentions determine.

Some bow at the Name of Jesus, while others of the same Communion pay no more
Reverence to that than to the Name of Christ.

Some bow to the East or Altar, (which you will,) while others that would be
thought as good Churchmen, condemn that Practice as superstitious.

Some use the Lords Prayer kneeling, others pay no more respect to that than to
any other Prayers.

Some are very clamorous in their Responds, others there are more modest, and a
less noisy sort still content themselves with an Amen only at the End.

Some only say over their Prayers, while a more merry sort sing them out; nay,
there are not wanting some Jovial Sparks, that Cant out their very Creed.

Some preach in the Surplice, while most pull it over their own Ears before
they go into the Pulpit.

Some make Prayers in the Pulpit after the Liturgy's over, others are only pray
wee's, that bid Prayer.

Some read the Service in the Desk, while others go with a part of it to the
Communion Table.

The Communion Table in some Churches is railed about, in many it is even left
as open as any other part of the Church.

In some Topping Churches you shall see huge unlighted Candles, (for what use
no Body alive can tell, but) the meaner Churches are forced to shift without
them.

Some are for a Consort of Music, others only for Organs, some dislike both,
and others can get neither.

And here, Sir, by the way, it is worth your while to observe, that among the
Dissenters, the poor and rich Congregations, the larger and the lesser, worship
God in the same innocent unceremonious manner; whereas in the prelatical Church
the rich Congregations worship with abundance of Pomp, while the Poverty of
others obliges them to a like simplicity with the Dissenters.

So that a Church of England Courtier is one sort of a Worshipper, a C. of E.
Cathedralist of another kind, a C. of E. Citizen yet less theatrical, and a C.
of E. Peasant of a sort by himself.

In a word, this Diversity of Worship is so very considerable, and makes these
pretended Uniformity Men look so little like* Members of one and the same
Church, that I am very confident, a perfect stranger to them all, at one time
visiting the Royal Chapel at high Devotion, and by and by looking into
Westminster-Abbey, and anon tracing to St. Lawrence's in the City, and shortly
after traveling to some homely Country Church, and strictly observing all
their various ways of Worshipping, would be ready to swear, that these men
never had an Act of Uniformity read among 'em, but were each of them a much
more distinct sort of Worshippers, and less of a piece than the Dissenters are
with the last mentioned, and honestest sort among themselves.

From all this we may naturally infer, that either the several Formalities
instanced in, which are so much magnified by one Party, and neglected by
another of the same Communion, do appertain to the prelatical Church, or they
do not; if they do, those separate from it that use them not, if they do not
belong to it, those are Separatists that use them; this however is certain, as
they differ more or less in these things, so far they separate each from other.

If the Church Guides have only recommended these things without enjoining
them, and have left them to be observed or omitted, as best agrees with the
Judgments and Consciences of others: Why might not the same Course be taken
with all the other Ceremonies? Why is not the Gesture at the Supper, why is not
the Cross in Baptism, why are not the Surplice and other Vestments, and many
things of the like nature, left in their own Indifferency, to be embraced or
rejected as every one is determined in his own Mind?

If so considerable a Diversity may consist with
Uniformity, and is actually found in the prelatical Church, why might not this
be allowed, in Order to so great a Benefit to the Church, as the Union of the
two great parties would be?

But besides, what has been already said of their Discord, I dare be so bold
to affirm, that abundance who ordinarily join in local Communion with the
Prelatists, do mentally and really separate more from them than many others of
a distinct Communion.

So do all those, both Ministers and People, that pervert the doctrinal
Articles, and hold Opinions inconsistent with the most natural and genuine
meaning of them.

They are in the same Predicament who lead a Vicious Course of Life; for, as
the former have separated from the Truth which the Church does profess, so have
these from that Purity which it declares necessary to Salvation.

A Dissenter that is sound in all the Articles of Faith, and orders his
Conversation accordingly, is
incomparably more of the Church of England than the most exquisite Formalist,
that has learnt all his Gates and his Postures, but is neither sound in his
Head nor in his Heart.

The one separates only from some little particularities that are against his
Conscience, and the other from that which is vital and essential both to a
Christian and a Church, and which his own Conscience, and the Scripture, and
the Consent of all Christians urge upon him as indispensably necessary.

Nay, so Obnoxious is the Prelatical Church on the account of Separation, that
great Numbers of those who join with them, have as mean an Opinion of their
Ceremonies, and in their Judgments and Affections separate as much from them as
the Dissenters, having nothing that engages 'em to an Observation of them, but
a bare Establishment by the Civil Magistrate, whose Authority in this Case has
been rejected by many very great Men: But a legal Establishment is a formal
Word that enchants abundance, and it is enough for these that somewhere or other
they have met with some word that gives 'em a little Liberty in their own Minds
to communicate with the Church: And whilst with very hard shifts this sort of
Churchmen have made themselves judge it barely lawful to abide in that
Communion, they are loath to leave the Sun-side of the Bank; little thinking in
the mean time, that to join with a Church less pure and edifying, when a better
may be had, (though with Reproach) is to prefer carnal policy before christian
Wisdom, Pollution to Purity and Peace with men to Peace with God and our Souls
salvation.

But lest it should be objected, that these are but Trimmers, or half
Churchemen at best, let me observe to you, Sir, that on the other hand there
are very many who have the Honor to be of the high Church (as they themselves
phrase it) who do yet very substantially separate from the main body.

Among these we will first rank the Jacobites, who have private Assemblies and
Ministers (if not Prelates) of their own, and who perhaps can be content to
wave the Consecration of places, as the Dissenters have done before them:
Matters are now come to that pass even among high Churchmen themselves, that
the voice is lo here is the Church in one man's mouth! and lo there in another!
in the Judgment of these Churchmen the far greater number of the prelatical
Church have deserted its Principles, and have lost the great Characteristick of
a true Church of England Man, (viz.) Passive Obedience Loyalty to a jure divino
Succession; upon which verry account it is, that the abdicated Prelate of Bath
and Wells has scattered his Pastoral Letters against holding Communion with
that part of the Church which have taken the Oaths to the present Government.
'Twould do well if his Brother of Sarum and he could concert this affair, at
least we desire that our Prelate (before he addresses any more discourses
against the Dissenters) would free himself and his party from that Guilt of a
sinful separation which the Jacobite Sons of the Church are daily reflecting
upon them.

But besides these high Church Separatists, there are not wanting a
considerable Number of another sort, who would willingly exclude some of those
Offices which themselves and their Congregations statedly perform: How glad
would many of this strain be to have conceived Prayer before Sermon, and
singing of Psalms totally suppressed? but they know well enough, should not
these be parts of their Service, great Numbers would soon desert 'em: Though how
they can reconcile this kind of Prayer, and Singing, with
their own solemn Promise to use the Liturgy, and no other Form, I leave to
their own Consciences to determine!

Nay, it is further considerable, that where they are agreed to practice alike,
it is upon such very different Principles, and so destructive of each other,
that from hence it is notoriously evident, how powerful a worldly Interest is to
make contrary Principles sweetly conspire to its own support.

Let the several opposite Principles upon which the Hierarchy is built be our
Instance, the poor simple vulgar, and many of a better sort that would be
thought Champions for the Church, take it for granted, that all the Learned Men
on their side do firmly believe our English Episcopacy to be Jure Divino, and
in this they think them most unanimous: But (alas!) they little imagine how
very differently and inconsistently sometimes their great Doctors, and those
that wear Lawn Sleeves all at once, shall argue in its defense.

Give me leave, Sir, to name two or three several Opinions on this very Head:

(1.) SOME Churchmen tell us, that a Bishop and Dr. Hammond etc.
a Presbiter were all one in the Scripture-times, and that the Bishops
afterward made the Distinct order of Presbiters or Priests, as they are now
called.

This (I humbly conceive) you will say was a great piece of Boldness, and
certainly it can be called no less, for any Men to make a New subordinate
Office in the Church without Authority from the Great Bishop of our Souls, the
Lord JESUS CHRIST.

(2.) OTHERS of the same Church, (and those the most before Laud's time,) used
to say, that by Divine Institution there were no Bishops over Presbiters, but
Prebiters to avoid Divisions set up one among themselves above the rest, and
gave him the Title of Bishop, by way of eminency.

But this sort of Episcopacy is a little too low and mean for our modern
Prelates to content themselves with.

(3.) MANY of this high Church think that Diocesan Mr. Dodwell, etc.
Episcopacy is jure divino, and that an uninterrupted Succession of such
Bishops is absolutely necessary to the being of a Church, and to the Validity
of every Ministers Ordination: TO these I might add, no small names among them
who differ from Bps. Gunning, Bramhal, etc.
their Brethren in this, that they would have the Universal Church governed by
a College of Bishops (by Letters Missive or in Council) and the Pope as prime
Patriarch to be the Principium Unitatis. Are not these very hopeful Churchmen
think you? and don't they put us in the ready way to Catholic Unity? Roman
Catholic I mean?

(4.) THERE are yet OTHERS of this very Dr. Stillingfleet, etc.
Church who think that there is not any particular form of Church Government of
divine Institution, but that in the Communion or Subordination of Churches we
can only follow the general Rules of Scripture, and the common Principles that
belong to the Conservation of Societies. This Sort of all others contributes
most effectually
to the destruction of that common conceit, that our Diocesan Episcopacy is of
divine Right: And of these some ascribe more to the power of Magistrates in
this point, and some more to the Agreement of Churches among themselves:

Yet all these must and do subscribe (but God knows how!) to one and the same
Position,
that it is evident to all that have diligently read the Scriptures, and the
Ancient Fathers, that Bishops, Priests, and Deacons have been three distinct
Offices, ever since the Apostles Times.

I would to God the whole Levitical Tribe of this divided Communion, would
seriously lay to heart this one thing.

But at present I spare our Prelate any further Trouble of this kind, and the
rather because I am confident by this time you are fully convinced, and will
with me readily conclude, That this goodly Church of England, (which
notwithstanding all its Boasts of Unity and Uniformity, does next to the
Popish, abound with the most Schisms and Separations of any in the world) is
the least qualified, and has the poorest Title of any that ever pretended to be
the Standard, and Center of Union to all other Churches whatsoever.

And in this Faith I subscribe my self

SIR, Yours, etc.

FINIS.

