THE GREAT HONOR AND ADVANTAGE OF THE East India TRADE TO THE KINGDOM,
Asserted.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Speed at the Three Crowns near the Royal Exchange
in Cornhill, 1697.

TO THE Honorable the Governor, to the Right Worshipful the Deputy Governor,
and to the Worshipful the Committee of the Honorable the East India Company.
May it please your Honor, etc.
HAving upon the Revival of the mistaken Clamours against the East India
Commerce, digested my Thoughts upon the Matter into the following method, I
have consented to make them Public, if perhaps they may be useful to Rectify
the Misapprehensions of some People; and as the unbias'd search after Truth,
will, I hope, excuse me to your Adversaries, so I persuade my self, the
appearance of that Truth will Apologize for my Presumption in putting it under
your Honors Favor and Protection, which if it may obtain, as it will be a
sufficient Guard to this Treatise, so it will be an Abundant Recompense to its
Author,

Who is your Honors, etc. most Humble Servant, J. C.

THE GREAT Honor and Advantage OF THE East India TRADE, etc.
IT cannot but seem something strange that it should be thought necessary in
this Age of ours, that pretends to see so much further than their Ancestors:
for a Man to give himself any trouble to Oppose an Assertion, which in the
mildest Construction, cannot pass for less than a Paradox. But since it has
been long ago Remarked, That there is scarce an Opinion so unreasonable, but
has been defended by some Philosopher or other; It may appear the less
wonderful, that there are still People to be found, no Philosophers indeed, who
engage themselves to maintain the most Palpable Contradiction, and such a Task
in my Opinion, have they undertaken, who would persuade the World, that the
East India Trade is Prejudicial to the welfare of the Nation.

A Trading Genius has always been found the most effectual Means to Enrich a
People, preferable to all other ways, because wherever it is seen, it never
fails to settle the most lasting Marks of its Advantages. This is so very
obvious, and the Example of it so Notorious, that it would be a perfect
superfluity to offer any thing for its Confirmation; The prodigious Rise of a
People our near Neighbors by this, from a very small Beginning, is an
undeniable Proof of its almost Miraculous Power; and here at Home likewise it
cannot be denied, That our Commerce and our Riches have both increased together.

This has been the great Engine that has wrought us into that Fund of Wealth,
which served not only to Enrich us in Peace, but has enabled us to defend our
selves thus long, at so great Expense against the Invasion of a most Powerful
Enemy, toward which Extraordinary Service, I think it need not be doubted, but
the East India Trade has contributed, in proportion, as much, if not more, than
any other.

The enlarging of our Commerce, and the improvement of Navigation, were the
chief Reasons of its first Establishment by that Great and Wise Princess Queen
Elizabeth, which it has apparently effected in both, by Employing and
Encouraging the Building of some of the best Ships in the World, and by
bringing such store of Useful and Necessary Commodities, as make us able to
furnish those very Countries in Europe, from whence had they been left sole
Masters of the Trade, we must have been contented to have received them, and
should have received, 'em at second hand.

Besides the Example of the Dutch, who are so sensible of the Benefit of this
Merchandise, that I am persuaded they would not Exchange their Intrest in it,
for the best Jewel in the English Crown. Methinks the late extraordinary
endeavors of our Scotch Friends, who are generally esteemed wise enough for
themselves, to establish a Commerce thither, should make our Opposers of this
Trade consider, whether it is a thing so damageable as they say it is. No Man
Courts a Mischief, was the entertaining of this Trade to India, so pernicious
as these mistaken People would persuade us; I dare Answer for them, they would
be so far from striving for a share in it; that they would not give so much as
Thanks for the whole.

After all, it is very manifest, that not only the Dutch are, and the Scotch
promise themselves to be great Gainers by this Traffic; but that we our selves
have likewise reaped considerable Profit from it to. The continuance of the
Company; the Advance of their Actions to treble their first Value, not long
before the breaking forth of the Troubles in India, together with the goodness
of their Credit, apparent by their borrowing what Sum they pleased, at 4 per
Cent, when the general and fixed Rate was six, were all indisputable Evidences
at least of their thriving; and if the Qualities of the Goods they brought are
duly considered, their usefulness, not only here at home, but also the great
Advantage they bring us by a second Transportation: It must be concluded that
the Nation was so far from loosing, that they brought a mighty Improvement
along with 'em.

It Is true indeed, if we were obliged to take the Report of this Affair from
some People, one would imagine this Trade to be not only unprofitable, but
rediculous, and that we were as foolish and extravagant in our Traffic with
these Indians, as those other are said to be with us, who give us Gold, etc.
for Toys and Trifles: First, they take it for granted that we carry thither
nothing but Money. And what do we receive in return? Why, nothing but China
Beads, China Pictures and Monkey-fac'd Babies, as one lately in Print sadly
complains against them. These are the Rare Things, say they, that are so far
fetched and bought so dear; And truly if this be the Case, I must confess it is
more than time to look after it. But upon further Examination, I question not
but it will appear to be quite otherwise.

For the more effectually carrying on of the Trade to those Parts, it has been
found absolutely necessary to Export thither, considerable Sums in Specie,
beside quantities to a great value of our Native Product: But if the Account
this Money turns to, be well reflected on, it will appear that we are no loosers
by the Bargain. He that parts with his Money for a Commodity that will yield him
six times as much as it cost him, never reckons himself any thing the Poorer,
tho at the present he does lay out the Money: And this is the very Case of the
East India Traders, who tho they do Export some Money, the Commodities they
bring for it, effectually Answer six times the Value of the prime Cost, when
they are brought hither.

I am not unsensible how much more difficult it is than ordinary at present, to
persuade People, that Money in Specie can be parted with out of the Kingdom, to
any Advantage: Yet, that I may not seem to insinuate only, without affirming
any thing Positive: I will venture to advance this Assertion, That Money
expended in Foreign Trade, and especially in this Trade to India, does not
diminish, but increase our Treasure.

To make short work of this, I might alledg the Examples of Venice, Florence,
Genoa, Holland, etc. to confirm this Position, every one of which freely allow
the Exportation of Money, and have by Experience found it exceeding Profitable
to 'em; but least none of these should be thought parellel to our Case, I shall
further endeavor to evince it by Reason.

And first, it must be acknowledged that there is no way for us to procure
Treasure, but by Foreign Commerce, we having no Mines of Gold or Silver, to any
purpose here in England: Now, as the Use and Want of our Commodities occasions
the Vent of them in Foreign Countries, so from the want and use of theirs on
our part, there arises a mutual Commerce between us; and if we export Goods to
greater value upon our own Ships, than we receive from them, The Overplus at
the End of the Account must be paid us in Money.

The Balance being thus on our side, with respect to the Exportation of our
own Product and Manufacture, if by any means we can increase our Exportation,
the Nation will thereby become proportionably the Richer: And here it will be
necessary to distinguish between the Profit of the Merchant, and the Profit of
the Kingdom; they very often falling under very different considerations; for
Example, suppose 5000 l. sent upon an English Bottom to the East Countries to
Buy Corn, which after some time is carried with much Difficulty and Charge to
be sold again into Italy or elsewhere. Suppose then the Merchant is forced to
sell this Corn for only so much above the prime Cost, as he has expended in
Charges, it may be 2000 l. in this Case, tho the Merchant has gained nothing,
yet it is plain the Kingdom has increased 2000 l. by this Trading, from whence
it follows, that the longer and more remote the Voyage is, the greater the
Profit is to the Kingdom. For if 10000 l. is carried to India to buy Muslins,
the Merchant, upon a Second Transportation, by Reason of the Great Charges he
is at, etc. in so tedious a Voyage, must sell them again for 70000 pounds, to
be but a moderate gainer. Though it is apparent again that the Kingdom has by
this means Sevenfold increased its Treasure.

If it be Objected, That this will be Returned in Goods, and not in Money, as
it was at first Issued out; I Answer, That this is impossible, because seeing
the Balance was on our side, and the Exportation of our Manufactures exceeded
our want and use of Foreign Goods before, it will follow necessarily, that upon
the Increase of our Exportation which we have purchased elsewhere with our
Money, The Balance will be so much the more to our Advantage, and, by
consequence, at the end of the Reckoning, we must receive the Increase in
Treasure.

And this will serve likewise to Answer those who say, That the Dutch, the
Genoese, etc. are obliged to Trade with Money, because they have few
Manufactures of their own to Traffic with. For if the Trade of our
Manufactures be gainful to us, and the Trade with Money be gainful to them,
What should hinder us, that have Means and Opportunity, from joining them, and
making our Profit of them both together?

But it is Objected, That the Importation of East India Goods, does not produce
any of these Good Effects; But hinders the use of our own Manufactures, thereby
depriving a great many People of their Living. In Answer to this, I shall
consider, what are the Goods chiefly brought from India, of what use they are
to us, and what Influence they have upon our home-made Commodities. As to the
First, to avoid being tedious, I shall only name such as usually compose the
greatest and most valuable part of their Cargo's, which are Callicoes, Muslins,
Bengalls, Sattins and Taffities. Pepper, Saltpeter, Raw-silk, besides
China-ware and Diamonds. These are the chief Goods which are brought hither
from India. Let us consider, in the next place, of what use they are to us; On
which occasion I might enlarge upon the Honor it is to the Nation to extend
its Commerce to such a Distant part of the World, etc. but I shall rather choose
to insist upon the real Profit that is gained by them, which in this particular
case is far greater to us, than the Natives from whence we have those
Commodities; for, if they yield us, upon a Second Transportation, but four
times the Price they cost in India, it is evident, we, i. e. the Nation, get
three times as much as they can do who sell them. The Charges of Freight,
Wages, Ensurance, Custom, etc. being only between our selves, without any
lessening of the Treasure of the Nation. Thus by our Industry we enrich our
selves by the Manufactures of others, as much, nay more proportionably than by
our own. Besides the Additional Advantage that we have by the Exportation of
Considerable Quantities of our own Product, such as Cloth, Tin, Lead, etc.
which are carried thither, toward the Purchase of those Beneficial
Commodities; Beneficial indeed, if we consider further that they are in a
manner as good as so much Money in the Stock of the Kingdom, by their aptness
for the Support, Enlarging, and Furnishing the best of our other Trades to
Holland, the East Countries, Turkey, Italy, etc. thereby, as I said before,
increasing our Exportation, and, by consequence, the Honor, Wealth and
Strength of the Kingdom.

The very great Damage we sustained by the Loss of the Ann, the Seymour, and
the other East India Ships, is an undeniable Instance of the Consequence of
that Trade, and the Mischief of its Interruption: for had those Ships come
safe, we should have had Goods enough to have Paid the Army beyond Sea, without
sending a Farthing-worth of Silver out of the Kingdom; and to have sold for
above three times as much Money as was at first sent out to Buy them.

As to the Objection, That the Importation of Made Goods, such as Bengalls,
Taffities, etc. hinder the use and vent of our Manufactures, and thereby puts a
great many out of their way of getting a Living; Let it be Supposed, but not
Granted, that some People are put by their usual course of gaining a Livelihood
by this: yet, if there are a great number of others employed by the same means,
This cannot be a reasonable Objection against it. At this rate the Brewers may
be opposed to the Vintners; the Weavers of Worsted against the Silk Weavers;
Norwich, etc. against Spittlefields: each of which would undoubtedly employ
many more hands, should the other Quit their present Business, and take to
something else.

But indeed the Indian-made Goods have not that troublesome effects, but on the
Contrary, another very convenient and profitable one, which is, that they
hinder the Importation and Consumption of Abundance of such Foreign Goods as we
should else have bought, and were wont to buy at much greater Prices. Muslins
are bought for of the Price of either Chambricks, Lawns, or Hollands.
Callicoe's a great deal cheaper than Scotch-cloaths, or other Linnens;
Indian-Sattins and Damasks, than French, or Halien; and the Taffities have so
great an Advantage of Florence Sarsnets and French Avignions, that they have
caused a general disuse of them throughout the Kingdom.

The India Goods are so different in their qualities from the Product of our
Country, and the main of our Manufacture, that it is absolutely impossible they
should ever do them any Injury, Woolen Clothes, Led, Tin, Iron, Corn, Leather,
the Fishery, etc. will always be as useful, and as vendible in Foreign
Countries, as if we had never so much as heard of the East India's.

But the Made Goods do, it seems, particularly injure the Broad Silk-Weavers,
and put them beside the way of living they were brought up in.

Now, besides what has been said already to this, that supposing this were
true, yet that it could not be esteemed a Public Damage, because if it does
take from one part of the People, it makes sufficient Recompense, by the
Employment it gives to another, much more to the Benefit of the Nation in
General: And it may be remembered likewise, that when this was urged by the
Workers in Worsted, with far greater Reason, a few years ago, as an Argument
against them, they could, by no means, allow it to be a good one.

Besides this, I say, there is to be added, That this Objection is not true in
Fact, as even Experience has testified. For, would the Prejudice these Men have
against the East India Trade suffer them to speak Truth, they would be obliged
to acknowledge, that the late Scarcity, and Dearness of Indian Goods, has been
so far from bringing them any Advantage, that on the contrary, their Business
and Work was never in so low a Condition, as since there has been almost none
at all.

For a Plentiful Importation of these Made Goods is generally one means to
cause a Considerable Diminution in the Price of Raw Silk to the Weaver, which
presently sets him at Work upon several sorts of Silks, so extremely Different
from the Indian, as gives him a sufficient share in the Common Trade. Whereas
the Excessive Dearness of Silk discourageth him, and puts the Buyers upon
seeking for something else, that may supply their use cheaper.

It must be confessed, that these People at present lie under extraordinary
hardship, and it were to be wished, that some Proper Method could be found to
Relieve them. But why must this be attributed to the East India Goods all of a
sudden? Since we all know, that in the Time of their greatest Plenty, as I said
but just now, they were much better employed; than since their greatest
Scarcity. That Consideration alone may go a great way to convince both them and
us, That the Decrease of their Trade is owing to some other Causes, if not
included in the General Decay of the Inland Trade; the Natural and Inevitable
Consequence of the Interruption of the Foreign; and that like all other
Restless People, who don't know where to fix the Reason of their Misery, they
have blindly stumbled upon this, the next in their way, to discharge their
uneasiness upon.

So that upon the Whole it cannot reasonably be thought, that their Mistaken
Prejudices can make any ill Impression upon this part of the Nations Trade: A
Trade, to sum up all, that is accompanied in every Respect, with so many, and
so great Advantages; A Trade, which is such an Addition to our Honor, such an
Improvement to our Navigation and Shipping, such an Enlargement to our
Exportation, and such a Bar to the Consumption of other so much dearer
Foreign Commodities.

In Fine; so every way Fitted to the General Interest and Profit of the NATION,
That I am persuaded, that were it Encouraged, as it might be, it would Equal,
if not Excel, any other Foreign Commerce that is used by this KINGDOM.

FINIS.

