A Supplement, 1689. to a former Treatise, concerning the East India Trade,
Printed 1681.
THAT the foregoing Treatise was not Calculated for the present Conjuncture,
the time when it was Printed, and Published, will sufficiently demonstrate; but
that which is at one time truly writ on any Subject, is of use in all times.

At that time, viz. about 1681. This Company had raised the English Navigation
and Power in India, much beyond what it was in any former Age, as appears
toward the end of the said Treatise: But soon after that destructive Trade of
the English interlopers in India beginning, the Dutch took the advantage of
that Confusion, and those Civil Broils between the English, to surprise
Bantam. Which troubles falling together upon the Company, and soon after a
general failure of Credit in all public Funds, caused very many Adventurers to
sell their Stocks, and was sufficient to have discouraged any Men, not
supported with the inward satisfaction, That it was their Duty toward God and
their Country, courageously to assert and defend (according to their Trust) the
English Dominion and Interest in India, as it was Established in a Joint Stock,
exclusive to all others, which it must ever be, and strengthened with the same
Powers and Authorities, as the Dutch East India Company have from their
Sovereigns, or else it will fall an unretrievable Victim between the Dutch and
French, to the irreparable Loss of England, and consequently the very great
abatement of the value of our English Lands.

These considerations inculcated to the then Committees, (not any private
Interest of their own) engaged their public and well prepared Minds, not to
despair of the good of their Country, but to expose their whole Stock to
hazard, for recovery of the Pepper Trade to England, which was thought to be
lost upon the surprise of Bantam, and to recover by Arms from the Great Mogul,
and other Indian Princes satisfaction for Damages received, and also those
inestimable Privileges they had deprived the English of, in those Interloping
times, when they saw the Nation in India divided, and contending among
themselves, like Guelphs and Gibelines, under the distinction of the Old and
the New Company; which latter Appellation the Interlopers assumed to
themselves, and under that Name made Contracts of Commerce and Alliances with
Princes and Governors in India, without any Authority from their Sovereign,
which our Law accounts a Crime of a high Nature, and which is in it self by the
Experience and Confession of all Men, of most destructive consequence, to any
Kingdom or Commonwealth Trading to the East Indies.

Whether those generous Resolutions were well or wisely pursued by the
Committee, and whether under all the aforesaid pressures, they have behaved
themselves like true Englishmen and Lovers of their Country, will best appear
by a brief, plain, and true Narrative of what they have done, since the
publishing of the aforesaid Treatise; and what now is the present State of the
English Interest in India.

The Company have built within these Seven Years past, the following New Great
Ships; not to mention many more smaller ones, now in their Service, ( Viz.)

The Old Defense. Resolution. Rochester. Beaufort. Royal Charles. Royal James.
Princess of Denmark. Modena. New Berkeley Castle. Royal James and Mary. New
Defense. Benjamin. One New Building on the Stocks. Chandois. Herbert.
Kempthorne.
Note 1. That all these sixteen Ships (except the Old Defense that was stranded
in the River of Thames) are still in being, and may carry each from sixty to
eighty Guns except the Benjamin, that has now but thirty Guns, and six
Pedereroes.

2. All of them except the Benjamin are three-deck't Ships, and are of Burden
according to the Kings Tonnage, from Nine-Hundred to One Thousand three Hundred
Tons each.

3. The three last, viz. Chandois, Herbert and Kempthorne, were built for the
Turkey Trade, but those Freights not bearing the Charge of such great Ships,
they were at their Owners Requests taken in, and are now all in the East India
Companies Service.

Within the aforesaid Term of seven years, (the Company having lost Bantam
where they had no Fort, but only a large Factory, to secure their Pepper
Trade; by means of which defect it was the easilier lost) The Company have
Built, Fortified and Garrisoned three Forts in several parts of India, for
security of the Pepper Trade, so necessary to this Kingdom; which three Forts,
to fix and render Tenable and Serviceable, have and will cost the Company viis
and modis Four Hundred Thousand pound Sterling.

The Company have now at Sea, in India, and coming from thence, this last day
of January, 168 8/9. the following Ships and Cargoes, Viz.

Tons Guns Seamen Soldiers The Prudent Mary, Let for 300 carryng 30 60 and 15
New London 515 34 102 80 Modena 775 60 154 109 Tonqueen Merchant 160 14 32 30
Charles the Second 775 60 155 74 Caesar 515 40 103 116 Royal James and Mary 670
40 134 124 Iosia, alias Society 620 40 124 83 Shrewsbury 350 30 69 50 Diana 170
20 34 30 Kempthorne 640 50 127 95

Permission Ships.
Tuns, Guns. Seamen. Soldiers. Worcester Frigate 220 18 34 35 Bawdon 150 16 39
30 Jonas Frigate 80 16 6 John and Mary 100 14 20 10

These fifteen Ships beforementioned, Consigned to Bombay and the Coast of
India, their Cargoes amounting to above Three Hundred and sixty Thousand pounds
Sterling.

Tuns. Guns. Seamen. Soldiers. The Rochester Let for 775 carrying 60 154 and
121 Nathaniel 550 36 109 107 Bengal Merchant 570 40 114 66 Williamson 580 40
116 57 Resolution 650 40 130 92 Princess of Denmark 670 40 113 39 New Defense
730 60 146 122

Permission Ships.
Rebecca 170 20 33 10 Curiana 140 20 27 30 Loyal Captain 150 24 27 10 James 300
30 60 40 Anne 120 18 25 10 Dorothy 225 26 46 20

These Thirteen Ships aforementioned, were Consigned to Fort St. George, etc.
on the Coast of Choromandel, and to the Bay of Bengal, their Cargoes amounting
to near five hundred and seventy thousand pounds sterling.

Tuns. Guns. Seamen. Soldiers. The Dragon Let for 180 Carrying 18 36 Royal
James 650 50 129 97 New Berkeley Castle 650 40 129 87 Rainbow 250 24 50 Persia
Merchant 370 32 74 40

Permission Ships.
Loyal Merchant 450 32 90 30 Mary 150 20 30 11

These seven ships beforementioned were Consigned to China and the South Seas,
their Cargoes amounting to near one hundred thousand pounds.

Besides about thirty other armed small ships and Vessels, constantly remaining
in the Country.

The Company have now upon their hands in England unsold, above the value of
seven hundred thousand pounds in East India Goods, for the supply of this and
Foreign Nations, whereas they do not know of fifty thousand pound value of
East India Goods in Europe unsold, in any other European Companies hands,
except the Dutch Spice, of which they always keep great Stores, having in the
last age secured that Trade entirely to themselves.

The Company have within the said seven years last past, so enlarged, and
Fortified the English Fort of St. George and their City of Madrass, upon the
Coast of Choromandel; that it is now one of the finest, and largest Cities in
those parts of the world, and secured by a good Garrison, and containing at
least one hundred thousand Families of all Nations, which inhabit within that
City, and the Territory about it, all subject to such Laws for Life and Goods,
as the Company by virtue of their Charter think fit to impose upon them.

The Customs and New Impost paid His Majesty by the Company for two years,
from August, 1685. to August, 1687. amounted to two hundred fifty five thousand
three hundred twenty six pounds, ten shillings and one penny, as by particulars
presented His late Majesty. Since the Wars in India, it has been less, by
reason of those Wars, but now the Wars are over the Companies Customs are like
to be more yearly, then they were in either of the two years beforementioned.

The Company have built new Forts in, and otherwise strengthened their Island
of Bombay, and have ordered a dry Dock to be built there, which they hope may
be finished by this time, and all other conveniences for repairing and fitting
the biggest English ships, and sent thither all Stores needful for such
purposes: which dry Dock was the principal want, the English Nation underwent
for some ages before.

And which is the most considerable National advantage, that ever was attempted
by Englishmen in those parts of the World, the Company have reduced the
principal part of their Trade of Surrat, to their own Island of Bombay; The
Inhabitants whereof from four thousand Families, which they were computed at,
when the Company first possessed that Island, are since increased to fifty
thousand Families, all subject to the Companies Laws. And that Island lying
upon the North Coast of India, near Surrat, the Emporium of the Indian Trade,
to Arabia, Persia, Bussorah, and the Red Sea, is of inestimable value to this
Kingdom. The said Island has cost the Company in Fortifying, Garrisoning, etc.
at times above five hundred thousand pounds sterling; and never produced any
return to the Company, nor ever would have been of use to England, nor in a
posture to defend it self; though it be one of the best Ports in the Eastern
World, if the English Trade had not been brought thither, and consequently the
English shipping to ride there, and load home (and not at, and from Swally, or
the River of Surrat as formerly.) This was known to the former Committees, and
lamented long since, that such a Jewel as the Island of Bombay should be in
English hands, and we should not have the heart to make use of it. But the
truth was, those former Committees durst not attempt such a change of their
Affairs, for fear of the charge of such a remove; but especially for fear of
angrying the Mogul, whose people gained exceedingly by our ships riding in
their Ports, as well as by our Trade, and were out of fear of Bombay, while it
was in such a forlorn neglected condition; and therefore durst boldly injure
and affront the English, while they had the President, and all the Chief of the
Nation, and all their Estates as a Pawn continually in their hands, to secure
their patient suffering of all contempts whatsoever. But the Case is now
altered by the Conduct, Cost, and Courage of the late Committees, and the Moors
must and will be civil hereafter. For as there is no people kinder than those
India Governors, when they have to do with men, that Can and Will rerevenge
themselves, so there are no Men more Unjust, False, Treacherous and Tyrannical
than they are, when they have to do with such, as are entirely within their
power.

The Mogul being as is generally known, so great and powerful a Prince, it was
vulgarly thought a Vain or rather a Distracted attempt in the Company, to make
any War upon him, as well in respect of his boundless Riches, and Power, as of
the vast charges the Company should be at, in sending and maintaining Warlike
Ships, into so remote parts of the World. Yet such has been God's blessing
upon the Companies Arms, their unavoidable necessity, and their righteous
Cause, that That War beyond all men's Opinion has ended to the Eternal Honor of
the English Nation, in those parts of the World, and a Peace concluded upon
such honorable Articles. (The Ratifications whereof from the Mogul himself in
the Persian Language, are brought home now by the Ship Modena) that if a Blank
had been delivered to the Company in England, to write down their own Terms,
They would not have desired more than is granted by the said Articles; The
substance of which are as follows, viz.

First, The Customs at Surrat to be two per Cent. and no more, for Goods and
Money; and for what has been taken more than that, to be paid back and made
good out of the Customs.

Secondly, That at but one place in the Kings Dominions any Custom be paid, and
having paid Custom at one place, not to be disturbed by any other, nor no
manner of duty demanded.

Thirdly, That no Custom be taken for any manner of Provisions, and what Custom
has been paid on that account, to be paid back.

Fourthly, Whatever has been Robbed from the English, to be made good to them,
by that Place or Government, where the loss was sustained.

Fifthly, That no Custom be demanded for what Goods may come from Mocha, and
what has been taken for Custom of those Goods to be paid back.

Sixthly, That we have a room in the Minthouse to our selves, and appoint whom
we please to do our business there, and Coin our own Money, and the Governor
to have no Command over those Sheroffs or Moneyers, that are appointed by us
for that work.

Seventhly, What Goods may have passed the Custom-house, and brought up again,
not to be liable to pay Custom the second time.

Eighthly, No Englishman shall serve in the Mogul's Dominions, and if any runs
away from Ships or Factories, to be seized and delivered up to us.

Ninthly, Indico Custom to be at Rupees 2 and three fourths per bale, and no
more, and what taken more then that, to be paid back.

Tenthly, No demands nor no trouble to the English at Surrat, must be given for
what mischief has, or may be done by the English at Bengala.

Eleventhly, That whatever is bought by one Governor for the King, although he
should be turned out before the Money should be paid for such Goods, yet the
Money to be made good, and no abatement made, nor any Goods so Sold returned.

Twelfthly, That whatever any Officers may buy or take, the Governor on the
place to see that we be paid for it.

Thirteenthly, None shall offer any abuse to our English, or other Servants of
the Country.

Fourteenthly, That whoever be our Debtors, the Governor of the place see us
paid, on complaining to him out of hand.

Fifteenthly, That no one give us any the least disturbance at Swally, but we
Land and Ship Goods as we please there, without any disturbance, or paying any
Custom or other duties.

Sixteenthly, That no Goods be over rated at the Custom-house, and that Custom
be taken for goods bought in the Moguls Dominions, as first cost at the place
where bought, and not to be rated at the place Exported, as worth there.

To open the foregoing Articles, and to demonstrate to persons unacquainted
with the East Indies, the Honor of this Peace, and the inestimable value of
those Articles to the English Trade and Nation, would interrupt the designed
Brevity of this Addition. It is sufficient, that the worst Enemies the Company
have, must confess if they will say what they think, they are much more worth
than all the Charge of the War, which they cannot compute at less than Ten
Hundred Thousand pound Sterling, and were by themselves thought impossible to
be ever attained; and that no Englishman could live without unsufferable
Assronts and Exactions in the Interloping times, before the Company began their
late War upon the Mogul, whereas now no Nation in India has such Honorable
Terms with that great Monarch, nor none so much respect from his Governors in
all places; which Honorable and Advantageous Terms the English Company are
like to enjoy forAges, because the former Privileges the English had (which
were never in any degree comparable to these) were only purchased by money
from his grear Governors, and broke at their pleasure, when more Money could
be got from other Nations vying with us in Trade, or English Interlopers;
Whereas these are not only acquired by Arms, and confirmed by the Mogul's own
Phirmaund and Husball Hoocombe, but secured by maintaining a strong English
Garrison at Bombay, and making that Island (which lies upon the principal parts
of the Mogul's Country, as the Islands of Scilly do upon England) the seat of
the English Dominion, and the Center of their Trade on the North Coast of
India, as Batavia is to the Dutch East India Company on the South. Which
Transition alone, from Surrat to Bombay, could never have been done without a
War as was beforesaid.

POSTSCRIPT.
THE Treaty managed between the great Lord, sent down by the Mogul for that
purpose, (which we hear was his Cousin Germain) and the English General after
five weeks Negotiation, was left unfinished for want of the great Mogul's
Ratification by a ` Phirmaund and Husball Hoocombe; and the General departed
with his Fleet from Surrat River. But the General not being able to return to
Surrat at that season of the year, received it at Bombay, after Receipt of the
following Letter.

Translate of a Letter from Muckteer Caune, the Governor of Surrat, to the
General Sir John Child Baronet, etc.

MAny times I sent your Excellency word, that the King's Phirmaund would come
from Court in a little time, therefore I desired your stay at the Rivers mouth
one week more, and Orders would come from Court according to yours, and my
desire; but you would not continue at the Rivers mouth, but weighed your
Anchors and went away, because of the lateness of the year and bad weather;
since, the King's ` Phirmaund is come for you, and arrived here the 8th. of
May, which the King has sent with a great deal of Affection and Love toward
you, which was brought by Persons that attend his own Person, and it is
according to your own desires, the King has consented to every thing, and you
are Happy and Great, known to the World as the Sun is, and whatever is in your
mind, the King has empowered me to comply with; therefore it is fit for you to
come away to Surrat presently over Land, as you promised you would, when you
left Surrat Rivers mouth, on knowledge of the King's Phirmaund being arrived
here; therefore pray make all the haste you can, and come and receive your
Phirmaund from the great King to your Honor, and let your business go on with
a good heart, and do you not fail to come away with all the speed you can; I
desire it a thousand times over, the Phirmaund is much for your Profit; what I
have received from Court concerning it, I now send you the Copy of.

FINIS.

