THE Christian Conventicle, OR, The Private-Meetings of God's People in evil
times, vindicated and warranted by the Word of God. Being some-time since
delivered in several Sermons, And now published for public benefit.

Not forsaking the Assembling of our selves together, as the manner of some is,
but exhorting one another, etc. Heb. 10.25. THE Christian Conventicle, etc.
Malach. 3.16, 17. Then they that feared the Lord spoke often one to another,
and the Lord hearkened, and heard it, and a Book of remembrance was written
before him for them that feared the Lord, and that thought upon his Name: And
they shall be mine, says the Lord of hosts, in that day when I make up my
Jewels, etc.


THis Prophecy of Malachi may fitly be styled, A holy Dialogue; wherein many
are brought in to speak their minds.

First, you have here the Prophet; Secondly, the Messiah; Thirdly, Wicked and
Profane men; Fourthly, the pious and holy persons; And, lastly, God himself.
The Prophet, he speaks thunderingly: Christ, he speaks threatningly; The
Profane, they speak blasphemingly: God's People, they speak frequently: And
God himself, he speaks most comfortably.
1. For the first: The Prophet, he speaks thunderingly; he lets fly
thunderbolts of wrath both against the Priests, and against the People of that
Age: Their sins were very many, and very great both, as their Sacrilege, their
mixtures in the Worship of God, their marrying to the daughters of a strange
god; and many such things, as may be read in the first and second chapters. But
that that did aggravate their sin, was, that this was done presently after
their deliverance out of a seventy years captivity. And this is that which is
very much displeasing unto God, that he should lose all his labor and love in
afflicting of a people, and that after restoring of them to their former
privileges, they should make such evil returns unto the Lord God.

2. The Messiah, he speaks, and he speaks very threateningly. The Jews they had
a flattering conceit, that when Christ came, there should be nothing but honey,
and oil, and fatness, i. e. all manner of pleasure; they had a foolish false
conceit, that Christ should come as another Alexander, in great glory and pomp,
conquering all before him: But our Messiah tells them here, that he would come
in another way, they should find him to come in a way of purity and holiness;
it is to purify the sons of Levi: he would be as the Refiners fire, and the
Fullers soap; He sends his Herrald of Arms before him, to proclaim War.

3. Profane men, they speak; and they speak blasphemously, as you may see in
chap. 2. last verse. and in chap. 3.13. These Vipers they spit their venom in
the very face of Almighty God; Wherein have we wearied him? when ye say, Every
one that does evil, is good in the sight of the Lord, and he delights in
them, or, where is the God of Judgment? (Oh, my Brethren, that ever the just
and righteous God should be so much scandal'd and blasphemed, that he should
delight in sinners!) And then he goes on, -- And, your words have been stout
against me, -- Ye have said, It is in vain to serve God, and what profit is it
that we have kept his Ordinance, and walked mournfully before the Lord of
hosts? We count the proud happy; yea, they that work wickedness are set up, and
they that tempt God are delivered. And then,

4. You have the People of God, they speak; and they speak frequently; Then
they that feared the Lord, spoke often one to another. What it was that was
spoken by them one to another? It is thought they spoke contrary to what the
wicked did; they blessed God, when others blasphemed him; and spoke for him,
when they spoke against him. And then,

5. God, he speaks; and he speaks comfortably to them; -- They shall be mine,
says the Lord of hosts, in the day that I make up my Jewels, and I will spare
them, as a man spares his children that are near and dear unto him.

Thus have I (as briefly as I could) brought you unto the Text. And you may see
what my Text (at the very first view of it) seems to be; (I shall make some use
of it, and (I hope) to some purpose;) My Text is nothing else but An Holy
Conventicle, (For, how could they speak often one to another, if they did not
often meet together?) and you have the probation and approbation of it;

1. The probation of it, from the practice of God's People. And 2. The
approbation, from the speech of God himself.
1. The probation. They don't assemble themselves together (as the profane
rabble of the world would make it) for evil practices, and for evil purposes.
And

2. It cannot be so bad; nay, it must be singularly good for them so to meet
together, or else it would not have that promise made of God unto it, as you
see in the words.

In the Text, 1. You have Christians regarded, And 2. Recorded (for the credit
of them) for their meeting together.


1. Regarded. The Text says, The Lord hearkened and heard. It Is a word that
implies a diligent attention unto any thing; and (as one observes well upon the
place) there is the attention of the ear, and the intention of the mind. And
then,

It Is recorded. That whatever they spoke, all their speeches, prayers, etc.
they were entered into God's Book of Remembrance. As God has his bottle, so he
has his book; as he is present in the Assembly, to bottle up their tears; so he
is there with his Book, to write down all their performances. God has but two
books, the book of his Documents, and the book of his Monuments: now if we
learn and live according to the book of Gods documents, we shall be sure to be
recorded in, and rewarded according to God's Book of Monuments, where he has
written down the carriages of his Saints and People.

But now, for the matter of the Text it self: you may be pleased to observe
these particulars; 1. The Persons, who; 2. The Act, what; 3. The Time, when; 4.
The Manner, how; 5. The Subjects, with whom they were thus meeting.


1. The Persons, who. Who? They are they that fear the Lord.

2. The Act, what they are about. Some may think, sure they are about some vain
foolish thing or other. No, they are talking and discoursing of God, and of
holy things. And then,

3. The time, when. When wicked and ungodly men were ^laspeming God, when they
were feasting, and in the midst of their jovialty, then these were keeping a
Conventicle. And then,

4. The manner, how. Some may say, They will be quickly weary of thus spending
time together; they may do it once it may be. No, but they do it often. -- They
spoke often one to another. And then

5. The Subjects, with whom they did it; and that with those of their own
party, opinion, and persuasion, those that were fellow-Jewels with themselves,
those whose names were written in the Book of Life.

Thus have I given you the division of the Text. The Observations are these;

1. Obser. That let the Times be never so bad, and never so profane, yet the
Lord has a certain number of people that are good at that time. Though the
Devil has most, yet God ever has the best; he will take the choice unto
himself: Then they that feared the Lord, etc.

2. Obser. That when wicked men are the worst, then God's People are the best;
-- Then they that feared the Lord, they stood up, and there was a holy courage
within them: It was winter with the wicked, and therefore it was fire with the
righteous, they burnt the hotter.

3. Obser. That the fear of God is a singular Antidote against Atheism and
Aposlacy. -- They that feared the Lord, then they stood up.

4. Obser. That holy Conference, it is a most necessary duty in unholy times. As
here you see, the Times the Prophet conplains of most bitterly, how full of
vileness and wickedness they were; Now the People of God, they met often one
with another, conferred and discoursed often one with another.

Brethren, you see here are four very sweet and sovereign Doctrines; they are
all so singular, that (I confess) I cannot tell which of the four to choose, and
to make the subject of my discourse.

Here is that that is matter of comfort, of credit, of safety, and of duty unto
you; As

1. That the times are never so bad, but that God has some that are good in
those times, (seven thousand in the Prophet Elijah's time, though he did not
know it; so, there may be many now that we do not know of.) That Is matter of
comfort.

2. That the worse others are, the better will God's People be. Brethren, this
is matter of credit and commendation to God's People, that they will not be
made the worse, but are made the better by bad times.

3. That the fear of God is a preservative against the infection of Atheism and
Apostasy: This is matter of safety and security. We see Cedars blown up by the
root, but so long as we have the fear of God in us, we shall never be blown up.

4. These are the most unholy times (I am persuaded) that ever England saw:
Now, Brethren, for us to meet together, and confer together, and pray together,
is but a performance of that duty that is required of us. And this I could
choose very well, to make the subject of my discourse:

But, as Samuel, when many were brought before him, 1 Samuel 16. This I could
think the Lord's Anointed, and another, and another; but it was a David, a
little younger son that the Lord had chose: O so (methinks) I could think of
these four Doctrines; yet there is a little Doctrine, a little David yet behind
(methinks) that I would desire to spend a little discourse on at this time, and
that is, Doct. That the Fearers of God are, and ought to be frequenters of
Conventicles.

I chose this subject upon this double account,

1. Because no thing is more derided by wicked men than these are; and truly,
nothing more slighted (for the most part) by the Godly themselves than these
are. Now to raise the honor of Conventicles against the contempt of wicked
men, and the value of them against the contempt of godly men, I thought good to
say something of it, to declare the excellency of it.

2. I chose it, because that in this Doctrine is contained the extract of all
the other Doctrines: For,

1. If I can make this good to you, (as I hope I shall) here you shall be sure
to meet with such as are good in bad times: and there you meet with the first
Doctrine.

2. By frequenting of Conventicles, you will be made the better by the prayers
and exhortations of God 's faithful Ministers, and those that fear the Lord.
And this will make the second Doctrine, That the worse others are, the better
they be.

3. By frequenting of Conventicles, you will attain to the more fear of the
Lord, and so attain to more safety; And there you meet with the third Doctrine.

4. By frequenting of Conventicles, you will perform Duty; And that is the sum
of the last Doctrine.

Now, in the prosecution of this point, I shall a little make bold, 1. To
explain this Doctrine. 2. To confirm it.


And so to make application of it.

For the first. For the explication. There is but two things to be explained,
1. What Is meant by a Conventicle? 2. What by the Fearers of God?


First, for a Conventicle: it is nothing else but a meeting together of men and
women in one place. That Is the proper meaning of that word, Conventicle. And
then

You must know, there are two sorts of Conventicles; such as are the greater,
and such as are the lesser Conventicles: the great ones in the Churches, and
the lesser ones in Chambers, or in private Houses, and no more difference, but
with respect to the degrees of them; and more or less does not any way vary the
kind. And if there be any such that deride private Meetings in Chambers as
Conventicles, they do throw dirt into the Congregation of God. And

Again; There is a twofold Conventicle, a bad, and a good.

1. A bad: A Convention or meeting together of ungodly men, for wicked ends,
and to accomplish wicked designs. [And indeed, they are only these which may
properly be called Conventicles.] This (in Scripture) has many names given
unto it; It is called the Convention of Deriders: it is called the Council of
Scorners, Psalm. 1.1. it is called the Congregation of Hypocrites, etc, Job 15.34.

Now, for the matter of their ends, why they convent themselves, they are
ordinarily these six;

1. They meet to offer up worship to Idols, 1 Kin. 18.20, and 26.

2. They meet to defile themselves and bodies, 1 Timothy 1.10.

3. They meet to abuse the creatures; to run on in excess of riot, 1 Pet. 4.4.

4. They meet to slander, to censure, and to scandalize the People of God.
Psalm. 41.5, 6, 7, 8.

5. They meet to lay their design for the ruin and destruction, and
extirpation of the Churches and People of God, Prove. 30.14. Act. 22.22. And

6. They meet to disturb the peace of the Place and Nation where they are.
Psalm. 140.2.

These are such as (in their sense) they call Conventicles. And I know none
more guilty than they that frequent Play Houses, Whore-houses, Alehouses and
Taverns, where wicked men come to make their Songs against the People of God.
And these (in Scripture-sense) may more fitly be called Confederacies than
Conventicles. For my part, I think such places worthy to be punished by the
Judges.

Secondly, (Brethren) There is a good and a holy Conventicle; That is, when
God's People meet together for holy ends, to perform holy actions. And this (my
Brethren) is called the Congregation of the Righteous, Psalm. 1.5. the Assembly
of the Saints, Psalm. 89.5. the meeting together of the upright ones, Psalm.
111.1. And many such names are given to it in Scripture.

And the ends that they meet for, they are very many, and as good as many; (And
when I speak of this Conventicle, I mean nothing but the Communion of Saints.)

That God's People meet together in private in evil times; --

1. It Is not in contempt of the Public Assemblies. The Lord (that knows our
hearts) knows, that while we had Public Assemblies, and the Ordinances in
purity, without the mixture of distasteful things, we did prize Public
Ordinances, and did highly esteem them; and the loss of them is our grief, and
the ground of our mourning. It Is not therefore out of contempt that we meet in
private; for when we are together there, we do mourn for our losses, and pray
for the freedom of Public Ordinances again. Much less --

(2.) is the ground of our meeting in private for lewd practices, as the wicked
are apt to charge us. The Heathens were wont to charge the Primitive
Christians, That they met in the evening, and put out their Candles, and then
they were guilty of all manner of lewdness. They muse as they use; They
themselves are wicked in private, and they think others so: But now God's
People, they mourn for the wickedness of the wicked; they detect the lewd
practices of the wicked, and therefore are far from being guilty themselves. Nor,

3. Do God's People convent together to move Sedition, (That Is another thing
that is charged upon them.) No, Religion teaches us better, to pray for Kings,
and those in Authority. And God, and the Places where we meet, can bear
witness, that we make it our work to call on God for mercy for our King, and
for our Governors. But --

When the People of God meet together in private, it is

1. To confer one with another. This is plain in the Text; -- Then they that
feared the Lord spoke often one with another.

2. Another end why they meet together, it is to pray with one another, to pour
out their souls into the bosom of God, to call and cry to God for mercy for the
Nations, and mercy for their own Souls, and mercy for their Friends, and to
supplicate God's return to them again.

3. A third end is, to observe the Gifts and Graces one of another.

4. To break Bread one with another.

5. To humble our souls exceedingly, for the sins and calamities of the Age and
Time wherein we live; to humble our selves for those sins that have provoked
God to deprive us of Publick-Meetings. Such as fear the Lord, O they mourn for
the sins of their nature in private Meetings, and for the sins of their lives;
for their omissions and commissions; for their sins of prosperity, for
wantonness under means and mercies; for the sins of Professors, (for their
formality and lukewarmness) that have laid stumbling blocks before the weak;
and they mourn for the enmity and debauchery of the Wicked now, and for all
those dishonours that are done to God.

6. Another end of their meeting, is, to exhort one another.

7. To warn one another.

8. To edify one another. The People of God they find themselves weak, dull,
sad, therefore they go into the communion of Saints in private places, that
they may be strengthened, quickened, and comforted by conference, and by the
discharge of their duties.

9. The People of God meet thus together, that they may meet with Christ, that
they may have his sweet presence, and may be instructed of him, that they may
have Christ's Spirit, and the graces and comforts of Christ. Act. 2.1, 2, 3, 4.

10. They thus meet to advance the Name of God, and of Christ. That Is rendered
as the reason of their meeting here in the Text; When they were met together,
the Text says, they thought on his Name; every one was proposing what they
should do to promote the Honor of God, what course they should take to advance
the Interest of Jesus Christ, how to further the Salvation of Souls.

11. When you are met together, you must be sure to praise the Lord; As you
ought to begin with prayer, so you should end with praise; God must never lose
the praise that is due unto his Name.

12. You ought to meet together to excommunicate wicked men, to curse them in
the Name of God, (i. e.) such as are impenitent, and nothing will serve their
turns but to reproach Gods People. Thus much for the explication of the first
thing, (viz.) a Conventicle, what it is.

Secondly. The Fearers of God, What Is mean by that? (This is as large to
explain as the o^ there.)

1. You must look upon the fear of God wit^ reverence to the Object of Fear,
and the Autho^ of Fear: The Object of Fear, so God is; the^ Author of Fear; so
God must be. Take it thus (...) We must look unto God as the Object of Fear,
and we must look unto God (as he is the Author of Fear) to make us the Subjects
of Fear. And these two, they end in that same fear which is called a fear to
offend.

2. There is a servile Fear, a slavish Fear, and a filial Fear, a Religious
Fear. Some fear God because he is a just God, and an avenger, more than for his
goodness: but the other is a filial fear, whereby a gracious soul fears to
offend God because he is good and gracious.

3. This Fear is taken two ways, (1.) for the Worship of God; (2.) for our
walking with God; our worshipping God aright, and for our walking with God
aright.

These two Fears are like two great Poles, on which the body of our
Spiritual-Life does move and turn.

And this fear of God it will over-aw our hearts; it will keep us from sinning;
it will cast out the fear of men; it will quicken to duty; it will draw out
love; it will make you willing to lay down your life for him, who so readily
laid down his life for you.

Thus I have done with the first Particular, the ^xplaining of the Text.

Secondly. For the proving on it, (though there ^e no great need, yet) take two
or three Texts;

In Jer. 23.25. it is said, That the people shall meet together, and enquire one
of another, What has the Lord answered? what has the Lord spoken? They should
come together and enquire what the Lord had delivered to the Prophet.

So, in 1 Thessalonians. 5.11, 14. Comfort your selves together, and edify one
another, even as also ye do. And, We exhort you, Brethren, warn them that are
unruly, comfort the feeble-minded, support the weak, be patient toward all men.

And, in Heb. 10.23, 24, 25. (speaking there that we should continue constant
in the profession of our Faith, says he) Let us consider one another, to
provoke unto love, and to good-works, [not forsaking the assembling of our
selves together,] as the manner of some is. No, God's People must not forsake
the Conventicles.

One Text more, (and that is very full to this purpose;) in John 13.34, 35.
There you shall find that our Savior was telling his Disciples, that he was
going away from them; and, thinking that that would take away much of their
comfort, says he, A new Commandment give I unto you, that ye love one another.
The meaning of the Text is this, (as some render it) It Is true, you will have a
great loss by my absence, but you may make it up by the presence one of
another: Frequent comm^ one with another, help one another, and this make up
the loss, this will make up your comfort^

For matter of presidents, the Scripture is (...) full.

When the Disciples (for fear of the Je^ were met together in a holy
Conventicle, C^ he came and stood in the midst of them, and (...) parted his
mind to them freely and fully, J^ 20.19 and 26 verses.

And the Apostles themselves spent their t^ in little else than in meeting
together; we re^ of their being met all together in one place with (...)
accord, Act. 2.1. of their going into an upper ro^ and continuing there with
one accord in prayer (...) supplication, Act. 1.13, 14. and again, of the being
assembled with one accord, Act. 15.25.

And it was their common course in the p^mitive times thus to meet together; As
sa^ Tertullian in his Apology; says he, We all m^ together in a Conventicle,
and we knock at Heav^ doors with our prayers, and we will not let God al^ till
he be pleased to come down graciously unto (...) Know thus much, that all
places are now sa^ ctified for our assembling. I confess, it is best (...)
public; Truth needs not to seek corners. Bu^ In every place Incense shall be
offered up unto (...) Name, Mal. 1.11. And, -- I will -- that men pr^ every
where, lifting up pure hands, 1 Timothy 2.8.

But now, what is the ground or reason that the (...) (...) be such a care
amongst God's People, that should thus frequent the Communion of Saints?
answer, --

Because there are many duties that are en^ed God's People to perform, that if
they ^t conventicle, they can never perform; as, ^ling up one another in their
most holy Faith, ^. 20. and their strengthening and watching over another, etc.
How can these duties be done ^hey don't meet together, and assemble themselves
together, to strengthen, encourage, ex^^, reprove one another?

2. Another reason is, That God has given (...) of Gifts, of Abilities and
Graces unto his ^ple, that they should communicate them one ^rother. That God
has given light unto the (...) it is that it should distribute its beams to
Earth for the good of its Inhabitants. That ^d has given water unto the Sea,
it is, that it ^uld send forth of its abundance in Rivers and ^eams, that it
may come to be serviceable un^^ the use of man. And so truly, that God has ^de
the light of the Sun of Righteousness to arise the hearts of any of his People,
and the beams his Graces and Gifts to be in them, it is that ^y should disperse
them, and communicate them (...) the use and service one of another. As in Co^.
10.7. The manifestation of the Spirit is gi^n to every man to profit withal.
And, in Luke (...) from ver. 13, to ver. 26. Christ (there) gave variety of
Talents, Why? For Improven^ There is no Gift, Grace, or Ability that God (...)
given to any one that is a member of his Chu^^ but he ought to be serviceable
and instrume^^ with the same for the good of others. It Is enough for Merchants
to have an Estate, but (...) must have a trading, they must go to the (...)
change. So it is with Christians; it is not eno^ for them that they have gifts
and graces, but t^ must meet together in some place; that is the Exchange,
where they do sell such and (...) things to others, and buy such and such
things them again; I mean in a Gospel sense; (vi^) imparting Counsels and
Admonitions to other and receiving Exhortations and Counsels of other Some have
the gift of resolving Cases of Cons^ence; others have a special gift to pour
out the souls in Prayer: Some (again) God has given gr^^ abilities to in the
imparting of Experiences; so^ to comfort and heal wounded Spirits, and such
lik^ Now, every one of these must be improved a^ employed; And how could this
possibly thus be, it were not that they had meetings together? B^ then --

3. Another reason is, Because that in the Meetings, they are sure to meet with
the Lo^^ Jesus Christ. O my Brethren, whither wou^^ not a gracious heart go, if
he were sure to me^ with Christ there? Why, if thou come thith^^ to the end
thou ought to come, ( i. e. to me^^ (...) Christ) he will be sure to meet
with thee ^e. -- Where two or three are met together in my me, there am I in
the midst of them. He will ^chsafe his spiritual and blessed presence, and
(...) be giving out of his graces, and making ^arer discoveries of himself and
of his love to ^m that come there to that end, to meet with (...). Whence
should we come to have those ^athings of soul after Jesus Christ? comes it ^m
the Ministers words? No, but from Christ's ^rit. O therefore (Brethren) I
beseech you, ^t seeing Christ promises his presence in such (...) ^ce, do not
withdraw your selves from the ^ne. Again,

4. Another reason is, Because in these Meet^^gs we are sure to meet with pure
Ordinances, ^^th holy and heavenly Administrations and In^^tutions; we shall
have God's Worship in a ^ospel-mould, without humane Inventions or ^ens
Traditions. In the public (many times) (...) Elephants hoof has been too deep
in those wa^rs, so that there is a great deal of need of the ^icorns horn: but
here is nothing but what comes ^^m an upright heart, guided and ordered
accor^ng to the Rule. And as God has set us apart (...) his Worship, so we
should uphold his Worship. ^here the Carcass is, there the Eagles are gathered
^^gether; And (not where the show of an Ordinance is, but) where the true
Ordinance of the lord Jesus Christ is, there the Eagles are upon ^^eir wings.
Again,

5. Another reason is, Because this is an Article of our Faith; We believe the
Communion (...) Saints. Now, my Brethren, we believing it in ou^ principle, it
would be sad if we should deny it i^ our practice. It is strange to me, that
men should be so zealous to stand up at the Creed, and not t^ stand up to the
Creed, to keep all the Article there repeated. For a man to hold the Communion
of Saints, and to oppose the Communion of Saints it is somewhat strange: I shall
not give much fo^^ this man's faith. Those men that hate and derid^ the
Communion of Saints, I cannot believe that they believe any such thing as the
Communion of Saints let their Creed be what it will. I fear there are too many
that have no better account to give o^ their belief, but that it must be so.
Again,

6. The People of God must be frequenters o^ Conventicles, because of the great
good that may be done and received by these Christian Meetings. My Brethren,
true communion, it is nothing else but the communication of our spiritual
strength, of our graces and of our comforts unto one another. Here (my
Brethren) the tongue of the Wise is a^ choice Silver, and the lips of the
Righteous feed many. Many times there are those that have got so much comfort,
strength, building up in faith and resolution at such a Meeting, that they have
had cause to bless God for it forever. Many times a^ Merchant gets more money in
one hour on the Exchange, than in a whole day in his own Warehouse: So, many
times God's People get more in one ^ou^ at the Exchange, at the place of the
meeting of ^od's People, than at home in a whole day.

7. For the People of God thus to meet together, it is one way of owning and
honoring of Christ. That when good things are frequently left off, we should
be found in the practice of them, such as Psalms are, and the like, thus we
honor our Lord Jesus.

8. Thus to assemble our selves, and perform our duty to the Most-High, does
much hinder the prevalency of corruption. If we should leave off assembling our
selves, corruption would get head; you cannot omit a duty but your sin will be
encouraged by it. Thomas was absent from that holy Conventicle, John 20.24, 25.
and his unbelief got nead; I will not believe (says he) till I see his wounds.
Omit Prayer in a morning, and Passion will get head that morning. Therefore the
People of God should thus meet together, to prevent the growth of their
corruptions.

Now, all this laid together, I hope you will give me leave to conclude, That
it is a very necessary duty, for God's Peopls to meet often one with another.

Now for the Application of this point.

Let it be,

First, A Use of Information. If it be thus, (Brethren) that the Fearers of God
are and ought to be frequenters of Conventicles, the Old-Testament-Believers
were so, and the New-Testament-Believers were so, as you have heard, Then

1. It does inform us what we should think of those men that hate, abhor,
deride, detect, oppose, make Laws against, and persecute the Assemblies of
God's People: What to think of them? why that they are ignorant of that very
Religion that they profess; to think of them as enemies of goodness, as limbs
of Satan, and Factors for Hell; yea, worse than very Heathens and Infidels
themselves. Nero, and other Roman Magistrates, will one day rise up against
that Generation that do oppose, oppress, depress the Meetings of Gods People;
for they permitted Paul to dwell in his own hired house, and let such as would
come unto him, and (says the Text) no man hindered him, Act. 28.30, 31. Nay,
the Grand- Turk (that great enemy of Christianity) will rise up against this
Generation; for, pay him but Toll and Tribute, and he will let you enjoy your
Liberty in Religion.

2. What does it inform us of them that will needs be accounted Professors of
Christianity, and very good Christians would be thought to be, yet will be so
shy as to shun all these Meetings, they will not come nigh them? Why, that they
have too much of the fea^ of men, and too little of the fear of God: that is the
reason they will not come thither. It was a very great blemish in Nichodmus's
Coat of Arms, that he would not come to our Savior's Conventicle but by night,
( Joh. 3.2.) when none should take notice of him: and it is a greater dishonor
to them that will never come at all, neither in the day, nor at night neither.
Even as it was with Nichodemus and others of the Jews, they were afraid they
should be thrust out of the Synagogue: So (I have cause to think) many of these
are afraid of Communication, and all because they are afraid of Excommunication.

Object. I know what some will plead for themselves, to take off all such kind
of censures as these, viz. That there are Public Meetings and Assemblies --.

Answ. Take heed of touching any such Pitch, lest you should be defiled with
the same. Take this for a Rule, That Worship which we ought to perform to the
Most-High, and be found in the practice of ought to be both for the matter and
manner thereof, according to the prescribed Rule of Gods Word only, no men on
Earth having authority to devise according to their own fancies and
imaginations, any forms of God's Worship and Service. Any Worship which is not
bottomed and grounded upon the Word of God, is a false Worship, and such as we
may not lawfully be present at, unless some way or other we do show our
dislike, or declare our dissent.

I shall now give you (1.) some discoveries of a false Worship, and then (2.)
prove to you the unlawfulness of being present at such a way of Worship, when
by our presence we do seem to own, or to countenance, or to approve of it.

First, To give you some discoveries of a false ^orship.

1. When it is such a worship, the pattern where^f is taken from Idolaters, and
not from the practice of the holy Prophets and Apostles of God. Thus, if you
observe that place in 1 King. 16.31. Ahab taking to wife Jezebel, the daughter
of Eth^aal King of the Zidonians, went and served Baal, and worshipped him.
Ahab marrying Jezebel, he will presently be of his wife's Religion. And we
might note this by the way, That it is a very dangerous thing for those that are
of the true Religion, to marry with those that are of a false Religion. When
the children of Israel began to fall in love with the daughters of Moab, they
soon fell to commit Idolatry with them. Solomon's Wives you know how they drew
him to Idolatry. Wives when they are naught, are oftentimes great Instruments
to draw their husbands unto false worship. So that hence they took their
pattern for this worship of Baal, from the Idolaters. Yea, when God had
prescribed Moses the pattern of his House, how he ought to frame the Tabernacle
for his Worship; if Moses should have left that, and gone to the Nations round
about him, and taken patterns from them, would not this have been a great
abomination in the sight of God? Why, should we lay by the Rule of the Word,
and the practice of the Churches in the days of the Apostles recorded in the
Scriptures, and go unto Turkey, to take our pattern of Worship from the Pagans,
or go unto Rome, and borrow our forms, and rites, and modes of Worship from the
Papists; would not this be to present an unclean thing unto the Lord, who has
so strictly commanded his People, that they should not so much as enquire after
other Nations, how they worship their Gods, nor imitate them in any of their
actions? Deuteronomy. 12.30, 31, 32. Why should Light go to borrow of Darkness? shall
the Church of Christ take their pattern of Worship from Antichrist? can there
any pure Water (fit for the service of the Sanctuary and the City of our God)
flow out of the Romish puddle? or, can a man pick any Gold (for the adorning of
the Temple of Christ) out of the Popes dunghill, where there is nothing but mire
and filth? Though you should take a Spaniard, or a Frenchman, and put an
English coat upon him, yet this does not make him an English man: So, if there
be one thing in the way of Worship that was not prescribed nor practiced in the
days of Christ, or in the days of the Apostles recorded in Scripture, it is
born out of due time, and is the innovation and invention of Antichrist, and it
is certainly a false worship.

2. Such a worship as has been cast out by the People of God in reforming
times, and afterward in corrupt times is brought in again, this is (certainly)
a false worship. So it was here in this ^ame worship of Baal which we have been
speaking of. You shall find it was in Israel many years before Ahab, for (in
Judge. 2.11.) it is said, That the children of Israel did evil in the sight of
the Lord, and served Baalim; and they forsook the Lord God of their fathers,
which brought them out of the Land of Egypt, and followed other gods, etc. And
afterward (in chap. 6.) you find how that they raised up some other forms,
pull down the Altars of Baal, and abolish all the worship of Baal in Israel.
And indeed, you may observe concerning the people of Israel, that when (for
their running a whoring after false worship) the judgments of God were upon
them; Then they cried unto the Lord, and God delivered them. And you shall then
often find a very zealous spirit upon them against false Worship; then they pull
down the Altars of Baal, and cut down the Groves, and break in pieces the
Idols, and enter into a Covenant with God, that they will keep close to his
Worship: but after a few years are over again, (by means of some evil Princes
or Governors, who did discountenance the true ways of God, and were favorers
of Idolatry) the people fell to false worship again, and did build again the
things that they had destroyed. Now, God commands his People to come out of
Babylon; now, when they have come out (in any degree or measure) by casting off
corruptions in worship, the Lord likes not that they should go back again, tha^
they should return to those corruptions from whence they had before departed.

3. When it is such a way of worship as is matter of great offense, and a burden
to the Godly in a Nation. So it was here too in this worship of Baal; though
the most and worst of the people of the Jews fell in with it, yet there were
thousands in Israel (which feared the Lord) that were greatly offended with it,
and cried out against it, and withdrew from it. Surely it is one sign that
Worship is not of God, when the most holy and gracious and strict-living people
in a Nation are greatly offended with it, and cannot submit unto it; and when
it is the wicked and ungodly tout in a Nation that do so exceedingly desire it,
and take their rest in it. Why, that a way of Worship is so well liked of by
the superstitious and ungodly people in a Nation, is argument enough how much
it is disliked of by God. In Exodus 8.26. when Pharaoh would have had Moses to
have sacrificed in the Land, ( -- Sacrifice to God in the Land.) Says Moses,
It Is not meet so to do; for we shall sacrifice the abominations of the
Egyptians to the Lord our God: ^o, shall we sacrifice the Abominations of the
Egyptians before their eyes, and shall they not stone us? will they not stone
us? Mark, The pure and sincere Worship of God, tha^ would have been an
Abomination to the Egyptians, they would not have endured it, but would have
fallen upon them and stoned them. Ah! my Brethren, the pure Ordinances of God,
are hated by the carnal world, they don't like of them. I but when a way of
worship is so well liked, and approved of by those that are the worst, and the
most profane in a Nation, that may be argument enough to prove that it is not
of God; for, if it were God's Worship, they would not love it nor delight in
it. So then, I say, when the multitude of those that are the most vicious,
ungracious and unholy, those that are the gross, loose, superstitious and
wicked in a Nation, are the people that do like and love it, surely this is
another sign that Worship is not of God.

4. And lastly. When it is such a way of Worship as people are forced into by
violence and compulsion, whether they like or approve of it or no. Thus it was
also with this Worship of Baal; it was as much as their lives were worth not to
submit to it. Those that would not bow down to the golden Image, they must be
thrown into the fiery Furnace, Dan. 3.6. And it is the known mark of the Beast
and his false worshippers, Rev. 13.16. that he causes all, both small and
great, rick and poor, free and bond, to receive a mark in their righthand, or
in their foreheads; and that no man might buy or sell, save he that had the
mark. That is, those that would not by some act or other, by some kind of
testimony or other, testify their conformity unto his worship, they must be
imprisoned, they must be banished. The worship of Antichrist, it is an Iron
yoke, it will break those that will not bow unto it. If men will not believe
their Doctrines, and subscribe their Articles and submit unto their Worship,
what then? Why then they must be fined, then imprisoned, then banished. Why
now, certainly, this is not the way of Christ, that men should be whipped and
scourged, and driven into the profession of his Religion, and the practice of
his Worship; that they should be forced into it by fire and faggot, strappado's
and gallows's: No, the way of Christ is, to teach people, and to instruct them;
to persuade Japhet to dwell in the tents of Shem: he would not have his
Religion forced on any one; that people (by Fines, Imprisonments and
Banishments) should be forced into the acknowledgement of him; He would have
men drawn to him, and not compelled to him; for indeed, no man's judgment can
be commanded by another man's will.

But now, having given you some discoveries of a false Worship, I come to the
proof of the second thing which I proposed, That it is not lawful to be present
at such worship, (i. e.) when by your presence there you seem to own it, to
approve of it, to assent or consent to it: You have a clear proof of it in 1
King. 19.18. Yet I have left me seven thousand in Israel, all the knees that
have not bowed unto Baal, and every mouth which has not kissed him. They would
not bow the knee to Baal, nor kiss him with the lip. This denying to bow the
knee, and to kiss with the mouth, shows, that they did not only in heart
abhor this false worship, but that they would not by any outward act so much as
seem to own it, or countenance it; The meaning (in short) is, they did no way
conform themselves to that corrupt service of the times. Another Scripture for
this you have in 2 Chronicles. 11. the 15th and 14th verses compared. When Jeroboam
had set up Calves there, and commanded all the people to Worship them, in ver.
15. it is said, He ordained him Priests for the High Places, and for the Devils,
and for the Calves which he had made. But now, in ver. 14. The Levites left
their suburbs, and their possessions, and came to Judah and Jerusalem (for
Jeroboam and his sons had cast them off from executing the Priests Office unto
the Lord:) and after them, out of all the Tribes of Israel, such as set their
hearts to seek the Lord God of Israel, came to Jerusalem to sacrifice unto the
Lord God of their Fathers. Mark that; such as set their hearts to seek the Lord
God of Israel. Though the generality of the people went with Jeroboam to Dan
and Bethel to sacrifice to the Calves, yet a remnant of Israel set their hearts
to seek the Lord God of Israel, who knew that God would be worshipped at
Jerusalem: therefore they would not join with others, and go with others; no,
the Priests would lose their Lands and Livings, rather than they would own
Jeroboams false gods, and worship them. You know what is commanded, in Hos.
4.15. says the Lord there, Come not ye unto Gilgal, neither go ye up to
Beth^aven; What was this Gilgal and Bethaven, that God commands them not so
much as to come thither? O they were the principal places and seats where
Jeroboam had set up his false worship: now God lays a Command on them that
feared his Name, not to come thither, no, not for curiosity-sake to please
their fancies; they must not come there where that false worship was. So some
would fain be present with them that worshipped false gods in the Temple, that
yet did not approve of them; see how the chief Apostle reproves them for it, in
1 Cor. 10.20. The Gentiles, they sacrifice to Devils, and not to God; and I
would not that ye should have fellowship with Devils: Ye cannot drink the cup
of the Lord, and the cup of Devils; ye cannot be partakers of the Lord's table,
and the table of Devils. Why do we provoke the Lord to jealousy? So, again, in
2 Cor. 6.14. Be not unequally yoaked with unbelievers; for what fellowship has
Righteousness with Unrighteousness? and what communion has light with
darkness? and what agreement has the Temple of God with Idols? For ye are the
Temple of the living God; -- wherefore, come out from among them, and be ye
separate, says the Lord, and touch not the unclean thing, and I will receive
you. -- Mark how the Apostle dot multiply expression upon expression; Come out
-- Touch not, -- Be ye separate, and have nothing to do with them.

And I might show you, how that by joynin^ with others in their false worship,
1. You sin against your selves. 2. You sin against others. 3. You sin against
God.


I say --

1. Join not with others in their false worship because hereby you sin against
your selves; for, by being parties in any false worship, (i. e.) by owning of
it, you come to be accessory to their sin. In Revel. 18.4. Come out of her my
people, be not partakers of her sins, that ye receive not of her plagues. -- My
People: Why if God's own People will defile themselves with the Corruptions of
Babylon, they must expect to partake of the Judgments of Babylon. And indeed,
many times God is more quick with his own People in this respect than with
others, because it is their duty to stand resolutely against all the Innovations
and Corruptions in matters of Religion; therefore when they shall comply with
the times, and defile themselves, many times (I say) the Lord is quick in
cutting them off, when he may suffer others to go on. And besides, hereby they
throw themselves into the mouth of a temptation. God commands (you know) Thou
shall not come near (...) house of an Harlot, Prove. 5.8. because of the
^ptation. Why, you know what is said concerning King Ahaz. (in 2 King. 16.10.)
that ^ing unto Damascus to meet the King of Assyria ^ere, (out of a Complement
it may be, to con^atulate him, or the like) he saw an Altar that (...) as at
Damascus; and King Ahaz sent to Uriah ^e Priest the fashion of the Altar, and
the pat^rn of it, according to all the workmanship ^ereof; and the Priest built
an Altar, etc. He (...) as presently in love with the Altar; to see it, (...)
as a temptation to him to make it, and to sacri^ce on it, and worship in like
manner. This Uriah (...) it seems) was one that was a Temporizing Priest, that
would do any thing the King commanded ^im; therefore when once he had gotten
the Al^ar made, and the King comes home, he present^y falls to Idolatry: they
lay on their Offering, ^hen they eat it, and then they go to worshipping. Peter
goes to see what the High Priest has done, ^e goes to warm himself, and is
accused. It Is dangerous to come into the Highpriests Hall, ^o warm at his
fire, lest we go away with a scorched conscience. And again --

2. You sin against others too, that set up these superstitious ways; whom you
herein do abet, and encourage, and harden in their evil ways. Do not
communicate with them. Though you be not as Master Builders to draw out a
Platform, yet you should have a care of bringing any brick or mortar to build
Babel. In short; in practice yo^ do offend others, and (it may be) by example
d^ draw them aside too: As in Gal. 2.11. Pete^ (there) by his dissimulation,
was a means to dra^ Barnabas and others of the Jews to side with him. And
specially, such a one as is looked on as (...) knowing and a religious person,
he is herein more dangerous than a Pagan or a Papist is; you hat^ them, and
will not be led by their example. An^ again,

3. You sin herein against God too, by bringing him the blind, the halt, and
the lame: (For such is every way of Religion, every way of Worship that is of
man's devising.) The Lord has not required any such service at your hands, and
therefore you have no promise (and so no reason to expect) to be accepted in
it. Nor can you do it in faith. As you must not believe for Doctrines the
Commandments of men, neither are you to solemnize for Worship the Commandments
of men. The People of God are bound to maintain the Integrity and Purity of
God's Ordinances. Take heed of any thing that does but look like false Worship.
We must abhor the garment that is but spotted with the flesh. We must not so
much as touch the unclean thing. God forhad the Israelites to have a false god
in their houses: though they did not worship it, yet they must not have it in
their houses. And, in Isa. 65.4. he reprehends them, not only for eating ^he
abominable thing, Swines flesh, but for having the broth of that abominable
thing in their vessels.

Object. 1. But, you will say, Was not Elijah himself present at the Worship of
Baal? so we find, ^n 1 King. 18.26, etc. Elijah, why he stands by them, and is
a looker-on, and bids them cry aloud unto Baal: therefore (it seems) we may be
present at false Worship, and yet not sin.

Answ. Though Elijah was present, yet he did not by his presence any way
countenance or allow that worship of theirs, but he did reprove them for it; he
was present to convince them of the evil of it, and to show them the vanity of
their worship. And thus indeed the Prophets and Apostles of God, they were
sometimes present at Sacrifices that were performed to Idols, but it was on
purpose to reprove them for it, and to convince them of their Idolatry.

Obj. 2. But (you will say unto me) though we be present at it, yet we can keep
our minds to our selves; we will not say Amen unto their prayers, we will not
join with them, but will keep our minds still unto our selves.

I answer. That is but to dissemble, and to play the Hypocrite both with God
and men. To say you will be present with your bodies at false worship, and yet
absent in your spirits, it is in effect to say, you will serve God with your
souls, and the Devil with your bodies. You know, the worship that is done in an
Assembly, it is looked on as the joint action of the whole Assembly; to which
you ought to say your Amen, if lawful; and if not, to show your dislike of it.
And therefore, if it be an Ordinance of God that thou be present at, thou
oughtst to come to it with thy whole heart and soul; and if otherwise, it is
such, any act of which worship thou can not warrantably join in, or be
present at.

Obj. 3. I but (you will say unto me) what if the Worship be corrupt in part,
yet not in the whole? there may be many good prayers and good words in it; now,
must we reject the good because of the bad that is mingled with it?

I Answ. There are many good things in the Turkish Alcoran, as well as in the
Popish Massebook, yet may we not lawfully make use of either. The Israelites
did halt betwixt God and Baal; that is, they did retain a great part of the
true Worship of God, though they did join their own inventions with it: Now,
it is not the retaining some part of the true Worship, that will sanctify any
part of the false Worship that is joined with it; no, nor the true matter of
worship that will sanctisie the false form of it. A little leaven (here) will
leaven the whole lump. What though the Philistines did set up the Ark in the
temple (...) Dagon; yet that neither honored Dagon nor (...) Temple the more.
What though there may (...) some tares among the corn; yet still both retain
their own nature; this does not make the tare or weeds to become Corn. The
Inventions and Devices of men in God's Worship, they are but unclean things,
that nothing is able to wash, or to make clean. In Ezekiel. 43.8. God does reprove
them there for setting up their post by his post, and their threshold by his
threshold. They did not pull down God's post or threshold, and set up their own
in the room; but they set up their own by it. And in Zeph. 1.5. They there
would swear by the name of the Lord, and of Malcam too. So in 2 King. 17.33.
There were some that would serve Baal, and yet fear the Lord. That is, they
would not cast off all the Worship of God, but would retain some parts of it,
only they would join their own Inventions with it. Now, God hates to share his
Worship between Christ and Antichrist; that men should have in their
right-hands many Truths of Christ, but in their left many falsities of
Antichrist. Indeed, sometimes some part of God's Worship covers a great deal
of Superstition; There are many evils, much superstition used in the Worship
of God at this day, yet because they retain some principal Truths of the Gospel
therewith, that is a great cover to all their corruptions. And indeed, the nearer
you come to the true Worship of God, and yet retain false worship with it, the
more danger there is of swallowing up many people.

Obj. 4. I but (you will say unto me) there may some things be found amiss in
the prayers and preaching of the best Ministers, that we cannot join in faith
with. If we may not join with some good because there is some evil mingled with
it, why in this case more than in that?

I answer. That preaching and praying of Ministers, when they do exercise their
own gifts, and have not Prayers and Sermons made for them, it is an Ordinance of
God, and being an Ordinance of God, you may safely communicate therein,
notwithstanding that there may be some failings in the Minister: in which case
the rule is, To prove all things, and only to hold fast that which is good, 1 Thessalonians. 5.25. I but, when any thing is brought into the worship of God that is
not God's Ordinance, but man's, here you cannot communicate in it safely,
because it is that that God has not required, nor promised any blessing unto;
and therefore you are to reject it, and not to have communion with it. Indeed,
there are corruptions in the best hearts, and mixtures in the holiest duties: I
but when the People of God do worship God in spirit and in truth, as long as
they don't set up any Idols in their hearts, nor regard any iniquity in their
souls, (as David says) so long the Lord does not reject their services, though
there are some personal infirmities that attend them.

Obj. 5. I but (you will say) we hear worse things than these can be every day; as
we go along the streets we hear men swearing and cursing; and though we are
present, yet we hope we are never the worse for that.

I answer. Though you hear such things in the streets, yet if you by no act of
yours join with them in it, but do grieve in your spirits when you hear them,
the sin is theirs, and not yours.

Obj. 6. I but (you will say) suppose it be such a way of Worship that (it may be)
many holy and godly men use, and they have found good and comfort in it?

Answ. We must follow the examples of holy men, no further than they follow the
example and rules of Christ. It Is no sufficient argument to prove that such a
thing is good, because some holy men have used it; then it might be an argument
that taking of Concubines is good, because we read of some good men in the old
Testament that used it. Asa and Jehosaphat (I think) were good Kings; yet it is
said, that in their days the High Places were not taken down, and they are
blamed for it. Hezekiah comes after, and he removes them, and is commended for
what he did. I question not but when these good men went into these
High Places, though they did evil in what they did, yet the Lord might manifest
himself good to them. Though some good men have used the Ordinances of God with
some corruptions and mixtures, yet the Lord has so far accepted of the
integrity and uprightness of their hearts in what they did, as that they have
found peace and comfort in so doing: I but this was the mercy of God to them.
You must not think it enough to justisie any evil or corruption in worship,
that some good men have used it, and yet found comfort in the Ordinances: the
times of their ignorance God might wink at, if they did but seek and serve him
according to what they knew.

Obj. 7. I but what if such a way of Worship be imposed on us, and commanded,
then it is their faults that impose it, and not our faults that do it.

I answer: That no man can without sin compose, or impose any forms or ways of
Worship of his own devising, for which he has no ground in the Word of God; so
neither can any submit to them without sin. What is unlawful in him that
imposes, must needs be unlawful in him that does receive it, and submit to it.
The King in commanding Daniel not to pray, did not make Daniels praying ever
the more unlawful: And the King's commanding the three Children and the rest to
bow, did not commend the act, or make it ever the more lawful. It Is not man's
allowing or commanding that does make lawful any way of Worship that is not
warranted by the Word of God. No man can lawfully do any thing in the Worship
of God, but that which he is satisfied in his conscience he may do, whether
commanded by man or not.

Obj. 8. I but (you will say) the matter is not great, and we will yield but a
little for peace and quietness sake.

I answer: There is not a more dangerous and deceitful temptation than that in
the world, for men to yield to the beginnings of evil under this pretense, that
they will yield but in a little. He that is not faithful in a little, will not
be faithful in much. The Priest that yielded to the King so far as to make the
Altar, and set it up, afterward must yield further, to offer upon the Altar, 2
Kin. 16. the 11th, 15 and 16 verses compared. As, many good men, they have
thought to yield thus far, and thus far, for peace and quietness sake: I but
when once their feet have been in the snare, they have after swallowing some
gnats, swallowed Camels too: and if the Serpent once get in his head, he will
soon get in his whole body. It Is a dangerous thing to go after the inventions
of men, though in never so little, (the Rule is certain;) because they know not
how far they shall go. As a Nobleman of England once said, I will pin my faith
on no man's sleeve, because I know not whither they will carry it. The true
Religion has the Word of God for its Rule, which remains certain and
unalterable; so that when I guide my self by that, I know how far I must go,
and where to stop; but when I make the Traditions and Inventions of men my
Rule, here is no certain stop at all; for men may be multiplying their
Traditions and Inventions every day. Therefore it is dangerous to yield in
little things in matter of false Worship.

Obj. 9. I but (you may say) it is possible hereby we may deprive our selves of
many of the Ordinances of God, and so deprive our souls of comfort, and we had
better do it.

Answ. 1. Let me ask you, What comfort and benefit can you expect from the
Ordinances of God, if you may not enjoy them as appointed by ^he Lord? If you
cannot enjoy God's Ordinances without committing sin, it is your duty to forbear
them; for this is the Rule, You may not do evil for the enjoyment of good, Romans
3.8. And therefore, it is not simply the want of Ordinances that is your sin,
but your contempt of them. I but now, when you cannot enjoy them in the way and
after the manner enjoined of the Lord, and forbear them upon that account, this
is no contempt, therefore not your sin. But further,

Answ. 2. Blessed be the Father of mercies, there is yet a possibility of
enjoying the Ordinances of God according to his own appointment; Though we may
not have them so publicly as we could desire, yet we may have them elsewhere,
and it is our duty (as you have heard made good to you) to follow
Gospel-Administrations to whatever place they are confined, and in whatever
place they may be enjoyed; if they are driven into corners, we must follow them
into those corners.

But now, here I meet with another Objection, and it has respect

1. To our absenting our selves from the Public Assemblies. And --

2. To our betaking of our selves to the more Private-Meetings of God's People.

And both of them have their rise from the Laws made in that behalf.

1. Respecting our absenting our selves from the Public Assemblies.

Object. You will say unto me, It Is possible, if we do not yield, we may
suffer; we may be undone both We and our Families too.

Answ. All I will say to that, is this; When you may not obey the Commands of
men, without sinning against God, you had better suffer than sin: you had
better suffer from men, because you are afraid of offending God; than to suffer
from God, because you are afraid of offending men. This indeed is a great
temptation to many a good soul, and holy man, O what will become of my Wife and
Children? if I lose my Living, my means of Livelihood, they may starve, and my
Conscience is against that: I have peace neither day nor night. Why it was the
case of those we spoke of but now, (in 1 King. 19.18.) they ventured Lives and
Estates and All, rather than they would bow the knee to Baal: I but yet God was
a Sanctuary to them, he provided an Obadiah that fed them, 1 King. 18.4. And
when Elijah was forced to flee for his life from the Prophets of Baal, God
commanded an Angel one time, and a Raven another time to feed him, 1 King.
19.17. and 1 King. 14.4, 6. If ordinary means fail, God knows how to raise up
extraordinary means, and will do so in time of his Peoples distress. Mind that
place in Isa. 66.5. Hear the Word of the Lord, ye that tremble at his Word;
your Brethren that hated you, that cast you out for my Name sake, said, Let the
Lord be glorified; but he shall appear to your joy, and they shall be ashamed.
Mark, my Brethren: There are a company among you that do tremble at my Word,
(q. d.) that dare not do any thing in my Worship without my Word; but there are
others of your Brethren that will find out ways to avoid sufferings; and will
adventure upon things in my Worship that I never commanded them; and they hate
you, and cast you out, excommunicate you, because you are not of their
judgment, because your consciences are more tender than theirs: I but he shall
appear to your joy, and they shall be ashamed: though for the present you may
lie under contempt, and be reproached as factious persons, and they may flatter
it out, and have preferments from the world, yet in time to come, the Lord will
appear to your joy, and their shame. And certainly, Brethren, the time is a
coming, and not far off, when the Lord will appear for his Worship, and for his
Ordinances in the purity of them; and when he will cast shame and contempt-upon
all false worship and worshippers. Let me shut up this, with a story concerning
a Christian Soldier, who being in the Heathen Army, and it being a day whereon
the Heathen Soldiers did always use to wear a Vail upon their heads, in
honor to some Idol god; the Christian Soldier in stead of wearing his Vail on
his head, he carried it in his hand: whereupon his Fellow Soldiers did begin
to scoff at him, and a great mutiny there was presently in the Army, and he
brought before the Officers to answer for his fact; and his answer was, I am a
Christian, I dare not conform to them in their superstitious observation of
days. At which they were exceedingly enraged, and so, that not only he, but
other Christians were like to suffer by his means: so that many other
Christians were hugely offended with this Christian, that he would stand upon
such a small thing. Now, Tertullian commends him, as being one that was holier
than any of the rest, who for fear of Persecution would comply and yield to
their superstitious observations. And though the other Christians said, Where
are we [forbidden] to wear a Vail on our heads? He answered, But where are we
[commanded] to do any such thing? So, some indeed may comply, and yield to
ruperstitious observations; yet those that are of a true Christian Spirit will
not comply, whatever persecutions or sufferings may fall upon them for it. As
in that fore-quoted place, 1 King. 19.8. I have left me seven thousand in
Israel, that have not (no, nor never will, come what will) bowed the knee to
Baal, nor kissed him with their lips. But now,

2. The other part of the Objection respects our betaking of our selves to the
more Private-Meetings of Gods People; and it is this: There are Laws made
against them, and we shall run our selves into danger if we be taken in these
Conventicles. To this I answer:

1. If you will be afraid of danger, then never think of performing duty: if
you will still be afraid of danger, you will be sure to keep your selves as much
as you can out on it, whatever duty you neglect for it: if you will be afraid
of danger, little hope then that you will ever either do, or be good at all;
seeing that if any man [will] live godly in Christ Jesus, he [must] suffer
persecution. The fearful did never yet set up any Trophies of Victory.

2. Had the Saints in former Ages and Times been afraid of danger, they had
never left us such examples as they have done. They would do their duty, and
trust God with their safety, let whatever would come on them.

3. Let me tell you, it is a very shameful and a very sinful thing, to shun
services and duties, because we would avoid sufferings and dangers. You must
have a care you don't suffer as evildoers, but never fear suffering as
well-doers. In 1 Pet. 4.15, 16. But let none of you suffer as a murderer, or as
a thief, or as an evil-doer, or as a busiebody in other men's matters; yet, if
any man [suffer as a Christian] let him not be ashamed, but let him glorify
God in this behalf.

And thus I have done with the second Inference. Again --

3. It does inform us what to think of these Conventicles, of these meetings
together of God's People. You should think of them as things of consequence, as
things of concernment, as things of soul and salvation-concernment, as things
that we ought and are bound as much to come to, as to any other duty whatsoever.

Now there are six or seven things this way that I would lay before you.

1. Look on them in God's Dictionary, and find how you read them there: There
they are called the Communion of Saints; the Paradise of the Earth; the
Harbingers of Heaven; the Firstfruits of Canaan; the Earnest of Eternal Joy,
and this is all.

2. Look upon them as the only Worship that God had in the pure and primitive
times, in the beginning of the Gospel-dayes, when no place in public was
admitted them, or allowed to them.

3. Look on Conventicles as all the means of comfort that you your selves are
like to have in times of persecution and fiery trial. When Ministers are driven
into corners, follow them into those corners.

4. Look upon them as the great Hammer, to break and beat down Antichrist's
Kingdom.

5. Look upon them as Evidences of your Grace, of the truth of your Grace, and
of the strength of your Grace, that you are neither afraid to confess Christ,
nor yet ashamed to confess him.

6. Look upon them as a great help of your Faith, to increase it, to strengthen
it; to get and procure joy and comfort.

7. Look on them, as things very highly pleasing unto God: as you may see in
the Text; -- The Lord hearkened and heard; even as a man that hears some
curious Music, he gives his mind with all intention to the same. -- O let me
hear thy voice; for thy voice is sweet, Cant. 2.14. it is spoken of the Church
in her Meetings. When they came together, O how delightful it was to God! But
--

Secondly. The next Use shall be of Lamentation. Is it thus, that there ought
to be such Meetings, and for such ends as you have heard, among which (I told
you) this was one, To humble and afflict our souls? then let us put it into
execution this day. Give me leave to strike this nail to the head, yea, to the
heart, that it may be a day of great lamentation, and of great mourning, that
we may every one pour out our souls before the Lord. (Beloved, this is very
necessary.) And --

First, Begin with your own souls, search them to the very bottom; labor to
find out your sins, and endeavor to bring your hearts to a godly sorrow and
repentance for them, such a one as may be unto life. O that as your sins have
been as clouds over your heads, so now they may break down into your hearts by
a shower of godly sorrow! Consider seriously how highly and heavily God is
provoked against you. Methinks that very one thing, That God is become our
Enemy, hides his face from us, stops his cars against us, and turns his back
upon us, were enough to kill any gracious heart, and to strike him dead at his
soul.

Look but upon what your sin has provoked God to do, and upon what it may
provoke God to do, and I hope that will humble you at this day, for fear your
peace, and the things thereof should be hid from your eyes.

First. What it has provoked God to do, viz. to rid you of your choicest
mercies, your precious opportunities, to strip you stark naked of all your
glorious privileges; except now and then a bit in a corner, we can else get no
pure bread, but a stone in stead of bread, and a Viper in stead of Fish. Says
David, My tears are my meat and drink day and night, while they continually say
unto me, Where is thy God? Psalm. 42.3. The loss of God's presence may well
humble us, and cause us to water our couch with our tears. And then,

Another thing that may make us humble is this; God has spit in our faces. O
this should go to our hearts. If a Father spit in his Daughters face for her
Adultery and Uncleanness, will she not be ashamed? yea, and grieve too? Now,
shall God spit in his Peoples face, and we not be ashamed, and grieved? Why,
it is so, that God has spit in our faces. For,

1. God has (in a large degree) given us over to the power and lust of our
enemies. There is not a greater cut to God's People, than to be in their
enemies hand, or in their enemies Land. -- He delivered his glory over into the
enemies hand, because they had provoked him, Psalm. 78.58, 61. Why truly, the
Philistines have gotten us into their hands, and whether they will put out our
eyes, or take away our lives we cannot tell.

2. Not only so; but we have provoked God so to spit in our faces, as that we
stink in the nostrils of our enemies, so that they scorn and deride us, because
we have sinned against the Lord. Jacob's complaint was of Simeon and Levi, --
You have made me to stink among the inhabitants of the Land, Genesis 34.30. Truly,
so have our sins made us to stink in the nostrils of all our enemies round
about us. This it has provoked God to do. But now,

Secondly, Consider what your sins may provoke God to do. If so be you don't
lament, return, reform, you will provoke God to proceed yet further against
you. Brethren, there are sad things, rods laid in brine for you, if you don't
lay your souls in brine: There are Fines, Prisons, -- carrying of you into
strange Lands, etc. In Lev. 26. ver. 27 to 33. there God tells them plainly,
because they would not be instructed nor reformed by those punishments that he
had brought upon them, therefore he would send them into their enemies Land; he
would make the Nation to cast them out, so that they should have no more
sanctuary in that place. Again,

Thirdly. Let me tell you (by way of comfort) if you will repent, lament,
reform, and return, there is hope in Israel concerning this thing: Oh there is
mercy with God, that he might be feared. With God there is pity, pardon, peace;
and God is ready to bestow it, yea, more ready than we are to receive it. But
--

Secondly. As we should mourn over our own sins, so we should lament over the
sins of the people of the Land among whom we live; we should weep for them that
laugh at us, and mourn for them that mourn not for themselves.

And know, there are (1.) the sins of the Priests, and (2) the sins of the
People. Now take either of these: --

First, The sins of the Priests. Jer. 23.15. For from the [Priests]
profaneness is gone out into the Land. Truly, so we may say; God's House that
was a House of Prayer, is [now] become a Den of Thieves and Robbers. The Wine
of the Sanctuary is now become the Venom of the Sanctuary.

And I might divide them over again, into the Fathers of the Church, and the
Sons of the Church, (as they call themselves:) they have their great and
grievous sins of both sorts: --

First. The Fathers: Look upon their Pride and Prelacy, their setting up of
will worship, their lording it over Christ's people, their persecuting of God's
People for Conscience Sake, etc. And,

Secondly. The Sons of the Church; their Apostasy and Atheism.

1. Their Apostasy. Diverse that were among us once, their compliance with them
that hate the Lord, and putting stumbling blocks before the weak; and their
horrible subscription, whereby they do interpretatively deny the Faith it self.

2. Their Atheism: their base Ignorance, their gross Drunkenness and
Covetousness, their slavish (...) of him they call their Diocessan, being more
(...) of offending against a Bishops Canon, than Gods Commandment; and their
preferring the Book of Common Prayer above the Bible. O that we could lay these
things seriously and sadly to heart, even the wickedness of the Clergy! O the
sins of the Clergy are very great and grievous! And then,

Secondly. For the People. (And it is very like, if the Priests be bad, the
people will be worse; and if the sons of the Church will be the sons of Belial,
the people will be apt to learn any wickedness that they shall teach them,
either by their principles, or by their practices.) O the Blasphemy, the hatred
of Holiness, Swearing, Cursing, drinking of Healths, yea, even in their own
blood; yea, many drinking Healths to the Devil himself! We read in Act. 14.11.
that the people there cried out concerning Paul and Barnabas, that the Gods
were come down from heaven to them in the likeness of men: but if they were now
in England, they would surely say that the Devils were come up into the Land
among us.

Let us therefore (my Brethren) now do our duties, carry our selves as friends
to them, though they carry themselves as enemies to us. Let us be the Lot's,
the Noah's, the David's, the Jeremiah's, the Paul's, whose eyes were Rivers of
waters, and did run down night and day, because men did break the Law of God. I
have told you often, and now tell you weeping, that they are enemies to the
Cross of Christ; whose end is destruction, whose God is their belly, and whose
glory is their shame, who mind earthly things. O let us pray for their souls,
their conviction and conversion. Brethren, though you have been praying long
already, and see but little account of your prayers, yet follow it on still,
you do not know but that the hearts of your enemies may be given in unto you: O
pray that they may be reformed, and that they may return, and may set up the
Lord Jesus Christ, whom they have dethroned.

And then, my Brethren, if so be that your prayers (you see) cannot prevail for
them, then (there is another duty remains for you to do, (The first must be
done first; but afterward) pray that the strong East wind of the Lord would
come, and blow these (...), and Locusts, and Droans out of the Land. I shall
not need to give you many places of Scripture to prove this Truth, seeing it is
so very plain from that fourth chapter of Nehemiah, the 4th and 5th verses,
where when the enemies of God set themselves against the building of the Temple
of the Lord, Nehemiah prays unto the Lord that he would preserve them, but
overturn, their enemies. And truly, my Brethren, though I speak of this as our
duty, yet I could more abundantly wish, that God would hear our prayers for
their conversion, than for their destruction.

Here I might have added a third Use, and that is, To exhort and persuade you
all, that whenever these is any such opportunity of private meeting together,
never to be discouraged from it, because you shall be derided, or may come
other ways to suffer by it: No, it is your Glory, it is your Crown, at such
times as these are, that you dare so bravely and boldly acknowledge the Lord
Jesus Christ, against so many opposers and deniers of Him, that are in the
times and places where you live. But I suppose it would be needless to urge it
any further: you see it is a duty, and the very Reasons (that I have given you)
of the Point, will be Arguments sufficient: Therefore I shall leave this with
you, and both this and you with God, desiring of the Lord to add his blessing
to what has been spoken, that it may be of good use to you.

FINIS.

