His MAJESTY the King of Denmarks LETTER To His HIGHNESS the Duke of Holstein
(GOTTORP) Concerning the Sequestration of the Dukedom of Schleswig: And the
said Duke's Answer thereunto.

As also His Imperial Majesty's Letter to the Duke of Holstein: With the Dukes
Answer.

Printed Anno Domini 1677.

THE KING of DENMARKs LETTER to the DUKE of HOLSTEIN Gottorp, Concerning the
SEQUESTRATION.
Christian the Fifth, by the Grace of God, King of Denmark, etc.
Serene Duke, etc.
IT is not unknown to your Dilection, what hitherto has past about the
receiving of the Investiture over the Dukedom of Schleswig; whereunto you have
obliged your self by the late Agreement of Rendesbourg; and how your Dilection
since that time, upon our several well-minded Admonitions, by diverse Letters
directed to Us, has promised the performance thereof; and in order thereunto,
sent hither some of your Ministers, who nevertheless under the pretext of going
for some nearer instructions from your Dilection, are lately parted again from
hence, without having dispatched any thing at all. And whereas We have hitherto
in vain expected their promised return; the time likewise at the said Agreement
of Rendesbourg appointed for the receiving of the abovementioned Investiture
being already in the Month of. July last past, besides diverse others since
indulged Terms long ago expired; We also having a sufficient and true
information of those most dangerous Machinations, which your Dilection has in
hand against Us and Our State; and besides, being very requisite, that We
carefully do mind what is necessary for the preserving of this Investiture,
depending from Us and Our Crown of Denmark: Therefore have we found Our selves
unavoidably, and as it were against Our will obliged, now to Sequestrate that
part of the said Dukedom, wherewith your Dilections Ancestors have been
heretofore Invested; and to issue out a Commission to some of our Counselors
and Officers there residing, for putting in Execution the said Sequestration,
and for performing all what is necessary to be done about the same. Since
therefore We would rather have desired any thing else, than to come to this
Extremity, We have thought good to give notice of this Our Resolution to your
Dilection, and to appoint yet out of a super-abundance another Term of Six
weeks from the date hereof, for the receiving of the said Investiture, to the
end that your Dilection and all the World may see, how willingly We would use
all possible moderation herein, without any over-hastening of your Dilection.
However, we do it with this further precaution and warning, that in case the
said prefixed Term, contrary to all expectation, likewise should be disregarded
by your Dilection, We then shall be necessitated, though much against Our Will,
to proceed ad apsam Pravationem Feudi, or to the cutting off the Fief, and to
take such further courses as the Feudal Laws do allow of. Of all this We have
thought convenient to advertise your Dilection, Recommending, etc.

Dated at Our Place of Residence at Copenhagen, the 19th of December. 1676. Your
Dilections Affectionate Cosen and Brother-in-Law, CHRISTIAN.

The Duke of HOLSTEIN's Answer to the aforegoing Letter.
Most Serene and most Potent King, etc.
YOur Majesty's Letter of the 19th of December last past, from Copenhagen
directed to Us, has been presented to Our hands the second of this instant, by
an Express from one of your Majesty's Commissaries; By the Contents whereof We
have seen the same, what already some days before had been published by some
Letters Pattents affixed in Our Dukedom of Schleswig, viz. That your Majesty
has been induced to Sequestrate that part of the said Dukedom, which does
belong to Us, and to nominate to that effect certain Commissaries, with the
annexed warning, that in case we did not within Six weeks, from the date of the
said Letter, effectually accomplish the receiving of the Invenstiture over that
Dukedom of Schleswig, your Majesty would proceed ad ipsam Privationem Feudi, or
the cutting off the Fief, and take such further courses as the Feudal Laws do
allow off, being moved thereunto by these reasons, That We in the point of the
receiving of the said Investiture, neither had performed that so termed late
Agreement of Rendesbourgh, nor the Promises made by Our Letters under Our own
hand, nor sent back our Ministers, who without any dispatch of Affairs were
gone from Copenhagen; but that on the contrary we had had in hand most
dangerous, and by a singular accident, discovered machinations against your
Majesty, and your State; and had also, as it were, unavoidably obliged your
Majesty to the preservation of your Majesty's and the Crown of Denmark's own
Rights.

Whereupon we cannot but with all due respect return this our Answer to your
Majesty, that for the sake of your Majesty's own Glory, and high Reputation,
and your Realms and Dominions welfare, We have most ardently desired and
wished, that our thoughts at the first seeing of your Majesty's aforementioned
Letters Patents, (as if they might have been published without your knowledge)
might have a sure ground, and your Majesty such a Kindness for us, as not to
indulge any longer our Persecutors, but rather to put a period to those unusual
hard proceedings, which we undeservedly have suffered from them, and to
reestablish and consolidate that ancient tie and friendship which has proved
so useful and beneficial to both Great Houses, and their respective Kingdoms,
Territories and Subjects; seriously considering withal, that it cannot be
available neither to the repute of your Majesty's innate Generosity, nor to
your Majesty's Realms and Dominions, to see us, who are in many regards so
nearly related, and never failing neither in due Respects, nor required
Faithfulness to your Majesty, thus oppressed, and reduced to a quite desperate
condition, without having been able to impetrate the least redress, which yet
lies so absolutely in your Majesty's own hands.

However, this is our only and especial comfort in all our daily increasing
calamities, that your Majesty by your Letters does suppeditate to us an
occasion to make our justification before your self and briefly to refute those
accusations so inhumanly invented by our ill-willers. For your Majesty's own
Christian Conscience will be the best and surest witness for us, that we never
have entertained any other Counsels, nor have negotiated with any body
whatsoever about any other things, but what to our best understanding we have
deemed to be good, expedient and lawful for a free Prince, to preserve our
selves in that State God Almighty has been pleased to settle us in, by making
us a lawful Heir and Successor to the Duke our Father of blessed memory, and to
transmit the same to our Posterity, even as we had got it. We our selves have
not made that Agreement concluded at Copenhagen on the 12th. day of May in the
year 1658, but have inherited those Rights, which in due consideration of the
manifold damages sustained, were thereby accrued to our Family. And it is also
known to the World, that we have employed none at all at the Treaty and
Conclusion of the reiterated Northern Peace in the Camp for Copenhagen, on the
27th. day of May in the year 1660, although we had then already taken the
Government upon us; and the said Treaty of Copenhagen has nevertheless been
confirmed therein, and the Guarantie thereof undertaken by them three most
Puissant States of Christendom: And presupposed his Majesty the King of
Denmark, Frederick the Third, our most Honored Father-in-Law of glorious
memory, something unwillingly, and against his mind, (which yet is altogether
unknown to us, since his Family as well as ours has been benefitted thereby,)
should have proceeded to the granting of that Sovereignty, and other advantages
promised to our Family; however it is but a merely spontaneous Act: Nay, it
has been an evident token of his Royal Affection toward us, that having
observed by our Addresses for a near Alliance of Marriage in his Royal Family,
our sincere inclination toward him, his Majesty in the year 1667; when the
Contract of Marriage in his own Fortress at Gluckstadi was a making up, has in
all and the singular Articles, Points and Clauses, wholly, and to all
perpetuity, confirmed to us the abovesaid Treaty of Copenhagen, grounded upon
the Sovereignty over the Dukedom of Schleswig, and established the same jointly
with that ancient Union for a perpetual norm and rule betwixt both Families,
with this engagement, and Royal firm Parol, that himself and his hereditary
Successors in the Government, neither directly nor indirectly would act, nor
cause to be acted against the same. But in what manner we have since been dealt
withal at Rendensbourg in the year 1675. and how we have been constrained by a
most troublesome detention to surrender our Fortresses, Artillery, Ammunition
and Militia; yet with this Comfort given us, that all differences therewith
were ended, and upon change of Times, and an ensuing Peace, all should be
restored in such a condition as it was taken from us; and how notwithstanding
all this, (after we forsooth for our Person were dismissed to Gottorp, yet
still had strange Troops about us, and so only had changed place, but not
detention,) certain Articles have been prescribed to our Ministers and
Counselors remaining behind in Arrest, and we forced to the pretended
Ratification thereof, even as we were to the surrender of our Fortresses
without any liberty left us, only therein to alter things quite inconsistent
with the Dignity of a Free- German Prince of the Empire: We are as unwilling to
relate, as your Majesty can be desirous to hear, and should also have forborne
to mention it either to your Majesty, or to any others, if we were not assured
in our Conscience that your Majesty out of an inbred Heroic love to Justice
does detest such a way of proceeding, and in that regard has laid a Ground for
that high displeasure your Majesty thereupon conceived against him, who out of
Reasons unknown to us, has occasioned all that mischief which then did befall
us.

And since thar time we have not been able to imagine, that your Majesty should
ever have intended, to erect that so termed Agreement of Rendesbourg,
proceeding from such derogatory and extorted Principles, and consequently
turning void by Law, into a Pragmatical Sanction, after your Majesty has
charged our Subjects with such Contributions as are untollerable, and do quite
cut of both our extraordinary and ordinary Revenues, and has quite demolished
to the Ground our Fortresses, your Majesty having thus your self thereby
introduced an impossibility to perform what the pretended Agreement of
Rendesbourg does import; For if we by virtue thereof are to receive the
Investiture over the Dukedom of Schleswig, it must be done at least after such
a manner, as the Duke our Father of blessed Memory the last time, viz. In the
year 1648, has received the same; and then we ought to be invested not only
with the bare Land, but also with those Fortresses, fince the last Feudal
Letter does make express mention thereof. It is true, we do confess, that even
after such rigorous proceedings, to testify our deference to your Majesty, and
our desire to Peace, but chiefly, to sublevate something our Subjects groaning
under their burden, and to promote their freedom according to our Power; we
have been come so far, as to condescend at length to the receiving the
Investiture upon these terms, that all things should be resettled in such a
state, as they had been before the pretended Agreement of Rendesbourg, and that
the weighty burden lying upon our Territories, should be taken off, and due
satisfaction effectually made for the damages sustained: And for that purpose
we have sent some of our Ministers to Copenhagen; but our just desires have
been rejected, an unconditional performance of the Feudal Duty insisted on, and
the redress of our Grievances set out of doors, and our Ministers having
alleged the want of full Powers thereunto, have been sent away back for new
Instructions; without being recalled by us from Copenhagen, as Her Majesty the
Queen Mother by her own Letters dated at Copenhagen the 19th day of November,
1676, has informed us. And we do confess very freely, that in case our
Subjects presently after our Conditional Promise made, had been eased from
their burden, the Fortresses reduced to their former state, and due
satisfaction effectually given us, we would have done the utmost, and undergone
afresh that Feudal Duty. But whereas also yet fince possession has been taken,
of our part of Stadt and Butjadinger-Land, notwithstanding the same has no
relation at all to that Process, which was actitated at Vienna in the Cause of
Oldenbourg, and besides his descending as a Fief from the Ducal House of
Brunswig Lunebourg. Our Subjects likewise both in Holstein and Sleswig have
been forbid to pay us the few remaining ordinary dues, and furthermore such
aims are made, as to exclude us from that Treaty of a General Peace at
Nimvegen, and consequently from all hopes of redress, and yet has but lately
the Navigation been by open Proclamations absolutely Interdicted to all our
Inhabitants and Subjects of the Dukedoms of Schleswig and Holstein, without
affording us, as Prince Regent, the least communication thereof, much less
designing us to join in the said Publication, if the same had been required: We
therefore have had good reason to wave the sending over our Deputies the second
time again, after they were thus dismissed before, but rather have taken a firm
resolution to get our Cause ventilated and discussed at the Treaty of the
General Peace at Nimwegen, with these certain hopes and confidence, that no
Potentate concerned therein will dispute our admission, in regard that amongst
other high concerns, there will be also treated about the re-establishment of
the Northern Peace, whereupon our Sovreignty over the Dukedom of Sbhleswig with
the other advantages stipulated for us and our Family, is not only grounded,
but also is an essential part thereof and stands comprehended under the
undertaken General and Special Warranty. Neither do we think. that your
Majesty's Minister in Holland has had any orders to render difficult the
impetrating of the Pasports, by us desired from the States General of the
United Provinces; for our Ministers destined to Nimegen, seeing he has not
been able to alledg any thing at all which should deserve the least reflection,
and exclude us from the General-Treaty, if we were but to be considered as a
German Prince, and had no concerns in the re-establishment of the Northern
Peace, which nevertheless has first of all periclitated on our side. But
concerning those machinations discovered by a singular accident, whereby, as we
do conceive, some end^^vours are used, to justify that in all points
disformally commenced Sequestration, we have not the least cause to clear our
selves in that respect, before any particulars are nearer touched, and it be
duly made appear to us, that we have been given concerned in any of those
Machinations represented to your Majesty. However we are sure and confident,
that we never have been so suspectedly privy to any thing, as that thereby just
cause should have been given, to charge us therewith by Potentates both within
and without the Empire, and to abalienate their former inclination from us and
our Family, much less can a Pretext thereby conveniently be taken to
sequestrate that part of the Dukedom of Schleswig, which with all right
Hereditarily and Property does belong to us, and to menace us with a total
deprivation thereof; and we do also fully persuade our selves, that your
Majesty will put this to the serious consideration of your Ministers, who have
brought this Process upon the Stage, and perhaps do endeavor to assert it is
consistency with the Feudal Laws* that as your Majesty doubtless makes great
doubt, to assume a Judges part in that proper Cause, so neither the
Sequestration of the Fief, nor the Deprivation of the same can or may consist
after that manner, as it it intended against us, although we should be
undisputably obliged to that Vassallage of the Dukedom of Schleswig, which yet
saving all due respect to your Majesty, we find our so ves necessitated
solemnly to contradict, except one would presume to Act by nullities; or by
making no reflection upon the Law. And the common Feudal Laws, whereupon
likewise the ancient unions and Hereditary Agreements, (in case any difference
as well in Feudal as other matters should arise) are usually grounded, do show,
that not only in the total deprivation of a Fief, but also in the
Sequestration, the hearing of the Cause before a Competent Judge ought solemnly
to preceed, notwithstanding one would presume to assert the necessiity of a
Sequestration, in case the the parties do show themselves unwilling; the
reasons whereof nevertheless will never be made out by those pretended
Machinations.

Having therefore pondered all the abovementioned, and such other concomitant
circumstances, we cannot but still keep to our resolution once deliberately
taken and remit that point of our undeservedly questioned Sovereignty over the
Dukedom of Schleswig, with all the other abalienated Dignities, Prerogatives,
Territories, and Fortresses; as also all due and equitable satisfaction, and
what else can conduce to our future* Security, to the place of Congress for a
general Peace at Nimvegen, patiently expecting from God and time, what
Conclusion there will be made and come forth about the restoring of the
Northern Peace, and consequently also of our Rights and Concerns. But we do in
the mean while very kindly and instantly entreat withal your Majesty, that out
of an inclination to Justice, and in regard of that desolate condition,
whereunto we and ours thus undeservedly see our selves the more and more
reduced, your Majesty would be pleased till then, and till the speediest (God
grant) ensuing conclusion of a general Peace, to preserve all peaceable
thoughts, and not to press upon us any further with the said Investiture, and
any other demands; but on the contrary, without delay to recall thot disconform
and misgrounded Sequestration, and not only leave to us the enjoyment of all
our Rights and Prerogatives undisturbed, but also to take off the exceeding
Contributions from our quite exhausted Subjects, and to restore that part of
Stadt and Butjadinger-Land and also of the Customs at Eltfliet properly
appertaining unto us, and amicably and friendly to interpret this our
unavoidable Justification and Declaration, with this assurance, that as we have
in all Points carefully observed that high respect due to your Majesty, so
likewise we have intended to say or write nothing, what should tend against the
same. All this is very consentaneous to equity, and to your Majesty's inbred
Generosity; and we shall be ready for our part every where to praise such your
Majesty's kindness, and with due thankfulness, and all possible services,
always acknowledge the same; most faithfully recommending withal your Majesty to
God Almighty's Protection.

Dated Hamborough the 16th of Jan, 1677. Your Majesty's Obsequious Cousin and
Brother-in-Law Christian Albrecht.

THE EMPEROR'S LETTER to the Duke of Holstein.
LEOPOLD by the Grace of GOD Elected Roman-Emperor.
Serene Duke, etc.
BY these we do give to understand to your Dilection, how we are informed, that
you have not only for your part approved of those projects which have been made
to you by Graventahl the Swedish Minister lately residing in our Imperial City
of Hamborough, about certain Levies to be made in Foreign Parts, and are come
to a certain conclusion with him in that affair; but also that your Dilection
for the promoting of the said Levies has made use of Kielman your late
President's Moneys, that lie there, and taken thereof the Sum of 200000
Rixdollars, and that your Dilection does employ in this affair the Swedish
President, K^^y, (who hitherto has pretended to live there as a private man,)
and also another person named Vlke.

And although we do repose a far better confidence in your Dilection, than that
by setting aside your strict ties and duties toward us, and the whole Roman
Empire, should thus lose your self, and by such prohibited, and very much
culpable advances, take the enemies part, contrary to the public Statures of
the Empire, and our imperial Avocatories published thereupon; yet have we
thought good kindly to acquaint, and seriously to admonish you by these, that
in case things should be thus, your Dilection might betimes desist from such
enterprises, and embracing better counsel, comport your self, according to what
duty does require of a Loyal Member of the Empire, to the end, that otherwise
we may not obliged, to cause to be proceeded against your Dilection, according
to our Imperial Avocatories; all which is for your Dilections Government;
Tendering withal our Imperial Grace and good Will to your Dilection. Dated at
our Castle at Lantz the 6th. of January in the year of our Lord 1677. of our
Reign in the Roman Empire the 19th. in Hungary the 22th. and in Bohemia the
21th.

LEOPOLD, V. Leopold William Count of Konigsegg.
Ad mandatum Sacrae Caesariae, Majestatis proprium, John Ambrose Hogell.

The Duke of Holstein's Answer to the afore-going Letter of the Emperor.
Most Serene, etc.
YOur Imperial Majesty's most gracious Letter from Lantz of the 6th Instant,
has been some days ago delivered to me by your Imperial Majesty's Minister
here residing the Lord Baron of Rondeck, and received by me with all the
humblest respects imaginable; but with an extreme astonishment I have
understood by the contents thereof, that your Imperial Majesty should have got
an information, as if I had not only for my part approved of those projects,
which had been made to me by Graventahl the Swedish Minister, lately residing
here in Hamborough, about certain Levies to be made in Foreign Parts, and had
been come to a certain conclusion with him in that affair; but also that for
the promoting of the said Levies; I had made use of Kielman my late President's
Moneys, that lie here, and taken thereof the Sum of 200000 Rixdollars, and that
I also did employ in this affair the Swedish President Kleihe, (who hitherto
has pretended to live here as a private man,) and another person likewise
named Vloke;: And that your Imperial Majesty most graciously has thought good
thereupon to acquaint me therewith, and seriously to admonish me, that in case
things should be thus, (which yet your Imperial Majesty would scarce expect
from me,) I may betimes desist from such enterprises, and embracing better
Counsel, comport my self according to what duty does require of a Loyal Member
of the Empire, to the end, that otherwise your Imperial Majesty may not be
obliged to cause to be proceeded against me according to your published
Imperial Avocatories.

It is true, I cannot promise unto my self from your Imperial Majesty's most
mild, and yet most just disposition, nothing else, but that such your Imperial
Majesty's very gracious Letter, although occasioned by the industrious
contrivance of some envying persons, who by all ways and means seek very
watchfully the oppression and ruin of my self and my Ducal House, yet to no
other end has been sent to me, but that your Imperial Majesty might thereby
get a fitter occasion to discover my innocence, and consequently by your
Imperial Majesty's Authority and highest Power to protect me as a Loyal Member
and Prince of the Empire, against those who have made no conscience for the
space of those 19 months, with a very unworthy treatment undeservedly to
oppress me, and of all my Princely Dignity to leave me nothing more than bare
life: However, when I do call to mind again, in what manner your Imperial
Majesty's Requisitorials concerning me, which were delivered into his Majesty
the King of Denmark's hands, have been by the contrivance of some Ministers,
bearing an hatred to me, abused so far, that they have begun almost from that
very hour to exhaust my poor subjects as well of Holstein as also of Sleswig,
with intolerable Contributions, and to render them quite incapable to
contribute so much, as they were lawfully bound to do for the upholding my
Princely State and Dignity; which proceedings are yet till this very moment
continued, to the utter destruction of my Territories, notwithstanding no
further Imperial Requisitorials have been insinuated to me; and though the same
has been granted to other States of the Lower Circle of Saxony in the point of
Quarters: Then have I just reason to fear, that they likewise now under your
Imperial Majesty's highest Name and Authority, though against your Imperial
Majesty's will and intention do go about to color, and palliate what they
newly have spun out for the finishing of my premeditated ruin, and partly have
already brought to an execution: All which I have by my former complaints, with
all submission represented to your Imperial Majesty, and thereby most humbly
implored your speedy Protection; whereunto also I do now refer my self, in
hopes your Imperial Majesty will be pleased, not only most graciously to hear,
but also see them according to your Imperial Clemency forthwith redressed.

Concerning those Accusations brought before your Imperial Majesty, and laid
home at my door, I should never have Imagined, upon what bottom and foundation
they could be grounded, unless your Imperial Majesty by the Nomination of
certain Persons had obliged me to a more exact information; whereupon I most
humbly can assure your Imperial Majesty by a true and faithful Word of a
Prince, that I never have hitherto had the least knowledge of those specified
Projects, touching the Levies of some Foreign Forces, much less, that I should
have approved of the same, or that I should have either directly or indirectly
with any man in the Worid, dealt or agreed about them. And I can protest with
Truth it self, that neither Kleyhe the King of Sweden's President; has all the
during time of his abode here made any Propositions to me concerning any
Conjunction with Foreign Crowns against your Imperial Majesty, and your high
Allies, nor ever offered to persuade me to any such thing. But this I do
declare willingly and freely, that I have caused my disconsolate condition,
whereunto I find my self undeservedly reduced, to be fully represented to his
Majesty the King of Great Britain. as Warrant of the Northern Peace, which
first of all began to bleed and suffer on my side; and my Requests to be made
withal, that His said Majesty would be pleased, in respect both of that General
and Special Warranty taken upon him concerning my Sovereignty over the Dukedom
of Sleswig lawfully obtained, to procure my Restitution, and due Satisfaction;
which I have been so far from disowning, that I have contented my self, that
the Memorials about the said Subject exhibited from time to time by my Deputy,
have faithfully been commucated to the Danish Minister residing in England. And
I have also employed at the Court even the same Vloken my Covnsellor at Court,
whom I did for almost two years employ at your Imperial Majesty's Court; and
have amongst other Negotiations also caused my most humble Remonstrations and
frequent instances by him to be made to your Imperial Majesty for my
Protection, with these certain hopes that he has behaved himself so well, that
no cause is left to put any mistrust in him, or to charge him with any sinister
and il-grounded accusations: since therefore the abovesaid foul aspersions;
sindioudy contrived by my ill wishers, can never be proved, nor laid to my
door; the rest consequently cannot consist, that for the carrying on of such
fictitious Levies, I should have taken and employed the said Sum of 200000
Rixdollars belonging to the Heirs of Kielman, which moneys I do not know in the
least if they do lie her or no. Whereas now my Innocence, and Fictitiousnes of
those Sinister imputations do sufficiently appear by the premises; so can I
with all submission assure your Imperial Majesty, that nothing in the World
shall be ever pressed from me, which may offend and interrupt my Loyal Duties
tendered to your Imperial Majesty, and to the Roman Empire, and that Devotion
which my Ancestors have with their Princely Blood sealed up to that Mighty
House of Austria, I do therefore again most humbly implore your Imperial
Majesty, as the most Sacred Head of the Empire, that your Imperial Majesty
would be pleased to give no way to all the Suspicious raised against me, but
rather out of Highest Fatherly care to provide for such ways and means,
whereby I as a devoted Co-member of the Roman Empire may be upheld and freed
from all the pressing Calamities. Thus longingly I do look for your Imperial
Majesty's effectual and gracious Resolution, etc.

Dated at Hambourg the 20 of Jan. Ann. 1677.
FINIS.

