Choice Remarks, On the most Observable ACTIONS Performed by Lewis the XIV.
PRESENT KING IN FRANCE.

LONDON, Printed for Richard Janeway, in Queens-Head-Ally, in Paternoster Row.
In the Year 1681.

Choice Remarks On the most observable Actions, performed by Lewis the XIV.
Present King in France.
LEwis the 13th. by his last Will and Testament, ordained that the Queen his
Wife should have the Government and Charge of the Person of King Lewis the
14th. his Son, during his Minority, and the Regency of the Kingdom. This young
Prince was not much advanced in the fifth year of his Age ere he began to
triumph over his Enemies, through the successful Conduct of the Duke D'Anguien
at the memorable Battle of Rocroy, and the gaining of Thionvillle, after a
Siege of twenty-two days.

The Duke of Orleans the Kings Uncle, Lieutenant General of the Kingdom, added
to his Victories the taking of Graveline, where Marshal de Gassion gave most
signal Proofs of his Valor. Thus Luxemburgh, being taught that an Infant King,
might be Victorious, Germany was now to learn the same Lesson. The Duke of
Anguien advances to the Banks of the Rhine, Attacks the Bavarian Army, and
three times defeats them. He surrounds and takes Philipsburgh, for which reason
Worms would not dispute with him any longer for her Liberty, no more then
Mayence, besides a great number of other Cities that gloried in opening their
Gates to the Conqueror. The retaking of Lerida in some measure counterballanc'd
so many great advantages. But the next year we continued the Progress of our
Conquests in Lorraine by the taking La Mothe, where the Sieur Magalotti who
commanded for the King, received his deaths wound; and in Catalogna under the
conduct of the Count of Harcourt, who was received into Barcellona with
applause and Acclamation. He defeated the Spaniards at the Battle of Liorens,
in which the Enemy lost between five and six thousand Men. After that he took
the City of Balagnier, some Months after that, the Count of Plessis-Praslin,
had also in Roussillon reduced Roses to his Majesty's obedience.

During so many brave exploits the Duke of Orleans was was not idle in
Flanders, where he took by force the Cities of Pourbourk, Links, Lans, Bethune,
Liters, St. Venant, Arenantieres, Menene, and other places in that Province.
Nor was the Duked Anguien less prosperous in Germany, where that young Prince
gave Battle to the Imperialists and Bavarians, whom he defeated near to
Nortlingen, with the loss of their General Mercy, who was killed with a Musket
shot; and their General Gleen, who was taken Prisoner, the all afterward
exchanged for Marshal Grammont, who fell into the Enemies hands at the
beginning of the Fight. Insomuch, that by that Victory, the Imperialists and
Bavarians were very much weakened, and constrained to retreat out of our way
for their Oecurity, which gave us opportunity to take Treves, and settle the
Elector of that place.

1645. This year concluded happily with the Marriage of Vladislaus, King of
Poland, with the Princess Louise Maria de Gonzaga of Mantua, Daughter of
Charles Duke of Gonzaga, Cleves, Mantua and Nevers deceased.

So many glorious successes happening to our Nation begat in the minds of the
Spaniard that Stomackful despite which was the occasion of much Division at
Rome. For as that City is the place where the Animosity between the French and
Spaniard most publicly appears, it soon fell out, that a difference arose
between Prince Cardinal d' Este, Protector of France, and the Admiral of
Castile, Ambassador of Obedience from the most Catholick-King in that Court:
and this the more easily in regard that the Spanish-Faction believed it self to
be the strongest both in Number, and by reason of the Vicinity of Naples. But
the Spaniards forgot that it never was the Custom of the French to number
their Enemies; however, that they always bring their Designs to pass, when they
find the Honor of their Prince concerned. So that this Dispute was gloriously
decided for the French, in regard the unlucky dishonor redounded to the
Spaniards, to have made a great noise, vast preparations, but to have given
very little proof of their Courage.

1646. This year produced Prodigies in Flanders, such as were the taking of
Lancy, Courtroy, Bergues, and Mardike, the retaking of which, was not a little
fatal to France, through the loss of so many brave Gentlemen. The Count of Fois
was one of those Hero's that encountered the Danger, being the first that
entered the Trench, where nothing could resist his Courage; at length wearied
as he was, while he was Charging the Enemy a second time, he was shot in the
side with a Musket-Bullet, of which Wound he dyed soon after. Nevertheless this
Consolation rested with that Generous Prince in his Misfortune, that he had
followed the steps of the most Illustrious of his Predecessors, ending his days
with a Death like that of the Famous Gaston de Fois, whose Illustrious Actions
he had so strictly imitated. The Duke of Nemours in that Assault received a
Wound in the Knee, the Prince of Marcellac in the Shoulder. But the Count of
Rocheguion, and the Chevalier de Fiesque were so unfortunate as to loose their
Lives upon the spot.

The taking of Dunkirk recomforted the Duke of Anguien for them is fortune of
his most intimate Confidents. After which he understood with no small Joy, that
the defeat of the Garrison of Bassee, was the Act of the Marshal de Melleray,,
who was ordered by his Majesty to pass into Piedmont to join with the Marshal
de Pressis-Praslin. Those two Generals, after they had recruited our
Naval-Forces, took soon after Piombino, and Porto Longone, and by such noble
Exploits they made us easily forget the misfortune of the Siege of Orbitello.
We were also thereby the less sensible of the loss of Armentier and Landrecies,
of which Archduke Leopold, made himself Master in the year 1647. Which was a
year remarkable for variety of Accidents. The Spanish Navy was defeated by the
French, upon the Sea of Genoa, in sight of Naples, and the Duke of Breze, who
commanded the Fleet, was killed with a Cannon-Shot. The Duke of Anguien, now
Prince of Conde, by the decease of Lewis of Bourbon his Father, was constrained
to raise the Siege of Lerida. The Marshal de Gassion was slain before the City
of Lens. But the revolt of the Kingdom of Naples, was a more then ordinary
Prank of Fortune. Nevertheless the Duke of Guese did not meet with those
advantages, there, with which he flattered himself; by reason that through the
Treachery of certain Neapolitans he fell unforrtunately into the hands of the
Spaniayds,

If at the beginning of the year 1648. the French, as well as the Sweads had
all the advantages they could desire in Germany, by reason of the defeat of the
Imperialists and Bavarians, of which there were slain and taken Prisoners,
about nine or ten thousand, of which number also was their General Melander;
our affairs went on with no less successful prosperity in Catalogna, where
Marshal Shomburgh having constrained the Spaniards to Retreat from the Siege of
Flix, took in the City of Tortosa, after he had lain before it some Months. But
in Flanders, Fortunegiving some kind of check to Balance the prosperity of the
Kings Forces, made us loose Courtray, to give Ipre into our possession. After
which success, the Spaniards believing us too weak to oppose them, by reason of
our losses sustained in the last Siege, forced us to give them Battle near to
Lens, wherein they were wholly defeated with the loss of eight thousand Men,
though their Army exceeded ours a third part in number.

This Victory, which could not choose but be the Subject of the General joy of
France, was the occasion of a World of Misery, whereto she was afterward
reduced. While they were returning thanks to God for this Victory in the
Cathedral Church of Paris, in another place they were providing Prisons for the
Sieurs de Broussel, Counselor in the Grand Chamber, Blanc-Menel and Charton,
Presidents of the Parliament. The Confinement of these three persons caused
most horrid disorders in Paris, where you might have seen in a moment the
Chains fastened, the Barricados put up, and all the People in Arms, which
nevertheless they soon laid down, after that the Queen, at the Prayer of the
Parliament had wisely granted them the Liberty of those three Senators. The
Calm lasted till the Kings leaving the City, who was carried out of Paris upon
the fifth or sixth at Night; which put the Burgesses to take Arms again. But
the Parliament apprehensive of the Mischiefs that might happen by reason of
these misunderstandings, sent a considerable part of their Members to St.
Germans, where his Majesty lay, who put forth the Declaration of the Month of
March, by which the Soldiers being remanded from Paris, to the Frontiers,
where the Spaniards were taking their advantages of their regaining Ipre, the
Face of things began to alter so, that there was great hopes of a new repose
and quiet upon the Return of the King.

But all our hopes were quite dashed, when we beheld the Princes of Conde and
Longuevile in Bois de of Vincennes, Guien and Provence all in an uproare,
because of their Governors, whose behavior and management was insupportable to
the people of those two Provinces. The Kings presence was requisite to reduce
Bourdeaux to obedience; Therefore his Majesty marched thither, and having
forced his entrance after some Resistance, he constrained the Heads of the
adverse Party to retire.

All the Conquests of Archduke Leopold, during these Divisions in France, were
bounded by the taking of Mouzon and Rethel; of which last place he was not long
Master, as being afterward regained in the Month of December by our Army
wherein was Cardinal Mazarine in person.

The Parliament judging that the Liberty of the Princes might be a means to
restore tranquillity to the Kingdom, as well as the retirement of Cardinal
Mazarine, went in a Body to Petition the King for the Liberty of those
Illustrious Prisoners, and sometime after made their humble Remonstrances to
his Majesty, for the Removal of the Cardinal from the Management of Public
Affairs, to take away all pretense and Color of a Civil-War.

Some few days after the Cardinal was retired, the Princes being set at
Liberty, arrived at Paris, where they were received with a most incredible Joy,
out of a hope which all Men had conceived, that their return would prevent all
those misfortunes which seemed to threaten us. But so far we were from
beholding that good Fortune with which we flattered our selves, and which the
Majority of the King, the solemnities of which, were performed with an
extraordinary Pomp, was in all probability most likely to settle, that we were
sensible of new miseries, apprehensive of renewing Calamities. For the Prince
of Conde out of his distrust, not finding it requisite to close with the Court,
retired to his New Government of Guien, whither being pursued by the Army, and
more then that by the presence of the Kings person, he treated with Spain,
makes a powerful party in Gasconie, and from thence, as Cardinal Mazarine was
reentred France he returned to Paris, where the Duke of Orleans joined with him
against the Cardinal their Common Enemy.

In the mean time, the King besieges Estampes, wherein the Army of the Princes
was enclosed; but the event did not prove so advantageous to the King, who was
obliged to retire with his Army and to surround Paris, where during the whole
remainder of the Campaign, several Skirmishes happened on both sides upon the
Arrival of the Lorrainers, who shunned however, as much as in them lay, a
general Battle; yet could not avoid a smart encounter in the Suburbs of St.
Anthony, where were slain on both sides above a thousand Men upon the place,
and where the Prince of Conde showed all the Conduct and Bravery that could be
expected from a valiant Captain, and yet if Mademoiselle had not caused the
Gate of the City to be opened, and discharged some pieces of Canon from the
Bastille, the Princes Army had been utterly Routed.

But two days after, the disorder happened to be so great in Paris, that the
People were forced to wear Straw to show the aversion which they had against
the Cardinal, which occasioned soon after the burning of the Gate of the City
Common Hall where, to unite the City with the Parliament, three hundred noted
Burgesses were Assembled, of whom the Mutineers, out of a Design to destroy
them all, Murdered the Sieur Le Great, Master of the Requests, de Janvry,
Counselor in Parliament, Myron, Master of the Accounts, and several others as
they came out of the Assembly. The Sieur Doujat, Counselor of the great
Chamber, and some other Persons of quality had run the same Fortune, had they
not found a way by disguising themselves to Slip unknown through the Mutineers
by the favor of the Night, who at length came to that Degree of Insolence, as
to force the Priestly and Religious Orders, the Women and Children to provide
themselves with straw to preserve themselves from their Fury.

In the midst of these Heats, the People of this great City weary of War, began
to distaste the Government of the Princes, and for that Reason sent several of
their Burgesses to Pontoise where the King was, to beseech his Majesty to
honor his good City of Paris with his Return, which caused the Duke of Orleans
to retire, and the Prince of Conde to Retreat, who with the Forces which he
took along with him, and some of the Spanish Succors took Rhetel, and St.
Menehon. Soon after the King returning to the City, attended by the Marshal of
the Hospital, who was Governor, the Provosts of Merchants, and the Sheriffs,
who had been constrained to absent themselves, was received with all the
submission imaginable.

After that the King went to the Parliament, which he united with that which he
had before established at Pontoise: and in the same place was published an Act
of Oblivion, in favor of the Rebellious, provided they deserved it by
returning to their Duty. But the Prince of Conde being withdrawn into the
Territories of the Catholic King, marched his Army before Rhetel, of which he
made himself Master, as also of Chasteau Porcien, St. Menehon and de Bar.

During these Troubles in Paris, the Spaniards, knowing that Marshal de Grancy
was absent from Gravelin, besieged the Place, and carried it, before it could
be relieved.

Guien being all out of Order, by Reason of the Princes Party, sent for the
Royal-Army Commanded by the Count of Harcourt, who retook Barbeseux, Poudesat,
and La Reole, although the Baron of Vatteville was come as far as the River of
Bourdeaux, sent by the Catholic King to the Succor of the Princes; who taking
hold of the present opportunities, sent Don John of Austria before Barcellona,
which was by him easily mastered. Nevertheless this Loss was in some measure
repaired by the surrender of Montrond, the Fortifications whereof the Marshal
de Pallaux who Commanded at the Siege, had Order to slight.

All this heap of misfortunes arrived to that height, that at the end of the
Campaign we found the Cities of Dunkirk and Casal both reduced, the first by
the Spaniard, the second by the Duke of Mantua.

The Cardinal of Retz, Coadjutor of Paris, having been Arrested in the Loure,
by the Sieur de Villequier, was carried to Bois de Vincennes, where after he
had been detained a long time; he was removed by the Marshal de Meilleraye to
the Castle of Nantes, from whence he made his escape in the day time, got to
Belle-Isle, and so to Rome.

The Year 1633. began to signalize it self in Burgundy by the Siege of
Bellgarde, which having been besieged by the Duke of Espernon, Governor of the
Province was constrained to yield to the Arms of his Majesty notwithstanding
the Resistance of the Marquess of Bouteville, who commanded within for the
Prince of Conde Rhetel, Mouzon, and St. Menehon followed the same Fortune soon
after, but the taking of Rocroy by the Prince, lessened our rejoycings for the
rest of our good success.

These successes were attended with the reducing of Bourdeaux, and all other
Towns of Guien, who had taken Arms in the Rebellion; as also with the
accommodation made with the Prince of Conde and the Duchess of Longueville,
who took hold of the benefit of the Act of Oblivion. The Princess of Conde
refusing to accept of it, retired into Flanders together with the Duke of
Anguien her son.

The King according to the example of his Predecessors, resolving upon his
Coronation, set forward for Reimes, where the Bishops of Soissons, with five
other Prelates received him, and at that great Ceremony, performed the Duty of
the Archbishop of that place. At the same time the City of Stenay being
besieged, was constrained to return to its first obedience, although the Prince
of Conde did all he could to relieve it. Perceiving therefore that there was no
avoiding the loss, he marched all the Spanish Army with great expedition, and
sat down before Arras with thirty thousand Men, before our Generals could put
any considerable Succor into the Town, so that he had leisure to make a
Circumsallation, that seemed to defy all the Forces in the World. Nevertheless,
the Terrible Lines of which it consisted, were so vigorously attacked by the
Army which was sent to succor that place, that the Enemy was forced to quit his
Works, which were sufficient to have daunted any other Nation but the French,
who by the shameful flight of the Spaniard, which happened upon St. Lewis's
day, 1654. gained sixty pieces of Cannon, and all the Besiegers Baggage, who
it is very probable had all left their Bodies in their Trenches, if the Prince
after he was forsaken by the Archduke, and the rest of the Spanish Generals,
had not bestirred himself after an extraordinary Manner, to make the best of
such a rash Retreat.

The Marshal de la Ferte Senneterre, resolving to end the Campaign with some
honorable Action, as he had begun and continued it all the year, lead the Body
which he commanded before Clermont, which he Besiged and took, while our other
Captains watched the motion of the scattered Spanish Troops, who did nothing
all the Winter but threaten Quesnoy, which was so abundantly revictual'd by the
Marquess of Chastelnan, assisted by the Marquess of Montpouillan and the
Chevalier de Manpeon, that that place was in a Condition not to fear the Enemy.

The beginning of the year 1655. was remarkable for the decease of Pope
Innocent the Xth. upon the 7th. of January. After whose Death Cardinal Chigi
supplied the Chair who called himself Alexander the seventh About the same time
the Duke of Guise returned from Naples, and the Court sent into Portugal, to
purchase a good number of Vessels for the Kings Service.

The Enemy being at a loss in Italy how to disingage himself from the Duke of
Modena in whose Territories the Governor of Milan, was engaged with an Army of
six thousand Men, and from whence he could hardly Retreat after he had lost his
Nephew, his Cousin, and above 1500 Soldiers, were at the same time much
perplexed how to preserve themselves against the Genoeses, who were become
weary of the pride of that Nation, which together with their slackness of
payment of the vast sums owing to that Republic, was the Reason that they sent
an Ambassador into France, who received all the satisfaction imaginable from
his Majesty, to whom the Nuncio, sometime after, delivered a Letter from the
Pope, wherein he returned thanks to the King for his kind inclinations and
satisfaction which he showed for his being exalted to the Sea, and withal
exhorted his Majesty to a good and sound Peace.

At that time the Conclusion of the Treaty which Cromwell and the Commonwealth
of England was a thing that brought no small advantage to the affairs of France.

In the year 1658. the Siege of Valenciennes, was raised by Marshal La Ferte,
whom the Enemy had put into some disorder. But Viscount Turenne with his
Brigade disputed with them the Ground they had got, and took La Capelle, while
they were hastening to its Relief with a powerful Army. In Italy the Duke of
Merceur besieged Valencia, the Count de Broile was slain in the Approaches, and
the Infantrie of Modena quite defeated by Troiti, Nevertheless the Duke with
the remainder that was left, never forsook his Trenches till he had taken the
place.

The arrival of Queen Christina from Sweden, and her Reception quite through
France, showed the esteem which the King had both of her Person and her Dignity.

The loss of Saint Guillain was recompensed by the taking of Montmedy, and the
defeat of the succors, with the Affront which the Enemy received at Calais,
which they would have surpised. St. Venant, Bourbourgh, and Mardike were
reduced by Marshal Turenne, who also relieved Ardres.

The Forces of France being joined with those of England, vanquished the Enemy
at the Battle of the Downs, which was followed by the taking of Dunkirk,
Bergues, St. Winox, Furnes and Dixmude, which took the Netherlands, and
constrained Don John of Austria, and the Prince of Conde, to retire into the
heart of Flanders, and to put themselves under the protection of Tournay. Our
Army at the same time took Mont-Cassel, Graveline, Oudenard, and was also
Master of the Field. Ipre was afterward taken, and upon the defeat of the
Prince of Ligne, Mencin, and other Forts, surrendered themselves.

The Spaniards requested of his Holiness and the State of the Empire to mediate
for Peace. The Journey to Lion, and the interview of their Majesty's, and their
Royal. Highnesses of Savoy could not contribute to that Agreement which was
intended for a double Alliance, the Queen having other thoughts at the same
time to make peace with Spain, and Marry the King to the Infanta. The arrival
of Monsieur Pimantell was the occasion of the Journey of Monsieur de Lionne to
Moden, and they were the two Ministers that treated with Cardinal Mazarine and
Don Lewis de Haro.

A Cessation of all sorts of Hostility was published on both sides, in Order to
a solid and firm Peace. And then it was that Men began to hope for the wonted
Intercourse between the two Nations, and that the former Commerce would be
established, which had been interrupted for four and twenty years together.

Cardinal Mazarine and Don Lewis de Haro being arrived in the Island of Faisans
began the Treaty the 13th of August which was at length concluded upon the
seventh of November, after four and twenty Conferences, at such a time that
Peace seemed to be more desired then expected The success of the Low Countries
and those of Portugal constrained the Spaniards to a Conclusion, the
Queen Mother giving them to understand, that if they let slip this Occasion,
they might probably never recover the same again. The disorders of Marseilles
forced the King to take a journey into Provence. The Duke of Merceur entered
the City with his Sword in his hand at the Head of the Light Horse, to preserve
it from Plunder: which done, his Majesty appointed the Erection of a Citadel,
the place and compass where he immediately assigned.

In the year 1660. He continued his Progress through all Toulouse, Bourdeaux,
and Bayonne to the very Island of Faisans, where happened an Interview between
the two Kings, and the Reception of the Infanta. The Pomp and Consummation of
this great Marriage, appeared extremely advantageous to the two Nations. The
Ceremonies finished, the Court returned to Paris, which had prepared all things
for the Magnificent Entry which the Queen made the 26th of August.

The Death of the Duke of Orleans at Blois the 2d. of Feb. 1661. and of
Cardinal Mazarine at Vineennes the 9th of March, moderated in some measure the
public rejoycings. They were very much lamented by the King and their own
Creatures. But the Marriages of the Duke of Orleans with the Princess of
England, and of the Prince of Florence, with Madomoiselle Dr Orleans made them
forget these Losses. The restraint of the Sieur Fouqnet surpised not only his
own, but all People of business. The Erection of the Chamber of Justice was
very disadvantageous for them. It opened the Kings Eyes, and caused him to take
Care of his Kingdom. It established an admitable Order in his Household, and a
rare Discipline in his Armies, keeping both the great and meaner Officers in
their Duty, and an entire dependency. It has also made him so much the Master
of the Fortresses and Citadels in the Kingdom, that the General and particular
Governors are in a most perfect Obedience. The Spaniard was desirous to
experiment whether his Majesty's new Government were upheld with constancy and
vigor. To this purpose the Baron of Batteville at Londou assaulted the Count
d' Estrades at the public Entry of the extraordinary ambassador of Swedeland.
The King complained thereof at Madrid, and at Brussels, and recalled his
Commissioners, that were employed with those of Spain, for the Regulation of
the Limits.

The Marquess of Fuentas came to make his Majesty satisfaction, assuring him,
that his Master had sent Order to his Ambassadors and Ministers not to appear
at all in Competition with those of France, which was made in the presence of
eight Ambassadors, and twenty two Residents.

The Birth of the Dauphin of France, and the Prince of Spain, the first and
sixth of November were great favors to both Nations.

The King made several Knights the first day of the year 1662. There was great
wondering that the Duke of Longueville should pretend to precede the Duke of
Vendosme, who preceded in Birth, not only him, but all Foreign Princes. The
Count of Soissons and the Duke of Guise refused the Order of Knighthood,
saying, they would go in pairs, like the Dukes of Merceur and Beaufort, which
was adjudged with great knowledge of the Cause in favor of the Natural Princes.

The first Campaign of the Portugeses astonished Spain, as did also the Marriage
of the King of England with the Infanta. The Succors which they obtained from
the French and English and the Signal Victories which they got by that means
have contributed much to the establishment of that Crown.

The Limits of the Kings Conquests were for the time happily regulated at Mets.

The Assault made at Rome upon the Duke of Crequi, and the evil consequences
which were thought would have followed from thence, were terminated by the
Treaty of Pisa,

In the year 1663. The Ambassadors of the thirteen Cantons of Switzerland came
to renew the fair Alliance betwixt them and France.

There happened some Disorder in Lorrain, Marsal was invested by the Count of
Guiche, but the Kings Journey in eleven days, and the submission of Duke
Charles, who redelivered the Place to the Kings obedience, calmed that Tempest.
In the Month of December the King created fourteen Dukes and Peers and the Duke
of Anguien espoused the Princess Palatine, Anna of Baviera.

Germany was very much alarumed in the year 1664. at the raising the Siege of
Canisia, and taking the Fort of Serini, and Montecuculi, the Emperors General
was, repulsed, and his Army had been lost, had it not beeen for the French
Troops under the Count of Fueillade who defeated the Turks upon the Raab. They
came to encamp before Vienna, and made an irruption into Silesia. However that
signal Rout constrained the Infidels to make a Truce for twentynine years
between the two Empires, The enterprise of Gigeri contributed very much to it,
so that the name of France was very much redoubted in the Ottaman Court.

In the year 1665. The English and Hollanders made a new War and France engaged
it self to succor the United Provinces, nevertheless he sent the Duke of
Vernueil into England to mediate a Reconciliation. But the English Treaty with
the Bishop of Munster, very much astonished the Hollander, so that the Troops
that were sent to their Releif, embroiled us with the King of Great Britain,

The Death of the King of Spain which happened upon the 17th of September, was
followed by that of the Duke of Vendosme, the 22th of October. The King and all
the Court testified their sorrow to the Duchess his Wife, and to the Prinees
of his Family. To which purpose the King sent the Duke of St. Aignan, clad all
in Mourning, the Train of his outward Garment being carried up by two of his
Gentlemen in Ordinary, with a square Bonnet, and the Collar of the Order
conducted by the Sieur Saintot, the King at Arms and the Heralds, who after
they had presented him the Holy water, he cast it three times upon the Coffin
of the deceased Prince, while his Majesty's Music sang the Anthem de
Profundis. The Count of Pressis Pralin, and the Marquis Pluvant for the Duke of
Orleans and Valois.

The Queen-Mothers of France and Portugal dyed, the 20th of January and 27th of
February 1664. The Peace between the Bishop of Munster and the Hollander,
occasioned the return of our Forces. But the Hollanders puffed up with their
Victories, affronted the Duke of Beaufort, who apprehensive of their Treachery,
gained Breast in sight of the English-Fleet.

In the year 1667. The Grand Signor, who made War in Candy for several years
sent thither his Grand Vizier with a potent Army. The place was assaulted with
great Vigor and well defended by the Marquis Ville and the Venetians.

The Queen of Poland dyed the 10th of May, and Alexander the VII. the 22th, to
whom succeeded Clement the IX. who has maintained the Grandeur and Dignity of
the Church with great Zeal and Honor.

The Marriage between the Duke of Guise and Mademoiselle d' Alencou was
Consummated the 15.

The several Musters which the King made of his Forces, were but a
Divertisement to his Enemies; but their March into Flanders astonished
Castel-Rodrige, who caused several places to be demolished. His Majesty
repaired Armentieres and Charle-le-Roy; forced Fournay, Bergue Furne, Lisle,
Courtray Oudenarde and Alost; which was retaken by assault by the Hollander and
the Marshal-General making himself Master of the Place, caused it to be
demolished.

The Empress being brought to Bed of an Archduke, his Majesty sent the Marquis
de Guiry to Congratulate their Imperial Majesty's at Vienna, who did not long
enjoy the happiness which she promised to her self of seeing a King of the
Romans.

The Estates and People of Portugal deposed their King Alphonsus from the
Government, and gave it to Don Pedro his Brother, who married the Queen upon
the Nullity of the first Marriage.

In the year 1668. The King having requested the Pope to be Godfather to his
Son. Monsieur the Dauphin, he cast his eye upon the Cardinal of Vendosme. To
him therefore he sent full power and authority to perform the Ceremony, wherein
the Cardinal behaved himself with great honor. He gave the King to understand,
that it belonged to his Holiness in his person, and not to the Queen of England
to name the Prince; and to the Bishops to tender to his dignity and to the Holy
See, those respects and submissions which were due. The Prince was named Lewis,
and the Ceremony was performed at St. Germains, the 24th of March. The Honors
were carried by the Bourbons, and the Train of the Prince's Royal Mantle was
born by the Duke of Vendosme, having his precedence immediately after the
Princes of the blood.

The Dispensation which the Legate gave for the second Marriage of the Queen of
Portugal his Niece, is to be accounted one of those blows of State lucky, and
unlooked for.

The Duke of Beaufort, and the Knight of Vendosme in his thirteenth year
Embarked with an intention to make a descent into the Spanish Tertitories. But
the Peace and an extraordinary Tempest put a stop to the Designs of that great
Admiral; however it made the boldness and fierceness of the young Prince to be
admired.

The Conquest of Franche Conte during the Carnival, was one of the greatest
Actions that ever were performed. it amazed all the World, and caused the
Spaniard to quit the Name and Arms of Portugal, and their Pretentions to that
Crown. However the Province was restored by the Peace of Aix la Chapelle, and
partly at the request of Clement the IX. The King having a greater regard to
the good of Christendom then the Grandeur of his glory and Dominion.

The Birth of the Infant of Portugal happened upon the sixth of January, 1669.
at what time his Holiness exhorted all the Princes of Christendom to the
Relief of Candie. The Duke of Beaufort, carried thither the Knight of Vendosme,
with a Detachment of Seamen. One time among the rest, hearing the Enemy beat
their Reveillez betimes in the Morning, he Commanded his Drums to beat a
Charge, and clear the Retrenchment at the head of the first Battalion, which he
did so generously, that the Turks abandoned the Place. But the Fire which the
Christians put to their Magazines caused such a Panick-Fear as forced them to
return. The Duke forsaken by his own People, was euvelop'd by the Infidels. He
could not quit the Field, nor the Victory which he had gotten. The Knight of
Vendosme stood firm to him. Fortune and War have spared that youthful Mars, and
the Honor of that famous and glorious Retreat which he made the 25th of June,
gave the world to understand he was both Soldier and Captain.

The great Services which the Cardinal Duke of Vendosme did the King and
Kingdom, terminated the 6th of August, after all the pains which he had taken
to forward, the Forces that were designed for Condy. The Duchess of Vendosme
his Mother, was the example and Model of Virtue and Sanctity of Lise, and dyed
this year, as also did the Queen of England, the one on the 8th, the other on
the 10th of September.

Our Monarch took a Progress into Flanders, 1670. to show the Queen the
Conquests lately joined to his Dominion and confirmed by the Treaty of Aix la
Chapelle. His Majesty visited all the places, took a View of the Fortifications
and Magazins, the strength and force of his Garrisons, and what was wanting to
keep them in a true Posture of defense. Wherein such has been his great pains
and care, that of places mean and of no regard, they are now become of great
importance and capable to endure long Sieges.

A new Embroylment of the Duke of Lorrain constrained the King to send thither
the Duke of Crequi, with an Army, which took Possession of Ponta Mousson, the
Walls whereof were raised; of Espinal and Chate, the Garrisons of which places
did but plunder and destroy the Country adjoining.

An Ambassador was sent by one of the Kings of the Coast of Guiny, who keeps
his Court at Darda, to admire the Grandeur of his Majesty's Court, and to see
what advantages he could make by establishing Commerce. Those barbarous people
live in Idolatry, and are very much to be pitied.

In the year 1671. The Spaniards by their Emissaries making the Duchu
apprehensive of our Neighborhood, and the Progress of the Kings Arms, engaged
those Republicans to forget the many Benefits which they had received from
France, and to labor their own Ruin with two much heat and passion. To which
purpose they solicited all the Sovereign Princes to join with them in Leagues
and Treaties against France.

The Virtue and Merit of the Bishop Duke of Laon advanced him to the Cardinal
Dignity. The Ministers of Spain opposed his advancement, and the Nomination of
the Queen of Portugal, which his most Christian Majesty very stiffly defended.
And indeed this Promotion was very honorable for France, especially done to
favor a Queen whose interest is much more profitable to the Kingdom.

The second Marriage of his Royal-Highness with the Daughter of the Elector
Palatine was concluded; and the Articles signed the 6th of November 1671. and
the Marshall du Plessis had the charge of the Procuration for the Ceremony of
the Espousals at Mets, the 16th of the same Month.

France and England by the succors which they gave the United Provinces made of
that Rebellious People a Puissant Democracie. But at last the two Kings
disdaining their ingratitude, joined their Forces to chastize their Crime. The
forbidding of Commerce, and the Injunctions laid upon their Subjects to
exercise all Acts of Hostility against them, was published the 7th of April,
and the King at the Head of an hundred and fifty thousand men caused them to
tremble. He presently took from them Orsoy, Wesel, Bury and Rhineberg; Rets,
Emmerick and Groll. The Count of Guiche passed the Rhine Swimming with two
thousand Horse. To which danger the Chevalier of Vendosme was the only Prince
that exposed himself besides his General. He so behaved himself, that at his
first setting foot in the Betau he gained an Ensign and a Standard which he
presented to the King; and flew with the Prince to the Skirmish, wherein the
Duke of Longueville was killed.

The passage over this River, caused the Prince of Orange to quit the Banks of
the Issel, at which time Vicount Turenne caused a detachment of six hundred Men
to be made by the Duke of Vendosme, which has always served at the Head of his
Regiment, and particularly to open the Trenches of Arnheime. They would have
also showed their Valor at Nimmeghen; but that great General stopped their
Fury, and besought the King to retain them about his person. The Forts of
Schenk, Doesburgh, Zutphen and many other Ramparts of Holland were taken in so
small a time, that there were reckoned up near fifty in two Months. Vtreck
refused Relief; on purpose to surrender it self to the King. Creveceur,
Coarden, Grave and Bomel were taken, and the Campaign ended with the taking of
Bodengrave, Survanmerdam, and Niverberg. To requite these Losses the Prince of
Orange with six thousand Spaniards, sent him by Montery under the Conduct of
Marcin, besieged Charleroy, but the Count of Montal, having got into the Town,
made him retreat with shame not only to himself but the Spaniards.

In the year 1675. The Hollanders having drawn to their side the House of
Austria, and the most part of the Princes of Germany, proposed strange
Chimera's to themselves. But Vicount Turenne constrained the Marquess of
Brandenburgh to fly, and took from him the County of Mark with several places.
Whereupon Cologne was chosen for the place of Treaty.

The King having caused Maestricht to be Invested, the Trenches were opened by
Night, the 18th of June. And that place of such importance, so well fortified,
so well defended, was forced to surrender at the end of the Month, a thing
almost incredible. In short, the United Provinces were so roughly handled both
by Sea and Land, that they acknowledge it to this hour, confessing that the Arms
of Kings are long and ponderous, and that it was ill done, to draw upon them
the Indignation of two great Monarchs; of which their Allies are not a little
sensible, their Countries still suffering for it.

At the beginning of the Winter, Vicount Turenne marched into Alsatia, there to
fight the Enemy. The Princes of Vendosme took Post to be in the Action; but the
Knight of Vendosme near to Mets broke his Arm, by the fall of his Horse, that
stumbled under him.

The Campaign began betimes in Burgundy, 1674, Gray, Wesoul and several other
Losses began a second time, the Conquest of that Country. That which hastened
his Majesty's March, was the surprizal of the Prince of Fustenburgh, the
Elector of Cologne's Plenipotentiary. An attempt in time of Peace contrary to
the public Faith. For the committing of which Action in regard the Emperor
gave Order against the Right of Nations, it will be an Eternal Reproach both to
him and his.

The King therefore completed the Conquest of Franche Conte, by the taking the
City and Citadel of Bezanson, Dole, Salins and all the rest of the Country,
which he subdued to his Obedience, and is a safeguard to six Provinces of his
Kingdom. The Duke of Lorrain, and Count Caprara in vain attempted to Relieve
it. For Vicount Turenne, with a far lesser strength gave them a stop beyond the
Rhine, where that great Captain did wonders during the whole Campaign, having
fought and won several Battles, and performed famous exploits in War. The
Knight of Vendosme was always near him, and still so desperately engaged the
Enemy, that he brake and disordered the Duke of Lorrain at the Battle of Seiren.

All this while in Holland, the Prince of Conde sustained the Forces of the
Empire, Spain, and the Low Countries. That Powerful Army thought to have
carried all things before them and to have taken up their Winter Quarters in
Picardie and Champaigne, and there to have quaffed the good Wines of Rhetmes.
But the Battle of Seneff which he won from so many Enemies, was the most
remarkable exploit of that exquisite Captain. He thought to have vanquished
them at Oudenard, but they shamefully quitted the Siege. The Duke of Vendosme,
who had signalized himself in Burgundy, took post to be an Eyewitness of so
great an Action.

1675. The Embassies of Marshall d' Estrees were very honorable and very bold.
That of the Duke his Son was maintained with the same Vigor. He knew well how
to let the Pope understand that he was obliged, not only to give audience to
the Ministers of his most Christian Majesty, but also to hear their just
Complaints, which is a prerogative that his Holiness cannot refuse to the first
King in the World.

The most important Cities of the Enemy were apprehensive of being besieged, at
what time the King attacked Limburgh, and made himself Master of that Duchy,
which is one of the seventeen Provinces of the Low Countries, which was
adjoined to the Government of Marshal d' Estrades, After this Conquest his
Majesty delivered up the Charge of the Army to Monsieur the Prince, who
endeavored all he could to Fight the Enemy; But the Intentions of the
Spaniards did not correspond with the Designs of the Princes of Conde and
Orange.

Montecuculi with all the Force of the Empire promised to himself that he would
pass the Rhine, which he did over the Bridge of Spire. But Marshal Turenne,
marching to meet him, he repassed it, the Imperialists being very much
surprised to see him so near them. The French were eager to give them Battle,
although encamped among Rivers and Woods, which caused them to follow the
retreating Enemy, who to secure his March, planted two pieces of Cannon upon a
Hill to favor his Retreat. And from thence it was that the Marshal-General
going to take a View of the Enemies encampment was killed with a great Shot.

He had designed the Chevalier of Vendosme to command the Cavalrie. However the
young Duke of Beaufort was the person at that time, who commanded fifteen
thousand Horse, and was present at the retaking of Corbi. That young Prince
after six Campaigns, has been so unfortunate, that he could never find an
opportunity to fight with Honor, and serve the King with Renown.

Upon the difference between the Count d' L' Orge, and the Marquess de Vaubrun,
the Army desired to be Commanded by the Duke of Vendosme. But the two Generals
being reconciled, they retreated through Wilstelt to Althnem, where was fought
a famous and memorable Battle.

Upon the Intelligence which Montecuculi received, that our Baggage marched
into Alsatia, he pretended to send certain Troops through Strasburgh, to Plunder
it, but the Marquess de Vaubrun passed the Rhine with seven Battalions and
twenty-two Squadrons. And indeed he had been lost without this Stratagem. He
flattered himself that not having to do with any more than one Brigade, it
would be easy for him to be cut in pieces with a powerful Army. They fought
there near ten hours. The Duke of Vendosme at the Head of his Battalion, which
appeared weak, because it was not so numerous as the rest, was more exposed to
the Attacks, yet as vigorusly sustained the force of the Enemy. The Enemy
understood not that there was a Prince at the head of it, with the Officers of
the Guards, and that it was the Regiment of Vendosme, which has ever been
Victorious. That young Mars outdid himself in a time, and upon an occasion of
so much danger and hazard. He received a slight wound cross the Thigh, which
did not at all hinder his Fighting, nor his winning of Honor.

The Prince of Conde had Orders to take Charge of that Army, and leave his own
to the Duke of Luxemburgh. So that although Montecuculi besieged Lovern and
Haguenau, that great General constrained him to quit the Sieges and repass the
Rhine.

The defeat of Marshal Crequi was the occasion of the Loss of Treves, the first
City which the Franks took from the Gauls.

The City of Conde and Bouchain were taken by the King, the 4th. and 12th of
May, 1676.

The King agreed to the Mediation of England for Peace, and made suitable
returns for the Zeal which his Majesty of Britain had shown for the Repose of
Christendom. Thereupon, Pasports were agreed, and sent where they were
required, and the Duke of Vitry and the Ambassadors Colbert and d' Avaux were
ordered Plenipotentiaries for France, and sent for Nimeghen, in Order to that
Affair, which was the conclusion of Peace, so important and earnestly desired.

FINIS.

