Christian Unity EXHORTED TO: BEING A few Words in tender love to all
Professing of Christianity in Old England, the Land of my Nativity.

WHEREIN The difference between Profession and Possession of that which is
really the substance of True Religion, is clearly manifested.

ALSO, The great Breach of Christian Charity, caused by their furious
Contentions about Formality.

With a few words to the Poor in Spirit, concerning my Opinion of a saving
knowledge of Christ Jesus.

By one who dearly loves all those whose Conversation becomes Christ's Gospel.

Ephesians. 4. Ver. 1.2, 3. I therefore the prisoner of the Lord beseech you that
ye walk worthy of the vocation wherewith ye are called, with all lowliness and
meekness, with long-suffering, forbearing one another in love, endeavoring to
keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace. Printed in the Year 1678.

Moderate Reader,
IT IS my hearts desire that all might come to know the difference between the
Form and the Power of Godliness, which is the only Foundation of true Religion;
not that I do in the least imagine that all are in ignorance, but because I
have observed that the generality of Christians are chiefly contending about
the form; and the greatest animosity, that I ever heard or read of, have been
caused by their different Opinions in that matter: Therefore, according to the
knowledge the Lord has been pleased to bestow upon me, it is my Judgment, that
if the Power of Godliness were more exalted, and the Form less regarded, our
love toward God and our Neighbor would be more augmented. Reader, I doubt not
but some have written largely on the same subject (however new fashions and new
Books are most pleasing to the curious pallates of these times;) but I have
found more of Controversy than true Piety in many of them; for it is most
certain that Logic translated into Divinity, has set all Christendom on fire.
And he that can frame Syllogisms in the vindication of his Opinion, is reputed
the best Christian, although he be but a cold well disciplined. Thus has true
Religion imongst Christians (so called) been almost (if not altogether)
eztinguished, Christian fellowship confounded, and Charity (which no true
Christian can want) buried in oblivion: Thus have they by their implacable
contests about the Form, disputed themselves out of the true knowledge of the
Power of Godliness: witness the sensuality, earthly mindedness, and
lukewarmness that most Professors are possessed with. Friendly Reader, it is not
my desire to exasperate the minds of any; for moderation is that which I
chiefly aim at; therefore I pray be impartial in judging what thou read, and
when thy mind is retired, thou will find a living sense in thy self of the
truth of what is written: then may we praise and magnify the name of our God,
to whom Glory; Honor, Praise, and Obedience is due, now and for ever.

July 13th. 1678.
Christian Unity, etc.
WHen I considered the diversity of opinions amongst nominal Christians, I
could not but consult the cause, which being found, the effect was not strange;
for the Devil has been that Jesuit which has sown the feed of Division
amongst men in former and latter Ages; and where the Notion of a Diety is not
totally extinguished, the Creature is a framing to it self something that may
have the form of Divine worship, wherein perhaps may be perceived some seeming
satisfaction which Induces many to make a large profession of it, but the Soul
not being satisfied with shadows, puts them on seeking something else that may
be more fatisfactory; so after many years Travel in the wilderness, they return
empty, lamenting their lost time, spent in that which profits not; the sense
of which causes them to enter into a serious contemplation, at which time the
still voice of the spiritual Shepherd (Jesus Christ) whispers to the Soul, if
thou art thirsty I will give thee of the water of life freely, after which thou
shall never thirst, for it shall be in thee a Well of water springing up to
everlasting life, so all the faculties of the Soul shall be refreshed with
Heavenly food, for he is the Heavenly bread which alone can satisfy the hungry
Soul; he is the true living substance most to be desired; all outward
elementary substances can but gratify the sensual part of man; but such has
been the deplorable state of many Nations, since the great Apostasy from that
pure Spiritual worship so much exhorted to by Christ and his Disciples, that
the Lord has suffered a Cloud of darkness to overspread the understandings of
the children of men, so that they have been a long time grovelling in the dark
among the earthly Elements, pleasing themselves with the Pictures of Divine
worship, making such great professions of the form, they deny the power of
Godliness and have destroyed thousands of each other, because their Emblems of
Divine worship did not agree in likeness; how contradictory this is to a
serious, humble, self-denying, meek Spirit, let the sober Reader judge.

Oh therefore it is the desire of my Soul, that every one that professes the
name of Christ should walk worthy of him: Ephesians. 2.3.
endeavoring with all lowliness, meekness, long suffering, and forbearing one
another, in love to keep the Unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace;
therefore way a with all striving and contending about matters that are only
circumstantiall, forbear imposing that on each other which cannot freely be
received by either, exclaim not against each other, because your Opinions do
not agree in all particulars; but labor more and more after Unity rather then
Uniformity; let all Controversy be ended, since it lies not in your power to
bring each others mind into one mould, desire earnestly of the Lord to mould
them into one. Ah dear Friends how helpful would you then be to each other in
exalting the glory of God, and ready would the Lord of life be to water you
with his blessings, that you may increase more and more with love to each
other; and this certainly will destroy the design of the great Enemy of our
Souls Salvation; whose design has been chiefly to cause Dissentions amongst
us: Oh that our moderation might be known to all men, that Christian Fellowship
may be renewed, and our conference with one another more Heavenly, that vain
Disputations may be prevented; Oh let us rather declare to each other what the
Lord has done for our Souls; how he has filled us with spiritual joys. How!
sweet are the streams of Divine love: How! exceedingly pleasant is the Sunshine
of his countenance, how are all the faculties of our Souls ravished with his
Beauty, Oh then may not we declare these things to worldly men that their
affections may be more Heavenward. Dear Friends, these are not hearsays culled
out of Books of men's inventions, but they are the precious fruits of Gods holy
Spirit; or as Paul said, the tasting of the Heavenly Gift, which is a living
power from whence all our Spiritual comforts arise; the knowledge whereof is
one of the chiefest principles which constitutes a true Christian.

Friendly Reader, these are the rich possessions of a Christian, this indeed is
the very substance of Religion; therefore I say, that man that enjoyes the
substance may be a Christian without the form, but no man with the form can be
a Christian without the substance.

Moderate Reader, notwithstanding I have contemned the forms of Religion, I do
not condemn all persons professing any of the several forms; for there are some
who have much of Gods power accompanying them in their external performances,
but no longer then the power of the mind and all the faculties of the Soul are
joined with them; my Opinion is of that latitude which extends to all who
desire to have a saving knowledge of Jesus Christ; notwithstanding I cannot but
reprove those who content themselves with a bare Historical faith, and indeed
it is to be feared that there are too too many have no other evidence for their
Christianity, then a verbal repetition of their Creed, commonly called a
confession of Faith; how far is this from that which purifies the heart, and
obtains such victory over sin, even to the removing of Mountains of
corruptions; let any sober Christian judge: but Christ's own Testimony
suffices; for he says, he that believes in him, out of his belly shall flow
Rivers of living waters; therefore it manifestly appears, that, that faith
which produces not these effects, is not the true faith.

A few words to the poor in spirit, who have been wearyed in Traveling on the
barren Mountains, and do now earnestly desire to know the true way.

It being my own condition in times past, I cannot but sympathize with thee who
ever thou art that have been wandering in by paths, whilst we pretend to know
the true way; therefore it manifestly appears that we wanted a true
acquaintance with, and a spiritual knowledge of Christ, who declared himself to
be the way and the life; Let us but reason together, Was not the knowledge we
had of Christ only Notional? had we any other evidence of faith in him, but a
bare ascent to what we have heard and read concerning him? what did it all
amount to? what satisfaction had we? only a groundless hope of Salvation,
because many others whom we supposed good Christians were of the same faith: we
had hopes to be saved by Christ's merits, hope after from punishment; but what
experience had we of the virtue of Christ's redeeming power out of sin here? he
came not only to save us from the punishment, but dominion of sin, and to bring
in everlasting righteousness.

Now if thou art not wedded to thy former profession, and have a true desire
after the saving knowledge Christ Jesus the only Savior of the world, I shall
(according to the measure of knowledge given me of God,) plainly and
affectionately declare what I believe to be a saving knowledge of him; also
what I have experienced of the benefits flowing from him: first thou must know
him to be at the door of thy heart by his invisible and eternal Spirit, at all
times according to St. John's Testimony: Behold I stand at the door and knock,
if any one will open to me, I will come into him and sup with him, and he with
me.

Friendly Reader, how many Days, Weeks, Months, and Years, Reve. 3.20.
has our dear Savior been knocking at the doors of our hearts, and we have
passed it by, thinking't was nothing but the checks of a natural conscience:
How! often have we vexed, grieved, and pierced, his holy spirit, how! often
have we crucified him afresh by rejecting and despising his Heavenly counsel;
how have we turned a deaf ear to all his reproofs; and all was because we had
not a true sense of his being so nigh to us, but were a seeking him where he
was not to be found.

Secondly, thou must know him to be thy Teacher, and reprover: it is his spirit
and not a natural conscience that checks thee for every evil thought, word, and
deed; how often have thou been made to cry, Lord forgive me, when no person in
the world could accuse thee; he it is that instructs in all things that pertain
to thy everlasting welfare, for he is always wooing and beseeching thee to
turn from the evil of thy ways, Joh. 1.12.
and if thou will but hearken to his instruction, thou shall receive power to
overcome all the Enemies temptations, for the wholly Scriptures of Truth
testify, that to as many as receive him he gives power to become the Sons of
God.

Thirdly, thou must know that he alone works in thee all good acts which thou
performest, so thou art but the instrument, and he the workman; therefore all
the honor of every good work is due to him, who works in us both to will,
and to do all things that are pleasing to his Heavenly Father; all therefore
that he requires of thee, is to be on a continual watch, so that thou may
know when thou art reproved; for I testify in Gods fear so long as thou art on
thy spiritual watch thou shall not think an evil thought, but thou shall be
sensible of his reproof. By this means friendly Reader thou will come to be
more and more, inwardly acquainted with him whom thou did formerly know only
by hearsay, then will thou cry out with Job. I have heard of thee before with
the hearing of my ear, but now has mine eyes seen thee; and the more thou
come acquainted with him, thou shall experience the virtue of Christ's
purifying power, whereby thou shall be more and more cleansed from all thy
dross and corruption, and those in whom he works righteousness he will
continually justify, for the blood of Jesus Christ will cleanse us from all
sin: so that we may be made fit Heirs of that Kingdom, prepared for those that
are true believers; now dear friend thou will not be in want of outward
representation to bring thee in remembrance of Christ Jesus, for the true real
spiritual enjoyment of the substance will cause all shadows to vanish, and
beggarly Elements to melt away, for it is impossible (so long as thou art on
thy spiritual watch) to be unmindful of him; otherwise thou may take thy lot
with the unwatchful Sentinel, who (though well armed) is surprised with the
Enemy, and taken Captive; this is the condition of many whom I believe to be
true Christians, for their being overcome by the enemy, is not because they
were false and hypocritical in what they professed, but because they were
sometimes off their watch, for Christ's Disciples were not all Hypocrites,
because they slept when their Lord and Master commanded them to watch; yet I
say, that unwatchfulness is reprovable in any, being a great duty exhorted to
by Jesus Christ; for he said, what I say unto you, I say unto all, watch; and
this comprehends all the directions which are conduceably to a holy life. Now
my dear friend, I have in short declared unto thee what my opinion is,
concerning a saving knowledge of Jesus Christ; it is not my desire that thou
should vow Allegiance to my Dictates, or pin thy faith upon my sleeve, as I
doubt we have both, ^oo much formerly upon others; but my heart earns toward
thee, that thou may be persuaded to hearken to the teachings of Christ's
spirit alone; and then thou will not need any of man's teaching; for the
Scriptures of Truth testify that no man knows the things of God save the
spirit of God, which spirit is ready and willing to instruct thee in all things
that are necessary for thee to know; so this is one great benefit thou shall
partake of by this inward acquaintance with Christ, in knowing him to be with
thee at all times, and in all places; Nay, when thou art in thy bed, (if thy
mind be retired) he will make thee remember what thou have done in the day
past, for he sits in thy conscience judging all thy actions; note therefore,
that conscience is not the Judge, but the Seat wherein the Judges sits,
therefore pray mistake not the Seat for the Judge: for I cannot but make
mention of this thing, because of the great mistake that thousands are in about
this matter; for when they have been afraid to commit some gross sin, they say
their conscience will not suffer them; not considering who it is that is in
their consciences restraining them from sinning; so Christ has been robbed of
his honor, and many hundreds have been in want of his Divine power, because
they have not known him so near them. Friendly Reader, let me entreat thee when
thou art in a serious frame of spirit, examine thy own heart, and I doubt not
but thou will find some sense of these things in thy own particular, and it
shall be the desire of my Soul, that the Lord may increase in thee more and
more a lively powerful sense of his Truths, that it may be to his glory, and
the everlasting welfare of thy poor immortal Soul: and for thy farther
satisfaction, search the holy Scriptures, for I desire not to write any thing
but what they testify, and wait on the Lord alone for Direction and Counsel;
therefore consult not with flesh and blood, and thou shall receive an inward
sense of that which thou desire to know; for the seeking that of man's wisdom
which alone belongs to the Revelation of Gods spirit, has been the only cause
that many have been always a learning, and yet never come to the knowledge of
the Truth; friendly Reader, I doubt not if thou art one who desires to be
acquainted with the holy dictates of Christ's spirit, but that thou will have a
clear ununderstanding of the vast difference between thy seeking knowledge from
the precepts of men, and the Revelations of Gods spirit; (too too much slighted
by many in our Nation) therefore pray let us beware of doing despite to the
spirit of Grace? and resisting the Holy Ghost in working on our corrupt wills
and affections, in order both to our conviction and conversion; for though
there is no power in our natural Wills to act that which is good, yet there is
an ability to refuse resisting of that which has power to work; otherwise how
could it be said in Scripture, that men grieve and quench the holy spirit of
God, and resist the Holy Ghost, and turn from the grace of God to wantonness,
which has provoked the Lord to declare by his holy Prophets, that his spirit
should not always strive with man; which makes me to conclude that there is a
Passive, (though not an active) power in man's will; for certainly the Lord
would not so much complain on the Children of men for rebelling against his
good spirit, if they were not destitute of all power in yielding obedience to
its holy operation; how did our dear and ever blessed Savior Jesus Christ
lament the sad state and condition of the City of Jerusalem, when he said, How
would I have gathered you as a Hen gathers her Chickens, under her wings, but
you would not? which to me is a plain demonstration that there was a
possibility of their receiving, as well as rejecting the tender offers of
Christ's love, and doubtless he would not have entreated them, were they wholly
incapable of receiving his kind Entreaties. Oh there; fore Dear friends, our
destruction is of our selves, for the Lord said by his Holy Prophet in the days
of old, why will you dye O House of Israel? clearly showing forth that we our
selves are the cause of our own destruction; Oh let us consider, what could he
have done more for us then he has done, he has written his holy Laws in our
hearts, which are holy Rules for us to walk by; he has sent his only begotten
Son to be our Mediator and Redeemer, that we may be saved from our sins here,
and the punishment due to them hereafter; he it is who is the Captain of our
Salvation: but if we will not be his faithful Soldiers, we cannot expect his
protection. Oh how great has his longsuffering been to usward, not willing
that any should perish, but that all should come to repentance, and to the
knowledge of his blessed Truths. Certainly had not our God been a God full of
compassion, slow of anger, and of great kindness, who retains not his anger
for ever, but in wrath remembers his mercy, because his compassions fail not;
we might have long since been destroyed, and been now roaring in endless woe and
misery; but blessed and for ever blessed be the name of our God whose mercy
endures for ever, that he has been pleased to continue unto us a day of
visitation; whereby we have been made to cry out, what have I done, Lord, what
have I done? How have I rejected the tender visitation of thy love? how have I
extinguished the Divine motions of thy holy Spirit? how have I sinned against
thy loving kindness which is better then life? and abused all thy mercies? Oh
therefore let us beware of letting slip the day of our visitation, being there
is an Eternity of felicity depends on our improving so gracious an oppertunity:
but such are the base inclinations of our corrupt natures, that we use all our
diligence, and watchfulness, rather to enjoy momentary pleasure, then to make
sure our Calling and Election; how little do the generality of men regard that
which is the most noble part of men, how earnestly do they pursue their sensual
delights, which have anxiety always for a companion. Oh that they would be
persuaded and entreated to set a part some time for a serious contemplation on
Eternity, whereby they may be truly sensible of the sad and dangerous state
that hitherto they have lived in; Oh that they would beware of being rocked
asleep in the Devils Cradle of carnal security, which is a great cause that so
many have dis-regarded the knockings of Christ's spirit at the door of their
hearts; and if at any time they are made sensible of some gross evil which they
have acted, immediately they endeavor to stop the mouth of conscience, either
by harkening to the Devils Lullabies, (viz.) Libidian Songs, or playing with
his Rattles; otherwise ride abroad in his Chariots of sensual pleasures, in
which they are frequently carried to the Gates of death; so the destruction of
body and soul is the sad consequence which certainly attends those who are (as
it were swallowed up of worldly pleasures.

But oh man who ever thou art that have been hitherto led away by the Enemy of
thy immortal soul, who would willingly make thee his associate in eternal
misery, be persuaded and entreated to take especial notice of these following
words: first let not the Devil tempt thee to imagine, that it is too late to
turn from the evil of thy ways, because perhaps thou have been an old sinner.
Secondly, let not the propensity of thy corrupt will and affections, to folly
and vanity induce thee to think the time too soon. Thirdly, let not the
multiplicity of thy sins which thou have not in times past repented of affright
thee; for be assured at whatsoever time thou hearken'st to the still voice of
Christ's spirit in thy conscience, which secretly rebukes thee, and tells thee
all things that ever thou did, thou shall find thy heart sorrowful for sin,
and as thou keep on thy watch, thou shall be brought more and more into a
tender frame of spirit, and thou shall be enabled to turn from thy sin,
perfectly, abhorring those things which formerly thou did so much delight in,
and thou shall assuredly receive pardon for all thy sins past be they never so
many and great, according to the words of Christ Jesus, John 5.24.
Verily, verily I say unto you, He that hears my word, and believes in him
that sent me, has everlasting life, and shall not come into condemnation: for
those sins which Christ pardons in this life shall never be charged to thy
account any more, Ezekiel 18.21,
according to the words the Lord spoke to the Prophet Ezekiell: But if the
wicked will turn from all the sins he has committed, and keep all my Statutes,
and do that which is lawful and right, he shall surely live, he shall not dye.
All his transgressions which he has committed, they shall not be mentioned
unto him. Now therefore thou may see what great encouragemet all persons have
to turn from their sins; Oh that these things were more seriously considered by
all that profess Christianity, they would certainly be more diligent in
improving those golden opportunities, which the Lord through his infinite love
and mercy has allowed them.

Friendly Reader, for thy farther encouragement, if thou will but take a walk
with me in the withdrawing Room of holy Meditation, thou shall have a
Soul-ravishing prospect into the Garden of Heavenly joy, where thou shall
behold the streams of Grace flowing from the fountain of Divine love; and thou
shall drink freely out of the springs of life, which alone can satisfy the
appetite of a thirsty Soul; therefore be entreated and persuaded no longer to
continue pleasing thy self in the dead Pictures of Religion, which has made
thee ignorant of those spiritual enjoyments, which alone belongs to the life
and power of Christianity, and for which reason many may be ignorant of what I
now write: therefore those that would be of the true Religion, must stand no
longer on the barren Mountains of profession, but rather hearken to the voice
of the spiritual Shepherd, who will certainly lead them into the pleasant
fields amongst the green Pastures, wherein grows the flowers of Heavenly joy,
and through which runs the pleasant Rivers of consolation, so that thou may
with joy draw water out of the well of Salvation, whereby thy soul shall be
completely refreshed, then shall all her faculties (which have long languished
for want of true substance) be revived; then shall she be fully sensible of the
difference between her true teacher and leader, and the false guides, who had
carried her into the wilderness, where she had been a long time afflicted with
trouble and sorrow; then will her bowels be filled with pity and compassion, on
all those who did formerly accompany her in her distressed condition, and will
be grieved that any should be so deceived as not to be persuaded to hearken to
the same spiritual voice, whereby they may partake of the same substantial
food; but rather choose to feed on the husk of Religion, then to partake with
her of those glorious refreshments, which causes her to be always praising and
magnifying the name of the Eternal God, at whose right hand are pleasure for
ever more.

A few words to those who are totally ignorant of spiritual things.
That there are many in the Land of my Nativity who are totally ignorant of
spiritual things, I may boldly affirm; but that it is in the power of any mortal
man to give them a spiritual discerning I utterly deny; Notwithstanding it
seems to me very expedient to remove all obstacles out of the way of the
ignorant, least their mis-apprehension of words cause a dis-satisfaction to the
matter, which otherwise being accompained with a Divine power, might prove
beneficial to them; therefore according as the Lord enables me, I shall
endeavor to answer with all plainness those objections which are of most
weight.



Joh. 16.7, 8. Nevertheless I tell you, it is expedient for you that I go away;
for if I go not away, the comforter will not com: ebut if I depart I will send
him unto you, and when he is come, he will remove the World of sin, of
righteousness, and of judgment. Joh. 14.15. But the Comforter which is the
Holy Ghost, whom the Father will send in my nam^, he shall teach all things,
and bring all things to your remembrance, whatsoever I have said; therefore
it is evident, that Christ is by his Spirit in every man, reproving and
instructing them, and bringing all things that he has formerly said to their
and our remembrance. But for a farther demonstration I shall use this one
comparison, As the natural Son in in the firmament does communicate its light
to several parts of the world, at one and the same time, though thousands of
miles asunder, and yet the body or whole proportion remains entire in the
firmament without any diminution; so does the glorious Son of righteousness,
though sitting in his Kingly Throne, communicates a measure of his own spirit
to every-man to profit with all; which spirit is oftentimes in Scripture called
the Light of Christ Jesus, which enlighteneth every man that comes into the
world, John 1.4. sometimes the Grace of God which teaches us to deny
ungodliness and worldly Lusts, and to walk soberly and godly in this present
world; this is that which has been often in the mouths of many, though they
did not ('it is to be feared) know what it was; therefore whoever thou art that
have been in ignorance; be it known to thee, that the Grace of God which thou
have had many times in thy mouth, is Christ's own spirit, which spirit has many
times restrained thee from committing wickedness, for without, thou could
not so much as think a good thought much less do a good action; for as Christ
tasted death for every man, he has given this Heavenly gift to every man, that
they may be in a possibility of Salvation; so that we are not condemned for
want of grace; but because we do not improve his gift of Grace, for he commands
us to nothing but what his Grace or Spirit will enable us to perform, if we
will but watch when it reproves or instructs us.





FINIS.

