THE Christian Belief: Wherein is Asserted and Proved, That as there is Nothing
in the GOSPEL contrary to REASON, yet there are some DOCTRINES in it Above
REASON; and these being necessarily enjoined us to Believe, are properly
called, MYSTERIES; IN Answer to a BOOK, ENTITLED, Christianity not Mysterious.

But we speak the Wisdom of God in a Mystery, even the hidden Mystery of God.
LONDON: Printed by W. Onley, for Alex. Rosvile, at the Dial, against St.
Dunstan 's Church, in Fleet Street. MDCXCVI.

THE CONTENTS, BEING ARTICLES, Most of 'em advanced In Opposition to the
Positions of our Adversary.
THe Measures and Extent of Human Knowledge, in Objects of Sense. Page 2.
Transubstantiation, why to be rejected. p. 6. The Knowledge of Spiritual
Objects. ib. Of Finite and Infinite Objects. p. 11. Of Matters of Revelation.
p. 14. Three Inferences. p. 15. A Vindication of the Maxim in Adoring, when we
cannot Comprehend. p. 18. The Use of Reason in Religion. p. 22, 23. 41, 42.
Matters of Revelation not so easily nor clearly comprehended, as the Phenomenon
of Nature. p. 23. 25. His Notion of Things contrary to Reason, rejected and
disproved. p. 33. Two Limitations to be observed, before we can pronounce any
thing contrary to Reason. p. 33, 34. Both confirmed and illustrated by the
Article of our Savior's Divinity. p. 40. The Difference between a seeming
Contradiction and real one, asserted. p. 46 Contradictions not to be pronounced
in Matters of Revelation, because they do not comport with common Ideas in
Objects of Sense. p. 47, 48. Revelation, a Motive of Assent, as well as mean of
Information. p. 49. Matters of Revelation, how far intelligible and possible.
p. 51. The Difference between Divine and Human Revelation on that account. p.
52. The true Notion of a Mystery, as applied to Things Incomprehensible, p. 56.
61. His Notion of a Mysteryexploded. p. 58. Mystery stated, with respect to
Inadequate Ideas. p. 59. 60; 62. And proved against him on his own Principles.
p. 62. The Notion of comprehending Things stated. p. 67. The true State of the
Controversy, with respect to Scripture. p. 73, 74. Authorities of Scripture,
where Mystery is applied to Incomprehensible Truths, 1 Cor. 2. 7. p. 81. 1 Timothy
3. 10. p. 84. Doctrines, or Divine Truths, contained in Scripture, that are
represented as Mysterious, and proved from Scipture to be so. p. 89. The first
Instance from 1 Cor. 1. 23. 24. second Instance 1 Cor. 13. v. 9. p. 94. And 2
Cor. 12. 4. p. 96. And Col. 2. 23. p. 97. All which are expounded at large, and
each Exposition ratified by the Judgment of the Fathers. The Opinions of the
Fathers for the three first Ages produced against him, even of those he has
cited. p. 105, 106. How far the Knowledge of the Object is required in Faith.
p. 118, 119. That Faith is opposed to Knowledge, or Science, and sometimes in
Scripture, implys an Assent to revealed Truths, as they exceed the Sphere of
Human Perception. p. 121, 122. This proved from Scripture, and the Authority of
the Fathers. p. 123, 124. The Belief of the Creation instanced. p. 120.
Mysteries proved from the Nature of Faith. p. 134. Miracles not to be admitted
contrary to the Testimony of the Senses, and why. ib. Miracles an Argument, a
majore, That there are Mysteries in the Christian Religion. p. 136, 137. His
Historical Account of Mysteries exploded. p. 138. The Methods of Initiation in
the Christian Faith, and the Discipline, Rites and Sanctions of the Primitive
Church, cleared from the Imputation of Paganism, or Imposture. p. 140. These
neither the Cause nor Product of Mystery. p. 143. The Lawfulness of Ceremonies,
especially such as the Established Church of England enjoins. p. 145. The
Authority of 'em asserted. p. 146. Not opposite to Christianity. p. 147. The
pernicious Design of his Treatise detected. p. 149, 150. The Conclusion, in a
Vindication of the present Methods of Answering by Instances. p. 151.
Editions of the Fathers, Clemens, Alexandrinus, Ed. Par. 1629. Justin Martyr,
Par. 1615. Irenaeus Ed. Erasmi, Basil. 1560. Tertullianus, Ed. Par. 1675.
Origin contra Cells. Edit. Cant. 1677. Dionys. vulgo Areopag. Antw. 1634. Johan.
Chrysostom. Par. 1621. Isiodor. Pelysiot. Par. 1638. Theophilact, Land. 1636.
Origin Comment. Rothomag. 1668. Athanasius ex Officina, Commeliana, 1601.
CERTAIN Christian Doctrines, Properly called Mysteries; And to be Esteemed
Above REASON, etc.
BEFORE I make any Formal Returns to the Positions advanced by this Zealous
Advocate for REASON, I shall endeavor to fix or state the several Measures and
Principles of Human Knowledge; I mean, with respect to the Objects of it, as it
includes the Knowledge of Objects of Sense, of Corporeal and Spiritual
Substances, of Finite and Infinite, and of Revealed Truths.

And, first, I can freely grant (what has cost our Adversary some Pages to
prove,) viz. [ That nothing in Nature can come to our Knowledge, but by some of
these four Means, viz. the Experience of the Senses, the Experience of the
Mind, Humane and Divine Revelation, Sect. 1. Cap. 3.]

But yet I think it very absurd, to advance one Rule or Standard for every Part
or Branch of Humane Knowledge, and thereupon form Arguments, and charge
Contradictions and Absurdities, without making the least allowance or
distinction, with respect to the nature of the Object, or the methods of
knowing it. Here is the Source of all our Adversary's Mistakes and
Miscarriages, whereby (as will anon more fully appear) he has cast a Cloud upon
Reason, rather than improved its Native Luster and Glory.

And, First, as for the Knowledge of Objects of Sense; it is certain the Mind of
Man, the proper Seat as well as Principle of Humane Knowledge, is here
entertained by the Objects of the Material World; for, Nothing but Matter in
the ordinary course of Natural Knowledge make an Impression upon the outward
Senses, so as to transmit, and fix an Idea in the Mind, suitable to the nature
of the Object. And certainly here is the great original Stock of Humane
Knowledge; for the Senses are not only the standing Vehicles to all those
Ideas, that are lodged in the Mind, (since even Faith and Revelation come by
Hearing) but these very Ideas, if positive, and formed on Things and
Substances, are little else but the Resemblances of material Sensations, or the
Ideas of some Object of Sense. However, exalted and refined may be the Ideas of
Angels and glorified Spirits, that have things presented to the view of the
Mind by an immediate Intuition, it is manifest we that are clothed with Senses
and Matter, and those of a very coarse allay, must have all our Ideas tinged
with material Adumbrations: These are that Glass upon the Mind through which we
see darkly, and that wonderfully incrassates and disguises the Images of
Things. It Is true, in Objects of Sense our Ideas must be comparatively clear
and exact, because we are seated in the very heart or center of the material
World, where its Objects perpetually crowd in upon our Senses, and are
continually presented to our view and observation: But yet, in Objects of
Sense, which we daily see and converse with, we can by no means pretend an
adequate Knowledge; for, we cannot comprehend or penetrate into their proper
Essences, or radical Substances; no, we can go no further than Properties,
Powers, or Faculties, that discover themselves in their Effects, strike the
Senses, and leave an Impression, whence a distinct Idea is formed. Again, We
cannot pretend to discover the true Modes of these Properties, Powers, or
Faculties, so as to discern wherein the precise Nature of 'em consists; for, at
least, we can only resemble it by some Ideas that are formed by the noblest of
Senses, that of Seeing; thus of Smells, and Tastes, and the like: So that we see
the highest Philosophical Exercitations, even in matters of Sense, are at last
wrapped up in that we can justly call a MYSTERY. Its true, Objects of Sense,
though formed from Effects and Properties, create a very certain and indisputable
Knowledge, because confirmed by daily and continued Observation, and because
the proper Objects of that part, which (as before concluded) is not only the
Vehicle, but first Elaboratory of all Ideas; I mean the outward Senses. And
therefore, in Objects of Sense, we must receive and embrace a Thing as it
presents itself to the view of our Senses, since we are assured, that GOD has
appointed no other way of communicating matters of this nature to Mankind. And
to receive an Object of Sense contrary to the Testimony of all our Senses,
(though upon the pretended Authority of Revelation) must overturn all the
Measures and Principles of Humane Knowledge, obliterate the Notices and
Distinctions of Truth and Error, raze the prime Faculties and Motrements of
Reason, and reduce Man, the Glory of the Creation, and GOD's Image and
Representative, infinitely below the level of Brutes that perish. For this
reason we may reject the Doctrine of Transubstantiation, notwithstanding the
highest Pretenses to Miracle or Mystery, since it implies a Contradiction of
the Testimony of all our Senses in matters of Sense.

But, Secondly, let us consider Humane Knowledge as engaged about the Objects
of the Spiritual World, or Spiritual or Immaterial Beings; for this must very
much alter the Scene of Knowledges, and fix it upon new Measures and Principles.

And, 1st, It Is indisputably evident, that our Knowledge of Spirits is of a
mixed nature, since it takes its rise partly from the Powers of Natural Reason,
and partly from Revelation. The Knowledge of God and our own Souls, may in some
measure be traced from the Powers of Natural Reason. The Frame of our own
Beings, as well as that of the Universe, will instruct us, That there must be
an Eternal, All-wise, and All-powerful Mover, agreeable to the Sacred Language:
The invisible things of Him from the Creation of the World, are clearly seen,
being understood by the things that are made, even His Eternal Power and
Godhead, Romans i. 20. but as for the Existence of other Beings, we call Spirits,
or their Orders and Societies, we must wholly receive it from Revelation.
Again; As for the Nature and Ideas of a Spirit, this must certainly rest on the
Instructions of Reason and Revelation; and after the best that can be given,
God knows, our Seize are very lame and imperfect; the excellency of our
own Faculties and Operations tell us, That we are acted by a Principle within,
that must be highly distinct from Matter, or least, that we see and handle much
more from that Great GOD, whose Workmanship is this very Reason that thus
dictates. This very Argument sufficiently instructs us, We ought not to think
that the Godhead is like unto Gold or Silver, or Stone graven by Art and Man's
Device, Acts xvii. 29.

But now, though from good Arguments we may conclude, That a Spirit is a Being
somewhat distinct from Matter, yet our most exalted Idea will be but a mere
Negative, or if Positive, a Resemblance of a refined Aerial kind of Matter; so
that our Ideas of a Spirit is much more abstruse, imperfect, and conjectural
than that of a Body, notwithstanding the utmost assistances of Revelation.

And here I Am obliged to make some Returns to what this Infallible Reasoner,
with the Authority of a Great Man on his side (as he calls him), has delivered
on the Subject; it amounts to this: We have as clear an Idea of Spirits as
Bodies, since both are only to be known by their Properties, and the Properties
of a Spirit are as clear as those of a Body. See Sect. 3. Cap. 2. N. 16, 17,
19. But, with Submission to the Infallible Chair, though some Properties which
belong to those Beings we call Spirits, are clearly known and agreed upon, yet
they are not so many, nor yet so distinguishing as those of Bodies; for,
besides the Properties of particular Bodies, that distinguish each other, there
are Properties certainly known, that belong to a Body as a Body, and
distinguish it from Spirit, and every Being that can be imagined; such are
extension of Parts, and a Faculty of possessing a Place in proportion to 'em.
These are for the most part Objects of Sense, and Self-evident; but we cannot
decipher or determine any peculiar Properties that belong to a Spirit as a
Spirit, and distinguish it from Body or Matter, and every thing else. We may
indeed conceive Spirits as Finite Beings, by the resemblance of Bodies, and
consequently make 'em exist in a place, and possess sometimes one place, and
sometimes another; but we can form no Idea how they exist in places, as we do
of Bodies. As for Thinking, Reasoning, and Willing, these seem to be too
remote, to be the distinguishing Properties of a Spiritual Substance as such,
being Faculties that seem to slow after its Radical or Original Properties are
given. I am sure they cannot be so in the Opinion of my Author's Great Man,
since in one place he tells us, [It's impossible without Revelation to discover
(whether Omnipotency has not given to some Systems of matter fitly disposed) a
Power to perceive or think. -- And again, I see no Contradiction in it, That
the first Eternal Thinking, Being, or Omnipotent Spirit, should, if he pleased,
give to certain Systems of created senseless Matter, put together as he thinks
fit, some degrees of Sense, Perception, and Thought.] Lock's Human
Understanding, Lock 's Human Vnderst. lib. 4. cap. 3.
Lib. 4. Cap. 3. N. 6. And therefore I think it appears, there is a vast
Difference between the Knowledge of Spirits and Bodies; insomuch that we may
justly pronounce, That no positive Ideas can be formed of Spirits, as Spiritual
Substances, but what carry the resemblances of Matter in 'em; other Ideas must
be formed by comparing 'em with Matter, and pronouncing what they are not,
rather than what they are.

But, Thirdly, let us examine the Measures and Extent of Humane Knowledge, with
respect to the Object, as it is Finite or Infinite. As for the Knowledge of
Finite Objects, an Estimate may be taken from what has been delivered on the
two preceding Arguments, the Subject of which being chiefly Finite Objects:
The present Enquiry then is, after the Knowledge of Infinite Objects; and here
certainly the Nature of the Being that thinks and knows, will determine the
Case, I mean, demonstrate the Imperfection of Humane Knowledge; for it is an
Absurdity in Terms, as well as in the Nature of the Thing, to imagine that a
Finite Mind should gain a perfect Comprehension of an Infinite Being; insomuch,
that it seems no Presumption to affirm, That GOD, by virtue of His Omnipotence,
after He has instated us in the Beatifick Vision, and discovered things that
Eye has not seen, nor Ear heard, nor Heart conceived; or, in a word, after we
have seen Him as He is, cannot possess us with an adequate Idea of His Immense
and Infinite Being: So that with respect to the Godhead we must affirm, That
our Ideas are made up of Negatives, and consequently with Clemens Alex. affirm,
That we rather know God by concealing what He is not, than what He is: (...).
Strom. lib. 5.
Or, at least, if we attempt any positive Conceptions, we are forced to shadow
'em forth by some Finite Ideas which we have taken up, and are already
implanted in us. Thus the Divine Attribute of Wisdom we are forced to resemble
by a Faculty of Discerning and Comprehending, infinitely surpassing the Sphere
of Humane Knowledge. Thus the Immensity of God, by a vast space, or an Idea
that is without Bounds or Limits, or is not to be circumscribed. Thus Eternity,
by an endless Succession of Time. Thus we see, after our nicest Conceptions,
and after the most accurate Characters and Descriptions from Revelation it
self, we are forced to call in Finite Objects, and measure the Blessed
Attributes of our Creator by Finite Ideas; an Undertaking so unworthy of him,
that it seems to be a piece of petty Larceny, or rather a lesser sort of
Idolatry, as it is a kind of Representation of the Invisible GOD, by things that
are seen, by a kind of Gold, or Wood, or Stone, graved in the shallow
Understandings of Impotent Men. Here our Weakness, our Blindness, plainly
discovers it self;* for though Knowledge in Finite Objects may appear bright and
shining, here it must suffer an Eclipse, and lie confounded in depth of
Mystery; and, in a word, humbly make St. Paul's Recognition: O the depth of the
Riches of the Wisdom, and Power, and Immenseness of God! how unsearchable, etc.

But, Fourthly, let us descend to the last Stage of Humane Knowledge, I mean
that about matters of Revelation. And, first, it is certain that pure Matters of
Revelation are things of which the Mind, by its own intrinsic Light, can form
no Ideas; and consequently we cannot pretend to know any thing more of them,
than GOD in a revealed way is pleased to communicate. It Is true, He seems to be
obliged to communicate Himself in such a manner, that His Revelations, at
least, may bear a resemblance to some of those Ideas we have already conceived,
or by the Power of Natural Reason can attain to. Thus does He reveal a Savior
that is GOD-Man, he is obliged to ascribe such Characters of Divinity to him, as
are agreeable to the revealed Characters of the Godhead, and those Ideas we can
form of it; and in like manner as to his Humanity; for otherwise I cannot
conceive how any revealed Truth can be imprinted on the Mind, without Special
Inspiration. But then, on the other hand, when God publishes a revealed Truth
in such Characters as suffice to inform us what he intends by it, viz. a
Savior that is GOD-Man, or the like, he is not obliged (neither is it any way
requisite to the reception of a revealed Truth) to demonstrate the modus of the
Union of the two Natures: First, Because the Subject of Revelation being
Matters not attainable by Reason, and GOD the Author of them, as long as we
have an Idea of the thing, or an Idea of what GOD proposes to be believed, the
modus of it is to be placed on the Infinite Power and Veracity of God.
Secondly, Because a leading Design of Revelation being to establish a
Confidence in God's Power and Veracity, in order to an absolute Obedience and
Worship, He did not intend to make us Philosophers, but revealed what was
useful and necessary, and directs us to adore, when we cannot comprehend.

From what has been delivered we may form two or three Inferences; 1st, With
respect to this last Argument, Whatever our Seize may be in Matters of
Sense and Natural Reason, it appears, that pure Matters of Revelation lie at a
great distance from us; and consequently Knowledge cannot penetrate much beyond
the Surface, since they are not only things in their own nature profound and
intricate, but all our Discoveries rest on the good Will and Pleasure of GOD,
that communicates 'em. And therefore, if Revelation itself tells us, we know
but in part, or imperfectly, we may safely affirm it, and place all
Difficulties on the Imperfections of Humane Knowledge, or the Depths and
Mysteriousness of Revealed Truths. 2dly, It Is a notorious Absurdity to argue
from Ideas of Objects of Sense, or Material Objects against Immaterial ones; or
Finite against Infinite, much more against Revealed ones. For it manifestly
appears, that the Measures of Humane Knowledge are to be taken from each
respective Object; for, as every Object has a distinct Essence or Nature, so
it has distinct Properties and Modes peculiar to its Nature; and the Ideas we
conceive of the one, may not reach or measure the other. This is even so clear,
that even in Properties that are common to several Objects, such as Spirits and
Bodies, when applied to their respective Objects, carry no manner of
Resemblance to each other.

Thus it is an inseparable Property of a Spirit and Body to occupy a Place, and
yet the manner of existing in a Place is, no doubt, vastly different; insomuch,
that I cannot find how any Ideas of the Vbi of Bodies can conclude any thing
against that of Spirits, much less measure or define it. And, by a Parity of
Reason, we may say as much of the Unity of a Body, and the Unity of an Infinite
Spirit; for the Unity of the Godhead or the Divine Essence may be preserved,
and yet communicate it self to Three Personal Subsistences: and it must be
absurd to deny this, because it will not comport with our common Ideas of the
Unity of a Body. 3dly, In Matters of Revelation, it is as absurd to Argue
against Revealed Truths, when the thing revealed is described in such a manner,
that we may know what is intended by it, because we cannot comprehend the Modus
of it; since this would oblige us to reject several things, even in Objects of
Sense, that are hitherto Unquestionable. What I have hitherto delivered, is by
way of Principle; and I shall stand by it as such, in defiance of the utmost
Attempts of our assuming Reasoner; and having laid this Foundation, I promise
my self Success, in unraveling his Arguments and Positions.

And first, to take him in the order we find him, before he gives you a State
of the Question, he begins with the main Burden of his Song, and introduces you
with some Sarcastical Reflections, upon the Managements, and Maxims of Divines,
about Religion. As if the generality of Christians had no Notion of Religion,
but Mystery; and Divines unanimously owned their Ignorance about it, [ Whilst
they gravely tell us, we must adore what we cannot comprehend;] and yet
majesteriously obtrude contradictory Comments, as infallible Demonstrations of
an unfathomable Mystery.

It Is visible this whole Paragraph is spent upon the Clergy; for, who are to
account for Men's Ignorance or absurd Notions in Religion, but those whose
Business it is to instruct and remove 'em? Again; Who are to answer for
Contradictions, but the Clergy, that resolve all into unfathomable Mystery, and
yet by their peremptory Comments pretend to unravel all to a Demonstration?
This is a Strain of impregnated Malice, that runs through the whole Book; where
the Clergy, by Insinuation, Consequence, or downright Assertions, are charged
with Imposture, as if they had industriously combined to resolve all Religion
into Mystery, even to the carrying on of Contradictions: For in one place he
makes it an Asylum or Shelter to their Ignorance; in another, an Artifice of
Usurpation, to oblige the Laity to admit nothing as a Branch of their Creed,
till it has been ratified from their Confessor's Chair. In a word, he
represents 'em as Introducers of Deism; he might have added, as Subverters of
all Religion too, since he makes 'em labor in nothing but Absurdities and
Contradictions. And now you have the Character or Temper of the Man, and see
where his poisoned Arrows are directed. I shall with Patience, or rather
Contempt, pass by all Strictures of this kind, and content my self with the
Confidence of wiping off his Calumnies by confuting his Positions. To return
then,

As for the Comments of some Divines, neither the Church, nor Body of the
Clergy are to account for the Indiscretions which Heat or Passion has surpised
some of them into; but, I Am persuaded, the Comments of others will stand the
Test of Reason and Argument, to establish those Truths we call MYSTERIES,
better than those of his Faction or Persuasion, to shake or overturn 'em.

As for the Maxim that instructs us to Adore what we cannot Comprehend, I think
it is extremely proper where we can prove a Mystery; for if God recommends an
Article of Faith that exceeds the Comprehension of a Finite Mind, we may rest
satisfied with an imperfect Idea, (even though it be no more than what is needful
to point out to us what God intends by it) and then surrender our Judgments to
His Infinite Veracity for the rest: A considerable Instance of Obedience (even
the Obedience of Faith) as well as Adoration.

After this, he presents us with the Opinions of some particular Persons, or,
at least, the Fictions of his own Brain, concerning the Authority of Fathers,
Councels, and Scripture, and the Rules of interpreting it: But I Am concerned to
assign what Deference is to be paid to Fathers or Councels, or what Rules to be
observed in interpreting Scripture, till he thinks fit to charge our
Constitution with Error in these matters. This is foreign to the Argument we
are now engaged in. The next thing he presents us with, is, Two Opinions of
nameless Parties concerning the Use of Reason in Religion, and the Sense of
Scripture; and, at last, makes all sides (that differ from his Notions) join in
this Position, (for I can put no other gloss on his words, when he affirms)
That both from different Principles agree, [ That several Doctrines of the New
Testament belong no further to the Enquiries of Reason, than to prove them
Divinely revealed; and, that they are properly Mysteries still, Ib. N. 6.] That
there are Doctrines in the New Testament that may be properly called Mysteries
still, I do not question; but I can evince in the Sequel of this Tract. But I
cannot find where the Church of England has declared herself, That Reason has
nothing to do with some Revealed Doctrines, but only to prove them divinely
revealed; for, certainly, Faith it self is a rational Assent to a Divine Truth;
and Reason will not only be concerned to enquire and prove, whether God has
delivered it, but to form some Idea (though an imperfect one) of the Nature of
this Truth; at least, such an Idea as will convince us what it is God proposes
to our Belief.

Else we assent to we know not what. But after the utmost Researches of Reason,
our very Reason may inform us, that there may be a great deal in this Truth or
Doctrine, with respect to the Nature or Modes of the thing, which She can by no
means comprehend, and consequently may still be justly accounted a Mystery.

And now we come to his own Positions: [ On the contrary we hold, -- That
nothing revealed, whether as to its manner or existence, is more exempted from
its Disquisitions, than the ordinary Phoenomena of Nature; and that there is
nothing in the Gospel contrary to Reason, nor above it, and that no Christian
Doctrine can be properly called a MYSTERY. N. 7.
This he proposes as the State of the Question, agreeable to the Title of his
Book, and consequently all that follows is only a confirmation or making good
of this Position. I must confess, I should be so fair to him, as to wait his
Arguments; but because nothing shall stick upon the Reader, I shall make
something of a return to such Decretory Assertions, in the order we find them:

And, First, this great Reasoner seems to play the Sophister, and express
himself in a very ambiguous manner: He tells us, That no Revealed Truth is
exempted from the Disquisitions of Reason. And truly, if he intends no more,
than that the sublimest Revealed Truths may be examined by Reason* as far as
she is able to comprehend them, we shall entirely join with him; for Revelation
is thus far an Address to the Reason of Mankind, and she may lawfully endeavor
to discover and conceive as much of their manner and existence as possible;
Provided she does not reject what she cannot comprehend, and that too upon this
very Argument, Because she cannot comprehend the whole Manner and Existence of
them.

Thus far Reason may be concerned, and yet Revealed Truths may be justly said
to be above Reason, and mysterious, and consequently his Positions do by no
means answer his Design, which is to prove, That Nothing is mysterious, or
above Reason.

But if he intends, that Matters of Revelation, both with respect to their
Manner and Existence, may be scanned and comprehended by Reason, as easily as
the Phoenomena of Nature; this we utterly deny, and with very good reason too:
1st, Because there is no connection in the Consequence, the Phoenomena of Nature
are often Objects of Sense, and of a finite nature: But there are revealed
matters that are in their very frame spiritual and infinite, and consequently
not to be comprehended by a finite Mind or Reason, much less with that ease and
clearness that Objects of Sense are conveyed to the Mind. Again, Matters of
Sense are knowable and comprehensible by the Powers of Natural Reason; but
there are Matters of Revelation that are not only incomprehensible in their own
nature, but knowable no further than God is pleased to communicate or impart to
us. This is clear from what has been already laid down and concluded, and
therefore this can be no Consequence; the Phoenomena of Nature are easily
comprehensible, therefore all matters of Revelation are so. This is so absurd,
that I do not question but I shall make it appear in the Sequel of this
Discourse, That there are some Matters of Revelation, which if scanned by Ideas
of Objects of Sense, carry the appearance of Contradictions; and yet this can
be no Argument against the Truth of 'em, or that we are mistaken in the purport
of the Holy Ghost, (as the Socinians would have it) when what we contend for is
represented in the clearest Characters and Descriptions. And yet, this is the
top of our Adversary's Reasonings. But, 2dly, as for Revealed Matters being
mysterious, or above Reason, it is already concluded, That the radical Essence
of Objects of Sense, and much more the Modes of their Properties, or their
Existence, are above the Comprehension of Reason: If so, what has been
delivered upon Matters of Revelation, will oblige us to conclude, against our
Adversary, That they cannot be fully comprehended in their Nature or Existence,
much less in the Modus of it; and consequently, that they are in the highest
sense mysterious, and above Reason.

But to proceed, in the next place he entertains you, pursuant to the Notions
of his great Man, with a large account what Reason is, and what she is not; the
Means of Information, and Ground-Perswasion: And I must freely own, that I can
for the most part agree with him, and his great Man; at least it is not
requisite to enter upon a nice Examination of every Paragraph, because I find
he makes no particular Application of what he has so elaborately delivered in
several Chapters, to prove his main Design. He tells us, Chap. 4. Sect. 1. [
That the Ground of Persuasion is Evidence, and Evidence he defines, an exact
Conformity of our Ideas, or Thoughts, with their Objects, or Things we think
upon.] The Description, I think, is well enough; but all this concludes nothing
to prove what he contends for, viz. That nothing is above Reason; for the
imperfect Ideas of Infinite and Incomprehensible Beings, must carry a
Resemblance, or Conformity to the Object, or the Characters of an
Incomprehensible Being; and yet it does not follow, but our Ideas are
imperfect, and that there is a great deal in the Object, of which we cannot
form any clear Idea. Indeed, if this were not so, he might justly infer, That
there is nothing above Reason in Revelation. In a word, since he has so
industriously stated the Nature of Reason and Humane Knowledge, he should have
proved, That there are no degrees of Evidence, or Knowledge, with respect* to
the Nature of the Object, or Means of Information: That we have as clear and
complete an Idea of Infinite Beings as Finite, of an Infinite Spirit as an
Object of Sense: That revealed Objects occurr by the same way as Objects of
Sense do; or, That the Extent of revealed Knowledge, does not depend on the
Good Will and Pleasure of God, in communicating what he pleases on every
Object. This would have cleared off all Dispute, and proved what he thinks he is
able to evince, viz. That the Evidence of all the Ideas of the Operations of
the Mind, is as infallible as our own Being, Cap. 4. N. 14. That what is
revealed in Religion, may be as easily comprehended, and found as consistent
with our common Notions, as what we know of Wood or Stone, of Air, Water, or
the like, Sect. 3. Cap. 2. N. 12.] Or, in a word, that there is nothing in
Religion, or Revelation mysterious, or above Reason. The two latter of these
Parodoxes will receive such Replies as are proper in the Sequel of this
Discourse; but I cannot pass the first without a few Remarks: And, to put the
most favorable Construction on an Ambiguous Assertion, I presume, he affirms,
That the Evidence of our Ideas which we form of the several Acts or Operations
of the Mind, (viz. Thinking, Contemplating, Knowing or Comprehending) are as
infallible as that of our Beings. This is a Maxim advanced to prove, That we
are to have the same Evidence in all speculative Ideas, and consequently in all
Ideas of pure Matters of Revelation; for this is his Application of it: [ Let
us now but strictly require this Evidence in all the Agreements and
Disagreements of our Ideas in Things merely speculative, etc. Ib.]* To show the
Weakness or Inconclusiveness of his Arguments, and the Falseness of his
Positions, I shall instance in the general Act or Operation of the Mind, that
of Thinking. And,

First, If he intends no more than that we have an Evidence (that we think,
when we actually think, or that we have a Faculty to think) as infallible as
that of our Being, I will easily join with him: But, can this be an Argument,
that all our Ideas of Speculative Objects, particularly of all Matters of
Revelation, (that are formed by Thinking) rest upon an Evidence as clear as
that of our Being? Again, If he contends for an Idea of the Nature of Thinking,
that carries an Evidence in it, as clear and infallible as that of our Being; I
say, we cannot form an Idea of the Nature of Thought, but by retreating to some
particular Instance or Object of Thought, and reflecting how the Mind exercises
itself upon it; and before we can form a perfect Idea of the Nature of Thought,
we must comprehend or discern the manner of the performance, and this will
carry us into a great many Difficulties and Conjectures. We may indeed
conclude, that Thought requires the application of the Object to the Mind, or
rather the application of the Mind to the Object, which may justly be called
Attention. Thus far the Idea of Thinking is clear and evident: But then, if we
enquire into the manner how this or that Object is communicated or applied to
the Mind, this seems to be inconceivable, even in Objects of Sense; for, who
can pretend to describe how Material Objects are imprinted on an Immaterial
Soul? Therefore we may conclude, that the Ideas we can form of the Nature of
Thinking, and consequently of the Operations of the Mind, do not carry an
Evidence in 'em as infallible as that of our Being.

But further; Admit we, that we could describe the precise Modus of the Nature
of Thinking, and consequently had an Idea that carries as much Evidence in it
as that of our Existence, it is absurd to conclude, that the Mind can form Ideas
of the highest Speculations equally evident and infallible. The Consequence, in
plain terms, is no other than this, Because the Evidence of the Ideas of one
particular Object is infallible, therefore the Evidence of the Ideas of every
Object is so. And certainly this is a Position that must pronounce all our
Ideas equally clear and perfect, and the Means of Information infallible, and
consequently there can be no Objects falsely represented to the Mind, nor no
Ideas false or imperfect. This is Mystery with a witness, or rather Positions
that in his own Language are, [ The Primary and Vniterical Origin of all his
Errors, Ib.] But, I think, he sufficiently confutes himself in the following
Paragraphs, when he pronounces some things dubious and obscure, and allows
false Ideas may be contracted by Precipitancy or Inattention, by Affection and
Prepossession, N. 18.

And now for the Second, Sect. II.
where he introduces us with a Description of what is contrary to Reason, [viz.
What is evidently repugnant to clear and distinct Ideas, or to our common
Notions, is contrary to Reason.] Now truly this I think is a very lame,
imperfect, or at least fallacious Description, unless it be balanced with some
Limitations and Restrictions.

As first, It can only hold in Objects of the same Species, or Nature; Thus we
can only argue from Objects of Sense, against Objects of Sense, from Finite
against finite, and from Matters of Revelation against pretended Matters of
Revelation: For its the greatest Absurdity in Nature, to conclude any thing
against any revealed Truth, or Doctrine, whose Object is purely Spiritual, and
absolutely Infinite; because it does not accord with our Ideas in Objects of
Sense; I Am sure the Holy Ghost instructs us better, in obliging us to compare
Spiritual Things with Spiritual. A sufficient Inhibition truly against
discarding revealed Truths by any other Ideas, then what are formed from
antecedent Notices of Revelation.

Thus for our Savior's Divinity, before we yield an Assent to it, it is
requisite the Characters and Properties of the Godhead, which are in the Books
of Revelation ascribed to the Father, with respect to the Godhead, should be
ascribed to the Son But then when this is done, it is absurd to reject this
great Truth, as contrary to Reason, upon the force of an unreasonable
Consequence formed by comparing the incomprehensible Godhead with Objects of
Sense.

Thus the Son cannot be God, because it must destroy the Unity of the Godhead;
for the Unity of the Godhead must be destroyed: Why? Because such Unity and
Plurality can never be admitted in Objects of Sense, and consequently not in
the sublimest Matters of Revelation. But what is this but to prostitute the
Glory and Majesty of the Invisible and Incomprehensible Godhead, by the vilest
Representations? What is it but a making him like Gold, Wood or Stone, or
Things graven by Man's Art. Certain I am, such Maxims as these are the highest
Contradictions to Reason; for if they might take place, it must shake the
Foundation of all Revelation, even those lively Characters which the Word of
God has given of the Godhead: If they must be scanned, or measured by common
Notions, or Ideas that result from Objects of Sense.

Secondly, Before we pronounce any thing contrary to Reason, we must be sure
that we have a clear and perfect Comprehension of the Thing; for though our Ideas
that are seemingly repugnant to it, be never so clear, how shall we judge of
the Repugnancy, as long as we cannot pretend to a perfect Idea on both sides?
This I Am sure is a very reasonable Injunction, between Objects of Sense, and
Matters of Revelation; so that if God has delivered any revealed Truth, and by
comparing it with the Ideas and Characters of other revealed Truths, we must
conclude, he intended such a particular thing, and at the same time discern the
Incomprehensibleness of it; insomuch that we cannot form an adequate Idea; it is
absurd to reject it, because this imperfect Idea will not comport with certain
clear Ideas in Objects of Sense. Here if any Difficulties, Absurdities, or
Contradictions arise, Reason will direct us to place 'em upon the Weakness of
our Understandings, or our imperfect way of comprehending such unfathomable
Objects; and with St. Paul, engage us to cry out, Who is sufficient for these
things? And now if my Adversary will add these Limitations to his Definition
(as I Am persuaded he will be forced to do) I do not question, but I can wipe off
all the Absurdities produced in the following Chapter, at least by showing
their Impertinence to the Case before us. And on this account, I pass by 'em,
as well as because there is nothing in 'em, that affects any thing already
delivered, but either confirms, or may be fairly solved by it. I therefore
proceed to his Argument, Sect. 2. Cap. 1. N. 4.

The first thing I shall insist upon is, [ That if any Doctrine of the New
Testament be contrary to Reason, we have no manner of Idea of it: To say for
instance, that a Ball is White and Black at once.] Here he sufficiently
discovers himself; he tells us before, That whatever is repugnant to common
Notions, is contrary to Reason; and what his common Notions are, the Instance
before us, sufficiently informs; that is, in plain English, whatever does not
comport with the most trite Ideas of Objects of Sense is contrary to Reason;
and therefore the most sublime revealed Truths (whose Objects are Spirits, and
Infinite Spirits, and consequently the Ideas we can pretend to, must be highly
imperfect) because we cannot adjust them with the most common Ideas of Sense,
are contrary to Reason. But the Absurdity of this Assertion, I hope, I have
sufficiently exploded.

But, to deliver my own Sentiments of matters of this nature once for all, I do
believe there is an eternal and universal Harmony in Reason, as well as things
both created and uncreated. The Reason of Mankind is certainly an immediate
Transcript of Infinite Reason, and all the Councels, Decrees, and Declarations
of Heaven are the Dictates of Infinite Reason, and the Reason of Mankind must
be established upon the unalterable Rules or Measures of Infinite Reason; and
therefore there can be no Ideas of Infinite Truths or Objects (provided they
are complete and perfect, such as GOD can conceive of Himself) which really
contradict the Rules and Measures of Humane Reason, if she were enabled to
comprehend 'em as clearly as her Maker.

But yet, I think, I have made it appear, that after all the Researches of
Reason, there are revealed Objects of which we can form but very imperfect
Ideas, both with respect to their Nature, Existence, and Modus, and yet we may
form such an Idea as instructs us what GOD intends we should believe.

From hence we may conclude, That as their nature is peculiarly distinguished
from all other Beings, so is the Modus of their Existence: So that it is highly
absurd to deny our Assent to the Truth of it, because we can form no Idea that
will comport with those we have formed on Objects of Sense, and consequently
adjudge it to be contrary to Reason. This is a Contradiction to the Eternal
Laws of right Reason, which, in Cases of this nature, direct us to fix the
Absurdity or Contrariety on the Imperfections of our Understanding, or the
Falseness of the Rule, in judging Matters of Revelation by Objects of Sense.

In a word, from what has been said, we may, in express terms, affirm, That we
can form imperfect Ideas of Matters of Revelation, so far as to know what GOD
proposes to our Belief: And yet, when we proceed to examine the Modus of their
Existence, we cannot reconcile it with the Ideas of Objects of Sense; and, for
all this, we must not pronounce any thing of this nature contrary to Reason; or
esteem those imperfect Ideas, no Ideas at all.

Give me leave to illustrate this matter in an Instance which the Socinian
chooses to advance his own Hypothesis, by exploding it; I mean, the Divinity of
our Savior: We affirm him to be possessed with the Fullness of the Godhead,
because his Divinity is described in Characters that are peculiar to the
Godhead, and such as correspond with those Ideas of the Godhead as are formed
by the Assistance of Revelation. He rejects his Divinity, because he proceeds
further, and examins the Modus of its Existence, with respect to the Unity of
the Godhead, and its Union with Humane Nature; and thereupon forms a Modus by
some common Ideas or Notions, and then compares it with other Ideas of the same
rank and quality, and rejects those Ideas which Scripture has given us of his
Divinity, by pronouncing such a Revelation absurd and contrary to Reason,
because the Modus of its Existence with the Unity of the Godhead and Humanity,
(a thing formed and hammered out of his own shallow Understanding,) does not
comport with common Ideas of Objects of Sense. Here, I think, is a Complication
of Absurdities, or things that run counter to the eternal Measures of right
Reason; the Godhead of our Blessed Savior is rejected and denied, as contrary
to Reason, not because we want Revelation for it, since we may read it in the
clearest Characters; but we must expound these away, 1st, Because we cannot
comprehend the Modus of its Existence (a thing that often exceeds our
Comprehension) even in Philosophical Disquisitions. 2dly, Because we cannot
form a Modus that comports with common Ideas or Notions in Objects of Sense.
But, if Consequences of this nature are suffered to take place, against such
legible Characters of Divinity, it must overturn those Ideas of a GOD, which
Revelation and Natural Reason has furnished us with, since the Characters of
both are equally clear and undeniable.

I have dwelt too long on this Argument, but not without Design, because I
would not be obliged to make a formal Return to every little Passage that runs
against us, or dispels every Speck of a Cloud that is raised upon Sophistry or
False Arguing: I am sure I have offered enough to take off the Force of what he
has suggested in the following Paragraph, N. 5. for, he is a complete Conjurer,
raises his own Devil, and then lays it, frames an Objection, and gives his own
Answer to it; it is this: [ If any will think to evade the Difficulty, by
saying, That the Ideas of certain Doctrines may be contrary indeed to common
Notions, yet consistent with 'emselves, -- he is but just where he was.] Now, I
have already delivered the Measures of forming revealed Ideas, not by comparing
'em with Objects of Sense, but Spiritual Things with Spiritual: I will admit,
indeed, it may be done by common Notions; if he will restrain his common Notions,
as he does in the close of his Paragraph, or, at least, with some Improvement
added to 'em; for I can freely subscribe: [ That we cannot otherwise discern
His Revelations, but by their conformity with our Natural Notices of Him,] GOD
he means; or, at least, those Improvements we receive of Him from Revelation.
And in this sense our Savior's Divinity is not contrary to common Notions; for
we can form an Idea of it agreeable to those Characters which Revelation and
Natural Reason gives us of the Godhead; but, then the Difficulty lies in
comprehending the Union and Existence of the two Natures together, which we
call the Modus of the thing; and this, we say, is not to be measured by common
Notices, for, to a Finite Mind, it is Incomprehensible: But then it is not a
Doctrine of Christianity, that we should comprehend it; much less is it a
Doctrine of Reason or Christianity that we should exclude or cashier the
clearest Characters of our Savior's Divinity or Incarnation from being a
Doctrine of Christianity, because we cannot comprehend the manner of the Union
of the two Natures, nor form any clear Idea of it, at least, such as will
comport with common Notions. It Is true, we may resemble it, as it is done in
one of our Creeds. As the reasonable Soul and Flesh is One Man, so GOD and Man
is One CHRIST; but we do not advance a Similitude into a complete Idea, or an
Article of Faith.

But, to offer a word or two more, if this method of Arguing may be admitted, I
cannot conceive but it must explode the Belief of the Soul, or any Principle
distinct from Matter, because we cannot fix the Modus of its Union, or conceive
an Idea of the manner of its incessant Intercourses with the Body.

To conclude this Argument, from what is said, I think here is enough to defeat
our Adversary's Triumphs, even over his own Objection; for, we may safely
affirm, That as the Nature of the Godhead is distinguished by Properties
peculiar to it self, so we may justly conclude, that it has a manner of
Existence with Humanity so peculiar to itself, that we must not pretend to
comprehend it, by comparing it with Objects of Sense; and yet we can freely
own, that there is neither Necessity nor Possibility of its being comprehended
by us, or of determining what is the precise Modus of it.

And thus much of his Notion of Self-consistence. And as for his Sarcastical
profane way of Arguing, when he tells us, That Four may be called Five in
Heaven; he might know, That Numbers are only empty Denominations, and no
Arguments to be formed from 'em, but as applied to Things; and then, if we
consider Heavenly Objects with respect to the manner of their Existence, a
Unity and a Trinity may be consistent, for any thing he knows to the contrary.
And this is sufficient to prevent any modest Man from pronouncing
Contradictions upon such unfathomable Truths, by measuring their Modus by
Common Notions, things that exceed our Comprehension as much as they are
besides the Business of our Curiosity or Faith. Here we may discern the Origin
of his ill Reasonings to be want of distinguishing Things, I mean the Being of
a Thing, and the Manner of its Existence, with respect to itself, or as it is
united to something else.

From hence I pass to N. 9. for nothing intervenes that directly concerns the
present Controversy, or, at least, has not had a Reply to it. And here I
cannot join with him, when he affirms, That a seeming Contradiction, (even in
Matters of Revelation) is to us as much as a real one; for, I think, the
Difference is palpable in all cases, but especially in Contradictions upon the
Nature of Things; for We call that a seeming Contradiction, when there is a
Repugnancy discovers itself, but we have not a clear and perfect Conviction of
it: And, I suppose, this must arise for want of a clear and perfect Idea of
each Term, or rather Object, of the Contradiction; and, till this is gained,
Reason must suspend, and neither determine that she is in the right or wrong,
till fresh Evidence offers to turn the Scale. But now, a real Contradiction, or
rather a clear Contradiction, (for it should pass under this Name with respect
to our knowledge of it) is, When we have a clear and unquestionable Idea of both
parts of it, or both Objects, and thence conceive an irreconcilable Repugnancy.
But now, in matters of pure Revelation, whose Nature is spiritual and infinite,
I cannot see how Reason can direct us to pronounce or determine real or clear
Contradictions between them and Common Notions, because we cannot pretend to an
adequate or clear Idea; I mean, that which is comparatively so, with respect to
those of Objects of Sense, and consequently cannot decree what real Repugnancy
lies between them: And therefore, if seeming Contradictions or Difficulties
arise, by comparing revealed Truths with common Ideas or Notions, Reason cannot
(as this Author would have it) pronounce a real Contradiction, and suspect
there can be no revealed Truth, especially when there are the clearest
Characters of the thing corresponding with Ideas of the same nature. Here
Reason must oblige us to place the Contradictions on our Inabilities in
comprehending Matters of this nature, and yield an Assent upon the Authority of
Infinite Power and Veracity: For when Revelation has set forth the thing in the
clearest Characters, and the very same in which the fundamental Article of all
Revelation is represented to us, I mean that of the Godhead, if seeming
Contradictions must be suffered to discard it, it is impossible we can yield any
Assent to the Being of a GOD; for, where the Characters are as clear for one as
the other, and both rest on the same Authority, that of Revelations to dispute
the one, must call in question the other.

Proceed we, in the next place, to consider what is delivered on the Authority
of Revelation, he means that which is Divine, Cap. 2. N. 11. And here I cannot
be reconciled to the Distinction he gives us: [ Revelation is not a
necessitating Motive of Assent; but a Mean of Information.] Now, truly I can
see no Absurdity in saying, That the same thing may be a Mean of Information,
and a Motive of an Assent too, for an Information carries an Assent along with
it proportionable to the Credit or Authority of the Informer. Now Revelation is
certainly a Mean of Information, since it presents us with new Objects, which
Natural Reason could never discover: But, besides this, it is an Information
that proceeds from Infinite Veracity, attended with Infinite Power, Wisdom, and
Goodness: Herein it is distinguished from Human Revelation; And therefore, when
once we are assured (so as to yield a firm Assent) that such a particular
Article is revealed, it becomes the most necessitating Motive of Assent; I
mean, to the Truth of it; because, this being granted, here is Infinite
Veracity, Wisdom, Power and Goodness against our Imperfect Conceptions, and the
seeming Difficulties founded in 'em. When once we assent or yield it to be
Divine Revelation, I think, we may safely affirm, against this Reasoner, [We
may believe purely upon his Word, without Evidence, (at least such as he
requires) in the things 'emselves]. Here the Authority of him that speaks, not
my Conception of the thing, or what he says, is the Ground of my Perswasion].

But, to proceed, as for what this Reasoner says of GOD's Omnipotence and
Contradictions, N. 13. no one is so silly to imagine, that real Contradictions
are an Object of Omnipotence; but there may be Contradictions which we
apprehend as real* that in truth are but seeming ones* and particularly when we
cannot fully comprehend the nature of both the Terms or Objects; and it is
already concluded, that in matters of Revelation Reason will often direct us to
suspect our Judgments, and esteem 'em as such: And then, I hope, there is no
Absurdity in Pronouncing, seeming Contradictions and Impossibilities, a proper
Subject of God's Omnipotence: Thus far our Savior will bear us out, for all
things are possible with God, Matt. xix. 26.

But, to pursue him a little further, he tells us, N. 16. speaking of GOD's
Revelations, [His Words must be intelligible, and the Matter possible. And as
for unintelligible Relations, we can no more believe them from the Revelation
of GOD, than from that of Man, for the conceived Ideas of Things are the only
Subjects of believing, and therefore all Matters revealed by GOD or Man, must
be equally intelligible and possible: We are then to expect the same degree of
Perspicuity ( he means, with respect to the knowledge of the Object) from GOD
as from Man, though more of Certitude from the first than the last: he means with
respect to the Veracity of the Publisher.]

Answ. What has already been delivered upon Matters of Revelation, I hope, will
satisfy any reasonable Man, how far a revealed Truth is required to be
intelligible. It Is concluded, GOD has discovered so much of the Nature of
revealed Truths as is useful or necessary; and consequently, He has, at least,
discovered so much as is sufficient to inform us, upon Principles of
Revelation, what He proposes to our Belief, but He did not intend to make us
Philosophers, so as to enable us to comprehend the Modus of revealed Truths, or
form an Idea of the Manner of Existence, in order to believe the Truth of 'em.
This we cannot pretend even in Physical Disquisitions; nay, I think, it is
justly concluded, that in Matters of Revelation, which are for the most part
Spiritual and Infinite, we are not to dispute the Possibility of their
Existence, by measuring 'em by Objects of Sense; for, in reality, this is the
same with comprehending the Modus of their Existence, since we cannot
absolutely declare against the Possibility of their Existence, without a
Faculty of comprehending and determining the Modus of it, and passing an
Estimate upon it as absurd and impossible: And therefore we say, That Matters
of Revelation are to be understood so far as to conceive what GOD proposes to
our Belief, but not to comprehend the Modus of their Existence; such Ideas are
not the necessary Subjects of Faith.

Again, In Humane Revelation the Object is Matters of Fact, and thing we attain
to by the Testimony of our Senses, and consequently are things that lie within
the proper Verge of Humane Understanding.

Again, They are Discoveries made by Persons upon the same level with
ourselves, and, consequently, such as are not only liable to be mistaken, but
may sometimes industriously lead others into Mistakes. And both these are
Arguments that will engage us to demand an absolute Comprehension of the Nature
of the Thing, and all its Circumstances; so that before we can come to a final
Datermination, or yield an Assent to the Truth of any such Relation, We must
comprehend the Nature of it so exactly, as to be able to judge, not only of the
Possibility, but Probability of it. And, I hope, no one can have the Face to
demand all this Evidence from GOD. Therefore we may conclude, against our
Majesterial Reasoner, That the same degree of Perspicuity is not required from
GOD, as from Man. In a word, if we cannot form a perfect Idea of revealed
Truths, much less of the Modus of their Existence, we cannot judge of the
Possibility of 'em: If indeed we were able to form an Idea of the Modus of
their Existence, that will comport with common Notions, though this be not the
true Modus, we may safely pronounce them possible; but we cannot pretend to
reject the Possibility of 'em, unless we could judge of the real Modus, and
show, that it is absurd and impossible: Therefore we may conclude, that all
Matters revealed by GOD or Man, are not required to be equally intelligible and
possible.

But, to proceed, as for those Instances of Scripture, that follow in this or
the next Chapter, to prove Christianity a rational intelligible Religion; they
only prove, That Reason is a concurring Instrument in embracing all religious
Truths, not by teaching us to comprehend the Nature of 'em, but to engage our
Assent, where we cannot fully comprehend upon rational Motives and Convictions:
And we think we act upon rational Motives and Convictions in Matters of
Revelation, when we know as much of the thing as satisfies us, what it is GOD
proposes to our belief, and yet find some things contained in 'em
incomprehensible in their own nature, and rely upon God's Veracity, Power,
Wisdom, and Goodness, rather than reject the whole, because we know but in
part. Nay further, in the case of Miracles, we grant, that Reason may judge of
the reality of 'em, because they are Objects of Sense, and are to be examined
by the Testimony of the Senses, by Ideas of Objects of Sense, and the
Exercitations of Reason upon 'em, and because Miracles are the uncontrollable
Demonstrations of the Spirit, or Means of Conviction, for proving the Divine
Original of Revelation; And we can freely grant, that Reason must act by common
Notions, to prove Revelation to be truly Divine: But when this is done, there is
no Consequence that Reason must still measure revealed Truths by common
Notions, and reject 'em if she cannot fully comprehend 'em, or if she cannot
make 'em comport with common Notions; which is the thing our Adversary labors
to prove.

The remaining Instances, which only declare the Perspicuity of the Moral Law
or Christian Precepts, an Ingenious Reader will presently discern how foreign
and impertinent they are to his Design.

At the same rate he trifles, when he raises an Objection from the Corruption
of Humane Reason; as if, by making his own Answers and Objections, he had
vanquished all our Arguments, gained the Field, and might triumphantly
maintain, That there is nothing in the Christian Religion mysterious, or above
Reason; for, I do not anywhere find the Chapter of England fixes the Controversy
on this Bottom* and therefore this is Reply enough to two of his Chapters, viz.
3, 4.

And now we come to the Third Section, Sect. III.
where we are introduced with an Account of what is mysterious and above Reason.
I shall for the most part take his own Accounts of it, and therefore shall not
much dispute any thing in the first Chapt. only I cannot forbear to remark, how
lame or imperfect, or, at least, industriously equivocal, all his Descriptions
are: He gives us two Significations of a Mystery, the first I shall not examine;
his second is, (I suppose he speaks his own Opinion, else he should have
declared the contrary) [ It is made to signify a thing of its own nature
inconceivable, and not to be judged of by our ordinary Faculties and Ideas,
though it be never so much revealed.] Indeed, I think the first part of this
Description is a Mystery; though, I suppose, he means, in the nature of the
thing, or by reason of its Immensity, it is inconceivable to us, or with respect
to Humane Comprehension; but then, who knows how far he intends to carry this,
I mean, represent a Mystery inconceivable? If he intends it so as that we can
form no manner of Idea of it, then he imposes a manifest Absurdity upon the
World; for no one ever called that a MYSTERY that we could have no Notion of;
for, such a thing may be as well Nothing, as Mystery, for any thing we can
tell. And therefore Mystery, at least, supposes an Imperfect or Inadequate
Idea, (as appears from all those Instances I have hitherto produced) otherwise
we could not know what God proposes to our Belief. But then, if we enquire
further into the thing, and endeavor to unravel the Modus of its Existence, we
can either form no distinct Idea, or, at least, none that will comport with
common Notions. And thus far we affirm, That Mysteries are not to be judged of
by our ordinary Faculties and Ideas, though never so clearly revealed. N. 1.

I proceed to Chap. 2. where, after having promised a wonderful Perspicuity in
the Case before him, he affirms, [ That nothing can be said to be a* Mystery,
because we have not an adequate Idea of it, or a distinct View of all its
Properties at once; for then every thing would be a Mystery. Sect. 8.
] Now truly I Am much of his Mind, for I Am persuaded that no Finite
Understanding can conceive all the several Properties of any one Being, at once
in a distinct view: This is the Peculiar of an All-wise GOD; and if an adequate
Idea must imply a distinct view of every Property at once, and Mystery opposed
to it, every thing must be a Mystery to every intelligent Being but GOD: So
that here is a Notion raised, that proves nothing, and no one requires it. We
will therefore pass this as an Unphilosophical Blunder, and describe an
adequate Idea to be what he aims at, viz. A clear and distinct Idea of the
Nature and Properties of an Object. This (he contends) cannot be fairly opposed
to MYSTERY, because, in the Knowledge of Humane Bodies, GOD has sufficiently
answered the Ends and Designs of it, by enabling us to comprehend the principal
Properties of Bodies, and the Uses of 'em: And therefore what remains cannot be
MYSTERY, N. 19, 20. This is truly a Reason which is more cogent on the other
hand, as well in Philosophical as Revealed Disquisitions: GOD has discovered,
or enabled us to comprehend, as much as is useful or necessary in both these
Cases; but, after all, we can pretend no further than some principal
Properties: And since Reason tells us, there is a great deal undiscovered and
incomprehensible, we may justly affirm, That there are Mysteries in Nature, as
well as Revelation; so that we are beholden to him for his Argument, though he
had no Friendly Design in it. Indeed, if he would be content to carry us no
further than the force of his Argument naturally tends, we should presently
join in an amicable Accommodation, which is in other terms no more than this:
There can be no Mystery in Revelation, (he might have added, nor in rerum
natura) I mean, in this Notion of it; because we know as much as our Finite
Understandings are capable of, or as much as is necessary or useful. If this
may be admitted, it is a substantial Reason to conclude against the Possibility
of a Mystery.

But we may say there are Mysteries, not because we know not as much as is
necessary and useful, but because after we know the principal Properties of
Things, or as much as is necessary or useful, we can discern a great deal which
we cannot comprehend. And this holds good not only in Matters of Revelation,
but Nature too. Our Adversary confesses as much; for though we have a competent
Idea of the Properties of Bodies, that is, as far as they are useful to us, yet
we are not able to comprehend the Modus of their Operations, nor indeed the
true Causes of a great many obvious Effects.

Again, In revealed Truths we can form, at least, an imperfect Idea of what GOD
proposes to our belief. Thus we form an Idea of our Savior's Divinity, from
those Characters which Revelation and Natural Reason gives us of the Godhead.
We believe him to be possessed with the fullness of the Godhead, because the
same Characters are ascribed to him that are ascribed to the Father in respect
of the Godhead; but we cannot form an Idea of the Manner of the Union of this
Divinity with Humane Nature, nor its Consistence with the Unity of the Godhead,
at least so as to make it comport with common Notions: So that in respect of
the Modus of things, whether as to their Existence or Operations, even in those
of Natural Bodies, as well as Matters of Revelation, there are Mysteries in
Nature, (and that properly) as well as in Revelation.

Our Adversary indeed would call this an Inadequate Knowledge, but nothing
Mysterious or above Reason; but I hope to prove it a Mystery even in the
received sense of the Word, as well as the reason of the Thing, and that too on
his own Concessions and Principles. And,

1st, It Is certain his Evasions concerning Inadequate Ideas will do him no
service, to take off the Denominations of Mystery, or above Reason; for we
affirm, That Things are Mysterious, and above Reason, because we can form but
very imperfect and inadequate Ideas of 'em. It Is certainly absurd to imagine
that any thing can be mysterious, or above Reason, which we are able fully to
comprehend; and it is equally absurd to say, that things are mysterious, when we
can form no Idea at all, since we can pronounce nothing when we know nothing:
But, to confess, that of most things we can form but imperfect and inadequate
Ideas, is to prove a thing to be mysterious; for, if we know and acknowledge,
that our most improved Ideas are inadequate, we must conclude there is something
behind, either as to the Modus or Rationale of Things, which Reason cannot
comprehend. And I know no better denomination, than to say, That Things are in
this respect mysterious, or above Reason.

To make up the strict Notion of Mystery, we are not to consider the Necessity
or Usefulness of what we cannot comprehend; but the grand Question is, Whether
there are not Modes and Properties of Things, that by reason of the
Imperfection of Human Understanding, or the Immensity or Intricacy of the
Things 'emselves, cannot be comprehended by us? For it is the Abstruseness or
Inaccessibility of Things that make the Mysteries, not the Necessity or
Usefulness of what is incomprehensible. And therefore if there be Things in
this material World which we cannot comprehend, we may truly affirm, That
there is a Mystery in Nature, or that Natural Causes or Effects are thus far
above Reason, or mysterious; much more may we affirm it of Matters of
Revelation: And therefore, to use the Instance of a vain insulting Adversary,
Though we live upon Water, and see and handle it daily, there may and is
something in it mysterious, and above Reason, inasmuch as we cannot form an
Idea of every thing that truly belongs to it. And yet no wise Man will be
tempted to make such a practical Inference as this Reasoner has suggested,
that is, resolve never to enquire into its Nature, nor employ it in his House
or Grounds See Sect. 3. N. 10.
. But, in Matters of Revelation, we know how inadequate our Ideas are, as much
as Finite differs from Infinite, Negative from Positive, and Sense from Spirit:
Must they not then contain things above Reason, because they are only thus
inadequate?

But further, As for the original Import of the word MYSTERY, I am not
concerned to trace it in the primitive Uses of it, it is sufficient if by Custom
it has obtained another Import (it may be) every jot as proper as the former.
Our Author owns, that in approved Classicks it is commonly taken for obscure and
intricate Matters, such as cannot well be comprehended or seen into See N. 5.
Sect. 3.
. And this, I think, is equally proper with that other described by him, which
implies something beyond a Veil, not discernable till that is removed: And in
this sense the Types under the Mosaic Law he accounts Mysteries; for those
which through the Imperfections or Weakness of Reason, or the Immensity,
Distance, or Intricacy of the Object, may be as little discerned as those that
have a Veil over 'em; and then they seem to be equally mysterious, and above
Reason. In a word, Mystery is something shut up from our View or Cognizance,
and it is not material whether this be done by a Veil or other Impediments or
Obstructions; and consequently Mystery and an Inadequate Idea may be very
consistent; I do not mean, that which arises from affected Ignorance, but the
Intricacy of the Object, and the Weakness of Humane Reason under its highest
Improvements.

But, to clear up his Understanding in this matter, by a few Arguments drawn
from his own Positions, the Riches of his own inexhausted Brain, he tells us,
Cap. 3. N. 27. That certain Gospel-Doctrines are called Mysteries, with respect
to the Jews, [ not* that they knew nothing of 'em, but they were not clearly
and fully revealed till the New Testament-times, being veiled before by various
Typical Representations, etc.] Well, you see he allows Mosaic Types to be
Mysteries, and gives the reason, Because they saw 'em through a Veil; or, in St.
Paul's Language, with respect to further Discoveries, through a Glass darkly: And
what is this, but that they knew them in part, or by inadequate Ideas? I Am sure
our Knowledge is as much cramped in several of those Instances produced by our
Author, from the Intricacy and Immensity of the Things 'emselves, as those
Gospel Truths shut up from the Jews by the Mosaic Veil of Types and Figures:
And consequently, why is not the one as much a Mystery to us, as the other to
the Jews, and for this very reason, because we know them inadequately.

But, to go a little further with him, I remember, in the State of his
Question, as well as in other places, he gives us to understand, That all
Revealed Matters may be judged of even by common Notions, both as to their
Manner and Existence, as easily as the ordinary Phoenomena of Nature; and
therefore concludes, That there is nothing in the Gospel contrary to Reason, or
above it; and, That no Christian Doctrine can be properly called a MYSTERY.
This is the State of the Question; and what he asserts must be a Criterion, in
judging what is mysterious or above Reason: So that we may hence conclude, and
that upon his own Principles too, That that Thing whose Manner or Existence
cannot be conceived, even with as much ease and clearness as the ordinary
Phoenomena of Nature, is a Mystery, and above Reason. Certainly here is a fair
Concession, and such as will make things mysterious, because we can but form
inadequate, Ideas; for, as this Author confesses, we can form Ideas of the
Beings of Things, and know as much as is useful from their Properties and
Effects, whilst we are ignorant of the manner of their Existence or Production:
See N. 8, 11. -- (the one of Plants, and the other of Rain). Here he manifestly
fixes our inadequate Ideas upon the Modus of Things, with respect to their
Operations and Existence; that is, our Ideas are inadequate, because we cannot
decipher wherein their Modus consists, though we know their principal Properties
by their Effects and Uses.

And now we may call in his own Principles to conclude against him, and affirm,
That inadequate Ideas must necessarily imply a Mystery, for inadequate Ideas
imply our Ignorance as to the Modus of Things, and that thing whose Modus
cannot be comprehended, according to his own Principles, is mysterious, and
above Reason. Here, I think, he pretends to Outdo the most improved Arts of
Priestcraft, whilst he declares for nothing but Reason, and banishes Mystery
out of the World, and yet imposes things that surpass the highest Mystery;
since he labors to make the World embrace his Contradictions for the undoubted
Decrees of Reason: [This is, in his own language, trifling with a witness, or
pitiful shifting or fooling, or what not, and such as discovers a mighty
Scarcity of good Arguments, N. 13.] But he has not done with us yet, and
therefore concludes with an obliging Proposal, [ If they will still be fooling,
and call these things Mysteries, I Am willing to admit as many as they please in
Religion, if they will allow me likewise to make mine as intelligible to others
as these are to me, Ib.]

I hope I have made good the first part, That there are true and proper
Mysteries, even in the Schools of Nature. And, if so, it is manifest,
notwithstanding his vain Triumphs, we have an Argument a majori, That there are
Mysteries in Revelation: I say, it is a majori to every one but him, that has
the Face to assert, That an infinite incomprehensible Spirit is an Object
equally intelligible with Objects of Sense, or with Wood or Stone. As for the
last part of his Proposals, I believe every one will consent, That he shall
make all those revealed Truths we call Mysteries, as intelligible as he is able,
provided he will promise not to reject 'em, because he fails in his Undertaking;
or, in a word, because he cannot make them compare with common Ideas or Notions.

And now, I hope, I have said enough to invalidate all the Arguments of this
Chapter. But lest he should think me rude, or that I neglect him too much, I
shall make some short Returns to a few Passages that are yet behind. And,

1st, He instructs us what it is to comprehend a Thing, viz. [When its chief
Properties, and their several Uses, are known to us; for to comprehend, in all
correct Authors, is nothing else but to know; and as of what is not knowable we
can have no Idea, so is it nothing to us. I shall, for once, admit, that in the
common Notion of Humane Perception or Comprehension, we think we know or
comprehend a Thing sufficiently, when its chief Properties, and their several
Uses, are known to us; but may we not at the same time discern, that there are
others we cannot conceive, and that the Modus or precise Nature of those we
know are inconceivable: And so we may, without Offense, or in a strict and
proper way of Speech, affirm, That there is a great deal mysterious in the
thing, and above Reason; and yet we do not pronounce it above Reason, (as he
suggests, ib.) because we know no more than concerns us; but because there is
something inconceivable, though to conceive it does not so directly concern us.

But, 2dly, as for that which is mysterious even in Matters of Revelation, we
do not pretend that it is any thing to us; I mean, as if we were obliged to
comprehend or define the precise Modus of the thing; This is to be a Mystery
and no Mystery. However, since we discern in certain revealed Truths something
which we cannot comprehend, we may believe those revealed Truths to be so far
mysterious, and they so far concern us, as to pay the Obedience of Faith to
'em, and not reject the Whole, because we cannot comprehend Everything that
belongs to 'em. This ought to be an Eternal Rule to our Author in matters of
Revelation, because it is founded upon his own Words and Principles: We believe
the Divinity of our Savior, because we have not only its Uses set forth, but
we have it represented in the principal Properties of the Godhead, even such as
are ascribed to GOD the Father; and consequently, in the Sense of this Author,
we may be said to comprehend or know this Divine Truth. Therefore if any thing
arises as to the Modus of its Existence, or otherwise, that is mysterious, (not
knowable, or of which we can have no Idea) his own Rule directs him, that this
is nothing to him, and consequently is by no means to be an Argument against
this Divine Truth: I Am sure, if it is not ridiculous not to supersede our
Disquisitions in matters that do not directly concern us, (another Assertion of
his, ib.) it is undoubtedly ridiculous to make Disquisitions in such Cases, and
make them an Argument for rejecting the clearest revealed Truths; which is the
constant Practice of the Modern Reasoners or Disputers of this World, the
Socinians.

But, to proceed, the next thing remarkable is, a compendious Rule to acquire
Useful Knowledge, N. 11. viz. Not to trouble ourselves nor others with what is
Useless were it known, or what is impossible to be known at all. Whereas in the
Paragraph immediately preceding, he seems to charge us with saying, That
Things are above Reason, because we know no more than concerns us, or is
useful. And yet allowing this Notion, he tells us, that it is ridiculous to
supersede our Disquisitions about it upon that Score; that is, according to his
own Notion, though we know as much of it as concerns us, or is useful. A blessed
Lawgiver truly, to institute Contradictions almost with the same Breath; for,
I think, he cannot avoid the Charge, without flying to that which is as
abominable in his very Thoughts as this reproachful to his Reason; I mean, by
Pleading he intended a Mystery.

And now, having given you enough of the Doctrinal part, he carries us to
Application; but truly, I hope I have disabled him so visibly in the former, as
supersedes the Necessity of a formal Reply to the latter. I shall only recite
the Application he has made, and rather refer than answer; [ 1st, That no
Christian Doctrine, no more than any ordinary piece of Nature, can be reputed a
Mystery, because we have not an adequate or complete Idea of whatever belongs
to it.] As for what may be attributed to inadequate Ideas, I have said enough
in this Chapter; and though we may not say, That the want of an adequate Idea is
the formalis ratio that constitutes a Mystery, yet our Inabilities in
comprehending some things that are really lodged in it, or really belong to it,
makes it a Mystery; and as is already proved with as good reason as those
things he counts mysterious, viz. Intelligible Truths beyond the Veil.

2dly, [What is revealed in Religion, as it is most useful and necessary, so it
must and may be as easily comprehended, and found as consistent with our common
Notions, as what we know of Wood or Stone, or the like.] We certainly agree,
That GOD has only revealed as much as is necessary or useful; and, in matters
of pure Revelation, no more than will give us an Idea of the Thing, or what it
is GOD proposes to our Belief; and therefore make this an Argument, that there
are Things that belong to it, of which we cannot form a distinct Idea, and,
consequently, from hence give it the Denomination of being Mysterious.

Now, as for the mysterious part of any revealed Truth, we affirm, That it
exceeds our Comprehension, otherwise the Mystery must cease: But, as it exceeds
our Comprehension, so we say, it is not necessary to be comprehended; much less
do we allow, that it may be comprehended by common Ideas or Notions, or scanned
by those Ideas: So as that, in case it does not correspond with 'em, we cannot
call in question the Truth of what is revealed and comprehended.

No, here, in case Curiosity tempts us to dive into the mysterious part of any
revealed Truth, and upon the closest Researches, we find ourselves unable to
comprehend; We are to adhere to the Substance of the Truth, where we cannot
comprehend the Modus of it; or, in other Terms, adore, where we cannot
comprehend. But as to our comprehending by common Notions, or, as easily as we
can comprehend, Wood, or Stone, or the like, I observe,

1st, This Gentleman makes all Objects of Humane Knowledge equally
comprehensible. And,

2dly, That we may take our Measures for comprehending any one, by those Idea's
we have formed of others; but I have elsewhere sufficiently discovered the
Falseness of both these Assertions; and there I shall not enlarge, but rest
upon the Conclusiveness of what has been offered.

3dly, When we do as familiarly explain such Doctrines as what is known of
Natural Things (which I pretend we can) we may then be as See N. 12. Sect. 3.
properly said to comprehend the one as the other. This is a very bold
Undertaking, and not to be believed 'till he gives us good Reason, and nothing
less than Matter of Fact for Demonstration, especially if he intends that part
of those Doctrines we justly call mysterious. But then, in using this
Familiarity, We must engage him not to explain away the Substance of any
Doctrine, nor to reject the Doctrine, if he fails in his Explication. And now
we come to attack him in his Strong-hold, that is, his Appeal to the Voice of
Scripture: See Cap. 3. Sect. 3.
And truly Scripture is an unquestionable Tribunal for the Decision of all
Controversies in Matters of Revelation; and as to their present Controversies,
as far as Scripture can determine, every one may desire to put the Case on this
Issue, and Appeal to this Tribunal (as well as he) provided he is satisfied
Scripture is on his side; and he may with greater satisfaction be reputed
Orthodox with this on his side, than to pass for Orthodox with the whole World,
and have it against him. But then in case he either mistakes the Sense of
Scripture, or has recourse to it, to make it come up to the State of his Case,
and prove more than what can be inferred from it; it is very bold to say, that
Scripture has engaged him in this Error, if it be one: Here I Am sure Scripture
will be no Protection to him, against a just Charge of Error, because he makes
an Appeal to her, and retreats under her Wing for Shelter; when in reality he
charges his own false Reasonings, or the Arguments of some particular Passions,
not to say unjust Propositions on Scripture, as if all were the unerring
Counsels and Dictates of Divine Truth. And truly this Reasoner does little
less, when he attempts to prove, that there are no Mysteries in Christianity,
because he endeavors to show, that the word Mystery in the New Testament, is
no where applied to the Thing we contend for, viz. a Thing that with respect to
Humane Reason, contains something in it altogether incomprehensible: For is it
not absurd to argue against a Thing from the signification of a Word, which
might never have been used in Scripture, and yet the Thing found there? and
though it is used, yet our Author, pursuant to the Mind of Scripture, fixes Three
several Significations on it, and consequently it can be no Argument that it
has not a Fourth; because it does not appear in Scripture; unless he could
prove that the Holy Ghost thought it necessary to reveal all the Notions or
Acceptations of the word Mystery; therefore if this Advocate for Reason allows
the whole Case, as he pretends, to be put upon this Issue, it will presently be
given against him, for want of a good Consequence. So that in truth, if the
Controversy is to be determined by Scripture, (as no doubt it ought) it must
unavoidably turn upon this issue, Whether there are not Truths set forth in
Scripture, in which, if we enquire into the Nature of 'em, a great deal is
contained in 'em, which we cannot comprehend, and consequently are mysterious,
and above Reason; whether Scripture deliver 'em under these Denominations or no.

This may be true, though the Word Mystery were no where to be found in
Scripture, or though Scripture had not so much as hinted, that there were any
thing mysterious or incomprehensible. If this can be proved, our Adversary must
acknowledge, that there are Mysteries in Christianity still. The Instances of
our Savior's Incarnation already produced, move upon this Supposition; and I
shall be ready to prove it, whenever he shall think fit to impugn the Truth of
it. But besides this, I shall in some measure condescend to his own Method, and
though I shall not Examine every Passage of Scripture, to see whether he has
rightly stated the Signification of the Word, yet I do not question, but we may
offer as strong Arguments to apply it sometimes to the Sense we contend for, as
he has done for another; and besides this, I hope to produce some Passages of
Scripture, that assure us there are still those things in Christianity, we
properly call Mysteries; and if this be performed, I hope it may without
Affectation be said, that his Appeal to the Tribunal of Scripture is defeated.

And, 1st, because I do not design Opposition, or Disputes, for Opposition's
sake; I shall own that the Word MYSTERY is used in the several Senses he has
put upon it.

I. For the Gospel in general.

II. For some unfolded Secrets. And,

III. For things veiled by Parables: but this is by no means an Argument that
there is no other signification to be found in Scripture: for I am persuaded, I
can prove the contrary with as much Authority and Force of Reason as he can
produce against it; I mean, that it is sometimes used to express the
Incomprehensibleness of certain Truths, though revealed. And,

1. That Mystery must imply something that is in the Nature of it to us
incomprehensible, St. Paul seems to have assured us, But we speak the Wisdom of
God in a Mystery, even the hidden Wisdom of God, 1 Cor. 2. 7. All sides agree,
that the Apostle points at the Fundamental Articles of the Christian Faith, and
particularly the Redemption of the World by Jesus Christ, and more primarily
the most abstruse part of it, his Incarnation.

2. It Is visible the Apostle speaks of it as a Mystery, even when he reveals
it; for he reveals the Wisdom of God in a Mystery. He now speaks to the
Perfect, that had owned the Gospel, and the Divine Authority of his Preaching,
as appears from the preceding Verse; and it is their peculiar to have the Meat
of the Word, or the Mysteries of the Kingdom of GOD, communicated to 'em; and
therefore, though this Wisdom of GOD be a Mystery, and consequently he delivers
it as such, yet the Perfect believe, when they cannot comprehend, because it is
the Wisdom of GOD: I am sure this Notion is agreeable to the Judgment of
Clemens Alexandrinus; for he uses the very Word of the Apostle, and calls it,
(...); nay, he makes this an Argument, why the Fundamental Truths of the Gospel
should only be communicated to the Pure and Perfect, (...), etc. ut supra,
Strom. Lib. 1. And therefore since the Apostle reveals it in a Mystery, it must
be so, because it contains something in it that is incomprehensible. Hence we
may justly Vindicate our English Translation, which does not join, (...), as
our Adversary would have it; but makes it a Repetition, or Enlargement upon the
Divine Wisdom, viz. even the Hidden Wisdom. It Is true, our Adversary endeavors
to evade this Exposition, because we are told in the 10th Verse, But God has
revealed them to us by his Spirit: But the Words manifestly referr to those
Things, which, in the preceding Verse, God is said to have prepared for them
that love him, which are chiefly the Benefits of our Redemption, and the
Consequent of this fundamental Revelation; or at least, if it must be this
fundamental Instance of Divine Wisdom, it is only revealed so as to let us
know, what God intends by it, and assures us of the Truth of it, but not to
comprehend the whole Nature of it; or in a word, it is so revealed, as any
other thing is revealed in a Mystery; that is, when something remains in it,
that is not to be comprehended; so that, in Truth, here is Mystery in two Senses:

1st, With respect to the Incomprehensibleness of the Thing. And,

2dly, With respect to the Thing before it was communicated to us.

And thus far not only the Natural Construction of the Words, but the Authority
of a Learned Expositor carries us, Vid. Theophilact. in locum, (...).

But Secondly, I shall insist on that noble Passage of St. Paul to Timothy, Ep.
1. Cap. 3. Ver. 10. And without Controversy, great is the Mystery of
Godliness; God was manifested in the Flesh, justified in the Spirit, seen of
Angels, preached unto the Gentiles, believed on in the World, received up into
Glory. It Is observable, our Adversary expounds as accurately, as he reasons;
for he produces this for his eighth Passage, where Mystery is put for the
Gospel in general, whereas it is manifest the Words cannot, without the greatest
Violence, be applied to any thing but a Divine Person, represented under
certain Divine Characters, and indeed to none but our Savior, the Cornerstone
of the Gospel, but not the Gospel; for truly the Apostle seems, in this place,
to have given a description of his whole Mediation. I am sure the Current of
the Fathers, as well as of after Commentators, apply it to none but our
Savior. But now since our Savior's Incarnation is this Mystery of Godliness,
it is evident the Apostle does not speak of what it was before it was revealed,
but what it is after it is preached and believed on in the World, and therefore
he calls it a Mystery, not because it was so before it was revealed, but
because it still remains so; and thereupon he endeavors to represent it as
such, by enlarging upon the Nature and Incomprehensibleness of it; God was
manifest in Flesh, the Foundation of this Mystery, the following Characters
being only their Appendages that take their rise and concenter in it. This is
an Exposition that discovers itself so clearly, that we find our Adversary
industriously huddling up this Passage, as it were, in a Mystery, without
giving any tolerable account of it; and at last is forced to confess, That the
gracious Manifestation of Christ and his Gospel, is to us wonderfully
stupendous and surprising, N. 30. So that we plainly read Mystery in the very
Sense we contend for: I am sure we have the Opinion of some Ancient
Church-Writers to ratify it. Of this Opinion we find Athanasius in his Tract
against Paulus Samosatenus de Incarnatione Verbi, where he gives his Judgment,
e Cathedra, as Archbishop of Alexandria; for first he lays open the Attempts of
this Heretic, in endeavoring to Subvert the Doctrine of our Savior's
Incarnation, and styles it, (...); and to prove it such, cites this very place
of our Apostle. Secondly, He represents the danger in attempting to unfold such
profound Difficulties, that are only with safety to us believed, and in a word,
enjoins us to adhere to the Apostolic Faith, without admitting new Terms or
Notions, (...), and above all, (...), to dread the Disquisition of such a
Mystery. But besides the Opinion of this great Man, we have the Comment of
Isiodore the Pelusiote, and Theophilact, fixing the Mystery of Godliness in the
Incomprehensibleness of it. Thus the former, Lib. 2. Ep. 192. (...), and
pursuant to this, expostulates, Who can comprehend the Miracle of his
Conception, transacted without Coition, or imagine how the Divine Nature can be
circumscribed, that is Immense, and not to be circumscribed? And Theophilact
proceeds in the same Strain thus, (...), in Locum. And now this is something
more certainly than calling it a Mystery, with respect to the Ages preceding
the Gospel; for I think this Passage in itself admits of the Exposition before
us more naturally, than that our Adversary contends for; besides we have the
Authority of the Learned in past Ages. And since I have made it appear he has
no advantage over us in his whole Hypothesis, I know not why we may not in his
own Language pronounce against him, that Mystery in the New Testament, is
sometimes put for a thing inconceivable in itself, and not to be judged of by
our ordinary Notions, however revealed. This likewise calls to mind the
Triumphs of our Adversary upon a Passage, which as we allow, styles the Gospel
a Mystery, under this Notion; it is Romans 16. 25. -- But is now made manifest,
whereupon he Expostulates, In what sense could this Secret be made manifest, if
it remained still Incomprehensible? A mighty Favor indeed, to bless the World
with a parcel of Unintelligible Notions. I confess, I incline to the former
sense, I mean a Mystery, with respect to the Ages preceding the Gospel, but can
see no foundation for Absurdities, no more than for his vain Triumphs, if we
take it in the Sense he pretends to explode; for this Reasoner, had he not been
too much used to confound things together, might have learned, that the highest
Mystery is not wholly unintelligible; and it may be properly said, to be
manifested in as much as God has communicated by the Apostle's preaching what is
useful and necessary, and as much as will inform us what God proposes to our
Belief: Again it is manifested, and that too to our unspeakable Comfort, since
the vast Designs of Divine Love, and the unexpressible Benefits to usward in
it, are abundantly laid open; and I think these are Favors or Blessings too
rich to be exposed in Ridicule or Burlesque.

But further, If the use of the Word in Scripture will not prove the thing we
contend for, there are sufficient hints in Scripture to prove it: I shall first
insist on St. Paul's Accounting the preaching of Christ unto the Greeks
foolishness; but unto them which are called, the Power of God and the Wisdom of
God, 1 Cor. 1. 23, 24.

Now this place is generally interpreted of the Incarnation of Christ, or the
Union of the two Natures into to one Divine Person: And those that embrace and
believe it, must resolve it into the Infinite Power and Wisdom of God, not as a
common, but special Act, and consequently a thing incomprehensible as they are;
and on this account, it is to the Greeks, the great Masters of Reason,
Foolishness; because, as it is represented to us, it contains in it, Things
that can never be reconciled with common Notions, or Ideas. What common Ideas
can satisfy us, that the Son of God should speak by a Man, or as the Sacred
Canon has it, in the form of a Man; that God should have a Son, and that he
should suffer as the Son of God? What common Ideas can represent to us, that
Christ could have a Being before the Worlds, as God; that he should be born a
Man, and exist as such, and yet not as a Man, begotten of a Man? These things,
the most improved Notices of Natural Reason cannot confirm, or warrant, no not
our Adversary with all his Reason. If any thing, it is the Arian, or Socinian
Hypothesis (though advanced contrary to the Current of Scripture) that may
pretend most to be a Rationale in this matter. And yet our Adversary seems to
explode this as much as that of the Trinitarians, because they are forced to
allow Divine Worship to be paid him, [ Cap. 1. Sect. 2. N. 2. I am mistaken if
either they, or the Arians can make their Notions of a dignified, and
Creature-God, capable of Divine Worship, appear more reasonable, than the
Extravagancies of other Sects, touching the Article of the Trinity.] But to
return, It Is manifest here we learn how the Doctrines of Christianity came to
be branded with the Imputation of Foolishness, viz. Because they will not
comport with common Notices, or the received Principles of Natural Philosophy:
for I have evinced it, upon the Objection of Trypho against Justin, and St.
Clement's Comment on the place, (...). Dial. cum Trypho, p. 269. And St.
Clement, in locum, thus, Lib. 1. Stromat. (...). Here we see this great Man
does not charge the Greeks with false Principles of Philosophy, as the Ground
of their Error, for he represents the Thing as much inconsistent with such
principles as they could, and makes this the Foundation of their unjust Charge,
I mean in pronouncing the Doctrines of Christianity Foolishness; and indeed he
calls 'em (...), but it can be on no other account, than because they would
admit of nothing but Natural Reason, and Philosophy, and thereupon would try
all revealed Truths by common Notions, or Principles of Philosophy, and reject
'em as absurd and foolish, because they could not make these deep Things of God
to comport with common Ideas of Objects of Sense. Indeed Celsus objects much
the same things against Origin; for upon every turn, he endeavors to ridicule
the Divinity of our Savior, by representing it inconsistent with the
Principles of Natural Reason: And now give me leave to make one single Remark,
since it occurs so naturally: Are not these the very Principles which our
Advocate for Reason moves upon? So that an unprejudiced Person might suspect
that I Am dealing with a Celsus, or a Trypho; or that they were risen from the
Dead. But to conclude this Argument, it is manifest St. Clemens must believe,
That the Fundamental Doctrine of the Christian Religion, still contains in it
something that cannot be comprehended by Natural Reason, that cannot be
reconciled to common Ideas, or Principles of Natural Philosophy, and
consequently something that is Mysterious and above Reason: And therefore if
this Reverend Father is not mistaken in the purport of the Holy Ghost (as we
have good Reason to conclude, he is not) the New Testament does contain the
Thing (if not the Word) we contend for, I mean, proposes to our Belief, Things
that are Incomprehensible, or above the Comprehension of Human Reason.

The last Argument I shall produce, is two or three Passages of Scripture,
which (because they bear an Affinity to one another) I shall examine and
conclude them under one Argument.

I begin with St. Paul's account of Humane Knowledge, even under this last
State of Revelation; for he includes himself, and the whole College of
Apostles, who undoubtedly enjoyed the Special Assistance of the Spirit of God;
nay, St. Paul had been caught up into the Third Heaven, where he was almost
overwhelmed with abundance of Revelations, 2 Cor. 12. And yet he tells us, We
know but in part, and we Prophecy in part, 1 Cor. Cap. 13. ver. 9. and the
Reason assigned is, We see through a Glass darkly, ver. 12. so that the
Impediment seems to lie upon the Mind, or the Immenseness of the Object, not in
God that denies us a competent Revelation; for this is the last Revelation of
himself; and therefore this Glass argues an Imperfection, or Inability in
comprehending some of those Truths that are revealed; but if this Glass be a
Veil which God casts before our Eyes, like that upon the Jews, in as much as he
does not impart in this Life a clear Discovery of certain Gospel Truths, then,
according to the Mind of our Author, there are still Mysteries in the Gospel,
in the highest Sense; but truly St. Clemens fixes it upon the Imperfections of
Humane Knowledge, since he represents the Mind in this Earthly Tabernacle, as
viewing Things through Senses after a gross corporeal manner, whereas in
another World our Knowledge will be highly enlarged, for then it will be Face
to Face; or, as he expresses it, (...): That is, by a pure and naked
Application of the Mind, or Intuition.

Again, it is manifest the Object of this Imperfect Knowledge, is the deep
things of GOD, or, in plain terms, the fundamental Revelations of the Gospel;
for, the Apostle must at least comprehend, if not principally intend them, when
he tells us, And we Prophecy but in part; that is, those Truths we publish to
the World are only revealed in part, since we can only pretend to know or
comprehend them in part. And truly St. Clement asserts as much of St. Paul
himself, notwithstanding his abundance of Revelations, for thus, on his words 2
Cor. xii. 4. (where, no doubt, he received the chiefest Instructions of his
Apostolic Office) He was caught up into Paradise, and heard unspeakable words,
which it is not lawful for Man to utter; he observes, that there was no Law nor
Precept given that obliged him to stifle any of those Christian Truths GOD had
committed to him; so that in saying, it is not lawful, he intended to represent
the Ineffability of the Divine Nature, or the things of GOD; (...). And, to
confirm this Notion, he cites three Passages that represent the
Incomprehensibleness of the Divine Nature, Romans xi. 33. Oh! the depth of the
Riches both of the Wisdom and Knowledge of God! And again, But we speak the
Wisdom of God in a Mystery: [That is, even when we speak it, else it proves
nothing in this place,] 1 Cor. ii. 7. And lastly, Colos. ii. Ver. 23. To the
Acknowledgment of the Mystery of God in Christ, [as you have it in the Ancient
Readings] in whom are hidden all the Treasures of Wisdom, or Knowledge. This is
a very remarkable Passage, and therefore I must beg leave to enlarge upon it.

As for the Sense of St. Clement, it is visible he looks upon it to be a
Mystery, though revealed and acknowledged, and to be a Mystery because it
contains something in it which is (...), or (...), for otherwise it can be no
Argument to prove what he had just before asserted. Indeed, our Adversary
thinks he has evaded the Force of this Exposition, by telling us, (without any
tolerable Proof) That the Words are to be understood of the Gospel of CHRIST;
but if it be the Gospel of CHRIST, it may be styled a MYSTERY, in respect of
its Fundamental Truths, inasmuch as they contain in 'em something that is hidden
or mysterious; for thus much the following Verse apparently hints* (...), [ i.
e. in which, if this Exposition obtains] are hidden (...): It Is manifest the
Apostle speaks of it as revealed, nay, as it is when acknowledged and embraced,
and yet there is something hidden or mysterious. Thus we may conclude, against
our Reasoner, that Mystery may be put for the Gospel, and yet called so,
because it contains certain Truths, whose Nature cannot be fully comprehended,
or certain Truths, that contain something in 'em that to us is
incomprehensible. But yet, for all his majesterial decisive way of expounding
Scripture, I think the words more naturally point at the Mystery of our
Redemption, in the Incarnation of the Son of GOD, especially if we add hereto
the ancient Reading used by these Fathers, St. Austin, and St. Ambrose, to the
Acknowledgment of the Mystery [not Knowledge of Mystery, as this vain Disputer
of this World would have it] of GOD in CHRIST, for, 1st, (...), which
immediately follows, must more naturally be applied to Christ, not to Mystery,
agreeable to our Translation, In whom all the Treasures, etc. This is agreeable
to the Sentiments of Origin, (...), In Hierom. Hom. 8. page 99. 2dly, If the
Gospel of Christ, and not Christ himself, was intended, it would be improper to
say, that the Treasures of Wisdom are hid in it, being a revealed Institution:
Therefore we may justly conclude, pursuant to the Mind of St. Clement, That the
Incarnation of our Redeemer (the Foundation of our Redemption, and Fountain
whence all the Treasures of Wisdom and Knowledge derive) is the Mystery of GOD
in Christ, which is to be acknowledged, not unravel'd or fully comprehended;
for, since it is expressly proposed as a Mystery, and remains one when embraced
or acknowledged, it must be so, because it carries in it something that is
hidden or incomprehensible.

Indeed Origin manifestly joins in this Notion; for, in his Comment on Matt.
xiii. 44. he makes the Field to be the Holy Scriptures, that set forth all the
Means of Salvation with the greatest clearness; but the Treasure to be CHRIST,
because in Him all the Depths of Wisdom are hid, in Him, in a Mystery, citing
this very Passage of St. Paul, by way of Proof, (...) [ dissertis verbis] (...).

And now give me leave to make an Appeal, as he does, [to all Equitable
Persons, N. 35.] Whether, by as good Reason and Authority, it does not appear,
That not only the Sense of the Word, but the Things we contend for, are
recorded in Scripture, as any he has produced to the contrary? So that, in
truth, we are ready to [render up ourselves] to the Voice of Scripture, as well
as submit the Merits of the Cause to it, without being influenced and carried
away by such weak Practisings as he has set forth, in a Dialogue that would
merit some Stripes, if performed by a Schoolboy, rather than Applause, as it is
the Product of a pretending Master of Reason. See Sect. 36.

And now I have done with his Scripture-authorities, but cannot pass by one
Remark of his, which I find to be the chief Improvement that graces his Second
Edition: [ Nor is it undeserving our particular Notice, that Mystery is here
made the distinguishing Mark of the False and Antichristian Church; (See Rev.
xvii. 5.) And no doubt but as far as any Church allows of Mysteries, so far it
is Antichristian, and may, with a great deal of Justice, though little Honor,
claim Kindred with the Scarlet Whore.] Here is a very bold Stricture, and yet a
Man with half an Eye may discern, that his Observation is as irrational and
ridiculous as his Inference; for Mystery, in this place, I suppose, would not
have passed for a distinguishing Mark, had not her Doctrines and Practices
merited the other part of the Title, viz. The Mother of Harlots, and
Abomination of the Earth; had she not held a golden Cup in her Hand, full of
Abominations and Filthiness of her Fornication, Ver. 4. and been drunken with
the Blood of the Saints, and with the Blood of the Martyrs of Jesus. But as for
his Inference, had he consulted St. Paul's Second Epistle to the Thessalonians
a little better, he might have learned, that there is a Mystery of Iniquity as
well as Godliness; but perhaps he was unwilling to be disappointed of a
malicious, though illogical, Suggestion; he might there have informed himself,
That it was always the Devil's Business to imitate the True Religion by mighty
Signs and lying Wonders, if it were possible, to deceive the very Elect; nay,
that Antichrist sits in the Temple of GOD, showing himself that he is GOD,
and consequently he must pretend to Mystery with a witness: So that, upon the
whole, this Gentleman may as well assign the Devil's Miracles for a
distinguishing Mark of Antichrist, and prove the true Religion to be nearly
related to Antichrist, the Scarlet Whore, and the Devil, because she proceeds
upon the Authority of Miracles: Nay, rather we may upon his Argument affirm,
That Miracles are a distinguishing Mark of the true Religion: And since
Antichrist and the Devil pretend to Miracles, the Religion they pretend to must
be true too. Whereas we know these to be Divine and Authoritative, those
Diabolical and Usurped, so we pronounce this the Mystery of Iniquity, that the
Mystery of Godliness.

The next thing that offers itself, is, the Suffrage of the Primitive Church.
It Is true, there are a great many things intervene, wherein he labors more to
give us a Specimen of his Wit, that Reason: But truly, I think, they are both
of a piece, for I can discover nothing that deserves a single Reflection, much
less a formal Reply. I proceed therefore to the Suffrage of the Fathers, to
whom he makes an Appeal. He tells us indeed, [ It is not out of any deference
to their Judgments, N. 40.] and therefore we must conclude he submits to it,
because he is persuaded they peremptorily declare for his Opinion; but I hope to
prove the contrary: For though he confesses he has bestowed a great deal of Pains
upon 'em, yet this is so far from discouraging us from entering the List, that
I hope to make it appear, that his Pains are either an Effect of his Ignorance
in these Authors, or of his Dishonesty in suppressing their Opinions. And,
first, all that he proves out of the Fathers is, That they have asserted other
Notions of Mystery than what we contend for; whereas he himself assigns four or
five different Notions; and if Classick Authors were consulted, we could
produce some more: and therefore he might as well reject one of his own
Notions, because the Fathers have not mentioned it. But I find this Author,
upon every turn, shamefully betrays his Reason, for he knows not what is
incumbent upon him to prove, and therefore we need not wonder if he proves not
his main Design: I Am sure he is now to prove a Negative, (or that which amounts
to it) if he proves any thing, viz. That the Fathers, he cites, no where apply
the word MYSTERY to things beyond Humane Comprehension; or, that those Notions
of the word Mystery, which he finds recorded, are delivered exclusively of all
others; for, if he has neither cited all their Notions or Acceptations of the
word, nor proved, that they are exclusive of all others, he proves nothing
against the acceptance of the word we now contend for; and if so, the most
cursory Reader will presently pronounce, That he must give up the Cause, in
case he fixes it on this Issue, I mean the Authority of Fathers. But because I
will take no advantage of his weakness, I will go along with him in his own
Instances. And,

1st, What he cites from Clemens Alexand. concludes nothing; for, I know no
Christian that denis the Christian Religion to be [ an Illumination, because it
brought hidden things to light, and that with respect to the Mosaic Veil.] But
this only proves one of his own Notions, that is indeed allowed by us. But to
be short with him; Whereas he has the Face to tell us, That several of those
Texts of Scripture alleged by him, are by this Father expounded on his side,
and consequently against our Notion: I shall appeal to what has been already
cited from him, to prove the quite contrary See p. 46, 48.
. Indeed I could add a great deal more to discover his Judgment of the
Inconceivableness of certain Objects of Faith, or Matters of Revelation; and,
because I Am engaged, I shall produce a few Instances: And, first, where he
styles Christianity an Illumination, he speaks of the Fullness of Christ, as a
Mystery revealed indeed, but the Nature of it known to a very few; and he
proves it from the Incomprehensible Nature of GOD, Strom. lib. 5. (...), and
yet more fully on Moses's words, Exodus 33. ver. 18. Show me thy Glory; (...).
2. p. 365. Strom. lib. That is, by the Effects of his Power. Again, on St.
Paul's words, 1 Cor. 5. Christ our Passover is sacrificed for us; Strom. lib.
5. he observes, (...). Here it is evident he argues from the
Incomprehensibleness of the Divine Nature, and consequently must fix the
Mystery on this Bottom, as well as the want of Revelation. Indeed, we may
justly argue a majori, from the Sense of this Father, if the Nature of the
Godhead be, in the Opinion of this great Man, so highly incomprehensible, how
much more must the Fundamental Article of the Christian Religion be so, the
consists of the Union of the Divine with Human Nature, and consequently, in a
proper sense, mysterious. See N. 42.

Thus much for St. Clement; the next Authority is Justin Martyr, which
concludes nothing to his purpose: For, First, he only uses the Word in a loose
Sense, and not exclusive of any other signification; and if this may be an
Argument against that Sense which this Reasoner declaims against, it will be so
against others, which he has expressly assigned. This may serve for a sufficient
Return to the next Paragraph, where Tertullian styles all Religious Rites, or
Acts of Worship, Mysteries; which among the Heathens were generally kept
secret: yet, though this be an allowed Sense of the Word, it can be no Argument,
but that Mystery, even in Tertullian's time, was applied to Things in 'emselves
abstruce or incomprehensible. Of the same stamp are his Arguments from Origin,
which prove no more than what all sides own, viz. that Mystery, in a vulgar, or
more loose Sense, is put for Symbols, Types, or any abstruse or sacred Matter.
N. 44.

Certainly, had this Gentleman consulted any other Pieces of this Learned
Father, he might have informed himself, that he uses Mystery even in Divine
Matters, for Things that are to us incomprehensible. Thus, in the forecited
Passage, speaking of the Thing as it now is, he expresses himself, (...). [ Vt
Supra. See page 56.]

Again, on the Words of our Savior, Mat. xix. 24, 26. he observes, That GOD
was able to make a Camel pass through an Eye of a Needle; and yet no one but God
or Christ, or he to whom he shall reveal it, is able to comprehend it, (...).
Afterward he challenges any Man to Illustrate or Explain such Mysteries; being
Things only comprehended, as well as performed, by GOD, (...). Page 382. 1 Vol.

But now in the close of this Paragraph, he thinks he sufficiently explodes our
Notion of Mystery, when he tells us Origin [was far from thinking any Doctrine
of our Religion a Mystery, in the present Sense of the Word, that he expressly
affirms them to agree all with common Notions, and to commend themselves to the
Assent of every well-dispos'd Hearer.] This truly looks very plausible; but I Am
persuaded, Origin, in making good this Assertion, will run counter to the
Notions of this Indefatigable Reasoner: For First, It Is well known, who the
Holy Father was engaged with, a Learned Heathen, who had formed an Objection,
That the Christians were to believe Things, though in themselves never so absurd
or ridiculous; and therefore it was his business to take off the Objection, by
shadowing forth the Reasonableness of every Doctrine: He begins with the
Doctrines of Natural Religion, the Being of a God, and our Love toward him;
but when he comes to the Mystery of our Savior's Incarnation, he makes a
stand, and repeats Celsus's Objection, viz. (...). The Answer is remarkable;
for it evinces the Divinity and Incarnation of our blessed Savior, as a
standing Doctrine of the Christian Church, to the Eternal Confusion of all
Socinian Pretenses to Antiquity. Let our Accusers know, that we (as it were
speaking the Sense of the Christian Church) do not only think, but are fully
persuaded, that he is Originally, or in the Beginning GOD, and the Son of GOD;
nay, he is the Substantial Word, Wisdom, and Truth; and as for his Mortal Body,
and Human Soul, we attribute the greatest Things to it; in as much as a most
exact and complete Union with his Divinity, it obtains a kind of Divinity; so
that we may still treat our Blessed Savior, GOD and Man, (as GOD) with the
highest Acts of Divine Worship. His words are these: (...).

You see the great Design of the Apologist is to represent how such Honor and
Dignity is derived upon the Humanity of our Savior, and consequently the
Reasonableness of paying Divine Worship to him even as GOD-Man, or GOD
Incarnate; and pursuant to this, to justify those Honors that accrue to the
Body of our Savior, he appeals to the Natural Transmutations of Matter,
whereby Bodies are often highly refined and improved, and then ingeniously
concludes, Why should not the Infinite Power of GOD therefore be able to change
the Mortal Body of Jesus? (...).

Thus we see how, out of Ignorance, or a worse Principle, the Disputer of this
World (for the Title belongs to him, though not so deservedly as those on whom
St. Paul bestows it) has Misrepresented the Sense of this great Man, whose main
Design was, to show the Reasonableness of paying Divine Worship to the Blessed
Jesus; and this he sufficiently performed, by asserting his Divinity, but he
did not attempt to demonstrate the Modus of the Union of the two Natures by
common Notions. He has indeed expressly asserted our Savior's Divinity, as well
as Humanity, in the highest Notion of it; and I defy this profound Reasoner to
state the Union of both Natures by common Ideas or Notions, much less to give
us as familiar an Idea of it as we have of Wood or Stone. Till he has done
this, he trifles, and we shall still believe that our Savior's Incarnation is
thus far a Mystery. Thus we have turned those very Fathers he most relies on
against him; and though he has the Confidence to fix a peremptory Challenge upon
the Writings of the three first Centuries, I could produce as much more, had I
not a regard to my own Time, and that of the Reader's, which ought to be a
sufficient Consideration with every Man, to prevent him from engaging in
Impertinences, or dwelling too long where Necessity does not require it: I
shall therefore only beg Leave to add the Judgment of Irenaeus, -- Si autem
omnium quae in Scripturis requirantur absolutiones non possumus invenire, --
credere autem haec talia debemus Deo, qui and nos fecit; rectissime scientes,
quia Scripturae quidem perfectae sunt, quippe a verbo Dei and Spiritu ejus
dictae: Nos autem secundum quod minores sumus and novissimi a verbo Dei and
Spiritu ejus, scientia mysteriorum ejus indigemus; and non mirum est, si in
spiritualibus coelestibus, and in his quae habent Revelari hoc patimur nos,
quandoquidem eorum quae ante pedes sunt -- quae and conteruntur a nobis, and
videntur and sunt nobiscum, multa fugerunt nostram scientiam, and Deo haec ipsa
committimus; -- Si ergo and in rebus creaturae, quaedam quidem eorum adjacent
Deo, quaedam autem and in nostram venerunt scientiam, quid mali est, si and
eorum quae in Scripturis requiruntur, universis Scripturis Spiritualibus
existentibus, quaedam quidem absolvamus secundum gratiam Dei; quaedam autem
commendemus Deo, and non solum in hoc saeculo, sed in futuro, ut semper quidem
Deus doceat, homo autem semper discat, quae sunt a Deo? [Here, by way of
Confirmation, he cites St. Paul, 1 Cor. xiii. v. 13.] Semper enim fides quae
est ad magistrum nostrum permanet firma, asseverans nobis, quoniam solus vere
Deus, [and afterward concludes] si secundum hunc modum quem diximus, quaedam
quidem quaestionum Deo commiserimus, and fidem nostram servabimus, and omnis
Scriptura ideo nobis data, consonans nobis invenietur. Lib. 2. Adv. Haer. cap.
47. Ed. Eras. I have cited this at large, because I find every thing agreeable
to the Hypothesis I have hitherto advanced. As,

1st, Mystery is indisputably applied to revealed Truths, beyond the reach of
Humane Comprehension.

2dly, Such revealed Truths, apparently delivered in Scripture, are not to be
rejected; because we cannot resolve the Difficulties that seem to accompany the
Belief of 'em, but to embrace 'em as the Word of GOD, and consequently as
founded in infinite Wisdom and Veracity.

3dly, Our Unskilfulness, not to say Inabilities, in comprehending Objects of
Sense, or Physical Matters, is made an Argument, that there are Mysteries in
Matters of Revelation.

I have hitherto confined my self to his Rule, i. e. the Fathers of the Three
First Centuries; but truly I can see no just reason why the Fathers of
after-Ages may not be admitted into the present Controversy, at least as
Witnesses, if not Judges. I Am sure there can nothing abstract, but his
groundless Fiction of a general Combination, to resolve all Religion into
Mystery: For, as for the received Use or Signification of the Word, certainly
after-Ages may be as competent Judges as those of the First Century: And, as
for the Controversy itself, Whether there is any Doctrine in Christianity
mysterious, certainly that Age ought to be appealed to, that had a more special
occasion to bring the Controversy upon the Stage, and this the Arrian Age, and
those that followed it; for, in this Age it is well known, those Doctrines we
contend, are mysterious, were more nicely controverted. I shall therefore add
to those Passages already cited, a few more, which prove the Use of the word to
be applied to things incomprehensible; and that there are Doctrines in
Christianity pronounced Mysteries, and that too for the Incomprehensibleness of
'em. The first I shall instance in is Dionys. Areop. where in one place he
describes our Savior's Incarnation, (...), Cap. 4. de Coelest. Hierarch. In
another place, (...), Sect. 9. Cap. 2. de Divinis Nomin. The second Instance is
from a Tract entitled, Expositio Fidei, rejected indeed as a Piece of Justin
Martyr; yet from Leontin's, and other concluding Arguments, justly esteemed to
be the Product of the Arrian Age: He styles the Unity and Trinity, (...), and
confesses it cannot be unfolded by Words, (...), and upon the Incarnation of
Christ, (...): And in such deep Research, at last, concludes with this Rule:
(...).

And now we may conclude this Chapter much in the same strain that he does N.
45. I do not find but [ the Fathers of the three first Centuries have exactly
the same Notions of Mystery, as well as those that follow them,] and for an
Allay to his Jealousies, I think they are pretty consistent as well as
unanimous; but then this Consistency and Unanimity happens to be against a
trifling Reasoner, and therefore I must take the Reverse to his concluding
Period, [ and justly hope, by this time, the Cause of Incomprehensible and
Inconceivable, or Mysteries in Religion, will be more zealously maintained by
all that sincerely respect Fathers, Scripture, or Reason.]

I come now to the Fourth Chapt. Sect. 3. which is an Answer to some
Scripture-Objections, and particularly from the Nature of Faith. I now find
this Discourse swells upon me beyond Expectations; and therefore, as for the
Scripture-passages cited by him, though there is more in 'em than he has
suggested, yet I shall pass 'em, especially because I think the Merits of the
Cause does by no means turn upon 'em: I shall therefore take up his Friend's
Arguments concerning the Nature of Faith, and try if he may not be compelled by
dint of Argument, since he would not embrace the Advice of his Friend, N. 51.

And first, As for what he has delivered, N. 52, 53. I find nothing but what
has already received an Answer, [ particularly what is cited, Sect. 2. c. 2,
and 7.] or at least, but what amounts to no more than will be concluded by what
I Am going to offer; and therefore he may take it for a full, or competent
Answer, viz. Reason is a necessary Handmaid, or Instrument of Faith; insomuch,
that we must believe upon Rational Motives and Convictions: And thus far, I
know no Son of the Church of England, that will dissent from him. As for what
is delivered, N. 54. [That Faith consists of two parts, Knowledge and Assent.]
I think no one will be so absurd to deny it; for I Am persuaded there can be no
Assent without Knowledge: Therefore, in a word, had I known his Design, I
should have excused the labor of citing so many Texts to prove it, and in a
few words grant, That in those things we call the pure Credenda of Religion, we
are at least to know so much, as will enable us to form an Imperfect Idea of
what it is God proposes to our Belief; but it does not imply such a Knowledge,
as enables to unravel and comprehend the whole Nature of the Object, or the
very Modes of its Existence, or Properties; or much less, give a Rationale of
every thing that belongs to it, No, if we know as much as instructs us what it
is God proposes to our Belief, we submit all the Difficulties that may arise
from the Belief of it, to God's Power and Wisdom, and yield an Assent
(notwithstanding some seeming Absurdities) upon the Infinite Veracity of God.
This distinguishes Faith from a bare rational Assent in common Matters; and
all this is consistent with what he has delivered, N. 55, 56. and therefore I
shall not engage in a particular Examination of what is there offered. To
proceed then in order to a clear Demonstration of this Notion of Faith, I shall
not consider the Case of Abraham's Faith (being the next thing that offers it
self) but shall instance in the Belief of the Creation: Through Faith we
understand, that the Worlds were framed by the Word of God; so that Things
which are seen, were made of Things which do not appear, Heb. xi. v. 3. Here I
think is a vast difference between God's creative Power, in raising the World
out of nothing, and restoring a dead Person to Life again, before the
corruptible part was any wise dissolved. Indeed I cannot conceive how we can
form an Idea of the possibility of such a Production; that God should raise so
vast a stock of Matter, even all created Nature, and every thing that we can
form any tolerable Ideas of, and yet without any Materials to work upon, can
never be comprehended. The Platonist supposed a Soul to the World, and the
Aristotelian a first Mover, but could never give any tolerable account of the
Rise of Mundane Matter, without making it eternal. In short, they always
taught, That an Agent necessarily supposes a Patient really distinct from the
Patient, especially in external Actions: And we know in Numbers it is
universally true, Ex nihilo nihil est. And we can conceive no otherwise in
Nature, at least the Reasoner cannot on his Principles pretend to it; for he
tells us, we can form no manner of Idea of nothing; and therefore how it is
possible to form an Idea of the Creation by common Ideas, when all our Ideas
take their rise from Created Beings, even that of the Infinite and Eternal
Being, are resembled by Objects of his own production. It Is true, we say this
is an effect of Infinite Power, but we have no notion of the Thing, unless we
apply Infinite Power to that which is the Subject of it, which is nothing into
every thing; and when all is done, we form an Idea of this Infinite Power,
purely by the Effects of it in Finite Beings: So that upon the whole, it is
evident, the Belief of the Creation, (that implys a Production of all things
out of nothing) is an Object that exceeds Humane Comprehension; and
consequently we may conclude, that Faith (which yields an Assent to the
Doctrine of the Creation) often implys an Assent to a Thing that contains
something in it, that is Incomprehensible. And indeed, that Objects of Faith
contain Things that exceed Humane Comprehension, is a Truth so indisputable,
that Faith in the Judgment of the Primitive Church-Writers, was on this account
distinguished from Knowledge or Science. It Is true; In all Objects of Faith, we
are to know so much of 'em, as to direct us what it is God proposes to our
Belief. And Secondly, We are to believe, That it is God that proposes 'em.
Thirdly, In all Acts of Faith we are to yield an Assent to the Truth, or Being
of Things; and this supposes, that we have formed at least an imperfect Idea of
their Nature; but for the Quomodo sint, that is, for the Manner of their Being,
or Existence, that may be an act of Knowledge, or Science, but not of Faith; so
that if seeming Contradictions or Absurdities arise on this account, and
consequently are thus far justly Incomprehensible, Faith throws us upon the
Infinite Veracity of God. All this I shall endeavor to confirm by the
Authorities of the Primitive Church. And,

First, The Passage already cited from Irenaeus manifestly instructs us, That
there are Difficulties and MYSTERIES in Revealed Truths, which Humane Reason
cannot comprehend, and obliges us to commit all such Matters to GOD, because
they were delivered by his Word and Spirit; and what is this, but to embrace
and believe upon his Infinite Veracity? And at last concludes, That if we
observe the Method, Fidem nostram servabimus, and omnis Scriptura a Deo nobis
data, consonans nobis invenietur: Does not this imply, that there are things
contained in Matters of Faith, that are Incomprehensible? Yea, rather that all
seeming Difficulties, or Absurdities that arise from 'em, when scanned by
common Notions, or Ideas, are to be committed to God as the best Expedient to
preserve a right Faith, see Page 64. But,

Secondly, Clemens Alexand. seems to state the Notion of Faith more clearly, in
opposition to Science: And first he fixes the Foundation of Faith in the Word
of GOD, or the Holy Scriptures, and represents it as an Irrefragible
Foundation, that carries the highest Demonstration in it; and that we are to
enquire no further than Ipse dixit, upon which he advances this Maxim, (...).
And to let us see how far he extends it, he instances in the forecited Passage
to the Heb. Cap. xii. v. 12. and thence proceeds to state the Difference
between Science and Faith, thus, (...), Vid. Stro. Lib. 2. P. 362, 3, 4. and in
his 5th Book he is more full, (...). Here we see, Faith is resolved into the
Infinite Power and Veracity of GOD; insomuch, that we are obliged to believe,
as soon as we know it to be the Word of GOD, or as soon as we know GOD proposes
any thing to our Belief: Here we find Science and Faith opposed, the one
requiring Demonstration or Arguments, drawn from the Nature of the Thing; the
other, not so: Therefore we must conclude, That if GOD proposes any thing to
our Belief, that contains Matters incomprehensible, or not reconcilable with
common Notions; Faith, in the Opinion of this Father, will command an Assent;
insomuch, that his Infinite Power and Veracity must overbalance all seeming
Absurdities and Contradictions.

But to conclude this Argument, I shall produce the Judgment of St. Chrysostom:
Thus he assigns the Reason, why the Natural Man cannot receive the Things that
be of GOD, 1 Cor. ii. v. 14. viz. For the Immensity of the Things 'emselves,
far exceeding the Comprehension of the most Improved Reason; and for the want
of Faith, (...), Hom. 7. And upon the Article of the Creation, Heb. xi. v. 3.
he tells us, The Mind that is prepared for the Reception of Faith, must be
(...); she must be elevated above Sense, and all sensible Objects, and pass
over the Weakness of Humane Reasonings; and afterward; Whereas, says he, Faith
is vilified as a Thing that is void of Demonstration, (...); or rather, a Thing
full of Folly, (...), the Apostle shows us in this one Instance, (...); for the
very Article, says he; is not established by Reason, but rather the contrary,
(...). Hom. 22. In Epist. Heb.

Again we find him describing Faith under the very same Notion, Hom. 23. in
Ter. Johan. where, upon Nichodemus's Words, How can a Man be born when he is
old? v. 4. he observes, (...). Upon which he enlarges, and tells us, It is the
Question of Heretics upon the Incarnation of our Blessed Savior, (demanding,
(...)) that by the weakness of common Notions, or Reasonings, destroy his
Immense Nature, (...); and at last concludes, That such Practices, or
Questions, (...). And on the Second Part of the Question, about entering the
Womb a Second time, he observes, When a Man proceeds upon common Notions, or
Reasonings in Spiritual Matters, and does not receive the Dictates of Faith,
(...). He talks like a Drunken or Madman, uttering the most absurd and
ridiculous things.

And now, certainly, we may conclude, what St. Chrysostom's Notion of Faith
was, without drawing Inferences; and that it every way agrees with that of
Clemens Alexandrinus: It Is therefore manifest, Faith is distinguished from
Knowledge, or Science, not only as the Objects of it are Matters of Revelation,
but as they contain Things that are incomprehensible; and yet it yields an
Assent upon the Infinite Veracity of the Word of GOD: I Am sure this Great Man
has dropped such unlucky Words against our Adversary's Principles, or his Methods
of Examining Divine Truths, as if he were risen from the Dead, and were
preparing to accuse him of Heresy, or some sly Maxims that look that way. I
should therefore advise him to weigh the Opinion of so Great a Person, before
he advances too far: and yet, when I consider what severe Censures he has past
upon the Writers of this Age, I despair of Success in giving Advice in this
kind; for I cannot think he will ever be persuaded to take his Measures of Faith,
from an Age, or any Writer in it, when he makes 'em, as it were, to have entered
into a League to turn all Religion into Mystery, and this another to be Name
for Imposture, or Priestcraft: If this be true, to be instructed by such a Race
of Men, is, in plain English, to take up one's Faith from those that have
fallen away from the Faith; but of this I shall say more in the last Chapter.

To return then: It Is now abundantly evident, that the Notion of Faith which we
now contend for, is not a Thing contrived to advance a particular Hypothesis,
or serve a particular Design, but by no means such a one as he suggests, viz.
[To stop the Mouths of such as demand a Reason where none can be given, and to
keep as many in Ignorance, as Interest shall think convenient. See N. 48.] But
I hope an Impartial Reader will find it established upon a good Foundation, or
in a word, upon such Reasons as he is not able to subvert or remove; beside, if
it be a Contrivance, we have this Apology, that it is not a late Forgery, since
we have traced it almost as far as any Ecclesiastical Records, (besides those
of Scripture) admit of; and this is a considerable Presumption of the Injustice
of such foul-mouthed Aspersions, 'till he gives us a better Set of Arguments to
remove it; which is the next Thing that should be examined: but truly there
appears so little in 'em, that I think they scarce deserve a distinct
Examination:

The First is, [ If Faith were not a Persuasion resulting from the previous
Knowledge and Comprehension of the Thing believed, there could be no Degrees
nor Differences of it.] Now First, It Is manifest, the Argument is advanced on a
false Supposition, (and that which runs through all his Observations) viz. That
we deny all Degrees of a previous Knowledge of the Object; whereas we say,
there must be at least such a previous knowledge of the Object, as instructs us
what it is GOD proposes to our Belief; but there is no necessity of
Comprehending the Absolute Nature of the Thing, so as to be able to give a
Rationale of every Thing that really belongs to it; and that too, by trying it
by common Notions. And moreover, we say, the different Degrees of Faith, do by
no means rise from such a Comprehensive Knowledge: No, when once we know what
GOD proposes to our Belief, the Degrees of Faith arise from the Application of
GOD's Veracity to our Minds and Consciences; if the Mind is possessed with a
deep Sense of it, as to engage us to place an absolute Confidence in it, though
we cannot form a Rationale of the Thing, yet we may embrace it with the highest
Degrees of Faith: I Am sure, this is the Doctrine which [ this Man of Reason]
might have learned from S. Paul, in the Case of Abraham, Who against Hope,
believed in Hope, -- and being not weak in Faith, he considered not his own
Body now dead, nor yet the Deadness of Sarah's Womb: he staggered not at the
Promise through Unbelief, but was strong in Faith, giving Glory to GOD, and being
fully persuaded, that what he had promised he was also able to perform; and
therefore it was imputed to him for Righteousness, Romans iv. 18, 19, 20, 21.

2d Arg. [ The Subject of Faith must be intelligible to all, since the Belief
thereof is commanded under no less a Penalty than Damnation.] As for the
Intelligibleness of Objects of Faith, I have already stated how far that is
necessary; but, with Submission, I think the Sin and Damnation of Unbelief,
arises, not because GOD has furnished us with a perfect Rationale of the Nature
of every Object of Faith, and we reject it; but because he has furnished us
with Means sufficient to know what he has proposed to our Belief, and to know
that he has proposed them, and we will fully reject 'em; and consequently what
he proposes: but more especially, because he has asserted the Truth of 'em, by
the highest Demonstrations of the Spirit, in mighty Signs and Wonders: This was
the Case of the Jews; but now ye say, Ye see, therefore your Sin remains.

4th Arg. [ Except Faith signifies an Intelligible Persuasion, we cannot give
others a Reason of the Hope that is in us.] The Inference is apparently false;
for we certainly give a Reason (and that too, according to the Mind of St.
Peter) of any Article of Faith, when we prove that it is Revealed by GOD, and
that we yield an Assent to the Truth of it (though we cannot remove every
Difficulty that may arise from it) upon the Authority of Infinite Veracity.

As for his Third, and Fifth Observations, I shall Appeal to any unprejudiced
Reader, whether there is any thing in 'em, that deserves a particular Reply,
more than in those Objections he first framed, and then answered: For as the
former prove nothing against the Incomprehensibleness of Matters of Faith, so
the latter were never advanced, to prove the Necessity of admitting such
Objects of Faith. Upon the whole then, I think it appears, there are Matters of
Faith that contain Things in 'em, which are Incomprehensible, and yet Faith
yields an Assent upon the Authority of Infinite Veracity, and consequently it is
an uncontrollable Argument, there are Mysteries in the Christian Religion.

The next thing to be considered, is, his Reply to the Argument of Miracles,
Cap. 5. Sect. 3. And, First, he entertains you with the Nature of a Miracle.
And as for the Description he gives us, I find, in the Main, no Reason to
except against it; after this, he guards it with some Limitations: The First of
which is, That a Miracle is not to be admitted contrary to Reason; I suppose,
he means contrary to common Notions, or those Idea's which Reason has formed
from Sense, Experience, or Instruction. And, no doubt, this is a very just
Limitation: For a Miracle is performed upon Objects of Sense; and it is an
Address to our Senses, or a Demonstration accommodated to the outward Senses,
by some sensible Effects, or Operations; and consequently, nothing is to be
admitted as a Miracle, that contradicts the Testimony of the Senses: and we
are, at least, so far Judges of its possibility, that in Case it manifestly
contradicts the Testimony of our Sense, we may justly rank it among
Impossibilities, and reject it as such. But further than this, I cannot
discern, that we are competent Judges of the Possibility of any Miracle; for to
judge of its Possibility, supposes a knowledge of its Modus: But this our
Adversary will not allow; [ For the manner of Miracles, (says he) is not
explicable. N. 77.

Thus far we are agreed; but I know not how this Limitation, much less those
that follow, affect the present Controversy. Indeed, he at last comes to the
Point, and tells us, [ Miracles are not above Reason, though we know nothing of
the Modus.] But I would fain know, why a Thing that contains somewhat in the
Nature of it, which exceeds Human Comprehension, is not as properly above
Reason, or Mysterious, as a Thing (in itself intelligible) only it lies
dormant, because shadowed thro'a Veil, I Am sure, Origin tells the contrary,
Comment. in Mat. 19. 24, 26. ut supra. See page 61.

But I have exposed the Folly of this Assertion in another place. Indeed, I
should have turned his own Arguments upon him, had he not prevented me, by
reviving 'em in such a manner, as gives me a better advantage over him. We have
it thus, [ As the beginning of my Book, I maintained, the Manner, as well as
the Thing was explicable. But of what? Of Miracles. No, surely; but of those
Doctrines, in Confirmation of which the Miracles are wrought. See N. 77.] This
is truly an unaccountable Paradox. Miracles are certainly the Demonstrations of
Sense, and consequently are to be scanned and judged of by common Ideas, even
the most clear and indisputable, such as result from Objects of Sense; but it is
concluded, that Matters of Revelation are founded on Objects that are Spiritual
and Infinite, and consequently are to us more abstruse and incomprehensible.

Again, Miracles are a direct and immediate Address to the Sense and Reason of
Mankind, and are designed to give an unquestionable Credit to every revealed
Truth, since they procure the Testimony of Infinite Veracity in the behalf of
it; and therefore, all the Reason and Arguments in Nature will direct, that
they should pass the severest Scrutiny. But in Matters of Revelation it is
concluded, that a great deal rests upon the Authority of Infinite Veracity, and
this depends upon the Evidence of Miracles; and therefore it is absurd to demand
a clearer and more precise Comprehension of the Nature of revealed Truths than
of Miracles.

This Gentleman owns, that Miracles are a Confirmation of revealed Truths; that
is, at least, as they are an absolute Attestation of their Divine Original: And
this is an uncontrollable Demonstration of the Truth of them. Indeed I Am
persuaded the meerest Novice in Logic will tell him, That we are to have, at
least, as adequate a Knowledge of that which is to confirm, as that which is
confirmed by it; or that the Premises are to carry as great Evidence in 'em as
we expect in the Conclusion: Therefore it is absurd to say, that the Modus of
Miracles is inexplicable, and the Modus of all revealed Truths not so. Indeed
this Gentleman seems to have furnished us with Weapons to fence against him
with the greatest Advantage; for if such Positions as these must pass for
Truth, it must be Truth in a Mystery. And truly, we could not have desired a
better Argument against him; for, if the Modus of Objects of Sense be
inexplicable, certainly the Modus of revealed Truths are much more
inexplicable; the Immenseness of whose Nature to a Finite Mind, renders them
incomprehensible.

Again, the Modus of Objects of Sense is not to be explained by Ideas of the
same kind; much less, is the Modus of Infinite and Spiritual Objects to be
explained by the Ideas of Objects of Sense: So that, in a word, since Miracles
(as Objects of Sense, with respect to the Modus of 'em) are inexplicable, and
by consequence justly to be esteemed above Reason, much more are Matters of
Revelation, with respect to their Modus, to be esteemed inexplicable, above
Reason, and consequently mysterious.

I come now to examine, in the last place, his pretended Historical Account of
the Rise of Mystery, and the Causes of it, under this Title, [ When, why, and
by whom were Mysteries brought into Christianity, Cap. 6. Sect. 3.] And truly I
am persuaded what has already been delivered will be esteemed (by an impartial
Reader) a sufficient Confutation to this whole Chapter, (at least if it answers
the Title) without examining any Paragraph: However, I think it deserves no
Answer, but a short Reply to the Title, and that is capable of no other, but
such as we give to an impertinent Question of the Romanists, Where was your
Religion before Luther? As to the time when Mystery was introduced, I hope it is
sufficiently proved to be of the same Date with Christianity itself, being
founded not in Names or Words only, but in Certain Truths, that are proposed as
Objects of Faith. But, 2dly, for the Person by whom, or that introduced it, I Am
persuaded there is enough offered to charge it upon the Blessed Author of the
Institution. Lastly, For the Reason why Mysteries were introduced, I shall
leave 'em to this notable Reasoner to dispute it out with the Infinite Wisdom
of GOD, in not creating Man with larger and more comprehensible Faculties, or
not contriving some more familiar Method of Redemption. And now, if what has
already been delivered stands good against this Author, (there being as yet no
reason to suspect it) I Will appeal to all the World, whether it does not destroy
the malicious Suggestions of this Chapter, which make Mystery to be a Trick of
Priestcraft, contrived for the support of Secular Grandeur and Dominion.

But, to descend to a few Particulars; He observes, (and that too with a great
deal of Contempt and Scorn) That the Christian Church initiated their Converts
in a Way and Method not much unlike that of the Heathen World; which is the
most he can make of all his Allegations. Now we own, the Christian Converts
were gradually initiated, that they were ranked in several Classes, and had a
Discipline, and Instructions, peculiar to each Class, and thereupon prohibited
the publication of the sublimest Parts of Religion, to any but those that had
gone through the inferior Classes; and truly, such Injunctions have not only
the unquestionable Dictates of Prudence for their Vindication, but Apostolic
Practice and Approbation; for it is the established Method with the Hebrew
Converts, as well as those at Corinth; they were brought on gradually to
Perfection, first by Milk, then by strong Meats, the one accommodated to Babes
in Christ, the other to those of full age; see Heb. v. ver. 12, 13, 14. and 1
Cor. iii. 2. where it is probable the Jewish Converts were first instructed in
those Scriptures that set forth the easiest parts of our Savior's Offices, as
Prophet, Priest, and King; but afterward, those that asserted his Divinity.
I Am sure St. Clement makes these Babes to be the Catechumens, or those that
were instructed in the Catechistick Parts of Christianity; but the Perfect,
those that were instructed in the sublimest parts of Religion; to wit, the
Essence of the Divine Nature. But now the great Crime is, that all these
Measures of Initiation were taken from the Heathens: And this is proved,
because they are much the same.

It is not now my business to examine the Parallel; though I must confess there
are, in a great many things, very lively Resemblances: But as for the Crime, I
cannot discern where that lies, since the Christians did not symbolize with any
Design to form a Comprehension between Heathenism and Christianity; nor (as
this Author suggests) out of an Opinion of any Religion contained in such
Rites, see N. 97. but out of a Zeal for GOD, and the Souls of Men, they, in St.
Paul's Language, became all things unto them, that if possible they might
enlarge the Territories of Christ's Kingdom, and save some; for, as long as
they acted on these Principles, I think there was no more Guilt in 'em, than in
St. Paul's occasional Compliances with Jewish Rites. Indeed our Adversary
elsewhere [ Number. 78, 79.] gives this very account of these Initiations or
Compliances; and therefore, I cannot conceive how he can justify so base an
Aspersion, viz. N. 90. [Here is enough to show how Christianity became
mysterious, and how so Divine an Institution did, through the Craft and Ambition
of Priests and Philosophers, degenerate into mere Paganism.] It Is well known
there are other Accounts given of those Religious Rites that were introduced in
the Primitive Church, than those already assigned; and those too, that are
abundantly sufficient to vindicate the Lawfulness of 'em: I shall refer him to
St. Cyril, the Author he has cited, who is very particular on this Subject.

But, in a word, it is manifest they were in 'emselves the best Expedients to
maintain the Discipline of the Church, and establish a regular and uniform
Piety, as well as orthodox, clear, and well-digested Faith; so unjust is the
Charge, that makes 'em Artifices to introduce Mystery, Ignorance, and Blind
Obedience.

2dly, As for those Emblematical Rites introduced in the Administrations of the
Christian Sacraments, they might possibly contribute to the establishing
Mysteries in a Jewish Sense, as it is used for Typical Representations: but
they seem to have no tendency to establish Mystery in the sense we contend for;
I mean, as it is put for Incomprehensible Truths.

But let us reflect a little on the Baseness of this Accusation: Here Is a
general Combination in the Pastors of the Catholic Church, and a great many
Hellish Designs formed in the Womb of it; Ambition and Covetousness is the
original Spring, Ceremony and a great many superfluous Rites the Instrument,
and the grand Designs were to turn Religion into Mystery, even to that degree,
that in the Opinion of this Author, it has made a Divine Institution degenerate
into Paganism; N. 90. But, for what Reason? Purely because some Christian Rules
of Discipline resemble the Religious Rites of Heathens; for, there can no other
be fixed on those that are truly Primitive. If this be so, I Am sure the Censure
is extravagantly absurd. What if a sober Heathen acts upon the strict Rules of
Justice, and abhors Slander and Detraction, more than this Calumniator; must
not a good Christian practice the same Virtue, for fear of being charged with
Paganism? I Am sure the Case is the same where the Thing is innocent or lawful.

Indeed, this Gentleman declaims against Mystery very heartily, but I am afraid
he has too much dealing with one sort of it; for, such Illogical, such
Groundless, such Vile Aspersions, must take their Rise from the Mystery of
Iniquity, that reigns in the high places; for it is nothing else but the
Language of him that is justly styled, the Accuser of his Brethren.

But, to proceed a little further, I find he has an immortal Abhorrence of the
Cross in Baptism, of Altars, of the Dedication or Consecration of Charches,
Music, the Rites of Burial; and, in a word, of the Institution of National
Churches, which he seems to call Human Faction, or Policy, in one place; [See
page 172. Ed. 2. and Usurpations upon Mankind in another, N. 93.] Now these are
Rites and Sanctions enjoined and practiced in the Established Church of
England; and when he thinks fit to discover wherein the Evil of them consists,
or that the People of this National Church are not obliged to yield an
Obedience to 'em, I promise an Answer, and such as will set him off in his own
Colors and Language too; that is, prove him an impertinent Trifler. It Is true,
he seems to explode 'em, because [ nothing like these are in the Writings of
the Apostles, but they are all plainly contained in the Books of the Gentiles,
and was the Substance of their Worship:] when we make such things the Substance
of our Worship, then let him accuse us: But as for the Necessity of finding the
particular Ceremonies in the Writings of the Apostles, we say there is none;
it is sufficient we find 'em by a fair Consequence, inasmuch as we find an
Ecclesiastical Power commissioned to enact prudent Laws for the Peace and Unity
of the Church, for the maintenance of Decency, Order, and Uniformity in the
Public Worship of God; and as long as Ceremonies are chosen, with respect to
the Number, so as not to bring a Burden, and create Distraction in the Public
Worship of God, and with respect to the Nature of 'em, inasmuch as they carry a
manifest Tendency toward the Advancement of the Ends of Religion.

Again, we say Apostolic Practice or Tradition, and an uninterrupted Custom of
the Primitive Church, is certainly a considerable Argument not only of the
Lawfulness, but Authority of 'em, especially so as that none shall dispute an
Obedience, when once they are enjoined by our proper Ecclesiastical Superiors.
I Am sure Tertullian makes this an express Rule of Obedience in these matters,
though this Author, by the help of a false Citation, seems to insinuate the
contrary: Harum and aliarum ejusmodi disciplinarum si legem expostules
Scripturarum nullam invenies: Traditio tibi praetendetur [by way of Rule,
whereas he reads it, praetenditur] Auctrix, consuetudo confirmatrix, and fides
observatrix, Lib. de Coron. c. 4.

But to draw toward a Conclusion, I do not now intend a formal Vindication of
Ceremonies; however, I think I have offered enough to publish the Ignorance or
Impudence of the Man; when he asserts, That [ nothing is so naturally opposite
as Ceremony and Christianity, N. 95.] What, even those that are appointed to
determine (for Decency, and Uniformity's sake) the Natural Circumstances of
Public Worship, such as Time, Place, and Manner? Let him make this out by dint
of Argument, and I Will engage (as was offered before) he shall have a fair
Answer. And now I have gone through a tedious Harrangue, which whether it be more
made up of Impotent Malice, or Illogical Conclusions, is disputable; and
therefore, I think myself happy to arrive at his Conclusion, and more happy
that I find little in it, that either deserves, or can justly provoke a Reply:
for I find him either bantering the World with his own Objections, and Answers,
which if placed in the Balance, will not weigh a Grain to effect the Merits of
the Cause either way, or giving 'em an account of his next Undertakings, though
in his last Edition, he is so prudent to add a Reserve, that I Am much afraid
will baulk the Expectation of the Thing; for he let us us know, he will take his
own time for it, as a thing not in the Command of any Mortal; and I Am persuaded
he will prove the Maxim by experimental Demonstration; for, I believe, want of
Health, or Business, or something else, will make it a good while before he
puts his finishing hand to his new intended System of Divinity. One or two
things, however, I cannot but remark, before I take a final leave. And,

First; After all this Argument, the Reader may imagine that the Difference
between us is not considerable; for he allows, That we cannot pretend to an
Adequate Knowledge of Things; and we say, That Divine Truths are chiefly
Mysterious, in respect of the Modus of 'em; and as it is impossible to
comprehend the Mysterious part of 'em, so we grant it is not necessary to be
known, or comprehended: But yet for all this, the Difference is very
considerable; for this Gentleman peremptorily affirms, That the Modus of all
Revealed Truths, is explicable; see Number. 77. Sect. 3. And in the Conclusion he
tells us, If his Hypothesis stands good, [ Whatever Instance can be alleged
(he means in contradiction to it) must either be found not Mysterious, or if it
prove a Mystery, not Divinely revealed;] so that he has formed a most
Compendious Rule for discarding the fundamental Doctrines of Christianity, if
any be proposed, whose Modus he cannot comprehend, and that too by common
Ideas, or Notions, his Hypothesis directs, That they are to be rejected as not
Divinely revealed: Indeed, whosoever surveys his Hypothesis, may at the first
glance discern this to be the Design, though he had not blabed out the Secret
in the close of it; and certainly the Design is so pernicious, and (though formed
on a weak Hypothesis) liable to influence an unwary Reader, and cheat him out
of the main of his Creed, that I wonder this Gentleman has escaped so long
without being chastised by some Pen more accurate than I can pretend to.

The Second thing I shall take notice of is, The Provisions he has made against
an Answer; for he tells us, That [ no particular Instances, or Doctrines of any
sort, can serve for a proper Answer to this Discourse.] This is pretty well
truly! He has been very Majesterial in advancing his own Positions, and will he
be as absolute in prescribing to his Answerers? As if nothing must pass for an
Answer, that is not formed by his Model, or has not received his Imprimatur. As
for the force of Instances, it is very well known, that an opposite Instance is
perfect Demonstration against a peremptory, and universal Position in an
Adversary; and the force of Positions, Arguments, or Notions that exist in
Theory, or Universals, are best illustrated and imprinted by Instances. I Am
sure he proceeds by these Measures in all his Reasonings, and will he debar
others of those Privileges he allows himself? This is to make himself the
absolute Sovereign of Reason and Argument; as if the rest of Mankind had no
Right to use any more of either, but what he cantons out by his own Weights,
and Measures. But he tells us, Instances can be no Answer to his Discourse, [
As long as the Reasons of it hold good:] Very true, for if the Reasons hold
good, the Instances alleged against 'em must be impertinent, or incompetent:
But the Instances I have produced are levelled against his Reasons and
Positions too, and, I hope, they sufficiently destroy both, and then the Method
of Answering will justify itself without his License or Approbation.

In a word, as for this Answer, I offer it to every candid impartial Reader
with Deference and Submission, who, I question not, will pass over some little
Slips or Blots that may arise through heat of Argument, if the main Lines are
correct and clear. And as for this Gentleman, or his Zealous Admirers, I tender
the Substance, or principal Parts of it, to be treated as he has peremptorily
resolved at the foot of his Discourse; I mean, give it no more Quarter than he
will to Error; but, according to his utmost Abilities and Opportunities, expose
it in its true Colors, that he may not be charged as an Accessory against
himself, in rendering his own Labors ineffectual, by weakly mincing or
softening of any thing.

FINIS.

