MAndetur Typis hic Liber, cui Titulus The Religion of Protestants a safe way
to Salvation: In quo nihil occurrit a bonis Moribus, a Doctrina and Disciplina
in Ecclesia Anglicana assertis, alienum.

RICH. BAILIE Vicecan. Oxon.

PErlegi hunc Librum, cui Titulus est The Religion of Protestants a safe way to
Salvation: In quo nihil reperio Doctrinae vel Disciplinae Ecclesiae Anglicanae
adversum, sed quamplurima quae Fidem Orthodoxam egregie illustrant, and
adversantia glossemata acute perspicue, and modeste dissipant.

Jo. PRIDEAUX S.T.P. Regius Oxon.

EGo Samuel Fell Publicus Theol. Professor in Univ. Oxon. and ordinarius
Praelector D. Marg. Comitiss. Richmondiae,perlegi Librum cui Titulus est, The
Religion of Protestants a safe way to Salvation: In quo nihil reperio Doctrinae
vel Disciplinae Ecclesiae Anglicanae, aut bonis Moribus adversum: sed multa
nervose and modeste eventilata contra Adversarios nostrae Ecclesiae and
veritatis Catholicae, quam feliciter tuetur.

Dat. 14o October. 1637. SAM. FELL.

Fiat secunda Editio juxta hoc Exemplar.

Ex. Aedib. London. Feb. 6. 1637. SAM. BAKER.

PErlegi hunc Librum, cui Tit. The Religion of Protestants a safe way to
Salvation;item, Novem Consciones nuperime additas: In quibus omnibus nihil
reperio Doctrinae vel Disciplinae Ecclesiae Anglicanae contrarium, quo minus
cum summa omnium utilitate Imprimatur,

Ex. Aed. Lambeth. 16. October. 1663. G. STRADLING S.T.P. Reverendis. in Christo
Pat. D. Gilb. Archiep. Cant. a Sac. Domest.

THE RELIGION OF PROTESTANTS A Safe way to Salvation.

OR, An ANSWER to a Book Entitled Mercy and Truth, or, Charity maintained by
Catholics: Which pretends to prove the Contrary.

To which is Added in this Third Impression The Apostolical Institution of
Episcopacy.

AS ALSO, IX. SERMONS, The First Preached before His Majesty King CHARLES the
First, the other Eight upon special and eminent Occasions.

BY William Chillingworth Master of Arts of the University of OXFORD.

Isaac. Casaubon. in Epist. ad Card. Perron. Regis JACOBI nomine scripta. Rex
arbitratur, rerum absolute necessariarum ad salutem, non magnum esse numerum.
Quare existimat ejus Majestas, nullam ad incundam concordiam breviorem viam
fore, quam si diligenter, separentur necessaria a non necessariis, and ut de
necessariis conveniat, omnis opera insumatur: in non necessariis libertati
Christianae locus detur. Simpliciter necessaria Rex appellat, quae vel express
verbum Dei praecipit credenda faciendave, vel ex verbo Dei necessaria
consequentia vetus Ecclesia elicuit. -- Si ad decidendas hodiernas
Controversias haec distinctio adhiberetur, and jus divinum a positivo seu
Ecclesiastico candide separaretur; non videtur de iis quae sunt absolute
necessaria, inter pios and moderatos viros, longa aut acris contentio futura.
Nam and pauce illa sunt, ut modo dicebamus, and fere ex aequo omnibus
probantur, qui se Christianos dici postulant. Atque istam distinctionem
Sereniss. Rex tanti putat esse momenti ad minuendas Controversias, quae hodie
Ecclesiam Dei tantopere exercent, ut omnium pacis studiosorum judicet officium
esse, diligentissime hanc explicare, docere, urgere.

LONDON: Printed by E. Cotes, for J. Clark, and are to be sold by Thomas
Thornicroft at the sign of the Eagle and Child in St. Paul's Churchyard near
the little North-door. M.DC.LXIV.

TO THE Most HIGH and MIGHTY PRINCE, CHALES By the Grace of God, KING of
Great Britain, France and Ireland, Defendor of the Faith, etc.
May it please your most Excellent Majesty,
I Present with all humility, to Your most Sacred hands, a Defense of that
Cause which is and ought to be infinitely dearer to you, than all the World:
Not doubting but upon this Dedication I shall be censured for a double
boldness; both for undertaking so great a Work, so far beyond my weak
abilities; and again, for presenting it to such a Patron, whose judgment I
ought to fear more than any Adversary. But for the first, it is a satisfaction
to my self, and may be to others, that I was not drawn to it out of any vain
opinion of myself, (whose personal defects are the only thing which I presume
to know,) but undertook it in obedience in Him who said, Tu conversus confirma
fratres, not to St. Peter only, but to all men: being encouraged also to it by
the goodness of the Cause, which is able to make a weak man strong. To the
belief hereof I was not led partially or by chance, as many are, by the
prejudice and prepossession of their Country, Education, and such like
inducements; which if they lead to Truth in one place, perhaps lead to Error in
a hundred; but having with the greatest equality and indifferency, made enquiry
and grounds on both Sides, I was willing to impart to others, that satisfaction
which was given to my self. For my inscribing to it Your Majesty's Sacred Name,
I should labor much in my excuse of it from high presumption, had it not some
appearance of Title to your Majesty's Patronage and protection, as being a
Defense of that Book, which by special order from Your Majesty was written some
years since, chiefly for the general good, but peradventure not without some
aim at the recovery of One of Your meanest Subjects from dangerous deviation;
and so due unto Your Majesty, as the fruit of Your own High Humility and most
Royal Charity. Besides, it is in a manner nothing else, but a pursuance of, and
a superstruction upon that blessed Doctrine, wherewith I have adorned and armed
the Frontispice of my Book, which was so earnestly recommended to Your Royal
Father of happy memory, to all the lovers of Truth and Peace; that is, to all
that were like Himself, as the only hopeful means of healing the Breaches of
Christendom, whereof the Enemy of souls makes such pestilent advantage. The
luster of this blessed Doctrine I have endeavored to uncloud and unvail, and
to free it from those mists and fumes which have been raised to obscure it, by
one of that Order, which envenomes even poison it self, and makes the Roman
Religion much more malignant and turbulent than otherwise it would be: whose
very Rule and Doctrine, obliges them to make all men, as much as lies in them,
subjects unto Kings, and servants unto Christ, no farther than it shall please
the Pope. So that whether Your Majesty be considered, either as a Pious Son
toward Your Royal Father King James, or as a tender hearted and compassionate
Son toward Your distressed Mother, the Catholic Church, or as a King of Your
Subjects, or as a Servant unto Christ, this Work, (to which I can give no other
commendation, but that it was intended to do You service in all these
capacities,) may pretend, not unreasonably, to Your Gracious acceptance.
Lastly, being a Defense of that whole Church and Religion You profess, it could
not be so proper to any Patron as to the great Defendor of it; which style Your
Majesty has ever so exactly made good, both in securing it from all dangers,
and in vindicating it (by the well ordering and rectifying this Church) from
all the foul aspersions both of Domestic and Foraign enemies, of which they
can have no ground, but their own want of Judgment, or want of Charity. But it
is an argument of a despairing and lost cause to support it self with these
impetuous outcries and clamours, the faint refuges of those that want better
arguments; like that Stoic in Lucian that cried (...) O damned villain! when
he could say nothing else. Neither is it credible the wiser sort of them should
believe this their own horrid assertion, That a God of goodness should damn to
eternal torments, those that love him and love truth, for errors which they
fall into through humane frailty! But this they must say, otherwise their only
great argument from their damning us, and our not being so peremtory in damning
them, because we hope unaffected Ignorance may excuse them, would be lost: and
therefore they are engaged to act on this Tragical part, only to fright the
simple and ignorant, as we do little children, by telling them that bites,
which we would not have them meddle with. And truly that herein they do but
act a part, and know themselves to do so, and deal with us here, as they do
with the King of Spain at Rome, whom they accurse and Excommunicate for fashion
sake on Maundy-Thursday, for detaining part of St. Peter's Patrimony, and
absolve him without satisfaction on Good Friday; methinks their faltring and
inconstancy herein, makes it very apparent: For though for the most part, they
speak nothing but thunder and lightning to us, and damn us all without mercy or
exception; yet sometimes to serve other purposes, they can be content to speak
to us in a milder strain, and tell us, as my Adversary does more than once,
That they allow Protestants as much Charity as Protestants allow them. Neither
is this the only contradiction which I have discovered in this uncharitable
Work; but have showed that by forgetting himself, and retracting most of the
principal grounds he builds upon, he has saved me the labor of a Confutation:
which yet I have not in any place found any such labor or difficulty, but that
it was undertakable by a man of very mean, that is, of my abilities. And the
reason is, because it is Truth I plead for; which is so strong an argument for
it self, that it needs only light to discover it; whereas it concerns Falsehood
and Error to use disguises and shadowings, and all the fetches of Art and
Sophistry; and therefore it stands in need of abler men, to give that a color
at least, which has no real body to subsist by. If my endeavors in this kind
may contribute any thing to this discovery, and the making plain that Truth
(which my Charity persuades me the most part of them disaffect, only because it
has not been well represented to them,) I have the fruit of my labor, and my
wish, who desire to live to no other end, than to do service to Gods Church,
and Your most Sacred Majesty, in the quality of

Your MAJESTY'S Most faithful Subject, and most humble and devoted Servant
William Chillingworth.

The CONTENTS of the Chapters, with the Answers thereunto.
THe Author of Charity Maintained, his Preface to the Reader, Page 1. The
Answer to the Preface, Page 5.
The FIRST PART.
CHAP. I. THe State of the Question; with a summary of the Reasons for which,
men of different Religions, one side only can be saved, Page 23. The Answer to
the First Chapter. Showing, that the Adversary grants the Former Question, and
proposes a New One: And that there is no reason, why among men of different
Opinions and Communions, one Side only can be saved, Page 25
CHAP. II. What is that means, whereby the revealed Truths of God are conveyed
to our understanding, and which must determine Controversies in Faith and
Religion, Page 37 The Answer to the Second Chapter. Concerning the means,
whereby the revealed Truths of God are conveyed to our Understanding; and which
must determine Controversies in Faith and Religion, Page 45
CHAP. III. That the distinction of Points Fundamental and not Fundamental, is
neither pertinent, nor true in our present Controversy: And that the
Catholic visible Church cannot err, in either kind of the said Point, Page
107 The Answer to the Third Chapter. Wherein is maintained, That the
distinction of Points Fundamental and not Fundamental, is in this present
Controversy good and pertinent: And that the Catholic Church may err in the
latter kind of the said Points, Page 115
CHAP. IV. To say, that the Creed contains all Points necessary to be believed,
is neither pertinent to the Question in hand, nor in it self true, Page 165 The
Answer to the Fourth Chapter. Wherein is showed, that the Creed contains all
necessary Points of mere belief, Page 172
CHAP. V. That Luther, Calvin, their Associates, and all who began or continue
the Separation from the external Communion of the Roman Church, are guilty of
the proper, and formal sin of Schism, Page 210 The Answer to the Fifth Chapter.
The separation of Protestants from the Roman Church, being upon just and
necessary causes, is not any way guilty of Schism, Page 227
CHAP. VI. That Luther and the rest of the Protestants have added Heresy unto
Schism, Page 279 The Answer unto the Sixth Chapter. That Protestants are not
Heretics, Page 289
CHAP. VII. In regard of the Precept of Charity toward ones self, Protestants
are in a state of Sin, as long as they remain separate from the Roman-Church,
Page 341 The Answer to the Seventh Chapter. That Protestants are not bound by
the Charity which they owe to themselves, to reunite themselves to the
Roman-Church, Page 345
The Conclusion, Page 365
THE PREFACE To the AUTHOR of CHARITY MAINTAINED: WITH An Answer to his
Pamphlet, entitled A Direction to N. N.
SIR,
UPon the first news of the publication of your Book, I used all diligence,
with speed to procure it; and came with such a mind to the reading of it, as S.
Austin, before he was a settled Catholic, brought to his conference with
Faustus the Manichee. For, as he thought that if any thing more than ordinary
might be said in defense of the Manichean Doctrine, Faustus was the man from
whom it was to be expected: So my persuasion concerning you was, -- Si Pergama
dextra Defendi possunt, certe hac defensa videbo. For I conceived that among
the Champions of the Roman Church, the English in reason must be the best, or
equal to the best, as being by most expert Masters trained up purposely for
this war, and perpetually practiced in it. Among the English, I saw the
Jesuits would yield the first place to none; and men so wise in their
generation as the Jesuits were, if they had any Achilles among them, I
presumed, would make choice of him for this service. And besides, I had good
assurance, that in the framing of this building, though you were the only
Architect, yet you wanted not the assistance of many diligent hands to bring
you in choice materials toward it; nor of many careful and watchful eyes, to
correct the errors of your Work, if any should chance to escape you. Great
reason therefore had I to expect great matters from you, and that your Book
should have in it the Spirit and Elixir of all that can be said in defense of
your Church and Doctrine; and to assure my self, that if my resolution not to
believe it, were not built upon the rock of evident grounds and reasons, but
only upon some sandy and deceitful appearances, now the wind and storm and
floods were coming, which would undoubtedly overthrow it.

2. Neither truly were you more willing to effect such an alteration in me,
then I was to have it effected. For my desire is to go the right way to eternal
happiness. But whether this way lie on the right hand or the left, or straight
forwards; whether it be by following a living Guide, or by seeking my direction
in a Book, or by harkening to the secret whisper of some private Spirit, to me
it is indifferent. And he that is otherwise affected, and has not a travelers
indifference, which Epictetus requires in all that would find the truth, but
much desires in respect of his ease, or pleasure, or profit, or advancement, or
satisfaction of friends, or any humane consideration, that one way should be
true rather than another; it is odds but he will take his desire that it should
be so, for an assurance that it is so. But, I for my part, unless I deceive my
self, was, and still am so affected, as I have made profession, not willing I
confess to take any thing upon trust, and to believe it without asking my self
why; no, nor able to command my self (were I never so willing) to follow, like
a sheep, every Shepherd that should take upon him to guide me; or every flock
that should chance to go before me: but most apt and most willing to be led by
reason to any way, or from it; and always submitting all other reasons to this
one, God has said so, therefore it is true. Nor yet was I so unreasonable as
to expect Mathematical demonstrations from you in matters plainly incapable of
them, such as are to be believed, and, if we speak properly, cannot be known;
such therefore I expected not. For, as he is an unreasonable Master, who
requires a stronger assent to his conclusions then his arguments deserve; so I
conceive him a froward and undisciplined Scholar, who desires stronger
arguments for a conclusion than the Matter will bear. But, had you represented
to my understanding such reasons of your Doctrine, as, being weighed in an
eaven balance, held by an eaven hand, with those on the other side, would have
turned the scale, and have made your Religion more credible than the contrary;
certainly, I should have despised the shame of one more alteration, and with
both mine arms and all my heart most readily have embraced it. Such was my
expectation from you, and such my preparation, which I brought with me to the
reading of your Book.

3. Would you know now what the event was, what effect was wrought in me, by
the perusal and consideration of it? To deal truly and ingenuously with you, I
fell somewhat in my good opinion both of your sufficiency and sincerity: but
was exceedingly confirmed in my ill opinion of the Cause maintained by you. I
found every where snares that might entrap, and colors that might deceive the
simple; but nothing that might persuade, and very little that might move an
understanding man, and one that can discern between Discourse and Sophistry. In
short, I was verily persuaded that I plainly saw and could make it appear, to
all dis-passionate and unprejudicate Judges, that a vein of sophistry and
calumny did run clean through it from the beginning to the end. And letting some
Friends understand so much, I suffered my self to be persuaded by them, that it
would not be either unproper for me, nor unacceptable to God, nor peradventure
altogether unserviceable to his Church, nor justly offensive to you (if you
indeed were a lover of Truth, and not a maintainer of a Faction,) if setting
aside the Second Part, which was in a manner wholly employed in particular
disputes, repetitions and references, and in wranglings with D. Potter about
the sense of some supernumerary quotations, and whereon the main question no
way depends, I would make a fair and ingenuous answer to the First, wherein the
substance of the present Controversy is confessedly contained; and which, if
it were clearly answered, no man would desire any other answer to the Second.
This therefore I undertook with a full resolution to be an adversary to your
Errors, but a Friend and Servant to your Person: and so much the more a friend
to your person, by how much the severer and more rigid adversary I was to your
errors.

4. In this Work my conscience bears me witness that I have, according to your
advice, proceeded always with this consideration, that I am to give a most
strict account of every line, and word, that passes under my pen: and
therefore have been precisely careful for the matter of my Book to defend truth
only, and only by Truth. And then, scrupulously fearful of scandalizing you or
any man with the manner of handling it. From this Rule, sure I am, I have not
willingly swerved in either part of it; and, that I might not do it ignorantly,
I have not only my self examined mine own Work, (perhaps with more severity
than I have done yours, as conceiving it a base and unchristian thing to go
about to satisfy others with what I my self am not fully satisfied;) but have
also made it pass the fiery trial of the exact censures of many understanding
Judges, always heartily wishing that you your Self had been of the Quorum. But
they who did undergo this burden, as they wanted not sufficiency to discover
any heterodox Doctrine, so I am sure, they have been very careful to let
nothing slip dissonant from truth or from the authorized Doctrine of the Church
of England: and therefore whatsoever causeless or groundless jealousy, any man
may entertain concerning my Person, yet my Book, I presume, in reason and
common equity should be free from them; wherein I hope, that little or nothing
has escaped so many eyes, which being weighed in the balance of the Sanctuary,
will be found too light. And in this hope I am much confirmed, by your strange
carriage of your self in this whole business. For though by some crooked and
sinister arts, you have got my Answer into your hands, now a year since and
upwards, as I have been assured by some that profess to know it, and those of
your own party; though you could not want every day fair opportunities of
sending to me, and acquainting me with any Exceptions, which, you conceived,
might be justly taken to it, or any part of it (than which nothing could have
been more welcome to me) yet hitherto you have not been pleased to acquaint me
with any one. Nay more, though you have been at sundry times, and by several
ways, entreated and solicited, nay pressed and importuned by me, to join with
me in a private discussion of the Controversy between us, before the
publication of my Answer, (because I was extremely unwilling to publish any
thing which had not passed all manner of trials, as desiring not that I, or my
Side, but that Truth might overcome on which Side soever it was;) though I have
protested to you, and sent it under my hand, (which protestation by Gods help I
would have made good) If you, or any other would undertake your Cause, would
give me a fair meeting, and choose out of your whole Book any one argument,
whereof you were most confident, and by which you would be content the rest
should be judged of, and make it appear that I had not, or could not answer it,
that I would desist from the work which I had undertaken, and answer none at
all; though by all the Arts which possibly I could devise, I have provoked you
to such a trial, in particular by assuring you that if you refused it, the
World should be informed of your tergiversation: notwithstanding all this, you
have perpetually, and obstinately declined it; which to my understanding is a
very evident sign that there is not any truth in your Cause, nor (which is
impossible there should be) strength in your Arguments, especially considering
what our Savior has told us, Every one that does evil hates the light,
neither comes to the light, lest his deeds should be reproved; but he that
does truth, comes to the light that his deeds may be made manifest that they
are wrought in God.

5. In the mean while though you despaired of compassing your desire this
honest way; yet you have not omitted to tempt me, by base and unworthy
considerations, to desert the Cause which I had undertaken; letting me
understand from you, by an Acquaintance common to us both, how that in case my
Work should come to light, my inconstancy in Religion (so you miscal my
constancy in following that way to heaven which for the present seems to me the
most probable) should be to my great shame painted to the life; that my own
Writings should be produced against my self; that I should be urged to answer
my own Motives against Protestantism, and that such things should be published
to the World touching my belief, (for my Painter I must expect should have
great skill in Perspective) of the Doctrine of the Trinity, the Deity of our
Savior, and all supernatural Verities, as should endanger all my Benefices
present or future: that this warning was given me, not out of fear of what I
could say (for that Catholics if they might wish any ill would beg the
Publication of my Book, for respects obvious enough,) but out of a mere
charitable desire of my good and reputation: and that all this was said upon a
supposition that I was answering, or had a mind to answer Charity Maintained;
If not, no harm was done. To which courteous Premonition, as I remember, I
desired the Gentleman, who dealt between us, to return this Answer, or to this
effect; That I believed the Doctrine of the Trinity, the Deity of our Savior,
and all other supernatural Verities revealed in Scripture, as truly and as
heartily as your self, or any man, and therefore herein your Charity was very
much mistaken; but much more and more uncharitably in conceiving me a man that
was to be wrought upon with these Terribiles visuformae, those carnal and base
fears which you presented to me, which were very proper motives for the Devil
and his instruments to tempt poor-spirited men out of the way of conscience and
honesty, but very incongruous, either for Teachers of Truth to make use of, or
for Lovers of Truth (in which Company I had been long ago matriculated) to
hearken to, with any regard. But if you were indeed desirous that I should not
answer Charity Maintained, one way there was, and but one, whereby you might
obtain your desire; and that was, by letting me know, when and where I might
attend you, and by a fair conference, to be written down on both sides,
convincing mine understanding (who was resolved not to be a Recusant if I were
convicted,) that any one part of it, any one Argument in it, which was of
moment and consequence, and whereon the cause depends, was indeed unanswerable.
This was the effect of my Answer, which I am well assured was delivered: but
Reply from you I received none but this, That you would have no conference with
me but in Print; and soon after finding me of proof against all these
batteries, and thereby (I fear) very much enraged, you took up the resolution
of the furious Goddess in the Poet, madded with the unsuccessfulness of her
malice,

Flectere si nequec superos, Acheronta movebo!

6. For certainly, those indigne contumelies, that mass of portentous and
execrable calumnies, wherewith in your Pamphlet of Directions to N. N. you have
loaded not only my Person in particular, but all the learned and moderate
Divines of the Church of England, and all Protestants in general, nay all wise
men of all Religions but your own, could not proceed from any other fountain.

7. To begin with the last; You stick not in the beginning of your first
Chapter, to fasten the imputation of Atheism and Irreligion upon all wise and
gallant men, that are not of your own Religion. In which uncharitable and
unchristian judgment, void of all color or shadow of probability, I know yet
by experience, that very many of the Bigots of your Faction, are partakers with
you. God forbid I should think the like of you! Yet, if I should say, that in
your Religion there want not some temptations unto, and some Principles of,
Irreligion and Atheism; I am sure I could make my assertion much more probable
than you have done, or can make this horrible imputation.

8. For to pass by, First, that which experience justifies, That where and when
your Religion has most absolutely commanded, there and then Atheism has most
abounded: To say nothing, Secondly, of your notorious and confessed forging of
so many false Miracles, and so many lying Legends, which is not unlikely to
make suspicious men to question the truth of all: Nor to object to you,
Thirdly, the abundance of your weak and silly Ceremonies, and ridiculous
observances in your Religion; which, in all probability, cannot but beget
secret contempt and scorn of it, in wise and considering men; and,
consequently, Atheism and Impiety, if they have this persuasion settled in them
(which is too rife among you, and which you account a piece of Wisdom and
Gallantry) that if they be not of your Religion, they were as good be of none
at all: Nor to trouble you, Fourthly, with this, that a great part of your
Doctrine, especially in the points contested, makes apparently for the temporal
ends of the Teachers of it;
which yet, I fear, is a great scandal to many Beaux Esprits among you: Only I
should desire you to consider attentively, when you conclude so often from the
Differences of Protestants, that they have no certainty of any part of their
Religion, no not of those points wherein they agree, Whether you do not that
which so Magisterially you direct me not to do, that is, proceed a destructive
way, and object arguments against your Adversaries, which tend to the overthrow
of all Religion? And whether, as you argue thus, Protestants differ in many
things, therefore they have no certainty of any thing: So an Atheist or a
Sceptique may not conclude as well, Christians and the Professors of all
Religions differ in many things, therefore they have no certainty in any thing?
Again, I should desire you to tell me ingenuously, Whether it be not too
probable that your portentous Doctrine of Transubstantiation joined with your
forementioned persuasion of, No Papists no Christians, has brought a great
many others, as well as himself, to Averroes his resolution, Quandoquidem
Christiani adorant quod comedunt, sit anima mea cum Philosophis? Whether your
requiring men upon only probable and prudential Motives, to yield a most
certain assent unto things in humane reason impossible; and telling them, as
you do too often, that they were as good not believe at all as believe with any
lower degree of faith; be not a likely way to make considering men scorn your
Religion, (and consequently all, if they know no other) as requiring things
contradictory, and impossible to be performed? Lastly, Whether your pretense
that there is no good ground to believe Scripture, but your Churches
infallibility, joined with your pretending no ground for this but some texts of
Scripture, be not a fair way to make them that understand themselves, believe
neither Church nor Scripture?

9. Your calumnies against Protestants in general, are set down in these
words, Chap. 2.. 2. The very doctrine of Protestants if it be followed closely,
and with coherence to it self, must of necessity induce Socinianism. This I say
confidently, and evidently prove, by instancing in one error which may well be
termed the Capital, and mother-Heresie, from which all other must follow at
ease; I mean, their heresy in affirming, That the perpetual visible Church of
Christ, descended by a never interrupted succession from our Savior, to this
day, is not infallible in all that it proposes to be believed, as revealed
truths. For if the infallibility of such a public Authority be once
impeached; what remains, but that every man is given over to his own wit, and
discourse? And talk not here of Holy Scripture. For if the true Church may
err, in defining what Scriptures be Canonical; or in delivering the sense and
meaning thereof; we are still devolved, either upon the private spirit, ( a
foolery now exploded out of England, which finally leaving every man to his own
conceits, ends in Socinianism); or else upon natural wit, and judgment, for
examining and determining, What Scriptures contain true or false doctrine, and
in that respect, ought to be received, or rejected. And indeed, take away the
authority of God's Church, no man can be assured, that any one Book, or parcel
of Scripture, was written by divine inspiration: or that all the contents, are
infallibly true; which are the direct errors of Socinians. If it were but for
this reason alone, no man, who regards the eternal salvation of his soul, would
live or dye in Protestancy, from which so vast absurdities as these of the
Socinians must inevitably follow. And it ought to be an unspeakable comfort to
all us Catholics, while we consider, that none can deny the infallible
authority of our Church, but jointly he must be left to his own wit and ways;
and must abandon all infused faith, and true Religion, if he do but understand
himself aright. In all which discourse, the only true word you speak is, This I
say confidently. As for proving evidently, that I believe you reserved for some
other opportunity: for the present, I am sure you have been very sparing of it.

10. You say, indeed confidently enough, that The deny all of the Churches
infallibility is the Mother-Heresie, from which all other must follow at ease:
Which is so far from being a necessary truth, as you make it, that it is indeed
a manifest falsehood. Neither is it possible for the wit of man, by any good, or
so much as probable consequence, from the denial of the Churches Infallibility
to deduce any one of the ancient Heresies, or any one error of the Socinians,
which are the Heresies here entreated of. For who would not laugh at him that
should argue thus; Neither the Church of Rome, nor any other Church is
infallible, Ergo, The doctrine of Arrius, Pelagius, Eutyches, Nestorius,
Photinus, Manichaeus, was true Doctrine? On the other side, it may be truly
said and justified by very good and effectual reason, that he that affirms,
with you, the Pope's infallibility, puts himself into his hands and power, to
be led by him at his ease and pleasure into all Heresy, and even to Hell it
self; and cannot with reason say (so long as he is constant to his grounds)
Domine, cur ita facis? but must believe white to be black, and black to be
white; virtue to be vice, and vice to be virtue; nay (which is a horrible but a
most certain truth) Christ to be Antichrist, and Antichrist to be Christ, if it
be possible for the Pope to say so: Which, I say, and will maintain, howsoever
you daub and disguise it, is indeed to make men Apostate from Christ to his
pretended Vicar, but real Enemy. For that name and no better (if we may speak
truth without offense) I presume He deserves, who under pretense of
interpreting the Law of Christ, (which Authority without any word of express
warrant he has taken upon himself,) does in many parts evacuate and dissolve
it: So dethroning Christ from his dominion over men's consciences, and instead
of Christ, setting up Himself; Inasmuch as he that requires that his
interpretations of any Law should be obeyed as true and genuine, seem they to
men's understandings never so dissonant and discordant from it, (as the Bishop
of Rome does,) requires indeed that his interpretations should. be the Laws;
and he that is firmly prepared in mind to believe and receive all such
interpretations without judging of them, and though to his private judgment
they seem unreasonable, is indeed congruously disposed to hold Adultery a
venial sin, and Fornication no sin, whenever the Pope and his Adherents shall
so declare. And whatsoever he may plead, yet either wittingly or ignorantly, he
makes the Law and the Lawmakers both stales, and obeyes only the Interpreter.
As if I should pretend that I should submit to the Laws of the King of
England, but should indeed resolve to obey them in that sense which the King of
France should put upon them, whatsoever it were; I presume every understanding
man would say, that I did indeed obey the King of France, and not the King of
England. If I should pretend to believe the Bible, but that I would understand
it according to the sense which the chief Mufty should put upon it, Who would
not say that I were a Christian in pretense only, but indeed a Mahumetan?

11. Nor will it be to purpose for you to pretend that the Precepts of Christ
are so plain that it cannot be feared, that any Pope should ever go about to
dissolve them, and pretend to be a Christian: For, not to say that you now
pretend the contrary, (to wit,) that the law of Christ is obscure even in
things necessary to be believed and done, and by saying so, have made a fair
way for any fowl interpretation of any part of it: certainly that which the
Church of Rome has already done in this kind, is an evident argument, that (if
she once had this power unquestioned, and made expedite and ready for use, by
being contracted to the Pope) she may do what she pleases with it. Who that
had lived in the Primitive Church, would not have thought it as utterly
improbable, that ever they should have brought in the worship of Images, and
picturing of God as now it is, that they should legitimate Fornication? Why may
we not think, they may in time take away the whole Communion from the Laity, as
well as they have taken away half of it? Why may we not think that any Text and
any Sense may not be accorded, as well as the whole 14. Chapter of the Ep. of S.
Paul to the Corinth. is reconciled to the Latine-Service? How is it possible
any thing should be plainer forbidden, than the worship of Angels, in the Ep.
to the Colossians? than the teaching for Doctrines men's commands in the Gospel
of S. Mark? And therefore seeing we see these things done, which hardly any man
would have believed, that had not seen them, Why should we not fear that this
unlimited power may not be used hereafter with as little moderation? Seeing
devices have been invented how men may worship Images without Idolatry, and
kill innocent men under pretense of Heresy without murder; Who knows that some
tricks may not be hereafter devised, by which, Lying with other men's wives
shall be no Adultery, taking away other men's goods no theft? I conclude
therefore, That if Solomon himself were here, and were to determine the
difference, Which is more likely to be mother of all Heresy, The denial of the
Churches or the affirming of the Popes Infallibility, that he would certainly
say, This is the mother, give her the child.

12. You say again confidently, That if this Infallibility be once impeached,
every man is given over to his own wit and discourse: which, if you mean
discourse, not guiding it self by Scripture, but only by principles of nature,
or perhaps by prejudices and popular errors, and drawing consequences, not by
Rule, but Chance, is by no means true; if you mean by Discourse, right Reason,
grounded on Divine Revelation and common Notions, written by God in the hearts
of all men; and deducing, according to the never failing rules of Logic,
consequent deductions from them: If this be it which you mean by discourse, it
is very meet, and reasonable, and necessary that men, as in all their actions,
so especially in that of greatest importance, the choice of their way to
happiness, should be left unto it: and he that follows this in all his opinions
and actions, and does not only seem to do so, follows always God; whereas he
that follows a Company of men, may oft-times follow a company of beasts. And
in saying this, I say no more than S. John to all Christians in these words,
Dearly beloved, believe not every spirit; but try the spirits, whether they be
of God, or no: and the rule he gives them to make this trial by, is, to
consider, Whether they confess Jesus to be Christ; that is, the Guide of their
Faith, and Lord of their Action; not, whether they acknowledge the Pope to be
his Vicar: I say no more than S. Paul, in exhorting all Christians, To try all
things, and hold fast that which is good: then S. Peter in commanding all
Christians, To be ready to give a reason of the hope that is in them: then our
Savior himself, in forewarning all his Followers, that if they blindly
followed blind guides, both leaders and followers should fall into the ditch:
and again, in saying even to the people, Yea, and why of your selves judge ye
not what is right? And though by passion, or precipitation, or prejudice, by
want of reason or not using what they have, men may be, and are oftentimes, led
in error and mischief; yet, that they cannot be misguided by Discourse, truly
so called, such as I have described, you your self have given them security.
For, what is Discourse, but drawing conclusions out of premises by good
consequence? Now, the Principles which we have settled, to wit, the Scriptures,
are on all sides agreed to be infallibly true. And you have told us in the
fourth Chap. of this Pamphlet, That from truth no man can, by good consequence,
infer falsehood; Therefore, by Discourse, no man can possibly be led to Error:
but if he err in his Conclusions, he must of necessity, either err in his
Principles, (which here cannot have place) or commit some error in his
Discourse; that is, indeed, not Discourse, but seem to do so.

13. You say, Thirdly, with sufficient confidence, That if the true Church may
err in defining what Scriptures be Canonical, or in delivering the sense
thereof, then we must follow either the private Spirit, or else natural wit and
judgment; and by them examine what Scriptures contain true or false Doctrine,
and in that respect ought to be received or rejected. All which is apparently
untrue, neither can any proof of it be pretended. For though the present Church
may possibly err in her judgment touching this matter, yet have we other
directions in it, besides the private spirit, and the examination of the
contents, (which latter way may conclude the negative very strongly, to wit,
that such or such a Book cannot come from God, because it contains
irreconcilable Contradictions; but the Affirmative it cannot conclude, because
the contents of a Book may be all true, and yet the Book not written by Divine
inspiration:) other direction therefore I say we have, besides either of these
three, and that is, The testimony of the Primitive Christians.

14. You say, Fourthly, with convenient boldness, That this infallible
Authority of your Church being denied, no man can be assured, that any parcel
of Scripture was written by Divine inspiration: Which is an untruth, for which
no proof is pretended; and besides, void of modesty, and full of impiety. The
first, because the experience of innumerable Christians is against it, who are
sufficiently assured, that the Scripture is divinely inspired, and yet deny the
infallible authority of your Church, or any other. The second, because if I
have not ground to be assured of the Divine authority of Scripture, unless I
first believe your Church infallible, than I can have no ground at all to
believe it: because there is no ground, nor can any be pretended, why I should
believe your Church infallible, unless I first believe the Scripture Divine.

15. Fifthly and lastly, You say, with confidence in abundance, that none can
deny the infallible authority of your Church, but he must abandon all infused
faith and true religion, if he do but understand himself: Which is to say,
agreeable to what you had said before, and what out of the abundance of your
heart you speak very often, That all Christians besides you, are open Fools, or
concealed Atheists. All this you say with notable confidence (as the manner of
Sophisters is, to place their confidence of prevailing in their confident manner
of speaking,) but then for the evidence you promised to maintain this
confidence, that is quite vanished and become invisible.

16. Had I a mind to recriminate now, and to charge Papists (as you do
Protestants) that they lead men to Socinianism, I could certainly make a much
fairer show of evidence than you have done. For I would not tell you, You deny
the infallibility of the Church of England; ergo, you lead to Socinianism,
which yet is altogether as good an Argument as this; Protestants deny the
infallibility of the Roman-Church; ergo, they induce Socinianism: Nor would I
resume my former Argument, and urge you, that by holding the Popes
infallibility, you submit your self to that Capital and Mother-Heresie, by
advantage whereof, he may lead you at ease to believe virtue vice, and vice
virtue; to believe Antichristianity Christianism, and Christianity
Antichristian; he may lead you to Socinianism, to Turcism, nay to be Devil
himself if he have a mind to it: But I would show you that diverse ways the
Doctors of your Church do the principal and proper work of the Socinians for
them, undermining the Doctrine of the Trinity, by denying it to be supported by
those pillars of the Faith, which alone are fit and able to support it, I mean
Scripture, and the Consent of the ancient Doctors.

17. For Scripture, your men deny very plainly and frequently, that this
Doctrine can be proved by it. See, if you please, this plainly taught, and
urged very earnestly by Cardinal Hosius, De Author. Sac. Scrip. l. 3. p. 53. By
Gordonius Huntlaeus, Contr. Tom. 1. Controv. 1. De verbo Dei C. 19. by
Gretserus and Tannerus, in Colloquio Ratisbon. And also by Vega, Possevin, Wick
us, and Others.

18. And then for the Consent of the Ancients; That that also delivers it not,
by whom are we taught but by Papists only? Who is it that makes known to all
the world, that Eusebius that great searcher and devourer of the Christian
Libraries was an Arrian? Is it not your great Achilles, Cardinal Perron, in his
3. Book 2. Chap. of his Reply to K. James? Who is it that informs us that
Origin (who never was questioned for any error in this matter, in or near his
time) denied the Divinity of the Son and the Holy Ghost? Is it not the same
great Cardinal, in his Book of the Eucharist against M. du Plessis l. 2. c. 7?
Who is it that pretends that Irenaeus has said those things which he that
should now hold, would be esteemed an Arrian? Is it not the same Perron, in his
Reply to K. James, in the fifth Chapter of his fourth Observation? And does he
not in the same place peach Tertullian also, and in a manner give him away to
the Arrians? And pronounce generally of the Fathers before the Council of Nice,
That the Arrians would gladly be tried by them? And are not your fellow-Jesuits
also, even the prime men of your Order, prevaricators in this point as well as
others? Does not your Friend M. Fisher, or M. Floyd, in his book of the Nine
Questions proposed to him by K. James, speak dangerously to the same purpose,
in his discourse of the resolution of Faith, toward the end? Giving us to
understand, That the new Reformed Arrians bring very many testimonies of the
Ancient Fathers to prove that in this Point they did contradict themselves, and
were contrary one to another: which places whosoever shall read, will clearly
see, that to common people they are unanswerable, yea that common people are
not capable of the answers that learned men yield unto such obscure passages.
And has not your great Antiquary Petavius, in his Notes upon Epiphanius in
Haer. 69. been very liberal to the Adversaries of the Doctrine of the Trinity,
and in a manner given them for Patrons and Advocates? first Justin Martyr, and
then almost all the Fathers before the Council of Nice, whose speeches, he
says, touching this point, cum Orthodoxae fidei regula minime consentiunt?
Hereunto I might add, that the Dominicans and Jesuits between them in another
matter of great importance, viz. God's Presci^^ce of future contingents, give
the Socinians the premises, out of which their conclusion does unavoidably
follow. For the Dominicans maintain on the one Side, that God can foresee
nothing but what he decrees: The Jesuits on the other Side, that he does not
decree all things: And from hence the Socinians conclude (as it is obvious for
them to do) that he does not foresee all things. Lastly, I might adjoyn this,
that you agree with one consent, and settle for a rule unquestionable, that no
part of Religion can be repugnant to reason, whereunto you in particulr
subscribe unawares in saying, From truth no man can by good consequence infer
Falsehood, which is to say in effect, that Reason can never lead any man to
Error: And after you have done so, you proclaim to all the world (as you in
this Pamphlet do very frequently,) that if men follow their Reason and
discourse, they will (if they understand themselves) be lead to Socinianism.
And thus you see with what probable matter I might furnish out and justify my
accusation, if I should charge you with leading men to Socinianism! Yet I do
not conceive that I have ground enough for this odious imputation. And much
less should you have charged Protestants with it, whom you confess to abhor
and detest it: and who fight against it, not with the broken reeds, and out of
the paper-fortresses of an imaginary Infallibility, which were only to make
sport for their Adversaries; but with the sword of the Spirit, the Word of God:
Of which we may say most truly, what David said of Goliah's Sword, offered by
Abimelech, Non est sicut iste, There is none comparable to it.

19. Thus Protestants in general, I hope, are sufficiently vindicated from your
calumny. I proceed now to do the same service for the Divines of England; whom
you question first in point of learning and sufficiency, and then in point of
conscience and honesty, as prevaricating in the Religion which they profess,
and inclining to Popery. Their Learning (you say) consists only in some
superficial talent of preaching, languages, and elocution, and not in any deep
knowledge of Philosophy, especially of Metaphysics, and much less of that most
solid, profitable, subtle, and (O rem ridiculam, Cato, and jocosam!) succinct
method of School Divinity. Wherein you have discovered in your self the true
Genius and spirit of detraction. For taking advantage from that wherein Envy it
self cannot deny but they are very eminent, and which requires great
sufficiency of substantial learning, you disparage them as insufficient in all
things else. As if forsooth, because they dispute not eternally, Utrum Chimaera
bombinans in vacuo, possit comedere secundas intentiones? Whether a Million of
Angels may not sit upon a Needle's point? Because they fill not their brains
with notions that signify nothing, to the utter extermination of all reason
and common sense, and spend not an Age in weaving and unweaving subtle
Cobwebs, fitter to catch flies than Souls; therefore they have no deep
knowledge in the Acroamatical part of Learning! But I have too much honored
the poorness of this detraction, to take notice of it.

20. The other Part of your accusation strikes deeper, and is more
considerable: And that tells us, that, Protestantism waxes weary of it self;
that the Professors of it, they especially of greatest worth learning and
authority, love Temper and Moderation; and are at this time more unresolved
where to fasten, than at the infancy of their Church: That, Their Churches
begin to look with a new face: Their walls to speak a new language: Their
Doctrine to be altered in many things for which their Progenitors forsook the
then Visible Church of Christ: For example, The Pope not Antichrist: Prayer for
the dead: Limbus Patrum: Pictures: That the Church has Authority in
determining Controversies of Faith, and to Interpret Scripture; about Freewil,
Predestination, Universal Grace: That all our works are not sins: Merit of good
works: Inherent Justice: Faith alone does not justify: Charity to be preferred
before knowledge; Traditions: Commandments possible to be kept: That their
thirty nine Articles are patient, nay ambitious, of some sense wherein they may
seem Catholic: That to allege the necessity of wife and children in these
days, is but a weak plea for a married Minister to compass a Benefice: That
Calvinism is at length accounted Heresy, and little less than Treason: That
men in talk and writing use willingly the once fearful names of Priests and
Altars: That they are now put in mind, that for exposition of Scripture they
are by Canon bound to follow the Fathers: which if they do with sincerity, it
is easy to tell what doom will pass against Protestants, seeing, by the
confession of Protestants, the Fathers are on the Papists side, which the
Answerer to some so clearly demonstrated, that they remained convinced: In
fine, as the Samaritans saw in the Disciples countenances that they meant to go
to Jerusalem, so you pretend it is even legible in the foreheads of these men,
that they are even going, nay making haste, to Rome. Which scurrilous Libel
void of all truth, discretion and honesty, what effect it may have wrought,
what credit it may have gained with credulous Papists, (who dream what they
desire, and believe their own dreams,) or with ill-affected, jealous, and weak
Protestants, I cannot tell: But one thing I dare boldly say, that you your self
did never believe it.

21. For did you indeed conceive, or had any probable hope, that such men as
you describe, men of worth, of learning and authority too, were friends and
favorers of your Religion, and inclinable to your Party, Can any imagine that
you would proclaim it, and bid the world take heed of them? Sic notus Ulysses?
Do we know the Jesuits no better than so? What, are they turned prevaricators
against their own Faction? Are they likely men to betray and expose their own
Agents and Instruments, and to awaken the eyes of Jealousy, and to raise the
clamor of the people against them? Certainly, your Zeal to the Sea of Rome,
testified by your fourth Vow of special obedience to the Pope, proper to your
Order, and your cunning carriage of all affairs for the greater advantage and
advancement of that See, are clear demonstrations that, if you had thought
thus, you would never have said so. The truth is, they that run to extremes in
opposition against you, they that pull down your infallibility and set up their
own, they that declaim against your tyranny and exercise it themselves over
others, are the Adversaries that give you greatest advantage, and such as you
love to deal with: whereas upon men of temper and moderation, such as will
oppose nothing because you maintain it, but will draw as near to you, that they
may draw you to them, as the truth will suffer them; such as require of
Christians to believe only in Christ, and will damn no Man nor Doctrine without
express and certain warrant from God; upon such as these you know not how to
fasten: but if you chance to have conference with any such, (which yet as much
as possibly you can you avoid and decline,) you are very speedily put to
silence, and see the indefensible weakness of your cause laid open to all men
And this, I verily believe, is the true reason that you thus rave and rage
against them, as foreseeing your time of prevailing, or even of subsisting,
would be short, if other Adversaries gave you no more advantage than they do.

22. In which persuasion also I am much confirmed by consideration of the
silliness and poorness of those Suggestions, and partly of the apparent vanity
and falsehood of them, which you offer in justification of this wicked Calumny.
For what, if out devotion toward God, out of a desire that he should be
worshipped as in Spirit and truth in the first place, so also in the beauty of
holiness? what if out of fear that too much simplicity and nakedness in the
public Service of God, may beget in the ordinary sort of men a dull and
stupid irreverence; and, out of hope that the outward state and glory of it,
being well-disposed and wisely moderated, may engender, quicken, increase and
nourish, the inward reverence, respect, and devotion which is due unto God's
Sovereign Majesty and Power? what if out of a persuasion and desire that
Papists may be won over to us the sooner, by the removing of this scandal out
of their way; and out of an holy jealousy, that the weaker sort of Protestants
might be the easier seduced to them by the magnificence and pomp of their
Churchservice in case it were not removed? I say, What if out of these
considerations, the Governors of our Church, more of late than formerly, have
set themselves to adorn and beautify the places where God's Honor dwells, and
to make them as heaven-like as they can with earthly ornaments? Is this a sign
that they are warping toward Popery? Is this devotion in the Church of
England, an argument that she is coming over to the Church of Rome? Sir Edwin
Sands, I presume, every man will grant, had no inclination that way; yet he,
forty years since, highly commended this part of devotion in Papists, and makes
no scruple of proposing it to the imitation of Protestants: Little thinking
that they who would follow his counsel, and endeavor to take away this
disparagement of Protestants, and this glorying of Papists, should have been
censured for it, as making way and inclining to Popery. His words to this
purpose are excellent words; and because they show plainly, that what is now
practiced was approved by zealous Protestants so long ago, I will here set them
down.

23. This one thing I cannot but highly commend in that sort and order: They
spare nothing which either cast can perform in enriching, or skill in adorning
the Temple of God, or to set out his Service with the greatest pomp and
magnificence that can be devised. And although, for the most part, much
baseness and childishness is predominant in the Masters and Contrivers of
their Ceremonies, yet this outward state and glory being well disposed, does
engender, quicken, increase, and nourish the inward reverence, respect, and
devotion which is due unto Sovereign Majesty and Power. And although I am not
ignorant that many men well reputed have embraced the thrifty opinion of that
Disciple, who thought all to be wasted that was bestowed upon Christ in that
sort, and that it were much better bestowed upon him or the poor, (yet with an
eye perhaps that themselves would be his quarter-Almoners) notwithstanding I
must confess, it will never sink into my heart, that in proportion of reason,
the allowance for furnishing out of the service of God should be measured by
the scant and strict rule of mere necessity, (a proportion so low, that nature
to other most bountiful, in matter of necessity has not failed, no not the
most ignoble creatures of the world,) and that for our selves no measure of
heaping but the most we can get, no rule of expense but to the utmost pomp we
list: Or that God himself had so enriched the lower parts of the world with
such wonderful varieties of beauty and glory, that they might serve only to
the pampering of mortal man in his pride; and that in the Service of the high
Creator Lord and Giver (the outward glory of whose higher palace may appear by
the very lamps that we see so far off burning gloriously in it) only the
simpler, baser, cheaper, less noble, less beautiful, less glorious things
should be employed. Especially seeing, as in Princes Courts, so in the Service
of God also, this outward state and glory, being well disposed, does (as I have
said) engender, quicken, increase and nourish th^^ward reverence, respect, and
devotion, which is due to so Sovereign Majesty and Power: Which those whom the
use thereof cannot persuade unto, would easily, by the want of it, be brought
to confess; for which cause I crave leave to be excused by them herein, if in
Zeal to the common Lord of all, I choose rather to commend the virtue of an
enemy, than to flatter the vice and imbecility of a friend. And so much for
this matter.

24. Again, what if the names of Priests and Altars, so frequent in the ancient
Fathers, though not in the now Popish sense, be now resumed and more commonly
used in England than of late times they were: that so the colorable argument
of their conformity, which is but nominal, with the ancient Church, and our
inconformity, which the Governors of the Church would not have so much as
nominal, may be taken away from them; and the Church of England may be put in a
state, in this regard more justifiable against the Roman than formerly it was,
being hereby enabled to say to Papists (whenever these names are objected,)
we also use the names of Priests and Altars, and yet believe neither the
corporal Presence, nor any Proper and propitiatory Sacrifice?

25. What if Protestants be now put in mind, that, for exposition of
Scripture, they are bound by a Canon to follow the ancient Fathers: which
whosoever does with sincerity, it is utterly impossible, he should be a Papist?
And it is most falsely said by you, that you know, that to some Protestants I
clearly demonstrated, or ever so much as undertook, or went about to
demonstrate, the contrary. What if the Centurists be censured somewhat roundly
by a Protestant Divine for a^^ming, that the keeping of the Lord's day was a
thing indifferent for two hundred years? Is there in all this or any part of it
any kind of proof of this scandalous Calumny?

26. As for the points of Doctrine wherein you pretend that these Divines begin
of late to falter, and to comply with the Church of Rome; upon a due
examination of particulars it will presently appear, First, that part of them
always have been, and now are, held constantly one way by them; as, the
Authority of the Church in determining Controversies of faith, though not the
infallibility of it: That there is Inherent Justice, though so imperfect that
it cannot justify: That there are Traditions, though none necessary: That
charity is to be preferred before knowledge: That good Works are not properly
meritorious. And lastly, that Faith alone justifies, though that faith
justifies not which is alone. And secondly, for the remainder, that they, every
one of them, have been anciently without breach of charity disputed among
Protestants: such for example were the Questions about the Pope's being the
Antichrist, The lawfulness of some kind of prayers for the dead; The Estate of
the Fathers Souls, before Christ's Ascension; Freewill, Predestination,
Universal grace: The possibility of keeping God's Commandments; The use of
Pictures in the Church: Wherein that there has been anciently diversity of
opinion amongst Protestants, it is justified to my hand by a Witness, with you,
beyond exception, even your great friend M. Breerly, whose care, exactness, and
fidelity (you say in your Preface) is so extraordinary great. Consult him
therefore: Tract. 3. Sect. 7. of his Apology: And in the 9, 10, 11, 14, 24, 26,
27, 37. Subdivisions of that Section; you shall see as in a mirror, your self
proved an egregious Calumniator, for charging Protestants with innovation and
inclining to Popery, under pretense forsooth, that their Doctrine begins of
late to be altered in these points. Whereas, M. Breerly will inform you, They
have been anciently, and even from the beginning of the Reformation,
controverted amongst them, though perhaps the stream and current of their
Doctors run one way, and only some brook or rivulet of them the other.

27. And thus my Friends, I suppose, are clearly vindicated from your scandals
and calumnies: It remains now that in the last place I bring my self fairly off
from your foul aspersions, that so my Person may not be (as indeed howsoever it
should not be) any disadvantage or disparagement to the Cause, nor any scandal
to weak Christians.

28. Your injuries then to me (no way deserved by me, but by differing in
opinion from you, (wherein yet you surely differ from me as much as I from
you,) are especially three. For first, upon hearsay, and refusing to give me
opportunity of begetting in you a better understanding of me, you charge me
with a great number of false and impious Doctrines, which I will not name in
particular, because I will not assist you so far in the spreading of my own
undeserved defamation: but whosoever teaches or holds them, let him be
Anathema! The sum of them all cast up by your self, in your first Chapter, is
this, Nothing ought or can be certainly believed, farther than it may be proved
by evidence of Natural Reason, (where I conceive, Natural reason is opposed to
supernatural Revelation;) and whosoever holds so, let him be Anathema! And
moreover to clear my self once for all, from all imputations of this nature,
which charge me injuriously with denial of Supernatural Verities, I profess
sincerely, that I believe all those Books of Scripture, which the Church of
England accounts Canonical, to be the Infallible word of God: I believe all
things evidently contained in them; all things evidently, or even probably
deducible from them: I acknowledge all that to be Heresy, which by the Act of
Parliament primo of Q. Eliz. is declared to be so, and only to be so: And
though in such points which may be held diversely of diverse men salva Fidei
compage, I would not take any man's liberty from him, and humbly beseech all
men, that they would not take mine from me: Yet thus much I can say (which I
hope, will satisfy any man of reason,) that whatsoever has been held
necessary to salvation, either by the Catholic Church of all Ages, or by the
consent of Fathers, measured by Vincentius Lyrinensis his rule, or is held
necessary, either by the Catholic Church of this Age, or by the consent of
Protestants, or even by the Church of England, that, against the Socinians, and
all others whatsoever, I do verily believe and embrace.

29. Another great and manifest injury you have done me, in charging me to have
forsaken your Religion, because it conduced not to my temporal ends, and suited
not with my desires and designs: Which certainly is an horrible crime, and
whereof if you could convince me, by just and strong Presumptions, I should
then acknowledge my self to deserve that Opinion, which you would fain induce
your Credents unto, that I changed not your Religion for any other, but for
none at all. But of this great fault my conscience acquits me, and God, who
only knows the hearts of all men, knows that I am innocent! Neither doubt I but
all they who know me, and amongst them many Persons of place and quality, will
say, they have reason in this matter to be my Compurgators. And for you, though
you are very affirmative in your accusation, yet you neither do, nor can
produce any proof or presumption for it, but forgetting your self (as it is
God's will often times that Slanderers should do), have let fall some passages,
which being well weighed, will make considering men apt to believe, that you
did not believe your self. For how is it possible you should believe that I
deserted your Religion for ends, and against the light of my conscience, out of
a desire of preferment; and yet, out of scruple of conscience, should refuse
(which also you impute to me,) to subscribe the 39. Articles, that is, refuse
to enter at the only common door, which herein England leads to preferment?
Again, How incredible is it that you should believe, that I forsook the
profession of your Religion, as not suting with my desires and designs, which
yet reconciles the enjoying of the pleasures and profits of sin here, with the
hope of happiness hereafter, and proposes as great hope of great temporal
advancements to the capable servants of it, as any, nay more than any, Religion
in the world; and instead of this should choose Socinianism, a Doctrine, which
howsoever erroneous in explicating the Mysteries of Religion, and allowing
greater liberty of opinion in speculative matters, than any other Company of
Christians does or they should do; yet certainly which you, I am sure, will
pretend and maintain to explicate the Laws of Christ with more rigor, and less
indulgence and condescendence to the desires of flesh and blood than your
Doctrine does! And besides, such a Doctrine by which no man in his right mind,
can hope for any honor or preferment, either in this Church or State, or any
other! All which clearly demonstrates that this foul and false aspersion, which
you have cast upon me, proceeds from no other fountain, but a heart abounding
with the gall and bitterness of uncharitableness, and even blinded with malice
toward me; or else from a perverse zeal to your superstition, which secretly
suggests this persuasion to you, That for the Catholic cause nothing is
unlawful, but that you may make use of such indirect and crooked Arts, as
these, to blast my reputation, and to possess men's minds with disaffection to
my Person, lest otherwise peradventure they might with some indifference hear
reason from me. God, I hope, which brings light out of darkness, will turn
your counsels to foolishness, and give all good men grace to perceive how weak
and ruinous that Religion must be, which needs supportance from such tricks and
devices! So I call them, because they deserve no better name. For what are all
these Personal matters, which hitherto you have spoke of, to the business in
hand? If it could be proved that Cardinal Bellarmine was indeed a Jew, or that
Cardinal Perron was an Atheist, yet I presume you would not accept of this for
an Answer to all their Writings in defense of your Religion. Let then my
actions, and intentions, and opinions be what they will, yet I hope, Truth is
nevertheless Truth, nor Reason ever the less Reason, because I speak it. And
therefore the Christian Reader, knowing that his Salvation or damnation depends
upon his impartial and sincere judgment of these things, will guard himself, I
hope, from these impostures, and regard not the person, but the cause and the
reasons of it; not who speaks, but what is spoken: Which is all the favor I
desire of him, as knowing that I am desirous not to persuade him, unless it be
truth whereunto I persuade him.

30. The third and last part of my Accusation was, That I answer out of
Principles which Protestants themselves will profess to detest: which indeed
were to the purpose, if it could be justified. But, besides that it is confuted
by my whole Book, and made ridiculous by the Approbations premised unto it, it
is very easy for me out of your own mouth and words to prove it a most
injurious calumny. For what one conclusion is there in the whole fabric of my
Discourse, that is not naturally deducible out of this one Principle, That all
things necessary to salvation are evidently contained in Scripture? Or, what
one Conclusion almost of importance is there in your Book, which is not by this
one clearly confutable?

31. Grant this, and it will presently follow in opposition to your first
Conclusion, and the Argument of your first Chap. that amongst men of different
opinions, touching the obscure and controverted Questions of Religion, such as
may with probability be disputed on both Sides (and such are the disputes of
Protestants;) Good men and ^^^ers of truth of all Sides may be saved; because
all necessary things being supposed evident concerning them, with men so
qualified, there will be no difference: There being no more certain sign that a
Point is not evident, than that honest and understanding and indifferent men,
and such as give themselves liberty of judgment after a mature consideration
of the matter, differ about it.

32. Grant this, and it will appear Secondly, that the means whereby the
revealed Truths of God are conveyed to our understanding, and which are to
determine all Controversies in Faith, necessary to be determined, may be, for
any thing you have said to the contrary, not a Church, but the Scripture; which
contradicts the Doctrine of your Second Chapter.

33. Grant this, and the distinction of Points Fundamental and not Fundamental,
will appear very good and pertinent. For those truths will be Fundamental,
which are evidently delivered in Scripture, and commanded to be preached to all
men; Those not Fundamental, which are obscure. And nothing will hinder but that
the Catholic Church may err in the latter kind of the said Points: because
Truths not necessary to the Salvation, cannot be necessary to the Being of a
Church; and because it is not absolutely necessary that God should assist his
Church any farther than to bring her to Salvation; neither will there be any
necessity at all of any infallible Guide, either to consign unwritten
Traditions, or to declare the obscurities of the Faith. Not for the former end,
because this Principle being granted true, nothing unwritten can be necessary
to be consigned. Nor for the latter, because nothing that is obscure can be
necessary to be understood, or not mistaken. And so the discourse of your whole
Third Chap. will presently vanish.

34. Fourthly, for the Creed's containing the Fundamentals of simple belief,
though I see not how it may be deduced from this Principle, yet the granting of
this, plainly renders the whole dispute touching the Creed unnecessary. For if
all necessary things of all sorts, whether of simple belief or practice, be
confessed to be clearly contained in Scripture, What imports it whether those
of one sort be contained in the Creed?

35. Fifthly, let this be granted, and the immediate Corollary in opposition to
your fifth Chap. will be and must be, That not Protestants for rejecting, but
the Church of Rome for imposing upon the Faith of Christians, Doctrines
unwritten and unnecessary, and for disturbing the Church's peace, and dividing
Unity for such matters, is in a high degree presumptuous and Schismatical.

36. Grant this sixthly, and it will follow unavoidably that Protestants cannot
possibly be Heretics, seeing they believe all things evidently contained in
Scripture, which are supposed to be all that is necessary to be believed: and
so your Sixth Chapter is clearly confuted.

37. Grant this lastly, and it will be undoubtedly consequent, in contradiction
of your Seventh Chapter, that no man can show more charity to himself than by
continuing a Protestant; seeing Protestants are supposed to believe, and
therefore may accordingly practice, at least by their Religion are not hindered
from practicing and performing all things necessary to Salvation.

38. So that the position of this one Principle, is the direct overthrow of
your whole Book, and therefore I, needed not, nor indeed have I made use of any
other. Now this Principle, which is not only the cornerstone or chief Pillar,
but even the basis, and adequate foundation of my Answer; and which while it
stands firm and unmovable, cannot but be the supporter of my Book, and the
certain ruin of Yours, is so far from being, according to your pretense,
detested by all Protestants, that all Protestants whatsoever, as you may see in
their harmony of Confessions, unanimously profess and maintain it. And you your
self, Chap. 6.. 30. plainly confess as much, in saying, The whole Edifice of
the Faith of Protestants is settled on these two Principles: These particular
Books are Canonical Scripture: And the sense and meaning of them is plain and
evident, at least, in all Points necessary to Salvation.

39. And thus your Venom against me is in a manner spent, saving only that
there remain two little Impertinencies, whereby you would disable me from being
a fit Advocate for the cause of Protestants. The first, because I refuse to
subscribe the Articles of the Church of England: The second, because I have set
down in writing, Motives which sometime induced me to forsake Protestantism,
and hitherto have not answered them.

40. By the former of which Objections it should seem, that either you conceive
the 39. Articles the common Doctrine of all Protestants; and if they be, Why
have you so often upbraided them with their many and great differences? Or
else, that it is the peculiar defense of the Church of England, and not the
common cause of all Protestants, which is here undertaken by me: which are
certainly very gross Mistakes. And yet why he who makes scruple of subscribing
the truth of one or two Propositions, may not yet be fit enough to maintain
that those who do subscribe them are in a savable condition, I do not
understand. Now though I hold not the Doctrine of all Protestants absolutely
true, (which with reason cannot be required of me while they hold
Contradictions,) yet I hold it free from all impiety, and from all error
destructive of Salvation, or in it self damnable: And this I think in reason
may sufficiently qualify me, for a maintainer of this assertion, that
Protestancy destroys not Salvation. For the Church of England, I am persuaded,
that the constant Doctrine of it is so pure and Orthodox, that whosoever
believes it, and lives according to it, undoubtedly he shall be saved; and that
there is no Error in it which may necessitate or warrant any man to disturb the
peace, or renounce the Communion of it. This in my opinion is all intended by
Subscription; and thus much if you conceive me not ready to subscribe, your
Charity I assure you is much Mistaken.

41. Your other objection against me, is yet more impertinent and frivolous
than the former: Unless perhaps it be a just exception against a Physician,
that himself was sometimes in, and recovered himself from, that disease which
he undertakes to cure; or against a Guide in a way, that at first, before he
had experience himself, mistook it, and afterward found his error and amended
it. That noble Writer Michael de Montaigne, was surely of a far different
mind; for he will hardly allow any Physician competent, but only for such
diseases as himself had passed through: And a far greater than Montaigne, even
he that said, Tu conversus confirma fratres, gives us sufficiently to
understand that they which have themselves been in such a state as to need
conversion, are not thereby made incapable of, but rather engaged and obliged
unto, and qualified for, this charitable function.

42. Neither am I guilty of that strange and preposterous zeal (as you esteem
it) which you impute to me; for having been so long careless in removing this
scandal against Protestants, and answering my own Motives, and yet now showing
such fervor in writing against others. For neither are they other Motives, but
the very same for the most part with those which abused me, against which this
Book which I now publish, is in a manner wholly employed: And besides, though
you Jesuits take upon you to have such large and universal intelligence of all
State Affairs and matters of importance; yet I hope such a contemptible matter,
as an Answer of mine to a little piece of paper, may very probably have been
written and escaped your Observation. The truth is, I made an Answer to them
three years since and better, which perhaps might have been published, but for
two reasons: One, because the Motives were never public, until you made them
so: The other, because I was loath to proclaim to all the world so much
weakness as I showed, in suffering my self to be abused by such silly Sophisms;
All which proceed upon mistakes and false suppositions, which unadvisedly I
took for granted; as when I have set down the Motives in order, by subsequent
Answers to them, I shall quickly demonstrate, and so make an end.

43. The Motives then were these. 1. Because perpetual visible profession,
which could never be wanting to the Religion of Christ, nor any part of it, is
apparently wanting to Protestant Religion, so far as concerns the points in
contestation. 2. Because Luther and his Followers, separating from the Church
of Rome, separated also from all Churches, pure or impure, true or false then
being in the World; upon which ground I conclude, that either Gods promises did
fail of performance, if there were then no Church in the world, which held all
things necessary, and nothing repugnant to Salvation; or else that Luther and
his Sectaries, separating from all Churches then in the World, and so from the
true, if there were any true, were damnable Schismatics. 3. Because, if any
credit may be given to as creditable Records as any are extant, the Doctrine of
Catholics has been frequently confirmed; and the opposite Doctrine of
Protestants confounded, with supernatural and divine Miracles. 4. Because many
points of Protestant doctrine, are the damned opinions of Heretics, condemned
by the Primitive Church. 5. Because the Prophecies of the old Testament,
touching the conversion of Kings and Nations to the true Religion of Christ,
have been accomplished in and by the Catholic Roman Religion, and the
Professors of it; and not by Protestant Religion, and the Professors of it. 6.
Because the doctrine of the Church of Rome is conformable, and the Doctrine of
Protestants contrary to the Doctrine of the Fathers of the Primitive Church,
even by the confession of Protestants themselves; I mean, those Fathers, who
lived within the compass of the first 600. years; to whom Protestants
themselves do very frequently and very confidently appeal. 7. Because the first
pretended Reformers had neither extraordinary Commission from God, nor ordinary
Mission from the Church, to Preach Protestant Doctrine. 8. Because Luther, to
preach against the Mass (which contains the most material points now in
Controversy) was persuaded by reasons suggested to him by the Devil himself,
disputing with him. So himself professes in his Bock de Missa Privata: That
all men might take heed of following him, who professes himself to follow the
Devil. 9. Because the Protestant cause is now, and has been from the
beginning, maintained with gross falsifications, and Calumnies; whereof their
prime Controv^rsie-Writers, are notoriously and in high degree guilty. 10.
Because by denying all humane authority, either of Pope, or Councels, or
Church, to determine Controversies of Faith, they have abolished all possible
means of suppressing Heresy, or restoring Unity to the Church.


These are the Motives; now my Answers to them follow briefly and in order.

44. To the first: God has neither decreed nor foretold, that his true
Doctrine should de facto be always visibly professed, without any mixture of
falsehood.

To the second: God has neither decreed not foretold, that there shall be
always a visible company of men free from all error in it self damnable.
Neither is it always of necessity Schismatical to separate from the external
communion of a Church, though wanting nothing necessary. For if this Church
supposed to want nothing necessary, require me to profess against my
conscience, that I believe some error, though never so small and innocent,
which I do not believe, and will not allow me her Communion but upon this
condition; In this case the Church for requiring this condition is
Schismatical, and not I for separating from the Church.

To the third: If any credit may be given to Records far more creditable than
these, the Doctrine of Protestants, that is, the Bible, has been confirmed,
and the Doctrine of Papists, which is in many points plainly opposite to it,
confounded with supernatural and divine Miracles, which for number and glory
outshine Popish pretended Miracles, as much as the Sun does an Ignis fatuus;
those I mean which were wrought by our Savior Christ and his Apostles: Now
this Book, by the confession of all sides confirmed by innumerous Miracles,
foretells me plainly, that in after-ages great signs and wonders shall be
wrought in confirmation of false doctrine, and that I am not to believe any
doctrine which seems to my understanding repugnant to the first, though an Angel
from Heaven should teach it; which were certainly as great a Miracle as any
that was ever wrought in attestation of any part of the doctrine of the Church
of Rome. But that true doctrine should in all ages have the testimony of
Miracles, that I am no where taught; So that I have more reason to suspect, and
be afraid of pretended Miracles, as signs of false doctrine, than much to
regard them as certain Arguments of the Truth. Besides, setting aside the
Bible, and the Tradition of it, there is as good story for Miracles wrought by
those who lived and dyed in opposition to the Doctrine of the Roman Church, (as
by S. Cyprian, Colmannus, Columbanus, Aidanus, and others,) as there is for
those that are pretended to be wrought by the members of that Church. Lastly,
it seems to me no strange thing that God in his Justice should permit some true
Miracles to be wrought to delude them, who have forged so many as apparently
the Professors of the Roman Doctrine have, to abuse the World.

To the fourth: All those were not See this acknowledged by Bellar. de Script.
Eccles. in Philastrio. By Petavius Animad. in Epiph. de inscrip. operis. By S.
Austin Lib. de Haer. Haer. 80.
Heretics which by Philastrius, Epiphanius, or S. Austin were put in the
Catalogue of Heretics.

To the fifth: Kings and Nations have been and may be converted by men of
contrary Religions.

To the sixth: The Doctrine of Papists, is confessed by Papists contrary to the
Fathers in many points.

To the seventh: The Pastors of a Church cannot but have authority from it, to
Preach against the abuses of it, whether in Doctrine or Practice, if there be
any in it: Neither can any Christian want an ordinary commission from God to do
a necessary work of Charity after a peaceable manner, when there is no body
else that can or will do it. In extraordinary cases, extraordinary courses are
not to be disallowed. If some Christian Layman should come into a Country of
Infidels, and had ability to persuade them to Christianity, Who would say, he
might not use it for want of Commission!

To the eighth: Luther's conference with the Devil might be, for ought I know,
nothing but a melancholy Dream. If it were real, the Devil might persuade
Luther from the Mass, hoping by doing so to keep him constant to it: Or that
others would make his disswasion from it an Argument for it, (as we see Papists
do) and be afraid of following Luther, as confessing himself to have been
persuaded by the Devil.

To the ninth: Iliacos intra muros peccatur and extra. Papists are more guilty
of this fault than Protestants. Even this very Author in this very Pamphlet
has not so many leaves as falsifications and calumnies.

To the tenth: Let all men believe the Scripture and that only, and endeavor
to believe it in the true sense, and require no more of others, and they shall
find this not only a better, but the only means to suppress Heresy, and
restore Unity. For he that believes the Scripture sincerely, and endeavors to
believe it in the true sense, cannot possibly be an Heretic. And if no more
than this were required of any man, to make him capable of the Churches
Communion, then all men so qualified, though they were different in opinion,
yet notwithstanding any such difference, must be of necessity one in Communion.

The AUTHOR of CHARITY MAINTAINED, His Preface to the READER.
GIve me leave (good Reader) to inform thee, by way of Preface, of three
Points. The first concerns D. Potters Answer, to Charity Mistaken. The second
relates to this Reply of mine. And the third contains some Premonitions, or
Prescriptions, in case D. Potter, or any in his behalf, think fit to Rejoyn.

2. For the first point, concerning D. Potters Answer, I say, in general,
reserving particulars to their proper places, that in his whole Book he has
not so much as once truly and really fallen upon the point in question, which
was, Whether both Catholics and Protestants can be saved in their several
professions? And therefore Charity Mistaken judiciously pressing those
particulars, wherein the difficulty does precisely consist, proves in general,
that there is but one true Church; that all Christians are obliged to hearken
to her; that she must be ever visible, and infallible; that to separate ones
self from her communion is Schism; and to dissent from her Doctrine is Heresy,
though it be in points never so few, or never so small in their own nature; and
therefore that the distinction of points Fundamental, and not Fundamental, is
wholly vain, as it is applied by Protestants. These (I say) and some other
general grounds, Charity Mistaken handles, and out of them does clearly evince,
that any least difference in faith cannot stand with salvation on both sides:
and therefore since it is apparent, that Catholics and Protestants disagree
in very many points of faith, they both cannot hope to be saved without
repentance: and consequently, as we hold, that Protestancy unrepented destroys
Salvation; so must they also believe that we cannot be saved, if they judge
their own Religion to be true, and ours to be false. And whosoever disguizeth
this truth, is an enemy to souls, which he deceives with ungrounded false hopes
of Salvation, in different Faiths, and Religions. And this Charity Mistaken
performed exactly, according to that which appears to have been his design,
which was not to descend to particular disputes, and D. Potter affectedly does,
namely, Whether or no the Roman-Church be the only true Church of Christ; and
much less, Whether general Councels be infallible; whether the Pope may err
in his Decrees common to the whole Church; whether he be above a General
Council; whether all points of Faith be contained in Scripture; whether Faith
be resolved into the authority of the Church, as into his last formal Object,
and Motive; and, least of all, did he discourse of Images, Communion under both
kinds, public service in an unknown Tongue, Seven Sacraments, Sacrifice of
the Mass, Indulgences, and Index Expurgatorius: All which, and diverse other
articles, D. Potter (as I said) draws by violence into his Book: and he might
have brought in Pope Joan, or Antichrist, or the Jews who are permitted to live
in Rome, which are common Themes for men that want better matter, as D. Potter
was fain to fetch in the aforesaid Controversies, that so he might dazzle the
eyes, and distract the mind of the Reader, and hinder him from perceiving,
that in his whole answer he utters nothing to the purpose and point in
question: which, if he had followed closely, I dare well say, he might have
dispatched his whole Book, in two or three sheets of paper. But the truth is,
he was loath to affirm plainly, that generally both Catholics and Protestants
may be saved: and yet seeing it to be most evident that Protestants cannot
pretend to have any true Church before Luther, except the Roman, and such as
agreed with her, and consequently, that they cannot hope for Salvation; if they
deny it to us: he thought best to avoid this difficulty by confusion of
language, and to fill up his Book with Points which make nothing to the
purpose. Wherein he is less excusable, because he must grant, that those very
particulars to which he digresseth, are not Fundamental errors, though it
should be granted that they be Errors, which indeed are Catholic Verities.
For since they b^ not Fundamental, not destructive of Salvation, what imports
it, Whether we hold them or no, for as much as concerns our possibility to be
saved?

3. In one thing only he will perhaps seem to have touched the point in
question, to wit, in his distinction of points Fundamental, and not
Fundamental: because some may think, that a difference in points which are not
Fundamental, breaks not the Unity of Faith, and hinders not the hope of
Salvation in persons so disagreeing. And yet, in this very distinction, he
never speaks to the purpose indeed, but only says, That there are some points
so Fundamental, as that all are obliged to know and believe them explicitly;
but never tells us, whether there be any other points of Faith, which a man may
deny or disbelieve, though they be sufficiently presented to his understanding,
as truths revealed, or testified by Almighty God; which was the only thing in
question. For if it be damnable, as certainly it is, to deny or disbelieve any
one truth witnessed by Almighty God, though the thing be not in it self of any
great consequence, or moment; and since of two disagreeing in matters of Faith,
one must necessarily deny some such truth; it clearly follows that amongst men
of different Faiths, or Religions, one only can be saved, though their
difference consist of diverse, or but even one point, which is not in his own
nature Fundamental, as I declare at large in diverse places of my first Part. So
that it is clear, D. Potter even in this his last refuge and distinction, never
comes to the point in question; to say nothing that he himself does quite
overthrow it, and plainly contradict his whole design, as I show in the third
Chapter of my first Part.

4. And as for D. Potter's manner of handling those very points, which are
utterly beside the purpose; it consists only in bringing vulgar mean
Objections, which have been answered a thousand times, yea, and some of them
are clearly answered even in Charity Mistaken; but he takes no knowledge at all
of any such answers, and much less does he apply himself to confute them. He
alleges also Authors with so great corruption and fraud, as I would not have
believed, if I had not found it by clear and frequent experience. In his second
Edition, he has indeed left out one or two gross corruptions, amongst many
others no less notorious, having, as it seems, been warned by some friends,
that they could not stand with his credit: but even in this his second Edition
he retracts them not at all, nor declares that he was mistaken in the First,
and so his Reader of the first Edition shall ever be deceived by him, though
withal he read the Second. For preventing of which inconvenience, I have
thought it necessary to take notice of them, and to discover them in my Reply.

5. And for conclusion of this point I will only say, that D. Potter might well
have spared his pains if he had ingenuously acknowledged, where the whole
substance, yea and sometime the very words and phrases of his Book may be found
in far briefer manner, namely, in a Sermon of D. Usher's preached before our
late Sovereign Lord King James, the 20. of June 1624. at Wansted, containing A
Declaration of the Universality of the Church of Christ, and the Unity of Faith
professed therein; which Sermon having been roundly and wittily confuted by a
Catholic Divine, under the name of Paulus Veridicus, within the compass of
about four sheets of Paper, D. Potter's Answer to Charity Mistaken was in
effect confuted before it appeared. And this may suffice for a general Censure
of his Answer to Charity Mistaken.

Concerning my Reply.
6. For the second, touching my Reply: if you wonder at the Bulk thereof,
compared either with Charity Mistaken, or D. Potter's Answer, I desire you to
consider well of what now I am about to say, and then I hope you will see, that
I was cast upon a mere necessity of not being so short, as otherwise might
peradventure be desired. Charity Mistaken is short, I grant, and yet very full,
and large, for as much as concerned his design, which you see was not to treat
of particular Controversies in Religion, no not so much as to debate whether or
no the Roman Church be the only true Church of Christ, which indeed would have
required a larger Volume, as I have understood there was one then coming forth,
if it had not been prevented by the Treatise of Charity Mistaken, which seemed
to make the other intended work a little less seasonable at that time. But
Charity Mistaken proves only in General out of some Universal Principles, well
backed and made good by choice and solid Authorities, that of two disagreeing
in points of Faith, one only without repentance can be saved; which aim exacted
no great bulk. And as for D. Potter's Answer, even that also is not so short,
as it may seem. For if his marginal notes printed in a small letter were
transferred into the Text, the Book would appear to be of some bulk: though
indeed it might have been very short, if he had kept himself to the point
treated by Charity Mistaken, as shall be declared anon. But contrarily, because
the question debated betwixt Charity Mistaken and D. Potter, is a point of the
highest consequence that can be imagined, and in regard that there is not a
more pernicious Heresy, or rather indeed ground of Atheism, than a persuasion
that men of different Religions may be saved, if otherwise, forsooth, they lead
a kind of civil and moral life: I conceive, that my chief endeavor was not to
be employed in answering D. Potter, but that it was necessary to handle the
Question it self somewhat at large, and not only to prove in geral, that both
Protestants and Catholics cannot be saved; but to show also, that Salvation
cannot be hoped for out of the Catholic Roman Church; and yet withal, not to
omit to answer all the particulars of D. Potter's Book which may any way
import. To this end I thought it fit to divide my Reply into two Parts; in the
former whereof, the main question is handled by a continued discourse without
stepping aside to confute the particulars of D. Potter's Answer, though yet so,
as even that in this first Part, I omit not to answer such passages of his, as
I find directly in my way, and naturally belong to the points whereof I treat:
and in the second Part I answer D. Potter's Treatise, Section by Section, as
they lie in order. I here therefore entreat the Reader, that if heartily he
desire satisfaction in this so important Question, he do not content himself
with that which I say to D. Potter in my second Part, but that he take the
First before him, either all, ot at least so much as may serve most to his
purpose of being satisfied in those doubts which press him most. For which
purpose, I have caused a Table of the Chapters of the first Part, together with
their Titles and Arguments, to be prefixed before my Reply.

7. This was then a chief reason why I could not be very short. But yet there
wanted not also diverse other causes of the same effect. For there are so
several kinds of Protestants through the difference of Tenets which they hold,
as that if a man convince but one kind of them, the rest will conceive
themselves to be as truly unsatisfied, and even unspoken to, as if nothing had
been said therein at all. As for example: Some hold a necessity of a perpetual
visible Church, and some hold no such necessity. Some of them hold it necessary
to be able to prove it distinct from ours; and others, that their business is
dispatched when they have proved ours to have been always visible: for then
they will conceive that theirs has been so: And the like may be truly said of
very many other particulars. Besides it is D. Potter's fashion, (wherein as he
is very far from being the first, so I pray God he prove the last of that
humor) to touch in a word many trivial old Objections, which, if they be not
all answered, it will and must serve the turn, to make the ignorant sort of men
believe and brag, as if some main unanswerable matter had been subtly and
purposely omitted; and every body knows that some Objection may be very
plausibly made in few words, the clear and solid answer whereof will require
more leaves of paper than one. And in particular D. Potter does couch his
corruption of Authors within the compass of so few lines, and with so great
confusedness and fraud, that it requires much time, pains, and paper to open
them so distinctly, as that they may appear to every man's eye. It was also
necessary to show what D. Potter omits in Charity Mistaken, and the importance
of what is omitted, and sometimes to set down the very words themselves that
are omitted, all words themselves that are omitted, all which could not but add
to the quantity of my Reply. And as for the quality thereof, I desire thee
(good Reader) to believe, that whereas nothing is more necessary than Books for
answering of Books: yet I was so ill furnished in this kind, that I was forced
to omit the examination of diverse Authors cited by D. Potter, meetly upon
necessity; though I did very well perceive by most apparent circumstances, that
I must probably have been sure enough so find them plainly misalledged, and
much wronged: and for the few which are examined, there has not wanted some
difficulties to do it. For the times are not for all men alike; and D. Potter
has much advantage therein. But Truth is truth, and will ever be able to
justify it self in the midst of all difficulties which may occurr. And as for
me, when I allege Protestant Writers as well Domestical as Foreign, I
willingly and thankfully acknowledge my self obliged for diverse of them to the
Author of the Book entitled, The Protestant's Apology for the Roman Church,
who calls himself John Breerly, whose care, exactness, and fidelity is so
extraordinary great, as that he does not only cite the Books, but the Editions
also, with the place and time of their Printing, yea and often the very page,
and line, where the words are to be had. And if you happen not to find what he
cites, yet suspend your judgment, till you have read the corrections placed at
the end of his Book; though it be also true, that after all diligence and
faithfulness on his behalf, it was not in his power to amend all the faults of
the Print: in which Prints we have difficulty enough for many evident reasons,
which must needs occurr to any prudent man.

8. And forasmuch as concerns the manner of my Reply, I have procured to do it
without all bitterness or gall of invective words, both for as much as may
import either Protestants in general, or D. Potter's person in particular;
unless, for example, he will call it bitterness for me to term a gross
impertinency, a slight, or a corruption, by those very names, without which I
do not know how to express the things; and yet therein I can truly affirm that
I have studied how to deliver them in the most moderate way, to the end I might
give as little offense as possibly I could, without betraying the Cause. And if
any unfit phrase may peradventure have escaped my pen (as I hope none has) it
was beside, and against my intention, though I must needs profess, that D.
Potter gives so many and so just occasions of being round with him, as that
perhaps some will judge me to have been rather remiss, than moderate. But since
in the very title of my Reply I profess to maintain Charity, I conceive that
the excess will be more excusable amongst all kinds of men, if it fall to be in
mildness, than if it had appeared in too much zeal. And if D. Potter have a
mind to charge me with ignorance or any thing of that nature, I can, and will
ease him of that labor, by acknowledging in my self as many and more personal
defects than he can heap upon me. Truth only, and sincerity, I so much value
and profess, as that he shall never be able to prove the contrary in any one
least passage or particle against me.

Rules to be observed, if D. Potter intend a Rejoinder.
9. In the third and last place, I have thought fit to express my self thus. If
D. Potter, or any other resolve to answer my Reply; I desire that he will
observe some things which may tend to his own reputation, the saving of my
unnecessary pains, and especially to the greater advantage of truth. I wish
then that he would be careful to consider, wherein the point of every
difficulty consists, and not impertinently to shoot at Rovers, and affectedly
mistake one thing for another. As for example, to what purpose (for as much as
conecrns the question between D. Potter and Charity Mistaken,) does he so often
and seriously labor to prove, that Faith is not resolved into the Authority of
the Church, as into the formal Object and Motive thereof? Or that all Points of
Faith are contained in Scripture? Or that the Church cannot make new Articles
of Faith? Or that the Church of Rome, as it signifies that particular Church or
Diocese, is not all one with the Universal Church? Or that the Pope as a
private Doctor may err? With many other such points as will easily appear in
their proper places. It will also be necessary for him not to put certain
Doctrines upon us, from which he knows we disclaim as much as himself.

10. I must in like manner entreat him not to recite my reasons and discourses
by halfs, but to set them down faithfully and entirely, for as much as in very
deed concerns the whole substance of the thing in question: because the want
sometime of one word, may chance to make void, or lessen the force of the whole
Argument. And I am the more solicitous about giving this particular caveat,
because I find how ill he has complied with the promise which he made in his
Preface to the Reader, not to omit without answer any one thing of moment in
all the discourse of Charity Mistaken. Neither will this course be a cause that
his Rejoinder grow too large, but it will be occasion of brevity to him, and
free me also from the pains of setting down all the words which he omits, and
himself of demonstrating, that what he omitted was not material. Nay, I will
assure him, that if he keep himself to the point of every diffficulty, and not
weary the Reader, and overcharge his margent with unnecessary quotations of
Authors in Greek and Latin, and sometime also in Italian and French, together
with Proverbs, Sentences of Poets, and such Grammatical stuff, nor affect to
cite a multitude of our Catholic School-Divines to no purpose at all; his
Book will not exceed a competent size, nor will any man in reason be offended
with that length which is regulated by necessity. Again, before he come to set
down his answer, or propose his Arguments, let him consider very well what may
be replied, and whether his own objections may not be retorted against himself,
as the Reader will perceive to have happened often to his disadvantage in my
Reply against him. But especially I expect, and Truth it self exacts at his
hand, that he speak clearly and distinctly, and not seek to walk in darkness,
so to delude and deceive his Reader, now saying, and then denying, and always
speaking with such ambiguity, as that his greatest care may seem to consist in
a certain Art to find a shift, as his occasions might chance, either now, or
hereafter to require, and as he might fall out to be urged by diversity of
several Arguments. And to the end it may appear that I deal plainly, as I would
have him also do, I desire that he declare himself concerning these points.

11. First, whether our Savior Christ have not always had, and be not ever to
have, a visible true Church on earth: and whether the contrary Doctrine be not
a damnable heresy.

12. Secondly, what visible Church there was before Luther, disagreeing from
the Roman Church, and agreeing with the pretended Church of Protestants.

13. Thirdly, Since he will be forced to grant, That there can be assigned no
visible true Church of Christ, distinct from the Church of Rome, and such
Churches as agreed with her, when Luther first appeared; whether it does not
follow, that she has not erred Fundamentally; because every such error
destroys the nature and being of the Church, and so our Savior Christ should
have had no visible Church on earth.

14. Fourthly, if the Roman Church did not fall into any Fundamental error, let
him tell us how it can be damnable to live in her Communion, or* to maintain
errors, which are known and confessed, not to be Fundamental, or damnable.

15. Fifthly, if her Errors were not damnable, nor did exclude salvation, how
can they be excused from Schism, who forsook her Communion upon pretense of
errors, which were not damnable.

16. Sixthly, if D. Potter have a mind to say, That her Errors are Damnable,
or Fundamental, let him do us so much charity, as to tell us, in particular,
what those Fundamental errors be. But he must still remember (and my self must
be excused, for repeating it) that if he say, The Roman Church erred
Fundamentally, he will not be able to show, that Christ our Lord had any
visible Church on earth, when Luther appeared: and let him tell us, How
Protestants had, or can have, any Church which was universal, and extended
herself to all ages, if once he grant that the Roman Church ceased to be the
true Church of Christ; and consequently, how they can hope for Salvation, if
they deny it to us.

17. Seventhly, whether any one Error maintained against any one Truth, though
never so small in it self, yet sufficiently propounded as testified or revealed
by Almighty God, do not destroy the Nature and Unity of Faith, or at least is
not a grievous offense excluding Salvation.

18. Eighthly, if this be so, how can Lutherans, Calvinists, Swinglians, and
all the rest of disagreeing Protestants, hope for Salvation, since it is
manifest, that some of them must needs err against some such truth as is
testified by Almighty God, either Fundamental, or at least not Fundamental.

19. Ninthly, we constantly urge, and require to have a particular Catalogue of
such Points as he calls Fundamental: A Catalogue, I say, in particular, and not
only some general definition, or description, wherein Protestants may perhaps
agree, though we see that they differ when they come to assign what Points in
particular be Fundamental; and yet upon such a particular Catalogue much
depends: as for example, in particular, Whether or no a man do not err in some
Point Fundamental or necessary to Salvation; and whether or no Lutherans,
Calvinists, and the rest, do disagree in Fundamentals; which if they do, the
same heaven cannot receive them all.

20. Tenthly and lastly, I desire that in answering to these Points, he would
let us know distinctly, what is the Doctrine of the Protestant English Church
concerning them, and what he utters only as his own private opinion.

21. These are the Questions, which, for the present, I find it fit and
necessary for me to ask of D. Potter, or any other who will defend his cause,
or impugn ours. And it will be in vain to speak vainly, and to tell me, that a
Fool may ask more questions in an hour, than a Wise man can answer in a year;
with such idle Proverbs as that. For I ask but such questions as for which he
gives occasion in his Book, and where he declares not himself, but after so
ambiguous and confused a manner, as that Truth it self can scarce tell how to
convince him so, but that with ignorant and ill judging men, he will seem to
have somewhat left to say for himself, though Papists (as he calls them) and
Puritans should press him contrary ways at the same time: and these questions
concern things also of high importance, as whereupon the knowledge of God's
Church, and true Religion, and consequently, Salvation of the soul, depends.
And now because he shall not tax me with being like those men in the Gospel,
whom our blessed Lord and Savior charged with laying heavy burdens upon other
men's shoulders, who yet would not touch them with their finger: I oblige my
self to answer upon any demand of his, both to all these Questions, if he find
that I have not done it already, and to any other, concerning matter of Faith
that he shall ask. And I will tell him very plainly, what is Catholic
Doctrine, and what is not, that is, what is defined, or what is not defined, and
rests but in discussion among Divines.

22. And it will be here expected, that he perform these things, as a man who
professes learning should do, not flying from questions which concern things
as they are considered in their own nature, to accidental or rare
circumstances, of ignorance, incapacity, want of means to be instructed,
erroneous conscience, and the like; which being very various and different,
cannot be well comprehended under any general Rule. But in delivering general
Doctrins, we must consider things, as they be ex natura rei, or per se loquendo
(as Divines speak) that is, according to their natures, if all circumstances
concur proportionable thereunto. As for example, some may for a time have
invincible ignorance, even of some Fundamental Article of Faith, through want
of capacity, instruction, or the like, and so not offend either in such
ignorance or error, and yet we must absolutely say, that error in any one
Fundamental point is damnable; because so it is, if we consider things in
themselves, abstracting from accidental circumstances in particular persons: as
contrarily, if some man judge some act of virtue, or some indifferent action to
be a sin, in him it is a sin indeed, by reason of his erroneous conscience; and
yet we ought not to say absolutely, that virtuous or indifferent actions are
sins: and in all sciences we must distinguish the general Rules from their
particular Exceptions. And therefore when, for example, he answers to our
Demand, Whether he hold that Catholics may be saved, or, Whether their
pretended errors be Fundamental and Damnable, he is not to change the state of
the question, and have recourse to Ignorance, and the like; but to answer
concerning the errors being considered what they are apt to be in themselves,
and as they are neither increased nor diminished, by accidental circumstances.

23. And the like I say of all the other Points, to which I once again desire
an answer without any of these or the like ambiguous terms, in some sort, in
some sense, in some degree, which may be explicated afterward, as strictly or
largely as may best serve his turn; but let him tell us roundly and
particularly, in what sort, in what sense, in what degree he understands those,
and the like obscure mincing phrases. If he proceed solidly after this manner,
and not by way of mere words, more like a Preacher to a vulgar Auditor, than
like a learned man with a pen in his hand, thy patience shall be the less
abused, and truth will also receive more right. And since we have already laid
the grounds of the question, much may be said hereafter in few words, if (as I
said) he keep close to the real point of every difficulty without wandering into
impertinent disputes, or multiplying vulgar and threadbare objections and
arguments, or laboring to prove what no man denies, or making a vain
ostentation by citing a number of Schoolmen, which every Puny brought up in
Schools is able to do; and if he cite his Authors with such sincerity, as no
time need be spent in opening his corruptions; and finally, if he set himself
awork with this consideration, that we are to give a most strict account to a
most just and impartial Judge, of every period, line, and word that passes
under our pen. For if at the latter day we shall be arraigned for every idle
word which is spoken, so much more will that be done for every idle word which
is written, as the deliberation wherewith it passes makes a man guilty of more
malice, and as the importance of the matter which is treated of in Books
concerning true Faith and Religion, without which no Soul can be saved, makes a
man's Errors more material, than they would be, if the question were but of
toys.

The Answer to the PREFACE.
AD 1. and 2.. If beginnings be ominous (as they say they are,) D. Potter has
cause to look for great store of uningenuous dealing from you; the very first
words you speak of him, viz. That he has not so much as once truly and really
fallen upon the Point in question, being a most unjust and immodest imputation.

2. For first; The Point in question, was not that which you pretend, Whether
both Papists and Protestants can be saved in their several Professions? But,
Whether you may without uncharitableness affirm that Protestancy unrepented
destroys Salvation? And that this is the very question, is most apparent and
unquestionable, both from the title of Charity Mistaken, and from the Arguments
of the three first Chapters of it, and from the title of your own Reply. And
therefore if D. Potter had joined issue with his Adversary only thus far; and,
not meddling at all with Papists, but leaving them to stand or fall to their own
Master, had proved Protestants living and dying so, capable of Salvation; I
cannot see how it could justly be charged upon him, that he had not once truly
and really fallen upon the Point in Question. Neither may it be said that your
Question here and mine, are in effect the same, seeing it is very possible that
the true Answer to the one might have been Affirmative, and to the other
Negative. For there is no incongruity, but it may be true That You and We
cannot both be saved: And yet as true, That without uncharitableness you cannot
pronounce us damned. For, all ungrounded and unwarrantable sentencing men to
Damnation, is either in a proriety of speech uncharitable, or else (which for
my purpose is all one,) it is that which Protestants mean, when they say,
Papists for damning them are uncharitable. And therefore though the Author of
C. M. had proved as strongly as he has done weakly, that one Heaven could not
receive Protestants and Papists both; yet certainly, it was very hastily and
unwarrantably, and therefore uncharitably concluded, that Protestants were the
part that was to be excluded. As, though Jews and Christians cannot both be
saved, yet a Jew cannot justly, and therefore not charitably, pronounce a
Christian damned.

3. But then secondly, to show your dealing with him very injurious; I say, he
does speak to this very Question very largely, and very effectually; as by
confronting his Work and Charity M. together, will presently appear. Charity M.
proves, you say, in general, That there is but one Church. D. Potter tells him,
His labor is lost in proving the unity of the Catholic Church, whereof there
is no doubt or controversy: and herein, I hope, you will grant he answers
right and to the purpose. C. M. proves (you say) secondly, That all Christians
are obliged to hearken to the Church. D. Potter answers, It is true: yet not
absolutely in all things, but only when she commands those things which God
does not countermand. And this also, I hope, is to his purpose, though not to
yours. C.M. proves, you say, thirdly, That the Church must be ever visible and
infallible. For her Visibility, D. Potter denies it not; and as for her
Infallibility, he grants it in Fundamentals, but not in Superstructures. C.M.
proves, you say, fourthly, That to separate one's self from the Church's
Communion, is Schism. D. Potter grants it, with this exception, unless there be
necessary cause to do so; unless the conditions of her Communion be apparently
unlawful. C.M. proves, you say, lastly, That to dissent from her Doctrine is
Heresy, though it be in points never so few, and never so small, and therefore
that the distinction of points fundamental and unfundamental, as it is applied
by Protestants, is wholly vain. This D. P. denies; shows the Reasons brought
for it, weak and unconcluding; proves the contrary, by Reasons unanswerable:
and therefore that The distinction of points into fundamental and
not-fundamental, as it is applied by Protestants, is very good. Upon these
grounds you say, C.M. clearly evinces, That any least difference in faith
cannot stand with salvation, and therefore seeing Catholics and Protestants
disagree in very many points of faith, they both cannot hope to be saved
without Repentance, you must mean, without an explicit and particular
repentance, and dereliction of their errors; for so C.M. has declared himself
p. 14. where he has these words, We may safely say that a man who lives in
Protestancy, and who is so far from Repenting it, as that he will not so much
as acknowledge it to be a sin, though he be sufficiently informed thereof, etc.
From whence it is evident, that in his judgment there can be no repentance of
an error, without acknowledging it to be a sin. And to this D. Potter justly
opposes: That both Siaes, by the confession of both Sides, agree in more points
than are simply and indispensably necessary to Salvation, and differ only in
such as are not precisely necessary: That it is very possible, a man may die in
error, and yet die with Repentance, as for all his sins of ignorance, so, in
that number, for the errors in which he dies; with a repentance though not
explicit and particular which is not simply required, yet implicit and general
which is sufficient: so that he cannot but hope, considering the goodness of
God, that the truth is retained on both Sides: especially those, of the
necessity of Repentance from dead Works and Faith in Jesus Christ, if they be
put in practice, may be an Antidote against the errors held on either Side; to
such he means, and says, as being diligent in seeking truth, and desirous to
find it, yet miss of it through humane frailty, and die in error. If you will
but attentively consider and compare the undertaking of C. M. and D. Potter's
performance in all these points, I hope, you will be so ingenuous as to
acknowledge, that you have injured him much, in imputing tergiversation to him,
and pretending that through his whole Book he has not once truly and really
fallen upon the Point in Question. Neither may you or C. M. conclude him from
hence (as covertly you do) An enemy to souls by deceiving them with ungrounded
false hopes of Salvation; seeing the hope of salvation cannot be ungrounded,
which requires and supposes belief and practice of all things absolutely
necessary unto salvation, and repentance of those sins and errors which we
fall into by humane frailty: Nor a friend to indifferency in Religions, seeing
he gives them only hope of pardon of Errors who are desirous, and, according
to the proportion of their opportunities and abilities, industrious to find the
truth; or at least truly repentant, that they have not been so. Which Doctrine
is very fit to excite men to a constant and im^artial search of truth, and very
far from teaching them that it is indifferent what Religion they are of; and,
without all controversy, very honorable to the Goodness of God, with which
how it can consist, not to be satisfied with his servant's true endeavors to
know his will, and do it, without full and exact performance, I leave it to you
and all good men to judge.

4. As little justice methinks you show, in quarrelling with him for
descending to the particular disputes here mentioned by you. For to say nothing
that many of these Questions are immediately and directly pertinent to the
business in hand, as the 1, 2, 3, 5, 6. and all of them fall in of themselves
into the stream of his Discourse, and are not drawn in by him, and besides are
touched for the most part, rather than handled; to say nothing of all this, you
know right well, if he conclude you erroneous in any one of all these, be it
but in the Communion in one kind, or the Language of your service, the
infallibility of your Church is evidently overthrown: And this being done, I
hope, there will be no such necessity of hearkening to her in all things: It
will be very possible to separate from her communion in some things, without
Schism; and from her Doctrine, so far as it is erroneous, without Heresy: Then
all that she proposes will not be, eo ipso, fundamental, because she proposes
it: and so presently all Charity Mistaken will vanish into smoke, and clouds,
and nothing.

5. You say he was loath to affirm plainly, that generally both Catholics and
Protestants may be saved: which yet is manifest he does affirm plainly, of
Protestants throughout his Book; and of erring Papists that have sincerely
sought the truth, and failed of it, and die with a general repentance, p. 77,
78. And yet you deceive your self if you conceive he had any other necessity to
do so, but only that he thought it true. For we may and do pretend that before
Luther there were many true Churches, besides, the Roman, which agreed not with
her: in particular, The Greek Church. So that what you say is evidently true,
is indeed evidently false. Besides, if he had had any necessity to make use of
you in this matter, he needed not for this end to say that now in your Church
Salvation may be had, but only that before Lurhers time it might be: Then when
your means of knowing the Truth were not so great, and when your ignorance
might be more invincible, and therefore more excusable. So that you may see, if
you please, it is not for ends, but for the love of truth, that we are thus
charitable to you.

6. Neither is it material that these particulars he speaks against, are not
fundamental errors; for though they be not destructive of salvation, yet the
convincing of them may be, and is, destructive enough of his Adversarie's
assertion: and if you be the man I take you for, you will not deny they are so.
For certainly, no Consequence can be more palpable than this; The Church of
Rome does err in this or that, therefore it is not infallible. And this perhaps
you perceived your self, and therefore demanded not, Since they be not
fundamental, what imports it whether we hold them or no? simply: But, for as
much as concerns our possibility to be saved. As if we were not bound by the
love of God and the love of Truth to be zealous in the defense of all Truths,
that are any way profitable, though not simply necessary to salvation! Or, as
if any good man could satisfy his conscience without being so affected and
resolved! Our Savior himself having assured, us, Mat. 5.19.
That he that shall break one of his least Commandments (some whereof you
pretend are concerning venial sins, and consequently the keeping of them not
necessary to salvation) and shall so teach men, shall be called the least in
the Kingdom of Heaven.

7. But then it imports very much, though not for the possibility that you may
be saved, yet for the probability that you will be so: because the holding of
these errors, though it did not merit, might yet occasion damnation. As the
doctrine of Indulgences may take away the fear of Purgatory, and the doctrine
of Purgatory the fear of Hell; as you well know it does too frequently. So that
though a godly man might be saved with these errors, yet by means of them,
many are made vicious, and so damned. By them I say, though not for them. No
godly Layman who is verily persuaded that there is neither impiety nor
superstition in the use of your Latine-service, shall be damned, I hope, for
being present at it; yet the want of that devotion which the frequent hearing
the Offices understood, might happily beget in them, the want of that
instruction and edification which it might afford them, may very probably
hinder the salvation of many which otherwise might have been saved. Besides,
though the matter of an Error may be only something profitable, not necessary,
yet the neglect of it may be a damnable sin; As, not to regard venial sins is
in the Doctrine of your Schools, mortal. Lastly, as venial sins, you say,
dispose men to mortal; so the erring from some profitable, though lesser truth,
may dispose a man to error in greater matters. As for example: The belief of
the Pope's infallibility is, I hope, not unpardonably damnable to every one
that holds it; yet if it be a falsehood (as most certainly it is) it puts a man
into a very congruous disposition to believe Antichrist, if he should chance to
get into that See.

8. Ad. 3. In his Distinction of, point fundamental and not fundamental, he may
seem, you say, to have touched the point, but does not so indeed. Because
though he says, There are some points so fundamental, as that all are obliged
to believe them explicitly, yet he tells you not, whether a man may disbelieve
any other points of faith, which are sufficiently presented to his
understanding, as Truths revealed by Almighty God. Touching which matter of
Sufficient Proposal, I beseech you to come out of the clouds, and tell us
roundly and plainly, what you mean by Points of faith sufficiently propounded
to a man's understanding, as Truths revealed by God. Perhaps you mean such, as
the person to whom they are proposed, understands sufficiently to be Truths
revealed by God. But how then can he possibly choose but believe them? Or how
is it not an apparent contradiction; that a man should disbelieve what himself
understands to be a Truth; o^ any Christian what he understands or but believes
to be testified by God? Doctor Potter might well think it superfluous to tell
you This is damnable; because indeed it is impossible. And yet one may very
well think, by your saying, as you do hereafter, That the impiety of heresy
consists in calling God's truth in question, that this should be your meaning.
Or do you esteem all those things sufficiently presented to his understanding
as Divine truths, which by you, or any other man, or any Company of men
whatsoever, are declared to him to be so? I hope you will not say so: for this
were to oblige a man to believe all the Churches, and all the men in the world,
whenever they pretend to propose Divine Revelations. D. Potter, I assure you
from him, would never have told you this neither. Or do you mean by
sufficiently propounded as Divine Truths, all that your Church propounds for
such? That you may not, neither; For the Question between us, is this; Whether
your Churches Proposition be a sufficient Proposition? And therefore to suppose
this, is to suppose the Question; which you know in Reasoning is always a
fault. Or lastly, do you mean (for I know not else what possibly you can mean,)
by sufficiently presented to his understanding as revealed by God; that which,
all things considered, is so proposed to him, that he might and should and
would believe it to be true and revealed by God, were it not for some voluntary
and avoidable fault of his own that interposeth it self between his
understanding and the truth presented to it? This is the best construction that
I can make of your words; and if you speak of truths thus proposed and
rejected, let it be as damnable, as you please, to deny or disbelieve them. But
then I cannot but be amazed to hear you say, That D. Potter never tells you
whether there be any other Points of faith, besides those which we are bound to
believe explicitly, which a man may deny or disbelieve, though they be
sufficiently presented to his understanding as truths revealed or testified by
Almighty God; seeing the light it self is not more clear than D. Potter's
Declaration of himself for the Negative in this Question. p. 245, 246, 247,
249, 250. of his Book. Where he treats at large of this very Argument,
beginning his discourse thus. It seems fundamental to the faith, and for the
salvation of every member of the Church, that he acknowledge and believe all
such points of faith, as whereof he may be convinced that they belong to the
Doctrine of Jesus Christ. To this conviction he requires three things; Clear
Revelation, Sufficient Proposition, and Capacity and Understanding in the
Hearer. For want of clear Revelation, he frees the Church before Christ and the
Disciples of Christ, from any damnable error, though they believed not those
things, which he that should now deny, were no Christian. To Sufficient
Proposition, he requires two things: 1. That the points be perspicuously laid
open in themselves. 2. So forcibly, as may serve to remove reasonable doubts to
the contrary, and to satisfy a teachable mind concerning it, against the
principles in which he has been bred to the Contrary. This Proposition, he
says, is not limited to the Pope or Church, but extended to all means
whatsoever, by which a man may be convinced in conscience, that the matter
proposed is divine Revelation; which he professes to be done sufficiently, not
only when his conscience does expressly bear witness to the truth; but when it
would do so, if it were not choked, and blinded by some unruly and unmortified
lust in the will. The difference being not great between him that is wilfully
blind, and him that knowingly gainsayeth the Truth. The third thing he
requires, is Capacity and Ability to apprehend the Proposal, and the Reasons of
it: the want whereof excuses fools and madmen, etc. But where there is no such
impediment, and the will of God is sufficiently propounded, there (says he) he
that opposes is convinced of error; and he who is thus convinced, is an
Heretic; and heresy is a work of the Flesh which excludes from salvation,
(he means without Repentance). And hence it follows, that it is fundamental
to a Christian's faith, and necessary for his salvation, that he believe all
revealed truths of God, whereof he may be convinced that they are from God.
This is the conclusion of Doctor Potter's discourse; many passages whereof you
take notice of in your subsequent disputations, and make your advantage of
them. And therefore I cannot but say again, that it amazeth me to hear you say,
that he declines this Question, and never tells you whether or no there be any
other points of faith, which being sufficiently propounded as divine
Revelations may be denied and dis-believed. He tells you plainly, there are
none such: and therefore you cannot say, that he tells you not whether there be
any such. Again, it is almost as strange to me, why you should say, this was
the only thing in question, Whether a man may deny or disbelieve any point of
faith, sufficiently presented to his understanding as a truth revealed by God.
For to say that any thing is a thing in question, methinks, at the first
hearing of the words, imports, that it is by some affirmed, and denied by
others. Now you affirm, I grant; but, What Protestant ever denied, that it was
a sin, to give God the lie? Which is the first and most obvious sense of these
words. Or, which of them ever doubted, that to disbelieve is then a fault, when
the matter is so proposed to a man, that he might and should, and, were it not
for his own fault, would believe it? Certainly, he that questions either of
these, justly deserves to have his wits called in question. Produce any one
Protestant that ever did so, and I will give you leave to say, It is the only
thing in question. But then I must tell you, that your ensuing Argument, viz.
To deny a truth witnessed by God is damnable, But of two that disagree one must
of necessity deny some such truth, Therefore one only can be saved; is built
upon a ground clean different from this postulate. For though it be always a
fault to deny what either I do know, or should know, to be testified by God;
yet that which by a cleanly conveyance you put in the place hereof, To deny a
truth witnessed by God simply, without the circumstance of being known or
sufficiently proposed, is so far from being certainly damnable, that it may be
many times done without any the least fault at all. As if God should testify
something to a man in the Indies, I that had no assurance of this testification
should not be obliged to believe it. For in such cases the Rule of the Law has
place, Idem est non esse and non apparere: not to be at all and not to appear
to me, is to me all one. If I had not come and spoken unto you (says our
Savior) you had had no sin.

10. As little necessity is there for that which follows: That of two
disagreeing in a matter of faith, one must deny some such truth. Whether by
[such] you understand, Testified at all by God; or, testified and sufficiently
propounded. For it is very possible the matter in controversy may be such a
thing wherein God has not at all declared himself, or not so fully and
clearly, as to oblige all men to hold one way; and yet be so overvalued by the
parties in variance, as to be esteemed a matter of faith, and one of those
things of which our Savior says, He that believes not shall be damned. Who
sees not that it is possible, two Churches may excommunicate and damn each
other for keeping Christmas ten days sooner or later; as well as Victor
excommunicated the Churches of Asia, for differing from him about Easter day?
And yet I believe you will confess, that God had not then declared himself
about Easter, nor has now about Christmas. Anciently some good Catholic
Bishops excommunicated and damned others for holding there were Antipodes: and
in this question I would fain know on which side was the sufficient proposal.
The contra-Remonstrants differ from the Remonstrants about the point of
Predetermination as a matter of faith: I would know in this thing also, which
way God has declared himself; whether for Predetermination or against it.
Stephen Bishop of Rome held it as a matter of faith and Apostolic Tradition,
That Heretics gave true Baptism: Others there were, and they as good
Catholics as he, that held that this was neither matter of Faith, nor matter
of Truth. Justin Martyr, and Irenaeus, held the doctrine of the Millenaries as
a matter of faith: and though Justin Martyr deny it, yet you, I hope, will
affirm, that some good Christians held the contrary. S. Augustine, I am sure,
held the communicating of Infants as much Apostolic tradition, as the
Baptizing of them: whether the Bishop and the Church of Rome of his time, held
so too, or held otherwise, I desire you to determine. But, sure I am, the
Church of Rome at this present holds the contrary. The same S. Austin, held it
no matter of faith that the Bishops of Rome were Judges of Appeals from all
parts of the Church Catholic, no not in Major Causes and Major Persons:
whether the Bishop or Church of Rome did then hold the contrary, do you resolve
me; but now I am resolved, they do so. In all these differences, the point in
question is esteemed and proposed by one side at least as a matter of faith,
and by the other rejected, as not so: and either this is to disagree in matters
of faith, or you will have no means to show that we do disagree. Now then to
show you how weak and sandy the foundation is, on which the whole fabric both
of your Book and Church depends, answer me briefly to this Dilemma. Either, in
these oppositions, one of the opposite Parts erred damnably, and denied God's
truth sufficiently propounded; or they did not. If they did, then they which do
deny God's truth sufficiently propounded, may go to heaven; and then you are
rash and uncharitable in excluding us, though we were guilty of this fault. If
not, then there is no such necessity that of two disagreeing about a matter of
faith, one should deny God's truth sufficiently propounded. And so the Major
and Minor of your Argument, are proved false. Yet though they were as true as
Gospel, and as evident as Mathematical Principles, the Conclusion (so
impertinent is it to the Premises) might still be false. For that which
naturally issues from these Propositions is not, Therefore one only can be
saved: But, Therefore one of them does something that is damnable. But, with
what Logic, or what Charity you can infer either as the immediate production
of the former premises, or as a Corollary from this Conclusion, Therefore one
only can be saved, I do not understand; unless you will pretend that this
consequence is good, Such a one does something damnable, therefore he shall
certainly be damned: Which whether it be not to overthrow the Article of our
Faith, which promises remission of sins upon repentance; and consequently, to
ruin the Gospel of Christ, I leave it to the Pope and the Cardinals to
determine. For if against this it be alleged, that no man can repent of the
sin wherein he dies: This muce I have already stopped, by showing, that if it
be a sin of Ignorance, this is no way incongruous.

11. Ad. 4. You proceed in sleighting and disgracing your Adversary, Pretending
his objections are mean and vulgar, and such as have been answered a thousand
times. But if your cause were good, these Arts would be needless. For though
some of his Objections have been often shifted, by men I mean the Divines of
Doway: whose profession we have in your Belgic Expurgatorius p. 12. in censura
Bertrami, in these words: Seeing in other ancient Catholics, we tolerate,
extenuate, and excuse very many errors, and d^vising some shift often deny
them, and put upon them a convenient sense when they are objected to us in
disputations and confl^cts with our Adversaries; we see no reason why Bertram
may not deserve the same equity.
that make a profession of devising shifts and evasions to save themselves and
their Religion from the pressure of truth, by men that are resolved they will
say something, though they can say nothing to purpose; yet I doubt not to make
it appear, that neither by others have they been truly and really satisfied;
and that the best Answer you give them, is to call them, Mean and vulgar
objections.

12. Ad. 5. But this pains might have been spared: For the substance of his
Discourse is in a Sermon of D. Ushers, and confuted four years ago by Paulus
Veridicus. It seems then, the substance of your Reply is in Paulus Veridicus,
and so your pains also might well have deen spared. But had there been no
necessity to help and piece out your confuting his Arguments with disgracing
his Person, (which yet you cannot do) you would have considered, that to them
who compare D. Potters Book, and the Archbishops Sermon, this aspersion will
presently appear a poor Detraction, not to be answered, but scorned. To say
nothing, that in D. Potter, being to answer a Book by express Command from
Royal Authority, to leave any thing material unsaid, because it had been said
before, especially being spoken at large, and without any relation to the
Discourse which he was to Answer, had been a ridiculous vanity and foul
prevarication.

13. Ad. 6. In your sixth Parag. I let all pass saving only this, That a
persuasion that men of different Religions (you must mean, or else you speak
not to the point, Christians of diverse Opinions and Communions) may be saved,
is a most pernicious Heresy, and even a ground of Atheism. What strange
extractions Chemistry can make. I know not; but sure I am, he that by reason
would infer this Conclusion, That there is no God; from this ground, That God
will save men in different Religions, must have a higher strain in Logic, than
you or I have hitherto made show of. In my apprehension, the other part of the
Contradiction, That there is a God, should much rather follow from it. And
whether Contradictions will flow from the same fountain, let the Learned judge.
Perhaps you will say, You intended not to deliver here a positive and measured
truth, and which you expected to be called to account for; but only a high and
tragical expression of your just detestation of the wicked Doctrine against
which you write. If you mean so, I shall let it pass: only I am to advertize
the lesse-wary Reader, that, passionate Expressions, and vehement Asseverations
are no Arguments; unless it be, of the weakness of the cause that is defended
by them, or the man that defends it. And to remember you of what Boethius says
of some such things as these, -- Nubila men's est, Haec ubi regnant. For my
part, I am not now in passion; neither will I speak one word which I think I
cannot justify to the full: and I say, and will maintain, that to say, That
Christians of different Opinions and Communions (such I mean, who hold all
those things that are simply necessary to Salvation) may not obtain pardon for
the Errors wherein they die ignorantly, by a general Repentance; is so far from
being a ground of Atheism, that to say the contrary, is to cross in Diameter a
main Article of our Creed, and to overthrow the Gospel of Christ.

14. Ad. 7, and 8. To the two next Parag. I have but two words to say. The one
is, that I know no Protestants that hold it necessary to be able to prove a
Perpetual Visible Church distinct from Yours. Some perhaps undertake to do so,
as a matter of courtesy; but I believe you will be much to seek for any one
that holds it necessary. For though you say, that Christ has promised there
shall de a perpetual Visible Church; yet you your selves do not pretend that he
has promised, there shall be Histories and Records always extant of the
professors of it in all ages: nor that he has any where enjoined us to read
those Histories, that we may be able to show them.

15. The other is, That Breerelie's great exactness, which you magnify so,
and amplify, is no very certain demonstration of his fidelity. A Romance may
be told with as much variety of circumstances, as a true Story.

16. Ad 9, and 10.. Your desires that I would, in this rejoinder, Avoid
impertinencies: Not impose doctrins upon you which you disclaim: Set down the
substance of your Reasons faithfully and entirely: Not weary the Reader with
unnecessary Quotations: Object nothing to you which I can answer my self, or
which may be returned upon my self: And lastly, (which you repeat again in the
end of your Preface) speak as clearly and distinctly and univocally as possibly
I can, are all very reasonable, and shall be by me most punctually and fully
satisfied. Only I have reason to complain, that you give us rules only, and not
good example in keeping them. For in some of these things I shall have frequent
occasion to show, that Medice, cura teipsum, may very justly be said unto you;
especially for objecting what might very easily have been answered by you, and
may be very justly returned upon you.

17. To your ensuing demands, though some of them be very captious and
ensnaring; yet I will give you as clear and plain ingenuous Answers as possibly
I can.

18. Ad 11.. To the first then, about the Perpetuity of the visible Church, my
Answer is: That I believe our Savior, ever since his Ascension, has had in
some place or other a Visible true Church on earth: I mean a Company of men,
that professed at least so much truth as was absolutely necessary for their
Salvation. And I believe that there will be somewhere or other such a Church to
the Worlds end. But the contrary Doctrine, I do at no hand believe to be a
damnable Heresy.

19. Ad. 12. To the second, What Visible Church there was before Luther,
disagreeing from the Roman? I answer, that before Luther there were many
Visible Churches, in many things disagreeing from the Roman: But not that the
whole Catholic Church disagreed from her, because she her self was a Part of
the Whole, though much corrupted. And to undertake to name a Catholic Church
disagreeing from her, is to make her no Part of it, which we do not, nor need
not pretend. And for men agreeing with Protestants in all points, we will then
produce them, when you shall either prove it necessary to be done, which you
know we absolutely deny; or when you shall produce a perpetual succession of
Professors, which in all points have agreed with you, and disagreed from you in
nothing. But this my promise, to deal plainly with you, I conceive, and so
intended it to be very like his, who undertook to drink up the Sea, upon
condition, that he to whom the promise was made, should first stop the Rivers
from running in. For this unreasonable request which you make to us, is to your
selves so impossible, that in the very next Age after the Apostles, you will
never be able to name a man, whom you can prove to have agreed with you in all
things, nay (if you speak of such, whose Works are extant and unquestioned)
whom we cannot prove to have disagreed from you in many things. Which I am so
certain of, that I will venture my credit, and my life upon it.

20. Ad. 13. To the third, Whether, seeing there cannot be assigned any visible
true Church distinct from the Roman, it follows not that she erred not
fundamentally? I say, in our sense of the word Fundamental, it does follow.
For, if it be true, that there was then no Church distinct from the Roman, then
it must be, either because there was no Church at all, which we deny: Or
because the Roman Church was the whole Church, which we also deny: Or because
she was a Part of the Whole, which we grant. And if she were a true part of the
Church, then she retained those truths which were simply necessary to
Salvation, and held no errors which were inevitably and unpardonably
destructive of it. For this is precisely necessary to constitute any man or any
Church a member of the Church Catholic. In our sense therefore of the word
Fundamental, I hope she erred not fundamentally: but in your sense of the word,
I fear she did: that is, she held something to be Divine Revelation, which was
not; something not to be, which was.

21. Ad. 14. To the fourth. How it could be damnable to maintain her Errors, if
they were not fundamental? I answer. 1. Though it were not damnable, yet if it
were a fault, it was not to be done. For a Venial sin with you is not damnable;
yet you say, it is not to be committed for the procuring any good. Non est
faciendum malum vel minimum, ut eveniat bonum vel maximum. 2. It is damnable to
maintain an error against conscience, though the error in it self, and to him
that believes it, be not damnable. Nay the profession not only of an error, but
even of a truth, if not believed, when you think on it again, I believe you
will confess to be a mortal sin; unless you will say, Hypocrisy and Simulation
in Religion is not so. 3. Though we say, the Errors of the Roman Church were
not destructive of Salvation, but pardonable even to them that died in them,
upon a general repentance: yet we deny not but in themselves they were damnable.
Nay, the very saying they were pardonable, implies they needed pardon, and
therefore in themselves were damnable: damnable meritoriously, though not
effectually. As a poison may be deadly in it self, and yet not kill him, that
together with the Poison takes an Antidote: or as Felony may deserve death, and
yet not bring it on him that obtains the Kings Pardon.

22. Ad. 15. To the fifth. How they can be excused from Schism, who forsook her
Communion upon pretense of Errors which were not damnable! I answer. All that
we forsake in you, is only the belief, and practice, and profession of your
Errors. Hereupon you cast us out of your Communion. And then with a strange,
and contradictious, and ridiculous hypocrisy, complain that we forsake it. As
if a man should thrust his friend out of doors, and then be offended at his
departure. But for us not to forsake the belief of your Errors, having
discovered them to be Errors, was impossible; and therefore to do so could not
be damnable, believing them to be Errors. Not to forsake the practice and
profession of them, had been damnable hypocrisy; supposing that (which you
vainly run away with, and take for granted) those Errors in themselves were not
damnable. Now to do so, and, as matters now stand, not to forsake your
Communion, is apparently contradictious: seeing the condition of your Communion
is, that we must profess to believe all your Doctrins not only to be damnable
Errors (which will not content you,) but also to be certain and necessary and
revealed Truths. So that to demand, Why we forsake your Communion upon pretense
of Errors which were not damnable, is, in effect, to demand why we forsook it
upon our forsaking it! For to pretend that there are Errors in your Church
though not damnable, is ipso facto, to forsake your Communion and to do that
which both in your account, and, as you think, in Gods account, puts him that
does so, out of your Communion. So that either you must free your Church, from
requiring the belief of any Error whatsoever, damnable and not damnable; or,
whether you will or no you must free us from Schism. For Schism there cannot
be, in leaving your Communion, unless we were obliged to continue in it. Man
cannot be obliged by Man, but to what either formally or vertually he is
obliged by God; for, all just power is from God. God the Eternal Truth neither
can nor will oblige us to believe any the least and the most innocent falsehood
to be a Divine truth, that is, to err; nor, to profess a known Error, which is
to lie. So that if you require the belief of any Error among the conditions of
your Communion, our Obligation to communicate with you cease, and so the
imputation of Schism to us vanishes into nothing; but lies heavy upon you for,
making our separation from you just and necessary, by requiring unnecessary and
unlawful conditions of your Communion. Hereafter therefore, I entreat you, let
not your demand be, How could we forsake your Communion without Schism, seeing
you erred not damnably? But, How we could do so without Schism, seeing you
erred not at all? which if either you do prove, or we cannot disprove it, we
will (I at least will for my part) return to your Communion, or subscribe my
self Schismatique. In the mean time, (...).

23. Yet notwithstanding all your Errors, we do not renounce your Communion
totally and absolutely, but only leave Communicating with you in the practice
and profession of your Errors. The trial whereof will be to propose some form
of worshipping God, taken wholly out of Scripture; and herein if we refuse to
join with you, then, and not till then, may you justly say, We have utterly and
absolutely abandoned your Communion.

24. Ad. 16. Your sixth demand I have already satisfied in my Answers to the
Second and the Fourth: and in my Reply, ad. 2. toward the end. And though you
say, your repeating must be excused, yet I dare not be so confident, and
therefore forbear it.

25. Ad. 17. To the seventh, Whether error against any one truth sufficiently
propounded as testified by God, destroy not the Nature and Unity of faith, or,
at least, is not a grievous offense excluding salvation? I answer; If you
suppose, as you seem to do, the proposition so sufficient, that the party to
whom it is made is convinced that it is from God, so that the denial of it
involves also with it the denial of Gods veracity; any such Error destroys both
faith and salvation. But if the Proposal be only so sufficient, not, that the
party to whom it is made is convinced, but only that he should, and, but for
his own fault, would have been convinced of the Divine Verity of the Doctrine
proposed: The crime then is not so great; for, the belief of Gods Veracity may
well consist with such an Error. Yet a fault I confess it is, and (without
Repentance) damnable, if, all circumstances considered, the Proposal be
sufficient. But then I must tell you, that the Proposal of the present Roman
Church is only pretended to be sufficient for this purpose, but is not so:
especially all the Rays of the Divinity, which they pretend to shine so
conspicuously in her Proposals, being so darkened and even extinguished with a
cloud of contradiction, from Scripture, Reason, and the Ancient Church.

26. Ad.. 18. To the Eighth, How of disagreeing protestants, both parts may
hope for salvation, seeing some of them must needs err against some Truth
testified by God? I answer, The most disagreeing Protestants that are, yet thus
far agree; 1. That those Books of Scripture which were never doubted of in the
Church, are the undoubted Word of God, and a perfect rule of faith. 2. That the
sense of them, which God intended, whatsoever it is, is certainly true So that
they believe implicitly even those very Truths against which they err; and,
Why an implicit faith in Christ and his Word, should not suffice as well as an
implicit faith in your Church^ I have desired to be resolved by many of your
Side, but never could. 3. That they are to use their best endeavors to believe
the Scripture in the true sense, and to live according, to it.
This if they perform (as I hope many on all Sides do) truly and sincerely, it
is impossible but that they should believe aright in all things necessary to
salvation; that is, in all those things which appertain to the Covenant between
God and man in Christ; for so much, is not only plainly, but frequently,
contained in Scripture. And believing aright touching the Covenant, if they for
their parts perform the condition required of them, which is sincere obedience,
Why should they not expect that God will perform his promise and give them
salvation? For, as for other things which lie without the Covenant, and are
therefore less necessary, if by reason of the seeming conflict which is
oftentimes between Scripture and Reason, and Authority on the one Side; and
Scripture, Reason, and Authority on the other; if by reason of the variety of
tempers, abilities, educations, and unavoidable prejudices, whereby men's
understandings are variously formed and fashioned, they do embrace several
Opinions, whereof some must be erroneous; to say that God will damn them for
such Errors, who are lovers of Him, and lovers of Truth, is to rob man of his
comfort, and God of his goodness; it is to make Man desperate, and God a
Tyrant. But they deny Truths testified by God, and therefore shall be damned.
Yes, if they knew them to be thus testified by him and yet would deny them,
that were to give God the lie, and questionless damnable. But if you should
deny a truth which God had testified, but only to a man in the Indies, (as I
said before), and this testification you had never heard of, or at least had no
sufficient reason to believe that God had so testified, Would not you think it
a hard case to be damned for such a denial? Yet consider, I pray, a little more
attentively the difference between them, and you will presently acknowledge,
the question between them is not at any time, or in any thing, Whether God says
true or no? or, Whether he says this or no? But, supposing he says this, and
says true, Whether he means this or no? As for example: Between Lutherans,
Calvinists, and Zwinglians, it is agreed that Christ spoke these words, This is
my Body; and that, whatsoever he meant in saying so is true: But what he meant
and how he is be understood, that is the question. So that though some of them
deny a Truth by God intended, yet you can with no Reason or Justice accuse them
of denying the truth of Gods Testimony, unless you can plainly show that God
has declared, and that plainly and clearly, what was his meaning in these
words. I say, plainly and clearly. For he that speaks obscurely and
ambiguously, and no where declares himself plainly, sure he has no reason to
be much offended if he be mistaken. When therefore you can show, that in this
and all other their Controversies, God has interposed his Testimony on one
Side or other; so that either they do see it, and will not; or, were it not for
their own voluntary and avoidable fault, might and should see it and do not;
let all such Errors be as damnable as you please to make them. In the mean
while, if they suffer themselves neither to be betrayed into their Errors, nor
kept in them by any sin of their will; if they do their best endeavor to free
themselves from all Errors, and yet fail of it through humane frailty; so well
am I persuaded of the goodness of God, that if in me alone, should meet a
confluence of all such Errors of all the Protestants in the World, that were
thus qualified, I should not be so much afraid of them all, as I should be to
ask pardon for them. For, whereas that which you affright us with, of calling
Gods Veracity in Question, is but a Panick fear, a fault that no man thus
qualified, is, or can be guilty of; to ask pardon of simple and purely
involuntary Errors is tacitly to imply that God is angry with us for them, and
that were to impute to him the strange tyranny of requiring brick, when he
gives no straw; of expecting to gather, where he strewed not; to reap where he
sowed not: of being offended with us for not doing what he knows we cannot do.
This I say upon a supposition, that they do their best endeavors to know Gods
will and do it; which he that denies to be possible, knows not what he says;
for he says in effect, That men cannot do, what they can do; for to do what a
man can do, is to do his best endeavor. But because this Supposition, though
certainly possible, is very rare, and admirable, I say, secondly, that I am
verily persuaded, that God will not impute errors to them as sins, who use such
a measure of industry, in finding truth, as humane prudence and ordinary
discretion (their abilities and opportunities, their distractions and
hindrances, and all other things considered) shall advise them unto, in a
matter of such consequence. But if herein also we fail, then our errors begin
to be malignant, and justly imputable; as offenses against God, and that love
of his truth which he requires in us. You will say then, that for those erring
Protestants, which are in this case, which evidently are far the greater patt,
they sin damnably in erring, and therefore there is little hope of their
Salvation. To which I answer, that the consequence of this Reason is somewhat
strong against a Protestant; but much weakened by coming out of the mouth of a
Papist. For all sins with you are not damnable; and therefore Protestants
errors might be sins, and yet not damnable. But yet out of courtesy to you, we
will remove this rub out of your way; and for the present suppose them mortal
sins; and is there then no hope of Salvation for him that commits them? Not,
you will say, if he die in them without repentance; and such Protestants you
speak of, Who without repentance die in their Errors. Yea but what if they die
in their errors with repentance? then I hope you will have Charity enough to
think they may be saved. Charity Mistaken takes it indeed for granted, that
this supposition is destructive of it self; In the place above quoted.
and that it is impossible, and incongruous, that a man should repent of those
errors wherein he dies; or die in those whereof he repents. But it was wisely
done of Him to take it for granted; for most certainly, He could not have
spoken one word of sense for the confirmation of it. For seeing Protestants
believe, as well as you, God's infinite and most admirable perfections in
himself, more than most worthy of all possible love: seeing they believe, as
well as you, his infinite goodness to them, in creating them of nothing; in
creating them according to his own Image; in creating all things for their use
and benefit; in streaming down his favors on them every moment of their lives;
in designing them, if they serve him, to infinite and eternal happiness; in
redeeming them, not with corruptible things, but the precious blood of his
beloved Son: seeing they believe, as well as you, his infinite goodness, and
patience toward them, in expecting their Conversion; in wooing, alluring,
leading, and by all means which his wisdom can suggest unto him, and man's
nature is capable of, drawing them to Repentance and Salvation: Seeing they
believe these things as well as you, and, for ought you know, consider them as
much as you, (and if they do not, it is not their Religion, but They that are
too blame) what can hinder, but that the consideration of God's most infinite
goodness to them, and their own almost infinite wickedness against him, God's
Spirit cooperating with them, may raise them to a true and sincere and a
cordial love of God? And seeing sorrow for having injured or offended the
person beloved, or when we fear we may have offended him, is the most natural
effect of true love; what can hinder, but that love which has oft-times
constrained them to lay down their lives for God, (which, our Savior assures
us is the noblest sacrifice we can offer) may produce in them an universal
sorrow for all their sins, both which they know they have committed, and which
they fear they may have? In which number, their being negligent, or not
dispassionate, or not unprejudicate enough in seeking the truth, and the effect
thereof, their errors, if they be sins, cannot but be comprised. In a word,
what should hinder, but that that Prayer -- Delicta sua quis intelligit? Who
can understand his faults? Lord, cleanse thou me from my secret sins, may be
heard and accepted by God, as well from a Protestant that dies in some errors,
as from a Papist that dies in some other sins of Ignorance, which perhaps he
might more easily have discovered to be sins, than a Protestant could his
errors to be errors? As well from a Protestant, that held some error, which (as
he conceived) God's word, and his reason, (which is also in some sort God's
word) lead him unto; as from a Dominican, who perhaps took up his opinion upon
trust, not because he had reason to believe it true, but because it was the
Opinion of his Order; for the same man, if he had light upon another Order,
would in all probability, have been of the other opinion: For what else is the
cause, that generally all the Dominicans are of one opinion, and all the
Jesuits of the other? I say, from a Dominican who took up his opinion upon
trust; and that such an opinion (if we believe the Writers of your Order) as,
if it be granted true, it were not a point-matter what opinions any man held,
or what actions any man did; for the best would be as bad as the worst, and
worst the as good as the best. And yet such is the partiality of your
Hypocrisy, that, of disagreing Papists, neither shall deny the truth testified
by God, but both may hope for salvation: but, of disagreeing Protestants
(though they differ in the same thing,) one side must deny God's Testimony, and
be incapable of salvation. That a Dominican through culpable negligence, living
and dying in his error, may repent of it, though he knows it not; or be saved,
though he do not: But if a Protestant do the very same thing, in the very same
point, and die in his error, his case is desperate. The sum of all that has
been said to this Demand, is this. 1. That no erring Protestant denies any
truth testified by God, under this formality, as testified by him; nor which
they know or believe to be testified by him. And therefore it is an horrible
calumny in you to say, They call God's Veracity in question. For God's
undoubted and unquestioned Veracity, is to them the ground why they hold all
they do hold: neither do they hold any opinion so stiffly, but they will forgo
it rather than this one, That all which God says is true. 2. God has not so
clearly and plainly declared himself in most of these things which are in
Controversy between Protestants, but that an honest man, whose heart is right
to God, and one that is a true lover of God, and of his truth, may, by reason
of the conflict of contrary Reasons on both sides, very easily, and therefore
excusably mistake, and embrace error for truth, and reject truth for error. 3.
If any Protestant or Papist be betrayed into, or kept in any Error, by any sin
of his will (as it is to be feared many millions are) such Error is, as the
cause of it, sinful and damnable: yet not exclusive of all hope of Salvation,
but pardonable, if discovered, upon a particular explicit repentance; if not
discovered, upon a general and implicit Repentance for all Sins known and
unknown: in which number all sinful Errors must of necessity be contained.


17. Ad. 19. To the 9. wherein you are so urgent for a particular Catalogue of
Fundamentals: I answer almost in your own words, that we also constantly urge
and require to have a particular Catalogue of your Fundamentals, whether they
be written Verities, or unwritten Traditions, or Church-Definitions, all which,
you say, integrate the material Object of your Faith: In a word, of all such
Points as are defined and sufficiently proposed; so that whosoever denies, or
doubts of any of them, is certainly in the state of damnation. A Catalogue I
say in particular of the Proposals: and not only some general definition, or
description, This great diversity of opinions among you, touching this matter,
if any man doubt of it, let him read Franciscus Picus Mirandula in l. Theorem.
in Expos. Theor. quarti; and Th. Waldensis Tom. 3. De Sacramentalibus. doct. 3.
fol. 5. and he shall be fully satisfied that I have done you no injury.
under which you lurk deceitfully, of what and what only is sufficiently
proposed: wherein yet you do not very well agree. For many of you hold the
Pope's proposal Ex Cathedra, to be sufficient and obliging: Some, a Council
without a Pope: Some, of neither of them severally, but only both together:
Some, not this neither in matter of manners, which Bellarmine acknowledges, and
tell us, it is all one in effect, as if they denied it sufficient in matter of
faith: Some not in matter of faith neither think this proposal infallible,
without the acceptance of the Church universal: Some deny the infallibility of
the Present Church: and only make the Tradition of all Ages the infallible
Propounder. Yet if you were agreed, what, and what only, is the infallible
Propounder, this would not satisfy us; nor yet to say that All is Fundamental
which is propounded sufficiently by him. For though agreeing in this, yet you
might still disagree whether such or such a Doctrine were propounded or not:
or, if propounded, whether sufficiently, or only unsufficiently. And it is so
known a thing, that in many Points you do so, that I assure my self you will
not deny it. Therefore we constantly urge and require a particular and perfect
Inventory of all those Divine Revelations, which, you say, are sufficiently
propounded; and that, such an one to which all of your Church will subscribe,
as neither redundant, nor deficient: which when you give in with one hand, you
shall receive a particular Catalogue of such Points as I call Fundamental, with
the other. Neither may you think me unreasonable in this Demand, seeing upon
such a particular Catalogue of your sufficient Proposals as much depends, as
upon a particular Catalogue of our Fundamentals. As for example; Whether or no
a man do not err in some Point defined and sufficiently proposed: and, whether
or no those that differ among you, differ in Fundamentals; which if they do,
One Heaven (by your own Rule) cannot receive them All. Perhaps you will here
complain, that this is not to satisfy your demand, but to avoid it, and to put
you off, as the Areopagites did hard causes, ad diem longissimum, and bid you
come again an hundred years hence. To deal truly, I did so intend it should be.
Neither can you say my dealing with you is injurious, seeing I require nothing
of you, but that, what you require of others, you should show it possible to be
done, and just and necessary to be required. For, for my part, I have great
reason to suspect, it is neither the one nor the other. For whereas the
Verities which are delivered in Scripture, may be very fitly divided into such
as were written because they were necessary to be believed; (of which rank are
those only, which constitute and make up the Covenant between God and Man in
Christ): and then such as are necessary to be believed not in themselves, but
only by accident, because they were written; Of which rank are many matters of
History, of Prophecy, of Mystery, of Policy, of Economy, and such like, which
are evidently not intrinsecal to the Covenant: Now, to sever exactly and
punctually these Verities one from the other, what is necessary in it self and
antecedently to the writing, from what is but only profitable in it self, and
necessary only because written, is a business of extreme great difficulty, and
extreme little necessity. For first, he that will go about to distinguish,
especially in the Story of our Savior, what was written because it was
profitable, from what was written because necessary, shall find an intricate
piece of business of it, and almost impossible that he should be certain he
has done it, when he has done it. And then it is apparently unnecessary to go
about it, seeing he that believes all, certainly believes all that is
necessary: And he that does not believe all (I mean all the undoubted parts of
the undoubted Books of Scripture) can hardly believe any, neither have we
reason to believe he does so. So that, that Protestants give you not a
Catalogue of Fundamentals, it is not from Tergiversation (as you suspect, who
for want of Charity to them always suspect the worst,) but from Wisdom and
Necessity. For they may very easily err in doing it; because though all which
is necessary be plain in Scripture, yet all which is plain, is not therefore
written because it was necessary. For what greater necessity was there that I
should know S. Paul left his Cloak at Troas, than those Worlds of Miracles,
which our Savior did, which were never written. And when they had done it, it
had been to no purpose; There being, as matters now stand, as great necessity
of believing those Truths of Scripture which are not Fundamental, as those that
are. You see then what reason we have to decline this hard labor, which you a
rigid Task-master have here put upon us. Yet instead of giving you a Catalogue
of Fundamentals, with which I dare say you are resolved, before it come, never
to be satisfied, I will say that to you, which, if you please, may do you as
much service; and this it is: That it is sufficient for any man's Salvation
that he believe the Scripture: that he endeavor to believe it in the true
sense of it, as far as concerns his duty: And that he conform his life unto it
either by Obedience or Repentance. He that does so (and all Protestants
according to the Dictamin of their Religion should do so) may be secure that he
cannot err Fundamentally. And they that do so, cannot differ in Fundamentals.
So that, notwithstanding their differences, and your presumption, the same
Heaven may receive them All.

28. Ad. 20. Your tenth and last request is, to know distinctly what is the
Doctrine of the Protestant English Church, in these Points; and what my private
opinion. Which shall be satisfied when the Church of England has expressed her
self in them; or when you have told us what is the Doctrine of your Church, in
the Question of Predetermination, or the Immaculate Conception.

29. Ad 21, and 22. These answers, I hope, in the judgment of indifferent men
are satisfactory to your Questions, though not to you, For I have either
answered them, or given you a reason why I have not. Neither, for ought I can
see, have I flitted from things considered in their own nature, to accidental
or rare Circumstances, but told you my opinion plainly what I thought of your
Errors in themselves: and what as they were qualified or malignified with good
or bad circumstances. Though I must tell you truly, that I see no reason, the
Question being of the damnableness of Error, why you should esteem ignorance,
incapacity, want of means to be instructed, accidental and rare Circumstances:
As if knowledge, capacity, having means of Instruction, concerning the truth of
your Religion or ours, were not as rare and unusual in the adverse part of
either, as Ignorance, Incapacity, and want of means of instruction. Especially
how, erroneous Conscience can be a rare thing in those that err, or how
unerring Conscience is not much more rare, I am not able to apprehend. So that
to consider men of different Religions (the subject of this Controversy) in
their own nature and without circumstances, must be to consider them, neither
as ignorant, nor as knowing: neither as having, nor as wanting means of
Instruction: neither as with Capacity, nor without it: neither with erroneous,
nor yet with unerring conscience. And then what judgment can you pronounce of
them, all the goodness and badness of an Action depending on the Circumstances?
Ought not a Judge being to give sentence of an Action, to consider all the
Circumstances of it? or is it possible he should judge rightly that does not
so? Neither is it to purpose, That Circumstances being various, cannot be well
comprehended under any general rule: For though under any general rule they
cannot, yet under many general rules they may, be comprehended. The Question
here is, you say, Whether men of different Religions may be saved? Now the
subject of this Question is an ambiguous term, and may be determined and
invested with diverse and contrary Circumstances: and accordingly, contrary
judgments are to be given of it. And who then can be offended with D. Potter
for distinguishing before he defines, (the want whereof is the chief thing that
makes defining dangerous?) Who can find fault with him for saying, If, through
want of means of instruction, incapacity, invincible or probable ignorance a
man die in error, he may be saved. But if he be negligent in seeking Truth,
unwilling to find it, either does see it and will not, or might see it and will
not, that his case is dangerous, and without repentance desperate. This is all
that D. Potter says: neither rashly damning all that are of a different opinion
from him, nor securing any that are in matter of Religion sinfully, that is,
willingly erroneous. The Author of this Reply (I will abide by it) says the
very same thing, neither can I see what adversary he has in the main Question
but his own shadow; and yet, I know not out of what frowardness, finds fault
with D. Potter for affirming that which himself affirms: And to cloud the
matter, whereas the Question is, Whether men by ignorance, dying in error, may
be saved, he would have them considered neither as erring, nor ignorant. And
when the question is, whether The Errors of Papists be damnable, to which we
answer, That to them that do or might know them to be errors, they are
damnable; to them that do not, they are not: He tells us that this is to change
the state of the Question, whereas indeed it is to state the Question, and free
it from ambiguity before you answer it: and to have recourse to Accidental
Circumstances; as if Ignorance were accidental to error, or as if a man could
be considered as in error, and not be considered as in ignorance of the Truth
from which he errs! Certainly, Error against a Truth, must needs presuppose a
nescience of it: unless you will say that a man may at once resolve for a Truth
and resolve against it; assent to it, and dissent from it; know it to be true,
and believe it not to be true. Whether Knowledge and Opinion touching the same
thing may stand together, is made a Question in the Schools: But he that would
question, Whether knowing a thing and doubting of it, much more, whether
knowing it to be true, and believing it to be false, may stand together,
deserves without question no other Answer but laughter. Now if Error and
Knowledge cannot consist, then Error and Ignorance must be inseparable. He then
that professes your errors may well be considered either as knowing or as
Ignorant. But him that does err indeed, you can no more conceive without
ignorance, than Long without Quantity, Virtuous without Quality, a Man and not
a living Creature, to have gone ten miles and not to have gone five, to speak
sense and not to speak. For as the latter in all these is employed in the
former, so is Ignorance of a Truth, supposed in Error against it. Yet such a
man, though not conceivable without ignorance simply, may be very well
considered either as with, or without voluntary and sinful Ignorance. And he
that will give a wise answer to this Question, Whether a Papist dying a Papist
may be saved, according to God's ordinary proceeding; must distinguish him
according to these several considerations, and say, He may be saved, If his
Ignorance were either invincible, or at least unaffected and probable: if
otherwise, without repentance he cannot.

To the rest of this Preface, I have nothing to say, saving what has been
said, but this, That it is no just exception to an argument to call it vulgar
and threadbare. Truth can neither be too common nor super-annuated, nor Reason
ever worn out. Let your Answers be solid and pertinent, and we will never find
fault with them for being old or common.

The FIRST PART.
CHAP. I. The State of the Question; with a summary of the Reasons for which,
amongst men of different Religions, one Side only can be saved.
NEver is malice more indiscreet, than when it charge others with imputation
of that, to which it self becomes more liable, even by that very act of
accusing others. For, though guiltiness be the effect of some error, yet
usually it begets a kind of Moderation, so far forth, as not to let men cast
such aspersions upon others, as must apparently reflect upon themselves. Thus
cannot the Poet endure that Gracchus, Quis tulerit Gracchum, etc.
who was a factious and unquiet man, should be inveighing against Sedition: And
the Roman Orator rebukes Philosophers; who, to wax glorious, superscribed their
Names upon those very Books, which they entitled, Of the contempt of Glory.
What then shall we say of D. Potter, who in the Title and Text of his whole
Book, does so tragically charge Want of Charity on all such Romanists as dare
affirm, that Protestancy destroys Salvation; while he himself is in act of
pronouncing the like heavy doom against Roman Catholics? For, not satisfied
with much uncivil language, in affirming the Roman Church many Page 11.
ways to have played the Harlot, and in that regard deserved a bill of divorce
from Christ, and detestation of Christians; in styling her, that proud Ibid.
and cursed Dame of Rome, which takes upon her to revel in the House of God; in
talking of an Idol Page 4. Edit. 1.
to be worshipped at Rome; he comes at length to thunder out this fearful
sentence against her: For that Page 20.
Mass of Errors (says he) in judgment and practice, which is proper to her,
and wherein she differs from us, we judge a reconciliation impossible, and to
us, (who are convicted in conscience of her corruptions) damnable. And in
another place he says: For us who Page 81.
are convincted in conscience, that she erres in many things, a necessity lies
upon us, even under pain of damnation, to forsake her in those Errors. By the
acerbity of which Censure, he does not only make himself guilty of that which
he judges to be a heinous offense in others, but freeth us also from all
color of crime by this his unadvised recrimination. For, if Roman Catholics
be likewise convicted in conscience of the Errors of Protestants, they may, and
must, in conformity to the Doctor's own rule, judge a reconciliation with them
to be also damnable. And thus, all the Want of Charity, so deeply charged on
us, dissolves it self into this poor wonder, Roman Catholics believe in their
conscience, that the Religion which they profess, is true, and the contrary
false.

2. Nevertheless, we earnestly desire, and take care, that our doctrine may not
be defamed by misinterpretation. Far be it from us, by way of insultation, to
apply it against Protestants, otherwise than as they are comprehended under the
generality of those who are divided from the only one true Church of Christ our
Lord, within the Communion whereof he has confined salvation. Neither do we
understand, why our most dear Countrymen should be offended if the Universality
be particularized under the name of Protestants, first given Sleidan. l. 6.
fol. 84.
to certain Lutherans, who protesting that they would stand out against the
Imperial decrees, in defense of the Confession exhibited at Ausburge, were
termed Protestants, in regard of such their protesting: which Confessio
Augustana, disclaiming from, and being disclaimed by Calvinists and Zwinglians,
our naming or exemplifying a general doctrine under the particular name of
Protestantism, ought not in any particular manner to be odious in England.

3. Moreover, our meaning is not, as misinformed persons may conceive, that we
give Protestants over to reprobation; that we offer no prayers in hope of their
salvation; that we hold their case desperate. God forbid! We hope, we pray for,
their Conversion; and sometimes we find happy effects of our charitable
desires. Neither is our Censure immediately directed to particular persons. The
Tribunal of particular Judgment is God's alone. When any man, esteemed a
Protestant, leaves to live in this world, we do not instantly with
precipitation avouch, that he is lodged in Hell. For we are not always
acquainted with what sufficiency of means he was furnished for instruction; we
do not penetrate his capacity to understand his Catechist; we have no
revelation what light might have cleared his errors, or Contrition retracted
his sins, in the last moment before his death. In such particular cases, we
wish more apparent signs of salvation, but do not give any dogmatical sentence
of perdition. How grievous sins, Disobedience, Schism, and Heresy are, is well
known. But to discern how far the natural malignity of those great offenses
might be checked by Ignorance, or by some such lessening circumstance, is the
office rather of Prudence than of Faith.

4. Thus we allow Protestants as much Charity, as D. Potter spares us, for whom
in the words above mentioned, and elsewhere, he See P. 39.
makes Ignorance the best hope of salvation. Much less comfort can we expect
from the fierce doctrine of those chief Protestantss, who teach that for many
Ages before Luther, Christ had no visible Church upon earth. Not these men
alone, or such as they, but even the 39. Articles, to which the English
Protestant Clergy subscribes, censure our belief so deeply, that Ignorance can
scarce, or rather not at all, excuse us from damnation. Our Doctrine of
Transubstantiation, is affirmed to be repugnant to the plain words of Art. 28.
Scripture; our Masses to be blasphemous Art. 31.
Fabies, with much more to be seen in the Articles themselves. In a certain
Confession of the Christian Faith, at the end of their books of Psalms
collected into Me^ter, and printed Cum privlegio Regis Regali, they call us
Idolaters, and limbs of Antichrist; and having set down a Catalogue of our
doctrins, they conclude, that for them we shall after the General Resurrection
be damned to unquestionable fire.

5. But yet lest any man should flatter himself with our charitable
Mitigations, and thereby wax careless in search of the true Church, we desire
him to read the Conclusion of the Second Part, where this matter is more
explained.

6. And because we cannot determine what Judgment may be esteemed rash, or
prudent, except by weighing the reasons upon which it was grounded, we will
here, under one aspect, present a Summary of those Principles, from which we
infer, that Protestancy in it self unrepented destroys Salvation: intending
afterward to prove the truth of every one of the grounds, till, by a
concatenation of sequels, we fall upon the Conclusion, for which we are charged
with Want of Charity.

7. Now, this is our gradation of reasons: Almighty God, having ordained
Mankind to a supernatural End of eternal felicity, has in his holy Providence
settled competent and convenient Means, whereby that end may be attained. The
universal grand Origin of all such means, is the Incarnation and Death of our
Blessed Savior, whereby he merited internal grace for us; and founded an
external visible Church, provided and stored with all those helps which might
be necessary to Salvation. From hence it follows, that in this Church, among
other advantages, there must be some effectual means to beget and conserve
Faith, to maintain Unity, to discover and condemn Heresies, to appease and
reduce Schisms, and to determine all Controversies in Religion. For without
such means the Church should not be furnished with helps sufficient to
salvation, nor God afford sufficient means to attain that End, to which himself
ordained Mankind. This means to decide Controversies in Faith and Religion
(whether it should be the holy Scripture, or whatsoever else) must be endued
with an Universal Infallibility in whatsoever it propounds for a divine
Truth, that is, as revealed, spoken, or testified by Almighty God, whether the
matter of its nature be great or small. For if it were subject to Error in any
one thing, we could not in any other yield it infallible assent; because we
might with good reason doubt, whether it chanced not to err in that particular.

8. Thus far all must agree to what we have said, unless they have a mind to
reduce Faith to Opinion. And even out of these grounds alone, without further
proceeding, it undeniably follows, that of two men dissenting in matters of
faith, great or small, few or many, the one cannot be saved without repentance,
unless Ignorance accidentally may in some particular person plead excuse. For
in that case of contrary belief, one must of necessity be held to oppose Gods
Word, or Revelation sufficiently represented to his understanding by an
infallible Propounder; which opposition to the Testimony of God is undoubtedly
a damnable sin, whether otherwise, the thing so testified, be in it self great
or small. And thus we have already made good what was promised in the argument
of this Chapter, that amongst men of different Religions, one is only capable
of being saved.

9. Nevertheless, to the end that men may know in particular what is the said
infallible means upon which we are to rely in all things concerning Faith, and
accordingly may be able to judge in what safety or danger, more or less they
live; and because D. Potter descends to diverse particulars about Scriptures
and the Church, etc. we will go forward, and prove, that although Scripture be
in it self most sacred, infallible, and divine, yet it alone cannot be to us a
Rule, or Judge, fit and able to end all doubts and debates emergent in matters
of Religion; but that there must be some external, visible, public, living
Judge, to whom all sorts of persons, both learned and unlearned, may without
danger of error have recourse; and in whose judgment they may rest for the
interpreting and propounding of Gods Word or Revelation. And this living Judge
we will most evidently prove to be no other, but that Holy, Catholic;
Apostolic, and Visible Church, which our Savior purchased with the effusion
of his most precious blood.

10. If once therefore it be granted, that the Church is that means which God
has left for deciding all Controversies in Faith, it manifestly will follow,
that she must be infallible in all her determinations, whether the matters of
themselves be great or small; because, as we said above, it must be agreed on
all sides, that if that means which God has left to determine Controversies
were not infallible in all things proposed by it, as truths revealed by
Almighty God, it could not settle in our minds a firm and infallible belief of
any one.

11. From this Universal Infallibility of God's Church, it follows, that
whosoever wittingly denies any one Point proposed by her, as revealed by God,
is injurious to his divine Majesty, as if he could either deceive, or be
deceived in what he testifies. The averring whereof, were not a Fundamental
error, but would overthrow the very foundation of all Fundamental Points, and
therefore, without repentance, could not possibly stand with salvation.

12. Out of these grounds we will show, that although the distinction of Points
Fundamental, and not Fundamental be good and useful, as it is delivered and
applied by Catholic Divines, to teach what principal Articles of faith,
Christians are obliged explicitly to believe: yet that it is impertinent to
the present purpose of excusing any man from grievous sin, who knowingly
disbelieves, that is, believes the contrary of that which God's Church
proposes as Divine Truth. For it is one thing not to know explicitly
something testified by God, and another positively to oppose what we know he
has testified. The former may often be excused from sin, but never the latter,
which only is the case in Question.

13. In the same manner shall be demonstrated, that to allege the Creed, as
containing all Articles of Faith, necessary to be explicitly believed, is not
pertinent to free from sin, the voluntary denial of any other Point known to be
defined by God's Church. And this were sufficient to overthrow all that D.
Potter alleges concerning the Creed: though yet, by way of Supererogation,
we will prove, that there are diverse important matters of Faith which are not
mentioned at all in the Creed.

14. From the aforesaid main Principle, that God has always had, and always
will have on earth, a Church Visible, within whose Communion Salvation must be
hoped; and infallible, whose definitions we ought to believe; we will prove,
that Luther, Calvin, and all other, who continue the division in Communion, or
Faith, from that Visible Church, which at, and before, Luther's appearance was
spread over the world, cannot be excused from Schism and Heresy, although they
opposed her Faith but in one only Point; whereas it is manifest, they dissent
from her in many and weighty matters, concerning as well belief, as practice.

15. To these reasons drawn from the virtue of Faith, we will add one other
taken from Charitas propria, the Virtue of Charity, as it obliges us, not to
expose our soul to hazard of perdition, when we can put our selves in a way
much more secure, as we will prove that of the Roman Catholics to be.

16. We are then to prove these points: First, that the infallible means to
determine controversies in matters of Faith, is the visible Church of Christ.
Secondly, that the distinction of Points Fundamental, and not-Fundamental,
makes nothing to our present Question. Thirdly, that, to say the Creed
contains all Fundamental Points of Faith, is neither pertinent nor true.
Fourthly, that both Luther, and all they who, after him, persist in division
from the Communion and Faith of the Roman Church, cannot be excused from
Schism. Fifthly, nor from Heresy. Sixthly and lastly, that in regard of the
precept of Charity toward one's self, Protestants be in state of sin, as long
as they remain divided from the Roman Church. And these six Points, shall be
several Arguments for so many ensuing Chapters.

17. Only I will here observe, that it seems very strange that Protestants
should charge ^s so deeply with Want of Charity, for only teaching, that both
they and we cannot be saved, seeing themselves must affirm the like of
whosoever opposes any least Point delivered in Scripture, which they hold to
be the sole Rule of Faith. Out of which ground they must be enforced to let all
our former Inferences pass for Good. For, is it not a grievous sin, to deny any
one truth contained in Holy Writ? Is there in such denial, any distinction
between Points Fundamental, and not-Fundamental, sufficient to excuse from
Heresy? Is it not impertinent, to allege the Creed containing all Fundamental
Points of Faith, as if, believing it alone, we were at liberty to deny all
other Points of Scripture? In a word: According to Protestants; Oppose not
Scripture, there is no Error against Faith; Oppose it in any least Point, the
Error (if Scripture be sufficiently proposed, which proposition is also
required before a man can be obliged to believe even Fundamental Points) must
be damnable. What is this, but to say with us, Of Persons contrary in
whatsoever Point of belief, one party only can be saved? And D. Potter must not
take it ill, if Catholics believe they may be saved in that Religion for
which they suffer. And if by occasion of this doctrine, men will still be
charging us with Want of Charity, and be resolved to take scandal where none is
given; we must comfort our selves with that grave and true saying of S.
Gregory: If scandal S. Greg. Hom. 7. in Ezekiel.
be taken from declaring a truth, it is better to permit scandal, than forsake
the truth. But the solid grounds of our Assertion, and the sincerity of our
intention in uttering what we think, yields us confidence, that all will hold
for most reasonable the saying of Pope Gelasius to Anastasius the Emperor: Far
be it from the Roman Emperor that he should hold it for a wrong, to have truth
declared to him! Let us therefore begin with that Point which is the first that
can be controverted betwixt Protestants, and us, for as much as concerns the
present Question, and is contained in the Argument of the next ensuing Chap.

The ANSWER to the FIRST CHAPTER. Showing, that the Adversary grants the Former
Question and proposes a New one: And that there is no reason, why among men of
different opinions and Communions, one Side only can be saved.
AD 1.. Your first onset is very violent. D. Potter is charged with malice and
indiscretion, for being uncharitable to you, while he is accusing you of
uncharitableness. Verily, a great fault, and folly, if the accusation be just;
if unjust, a great Calumny. Let us see then how you make good your charge. The
effect of your discourse, if I mistake not, is this: D. Potter charge the
Roman Church with many and great Errors; judges reconciliation between her
Doctrine and ours, impossible; and that for them who are convicted in
Conscience of her Errors, not to forsake her in them, or to be reconciled unto
her, is damnable: Therefore, if Roman Catholics be convicted in Conscience
of the Errors of Protestants, they may and must judge a reconciliation with
them damnable; and consequently to judge so, is no more uncharitable in them,
than it is in the Doctor to judge as he does. All this I grant; nor would any
Protestant accuse you of want of Charity, if you went no further: if you judged
the Religion of Protestants damnable to them only who profess it, being
convicted in conscience that it is erroneous. For, if a man judge some act of
virtue to be a sin, in him it is a sin indeed: So you have taught us, p. 19. So
if you be convinced, or rather, to speak properly, persuaded in conscience,
that our Religion is erroneous, the profession of it, though it self most true,
to you would be damnable. This therefore I subscribe very willingly, and
withal, that if you said no more, D. Potter and my self should be not to
Papists only, but even to Protestants, as uncharitable as you are. For I shall
always profess and glory in this uncharitableness of judging hypocrisy a
damnable sin. Let Hypocrites then and Dissemblers on both sides pass. It is not
toward them, but good Christians; not to Protestant Professors, but Believers,
that we require your Charity. What think you of those that believe so verily
the truth of our Religion, that they are resolved to die in it, and, if
occasion were, to die for it? What Charity have you for them? What think ye of
those that, in the days of our Fathers, laid down their lives for it? Are you
content that they shall be saved, or do you hope they may be so? Will you
grant, that, notwithstanding their Errors, there is good hope they might die
with repentance? and, if they did so, certainly they are saved? If you will do
so, this Controversy is ended. No man will hereafter charge you with want of
Charity. This is as much as either we give you, or expect of you, while you
remain in your Religion. But then you must leave abusing silly people, with
telling them (as your fashion is) that Protestants confess, Papists may be
saved, but Papists confess not so much of Protestants; therefore yours is the
safer way, and in Wisdom and Charity to our own souls we are bound to follow
it. For, granting this, you grant as much hope of salvation to Protestants, as
Protestants do to you. If you will not, but will still affirm, as Charity
Mistaken does, that Protestants, not dissemblers, but believers, without a
particular repentance of their Religion cannot be saved: This, I say, is a want
of Charity, into the society whereof D. Potter cannot be drawn but with
palpable and transparent Sophistry. For, I pray Sir, what dependence is there
between these Propositions: We that hold Protestant Religion false should be
damned if we should profess it, Therefore they also shall be damned, that hold
it true? Just as if you should conclude, Because he that doubts is damned if he
eat, Therefore he that does not doubt, is damned also if he eat. And therefore
though your Religion to us, and ours to you, if professed against Conscience,
would be damnable; yet may it well be uncharitable to define it shall be so, to
them that profess either this or that according to Conscience. This
recrimination therefore upon D. Potter wherewith you begin, is a plain Fallacy:
And, I fear, your proceedings will be answerable to these beginnings!

2. Ad. 2. In this Paragraph, Protestants are thus far comforted, that they are
not sent to Hell without Company; which, the Poet tells us, is the miserable
comfort of miserable Men. Then we in England are requested not to be offended
with the name of Protestants. Which is a favor I shall easily grant, if by it
be understood those that Protest, not against Imperial Edicts, but against the
Corruptions of the Church of Rome.

3. Ad. 3, 4, 5, 6. That you give us not over to reprobation, That you pray and
hope for our salvation, if it be a Charity, it is such an one as is common to
Turks, and Jews, and Pagans with us. But that which follows, is extraordinary;
neither do I know any man that requires more of you than there you pretend to.
For there you tell us, That when any man, esteemed a Protestant, dies, you do
not instantly avouch that he is lodged in Hell. Where the word, esteemed, is
ambiguous: For it may signify, esteemed truly, or esteemed falsely. He may be
esteemed a Protestant that is so: And he may be esteemed a Protestant that is
not so. And therefore I should have had just occasion to have laid to your
charge the transgression of your own chief prescription, which you say, truth
exacts at our hands, that is, to speak clearly or distinctly, and not to walk
in darkness; but that your following words, to my understanding, declare
sufficiently, that you speak of both sorts. For there you tell us, that the
Reasons, why you damn not any man that dies with the esteem of a Protestant,
are, 1. Because you are not always acquainted with what sufficiency of means
he was furnished for instruction; You must mean touching the falsehood of his
own Religion, and the truth of yours. Which reason is proper to those that are
Protestants in truth, and not only in estimation. 2. Because you do not
penetrate his capacity to understand his Catechist; which is also peculiar to
those, who for want of capacity (as you conceive) remain Protestants indeed,
and are not only so accounted. 3. Because you have no Revelation what light
might clear his errors; which belongs to those which were esteemed Protestants,
but indeed were not so. 4. Because you have no Revelation what Contrition might
have retracted his sins: which reason being distinct from the former, and
divided from it by the disjunctive Particle, Or, insinuates unto us, that
though no light did clear the errors of a dying Protestant; yet Contrition
might, for ought you know, retract his sins: which appropriates this reason
also to Protestants truly so esteemed.
I wish with all my heart that in obedience to your own Prescription, you had
expressed your self in this matter more fully and plainly. Yet that which you
say, does plainly enough afford us these Corollaries.

1 That whatsoever Protestant wants capacity, or, having it, wants
sufficient means of instruction to convince his Conscience of the falsehood of
his own, and the truth of the Roman Religion, by the confession of his most
rigid Adversaries, may be saved, notwithstanding any error in his Religion. 2
That nothing hinders, but that a Protestant, dying a Protestant, may die with
Contrition for all his sins. 3 That if he do die with Contrition, he may and
shall be saved.
4. All these acknowledgements we have from you, while you are, as you say,
stating, but, as I conceive, granting the very Point in question; which was, as
I have already proved out of C. M. Whether, without uncharitableness, you may
pronounce, that Protestants dying in the belief of their Religion, and without
particular repentance and dereliction of it, cannot possibly be saved. Which C.
M. affirms universally, and without any of your limitations. But this
presumption of his, you thus qualify, by saying, that This sentence cannot he
pronounced truly, and therefore sure not charitably; Neither of those
Protestants that want means sufficient to instruct and convince them of the
truth of your Religion, and the falsehood of their own; Nor of those, who though
they have negected the means they might have had, dyed with Contrittion, that
is, with a sorrow for all their sins, proceeding from the love of God. So that,
according to your Doctrine, it shall remain upon such only as either were, or,
but for their own fault, might have been, sufficiently convinced of the truth
of your Religion, and the falsehood of their own, and yet dye in it without
Contrition. Which Doctrine if you would stand to; and not pull down, and pull
back with one hand, what you give and build with the other, this Controversy
were ended; and I should willingly acknowledge that which follows in your
fourth Paragraph, That you allow Protestants as much Charity as D. Potter
allows you. But then I must entreat you to alter the argument of this Chapter,
and not to go about to give us reasons, why, amongst men of different
Religions, one side only can be saved absolutely, which your Reasons drive at:
But you must temper the crudeness of your Assertion, by saying, One side only
can be saved, unless want of Conviction, or else Repentance, excuse the other.
Besides, you must not only abstain from damning any Protestant in particular,
but, from affirming in general, that Protestants dying in their Religion cannot
be saved; for you must always remember to add this Caution, unless they were
excusably Ignorant of the falsehood of it, or died with Contrition. And then,
considering that you cannot know, whether or no, all things considered, they
were convinced sufficiently of the truth of your Religion, and the falsehood of
their own, you are obliged by Charity to judge the best, and hope they are not.
Considering again, that, notwithstanding their Errors; they may die with
Contrition, and that it is no way improbable that they do so, and the contrary
you cannot be certain of, You are bound in Charity to judge and hope they do
so. Considering thirdly and lastly, that if they die not with Contrition, yet
it is very probable they may die with Attrition, and that this pretense of
yours, that Contrition will serve without actual Confession, but Attrition will
not, is but a nicety or fancy, or rather, to give it the true name, a Device of
your own, to serve ends and purposes; God having no where declared himself, but
that wheresoever he will accept of that Repentance, which you are pleased to
call Contrition, he will accept of that which you call Attrition; For, though
he like best the bright flaming holocaust of Love, yet he rejects not, he
quenches not, the smoking flax of that Repentance (if it be true and
effectual) which proceeds from hope and fear: These things, I say, considered
(unless you will have the Charity of your Doctrine rise up in judgment against
your uncharitable Practice) you must not only not be peremptory, in damning
Protestants, but you must hope well of their Salvation: and, out of this hope,
you must do for them as well as others, those, as you conceive, Charitable
Offices, of Praying, giving Alms, and offering Sacrifice, which usually you do,
for those of whose Salvation you are well and charitably persuaded; (for, I
believe, you will never conceive so well of Protestants, as to assure your
selves they go directly to heaven.) These things when you do, I shall believe
you think as charitably as you speak. But until then, as he said in the
Comedy, Quid verba audiam, cum facta* videam? so may I say to you, Quid verba
audiam, cum facta non videam? To what purpose should you give us charitable
words, which presently you retract again, by denying us your charitable
actions? And, as these things you must do, if you will stand to and make good
this pretended Charity, so must I tell you again and again, that one thing you
must not do; I mean, You must not affright poor people out of their Religion,
with telling them, that, by the confession of both sides, your way is safe,
but, in your judgment, ours undoubtedly damnable. Seeing neither you deny
Salvation to Protestants dying with repentance, nor we promise it to you, if ye
die without it. For, to deal plainly with you, I know no Protestant that has
any other hope of your Salvation, but upon these grounds, that unaffected
ignorance may excuse you, or true repentance obtain pardon for you; neither do
the heavy censures, which Protestants (you say) pass upon your errors, any way
hinder, but they may hope as well of you, upon Repentance, as I do. For the
fierce Doctrine, which, God knows who, teaches, that Christ for many Ages
before Luther had no visible Church upon earth; will be mild enough, if you
conceive them to mean (as perhaps they do) by no visible Church, none pure and
free from corruptions, which in your judgment is all one with no Church. But
the truth is, the corruption of the Church, and the destruction of it, is not
all one. For, if a particular Man or Church may (as you confess they may) hold
some particular Errors, and yet be a Member of the Church Universal; why may
not the Church hold some Universal Error, and yet be still the Church?
especially seeing, you say, it is nothing but opposing the Doctrine of the
Church that makes an Error damnable, and it is impossible, that the Church
should oppose the Church, I mean, that the present Church should oppose it
self. And then for the English Protestants, though they censure your Errors
deeply, yet, by your favor, with their deepest censures it may well consist,
that invincible ignorance may excuse you from damnation for them. For you your
self confess, That Ignorance may excuse Errors, even in Fundamental Articles of
Faith: so that a man so erring shall not offend at all in such his ignorance or
error: they are your own words, Pref.. 22. And again, with their heaviest
censures it may well consist, that your Errors, though in themselves damnable,
yet may prove not-damning to you, if you die with true repentance, for all your
sins known and unknown.

5. Thus much Charity therefore, if you stand to what you have said, is
interchangeably granted by each Side to the other, that Neither Religion is so
fatally destructive, but that by Ignorance or Repentance Salvation may be had
on both Sides: though with a difference that keeps Papists still on the more
uncharitable side. For whereas we conceive a lower degree of Repentance (that
which they call Attrition) if it be true, and effectual, and convert the heart
of the penitent, will serve in them: They pretend (even this Author which is
most charitable toward us) that without Contrition there is no hope for us.
But, though Protestants may not obtain this purchase at so easy a rate as
Papists; yet (even Papists being Judges) they may obtain it: and, though there
is no entrance for them but at the only door of Contrition, yet they may enter;
Heaven is not inaccessible to them. Their errors are no such impenetrable
Isthmus's between them and Salvation, but that Contrition may make away through
them. All their Schism and Heresy is no such fatal poison, but that, if a man
join with it the Antidote of a general Repentance, he may die in it, and live
for ever. Thus much then being acknowledged, I appeal to any indifferent
Reader, whether C. M. be not by his Hyperaspist forsaken in the plain field,
and the Point in question granted to D. Potter, viz. That Protestancy, even
without a particular Repentance, is not destructive of Salvation. So that all
the Controversy remaining now, is, not simply Whether Protestancy unrepented
destroys Salvation? as it was at first proposed, but, Whether Protestancy in it
self (that is, abstracted from Ignorance and Contrition) destroys Salvation? So
that, as a foolish fellow, who gave a Knight the Lie, desiring withal leave of
him to set his Knighthood aside, was answered by him, that he would not suffer
any thing to be set aside that belonged unto him: So might we justly take it
amiss, that, conceiving as you do, Ignorance and Repentance such necessary
things for us, you are not more willing to consider us with them, than without
them. For my part, such is my Charity to you, that considering what great
necessity You have, as much as any Christian Society in the World, that these
Sanctuaries of Ignorance and Repentance should always stand open, I can very
hardly persuade my self so much as in my most secret consideration to divest
you of these so needful qualifications: But whenever your errors,
superstitions, and impieties come into my mind, (and, besides the general bonds
of Humanity and Christianity, my own particular Obligations to many of you,
such and so great, that you cannot perish without a part of my Self,) my only
comfort is, amidst these Agonies, that the Doctrine and Practice too of
Repentance, is yet remaining in your Church: And that, though you put on a face
of confidence of your innocence in point of Doctrine, yet you will be glad to
stand in the eye of Mercy as well as your fellows, and not be so stout, as to
refuse either God's pardon or the King's.

6. But for the present, Protestancy is called to the bar, and though not
sentenced by you to death without Mercy, yet arraigned of so much natural
malignity, (if not corrected by ignorance or contrition) as to be in it self
destructive of Salvation. Which Controversy I am content to dispute with you,
tying my self to follow the Rules prescribed by you in your Preface. Only I am
to remember you, that the adding of this limitation (in it self) has made this
a new Question; and that this is not the Conclusion, for which you were charged
with want of Charity. But that, whereas, according to the grounds of your own
Religion, Protestants may die in their supposed errors, either with excusable
ignorance, or with Contrition, and if they do so, may be saved, you still are
peremptory in pronouncing them damned. Which Position, supposing your Doctrine
true, and ours false, as it is far from Charity, (whose essential Character it
is, to judge and hope the best), so I believe that I shall clearly evince this
new, but more moderate, Assertion of yours to be far from verity, and that it
is Popery, and not Protestancy, which in it self destroys Salvation.

7. Ad. 7. and 8. In your gradation I shall rise so far with you as to grant,
That Christ founded a visible Church, stored with all helps necessary to
Salvation, particularly with sufficient means to beget and conserve Faith, to
maintain Unity, and compose Schisms, to discover and condemn Heresies, and to
determine all Controversies in Religion, which were necessary to be determined.
For all these purposes, he gave at the beginning (as we may see in the Epistle
to the Ephesians) Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists, Pastors, and Doctors: who by
word of mouth taught their Contemporaries, and by writings (wrote indeed by
some, but approved by all of them) taught their Christian posterity to the
world's end, how all these ends, and that which is the End of all these ends,
Salvation, is to be achieved. And these means the Providence of God has still
preserved, and so preserved, that they are sufficient for all these intents. I
say, sufficient, though, through the malice of men, not always effectual; for,
that the same means may be Sufficient for the compassing an end, and not
Effectual, you must not deny, who hold, that God gives to all men sufficient
means of Salvation, and yet that all are not saved. I said also, Sufficient to
determine all Controversies, which were necessary to be determined. For, if
some Controversies may for many Ages be undetermined, and yet in the meanwhile
men be saved; why should, or how can the Church's being furnished with
effectual means to determine all Controversies in Religion, be necessary to
Salvation; the end it self, to which these means are ordained, being, as
experience shows, not necessary? Plain sense will teach every man, that the
necessity of the means must always be measured by, and can never exceed, the
necessity of the end. As, if eating be necessary, only that I may live; then
certainly if I have no necessity to live, I have no necessity to eat. If I have
no need to be at London, I have no need of a horse to carry me thither. If I
have no need to fly, I have no need of wings. Answer me then I pray directly,
and categorically, Is it necessary that all Controversies in Religion should be
determined? or, is it not? If it be, Why is the the Question of
Predetermination, of the immaculate Conception, of the Pope's indirect power in
Temporalties, so long undetermined? If not, What is it but hypocrisy to
pretend such great necessity of such effectual means, for the atchieving that
end, which is it self not necessary? Christians therefore have and shall have
means sufficient (though not always effectual) to determine, not all
Controversies, but all necessary to be determined. I proceed on farther with
you, and grant that this means to decide Controversies in Faith and Religion,
must be endued with an Universal Infallibility in whatsoever it propounds for
a divine Truth. For, if it may be false in any one thing of this nature, in
anything which God requires men to believe, we can yield unto it but a wavering
and fearful assent in any thing. These Grounds therefore I grant very readily,
and give you free leave to make your best advantage of them. And yet, to deal
truly, I do not perceive how from the denial of any of them it would follow
that Faith is Opinion: or, from the granting them, that it is not so. But for
for my part whatsoever clamor you have raised against me, I think no otherwise
of the Nature of Faith, I mean, Historical Faith, than generally both
Protestants and Papists do; for, I conceive it an assent to divine Revelations
upon the Authority of the Revealer. Which though in many things it differ from
Opinion, (as commonly the word opinion is understood) yet in some things, I
doubt not but you will confess, that it agrees with it. As first, that as
Opinion is an Assent, so is Faith also. Secondly, that as Opinion, so Faith, is
always built upon less evidence than that of Sense or Science. Which Assertion
you not only grant, but mainly contend for in your sixth Chapter. Thirdly and
lastly, that, as Opinion, so Faith admit degrees; and that, as there may be a
strong and weak Opinion, so there may be a strong and weak Faith. These things
if you will grant (as sure if you be in your right mind you will not deny any
of them) I am well contented that this ill-sounding word, Opinion, should be
discarded, and that among the Intellectual habits you should seek out some
other Genus for Faith. For I will never contend with any man about words, who
grants my meaning.

8. But though the essence of Faith exclude not all weakness and imperfection,
yet may it be enquired, Whether any certainty of Faith, under the highest
degree, may be sufficient to please God and attain Salvation? Whereunto I
answer, That though Men are unreasonable, God requires not any thing but
Reason. They will not be pleased without a down-weight, but God is contented if
the scale be turned. They pretend, that heavenly things cannot be seen to any
purpose, but by the midday light: But God will be satisfied, if we receive any
degree of light which makes us leave the works of darkness, and walk as
children of the light. They exact a certainty of Faith above that of sense or
science; God desires only that we believe the Conclusion, as much as the
Premises deserve; that the strength of our Faith be equal or proportionable to
the credibility of the Motives to it. Now though I have, and ought to have, an
absolute certainty of this Thesis, All which God reveals for truth, is true,
being a Proposition, that may be demonstrated, or rather so evident to any one
that understands it, that it needs it not; Yet of this Hypothesis, That all the
Articles of our Faith were revealed by God, we cannot ordinarily have any
rational and acquired certainty, more than moral, founded upon these
Considerations: First, that the goodness of the precepts of Christianity, and
the greatness of the promises of it, shows it, of all other Religions, most
likely to come from the Fountain of goodness. And then that a constant, famous,
and very general Tradition, so credible that no wise man doubts of any other
which has but the fortieth part of the credibility of this; such and so
credible a Tradition, tells us, that God himself has set his Hand and Seal to
the truth of this Doctrine, by doing great, and glorious, and frequent Miracles
in confirmation of it. Now our Faith is an assent to this Conclusion, that the
doctrine of Christianity is true, which being deduced from the former Thesis,
which is Metaphysically certain, and from the former Hypothesis, whereof we can
have but a Moral certainty, we cannot possibly by natural means be more certain
of it than of the weaker of the Premises; as a River will not rise higher than
the fountain from which it flows. For the Conclusion always follows the worser
part, if there be any worse: and must be Negative, particular, Contingent, or
but Morally certain, if any of the Propositions, from whence it is derived, be
so: Neither can we be certain of it in the highest degree, unless we be thus
certain of all the Principles whereon it is grounded. As a man cannot go or
stand strongly, if either of his legs be weak. Or as a building cannot be
stable, if any one of the necessary pillars thereof be infirm and instable. Or
as, If a message be brought me, from a man of absolute credit with me, but by a
messenger that is not so, my confidence of the Truth of the Relation, cannot
but be rebated and lessened, by my diffidence in the Relatour.

9. Yet all this I say not, as if I doubted, that the Spirit of God, being
implored by devout and humble prayer, and sincere obedience, may, and will by
degrees, advance his servants higher, and give them a certainty of adherence,
beyond their certainty of evidence. But, what God gives as a reward to
believers, is one thing; and what he requires of all men, as their duty, is
another; and what he will accept of, out of grace and favor, is yet another.
To those that believe, and live according to their faith, he gives by degrees
the spirit of obsignation and confirmation, which makes them know (though how
they know not) what they did but believe: And to be as fully and resolutely
assured of the Gospel of Christ, as those which heard it from Christ himself
with their ears, which saw it with their eyes, which looked upon it, and whose
hands handled the Word of Life. He requires of all, that their Faith should be
(as I have said) proportionable to the Motives and Reasons enforcing to it; he
will accept of the weakest and lowest degree of Faith, if it be living and
effectual unto true Obedience. For he it is that will not quench the smoking
flax, nor break the bruised Reed. He did not reject the prayer of that
distressed man that cried unto him, Lord, I believe; Lord, help mine unbelief.
He commands us to receive them that are weak in faith, and thereby declares
that he receives them. And as nothing avails with him, but Faith which works
by love: So any Faith, if it be but as a grain of mustard seed, if it work by
love, shall certainly avail with him, and be accepted of him. Some experience
makes me fear, that the faith of considering and discoursing men, is like to be
cracked with too much straining: And that being possessed with this false
Principle, that it is in vain to believe the Gospel of Christ, with such a kind
or degree of assent, as they yield to other matters of Tradition: And finding
that their faith of it, is to them undiscernable, from the belief they give to
the truth of other Stories; are in danger either not to believe at all,
thinking, not at all as good as to no purpose; or else, though indeed they do
believe it, yet to think they do not, and to cast themselves into wretched
agonies and perplexities, as fearing they have not that, without which it is
impossible to please God, and obtain eternal happiness. Consideration of this
advantage, which the Devil probably may make of this Fancy, made me willing to
insist somewhat largely upon the Refutation of it.

10. I return now thither from whence I have digressed, and assure you,
concerning the grounds afore-laid, which were, that there is a Rule of Faith
whereby Controversies may be decided, which are necessary to be decided; and
that this Rule is universally infallible, That notwithstanding any opinion I
hold, touching Faith or any thing else, I may, and do believe them, as firmly
as you pretend to do. And therefore you may build on, in God's name; for by
God's help, I shall always embrace, whatsoever structure is naturally and
rationally laid upon them whatsoever conclusion, may to my understanding be
evidently deduced from them. You say, out of them it undeniably follows, That,
of two disagreeing in matter of Faith, the one cannot be saved, but by
repentance or ignorance. I answer, by distinction of those terms, two
dissenting in a matter of faith. For it may be either in a thing which is
indeed a matter of Faith, in the strictest sense; that is, something, the
Belief whereof God requires under pain of damnation: And so the Conclusion is
true, though the Consequence of it from your former premises either is none at
all, or so obscure, that I can hardly discern it. Or it may be, as it often
falls out concerning a thing which being indeed no matter of Faith, is yet
overvalued by the parties at variance, and esteemed to be so. And in this sense
it is neither consequent, nor true. The untruth of it I have already declared
in my examination of your Preface. The inconsequence of it, is of itself
evident; for, Who ever heard of a wilder Collection than this --

God has provided means sufficient to decide all Controversies in Religion,
necessary to be decided;

This means is universally infallible;

Therefore of two, that differ in any thing which they esteem a matter of
Faith, one cannot be saved.

He that can find any connection between these Propositions, I believe will be
able to find good coherence between the deaf Plaintiff's Accusation, in the
Greek Epigram, and the deaf Defendant's Answer, and the deaf Judge's Sentence:
And to contrive them all into a formal Categorical Syllogism.

11. Indeed, if the matter in agitation were plainly decided, by this
infallible means of deciding Controversies, and the Parties in variance knew it
to be so, and yet would stand out in their dissension: this were, in one of
them, direct opposition to the Testimony of God, and undoubtedly a damnable
sin. But, if you take the liberty to suppose what you please, you may very
easily conclude what you list. For, who is so foolish as to grant you these
unreasonable Postulates, that every emergent Controversy of Faith is plainly
decided by the means of decision which God has appointed; and that, of the
parties litigant, one is always such a convicted Recusant as you pretend?
Certainly, if you say so, having no better warrant than you have, or can have
for it, this is more proper and formal uncharitableness, than ever was charged
upon you. Methinks, with much more Reason, and much more Charity, you might
suppose, that many of these Controversies, which are now disputed among
Christians (all which profess themselves lovers of Christ, and truly desirous
to know his will and do it) are either not decidable by that means which God
has provided, and so not necessary to be decided: or, if they be, yet not so
plainly and evidently, as to oblige all men to hold one way: or Lastly, if
decidable, and evidently decided, yet you may hope that the erring party, by
reason of some veil before his eyes, some excusable ignorance or unavoidable
prejudice, does not see the Question to be decided against him, and so opposes
not that which He does know to be the Word of God, but only that which You know
to be so, and which he might know, were he void of prejudice. Which is a fault
I confess, but a fault, which is incident even to good and honest men very
often: and not of such a gigantique disposition, as you make it, to fly
directly upon God Almighty, and to give him the Lie to his face.

12. Ad. 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16. In all this long Discourse you only
tell us what you will do, but do nothing. Many Positions there are, but proofs
of them you offer none, but reserve them to the Chapters following; and there,
in their proper places, they shall be examined. The sum of all your Assumpts
collected by your self,. 16. is this, That the infallible means of determining
Controversies, is the Visible Church. That, the distinction of Points
Fundamental, and not-Fundamental, makes nothing to the present Question. That,
to say, the Creed contains all Fundamentals, is neither pertinent nor true.
That, whosoever persist in Division from the Communion and Faith of the Roman
Church, are guilty of Schism and Heresy. That, in regard of the Precept of
Charity toward one's self, Protestants are in state of sin, while they remain
divided from the Roman Church.


To all these Assertions I will content my self for the present to oppose this
one, That not one of them all is true. Only I may not omit to tell you, that if
the first of them were as true as the Pope himself desires it should be, yet
the Corollary, which you deduce from it, would be utterly inconsequent, That,
Whosoever denies any Point proposed by the Church, is injurious to God's Divine
Majesty; as if He could deceive, or be deceived. For though your Church were
indeed as Infallible a Propounder of Divine Truths as it pretends to be, yet,
if it appeared not to me to be so, I might very well believe God most true, and
your Church most false. As, though the Gospel of S. Matthew be the Word of God;
yet, if I neither knew it to be so, nor believed it, I might believe in God,
and yet think that Gospel a Fable. Hereafter therefore I must entreat you to
remember, that our being guilty of this impiety, depends not only upon your
being, but upon our knowing that you are so. Neither must you argue thus; The
Church of Rome is the Infallible Propounder of Divine Verities, therefore he
that opposes Her, calls God's Truth in Question: But thus rather, The Church
of Rome is so, and Protestants know it to be so; therefore in opposing her,
they impute to God, that either he deceives them, or is deceived himself. For
as I may deny something which you upon your knowledge have affirmed, and yet
never disparage your honesty, if I never knew that you affirmed it: So I may be
undoubtedly certain of God's Omniscience, and Veracity, and yet doubt of
something which he has revealed; provided, I do not know, nor believe that he
has revealed it. So, that though your Church be the appointed witness of God's
Revelations, yet until you know, that we know she is so, you cannot without
foul calumny impute to us, That we charge God blasphemously with deceiving, or
being deceived. You will say perhaps, That this is directly consequent from our
Doctrine, That the Church may err, which is directed by God in all her
Proposals. True, if we knew it to be directed by him, otherwise not; much less
if we believe, and know the contrary. But then, if it were consequent from our
Opinion, have you so little Charity, as to say, that men are justly chargeable
with all the consequences of their Opinions; Such Consequences, I mean, as they
do not own, but disclaim; and, if there were a necessity of doing either, would
much rather forsake their Opinion, than embrace those Consequences? What
opinion is there that draws after it such a train of portentous blasphemies, as
that of the Dominicans, by the judgment of the best Writers of your own Order?
And will you say now, that the Dominicans are justly chargeable with all those
Blasphemies? If not, seeing our case (take it at the worst) is but the same,
why should not your judgment of us be the same? I appeal to all those
Protestants that have gone over to your Side; whether when they were most
averse from it, they did ever deny or doubt of God's Omniscience or Veracity;
whether they did ever believe, or were taught, that God did deceive them, or
was deceived himself. Nay, I provoke to you your self, and desire you to deal
truly, and to tell Us whether you do in your heart believe, that we do indeed
not believe the eternal Veracity of the eternal Verity? And, if you judge so
strangely of us, having no better ground for it, than you have or can have, we
shall not need any farther proof of your uncharitableness toward us, this
being the extremity of true uncharitableness. If not, then, I hope, having no
other ground but this (which sure is none at all) to pronounce us damnable
Heretics, you will cease to do so; and hereafter (as, if your ground be true,
you may do with more Truth and Charity) collect thus, They only err damnably,
who oppose what they know God has testified; But, Protestants sure do not
oppose what they know God has testified, at least we cannot with Charity say
they do; Therefore they either do not err damnably, or with Charity we cannot
say they do so.

13. Ad. 17. Protestants (you say) according to their own grounds must hold,
that of persons contrary in whatsoever Point of Belief one part only can be
saved, therefore it is strangely done of them to charge Papists with want of
Charity for holding the same. The Consequence I acknowledge, but wonder much
what it should be that lays upon Protestants any necessity to do so! You tell
us, it is their holding Scripture the sole Rule of Faith: For this, you say,
obliges them to pronounce them damned, that oppose any least Point delivered
in Scripture. This I grant, If they oppose it after sufficient declaration, so
that either they know it to be contained in Scripture, or have no just probable
Reason, and which may move an honest man to doubt, Whether or no it be there
contained. For to oppose in the first case, in a man that believes the
Scripture to be the Word of God, is, to give God the lie. To oppose in the
second, is, to be obstinate against Reason; and therefore a sin, though not so
great as the former. But then this is nothing to the purpose of the necessity
of damning all those that are of contrary belief; and that for these Reasons.
First, because the contrary belief may be touching a Point not at all mentioned
in Scripture; and such Points, though indeed they be not matters of Faith, yet
by men in variance are often over-valued and esteemed to be so. So that, though
it were damnable to oppose any Point contained in Scripture, yet Persons of a
contrary belief (as Victor, and Polycrates, S. Cyprian, and Stephen) might both
be saved, because their contrary belief was not touching any Point contained in
Scripture. Secondly, because the contrary belief may be about the sense of some
place of Scripture which is ambiguous, and with probability capable of diverse
senses; and in such cases it is no marvel, and sure no sin, if several men go
several ways. Thirdly, because the contrary belief may be concerning Points
wherein Scripture may, with so great probability, be alleged on both sides,
(which is a sure note of a Point not-necessary) that men of honest and upright
hearts, true lovers of God and of Truth, such as desire above all things, to
know God's will and to do it, may, without any fault at all, some go one way,
and some another, and some (and those as good men as either of the former)
suspend their judgments, and expect some Elias to solve doubts, and reconcile
repugnancies. Now in all such Questions, one side or other (which soever it is)
holds that which indeed is opposite to the sense of the Scripture, which God
intended; for it is impossible that God should intend Contradictions. But then
this intended sense is not so fully declared, but that they which oppose it,
may verily believe that they indeed maintain it, and have great show of reason
to induce them to believe so; and therefore are not to be damned, as men
opposing that which they either know to be a Truth delivered in Scripture, or
have no probable Reason to believe the contrary; but rather, in Charity to be
acquitted and absolved, as men who endeavor to find the Truth, but fail of it
through humane frailty.

This ground being laid, the Answer to your ensuing Interrogatories, which you
conceive impossible, is very obvious and easy.

14. To the first, Whether it be not in any man a grievous sin to deny any one
Truth contained in holy Writ? I answer, Yes, if he knew it to be so, or have no
probable Reason to doubt of it: otherwise, not.

15. To the second: Whether there be in such denial any distinction between
Fundamental and not-Fundamental sufficient to excuse from Heresy? I answer,
Yes, There is such a Distinction. But the Reason is, because those Points,
either in themselves, or by accident, are Fundamental, which are evidently
contained in Scripture, to him that knows them to be so: Those not-Fundamental,
which are there-hence deducible, but probably only, not evidently.

16. To the third: Whether it be not impertinent to allege the Creed as
containing all Fundamental Points of Faith, as if believing it alone we were at
Liberty to deny all other Points of Scripture? I answer, It was never alleged
to any such purpose; but only as a sufficient, or rather more than a sufficient
Summarie of those Points of Faith, which were of necessity to be believed
actually and explicitly; and that only of such which were merely and purely
Credenda, and not Agenda.

17. To the fourth, drawn as a Corollary from the former, Whether this be not
to say, that, Of Persons contrary in belief, one part only can be saved? I
answer, By no means. For they may differ about Points not contained in
Scripture: They may differ about the sense of some ambiguous Texts of
Scripture: They may differ about some Doctrines, for, and against which
Scriptures may be alleged with so great probability, as may justly excuse
either Part from Heresy, and a self-condemning Obstinacy. And therefore,
though D. Potter do not take it ill, that you believe your selves may be saved
in your Religion; yet, notwithstanding all that has yet been pretended to the
contrary, he may justly condemn you, and that out of your own principles, of
uncharitable presumption, for affirming as you do, that no man can be saved out
of it.

CHAP. II. What is that means, whereby the revealed Truths of God are conveyed
to our Understanding, and which must determine Controversies in Faith and
Religion.
OF our estimation, respect, and reverence to holy Scripture, even Protestans
themselves do in fact give testimony, while they possess it from us, and take
it upon the integrity of our custody, No cause imaginable could avert our will
from giving the function of supreme and sole Judge to holy Writ, if both the
thing were not impossible in it self, and if both reason and experience did not
convince our understanding, that, by this Assertion Contentions are increased,
and not ended. We acknowledge holy Scrippture to be a most perfect Rule, for as
much as a Writing can be a Rule: We only deny that it excludes, either divine
Tradition, though it be unwritten, or an external Judge to keep, to propose, to
interpret in a true, Orthodox, and Catholic sense. Every single Book, every
Chapter, yea, every period of holy Scripture is infallibly true, and wants no
due perfection. But must we therefore infer, that all other Books of Scripture
are to be excluded, lest, by addition of them, we may seem to derogate from the
perfection of the former? When the first Books of the Old and New Testament
were written, they did not exclude unwritten Traditions, nor the Authority of
the Church to decide Controversies; and who has then so altered their nature,
and filled them with such jealousies, as that now they cannot agree for fear of
mutual disparagement? What greater wrong is it for the written Word, to be
compartner now with the unwritten, than for the unwritten, which was once
alone, to be afterward joined, with the written? Who ever heard, that, to
commend the fidelity of a Keeper, were to disauthorize the thing committed to
his custody? Or that, to extol the integrity and knowledge, and to avouch the
necessity of a Judge in suits of Law, were to deny perfection in the Law? Are
there not in Commonwealths, besides the Laws, written and unwritten customs,
Judges appointed to declare both the one, and the other, as several occasions
may require?

2. That the Scripture alone cannot be Judge in Controversies of Faith, we
gather it very clearly, From the quality of a writing in general: From the
nature of holy Writ in particular, which must be believed as true, and
infallible: From the Editions, and Translations of it: From the difficulty to
understand it without hazard of Error: From the inconveniences that must follow
upon the ascribing of sole Judicature to it: and finally, From the Confessions
of our Adversaries. And, on the other side, all these difficulties ceasing, and
all other qualities requisite to a Judge concurring in the visible Church of
Christ our Lord, we must conclude, that She it is, to whom, in doubts
concerning Faith and Religion, all Christians ought to have recourse.

3. The name, notion, nature, and properties of a Judge cannot in common reason
agree to any mere writing, which, be it otherwise in it its kind, never so
highly qualified with sanctity and infallibility; yet it must ever be, as all
writings are, deaf, dumb, and inanimate. By a Judge, all wise men understand a
person endued with life, and reason, able to hear, to examine, to declare his
mind to the disagreeing parties, in such sort as that each one may know whether
the sentence be in favor of his cause, or against his pretense; and he must be
applyable, and able to do all this, as the diversity of Controversies, Persons,
Occasions, and Circumstances may require. There is a great and plain
distinction betwixt a Judge and a Rule. For, as in a Kingdom, the Judge has
his Rule to follow, which are the received Laws and Customs; so are not they
fit orable to declare, or be Judges to themselves, but that office must belong
to a living Judge. The holy Scripture may be, and is, a Rule; but cannot be a
Judge, because, it being always the same, cannot declare it self any one time,
or upon any one occasion, more particularly then upon any other; and let it be
read over an hundred times, it will be still the same, and no more fit alone to
terminate Controversies in Faith, than the Law would be to end suits, if it
were given over to the fancy, and gloss of every single man.

4. This difference betwixt a Judge and a Rule, D. Potter perceived, when, more
than once having styled the Scripture a Judge, by way of correcting that term,
he adds, or rather a Rule, because he knew that an inanimate writing could not
be a Judge. From hence also it was, that, though Protestants in their beginning
affirmed Scripture alone to be the Judge of Controversies; yet, upon a more
advised reflection, they changed the phrase, and said, that not Scripture, but
the Holy Ghost speaking in Scripture, is Judge in Controversies. A difference
without a disparity. The Holy Ghost speaking only in Scripture, is no more
intelligible to us, than the Scripture in which he speaks: as a man speaking
only Latin, can be no better understood, than the tongue wherein he speaks.
And therefore to say, A Judge is necessary for deciding Controversies, about
the meaning of Scripture, is as much as to say, He is necessary to decide what
the holy Ghost speaks in Scripture. And, it were a conceit, equally foolish and
pernicious, if one should seek to take away all Judges in the Kingdom, upon
this nicety, that, albeit Laws cannot be Judges, yet the Lawmakers speaking in
the Law, may perform that Office; as if the Lawmakers speaking in the Law, were
with more perspicuity understood, than the Law whereby he speaks.

5. But, though some writing were granted to have a privilege, to declare it
self upon supposition that it were maintained in being, and preserved entire
from corruptions; yet it is manifest, that no writing can conserve it self, nor
can complain, or denounce the falsifier of it; and therefore it stands in need
of some watchful and not-erring eye, to guard it, by means of whose assured
vigilance, we may undoubtedly receive it sincere and pure.

6. And, suppose it could defend it self from corruption, how could it assure
us that it self were Canonical, and of infallible verity? By saying so? Of this
very Affirmation, there will remain the same Question still; how it can prove
it self to be infallibly true? Neither can there ever be an end of the like
multiplied demands, till we rest in the external Authority of some person or
persons bearing witness to the world, that such, or such a Book is Scripture;
and yet upon this Point, according to Protestants, all other Controversies in
Faith depend.

7. That Scripture cannot assure us, that it self is Canonical Scripture, is
acknowledged by some Protestants, in express words; and by all of them, in
deeds. M. Hooker, whom D. Potter ranketh Page 131.
among men of great Learning and Judgment, says, Of things In his first book
of Eccles Polity Sect. 14. p. 68.
necessary, the very chiefest is to know what Books we are to esteem Holy;
which Point is confessed impossible for the Scripture it self to teach. And
this he proves by the same Argument, which we lately used, saying thus, It is
not Ibid. l. 2. Sect. 4. p. 102.
the Word of God which does, or possibly can assure us, that we do well to
think it his Word. For, if any one Book of Scripture did give testimony of all,
yet still that Scripture, which gives testimony to the rest, would require
another Scripture to give credit unto it. Neither could we come to any pause
whereon to rest, unless, besides Scripture, there were something which might
assure us, etc. And this he acknowledges to be the L. 3. Sect. 8. page 1.146.
and alibi.
Church. By the way, If, Of things necessary the very chiefest cannot possibly
be taught by Scripture, as this man of great learning and judgment affirms,
and demonstratively proves; how can the Protestant Clergy of England subscribe
to their sixth Article? Wherein it is said of the Scripture, Whatsoever is not
read therein, nor may be proved thereby, is not to be required of any man, that
it should be believed as an Article of the Faith, or be thought requisite or
necessary to Salvation: and concerning their belief and profession of this
Article, they are particularly examined when they be ordained Priests and
Bishops. With Hooker, his defendant Covel does punctually agree. Whitaker
likewise confesses, that the question about Canonical Scriptures, is desined
to us, not by testimony of the private Spirit, which (says he) being private
and secret, is Adv. Stap. l. 2. c. 6. p. 270. to p. 357.
unfit to teach and refel others; but (as he acknowledges) by the Adv. Stap.
l. 2. c. 4. p. 300.
Ecclesiastical Tradition: An Argument (says he) whereby may be argued, and
convinced, what Books be Canonical, and what be not. Luther says, This L. de
cap. Bab. to 2. Wit. f. 88.
indeed the Church has, that she can discern the Word of God, from the word of
men: as Augustine confesses, that he believed the Gospel, being moved by the
Authority of the Church, which did preach this to be the Gospel. Fulk teaches,
that the Church In his Answer to a counterfeit Catholic, p. 5.
has judgment to discern true writings from counterfeit, and the Word of God
from the writing of men; and that this judgment she has not of her self, but
of the holy Ghost. And, to the end that you may not be ignorant, from what
Church you must receive Scriptures, hear your first Patriarch Luther speaking
against them, who (as he says) brought in Anabaptism, that so they might
despite the Pope. Verily (says he) these Ep. con. Anab. ad duos Paroches to.
2. Ger. Wit.
men build upon a week foundation. For by this means, they ought to deny the
whole Scripture, and the Office of Preaching. For, all these we have from the
Pope: otherwise we must go make a new Scripture.

8. But now in deeds, they all make good, that, without the Churches Authority,
no certainty can be had what Scripture is Canonical, while they cannot agree in
assigning the Canon of holy Scripture. Of the Epistle of S. James, Luther has
these words: The Praef. in epist. Jac. in ed. Jenen.
Epist. of James is contentious, swelling, dry; strawy, and unworthy of an
Apostolical Spirit. Which censure of Luther, Illyricus acknowledges and
maintains. Kemnitius teaches, that the second Epistle In Enchirid. p. 63.
of Peter, the second and third of John, the Epistle to the Hebrews, the
Epistle of James, the Epistle of Jude, and the Apocalypse of John are
Apocryphal, as not having sufficient Testimony In exam: Conc. Trid. part, 1. p.
55.
of their authority, and therefore that nothing in Controversy can be proved
out of these Ibid.
Books. The same is taught by diverse other Lutherans: and, if some other
amongst them, be of a contrary opinion since Luther's time, I wonder what new
infallible ground they can allege, why they leave their Master, and so many of
his prime Scholars? I know no better ground, than because they may with as
much freedom abandon him, as he was bold to alter that Canon of Scripture,
which he found received in God's Church.

9. What Books of Scripture the Protestants of England, hold for Canonical, is
not easy to affirm. In their sixth Article they say, In the name of the holy
Scripture, we do understand those Canonical Books of the Old and New Testament,
of whose Authority was never any doubt in the Church. What mean they by these
words? That by the Churches consent they are assured what Scriptures be
Canonical? This were to make the Church Judge, and not Scriptures alone. Do
they only understand the agreement of the Church to be a probable inducement?
Probability is no sufficient ground for an infallible assent of Faith. By this
rule (of whose Authority was NEVER any doubt in the Church) the whole book of
Esther must quit the Canon, because some in the Church have excluded it from
the Canon, as Apud Eusebius. l. 4. hist. c. 26
Melito Asianus, In Synop.
Athanasius, and In carm. de genuinis Scrip.
Gregory Nazianzen. And Luther, (if Protestants will be content that he be in
the Church) says, The Jews Li. de serve. arb. con. Eras. tom. 2. Wit. sol. 471.
place the book of Esther in the Canon; which yet, if I might be Judge, does
rather deserve to be put out of the Canon. And of Ecclesiastes he says, This
In lat. sermon. conviviali. us Franc. in 8. imp. Anno 1571.
book is not full; there are in it many abrupt things: he wants boots and
spurs, that is, he has no perfect sentence, he rides upon a tongue reed like me
when I was in the Monastery. And much more is to be read in him: who In Ger.
colloq. Lutheri ab Aurifabro ed. Fran. tit. de lib. vet. and nov. Test. fol.
379.
says further, that the said book was not written by Solomon, but by Syrach in
the time of the Macchabees, and that it is like to the Talmud (the Jews Bible)
out of many books heaped into one work, perhaps out of the Library of King
Prolomaeus. And further he says, that Ib. tit. edit. Patriar. and Proph. sol.
282.
he does not believe all to have been done as there is set down. And he
teaches the Tit. de li. Vet. and Nov. Test.
book of Job to be as it were, an argument for a Fable (or Comedy) to set
before us an example of Patience. And he Fol. 380.
delivers this general censure of the Prophets Books, The Sermons of no Prophet
were written whole and perfect, but their Disciples, and Auditors snatched, now
one sentence, and then another, and so put them all into one book, and by this
means the Bible was conserved. If this were so, the books of the Prophets,
being not written by themselves, but promiscuously and casually, by their
Disciples, will soon be called in question. Are not these errors of Luther
fundamental? and yet, if Protestants deny the Infallibility of the Church, upon
what certain ground can they disprove these Lutherian, and Luciferian
blasphemies? O godly Reformer of the Roman Church! But to return to our English
Canon of Scripture. In the New Testament by the abovementioned rule (of whose
authority was never any doubt in the Church) diverse Books of the New Testament
must be dis-canonized, to wit, all those of which some Ancients have doubted,
and those which diverse Lutherans have of late denied. It is worth the
observation, how the beforementioned sixth Article, does specify by name all
the Books of the Old Testament which they hold for Canonical; but those of the
New Testament, as they are commonly received, we do receive and account them
Canonical. The Mystery is easily to be unfolded. If they had descended to
particulars, they must have contradicted some of their chiefest Brethren. As
they are commonly received, etc. I ask, By whom? By the Church of Rome? Then,
by the same reason they must receive diverse Books of the Old Testament, which
they reject. By Lutherans? Then with Lutherans they may deny some Books of the
New Testament. If it be the greater, or less number of Voices, that must cry up
or down, the Canon of Scripture, our Roman Canon will prevail: and among
Protestants the Certainty of their Faith must be reduced to an Uncertain
Controversy of Fact, Whether the number of those who reject, or of those
others who receive such and such Scriptures, be greater. Their Faith must alter
according to years and days. When Luther first appeared, he, and his Disciples
were the greater number of that new Church; and so this claim (Of being
commonly received) stood for them, till Zuinglius or Calvin grew to some equal,
or greater number than that of the Lutherans, and then this rule of (Commonly
received) will canonize their Canon against the Lutherans. I would gladly know,
why, in the former part of their Article, they say both of the Old and New
Testament: In the name of the holy Scripture, we do understand those Canonical
Books of the Old and New Testament, of whose Authority was never any doubt in
the Church; And in the latter part, speaking again of the New Testament, they
give a far different rule, saying, All the Books of the New Testament, as they
are commonly received, we do receive, and account them Canonical. This, I say,
is a rule much different from the former (of whose Authority was NEVER any
doubt in the Church.) For some Books might be said to be Commonly received,
although they were sometime doubted of by some. If to be Commonly received,
pass for a good rule to know the Canon of the New Testament, why not of the
Old? Above all we desire to know, Upon what infallible ground in some Books
they agree with us against Luther, and diverse principal Lutherans, and in
others jump with Luther against us? But seeing they disagree among themselves,
it is evident that they have no certain rule to know the Canon of Scripture, in
assigning whereof some of them must of necessity err; because, of contradictory
Propositions both cannot be true.

10. Moreover, the letters, syllables, words, phrase, or matter contained in
holy Scripture have no necessary, or natural connection with divine Revelation
or Inspiration: and therefore by seeing, reading, or understanding them, we
cannot infer that they proceeed from God, or be confirmed by divine Authority;
as because Creatures involve a necessary relation, connection, and dependence
on their Creator, Philosophers may by the light of natural reason, demonstrate
the existence of one prime cause of all things; In Holy Writ there are
innumerable truths not surpassing the sphere of humane wit, which are, or may
be delivered by Pagan Writers, in the self same words and phrase as they are in
Scripture. And as for some truths peculiar to Christians (for example, the
mystery of the blessed Trinity, etc.) The only setting them down in Writing is
not enough to be assured that such a Writing is the undoubted Word of God:
otherwise some sayings of Plato, Trismegistus, Sibyls, Ovid, etc. must be
esteemed Canonical Scripture, because they fall upon some truths proper to
Christian Religion. The internal light, and inspiration, which directed and
moved the Authors of Canonical Scriptures, is a hidden Quality infused into
their understanding and will, and has no such particular sensible influence
into the external Writing, that in it we can discover, or from it demonstrate
any such secret light and inspiration; and therefore to be assured that such a
Writing is divine, we cannot know from it self alone, but by some other
extrinsecal Authority.

11. And here we appeal to any man of judgment, whether it be not a vain brag
of some Protestants to tell us, that they wot full well what is Scripture, by
the light of Scripture it self, or (as D. Potter words it) by Page 141.
that glorious beam of divine light which shines therein; even as our eye
distinguishes light from darkness, without any other help than light it self;
and as our ear knows a voice, by the voice it self alone. But this vanity is
refuted, by what we said even now; that the external Scripture has no apparent
or necessary connection with divine inspiration or revelation. Will D. Potter
hold all his Brethren for blind men, for not seeing that glorious beam of
divine light which shines in Scripture, about which they cannot agree? Corporal
light may be discerned by it self alone, as being evident, proportionate, and
connatural to our faculty of seeing. That Scripture is Divine, and inspired by
God, is a truth exceeding the natural capacity and compass of man's
understanding, to us obscure, and to be believed by divine Faith, which,
according to the Apostle, is, argumentum Heb. v. 1.
non-apparentium; an argument, or conviction, of things not-evident; and
therefore no wonder if Scripture do not manifest it self by it self alone, but
must requ^re some other means for applying it to our understanding.
Nevertheless their own similitudes and instances make against themselves. For,
suppose a man had never read, or heard of Sun, Moon, Fire, Candle, etc. and
should be brought to behold a light, yet in such sort as that the Agent, or
Cause efficient from which it proceeded, were kept hidden from him; could such
a one, by only beholding the light, certainly know, Whether it were produced by
the Sun, or Moon, etc? Or, if one hear a voice, and had never known the
Speaker, could he know from whom in particular that voice proceeded? They, who
look upon Scripture, may well see, that some one wrote it; but that it was
written by divine inspiration, how shall they know? Nay, they cannot so much as
know who wrote it, unless they first know the Writer, and what hand he writes:
as likewise I cannot know whose voice it is which I hear, unless I first both
know the person who speaks, and with what voice he uses to speak; and yet,
even all this supposed, I may perhaps be deceived. For there may be Voices so
like, and Hand so counterfeited, that men may be deceived by them, as birds
were by the Grapes of that skilful Painter. Now since Protestants affirm,
knowledge concerning God as our supernatural end, must be taken from Scripture,
they cannot in Scripture alone discern that it is his voice, or writing,
because they cannot know from whom a writing, or voice proceeds, unless first
they know the person who speaks, or writes. Nay, I say more, by Scripture
alone, they cannot so much as know, that any person does in it, or by it, speak
any thing at all: because one may write without intent to signify, or affirm
any thing, but only to set down, or, as it were, paint, such characters,
syllables, and words; as men are wont to set copies, not caring what the
signification of the words imports: or as one transcribes a writing which
himself understands not: or when one writes what another dictates, and in other
such cases, wherein it is clear, that the Writer speaks or signifies nothing in
such his writing; and therefore by it we cannot hear, or understand his voice.
With what certainty then can any man affirm, that by Scripture it self they can
see, that the Writers did intend to signify any thing at all: that they were
Apostles, or other Canonical Authors: that they wrote their own sense, and not
what was dictated by some other man: and finally and especially, that they
wrote by the infallible direction of the holy Ghost?

12. But let us be liberal, and for the present suppose (not grant) that
Scripture is, like to corporal light, by it self alone able to determine, and
move our understanding to assent; yet the Similitude proves against themselves.
For light is not visible, except to such as have eyes, which are not made by
the light, but must be presupposed as produced by some other cause. And
therefore, to hold the similitude, Scripture can be clear only to those who are
endued with the eye of Faith; or, as D. Potter above cited says, to all that
have Page 141.
eyes to discern the shining beams thereof; that is, to the believer, as
immediately after he speaks. Faith then must not originally proceed from
Scripture, but is to be presupposed, before we can see the light thereof; and
consequently there must be some other means precedent to Scripture, to beget
Faith, which can be no other than the Church.

13. Others affirm, that they know Canonical Scriptures to be such, by the
Title of the Books. But how shall we know such Inscriptions, or Titles, to be
infallibly true? From this their Answer our Argument is strengthened, because
diverse Apocryphal writings have appeared, under the Titles, and Names of sacred
Authors, as the Gospel of Thomas mentioned by Cont. Adimantum c. 17.
S. Augustine, the Gospel of Peter, which the Nazaraei did use, as L. 2.
haeretic. fab.
Theodoret witnesses, with which Seraphion a Catholic Bishop, was for some
time deceived, as may be read in Li. 6. c. 10.
Eusebius, who also speaks of the Apocalypse of Lib. 6. c. 11.
Peter. The like may be said of the Gospels of Barnabas, Bartholomew, and other
such writings specified by Pope Did. Can. Sancta Romana.
Gelasius. Protestants reject likewise some part of Esther and Daniel, which
bear the same Titles with the rest of those Books, as also both we, and they
hold for Apocryphal, the third and fourth Books which go under the name of
Esdras, and yet both of us receive his first and second book. Wherefore Titles
are not sufficient assurances what Books be Canonical: which In his defense,
art. 4. page 31.
D. Covel acknowledges in these words, It is not the Word of God, which does,
or possibly can assure us, that we do well to think it is the Word of God: the
first outward motion leading men so to esteem of the Scripture, is the
Authority of Gods Church, which teaches us to receive Mark' s Gospel, who was
not an Apostle, and to refuse the Gospel of Thomas who was an Apostle: and to
retain Luke' s Gospel who saw not Christ, and to reject the Gospel of Nicodemus
who saw him.

14. Another Answer, or rather Objection they are wont to bring: That the
Scripture being a principle needs no proof among Christians. So Page 234.
D. Potter. But this is either a plain begging of the question, or manifestly
untrue, and is directly against their own Doctrine, and Practice. If they mean,
that Scripture is one of those principles, which being the first, and the most
known in all Sciences, cannot be demonstrated by other principles, they suppose
that which is in question, Whether there be not some Principle, (for example,
the Church) whereby we may come to the knowledge of Scripture. If they intend,
that Scripture is a Principle, but not the first, and most known in
Christianity, then Scripture may be proved. For Principles, that are not the
first, nor known of themselves, may, and ought to be proved, before we can
yield assent, either to them, or to other verities depending on them. It is
repugnant to their own Doctrine, and practice, in as much as they are wont to
affirm, that one part of Scripture may be known to be Canonical, and may be
interpreted by another. And since every Scripture is a Principle sufficient,
upon which to ground divine Faith, they must grant, that one Principle may, and
sometime must, be proved by another. Yea this their Answer, upon due
ponderation, falls out to prove, what we affirm. For since all Principles cannot
be proved, we must (that our labor may not be endless) come at length, to rest
in some Principle, which may not require any other proof. Such is Tradition,
which involves an evidence of fact; and from hand to hand, and age to age,
bringing us up to the times, and Persons of the Apostles, and our Savior
himself, comes to be confirmed by all those Miracles, and other arguments,
whereby they convinced their doctrine to be true. Wherefore the ancient Fathers
avouch that we must receive the sacred Canon upon the credit of God's Church.
In Synopsi.
S. Athanasius says, that only four Gospels are to be received, because the
Canons of the holy and Catholic Church have so determined. The third Council
of Can. 47.
Carthage having set down the Books of holy Scripture, gives the reason,
because, We have received from our Fathers that these are to be read in the
Church. S. Augustine Cont. ep. Fundam. c. 5.
speaking of the Acts of the Apostles, says, To which book I must give credit,
if I give credit to the Gospel, because the Catholic Church does alike
recommend to me both these Books. And in the same place he has also these
words: I would not believe the Gospel, unless the authority of the Catholic
Church did move me. A saying so plain, that Zuinglius is forced to cry out,
Here I To. 1. fol. 135.
implore your equity to speak freely, whether this saying of Augustine seem not
over-bold, or else unadvisedly to have fallen from him.

15. But suppose they were assured what Books were Canonical, this will little
avail them, unless they be likewise certain in what language they remain
uncorrupted, or what Translations be true. Calvin Instit. c. 6. Sect. 11.
acknowledges corruption in the Hebrew Text; which if it be taken without
points, is so ambiguous, that scarcely any one Chapter, yea period, can be
securely understood without the help of some Translation. If with points, These
were after S. Hieroms time, invented by the perfidious Jews, who either by
ignorance might mistake, or upon malice force the Text, to favor their
impieties. And that the Hebrew Text still retains much ambiguity, is apparent
by the disagreeing Translation of Novelists; which also proves the Greek, for
the New Testament, not to be void of doub^fulness, as Calvin Instit. c. 7^
Sect. 12.
confesses it to be corrupted. And although both the Hebrew and Greek were
pure, what does this help, if only Scripture be the rule of Faith, and so very
few be able to examine the Text in these languages. All then must be reduced to
the certainty of Translations into other Tongues, wherein no private man having
any promise, or assurance of Infallibility, Protestants who rely upon Scripture
alone, will find no certain ground for their faith: as accordingly whitaker
Lib. de sancta Scriptura p. 52.
affirms: Those who understand not the Hebrew and Greek, do err often, and
unavoidably.

16. Now concerning the Translations of Protestants, it will be sufficient to
set down what the laborious, exact, and judicious Author of the Protestants
Apology, etc. dedicated to our late King James of famous memory; has to this
Taste. 1. Sect. 10. subd. 4. joined with Tract. 2 cap. 2. Sect. 10 subd. 2.
purpose. To omit (says he) particulars, whose recital would be infinite, and
to touch this point but generally only, The Translation of the New Testament by
Luther is condemned by Andreas, Osiander, Keckermannus, and Zuinglius, who
says hereof to Luther, Thou do corrupt the Word of God, thou art seen to be
a manifest and common corrupter of the holy Scriptures: how much are we ashamed
of thee who have hitherto esteemed thee beyond all measure, and now prove thee
to be such a man? And in like manner does Luther reject the Translation of the
Zuinglians, terming them in matter of Divinity, Foo^s, Asses, Antichrists,
Deceivers, and of Asse-like understanding. In so much that when Froschoverus
the Zuinglian Printer of Zurich sent him a Bible translated by the Divines
there, Luther would not receive the same, but sending it back rejected it, as
the Protestants Writers Hospinianus, and Lavatherus, witness. The Translation
set forth by Oecolampadius, and the Divines of Basil, is reproved by Beza, who
affirms that the Basil Translation is in many places wicked, and altogether
differing from the mind of the holy Ghost. The Translation of Castalio is
condemned by Beza, as being sacrilegious, wicked, and Ethnical. As concerning
Calvin's Translation, that learned Protestant Writer Carolus Molinaeus says
thereof, Calvin in his Harmony makes the Text of the Gospel to leap up and
down: he uses violence to the letter of the Gospel; and, besides this, adds
to the Text. As touching Beza's Translation, (to omit the dislike had thereof
by Selneccerus the German Protestant of the University of Jena) the foresaid
Molinaeus says of him, de facto mutat textum; he actually changes the text,
and gives farther sundry instances of his corruptions: as also Castalio that
learned Calvinist, and most learned in the tongues, reprehendeth Beza in a
whole Book, of this matter, and says, that to note all his errors in
translation, would require a great volume. And M. Parkes says, As for the
Geneva Bibles, it is to be wished that either they may be purged from those
manifold errors, which are both in the text, and in the margent; or else
utterly prohibited. All which confirms your Majesty's grave and learned
Censure, in your thinking the Geneva translation to be warst of all; and that
in the Marginal notes annexed to the Geneva translation, some are very partial,
untrue, seditious, etc. Lastly, concerning the English translation, the
Puritans say, Our translation of the Psalms, comprised in our Book of
Common Prayer, does in addition, substraction, and alteration, differ from the
truth of the Hebrew, in two hundred places at the least. In so much as they do
therefore profess to rest doubtful, whether a man with a safe conscience may
subscribe thereunto And M. Carlisle says of the English translators, that they
have depraved the sense, obscured the truth, and deceived the Ignorant, that in
many places they do detort the Scriptures from the right sense. And that, they
show themselves to love darkness more than light, falsehood more than truth. And
the Ministers of Lincoln-Diocess, give their public testimony, terming the
English Translation, A Translation that takes away from the Text; that adds
to the Text; and that sometime to the changing, or obscuring, of the meaning of
the holy Ghost. Not without cause therefore, did your Majesty affirm, that you
could never see a Bible well Translated into English. Thus far the Author of
the Protestants Apology, etc. And I cannot forbear to mention, in particular,
that famous corruption of Luther, who in the Text, where it is said ( Romans 3.
v. 28. We account a man to be justified by faith, without the works of the Law)
in favor of Justification by faith alone, translateth (justified by faith
ALONE.) As likewise the falsification of Zuinglius is no less notorious, who in
the Gospels of S. Matthew, Mark, and Luke, and in S. Paul, in place of, This
is my Body, this is my Blood, translates, This signifies my Body, this
signifies my Blood. And here let Protestants consider duly of these Points.
Salvation cannot be hoped for, without true Faith: Faith, according to them,
relies upon Scripture alone: Scripture must be delivered to most of them, by
the Translations: Translations depend on the skill and honesty of men, in whom
nothing is more certain than a most certain possibility to err, and no greater
evidence of truth, than that it is evident some of them embrace falsehood, by
reason of their contrary Translations. What then remains, but that Truth,
Faith, Salvation, and All, must in them rely upon a fallible and uncertain
ground? How many poor souls are lamentably seduced, while from preaching
Ministers, they admire a multitude of Texts of divine Scripture, but are indeed
the false Translations, and corruptions of erring men? Let them therefore, if
they will be assured of true Scriptures, fly to the always visible Catholic
Church, against which the gates of hell can never so far prevail, as that she
shall be permitted to deceive the Christian world with false Scriptures. And
Luther himself, by unfortunate experience, was at length forced to confess thus
much, saying, If the Li. cont. Zuing. de verit. corp. Christ in Eucha.
world last longer, it will be again necessary to receive the Decrees of
Councels, and to have recourse to them, by reason of diverse interpretations of
Scripture which now reign. On the contrary side, the Translation approved by
the Roman-Church, is commended even by our Adversaries: and D. Covell in
particular says, that it was used in the Church, one thousand In his answer
unto M. Joha Burges, page 94.
three hundred years ago, and doubts not to prefer Ibid.
that Translation before others. In so much, that whereas the
English-Translations be many, and among themselves disagreeing, he concludes,
that of all those the approved Translation authorized by the Church of England,
is that which comes nearest to the vulgar, and is commonly called the Bishops
Bible. So that the truth of that Translation which we use, must be the rule to
judge of the goodness of their Bibles: and therefore they are obliged to
maintain our Translation, if it were but for their own sake.

17. But does indeed the source of their manifold uncertainties stop here? No,
The chiefest difficulty remains, concerning the true meaning of Scripture: for
attaining whereof, if Protestants had any certainty, they could not disagree so
hugely as they do. Hence Mr. Hooker says, We are In his Preface to his Books
of Eccl. Polity, Sect. 6.26.
right sure of this, that Nature, Scripture, and Experience have all taught the
wo^ld to seek for the ending of contentions, by submitting it self unto some
judicial, and defini^ive sentence, whereunto neither part that contendeth may,
under any pretense, refuse to stand Doctor Fields words are remarkable to this
purpose, Seeing (says he) the Controversies In his Treatise of the Church in
his Epistle dedicatory to the L. Archbishop.
of Religion in our tim^s are grown in number so many, and in nature to
intricate, that few have time and leisure, fewer strength of understanding, to
examine them; what remains for men desirous of satisfaction in things of such
consequence, but diligently to search out which among all the societies in the
world, is that blessed company of holy ones, that household of Faith, that
Spouse of Christ, and Church of the living God, which is the Pillar and Ground
of Truth, that so they may embrace her Communion, follow her Directions, and
rest in her Judgment?

18. And now that the true Interpretation of Scripture ought to be received
from the Church, it is also proved by what we have already demonstrated, that
she it is, who must declare what Books be true Scripture; wherein if she be
assisted by the holy Ghost, Why should we not believe her, to be infallibly
directed concerning the true meaning of them? Let Protestants therefore either
bring some proof out of Scripture, that the Church is guided by the holy Ghost
in discerning true Scripture, and not in delivering the true sense thereof; Or
else give us leave to apply against them, the argument which S. Augustine
opposed to the Manicheans, in these words, I would not Con. Ep. Fund. cap. 5.
believe the Gospel, unless the Authority of the Church did move me. Them
therefore whom I obeyed, saying, Believe the Gospel, why should I not obey
saying to me, Do not believe Manicheus, (Luther, Calvin, etc.) Choose what thou
please. If thou shall say, Believe the Catholics; They warn me, not to give
any credit to you. If therefore I believe them, I cannot believe thee. If thou
say, Do not believe the Catholics, thou shall not do well in forcing me to
the faith of Manicheus, because, by the Preaching of Catholics, I believed
the Gospel it self. If thou say, You did well to believe them (Catholics)
commending the Gospel, bu^ you did not well to believe them, discommending
Manicheus; Do thou think me so very foolish, that, without any reason at all,
I should believe what thou will, and not believe what thou will not? And do not
Protestants perfectly resemble these men, to whom S. Augustine spoke, when they
will have men to believe the Roman-Church delivering Scripture, but not to
believe her condemning Luther, and the rest? Against whom, when they first
opposed themselves to the Roman Church, S. Augustine may seem to have spoken no
less Prophetically, than Doctrinally, when he said, Why should I not most Lib.
de util. ere. Cap. 14.
diligently inquire what Christ commanded of them before all others, by whose
authority I was moved to believe, that Christ commanded any good thing? Can
thou better declare to me what he said, whom I would not have thought to have
been, or to be, if the belief thereof had been recommended by thee to me? This
therefore I believed by fame, strengthened with celebrity, consent, Antiquity.
But every one may see that you, so few, so turbulent, so new, can produce
nothing deserving authority. What madness is this? Believe them (Catholics),
that we ought to believe Christ; but learn of us, what Christ said. Why, I
beseech thee? Surely if they (Catholics) were not at all, and could not teach
me any thing, I would more easily persuade my self, that I were not to believe
Christ, than that I should learn any thing concerning him from any other than
them by whom I believed him. If therefore we receive the knowledge of Christ,
and Scriptures from the Church, from her also must we take his Doctrine, and
the interpretation thereof.

19. But besides all this, the Scriptures cannot be Judge of Controversies; who
ought to be such, as that to him not only the learned, or Veterans, but also
the unlearned, and Novices, may have recourse: for these being capable of
Salvation, and endued with Faith of the same nature with that of the learned,
there must be some universal Judge, which the ignorant may understand, and to
whom the greatest Clerks must submit. Such is the Church; and the Scripture is
not such.

20. Now, the inconveniences which follow by referring all Controversies to
Scripture alone, are very clear. For by this Principle, all is finally in very
deed and truth reduced to the internal private Spirit, because there is really
no middle way betwixt a public external, and a private internal voice; and
whosoever refuses the one, must of necessity adhere to the other.

21. This Tenet also of Protestants, by taking the office of Judicature from
the Church, comes to conferr it upon every particular man, who being driven
from submission to the Church, cannot be blamed if he trust himself as far as
any other, his conscience dictating, that wittingly he means not to cozen
himself, as others maliciously may do. Which inference is so manifest, that it
has extorted from diverse Protestants the open confession of so vast an
absurdity. Hear Luther, The Governors of (a) Churches, To. 2. Wittemb. fol. 375.
and Pastors of Christ's Sheep, have indeed power to teach, but the Sheep ought
to give judgment, whether they propound the voice of Christ, or of Aliens.
Lubertus says, As we have In lib de principiis Christian. dogm li 6. c. 13.
demonstrated that all public Judges may be deceived in interpreting; so we
affirm, that they may err in judging. All faithful men are private Judges, and
they also have power to judge of Doctrins, and interpretations. Whitaker, even
of the unlearned, says, They De sacra Scriptura page 529.
ought to have recourse unto the more learned; but in the mean time we must be
careful not to attribute to them overmuch, but so, that still we retain our
own freedom. Bilson also affirms, that, The people In his true Difference,
part 2.
must be discerners, and Judges of that which is taught. The same pernicious
Doctrine is delivered by Brentius, Zanchius, Cartwright, and others exactly
cited by Tract. 2. cap. 1 Sect. 1.
Breerely; and nothing is more common in every Protestants mouth, than that he
admits of Fathers, Councles, Church, etc. as far as they agree with Scripture;
which upon the matter is himself. Thus Heresy ever falls upon extremes. It
pretends to have Scripture alone for Judge of Controversies, and in the mean
time sets up as many Judges, as there are men and women in the Christian world.
What good Statesmen would they be, who should ideate, or fancy, such a
Commonwealth, as these men have framed to themselves a Church? They verify
what S. Augustine objecteth against certain Heretics. You see Lib. 32. cont.
Faust.
that you go about to overthrow all authority of Scripture, and that every man's
mind may be to himself a Rule, what he is to allow, or disallow in every
Scripture.

22. Moreover, what confusion to the Church, what danger to the Commonwealth,
this denial of the Authority of the Church, may bring, I leave to the
consideration of any judicious, indifferent man. I will only set down some
words of D. Potter, who speaking of the Proposition of revealed Truths,
sufficient to prove him that gain-saith them, to be an Heretic, says thus:
This Proposition Page ^4*
of revealed truths, is not by the infallible determination of Pope, or Church;
(Pope, and Church being excluded, let us hear what more secure rule he will
prescribe) but by whatsoever means a man may be convinced in conscience of
divine Revelation. If a Preacher do clear any Point of Faith to his Hearers; if
a private Christian do make it appear to his Neighbor, that any Conclusion, or
Point of Faith is delivered by divine revelation of Gods Word; if a man himself
(without any Teacher) by reading the Scriptures, or hearing them read, be
convinced of the truth of any such Conclusion; this is a sufficient Proposition
to prove him that gain says any such proof, to be an Heretic, and obstinate
opposer of the Faith. Behold, what goodly safe Propounders of Faith arise in
place of Gods universal visible Church, which must yield to a single Preacher,
a Neighbor, a man himself if he can read, or at least have ears to hear
Scripture read. Verily I do not see, but that every well-governed civil
Commonwealth, ought to concur toward the exterminating of this Doctrine,
whereby the Interpretation of Scripture is taken from the Church, and conferred
upon every man, who, whatsoever is pretended to the contrary, may be a
passionate seditious creature.

23. Moreover, there was no Scripture, or written Word for about two thousand
years from Adam to Moses, whom all acknowledge to have been the first Author of
Canonical Scripture: And again, for about two thousand years more, from Moses
to Christ our Lord, holy Scripture was only among the people of Israel; and yet
there were Gentiles endued in those days with divine Faith, as appears in
Job, and his friends. Wherefore, during so many Ages, the Church alone was the
Decider of Controversies, and Instructor of the faithful. Neither did the Word
written by Moses, deprive the Church of her former Infallibility, or other
qualities requisite for a Judge: yea D. Potter acknowledges, that besides the
Law, there was a living Judge in the Jewish Church, endued with an absolutely
infallible direction in case of moment; as all Points belonging to divine Faith
are. Now, the Church of Christ our Lord, was before the Scriptures of the New
Testament, which were not written instantly, nor all at one time, but
successively upon several occasions; and some after the decease of most of the
Apostles: and after they were written, they were not presently known to all
Churches: and of some there was doubt in the Church for some Ages after our
Savior. Shall we then say, that according as the Church by little and little
received holy Scripture, she was by the like degrees divested of her possessed
Infallibility, and power to decide Controversies in Religion? That sometime
Churches had one Judge of Controversies, and others another? That with months,
or years, as new Canonical Scripture grew to be published, the Church altered
her whole Rule of Faith, or Judge of Controversies? After the Apostles time,
and after the writing of Scriptures, Heresies would be sure to rise, requiring
in God's Church, for their discovery and condemnation, Infallibility, either to
write new Canonical Scripture, as was done in the Apostles time by occasion of
emergent Heresies; or Infallibility to interpret Scriptures, already written,
or without Scripture, by divine unwritten Traditions, and assistance of the
holy Ghost to determine all Controversies, as Tertullian says: The soul is De
test. ani^ cap. 5.
before the letter; and speech before Books; and sense before style. Certainly
such addition of Scripture, with derogation, or substraction from the former
power and infallibility of the Church, would have brought to the world division
in matters of faith, and the Church had rather lost, than gained by holy
Scripture, (which ought to be far from our tongues and thoughts) it being
manifest, that, for decision of Controversies, Infallibility settled in a living
Judge, is incomparably more useful and fit, than if it were conceived, as
inherent in some inanimate writing. Is there such repugnance betwixt
Infallibility of the Church, and Existence of Scripture, that the production of
the one, must be the destruction of the other? Must the Church wax dry, by
giving to her Children the milk of sacred Writ? No, No. Her Infallibility was,
and is, derived from an inexhausted Fountain. If Protestants will have the
Scripture alone for their Judge, let them first produce some Scripture
affirming, that by the entering thereof, Infallibility went out of the Church.
D. Potter may remember what himself teaches; That the Church is still endued
with Infallibility in Points Fundamental; and consequently, that Infallibility
in the Church does well agree with the truth, the sanctity, yea with the
sufficiency, of Scripture, for all matters necessary to Salvation. I would
therefore gladly know, out of what Text he imagines that the Church by the
coming of Scripture, was deprived of Infallibility in some Points, and not in
others? He affirms, that the Jewish Synagogue retained infallibility in
herself, notwithstanding the writing of the Old Testament; and will he so
unworthily and unjustly deprive the Church of Christ of Infallibility by reason
of the New Testament? Especially, if we consider, that, in the Old Testament,
Laws, Ceremonies, Rites, Punishments, Judgments, Sacraments, Sacrifices, etc.
were more particularly, and minutely delivered to the Jews, than in the New
Testament is done; our Savior leaving the determination or declaration, of
particulars to his Spouse the Church, which therefore stands in need of
Infallibility more than the Jewish Synagogue. D. Potter Page 24.
against this argument, drawn from the power and infallibility of the
Synagogue, objects, That we might as well inserr, that Christians must have one
Sovereign Prince over all, because the Jews had one chief Judge. But the
disparity is very clear. The Synagogue was a type, and figure of the Church of
Christ; not so their civil Government, of Christian Commonwealths or Kingdoms.
The Church succeeded to the Synagogue, but not Christian Princes to Jewish
Magistrates: And the Church is compared to a house, or Heb. 13.
family; to an Cant. 2.
Army, to a 1 Cor. 10. Ephesians. 4.
body, to a Mat. 12.
kingdom, etc. all which require one Master, one General, one head, one
Magistrate, one spiritual King; as our blessed Savior with fict Unum ovile,
Joan. c. 10.
joined Unus Pastor: One Sheepsold, One Pastor: But all distinct Kingdoms, or
Commonwealths, are not one Army, Family, etc. And finally, it is necessary to
Salvation, that all have recourse to one Church; but for temporal weal, there
is no need that all submit, or depend upon one temporal Prince, Kingdom, or
Commonwealth: and therefore our Savior has left to his whole Church, as
being One, one Law, one Scripture, the same Sacraments, etc. Whereas Kingdoms
have their several Laws, different governments, diversity of Powers,
Magistracy, etc. And so this objection returns upon D. Potter. For as in the
One Community of the Jews, there was one Power and Judge, to end debates, and
resolve difficulties; so in the Church of Christ, which is One, there must be
some one Authority to decide all Controversies in Religion.

24. This Discourse is excellently proved by ancient S. Irenaeus Lib. 5. c. 4.
in these words; What if the Apostles had not lest Scriptures, ought we not to
have followed the order of Tradition which they delivered to those to whom they
committed the Churches? to which order many Nations yield assent, who believe
in Christ, having Salvation written in their hearts by the Spirit of God,
without letters or lake, and diligent keeping ancient Tradition. It is easy to
receive the truth from God's Church, seeing the Apostles have most fully
deposited in her, as in a rich storehouse, all things belonging to truth. For
what? if there should arise any contention of some small question, ought we not
to have recourse to the most ancient Churches, and from them to receive what is
certain and clear concerning the present question?

25. Besides all this, the doctrine of Protestants is destructive of it self.
For either they have certain and infallible means, not to err in interpreting
Scripture; or they have not If not, then the Scripture (to them) cannot be a
sufficient ground for infallible Faith, nor a meet Judge of Controversies. If
they have certain infallible means, and so cannot err in their interpretations
of Scriptures; then they are able with infallibility to hear, examine, and
determine all Controversies of Faith, and so they may be, and are Judges of
Controversies, although they use the Scripture as a Rule. And thus, against
their own doctrine, they constitute another Judge of Controversies, besides
Scripture alone.

26. Lastly, I ask D. Potter, Whether ^his Assertion (Scripture alone is Judge
of all Controversies in Faith) be a fundamental Point of Faith, or no? He must
be well advised, before he say, that it is a Fundamental Point. For he will
have against him, as many Protestants as teach that by Scripture alone, it is
impossible to know what Books be Scripture, which yet, to Protestants, is the
most necessary and chief Point of all other. D. Covell expressly says,
Doubtless In his Defense of Mr. Hookers books art 4. p. 31.
it is a tolera le opinion in the Church of Rome, if they go no further, as
some of them do not (he should have said, as none of them do) to affirm, that
the Scriptures are holy and divine in themselves, but so esteemed by us, for
the authority of the Church. He will likewise oppose himself to those his
Brethren, who grant that Controversies cannot be ended, without some external
living Authority, as we noted before. Besides, how can it be in us a
fundamental Error to say, the Scripture alone is not Judge of Controversies,
seeing (notwithstanding this our belief) we use for interpreting of Scripture,
all the means which they prescribe; as Prayer, Conferring of places, Consulting
the Originals, etc. and to these add the Instruction, and Authority of God's
Church, which even by his confession cannot err damnably, and may afford us
more help, than can be expected from the industry, learning, or wit of any
private person: and finally, D. Potter grants, that the Church of Rome does not
maintain any fundamental error against Faith; and consequently, he cannot
affirm that our doctrine, in this present Controversy, is damnable. If he
answer, that their Tenet, about the Scriptures being the only Judge of
Controversies, is not a Fundamental Point of Faith: then, as he teaches, that
the universal Church may err in Points Fundamental; so, I hope, he will not
deny, but particular Churches, and private men, are much more obnoxious to
error in such Points; and in particular in this, that Scripture alone is Judge
of Controversies: And so, the very Principle upon which their whole Faith is
grounded, remains to them uncertain: and on the other side, for the selfsame
season, they are not certain, but that the Church is Judge of Controversies;
which if she be, then their case is lamentable, who in general deny her this
Authority, and in particular Controversies oppose her definitions. Besides,
among public Conclusions defended in Oxford the year 1633. to the questions,
Whether the Church have Authority to determine Controversies in Faith; And, To
interpret holy Scripture? The answer to both is Affirmative.

27. Since then, the visible Church of Christ our Lord, is that infallible
Means whereby the revealed truths of Almighty God, are conveyed to our
understanding; it follows, that to oppose her definitions is to resist God
himself; which blessed St. Augustine plainly affirms, when, speaking of the
Controversy about Rebaptization of such as were baptized by Heretics, he
says, This De unit. Eccles. c. 2^.
is neither openly, nor evidently read; neither by you nor by me: yet if there
were any wise man of whom our Savior had given testimony, and that he should
be consulted in this question, we should make no doubt to perform what he
should say, lest we might seem to gainsay not him so much as Christ, by whose
testimony he was recommended. Now Christ bears witness to his Church. And a
little after, Whosoever refuses to follow the practice of the Church, does
resist our Savior himself, who by his testimony recommends the Church. I
conclude therefore with this argument; Whosoever resists that means which
infallibly proposes to us God's Word or Revelation, commits a sin, which,
unrepented, excludes Salvation: But whosoever resists Christ's visible
Church, does resist that means, which infallibly proposes God's Word or
Revelation to us. Therefore, whosoever resists Christ's visible Church,
commits a sin, which unrepented, excludes Salvation. Now, what visible Church
was extant, when Luther began his pretended Reformation, whether it were the
Roman, or Protestant Church; and whether he, and other Protestants do not
oppose that visible Church, which was spread over the World, before, and in
Luther's time, is easy to be determined, and imports every one most
seriously to ponder, as a thing whereon eternal salvation depends. And
because our Adversaries do here most insist upon the distinction of Points
Fundamental, and not-Fundamental; and in particular teach, that the Church may
err in Points not-Fundamental, it will be necessary to examine the truth, and
weight of this evasion, which shall be done in the next Chapter.

An ANSWER to the SECOND CHAPTER. Concerning the means, whereby the revealed
Truths of God are conveyed to our Understanding; and which must determine
Controversies in Faith and Religion.
AD. 1. He that would usurp an absolute Lordship and tyranny over any people,
need not put himself to the trouble and difficulty of abrogating and
disanulling the Laws, made to maintain the common liberty; for he may frustrate
their intent, and compass his own design as well, if he can get the power and
authority to interpret them as he pleases, and add to them what he pleases, and
to have his interpretations and additions stand for Laws; if he can rule his
people by his Laws, and his Laws by his Lawyers. So the Church of Rome, to
establish her tyranny over men's consciences, needed not either to abolish or
corrupt the holy Scriptures, the Pillars and supporters of Christian liberty
(which in regard of the numerous multitude of Copies dispersed through all
places, translated into almost all Languages, guarded with all sollicitous care
and industry, had been an impossible attempt;) But the more expedite way, and
therefore more likely to be successeful, was, to gain the opinion and esteem of
the public and authorized Interpreter of them, and the Authority of adding to
them what Doctrine she pleased under the title of Traditions or Definitions. For
by this means, she might both serve herself of all those clauses of Scripture,
which might be drawn to cast a favorable countenance upon her ambitious
pretenses, which in case the Scripture had been abolished, she could not have
done; and yet be secure enough of having either her power limited, or her
corruptions and abuses reformed by them; this being once settled in the minds of
men, that unwritten doctrins, if proposed by her, were to be received with
equal reverence to those that were written; and that the sense of Scripture was
not that which seemed to men's reason and understanding to be so, but that which
the Church of Rome should declare to be so, seemed it never so unreasonable and
incongruous. The matter being once thus ordered, and the holy Scriptures being
made in effect not your Directors and Judges (no farther than you please) but
your servants and instruments, always pressed and in readiness to advance your
designs, and disabled wholly with minds so qualified to prejudice or impeach
them; it is safe for you to put a crown on their head, and a reed in their
hands, and to bow before them, and cry, Hail Ring of the Jews! to pretend a
great deal of esteem, and respect, and reverence to them, as here you do. But
to little purpose is verbal reverence without entire submission and sincere
obedience; and, as our Savior said of some, so the Scripture, could it speak,
I believe would say to you, Why call ye me Lord, Lord, and do not that which I
command you? Cast away the vain and arrogant pretense of infallibility, which
makes your errors incurable. Leave picturing God, and worshipping him by
pictures. Teach not for Doctrine the commandments of men. Debarr not the Laity
of the Testament of Christ's Blood. Let your public Prayers, and Psalms, and
Hymns be in such language as is for the edification of the Assistents. Take not
from the Clergy that liberty of Marriage which Christ has left them. Do not
impose upon men that Humility of worshipping Angels which S. Paul condemns.
Teach no more proper sacrifices of Christ but one. Acknowledge them that die in
Christ to be blessed, and to rest from their labors. Acknowledge the Sacrament
after Consecration, to be Bread and Wine, as well as Christ's body and blood.
Acknowledge the gift of continency without Marriage, not to be given to all. Let
not the weapons of your warfare be carnal, such as Massacres, Treasons,
Persecutions, and, in a word, all means either violent or fraudulent: These and
other things, which the Scripture commands you, do, and then we shall willingly
give you such Testimony as you deserve; but till you do so, to talk of
estimation, respect, and reverence to the Scripture, is nothing else but talk.

2. For neither is that true which you pretend, That we possess the Scripture
from you, or take it upon the integrity of your Custody; but upon Universal
Tradition, of which you are but a little part. Neither, if it were true that
Protestants acknowledged, The integrity of it to have been guarded by your
alone Custody, were this any argument of your reverence toward them. For
first, you might preserve them entire, not for want of Will, but of Power to
corrupt them, as it is a hard thing to poison the Sea. And then having
prevailed so far with men, as either not to look at all into them, or but only
through such spectacles as you should please to make for them, and to see
nothing in them, though as clear as the sun, if it any way made against you,
you might keep them entire, without any thought or care to conform your doctrine
to them, or reform it by them (which were indeed to reverence the Scriptures;)
but, out of a persuasion, that you could qualify them well enough with your
glosses and interpretations, and make them sufficiently conformable to your
present Doctrine, at least in their judgment, who were prepossessed with this
persuasion, that your Church was to Judge of the sense of Scripture, not to be
judged by it.

3. For, whereas you say, No cause imaginable could avert your will, for giving
the function of supreme and sole Judge to holy Writ; but that the thing is
impossible, and that by this means controversies are increased and not ended:
you mean perhaps, -- That you can or will imagine no other cause but these. But
sure there is little reason you should measure other men's imaginations by your
own, who perhaps may be so clouded and veiled with prejudice, that you cannot,
or will not, see that which is most manifest. For what indifferent and
unprejudicate man may not easily conceive another cause which (I do not say
does, but certainly) may pervert your wills, and avert your understandings from
submitting your Religion and Church to a trial by Scripture? I mean the great
and apparent and unavoidable danger which by this means you would fall into, of
losing the Opinion which men have of your Infallibility, and consequently your
power and authority over men's consciences, and all that depends upon it. So
that though Diana of the Ephesians be cried up, yet it may be feared that with
a great many among you (though I censure or judge no man) the other cause which
wrought upon Demetrius and the Craftsmen, may have with you also the more
effectual, though more secret influence: and that is, that by this craft we
have our living; by this craft, I mean, of keeping your Proselytes from an
indifferent trial of your Religion by Scripture, and making them yield up and
captivate their judgment unto yours. Yet had you only said de facto, that no
other cause did avert your own will from this, but only these which you
pretend; out of Charity I should have believed you. But seeing you speak not of
your self, but of all of your Side, whose hearts you cannot know; and profess
not only, That there is no other cause, but that No other is imaginable, I
could not let this pass without a censure. As for the impossibility of
Scriptures being the sole Judge of Controversies, that is, the sole Rule for
men to judge them by (for we mean nothing else) you only affirm it without
proof, as if the thing were evident of it self. And therefore I, conceiving the
contrary to be more evident, might well content my self to deny it without
refutation. Yet I cannot but desire you to tell me, If Scripture cannot be the
Judge of any Controversy, how shall that touching the Church and the Notes of
it, be determined? And if it be the sole Judge of this one, why may it not of
others? Why not of All? Those only excepted wherein the Scripture it self is
the subject of the Question, which cannot be determined but by natural reason,
the only principle, beside Scripture, which is common to Christians.

4. Then for the Imputation of increasing contentions and not ending them,
Scripture is innocent of it; as also this opinion, That controversies are to be
decided by Scripture. For if men did really and sincerely submit their
judgments to Scripture, and that only, and would require no more of any man
but to do so, it were impossible but that all Controversies, touching things
necessary and very profitable should be ended: and if others were continued or
increased, it were no matter.

5. In the next words we have direct Boyes-play; a thing given with one hand,
and taken away with the other* an acknowledgment made in one line, and
retracted in the next. We acknowledge (say you) Scripture to be a perfect rule,
for as much as a Writing can be a Rule; only we deny that it excludes unwritten
Tradition. As if you should have said, We acknowledge it to be as perfect a Rule
as a Writing can be; only we deny it to be as perfect a Rule as a writing may
be. Either therefore you must revoke your acknowledgment, or retract your
retractation of it; for both cannot possibly stand together. For if you will
stand to what you have granted, That Scripture is as perfect a Rule of Faith as
a writing can be: you must then grant it both so Complete, that it needs no
addition, and so evident, that it needs no interpretation: For both these
properties are requisite to a perfect Rule, and a writing is capable of both
these properties.

6. That both these properties are requisite to a perfect Rule, it is apparent:
Because that is not perfect in any kind which wants some parts belonging to its
integrity; As, he is not a perfect man that wants any part appertaining to the
Integrity of a Man; and therefore that which wants any accession to make it a
perfect Rule, of it self is not a perfect Rule. And then, the end of a Rule is
to regulate and direct. Now every instrument is more or less perfect in its
kind, as it is more or less fit to attain the end for which it is ordained:
But nothing obscure or unevident while it is so, is fit to regulate and direct
them to whom it is so: Therefore it is requisite also to a Rule (so far as it
is a Rule) to be evident; otherwise indeed it is no Rule, because it cannot
serve for direction. I conclude therefore, that both these properties are
required to a perfect Rule: both to be so complete as to need no Addition; and
to be so evident as to need no Interpretation.

7. Now that a writing is capable of both these perfections, it is so plain,
that I am even ashamed to prove it. For he that denies it, must say, That
something may be spoken which cannot be written. For if such a complete and
evident Rule of Faith may be delivered by word of mouth, as you pretend it may,
and is; and whatsoever is delivered by word of mouth may also be written; then
such a complete and evident Rule of Faith may also be written. If you will have
more light added to the Sun, answer me then to these Questions. Whether your
Church can set down in writting all these, which she pretends to be divine
unwritten Traditions, and add them to the verities already written? And,
Whether she can set us down such interpretations of all obscurities in the
Faith as shall need no farther interpretations? If she cannot, then she has
not that power which you pretend she has, of being an Infallible Teacher of
all divine verities, and an infallible Interpreter of obscurities in the Faith:
for she cannot teach us all divine verities, if she cannot write them down;
neither is that an interpretation which needs again to be interpreted. If she
can; Let her do it, and then we shall have a writting, not only capable of,
but, actually endowed with, both these perfections, of being both so complete
as to need no Addition, and so evident as to need no Interpretation. Lastly,
whatsoever your Church can do or not do, no man can, without Blasphemy, deny,
that Christ Jesus, if he had pleased, could have writ us a Rule of Faith so
plain and perfect, as that it should have wanted neither any part to make up
its integrity, nor any cleerness to make it sufficiently intelligible. And if
Christ could have done this, then the thing might have been done; a writting
there might have been, endowed with both these properties. Thus therefore I
conclude; a writing may be so perfect a Rule, as to need neither Addition nor
Interpretation; But the Scripture you acknowledge a perfect Rule for as much as
a writing can be a Rule, therefore it needs neither Addition nor Interpretation.

8. You will say, that though a writing be never so perfect a Rule of Faith,
yet it must be beholding to Tradition to give it this Testimony, that it is a
Rule of Faith, and the Word of God. I answer: First, there is no absolute
necessity of this. For God might, if he thought good, give it the attestation
of perpetual miracles. Secondly, that it is one thing to be a perfect Rule of
Faith, another to be proved so unto us. And this though a writing could not be
proved to us to be a perfect rule of Faith, by its own saying so, for nothing
is proved true by being said or written in a book, but only by Tradition which
is a thing credible of it self, yet it may be so in it self, and contain all
the material objects, all the particular articles of our Faith, without any
dependence upon Tradition; even this also not excepted, that this writing does
contain the rule of Faith. Now when Protestants affirm against Papists, that
Scripture is a perfect Rule of Faith, their meaning is not, that by Scripture
all things absolutely may be proved, which are to be believed: For it can never
be proved by Scripture to a gainsayer, that there is a God, or that the book
called Scripture is the word of God; For he that will deny these Assertions
when they are spoken, will believe them never a whit the more, because you can
show them written: But their meaning is, that the Scripture to them which
presuppose it Divine, and a Rule of Faith, as Papists and Protestants do,
contains all the material objects of Faith; is a complete and total, and not
only an imperfect and a partial Rule.

9. But every Book, and Chapter, and Text of Scripture is infallible and wants
no due perfection, and yet excludes not the Addition of other books of
Scripture; Therefore the perfection of the whole Scripture excludes not the
Addition of unwritten Tradition. I answer; Every Text of Scripture though it
has the perfection belonging to a Text of Scripture, yet it has not the
perfection requisite to a perfect Rule of Faith; and that only is the
perfection which is the subject of our discourse. So that this is to abuse your
Reader with the ambiguity of the word Perfect. In effect, as if you should say,
A text of Scripture may be a perfect Text, though there be others beside it;
therefore the whole Scripture may be a perfect Rule of Faith, though there be
other parts of this Rule, besides the Scripture, and though the Scripture be
but a part of it.

10. The next Argument to the same purpose is, for Sophistry, cosengerman to
the former. When the first books of Scripture were written, they did not
exclude unwritten Tradition: Therefore now also, that all the books of
Scripture are written, Traditions are not excluded. The sense of which argument
(if it have any) must be this. When only a part of the Scripture was written,
then a part of the divine doctrine was unwritten; Therefore now when all the
Scripture is written, yet some part of the divine doctrine is yet unwritten. If
you say, your Conclusion is not, that it is so, but, without disparagement to
Scripture, may be so: without disparagement to the truth of Scripture, I grant
it; but without disparagement to the Scripture's being a perfect Rule, I deny
it. And now the Question is not of the Truth, but the perfection of it; which
are very different things, though you would fain confound them. For Scripture
might very well be all true, though it contain not all necessary Divine Truth.
But unless it do so, it cannot be a perfect Rule of Faith; for that which
wants any thing is not perfect. For, I hope, you do not imagine, that we
conceive any antipathy between God's Word written and unwritten, but that both
might very well stand together. All that we say is this, that we have reason to
believe that God, de facto, has ordered the matter so, that all the Gospel of
Christ, the whole Covenant between God and man, is now written. Whereas, if he
had pleased, he might so have disposed it, that, part might have been written,
and part unwritten: but then he would have taken order, to whom we should have
had recourse, for that part of it which was not written; which seeing he has
not done (as the progress shall demonstrate) it is evident he has left no
part of it unwritten. We know no man therefore that says, It were any injury
to the written Word to be joined with the unwritten, if there were any
wherewith it might be joined: but that, we deny. The fidelity of a keeper may
very well consist with the authority of the thing committed to his custody. But
we know no one society of Christians that is such a faithful keeper as you
pretend. The Scripture it self was not kept so faithfully by you, but that you
suffered infinite variety of Readings to creep into it; all which could not
possibly be divine, and yet, in several parts of your Church, all of them,
until the last Age, were so esteemed. The interpretations of obscure places of
Scripture, which without Question the Apostles taught the Primitive Christians,
are wholly lost; there remains no certainty scarce of any one. Those Worlds of
Miracles, which our Savior did, which were not written, for want of writing
are vanished out of the memory of men. And many profitable things which the
Apostles taught and writ not, as that which S. Paul glanceth at in his second
Epistle to the Thessal. of the cause of the hinderance of the coming of
Antichrist, are wholly lost and extinguished. So unfaithful or negligent has
been this Keeper of Divine Verities; whose eyes, like the Keepers of Israel
(you say) have never slumbred nor slept. Lastly, we deny not but a Judge and a
Law might well stand together, but we deny that there is any such Judge of Gods
appointment. Had he intended any such Judge, he would have named him, lest
otherwise (as now it is) our Judge of Controversies should be our greatest
Controversy.

11. Ad. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. In your second Paragraph, you sum up those Arguments
wherewith you intend to prove that Scripture alone cannot be Judge in
Controversies. Wherein I profess unto you before hand, that you will fight
without an Adversary. For though Protestants, being warranted by some of the
Fathers, have called Scripture the Judge of Controversy; and you, in saying
here, That Scripture alone cannot be Judge, imply that it may be called in some
sense a Judge, though not alone: Yet, to speak properly (as men should speak
when they write of Controversies in Religion) the Scripture is not a Judge of
Controversies, but a Rule only, and the only Rule for Christians to judge them
by. Every man is to judge for himself with the Judgment of Discretion, and to
choose either his Religion first, and then his Church, as we say: or, as you,
his Church first, and then his Religion. But, by the consent of both sides,
every man is to judge and choose: and the Rule whereby he is to guide his
choice, if he be a natural man, is Reason; if he be already a Christian,
Scripture; which we say is the Rule to judge Controversies by. Yet not all
simply, but all the, Controversies of Christians, of those that are already
agreed upon This first Principle, that the Scripture is the Word of God. But
that there is any Man, or any Company of men appointed to be Judge for all man,
that we deny; and that I believe, you will never prove. The very truth is, we
say no more in this matter, than evidence of Truth has made you confess in
plain terms in the beginning of this Chapter, viz. That Scripture is a perfect
Rule of Faith, for as much as a writing can be a Rule. So that all your
Reasons, whereby you labor to dethrone the Scripture from this Office of
Judging, we might let pass as impertinent to the Conclusion which we maintain,
and you have already granted; yet out of courtesy we will consider them.

12. Your first is this; A Judge must be a person fit to end Controversies; but
the Scripture is not a person, nor fit to end Controversies, no more than the
Law would be without the Judges; therefore though it may be a Rule, it cannot
be a Judge. Which conclusion I have already granted. Only my request is, that
you will permit Scripture to have the properties of a Rule, that is, to be fit
to direct every one that will make the best use of it, to that end for which it
was ordained: And that is as much as we need desire. For, as if I were to go a
journey, and had a guide which could not err, I needed not to know my way: so
on the other side, if I know my way, or have a plain rule to know it by, I
shall need no guide. Grant therefore Scripture to be such a Rule, and it will
quickly take away all necessity of having an infallible guide. But without a
living Judge it will be no fitter (you say) to end Controversies, than the Law
alone to end suits. I answer, if the Law were plain and perfect, and men honest
and desirous to understand aright, and obey it, he that says it were not fit to
end Controversies, must either want understanding himself, or think the world
wants it. Now the Scripture, we pretend, in things necessary is plain and
perfect; and men, we say, are obliged under pain of Damnation, to seek the true
sense of it, and not to wrest it to their preconceived Fancies. Such a law
therefore to such men, cannot but be very fit to end all Controversies
necessary to be ended. For others that are not so, they will end when the world
ends, and that is time enough.

13. Your next encounter is with them, who acknowledging the Scripture a Rule
only and not a Judge, make the holy Ghost, speaking in Scriture, the Judge of
Controversies. Which you disprove by saying, That, the holy Ghost speaking only
in Scripture is no more intelligible to us, than the Scripture in which he
speaks. But by this reason, neither the Pope, nor a Council can be a Judge
neither. For first, denying the Scriptures, the writings of the holy Ghost, to
be Judges; you will not, I hope, offer to pretend, that their Decrees, the
writings of men, are more capable of this function: the same exceptions at
least, if not more, and greater lying against them as do against Scripture. And
then what you object against the holy Ghost, speaking in Scripture, to exclude
him from this office, The same I return upon them and their Decrees, to debar
them from it; that they speaking unto us only in their Decrees, are no more
intelligible than the Decrees in which they speak. And therefore if the Holy
Ghost speaking in Scripture may not be a Judge for this Reason; neither may
they, speaking in their Decrees, be Judges for the same Reason. If the Pope's
Decrees (you will say) be obscure, he can explain himself; and so the Scripture
cannot. But the holy Ghost, that speaks in Scripture, can do so, if he please;
and, when he is pleased, will do so. In the mean time, it will be fit for you
to wait his leisure, and to be content, that those things of Scripture which
are plain should be so, and those which are obscure should remain obscure,
until he please to declare them. Besides, he can (which you cannot warrant me
of the Pope or a Council) speak at first so plainly, that his words shall need
no farther explanation; and so in things necessary we believe he has done. And
if you say, The Decrees of Councels touching Controversies, though they be not
the Judge, yet they are the Judge's sentence: So, I say, the Scripture, though
not the Judge, is the sentence of the Judge. When therefore you conclude, That,
to say a Judge is necessary for deciding Controversies about the meaning of
Scripture, is as much as to say, He is necessary to decide what the holy Ghost
speaks in Scripture: This, I grant, is true; but I may not grant that a Judge
(such an one as we dispute of) is necessary either to do the one, or the other.
For, if the Scripture (as it is in things necessary) be plain, why should it be
more necessary to have a Judge to interpret them in plain places, than to have a
Judge to interpret the meaning of a Councel's Decrees, and others to interpret
their Interpretations, and others to interpret theirs, and so on for ever? And
where they are not plain, there if we, using diligence to find the Truth, do
yet miss of it and fall into Error, there is no danger in it. They that err,
and they that do not err, may both be saved. So that those places, which
contain things necessary, and wherein Error were dangerous, need no infallible
interpreter, because they are plain: and those that are obscure need none,
because they contain not things Necessary, neither is Error in them dangerous.

13. The Lawmakers speaking in the Law, I grant it, is no more easily
understood than the Law it self; for his speech is nothing else but the Law: I
grant it very necessary, that, besides the Lawmakers speaking in the Law, there
should be other Judges to determine Civil and Criminal Controversies, and to
give every man that justice which the Law allows him. But your Argument drawn
from hence to show a necessity of a Visible Judge in Controversies of Religion,
I say is Sophistical: and that for many Reasons.

14. First, Because the variety of Civil cases is infinite, and therefore there
cannot be possibly Laws enough provided for the determination of them: and
therefore there must be a Judge to supply out of the Principles of Reason the
interpretation of the Law where it is defective. But the Scripture (we say) is
a perfect Rule of Faith, and therefore needs no supply of the defects of it.

15. Secondly, To execute the Leter of the Law, according to rigor, would be
many times unjust, and therefore there is need of a Judge to moderate it;
whereof in Religion there is no use at all.

16. Thirdly, In Civil and Criminal Causes the parties have for the most part
so much interest, and very often so little honesty, that they will not submit
to a Law though never so plain, if it be against them; or will not see it to be
against them, though it be so never so plainly: whereas if men were honest, and
the Law were plain and extended to all cases, there would be little need of
Judges. Now in matters of Religion, when the Question is, Whether every man be
a fit Judge and chooser for himself, we suppose men honest, and such as
understand the difference between a Moment and Eternity. And such men we
conceive, will think it highly concerns them to be of the true Religion, but
nothing at all that this or that Religion should be the true. And then we
suppose that all the necessary points of Religion are plain and easy, and
consequently every man in this cause to be a competent Judge for himself;
because it concerns himself to judge right as much as eternal happiness is
worth. And if, through his own default he judge amiss, he alone shall suffer
for it.

17. Fourthly, In Civil Controversies we are obliged only to external passive
obedience, and not to an internal and active. We are bound to obey the sentence
of the Judge, or not to resist it, but not always to believe it just. But, in
matters of Religion, such a Judge is required whom we should be obliged to
believe, to have judged right. So that in Civil Controversies every honest
understanding man is fit to be a Judge; But in Religion none but he that is
infallible.

18. Fifthly, In Civil Causes there is means and power, when the Judge has
decreed, to compel men to obey his sentence: otherwise, I believe, Laws alone,
would be to as much purpose for the ending of differences, as Laws and Judges
both. But all the power in the world is neither fit to convince, nor able to
compel a man's conscience to consent to any thing. Worldly terror may prevail
so far as to make men profess a Religion which they believe not, (such men I
mean, who know not that there is a Heaven provided for Martyrs, and a Hell for
those that dissemble such Truths as are necessary to be professed): But to
force, either any man to believe what he believes not, or any honest man to
dissemble what he does believe (if God commands him to profess it,) or to
profess what he does not believe, all the Powers in the World are too weak,
with all the Powers of Hell to assist them.

19. Sixthly, In Civil Controversies the case cannot be so put, but there may
be Judge to end it, who is not a party: In Controversies of Religion, it is in
a manner impossible to be avoided, but the Judge must be a party. For this must
be the first, Whether he be a Judge or no, and in that he must be a party. Sure
I am, the Pope, in the Controversies of our time, is a chief party; for it
highly concerns him, even as much as his Popedom is worth, not to yield any one
point of his Religion to be erroneous. And he is a man subject to like passions
with other men. And therefore we may justly decline his sentence, for fear
temporal respects should either blind his judgment, or make him pronounce
against it.

20. Seventhly, In Civil Controversies, it is impossible Titius should hold the
land in question and Sempronius too: and therefore either the Plaintiff must
injure the Defendant by disquieting his possession, or the Defendant wrong the
Plaintiff by keeping his right from him. But in Controversies of Religion, the
Case is otherwise. I may hold my opinion and do you no wrong, and you yours and
do me none. Nay, we may both of us hold our opinion, and yet do our selves no
harm; provided, the difference be not touching any thing necessary to
salvation, and that we love truth so well, as to be diligent to inform our
Conscience, and constant in following it.

21. Eighthly, For the deciding of Civil Controversies, men may appoint
themselves a Judge. But, in matters of Religion, this office may be given to
none but whom God has designed for it: who does not always give us those
things which we conceive most expedient for our selves.

22. Ninthly, and Lastly, For the ending of Civil Controversies, Who does not
see, it is absolutely necessary, that not only Judges should be appointed, but
that it should be known and unquestioned who they are? Thus all the Judges of
our Land are known men, known to be Judges, and no man can doubt or question,
but these are the Men. Otherwise, if it were a disputable thing, Who were these
Judges, and they had no certain warrant for their Authority, but only some
Topical congruities; Would not any man say, such Judges, in all likelihood,
would rather multiply Controversies, than end them? So likewise, if our
Savior, the King of Heaven, had intended that all Controversies in Religion
should be by some visible Judge finally determined, Who can doubt, but in plain
terms he would have expressed himself about this matter? He would have said
plainly, The Bishop of Rome I have appointed to decide all emergent
Controversies. For that our Savior designed the Bishop of Rome to this Office,
and yet would not say so, nor cause it to be written -- ad Rei memoriam -- by
any of the Evangelists or Apostles, so much as once; but leave it to be drawn
out of uncertain Principles, by thirteen or fourteen more uncertain
Consequences, He that can believe it, let him.

23. All these Reasons, I hope, will convince you, that though we have, and
have great necessity of, Judges in Civil and Criminal Causes: yet you may not
conclude from thence, that there is any public authorized Judge to determine
Controversies in Religion, nor any necessity there should be any.

24. But the Scripture stands in need of some watchful and unerring eye to
guard it, by means of whose assured Vigilance, we may undoubtedly receive it
sincere and pure. Very true, but this is no other than the watchful eye of
Divine Providence: the goodness whereof will never suffer, that the Scripture
should be depraved and corrupted, but that in them should be always extant a
conspicuous and plain way to eternal happiness. Neither can any thing be more
palpably unconsistent with his goodness, than to suffer Scripture to be
undiscernably corrupted in any matter of moment, and yet to exact of men the
Belief of those verities, which, without their fault, or knowledge, or
possibility of prevention, were defaced out of them. So that God requiring of
men to believe Scripture in its purity, ingages himself to see it preserved in
sufficient purity; and you need not fear but he will satisfy his engagement.
You say, We can have no assurance of this, but your Churches Vigilance. But if
we had no other, we were in a hard case; for, Who could then assure us that
your Church has been so vigilant, as to guard Scripture from any the least
alteration? There being various Lections in the ancient Copies of your Bibles,
What security can your new raised Office of Assurance give us, that that
reading is true which you now receive, and that false which you reject?
Certainly, they that anciently received and made use of those diverse Copies,
were not all guarded by the Churches Vigilance from having their Scripture
altered from the purity of the Original in many places. For of different
readings, it is not in nature impossible that all should be false, but more
than one cannot possibly be true. Yet the want of such a protection, was no
hinderance to their salvation, and Why then shall the having of it be necessary
for ours? But then, this Vigilance of your Church, what means have we to be
ascertained of it? First, the thing is not evident of it self; which is
evident, because many do not believe it. Neither can any thing be pretended to
give evidence to it, but only some places of Scripture; of whose incorruption
more than any other, what is it that can secure me? If you say the Churches
Vigilance, you are in a Circle, proving the Scriptures uncorrupted by the
Church's Vigilance, and the Church's Vigilance by the incorruption of some
places of Scripture, and again the incorruption of those places by the
Church's Vigilance. If you name any other means; then, that means which
secures me of the Scripture's incorruption in those places, will also serve to
assure me of the same in other places. For my part, abstracting from Divine
Providence, which will never suffer the way to Heaven to be blocked up, or made
invisible, I know no other means (I mean, no other natural and rational means)
to be assured hereof, than I have that any other Book is uncorrupted. For,
though I have a greater degree of rational and humane Assurance of that than
this, in regard of diverse considerations which make it more credible, That the
Scripture has been preserved from any material alteration; yet my Assurance of
both is of the same kind and condition; both Moral Assurances, and neither
Physical or Mathematical.

25. To the next Argument the Reply is obvious; That, though we do not believe
the Books of Scripture to be canonical, because they say so, (For other Books
that are not Canonical may say they are, and those that are so, may say nothing
of it): yet we believe not this upon the Authority of your Church, but upon the
Credibility of Universal Tradition, which is a thing Credible of it self, and
therefore fit to be rested on; whereas the Authority of your Church is not so.
And therefore your rest thereon is not Rational but merely voluntary. I might
as well rest upon the judgment of the next man I meet, or upon the chance of a
Lottery for it. For by this means I only know I might err, but by replying on
you I know I should err. But yet (to return you one Suppose for another)
suppose I should for this and all other things submit to her direction, How
could she assure me that I should not be misled by doing so? She pretends
indeed infallibility herein, but how can she assure us that she has it? What,
by Scripture? That, you say, cannot assure us of its own Infallibility, and
therefore not of yours. What then, by Reason? That, you say, may deceive in
other things, and why not in this? How then will she assure us hereof, By
saying so? Of this very affirmation there will remain the same Question still,
How can it prove it self to be infallibly true? Neither can there be an end of
the life multiplied Demands, till we rest in something evident of it self,
which demonstrates to the world that this Church is infallible. And seeing
there is no such Rock for the Infallibility of this Church to be settled on, it
must of necessity, like the Island of Delos, flote up and down for ever. And yet
upon this Point according to Papists, all other Controversies in says depend.

26. To the 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14.. The sum and substance of the Ten next
Paragraphs, is this, That it appears, by the Confession of some Protestants,
and the Contentions of others, that the Questions about the Canon of Scripture,
what it is; and about the Various Reading and Translations of it, which is
true, and which not: are not to be determined by Scripture, and therefore that
all Controversies of Religion are not decidable by Scripture.

27. To which I have already answered, saying, That, when Scripture is affirmed
to be the Rule by which all Controversies of Religion are to be decided, Those
are to be excepted out of this generality, which are concerning the Scripture
it self. For, as that general saying of Scripture, He has put all things under
his feet, is most true, though yet S. Paul tell us, That when it is said, He
has put all things under him, it is manifest he is excepted who did put all
things under him: So when we say that all Controversies of Religion are
decidable by the Scripture, it is manifest to all, but cavillers, that we do,
and must, except from this generality, those which are touching the Scripture
it self. Just as a Merchant showing a Ship of his own, may say, All my
substance is in this Ship; and yet never intend to deny, that his Ship is part
of his substance, nor yet to say that his Ship is in it self. Or, as a man may
say, that a whole house is supported by the foundation, and yet never mean to
exclude the foundation from being a part of the house, or to say; that it is
supported by it self. Or as you your selves use to say, that the Bishop of Rome
is Head of the whole Church, and yet would think us but captious Sophisters,
should we infer from hence, that either you made him no part of the whole, or
else made him head of himself. Your Negative Conclusion, therefore, that these
Questions touching Scripture, are not decidable by Scripture, you needed not
have cited any Authorities, nor urged any Reason to prove it; it is evident of
it self, and I grant it without more ado. But your corollary from it, which you
would insinuate to your unwary Reader, That therefore they are to be decided by
your, or any, Visible Church, is a mere inconsequence, and very like his
collection, who, because Pamphilus was not to have Glycerium for his Wife,
presently concluded that he must have her; as if there had been no more men in
the World but Pamphilus and himself. For so you, as if there were nothing in
the World capable of this Office, but the Scripture, or the present Church;
having concluded against Scripture, you conceive, but too hastily, that you
have concluded for the Church. But the truth is, neither the one nor the other
have any thing to do with this matter. For first, the Question whether such or
such a Book be Canonical Scripture, though it may be decided negatively out of
Scripture, by showing apparent and irreconcilable contradictions between it
and some other Book confessedly Canonical; yet affirmatively it cannot but only
by the testimonies of the Ancient Churches: any Book being to be received as
undoubtedly Canonical, or to be doubted of as Uncertain, or rejected as
Apocryphal, according as it was received, or doubted of, or rejected by them.
Then for the Question, Of various readings which is the true? it is in reason
evident, and confessed by your own Pope, that there is no possible
determination of it, but only by comparison with ancient Copies. And lastly,
for controversies about different translations of Scripture, the Learned have
the same means to satisfy themselves in it, as in the Questions which happen
about the translation of any other Author; that is, skill in the Language of
the Original, and comparing translations with it. In which way if there be no
certainty, I would know that certainty you have, that your Doway old, and
Rhemish new Testament, are true translations? And then for the unlearned, those
on your side are subject to as much, nay the very same uncertainty with those
on ours. Neither is there any reason imaginable, why an ignorant English
Protestant may not be as secure of of the Translation of our Church, that it is
free from error, if not absolutely, yet in matters of moment, as an ignorant
English Papist can be of his Rhemist Testament, or Doway Bible. The best
direction I can give them, is, to compare both together, and where there is no
real difference (as in the Translation of controverted places I believe there
is very little) there to be confident, that they are right; where they differ,
there to be prudent in the choice of the Guides they follow. Which way of
proceeding if it be subject to some possible error, yet is it the best that
either we, or you have; and it is not required that we use any better than the
best we have.

28. You will say, Dependence on your Churches infallibility is a better. I
answer, it would be so, if we could be infallibly certain, that your Church is
infallible, that is, if it were either evident of it self, and seen by its own
light, or could be reduced unto, and settled upon, some Principle that is so.
But seeing you your selves do not so much as pretend to enforce us to the
belief hereof, by any proofs infallible and convincing; but only to induce us
to it, by such as are, by your confession, only probable and prudential
Motives; certainly it will be to very little purpose, to put off your
uncertainty for the first turn, and to fall upon it at the second: to please
your selves in building your house upon an imaginary Rock when you your selves
see and confess, that this very Rock stands it self at the best but upon a
frame of timber. I answer secondly, that this cannot be a better way, because
we are infallibly certain that your Church is not infallible, and indeed has
not the real Prescription of this Privilege, but only pleases her self with a
false imagination and vain presumption of it; as I shall hereafter demonstrate
by many unanswerable Arguments.

29. Now seeing I make no scruple or difficulty to grant the conclusion of this
Discourse, that, These controversies about Scripture, are not decidable by
Scripture; and have showed, that your deduction from it, that therefore they
are to be determined by the Authority of some present Church, is irrational,
and inconsequent; I might well forbear to tire myself with an exact and
punctual examination of your premises (...), which whether they be true or
false, is to the Question disputed wholly impertinent. Yet because you shall
not complain of tergiversation, I will run over them, and let nothing, that is
material and considerable, pass without some stricture or animadversion.

30. You pretend that M. Hooker acknowledges, that, That whereon we must rest
our assurance that the Scripture is God's Word, is the Church: and for this
acknowledgement you refer us to l. 3.. 8. Let the Reader consult the place,
and he shall find that he and M. Hooker have been much abused, both by you
here, and by M. Breerly, and others before you; and that M. Hooker has not one
syllable to your pretended purpose, but very much directly to the contrary.
There he tells us indeed, That, ordinaly the first Introduction and probable
Motive to the belief of the verity, is the Authority of the Church; but, that
it is the last Foundation whereon our belief hereof is rationally grounded,
that in the same place he plainly denies. His words are, Scripture teaches us
that saving Truth which God has discovered unto the world by Revelation, and
it presumes us taught otherwise, that it self is Divine and Sacred. The
Question then being by what means we are taught this: Some answer so, but he
does not.
some answer; that to learn it we have no other way than Tradition. As, namely,
that so we believe, because we from our Predecessors, and they from theirs,
have so received. But is this enough? That which all men's experience teaches
them, may not in any wise be denied: and by experience we all know, that The
first outward Motive, not the last assurance whereon we rest.
the first outward Motive leading men to esteem of the Scripture, is, the
Authority of God's Church. For when we know The whole Church that he speaks of,
seems to be that particular Church, wherein a man is bred and brought up; and
the Authority of this he makes an Argument which presses a man's modesty more
than his reason. And in saying, It seems impudent to be of a contrary mind,
without cause, he implies; There may be a just cause to be of a contrary mind,
and that then it were no impudence to be so.
the whole Church of God has that opinion of the Scripture, we judge it at the
first an impudent thing for any man, bred and brought up in the Church, to be
of a contrary mind without cause. Afterward, the more we bestow our labor
upon reading or hearing the mysteries thereof, Therefore the Authority of the
Church is not the pause whereon we rest: we had need of more assurance, and the
int^ins^cal Arguments afford ^t.
the more we find that the thing it self does answer our received opinion
concerning it: so that the former inducement, prevailing Somewhat, b^t not
much, until it be backed and enforced by farther reason: it self therefore is
not the farthest reason and the last resolution.
somewhat with us before, does now much more prevail, when the very thing has
ministered farther reason. If Infidels or Atheists chance at any time to call it
in question, this gives us occasion to sift what reason there is, whereby the
testimony of the Church, concerning Scripture, and our own persuasion, which
Scripture it self has settled, may be proved a truth infallible. Observe, I
pray; Our persuasion, and the testimony of the Church concerning Scripture, may
be proved true; Therefore neither or them was in his account the farthest proof.
In which case the ancient Fathers, being often constrained to show what
warrant they had so much to rely upon the Scriptures, endeavored still to
maintain the Authority of the Books of God, by Arguments, such as the
unbelievers themselves must needs think reasonable, if they judge thereof as
they should. Neither is it a thing impossible or greatly hard, even by such
kind of proofs, so to manifest and clear that Point, that no man living shall
be able to deny it, without denying some apparent Principle, such as all men
acknowledge to be true Natural reason th^n built on principles common to all
men, is the last resolution; unto which the Churches Authority is but the first
inducement.
By this time, I hope, the Reader sees sufficient proof of what I said in my
Reply to your Preface, that M. Breerelie's great ostentation of exactness, is
no very certain Argument of his fidelity.

31. But, seeing the belief of Scripture is a necessary thing, and cannot be
proved by Scripture, How can the Church of England teach, as she does, Art. 6.
That all things necessary are contained in Scripture?

32. I have answered this already. And here again, I say, That all but
cavillers will easily understand the meaning of the Article to be, That all the
Divine verities, which Christ revealed to his Apostles, and the Apostles taught
the Churches, are contained in Scripture; That is, all the material objects of
our Faith; whereof the Scripture is none, but only the means of conveying them
unto us: which we believe not finally, and for it self, but for the matter
contained in it. So that, if men did believe the Doctrine contained in
Scripture, it should no way hinder their salvation, not to know whether there
were any Scripture or no. Those barbarous Nations Irenaeus speaks of, were in
this case, and yet no doubt but they might be saved. The end that God aims at,
is the belief of the Gospel, the Covenant between God and Man; the Scripture he
has provided as a means for this end, and this also we are to believe, but not
as the last Object of our Faith, but as the Instrument of it. When therefore we
subscribe to the 6 Art. you must understand, that, by Articles of Faith, they
mean the final and ultimate Objects of it, and not the Means and instrumental
Objects; and then there will be no repugnance between what they say, and that
which Hooker, and D. Covel, and D. Whitaker, and Luther here say.

33. But Protestants agree not in assigning the Canon of Holy Scripture. Luther
and Illyricus reject the Epistle of S. James: Kemnitius, and other Lutherans,
the second of Peter, the second and third of John. The Epistle to the Hebrews,
the Epistle of James, of Jude, and the Apocalypse. Therefore without the
Authority of the Church, no certainty can be had what Scripture is Canonical.

34. So also the Ancient Fathers, and not only Fathers, but whole Churches,
differed about the certainty of the Authority of the very same Books: and by
their difference showed, they knew no necessity of conforming themselves herein
to the judgment of your or any Church. For had they done so, they must have
agreed all with that Church, and consequently among themselves. Now, I pray,
tell me plainly, Had they sufficient certainty what Scripture was Canonical, or
had they not? If they had not, it seems there is no great harm or danger in not
having such a certainty whether some Books be Canonical or no, as you require:
If they had, Why may not Protestants, notwithstanding their differences, have
sufficient certainty hereof, as well as the Ancient Fathers and Churches,
notwithstanding theirs?

35. You proceed. And whereas the Protestants of England in the 6. Art. have
these words, In the name of the Holy Scripture we do understand those Books, of
whose Authority was never any doubt in the Church; you demand, What they mean
by them? Whether that, by the Churches consent they are assured what Scriptures
be Canonical? I answer for them. Yes, they are so. And whereas you infer from
hence, This is to make the Church Judge: I have told you already, That, of this
Controversy we make the Church the Judge; but not the present Church, much
less the present Roman Church, but the consent and testimony of the Ancient and
Primitive Church, Which, though it be but an highly probable inducement, and no
demonstrative enforcement; yet methinks you should not deny but may be a
sufficient ground of Faith: Whose Faith, even of the Foundation of all your
Faith, your Churches Authority is built lastly and wholly upon Prudential
Motives.

36. But, by this Rule the whole Book of Esther must quit the Canon; because it
was excluded by some in the Church: by Melito, Athanasius, and Gregory
Nazianzen. Then, for ought I know, he that should think he had reason to
exclude it now, might be still in the Church as well as Melito, Athanasius,
Nazianzen were. And while you thus inveigh against Luther, and charge him with
Luciferian heresies, for doing that which you in this very place confess, that
Saints in Heaven before him have done, are you not partial, and a Judge of evil
thoughts?

37. Luther's censures of Ecclesiastes, Job, and the Prophets, though you make
such tragedies with them, I see none of them but is capable of a tolerable
construction, and far from having in them any fundamental Heresy. He that
condemns him for saying, the Book of Ecclesiastes is not full, That it has
many abrupt things, condemns him, for ought I can see, for speaking truth. And
the rest of the censure is but a bold and blunt expression of the same thing.
The Book of Job may be a true History, and yet, as many true stories are, and
have been, and Argument of a Fable to set before us an example of Patience. And
though the Books of the Prophets were not written by themselves, but by their
Disciples, yet it does not follow that they were written casually: (Though I
hope, you will not damn all for Heretics, that say, Some Books of Scripture
were written casually.) Neither is there any reason they should the sooner be
called in question for being written by their Disciples, seeing being so
written, they had attestation from themselves. Was the Prophecy of Jeremy the
less Canonical, for being written by Baruch? Or, because S. Peter the Master,
dictated the Gospel, and S. Mark the Scholar writ it, is it the more likely to
be called in Question?

38. But leaving Luther, you return to our English Canon of Scripture; And tell
us, That, in the New Testament, by the abovementioned Rule (of whose Authority
was never doubt in the Church) diverse Books must be dis-canonized. Not so. For
I may believe even those questioned Books to have been written by the Apostles,
and to be Canonical: but I cannot in reason believe this of them so
undoubtedly, as of those Books which were never questioned. At least I have no
warrant to damn any man that shall doubt of them or deny them now: having the
example of Saints in Heaven, either to justify, or excuse such their doubting
or denial.

39. You observe in the next place, That our sixth Article, specifying by name
all the Books of the Old Testament, shuffles over those of the New with this
generality -- All the Books of the New Testament, as they are commonly
received, we do receive, and account them Canonical: And in this you fancy to
your self a mystery of iniquity. But if this be all the shuffling that the
Church of England is guilty of, I believe the Church, as well as the King, may
give for her Motto, Honi soit qui mal y pense. For all the Bibles, which since
the composing of the Articles have been used and allowed by the Church of
England, do testify and even proclaim to the World, that by Commonly-received,
they meant, received by the Church of Rome, and other Churches before the
Reformation. I pray, take the pains to look in them, and there you shall find
the Books, which the Church of England counts Apocryphal, marked out, and
severed from the rest, with this Title in the beginning, The Books called
Apocrypha; and with this close or seal in the end, The end of the Apocrypha.
And having told you by name, and, in particular, what Books only she esteems
Apocryphal, I hope you will not put her to the trouble of telling you, that the
rest are in her judgment Canonical.

40. But, if by Commonly-received, She meant, by the Church of Rome; then by
the same reason, must she receive diverse Books of the Old Testament which she
rejects.

41. Certainly, a very good consequence. The Church of England receives the
Books of the New Testament, which the Church of Rome receives; Therefore she
must receive the Books of the Old Testament which she receives. As if you
should say, If you will do as we, in one thing, you must in all things. If you
will pray to God with us, ye must pray to Saints with us. If you hold with us,
when we have reason on our Side, you must do so, when we have no reason.

42. The Discourse following, is but a vain Declamation. No man thinks that
this Controversy is to be tried by Most Voices, but by the Judgment and
Testimony of the Ancient Fathers and Churches.

43. But, with what Coherence can we say in the former part of the Article,
That, by Scripture we mean those Books that were never doubted of; and in the
latter say, We receive all the Books of the New Testament, as they are commonly
received, whereas of them many were doubted? I answer, When they say, of whose
Authority there was never any doubt in the Church, They mean not, those only of
whose Authority there was simply no doubt at all, by any man in the Church; But
such as were not at any time doubted of by the whole Church, or by all
Churches; but had attestation, though not universal, yet, at least, sufficient
to make considering men receive them for Canonical. In which number they may
well reckon those Epistles which were sometimes doubted of by some, yet whose
number and authority was not so great, as to prevail against the contrary
suffrages.

44. But, if to be commonly received, pass for a good Rule to know the Canon
of the New Testament by, why not of the Old? You conclude many times very well,
but still when you do so, it is out of Principles which no man grant: for, who
ever told you, that to be commonly received is a good Rule to know the Canon of
the New Testament by? Have you been trained up in Schools of subtilty, and
cannot you see a great difference between these two, We receive the Books of
the New Testament as they are commonly received, and we receive those that are
commonly received, because they are so? To say this, were indeed to make, being
commonly received, a Rule or reason to know the Canon by. But to say the
former, does no more make it a Rule then you should make the Church of England
the Rule of your receiving them, if you should say, as you may, The Books of
the New Testament we receive for Canonical, as they are received by the Church
of England.

45. You demand, Upon what infallible ground we agree with Luther against you
in some, and with you against Luther in others? And I also demand, Upon what
infallible ground you hold your Canon, and agree neither with us, nor Luther?
For sure your differing from us both, is of it self no more apparently
reasonable, than our agreeing with you in part, and in part with Luther. If you
say, Your Churches infallibility is your ground: I demand again some infallible
ground, both for the Churches infallibility, and for this, that Yours is the
Church; and shall never cease multiplying demands upon demands, until you
settle me upon a Rock; I mean, give such an Answer, whose Truth is so evident,
that it needs no further evidence. If you say, This is Universal Tradition: I
reply, your Churches infallibility is not built upon it, and that the Canon of
Scripture, as we receive it, is. For we do not profess our selves so
absolutely, and undoubtedly certain neither do we urge others to be so, of
those Books, which have been doubted, as of those that never have.

46. The Conclusion of your Tenth is, That the Divinity of a writing cannot be
known from it self alone, but by some extrinsecal Authority; Which you need not
prove, for no wise man denies it. But then, this Authority is that of Universal
Tradition, not of Your Church. For to me it is altogether as (...), that the
Gospel of S. Matthew is the Word of God, as that all which your Church says,
is true.

That Believers of the Scripture, by considering the Divine matter, the
excellent precepts, the glorious promises contained in it, may be confirmed in
their faith of the Scriptures Divine Authority; and that among other
inducements and enforcements hereunto, internal arguments have their place and
force, certainly no man of understanding can deny. For my part I profess, if
the Doctrine of the Scripture were not as good, and as fit to come from the
Fountain of goodness, as the Miracles by which it was confirmed, were great, I
should want one main Pillar of my faith: and for want of it, I fear, should be
much staggered in it. Now this and nothing else, did the Doctor mean in saying,
The Believer sees, by that glorious Beam of Divine light which shines in
Scripture, and by many internal Arguments, that the Scripture is of Divine
Authority. By this (says he) he sees it, that is, he is moved to, and
strengthened in, his belief of it: and by this partly, not wholly; by this,
not alone, but with the concurrence of other Arguments. He that will quarrel
with him for saying so, must find fault with the Master of the Sentences, and
all his Scholars, for they all say the same. The rest of this Paragragh, I am
as willing it should be true, as you are to have it: and so let it pass, as a
discourse wherein we are wholly unconcerned. You might have met with an
Answerer, that would not have suffered you to have said so much Truth together;
but to me it is sufficient, that it is nothing to the purpose.

48. In the next Division, out of your liberality, you will suppose, that
Scripture, like to a corporal light, is by it self alone able to determine and
move our understanding to assent: yet notwithstanding this supposal, Faith
still (you say) must go before Scripture, because as the light is visible only
to those that have eyes: so the Scripture, only to those that have the Eye of
Faith. But to my understanding, if Scripture do move and determine our
Understanding to assent, then the Scripture, and its moving, must be before
this assent, as the cause must be before its own effect; now this very assent
is nothing else but Faith, and Faith nothing else than the Understanding's
assent. And therefore (upon this supposal) Faith does, and must, originally
proceed from Scripture, as the effect from its proper cause: and the influence
and efficacy of Scripture is to be presupposed before the assent of Faith, unto
which it moves and determines, and consequently if this supposition of yours
were true, there should need no other means precedent to Scripture to beget
Faith, Scripture it self being able as here you suppose) to determine and move
the Understanding to assent, that is, to believe them, and the Verities
contained in them. Neither is this to say, that the eyes with which we see, are
made by the light by which we see. For you are mistaken much, if you conceive
that in this comparison, Faith answers to the Eye. But if you will not pervert
it, the Analogy must stand thus; Scripture must answer to light; The eye of
the soul, that is, the Understanding, or the faculty of assenting, to the
Bodily eye; And lastly, assenting or believing to the act of Seeing. As
therefore the light, determining the Eye to see, though it presupposes the Eye
which it determines, as every Action does the object on which it is employed,
yet it self is presupposed and antecedent to the act of seeing, as the cause is
always to its effect: So, if you will suppose that Scripture, like light,
moves the Understanding to assent, the Understanding (that is the eye and
object on which it works) must be before this influence upon it; But the
Assent, that is, the belief whereto the Scripture moves and the Underis moved,
which answers to the act of seeing, must come after. For if it did assent
already, To what purpose should the Scripture do that which was done before?
Nay indeed, How were it possible it should be so, any more than a Father can
beget a Son that he has already? Or an Architect built a house that is built
already? Or than this very world can be made again before it be unmade?
Transubstantion indeed is fruitful of such Monsters. But they that have not
sworn themselves to the defense of Error, will easily perceive, that jam factum
facere, and factum infectum facere, are equally impossible. But I digress.

49. The close of this Paragraph, is a fit cover for such a dish. There you
tell us, That if there must be some other means precedent to Scripture to beget
faith, this can be no other than the Church. By the Church, we know you do,
and must understand the Roman Church: so that in effect you say, no man can
have faith, but he must be moved to it by your Churches Authority. And that is
to say, that the King and all other Protestants, to whom you write, though they
verily think they are Christians and believe the Gospel, because they assent to
the truth of it, and would willingly die for it, yet indeed are Infidels and
believe nothing. The Scripture tells us, The heart of man knows no man, but
the spirit of man which is in him. And Who are you, to take upon you to make us
believe, that we do not believe, what we know we do? But if I may think verily
that I believe the Scripture, and yet not believe it; how know you that you
believe the Roman Church? I am as verily and as strongly persuaded that I
believe the Scripture, as you are that you believe the Church. And if I may be
deceived, why may not you? Again, what more ridiculous, and against sense and
experience, than to affirm, That there are not millions amongst you and us that
believe, upon no other reason than their education, and the authority of their
Parents and Teachers, and the opinion they have of them? The tenderness of the
subject, and aptness to receive impressions, supplying the defect and
imperfection of the Agent! And will you proscribe from heaven all those
believers of your own Creed, who do indeed lay the foundation of their Faith
(for I cannot call it by any other name) no deeper than upon the authority of
their Father, or Master, or Parish Priest? Certainly, if these have no true
faith, your Church is very full of Infidels. Suppose Xaverius by the holiness
of his life had converted some Indians to Christianity, who could (for so I
will suppose) have no knowledge of your Church but from him, and therefore must
last of all build their faith of the Church, upon their opinion of Xaverius: Do
these remain as very Pagans after their conversion, as they were before? Are
they brought to assent in their souls, and obey in their lives the Gospel of
Christ, only to be Tantaliz'd and not saved, and not benefited, but deluded by
it, because, forsooth, it is a man and not the Church that begets faith in
them? What if their motive to believe be not in reason sufficient? Do they
therefore not believe what they do believe, because they do it upon
insufficient motives? They choose the Faith imprudently perhaps, but yet they
do choose it. Unless you will have us believe, that that which is done, is not
done, because it is not done upon good reason: which is to say, that never any
man living ever did a foolish action. But yet I know not why the Authority of
one holy man, which apparently has no ends upon me, joined with the goodness
of the Christian faith, might not be a far greater and more rational motive to
me to embrace Christianity, than any I can have to continue in Paganism. And
therefore, for shame, if not for love of Truth, you must recant this fancy when
you write again: and suffer true faith to be many times, where your Churches
infallibility has no hand in the begetting of it. And be content to tell us
hereafter, that we believe not enough, and not go about to persuade us we
believe nothing, for fear with telling us what we know to be manifestly false,
you should gain only this, Not to be believed when you speak truth. Some pretty
sophisms you may happily bring us, to make us believe, we believe nothing: but
wise men know that Reason against Experience is always Sophistical. And
therefore as he that could not answer Zeno's subtilties against the existence
of Motion, could yet confute them by doing that, which he pretended could not
be done: So, if you should give me a hundred Arguments to persuade me, because
I do not believe Transubstantiation, I do not believe in God, and the Knots of
them I could not unty, yet I should cut them in pieces with doing that, and
knowing that I do so, which you pretend I cannot do.

50. In the thirteenth Division, we have again much ado about nothing. A great
deal of stir you keep in confuting some, that pretend to know Canonical
Scripture to be such, by the Titles of the Books. But these men you do not
name, which makes me suspect you cannot. Yet it is possible there may be some
such men in the world; for Gusmen de Alfarache has taught us that, The Fools
hospital is a large place.

51. In the fourteenth. we have very artificial juggling. D. Potter had said,
That the Scripture (he desires to be understood of those books wherein all
Christians agree) is a principle, and needs not be proved among Christians. His
reason was, because, that needs no farther proof which is believed already. Now
by this (you say) he means either, that the Scripture is one of these first
Principles, and most known in all Sciences, which cannot be proved: which is to
suppose, it cannot be proved by the Church; and that is to suppose the
Question: Or, he means, That it is not the most known in Christianity, and then
it may be proved. Where we see plainly, That two most different things, Most
known in all Sciences, and, Most known in Christianity, are captiously
confounded. As if the Scripture might not be the first and most known Principle
in Christianity, and yet not the most known in all Sciences? Or, as if to be a
First Principle in Christianity, and in all Sciences, were all one? That
Scripture is a Principle among Christians, that is, so received by all that it
need not be proved in any emergent Controversy to any Christian, but may be
taken for granted, I think few will deny. You your selves are of this a
sufficient Testimony, for urging against us many texts of Scripture, you offer
no proof of the truth of them, presuming we will not question it. Yet this is
not to deny, that Tradition is a Principle more known than Scripture; But to
say, It is a Principle not in Christianity, but in Reason, nor proper to
Christians, but common to all men.

52. But, It is repugnant to our practice to hold Scripture a Principle;
because we are wont to affirm, that one part of Scripture may be known to be
Canonical, and may be interpreted by another. Where the former device is again
put in practice. For to be known to be Canonical, and to be interpreted, is not
all one. That Scripture may be interpreted by Scripture, that Protestants
grant, and Papists do not deny; neither does that any way hinder but that this
assertion -- Scripture is the word of God, may be among Christians a common
Principle. But the first, -- That one part of Scripture may prove another part
Canonical, and need no proof of its own being so; for that, you have produced
diverse Protestants that deny it; but who they are that affirm it, nondum
constat.

53. It is superfluous for you to prove out of S. Athanasius, and S. Austine,
that we must receive the sacred Canon, upon the credit of Gods Church.
Understanding by Church, as here you explain your self, The credit of
Tradition. And that not the Tradition of the Present Church, which we pretend
may deviate from the Ancient, but such a Tradition, which involves an ^^ndence
of Fact, and from hand to hand, from age to age, bringing us up to the times
and persons of the Apostles, and our Savior himself, comes to be confirmed by
all those Miracles, and other Arguments, whereby they convinced their doctrine
to be true. Thus you. Now prove the Canon of Scripture which you receive by
such Tradition, and we will allow it. Prove your whole doctrine, or the
infallibility of your Church by such a Tradition, and we will yield to you in
all things. Take the alleged places of S. Athanasius, and S. Austin, in this
sense, (which is your own,) and they will not press us any thing at all. We
will say, with Athanasius, That only four Gospels are to be received, because
the Canons of the Holy and Catholic Church (understand of all Ages since the
perfection of the Canon) have so determined.

54. We will subscribe to S. Austin, and say, That we also would not believe
the Gospel, unless the Authority of the Catholic Church did move us, (meaning
by the Church, the Church of all Ages, and that succession of Christians which
takes in Christ himself and his Apostels.) Neither would Zwinglius have needed
to cry out upon this saying, had he conceived as you now do, that by the
Catholic Church, the Church of all Ages, since Christ, was to be understood.
As for the Council of Carthage, it may speak not of such Books only, as were
certainly Canonical, and for the regulating of Faith; but also of those which
were only profitable, and lawful to be read in the Church. Which in England is
a very slender Argument that the book is Canonical, where every body knows that
Apocryphal books are read as well as Canonical. But howsoever, if you
understand by Fathers, not only their immediate Fathers and Predecessors in the
Gospel, but the succession of them from the Apostles; they are right in the
Thesis, that whatsoever is received from these Fathers, as Canonical, is to be
so esteemed; Though in the application of it, to this or that particular book
they may happily err, and think that book received as Canoniel, which was only
received as profitable to be read; and think that Book received always, and by
all, which was rejected by some, and doubted of by many.

55. But we cannot be certain, in what language the Scriptures remain
uncorrupted. Not so certain, I grant, as of that which we can demonstrate: But
certain enough, morally certain, as certain as the nature of the thing will
bear: So certain we may be, and God requires no more. We may be as certain as
S. Austin was, who in his second book of Baptism, against the Donatists, c. 3.
plainly implies, the Scripture might possibly be corrupted. He means, sure, in
matters of little moment, such as concern not the Covenant between God and Man.
But thus he says. The same S. Austin in his 48. Epist. clearly intimates,
Neque enim sic poturt integrit as atque notitia literarum quamlibet illust is
Episcopi, castodiri, quemadmodum Scritura Canonica tet linguarum literis and
ordine and successione celebrationis Ecclesiasticae custoditur; contra quam non
desuerunt tam^n, qui sub nominibus Aposiolorum multa consiagerent. Frustra
quidem; quia illa sic commendata, sic celebrata, sic nota est. Verum quid
possit adversus literas non Canonica authoritate sundatas etiam hinc
demonstrabit impiae conatus audaciae, quod and adversus cos quae tanta notitiae
mole firmatae sunt, sese erigere non praetermisit. Aug. ep. 48. ad Vincent.
cont. Donat. and Rogat.
That in his judgment, the only preservative of the Scriptures integrity, was
the translating it into so many Languages, and the general and perpetual use
and reading of it in the Church: for want whereof the works of particular
Doctors were more exposed to danger in this kind; but the Canonical Scripture
being by this means guarded with universal care and diligence, was not
obnoxious to such attempts. And this assurance of the Scriptures incorruption,
is common to us with him, we therefore are as certain hereof as S. Austin was,
and that, I hope, was certain enough. Yet if this does not satisfy you, I say
farther, We are as certain hereof as your own Pope Sixtus Quintus was. He in
his Preface to his Bible tells us, In hac germani textus pe^vestigatione, satis
perspicue inter omnes constat, nullum argumenum esse certius ac sirmius, quam
antiquorum probatorum codicum Latinorum fidem, etc. sie S^xtus in Praef.
That in the pervestigation of the true and genuine Text, it was perspicuously
manifest to all men, that there was no Argument more firm and certain to be
relied upon, than the Faith of Ancient Books. Now this ground we have to build
upon as well as he had: and therefore our certainty is as great, and stands
upon as certain ground as his did.

56. This is not all I have to say in this matter. For I will add moreover,
that we are as certain in what Language the Scripture is uncorrupted, as any
man in your Church was, until Clement the eighth set forth your own approved
Edition of your Vulgar Translation. For you do not, nor cannot, without extreme
impudence, deny, that until then, there was great variety of Copes current in
diverse parts of your Church, and those very frequent in various lections: all
which Copies might possibly be false in some things, but more than one sort of
them, could not possibly be true in all things. Neither were it less impudence
to pretend, that any man in your Church, could until Clement's time have any
certainty what that one true Copy and Reading was, (if there were one
perfectly true.) Some indeed that had got Sixtus his Bible, might, after the
Edition of that, very likely think themselves cock-sure of a perfect true
uncorrupted Translation, without being beholding to Clement; but how foully
they were abused and deceived that thought so, the Edition of Clemens,
differing from that of Sixtus in a great multitude of places, does sufficiently
demonstrate.

57. This certainty therefore, in what language the Scripture remains
uncorrupted, is it necessary to have it, or is it not? If it be not, I hope we
may do well enough without it. If it be necessary, What became of your Church
for 1500 years together? All which time, you must confess she had no such
certainty: no one man being able truly and upon good ground to say, This or
that Copy of the Bible is pure, and perfect, and uncorrupted in all things. And
now at this present, though some of you are grown to a higher degree of
Presumption in this Point, yet are you as far as ever, from any true, real, and
rational assurance of the absolute purity of your Authentic Translation:
which I suppose my self to have proved unanswerably in diverse places.

58. In the sixteenth Division, It is objected to Protestants in a long
discourse transcribed out of the Protestant's Apology, That their Translations
of the Scripture are very different, and by each other mutually condemned.
Luther 's Translation by Zwinglius, and others: That of the Zwinglians, by
Luther. The Translation of Oecolampadius, by the Divines of Basil: that of
Castalio, by Beza: That of Beza, by Castalio. That of Calvin, by Carolus
Molinaeus. That of Geneva, by M. Parks, and King James. And lastly, One of our
Translations by the Puritans.

59. All which might have been as justly objected against that great variety of
Translations extant in the Primitive Church, and made use of by the Fathers and
Doctors of it. For which, I desire not that my word, but S. Austin's may be
taken. They, which have translated the Scriptures out of the Hebrew into Greek,
may be numbered; but the Latin Interpreters are innumerable. For, whenever any
one, in the first times of Christianity, met with a Greek Bible, and seemed to
himself to have some ability in both Languages, he presently ventured upon an
Interpretation. So He, in his second Book of Christian doctrine. Cap. 11. Of
all these, that which was called the Italian Translation was esteemed best; so
we may learn from the same S. Austin in Chap. 15. of the same Book. Amongst all
these interpretations (says he) let the Italian be preferred: for it keeps
closer to the Letter, and is perspicuous in the sense. Yet so far was the
Church of that time from presuming upon the absolute purity and perfection,
even of this best Translation, that S. Hierom thought it necessary to make a
new Translation, of the Old Testament, out of the Hebrew Fountain, (which
himself testifies in his Book de Viris illustribus); and to correct the Vulgar
version of the New Testament, according to the truth of the Original Greek;
amending many errors which had crept into it, whether by the mistake of the
Author, or the negligence of the Transcribers; which work he undertook and
performed at the request of Damasus, Bishop of Rome. You constrain me (says
he) to make a new work of an old: that, after the Copies of the Scriptures have
been dispersed through the whole World, I should sit, as it were, an Arbitrator
amongst them, and, because they vary among themselves, should determine what
are those things (in them) which consent with the Greek verity. And after:
Therefore this present Preface promises the four Gospels only, corrected by
collation with Greek Copies. But, that they might not be very dissonant from
the custom of the Latin reading, I have so tempered with my style, the
Translation of the Ancients, that, those things amended which did seem to
change the sense, other things I have suffered to remain as they were. So that
in this matter Protestants must either stand or fall with the Primitive Church.

60. The Corruption that you charge Luther with, and the falsification that you
impute to Zwinglius, What have we to do with them? Or why may not we as justly
lay to your charge the Errors, which Lyranus, or Paulus Brugensis, or
Laurentius Valla, or Cajetan, or Erasmus, or Arias Montanus, or Augustus
Nebiensis, or Pagnine, have committed in their Translations?

61. Which yet I say not, as if these Translations of Luther and Zwinglius were
absolutely indefensible; for what such great difference is there between Faith
without the Works of the Law, and Faith alone without the Works of the Law? Or
why does not, Without, Alone, signify all one with, Alone, Without? Consider
the matter a little better, and observe the use of these phrases of speech in
our ordinary talk, and perhaps you will begin to doubt whether you had
sufficient ground for this invective. And then for Zwinglius, if it be true (as
they say it is) that the language our Savior spoke in, had no such word as
Tosignifie, but used always, to be, in stead of it, as it is certain the
Scripture does in an hundred places; then this Translation, which you so
declaim against, will prove no falsification in Zwinglius, but a calumny in you.

62. But the faith of Protestants relies upon Scripture alone; Scripture is
delivered to most of them by Translations; Translations depend upon the skill
and honesty of Men, who certainly may err because they are Men, and certainly
do err, at least some of them, because their Translations are contrary. It
seems then the Faith, and consequently the Salvation of Protestants, relies
upon fallible and uncertain grounds.

63. This Objection, though it may seem to do you great service for the
present; yet I fear, you will repent the time that ever you urged it against us
as a fault, that we make men's salvation depend upon uncertainties; For the
Objection returns upon you many ways, as first thus; The salvation of many
millions of Papists (as they suppose and teach) depends upon their having the
Sacrament of Penance truly administered unto them. This again upon the
Minister's being a true Priest. That such or such a man is Priest; not himself,
much less any other can have any possible certainty: for it depends upon a
great many contingent and uncertain supposals. He that will pretend to be
certain of it, must undertake to know for a certain all these things that
follow.

64. First, That he was baptized with due matter. Secondly, with the due form
of words, (which he cannot know, unless he were both present and attentive.)
Thirdly, he must know that he was baptized with due Intention, and that is,
that the Minister of his Baptism was not a secret Jew, nor a Moor, nor an
Atheist, (of all which kinds, I fear, experience gives you just cause to fear,
that Italy and Spain have Priests not a few) but a Christian in heart, as well
as Profession; (otherwise, believing the Sacrament to be nothing, in giving it
he could intend to give nothing,) nor a Samosatenian, nor an Arrian: but one
that was capable of having due intention, from which they that believe not the
Doctrine of the Trinity are excluded by you. And lastly, That he was neither
drunk nor distracted at the administration of the Sacrament, nor our of
negligence or malice omitted his intention.

65. Fourthly, he must undertake to know, that the Bishop, which ordained him
Priest, ordained him completely with due Matter, Form, and Intention: and
consequently, that he again was neither Jew, nor Moor, nor Atheist, nor liable
to any such exception, as is unconsistent with due Intention in giving the
Sacrament of Orders.

66. Fifthly, he must undertake to know, that the Bishop, which made him
Priest, was a Priest himself; for your Rule is, Nihil dat quod non habet: And
consequently, that there was again none of the former nullities in his Baptism,
which might make him incapable of Ordination; nor no invalidity in his
Ordination, but a true Priest to ordain him again, the requisite matter, and
form* and due intention, all concurring.

67. Lastly, he must pretend to know the same of him that made him Priest, and
him that made Him Priest, even until he comes to the very fountain of
Priesthood. For, take any one in the whole train and succession of Ordainers,
and suppose him, by reason of any defect, only a supposed and not a true
Priest, then according to your Doctrine he could not give a true, but only a
supposed Priesthood; and they that receive it of him, and again they that
derive it from them, can give no better than they received; receiving nothing
but a name and shadow, can give nothing but a name and shadow: and so from age
to age, from generation to generation, seeing equivocal Fathers beget only
equivocal Sons; No Principle in Geometry being more certain than this, That the
unsuppliable defect of any necessary Antecedent, must needs cause a nullity of
all those Consequences which depend upon it. In fine, to know this one thing
you must first know ten thousand others, whereof not any one is a thing that
can be known, there being no necessity that it should be true, which only can
qualify any thing for an object of Science, but only, at the best, a high
degree of probability that it is so. But then, that of ten thousand probables,
no one should be false; that of ten thousand requisites, whereof any one may
fail, not one should be wanting, this to me is extremely improbable and even
cousingerman to Impossible. So that the assurance hereof is like a Machin
composed of an innumerable multitude of pieces, of which it is strangely
unlikely but some will be out of order; and yet, if any one be so, the whole
Fabric of necessity falls to the ground. And he that shall put them together,
and maturely consider all the possible ways of lapsing, and nullifying a
Priesthood in the Church of Rome, I believe, will be very inclinable to think,
that it is an hundred to one, that, amongst an hundred seeming Priests, there
is not one true one. Nay, that it is not a thing very improbable, that, amongst
those many millions, which make up the Romish Hierarchy, there are not twenty
true. But be the truth in this what it will be, once this is certain, that
They, which make men's salvation (as you do) depend upon Priestly Absolution;
and this again (as you do) upon the Truth and reality of the Priesthood that
gives it; and this lastly upon a great multitude of apparent uncertainties, are
not the fittest men in the world, to object to others, as a horrible crime,
That they make men's Salvation depend upon fallible and uncertain foundations.
And let this be the first retortion of your Argument.

68. But suppose, this difficulty assoyled, and that an Angel from Heaven
should ascertain you (for other assurances you can have none) that the person
you make use of, is a true Priest, and a competent Minister of the Sacrament of
Penance; yet still the doubt will remain, Whether he will do you that good
which he can do, whether he will pronounce the absolving words with intent to
absolve you! For perhaps, he may bear you some secret malice, and project to
himself your damnation, for a complete Italian revenge. Perhaps (as the tale is
of a Priest that was lately burnt in France) he may upon some conditions have
compacted with the Devil to give no Sacraments with Intention. Lastly, he may
be (for ought you can possibly know) a secret Jew, or Moor, or
Anti-Trinitarian, or perhaps such a one as is so far from intending your
forgiveness of sins and salvation by this Sacrament, that in his heart he
laughs at all these things, and thinks Sin nothing, and Salvation a word. All
these doubts you must have clearly resolved (which can hardly be done but by
another Revelation,) before you can upon good grounds assure your self, that
your true Priest gives you true and effectual absolution. So that when you have
done as much as God requires for your Salvation, yet can you by no means be
secure, but that you may have the ill luck to be damned: which is to make
Salvation a matter of chance, and not of choice; and which a man may fail of,
not only by an ill life, but by ill fortune. Verily, a most comfortable
Doctrine for a considering man lying upon his deathbed, who, either feels or
fears that his repentance is but attrition only, and not contrition, and
consequently believes, that, if he be not absolved really by a true Priest, he
cannot possibly escape damnation. Such a man for his comfort, you tell, first
(you that will have men's salvation depend upon no uncertainties) that though he
verily believe that his sorrow for sins is a true sorrow, and his purpose of
amendment a true purpose; yet he may deceive himself, perhaps it is not; and,
if it be not, he must be damned. Yet you bid him hope well: But, Spes est rei
incertae nomen. You tell him secondly, that though the party he confesses to,
seem to be a true Priest, yet, for ought he knows, or, for ought himself knows,
by reason of some secret undiscern^ble invalidity in his Baptism or Ordination,
he may be none, and if he be none, he can do nothing. This is a hard saying,
but this is not the worst. You tell him thirdly, that he may be in such a state
that he cannot, or, if he can, that he will not give the Sacrament with due
Intention: and, if he does not, all is in vain. Put case, a man by these
consideration should be cast into some agonies; what advice, what comfort would
you give him? Verily, I know not what you could say to him, but this; that,
first for the Qualification required on his part, he might know that he desired
to have true sorrow, and that that is sufficient. But then, if he should ask
you, Why he might not know his sorrow to be a true sorrow, as well as his
desire to be sorrowful, to be a true desire; I believe you would be put to
silence. Then secondly, to quiet his fears, concerning the Priest and his
Intention you should tell him, by my advice, that God's goodness (which will
not suffer him to damn men for not doing better than their best,) will supply
all such defects, as to humane endeavors were unavoidable. And therefore
though his Priest were indeed no Priest, yet to him he should be as if he were
one: and if he gave Absolution without Intention, yet in doing so he should
hurt himself only and not his penitent. This were some comfort indeed, and this
were to settle men's salvation upon reasonable certain grounds. But this, I
fear, you will never say; for this were to reverse many Doctrines established
by your Church; and besides, to degrade your Priesthood from a great part of
their honor, by lessening the strict necessity of the Laitie's dependence upon
them. For it were to say, that the Priests Intention is not necessary to the
obtaining of Absolution; which is to say, that it is not in the Parson's power
to damn whom he will in his Parish, because, by this rule, God should supply
the defect which his malice had caused. And besides, it were to say, that,
Infants dying without Baptism might be saved, God supplying the want of Baptism
which to them is unavoidable. But beyond all this, it were to put into my mouth
a full and satisfying Answer to your Argument, which I am now returning; so
that in answering my Objection you should answer your own. For then I should
tell you, that it were altogether as abhorrent from the goodness of God, and as
repugnant to it, to suffer an ignorant Lay-man's soul to perish, merely for
being misled by an undiscernable false Translation, which yet was commended to
him by the Church, which (being of necessity to credit some in this matter) he
had reason to rely upon, either above all other, or as much as any other, as
it is to damn a penitent sinner for a secret defect in that desired Absolution,
which his Ghostly Father perhaps was an Atheist, and could not give him, or was
a villain and would not. This answer therefore, which alone would serve to
comfort your penitent in his perplexities, and to assure him that he cannot
fail of Salvation if he will not, for fear of inconvenience you must forbear.
And seeing you must, I hope you will, come down from the Pulpit, and preach no
more against others for making men's Salvation depend upon fallible and
uncertain grounds, lest by judging others, you make your selves, and your own
Church inexcusable, who are strongly guilty of this fault, above all the men
and Churches of the World: whereof I have already given you two very pregnant
demonstrations, drawn from your presumptuous tying God and Salvation to your
Sacraments; And the efficacy of them to your Priest's Qualifications and
Intentions.

69. Your making the Salvation of Infants depend on Baptism a Casual thing, and
in the power of man to confer, or not confer, would yield me a Third of the
same nature. And your suspending the same on the Baptizer's Intention, a
Fourth. And lastly, your making the Real presence of Christ in the Eucharist
depend upon the casualties of the Consecrator's true Priesthood and Intention,
and yet commanding men to believe it for certain that he is present, and to
adore the Sacrament, which, according to your Doctrine, for ought they can
possibly know, may be nothing else but a piece of Bread, so exposing them to
the danger of Idolatry, and consequently of damnation, does offer me a Fifth
demonstration of the same Conclusion, if I thought fit to insist upon them. But
I have no mind to draw any more out of this Fountain; neither do I think it
charity to cloy the Reader with uniformity, when the Subject affords variety.

70. Sixthly, therefore, I return it thus. The faith of Papists relies alone
upon their Church's infallibility. That there is any Church infallible, and,
that Theirs is it, they pretend not to believe, but only upon prudential
Motives. Dependence upon prudential Motives they confess to be obnoxious to a
possibility of erring. What then remains, but Truth, Faith, Salvation, and
All, must in them rely upon a fallible and uncertain ground!

71. Seventhly, The Faith of Papists relies upon the Church alone. The Doctrine
of the Church is delivered to most of them by their Parish Priest, or Ghostly
Father, or, at least, by a company of Priests, who, for the most part, sure,
are men and not Angels, in whom nothing is more certain than a most certain
possibility to err. What then remains, but that Truth, Faith, Salvation, and
All, must in them rely upon a fallible and uncertain ground.

72. Eighthly thus. It is apparent and undeniable, that many Thousands there
are, who believe your Religion upon no better grounds, than a man may have for
the belief almost of any Religion. As some believe it, because their
Forefathers did so, and they were good People. Some, because they were
Christened, and brought up in it. Some, because many Learned and Religious men
are of it. Some, because it is the Religion of their Country, where all other
Religions are persecuted and proscribed. Some, because Protestants cannot show
a perpetual succession of Professors of all their Doctrines. Some, because the
service of your Church is more stately, and pompous, and magnificent. Some,
because they find comfort in it. Some, because your Religion is farther spread,
and has more Professors of it, than the Religion of Protestants. Some, because
your Priests compass Sea and Land to gain Proselytes to it. Lastly, an infinite
number, by chance, and they know not why, but only because they are sure they
are in the right. This which I say, is a most certain experimented truth, and,
if you will deal ingenuously, you will not deny it. And, without question, he
that builds his faith upon our English Translation, goes upon a more prudent
ground than any of these can, with reason, be pretended to be. What then can
you allege but that with you, father than with us, Truth, and Faith, and
Salvation, and All, rely upon fallible and uncertain grounds?

73. Ninthly. Your Rhemish and Doway Translations are delivered to your
Proselytes, (such, I mean, that are dispensed with, for the reading of them,)
for the direction of their Faith and Lives. And the same may be said of your
Translations of the Bible into other National languages, in respect of those
that are licenced to read them. This, I presume, you will confess. And
moreover, that these Translations came not by inspiration, but were the
productions of humane Industry; and that, not Angels, but men, were the Authors
of them. Men, I say, mere men, subject to the same passions, and to the same
possibility of erring with our Translators. And then how does it not
unavoidably follow, that in them which depend upon these Translations for their
direction, Faith, and Truth, and Salvation, and All, relies upon fallible and
uncertain grounds?

74. Tenthly and lastly (to lay the ax to the root of the tree) the Helena
which you so fight for* your vulgar Translation, though some of you believe, or
pretend to believe it to be in every part and particle of it, the pure and
uncorupted Word of God; yet others among you, and those as good and zealous
Catholics as you, are not so confident hereof.

75. First, for all those who have made Translations of the whole Bible or any
part of it different many times in sense from the Vulgar, as Lyranus, Cajetan,
Pagnine, Arias, Erasmus, Valla, Steuchus, and others, it is apparent and even
palpable, that they never dreamt of any absolute perfection and authentical
infallibility of the Vulgar Translation. For, if they had, Why did they in many
places reject it and differ from it?

76. Vega was present at the Council of Trent, when that Decree was made, which
made the Vulgar Edition (then not extant any where in the world) authentical,
and not to be rejected upon any pretense whatsoever. At the forming this
Decree, Vega I say, was present, understood the mind of the Council, as well as
any man, and professes that he was instructed in it by the President of it, the
Cardinal S. Cruce. And yet he has written that the Council in this Decree
meant to pronounce this Translation free (not simply from all Error) but only
from such Errors, out of which any opinion pernitions to faith and manners
might be collected. This, And radius in his defense of that Council reports of
Vega, and assents to it himself. Driedo, in his Book of the Translation of holy
Scripture, has these words very pregnant and pertinent to the same purpose;
The Sea Apostolic, has approved or accepted Hierom 's Edition, not as so
wholly consonant to the Original, and so entire, and pure, and restored in all
things, that it may not be lawful for any man, either by comparing it with the
Fountain to examine it, or, in some places to doubt, Whether or no Hierom did
understand the true sense of the Scripture; but only, as an Edition to be
preferred before all others then extant, and no where deviating from the Truth
in the rules of faith and good life. Mariana, even where he is a most earnest
Advocate for the Vulgar Edition, yet acknowledges the imperfection of it in
these words, ^^o E^^t. vulg. c. 21. p. 99.
The faults of the Vulgar Edition are not approved by the Decree of the Council
of Trent, a multitude whereof we did collect from the variety of Copy. And
again, We maintain that the Hebrew and Greek, were by no means rejected by the
Trent-Fathers: And that the Latin Edition is indeed approved; yet not so, as
if they did deny that some places might be translated more plainly, some more
properly; whereof it were easy to produce innumerable examples. And this he
there professes to have learnt of Laines the then General of the Society: who
was a great part of that Council, present at all the Actions of it, and of very
great authority in it.

77. To this so great authority he adds a reason of his opinion; which with all
indifferent men will be of a far greater authority. If the Council (says he)
had purposed to approve an Edition in all respects, and to make it of equal
authority and credit with the Fountains, certainly they ought with exact care
first to have corrected the Errors of the Interpreter: which certainly they did
not.

78. Lastly, Bellarmine himself, though he will not acknowledge any
imperfection in the Vulgar Edition, yet he acknowledges that the ^ase may, and
does oft-times, so fall out, B^ll de ver^e D^^d. 2. c. 12. p. 120.
that it is impossible to discern which is the true reading of the Vulgar
Edition, but only by recourse unto the Originals, and dependence upon them.

79. From all which it may evidently be collected, that, though some of you
flatter your selves with a vain imagination of the certain absolute purity and
perfection of your Vulgar Edition; yet the matter is not so certain, and so
resolved, but that the best learned men amongst you are often at a stand, and
very doubtful sometimes whether your Vulgar Translation be true, and sometimes
whether this or that be your Vulgar Translation, and sometimes undoubtedly
resolved that your Vulgar Translation is no true Translation, nor consonant to
the Original, as it was at first delivered. And what then can be alleged, but
that out of your own grounds it may be inferred and enforced upon you, that not
only in your Laymen, but your Clergymen and Scholars, Faith, and Truth, and
Salvation, and All, depends upon fallible and uncertain grounds? And thus, by
ten several retortions of this one Argument, I have endeavored to show you,
How ill you have complied with your own advice, which was to take heed of
urging Arguments that might be returned upon you. I should now, by a direct
Answer, show, that it presses not us at all: but I have in passing, done it
already in the end of the second retortion of this Argument, and thither I
refer the Reader.

80. Whereas therefore you exhort them that will have assurance of true
Scriptures, to fly to your Church for it: I desire to know (if they should
follow your advice) how they should be assured that your Church can give them
any such assurance; which has been confessedly so negligent, as to suffer many
whole Books of Scripture to be utterly lost. Again, in those that remain,
confessedly so negligent as to suffer the Originals of these that remain to be
corrupted. And lastly, so careless of preserving the integrity of the Copies of
her Translation, as to suffer infinite variety of Readings to come in to them,
without keeping any one perfect Copy, which might have been as the Standard,
and Polycletus his Canon, to correct the rest by. So that which was the true
reading, and which the false, it was utterly undiscernable, but only by
comparing them with the Originals, which also she pretends to be corrupted.

81. But Luther himself, by unfortunate experience, was at length enforced to
confess thus much, saying, If the wordlast longer, it will be again necessary
to receive the Decrees of Councels, by reason of diverse interpretations of
Scripture which now reign.

82. And what if Luther, having a Pope in his belly, (as he was wont to say
that most men had,) and desiring perhaps to have his own interpretations pass
without examining, spoke such words in heat of Argument? Do you think it
reasonable that we should subscribe to Luther's divinations and angry speeches?
Will you oblige your self to answer for all the assertions of your private
Doctors? If not; Why do you trouble us with what Luther says, and what Calvin
says? Yet this I say not, as if these words of Luther made any thing at all for
your present purpose. For what if he feared, or pretended to fear, that, the
infallibility of Councels being rejected, some men would fall into greater
Errors than were imposed upon them be the Councels? Is this to confess that
there is any present visible Church, upon whose bare Authority we may
infallibly receive the true Scriptures and the true sense of them? Let the
Reader judge. But, in my opinion, to fear a greater inconvenience may follow
from the avoiding of the less, is not to confess that the less is none at all.

83. For D. Covel's commending your Translation, What is it to the business in
hand? Or how proves it the perfection of it, which is here contested, any more
than S. Augustine's commending the Italian Translation, argues the perfection
of that, or that there was no necessity that S. Hierom should correct it? D.
Covel commends your Translation and so does the Bishop of Chichester, and so
does D. James, and so do I. But I commend it for a good Translation, not for a
perfect. Good may be good, and deserve commendations; and yet Better may be
better. And though he says, that the then approved Translation of the Church of
England, is that which comes nearest the Vulgar, yet he does not say, that it
agrees exactly with it. So that whereas you infer, that the Truth of your
Translation must be the Rule to judge of the goodness of ours: this is but a
vain flourish. For, to say of our Translations, That is the best which comes
nearest the Vulgar, (and yet it is but one man that says so,) is not to say, it
is therefore the best because it does so. For this may be true by accident, and
yet the truth of our Translation no way depend upon the truth of yours. For,
had that been their direction, they would not only have made a Translation that
should come near to yours, but such a one which should exactly agree with it,
and be a Translation of your Translation.

84. Ad 17. In this Division you charge us, with great uncertainty, concerning
the true meaning of Scripture. Which has been answered already, by saying,
That, if you speak of plain places, (and in such all things necessary are
contained,) we are sufficiently certain of the meaning of them, neither need
they any interpreter. If of obscure and difficult places, we confess we are
uncertain of the sense of many of them. But then we say there is no necessity
we should be certain. For, if God's will had been, we should have understood
him more certainly, he would have spoken more plainly. And we say besides, that
as we are uncertain, so are You too; which he that doubts of, let him read your
Commentators upon the Bible, and observe their various and dissonant
interpretations, and he shall in this point need no further satisfaction.

85. But seeing there are contentions among us, we are taught by nature and
Scripture, and experience (so you tell us out of M. Hooker to seek for the
ending of them, by submitting unto some Judicial sentence, whereunto neither
part may refuse to stand. This is very true. Neither should you need to
persuade us to seek such a means of ending all our Controversies, if we could
tell where to find it. But this we know, that none is fit to pronounce for all
the world a judicial definitive obliging sentence in Controversies of Religion,
but only such a Man, or such a society of Men, as is authorized thereto by God.
And besides, we are able to demonstrate, that it has not been the pleasure of
God to give to any Man, or Society of Men, any such authority. And therefore,
though we wish heartily that all Controversies were ended, as we do that all
sin were abolisht, yet we have little hope of the one, or the other, till the
World be ended. And in the mean while, think it best to content our selves
with, and to persuade others unto, an Unity of Charity, and mutual Toleration;
seeing God has authorized no man to force all men to Unity of Opinion. Neither
do we think it fit to argue thus, To us it seems convenient there should be one
Judge of all Controversies for the whole world, therefore God has appointed
one: But more modest and more reasonable to collect thus, God has appointed no
such Judge of Controversies, therefore, though it seems to us convenient there
should be one, yet it is not so: Or though it were convenient for us to have
one, yet it has pleased God (for Reasons best know to Himself) not to allow us
this convenience.

86. D. Field's words which follow, I confess, are somewhat more pressing: and,
if he had been infallible, and the words had not slipped unadvisedly from him,
they were the best Argument in your Book. But yet it is evident out of his
Book, and so acknowledged by some of your own, That he never thought of any one
company of Christians invested with such authority from God, that all men were
bound to receive their Decrees without examination, though they seem contrary
to Scripture and Reason, which the Church of Rome requires. And therefore, if
he have in his Preface strained too high in commendation of the Subject he
writes of, (as Writers very often do in their Prefaces and Dedicatory Epistles)
what is that to us? Besides, by all the Societies of the World, it is not
impossible, nor very improbable, he might mean, all that are, or have been in
the world, and so include even the Primitive Church: and her Communion we shall
embrace, her Direction we shall follow, her Judgment we shall rest in; if we
believe the Scripture, endeavor to find the true sense of it, and live
according to it.

87. Ad. 18. That the true Interpretation of the Scripture ought to be received
from the Church, you need not prove; for it is very easily granted by them, who
profess themselves very ready to receive all Truths, much more the true sense
of Scripture, not only from the Church, but from any society of men, nay from
any man whatsoever.

88. That the Church's Interpretation of Scripture is always true, that is it
which you would have said: and that in some sense may be also admitted, viz. if
you speak of that Church (which before you spoke of in the 14..) that is, of
the Church of all Ages since the Apostles. Upon the Tradition of which Church
you there told us, we were to receive the Scripture, and to believe it to be
the Word of God. For there you teach us, That our Faith of Scripture depends on
a Principle, which requires no other proof; And that, such is Tradition, which,
from hand to hand, and age to age, bringing us up to the Times and Persons of
the Apostles and our Savior himself, comes to be confirmed by all those
Miracles, and other Arguments whereby they convinced their Doctrine to be true.
Wherefore the Ancient Fathers avouch that we must receive the sacred Scripture
upon the Tradition of this Church. The Tradition then of this Church you say
must teach us what is Scripture: and we are willing to believe it. And now, if
you make it good unto us, that the same Tradition down from the Apostles, has
delivered from age to age, and from hand to hand, any interpretation of any
Scripture, we are ready to embrace that also. But now, if you will argue thus:
The Church in one sense tells us what is Scripture, and we believe it;
therefore, if the Church, taken in another sense, tell us, This or that is the
meaning of the Scripture, we are to believe that also; this is too transparent
Sophistry, to take any but those that are willing to be taken.

89. If there be any Traditive Interpretation of Scripture, produce it, and
prove it to be so; and we embrace it. But the Tradition of all ages is one
thing; and the Authority of the present Church, much more of the Roman Church,
which is but a Part, and a corrupted Part, of the Catholic Church, is
another. And therefore, though we are ready to receive both Scripture, and the
sense of Scripture upon the Authority of Original Tradition, yet we receive
neither the one, nor the other, upon the Authority of your Church.

90. First for the Scripture, How can we receive them upon the Authority of
your Church, who hold now those Books to be Canonical, which formerly you
rejected from the Canon? I instance in the Book of Macchabees, and the Epistle
to the Hebrews. The first of these you held not to be Canonical in S.
Gregorie's time, or else he was no member of your Church; for it is apparent
See Gr^g. Ma^^ 19 (...) 13.
He held otherwise. The second you rejected from the Canon in S. Hierom's time,
as it is evident out of (...) there (...) And again (...) c. 8. in (...).
many places of his Works.

91. If you say (which is all you can say) that Hierom spoke this of the
particular Roman Church, not of the Roman Catholic Church; I answer, there
was none such in his time, None that was called so. Secondly, What he spoke of
the Roman Church, must be true of all other Churches, if your Doctrine of the
necessity of the Conformity of all other Churches to that Church, were then
Catholic Doctrine. Now then choose whether you will, Either that the
particular Roman Church was not then believed to be the Mistress of all other
Churches (notwithstanding, Ad hanc Ecclesiam, necesse est omnem convenire
Ecclesiam, hoc est, omnes qui sunt undique fi^leles; which Cardinal Perron, and
his Translatress so often translates false: Or, if you say she was, you will
run into a greater inconvenience, and be forced to say, that all the Churches
of that time rejected from the Canon, the Epistle to the Hebrews, together with
the Roman Church. And consequently, that the Catholic Church may err in
rejecting from the Canon, Scriptures truly Canonical.

92. Secondly, How can we receive the Scripture upon the Authority of the Roman
Church, which has delivered at several times Scriptures in many places
different and repugnant, for Authentical and Canonical? Which is most evident
out of the place of Malachy, which is so quoted for the Sacrifice of the Mass,
that either all the ancient Fathers had false Bibles, or yours is false. Most
evident likewise from the comparing of the story of Jacob in Genesis, with that
which is cited out of it, in the Epistle to the Hebrews, according to the
vulgar Edition. But above all, to any one who shall compare the Bibles of
Sixtus and Clement, so evident, that the wit of man cannot disguise it.

93. And thus you see what reason we have to believe your Antecedent, That your
Church it is which must declare, what Books be true Scripture. Now, for the
consequence, that certainly is as liable to exception as the Antecedent. For,
if it were true, that God had promised to assist you, for the delivering of
true Scripture, would this oblige Him, or would it follow from hence that He
had obliged himself, to teach you, not only sufficiently, but effectually and
irresistibly the true sense of Scripture? God is not defective in things
necessary: neither will he leave himself without witness, nor the World without
means of knowing his will and doing it. And therefore it was necessary that by
his Providence he should preserve the Scripture from any undiscernable
corruption, in those things which he would have known: otherwise it is
apparent, it had not been his will, that these things should be known, the only
means of continuing the knowledge of them being perished. But now neither is
God lavish in superfluities, and therefore having given us means sufficient for
our direction, and power sufficient to make use of these means, he will not
constrain or necessitate us to make use of these means. For that were to cross
the end of our Creation, which was to be glorified by our free obedience:
whereas Necessity and Freedom cannot stand together. That were to reverse the
Law which he has prescribed to himself in his dealing with Man; and that is,
to set life and death before him, and to leave him in the hands of his own
Counsel. God gave the Wisemen a Star to lead them to Christ, but he did not
necessitate them to follow the guidance of this Star: that was left to their
liberty. God gave the Children of Israel a Fire to lead them by night, and a
Pillar of Cloud by day; but he constrained no man to follow them: that was left
to their liberty. So he gives the Church the Scripture: which in those things
which are to be believed or done, are plain and easy to be followed, like the
Wisemen's Star. Now that, which he desires of us on our part, is, the Obedience
of Faith, and love of the Truth, and desire to find the true sense of it, and
industry in searching it, and humility in following, and Constancy in
professing it: all which, if he should work in us by an absolute irresistible
necessity, he could no more require of us as our duty, than he can of the Sun
to shine, of the Sea to ebb and flow, and of all other Creatures to do those
things which by mere necessity, they must do, and cannot choose. Besides, What
an impudence is it to pretend that your Church is infallibly directed
concerning the true meaning of the Scripture, whereas there are thousands of
places of Scripture, which you do not pretend certainly to understand, and
about the Interpretation whereof, your own Doctors differ among themselves? If
your Church be infallibly directed concerning the true meaning of Scripture,
why do not your Doctors follow her infallible direction? And, if they do, How
comes such difference among them in their Interpretations?

94. Again, Why does your Church thus put her Candle under a Bushel, and keep
her Talent of interpreting Scripture infallibly, thus long wrapped up in napkins?
Why sets she not forth Infallible Commentaries or Expositions upon all the
Bible? Is it, because this would not be profitable for Christians, that
Scripture should be interpreted? It is blasphemous to say so. The Scripture it
self tells us, All Scripture is profitable. And the Scripture is not so much
the Words as the Sense. And, if it be not profitable, Why does she employ
particular Doctors to interpret Scriptures fallibly? unless we must think that
fallible interpretations of Scripture are profitable, and infallible
interpretations would not be so?

95. If you say, The Holy Ghost, which assists the Church in interpreting, will
move the Church to interpret when he shall think fit, and that the Church will
do it when the Holy Ghost shall move her to do it. I demand, Whether the Holy
Ghost's moving of the Church to such works as these, be resistible by the
Church, or irresistible. If resistible, then the Holy Ghost may move, and the
Church may not be moved. As certainly the Holy Ghost does always move to an
action, when he shows us plainly, that it would be for the good of men, and
honor of God: As he that has any sense will acknowledge that an infallible
exposition of Scripture could not but be; and there is no conceivable reason,
Why such a work should be put off a day, but only because you are conscious to
your selves, you cannot do it, and therefore make excuses. But if the moving of
the Holy Ghost be irresistible, and you are not yet so moved to go about this
work; then I confess you are excused. But then I would know, Whether those
Popes, which so long deferred the calling of a Council for the Reformation of
your Church, at length pretended to be effected by the Council of Trent,
whether they may excuse themselves, for that they were not moved by the Holy
Ghost to do it? I would know likewise, as this motion is irresistible when it
comes, so whether it be so simply necessary to the moving of your Church to any
such public Action, that it cannot possibly move without it? That is, Whether
the Pope now could not, if he would, seat himself in Cathedra, and fall to
writing Expositions upon the Bible for the direction of Christians to the true
sense of it? If you say, He cannot, you will make your self ridiculous. If he
can, then I would know, Whether he should be infallibly directed in these
Expositions, or no? If he should, then what need he to stay for irresisible
motion? Why does he not go about this noble work presently? If he should not,
How shall we know that the calling of the Council of Trent was not upon his own
voluntary motion, or upon humane importunity and suggestion, and not upon the
motion of the Holy Ghost? And consequently, How shall we know whether he were
assistant to it or no, seeing He assists none but what He himself moves to? And
whether He did move the Pope to call this Council, is a secret thing, which we
cannot possibly know, nor perhaps the Pope himself.

96. If you say, your meaning is only, That the Church shall be infallibly
guarded from giving any false sense of any Scripture, and not infallibly
assisted positively to give the true sense of all Scripture: I put to you your
own Question, Why should we believe the Holy Ghost will stay there? Or, Why may
we not as well think he will stay at the first thing, that is, in teaching the
Church what Books be true Scripture? For, if the Holy Ghost's assistance be
promised to all things profitable, then will he be with them infallibly, not
only to guard them from all Errors, but to guide them to all profitable truths,
such as the true senses of all Scripture would be. Neither could he stay there,
but defend them irresistibly from all Vices; Nor there neither, but infuse into
them irresistibly all Virtues: for all these things would be much for the
benefit of Christians. If you say, he cannot do this without taking away their
freewill in living; I say, neither can he necessitate men to believe aright,
without taking away their free will in believing, and in professing their
belief.

97. To the place of S. Austin; I answer, That, not the Authority of the
present Church, much less of a Part of it (as the Roman Church is) was that
which alone moved S. Austin to believe the Gospel, but the perpetual Tradition
of the Church of all Ages. Which you your self have taught us to be the only
Principle by which the Scripture is proved, and which it self needs no proof;
and to which you have referred this very Saying of Saint Austin, Ego vero
Evangelio non crederem, nisi, etc. Chap. 2.. 14. And in the next place, which
you cite out of his Book De Util. Cred. c. 14. he shows, That his motives to
believe, were Fame, Celebrity, Consent, Antiquity. And seeing this Tradition,
this Consent, this Antiquity did as fully and powerfully move him not to
believe Manichaeus, as to believe the Gospel, (the Christian Tradition being as
full against Manichaeus as it was for the Gospel) therefore he did well to
conclude upon these grounds, that he had as much reason to dis-believe
Manichaeus, as to believe the Gospel. Now, if you can truly say, that the same
Fame, Celebrity, Consent, Antiquity, that the same Universal and Original
Tradition, lies against Luther and Calvin, as did against Manichaeus, you may
do well to apply the Argument against them; otherwise it will be to little
purpose to substitute their names instead of Manichaeus, unless you can show
the thing agrees to them as well as him.

98. If you say that S. Austin speaks here of the authority of the present
Church, abstracted from consent with the Ancient, and therefore you, seeing you
have the present Church on your side against Luther and Calvin, as S. Austin
against Manichaeus, may urge the same words against them which S. Austin did
against him.

99. I answer, First, That it is a vain presumption of yours that the
Catholic Church is of your side. Secondly, that, if S. Austin speak here of
that present Church, which moved him to believe the Gospel, without
consideration of the Antiquity of it, and its both Personal and Doctrinal
succession from the Apostles; his Argument will be like a Buskin that will
serve any leg. It will serve to keep an Arrian, or a Grecian, from being a
Roman Catholic, as well as a Catholic from being an Arrian, or a Grecian:
In as much as the Arrians and Grecians did pretend to the title of Catholics,
and The Church, as much as the Papists now do. If then you should have come to
an ancient Goth or Vandal, whom the Arrians converted to Christianity, and
should have moved him to your Religion; might he not say the very same words to
you as S. Austin to the Manichaeans? I would not believe the Gospel, unless the
Authority of the Church did move me. Them therefore whom I obeyed, saying,
Believe the Gospel, why should I not obey saying to me, Do not believe the
Homo-ousians? Choose what thou please: If thou shall say, Believe the Arrians,
they warn me not to give any credit to you. If therefore I believe them, I
cannot believe thee. If thou say, Do not believe the Arrians, thou shall not do
well to force me to the faith of the Homo-ousians, because by the preaching of
the Arrians I believed the Gospel it self. If you say, You did well to believe
them, commending the Gospel, but, you did not well to believe them,
discommending the Homo-ousians: Do thou think me so very foolish, that,
without any reason at all, I should believe what thou will, and not believe
what thou will not? It were easy to put these words into the mouth of a
Grecian, Abyssine, Georgian, or any other of any Religion. And I pray bethink
your selves, What you would say to such a one in such a case, and imagine that
we say the very same to you.

100. Whereas you ask, Whether Protestants do not perfectly resemble those men
to whom S. Austin spoke, when they will have men to believe the Roman Church
delivering Scripture, but not to believe her condemning Luther? I demand again,
Whether you be well in your wits to say, that Protestants would have men
believe the Roman Church delivering Scripture, whereas they accuse her to
deliver many Books for Scripture which are not so? and do not bid men to
receive any Book which she delivers, for that reason, because she delivers it?
And, if you meant only, Protestants will have men to believe some Books to be
Scripture which the Roman Church delivers for such, may not we then ask as you
do, Do not Papists perfectly resemble these men, which will have men believe
the Church of England delivering Scripture, but not to believe her condemning
the Church of Rome?

101. And whereas you say, S. Austin may seem to have spoken Prophetically
against Protestants, when he said, Why should I not most diligently enquire
what Christ commanded of them before all others, by whose Authority I was moved
to believe, that Christ commanded any good thing? I answer. Until you can show
that Protestants believe that Christ commanded any good thing, that is, That
they believe the Truth of Christian Religion upon the Authority of the Church
of Rome, this place must be wholly impertinent to your purpose; which is to
make Protestants believe your Church to be the infallible Expounder of
Scriptures and Judge of Controversies: Nay rather, is it not directly against
your purpose? For why may not a Member of the Church of England, who received
his Baptism, Education, and Faith from the Ministry of this Church, say just
so to you as S. Austin here to the Manichees? Why should I not most diligently
enquire, what Christ commanded of them (the Church of England) before all
others, by whose Authority I was moved to believe, that Christ commanded any
good thing? Can you, F. or K. or whosoever you are, better declare to me what
he said, whom I would not have thought to have been, or to be, if the belief
thereof had been recommended by you to me? This therefore (that Christ Jesus
did those Miracles, and taught that Doctrine which is contained evidently in
the undoubted Books of the New Testament) I believed by Fame, strengthened with
Celebrity and Consent, (even of those which in other things are at infinite
variance one with another,) and lastly by Antiquity (which gives an universal
and a constant attestation to them.) But every one may see that you, so few in
comparison of all those upon whose consent we ground our belief of Scripture,)
so turbulent, (that you damn all to the fire, and to Hell, that any way differ
from you; that you profess it is lawful for you, to use violence and power
whenever you can have it, for the planting of your own Doctrine, and the
extirpation of the contrary;) Lastly, so new in many of your Doctrines, (as in
the lawfulness and expedience of debarring the Laity the Sacramental Cup; the
lawfulness and expedience of your Latin Service, Transubstantiation,
Indulgences, Purgatory, the Pope's Infallibility, his Authority over Kings,
etc. So new, I say, in comparison of the undoubted Books of Scripture, which
evidently contains, or rather is our Religion, and the sole, and adequate
object of our faith: I say, every one may see that you, so few, so turbulent,
so new, can produce nothing deserving Authority (with wise and considerate
men.) What madness is this? Believe then the consent of Christians, which are
now, and have been ever since Christ in the World, that we ought to believe
Christ; but learn of us what Christ said, which contradict and damn all other
parts of Christendom. Why, I beseech you? Surely, if they were not at all, and
could not teach me any thing, I would more easily persuade my self, that I were
not to believe in Christ, than that I should learn any thing concerning him,
from any other, than them by whom I believed him: at least, than that I should
learn what his Religion was from you, who have wronged so exceedingly his
Miracles and his Doctrine, by forging so evidently so many false Miracles for
the Confirmation of your new Doctrine; which might give us just occasion, had
we no other assurance of them but your Authority, to suspect the true ones.
Who, with forging so many false Stories, and fals^ Authors, have taken a fair
way to make the faith of all Stories questionable, if we had no other ground
for our Belief of them but your Authority; who have brought in Doctrines
plainly and directly contrary to that which you confess to be the Word of
Christ, and which, for the most part, make either for the honor or profit of
the Teachers of them: which (if there were no difference between the Christian
and the Roman Church) would be very apt to make suspicious men believe that
Christian Religion was a humane invention, taught by some cunning Impostors,
only to make themselves rich and powerful; who make a profession of corrupting
all sorts of Authors: a ready course to make it justly questionable whether any
remain uncorrupted. For, if you take this Authority upon you, upon the six Ages
last past; how shall we know, that the Church of that time, did not usurp the
same Authority upon the Authors of the six last Ages before them, and so
upwards, until we come to Christ himself? Whose questioned Doctrines, none of
them came from the Fountain of Apostolic Tradition, but have insinuated
themselves into the Streams, by little and little; some in one age, and some in
another; some more anciently, some more lately; and some yet are Embrio's, yet
hatching, and in the shell; as the Pope's infallibility, the blessed Virgin's
immaculate Conception, the Pope's power over the Temporalties of Kings, the
Doctrine of Predetermination, etc. all which yet are, or in time may be,
imposed upon Christians under the Title of Original and Apostolic Tradition;
and that with that necessity, that they are told, they were as good believe
nothing at all, as not believe these things to have come from the Apostles,
which they know to have been brought in but yesterday: which whether it be not
a ready and likely way to make men conclude thus with themselves -- I am told,
that I were as good believe nothing at all, as believe some points which the
Church teaches me, and not others: and some things which she teaches to be
Ancient and Certain, I plainly see to be New and False; therefore I will
believe nothing at all. Whether, I say, the foresaid grounds be not a ready and
likely way to make men conclude thus; and whether this Conclusion be not too
often made in Italy, and Spain, and France, and in England too, I leave it to
the judgment of those that have wisdom and experience. Seeing therefore the
Roman Church is so far from being a sufficient Foundation for our Belief in
Christ, that it is in sundry regards a dangerous temptation against it; why
should I not much rather conclude, Seeing we receive not the knowledge of Christ
and Scriptures from the Church of Rom^; neither from her must we take his
Doctrine, or the Intepretation of Scripture.

102. Ad. 19. In this number, this Argument is contained. The Judge of
Controversies ought to be intelligible to learned and unlearned; The Scripture
is not so, and the Church is so; Therefore the Church is the Judge, and not the
Scripture.

103. To this I answer: As, to be understandible is a condition requisite to a
Judge, so is not that alone sufficient to make a Judge; otherwise you might
make your self Judge of Controversies, by arguing, The Scripture is not
intelligible by all, but I am; therefore I am Judge of Controversies. If you
say, Your intent was to conclude against the Scripture, and not for the Church:
I demand why then, but to delude the simple with sophistry, did you say in the
close of this, Such is the Church, and the Scripture is not such? but that you
would leave it to them, to infer in the and, (which indeed was more than you
undertook in the beginning) Therefore the Church is Judge, and the Scripture
not. I say Secondly, that you still run upon a false supposition: that God has
appointed some Judge of all Controversies that may happen among Christians,
about the sense of obscure Texts of Scripture: whereas he has left every one
to his liberty herein, in those words of S. Paul, Quisque abundet in sensu suo,
etc. I say, Thirdly, Whereas some Protestants make the Scripture Judge of
Controversies, that they have the Authority of Fathers to warrant their manner
of speaking: as of Cont. Parmen l. 5. in Prin.
Optatus.

104. But speaking truly and properly, the Scripture is not a Judge, nor cannot
be, but only a sufficient Rule, for those to judge by, that believe it to be
the Word of God (as the Church of England, and the Church of Rome both do,)
what they are to believe, and what they are not to believe. I say sufficiently
perfect, and sufficiently intelligible, in things necessary, to all that have
understanding, whether they be learned or unlearned. And my reason hereof is
convincing and Demonstrative; because nothing is necessary to be believed, but
what is plainly revealed. For to say, that when a place of Scripture, by reason
of ambiguous terms, lies indifferent between diverse senses, whereof one is
true, and the other is false, that God obliges men under pain of damnation, not
to mistake through error and humane frailty, is to make God a Tyrant; and to
say that he requires us certainly to attain that end, for the attaining whereof
we have no certain means: which is to say, that, like Pharaoh, he gives no
straw, and requires brick; that he reaps where he sows not; that he gathers
where he strews not; that he will not be pleased with our utmost endeavors to
please him, without full, and exact, and never failing performance; that his
will is, we should do what he knows we cannot do; that he will not accept of us
according to that which we have, but requires of us what we have not. Which,
Whether it can consist with his goodness, with his wisdom, and with his word, I
leave it to honest men to judge. If I should send a servant to Paris, or Rome,
or Jerusalem, and he using his utmost diligence not to mistake his way, yet
notwithstanding, meeting often with such places where the road is divided into
several ways, whereof every one is as likely to be true, and as likely to be
false as any other, should at length mistake and go out of the way; Would not
any man say that I were an impotent, foolish and unjust Master, if I impute
that to God, which we would take in foul scorn, if it were imputed to our
selves? Certainly, I, for my part, fear, I should not love God, if I should
think so strangely of him.

105. Again, when you say, That unlearned and ignorant men cannot understand
Scripture, I would desire you to come out of the Clouds, and tell us what you
mean: Whether, that they cannot understand all Scripture, or that they cannot
understand any Scripture, or that they cannot understand so much as is
sufficient for their direction to heaven. If the first, I believe the Learned
are in the same case. If the second, Every man's experience will confute you:
for, Who is there that is not capable of a sufficient understanding of the
Story, the Precepts, the Promises, and the Threats of the Gospel? If the third,
that they may understand something, but not enough for their Salvations; I ask
you, first, Why then does S. Paul say to Timothy, The Scriptures are able to
make him wise unto Salvation? Why does Saint Austin say, Ea quae manifest
posita sunt in sacris Scripturis, omnia continent quae pertinent ad Fidem,
Moresque vivendi? Why does every one of the four Evangelists entitle their Book
The Gospel, if any necessary and essential part of the Gospel were left out of
it? Can we imagine, that either they omitted something necessary, out of
ignorance not knowing it to be necessary? Or, knowing it to be so, maliciously
concealed it? Or, out of negligence, did the work they have undertaken by
halfs? If none of these things can without Blasphemy be imputed to them,
considering they were assisted by the Holy Ghost in this work, then certainly
it most evidently follows, that every one of them writ the whole Gospel of
Christ; I mean, all the essential and necessary parts of it. So that, if we had
no other Book of Scripture, but one of them alone, we should not want any thing
necessary to Salvation. And what one of them has more than another, it is only
profitable and not necessary. Necessary indeed to be believed, because
revealed; but not therefore revealed, because necessary to be believed.

106. Neither did they write only for the learned, but for all men. This being
one especial means of the preaching of the Gospel, which was commanded to be
preached, not only to learned men, but to all men. And therefore, unless we
will imagine the Holy Ghost and them, to have been wilfully wanting to their
own desire and purpose, we must conceive, that they intended to speak plain,
even to the capacity of the simplest; at least, touching all things necessary
to be published by them, and believed by us.

107. And whereas you pretend it is so easy, and obvious both for the learned
and the ignorant, both to know, Which is the Church, and what are the Decrees
of the Church, and what is the sense of those Decrees: I say, this is a vain
pretense.

108. For first, How shall an unlearned man whom you have supposed now ignorant
of Scripture, how shall he know which of all the Societies of Christians is
indeed the Church? You will say perhaps, He must examine them by the notes of
the Church, which are, perpetual Visibility, Succession, Conformity with the
Ancient Church, etc. But how shall he know, first, that these are the notes of
the Church, unless by Scripture, which, you say, he understands not? You may say
perhaps, he may be told so. But seeing men may deceive, and be deceived, and
their words are no demonstrations, How shall he be assured that what they say
is true? So that at the first he meets with an impregnable difficulty, and
cannot know the Church but by such notes, which whether they be the notes of
the Church he cannot possibly know. But let us suppose this Isthmus dug
through, and that he is assured, These are the notes of the true Church: How
can he possibly be a competent Judge, Which society of Christians has title to
these notes, and which has not? Seeing this trial of necessity requires a
great sufficiency of knowledge of the monuments of Christian Antiquity, which no
unlearned man can have, because he that has it cannot be unlearned. As for
example, how shall he possibly be able to know whether the Church of Rome has
had a perpetual Succession of Visible Professors, which held always the same
Doctrine which they now hold, without holding any thing to the contrary; unless
he has first examined, what was the Doctrine of the Church in the first age,
what in the second, and so forth? And whether this be not a more difficult
work, than to stay at the first Age, and to examine the Church by the
conformity of her Doctrine with the Doctrine of the first Age, every man of
ordinary understanding may judge.

108. Let us imagine him advanced a step farther, and to know which is the
Church: how shall he know what that Church has decreed, seeing the Church has
not been so careful in keeping of her decrees, but that many are lost, and many
corrupted? Besides, when even the Learned among you are not agreed concerning
diverse things, whether they be De fide, or not, how shall the unlearned do?
Then for the sense of the Decrees, how can he be more capable of the
understanding of them, than of plain Texts of Scripture, which you will not
suffer him to understand? Especially, seeing the Decrees of diverse Popes and
Councels are conceived so obscurely, that the Learned cannot agree about the
sense of them. And then they are written all in such languages which the
ignorant understand not, and therefore must of necessity rely herein, upon the
uncertain and fallible authority of some particular men, who inform them that
there is such a Decree. And if the Decrees were translated into Vulgar
Languages, why the Translators should not be as infallible as you say the
Translators of Scripture are, who can possibly imagine?

109. Lastly, how shall an unlearned man, or indeed any man, be assured of the
certainty of that Decree, the certainty whereof depends upon suppositions which
are impossible to be known whether they be true or no? For, it is not the
Decree of a Council, unless it be confirmed by a true Pope. Now the Pope cannot
be a true Pope, if he came in by Simony: which whether he did or no, who can
answer me? He cannot be a true Pope unless he were baptized, and baptized he
was not, unless the Minister had due Intention. So likewise he cannot be a true
Pope, unless he were rightly ordained Priest, and that again depends upon the
Ordainer's secret Intention, and also upon his having the Episcopal Character.
All which things, as I have formerly proved, depend upon so many uncertain
suppositions, that no humane judgment can possibly be resolved in them. I
conclude therefore, that not the learned man amongst you all, no not the Pope
himself, can, according to the grounds you go upon, have any certainty, that
any Decree of any Council is good and valid, and consequently, not any
assurance that it is indeed the Decree of a Council.

110. Ad. 20. If by a private spirit, you mean, a particular persuasion that a
Doctrine is true, which some men pretend, but cannot prove to come from the
Spirit of God: I say, to refer Controversies to Scripture, is not to refer them
to this kind of private Spirit. For is there not a manifest difference between
saying, The Spirit of God tells me that this is the meaning of such a Text
(which no man can possibly know to be true, it being a secret thing) and
between saying, These and these reasons I have to show, that this or that is
true Doctrine, or that this or that is the meaning of such a Scripture? Reason
being a Public and certain thing, and exposed to all men's trial and
examination. But now, if by private spirit you understand every man's particular
Reason, then your first and second inconvenience will presently be reduced to
one, and shortly to none at all.

111. Ad. 20. And does not also giving the office of Judicature to the Church,
come to confert it upon every particular man? For, before any man believes the
Church infallible, must he not have reason to induce him to believe it to be
so? And, must he not judge of those reasons, whether they be indeed good and
firm, or captious and sophistical? Or, would you have all men believe all your
Doctrine upon the Churches Infallibility, and the Churches Infallibility they
know not why?

112. Secondly, supposing they are to be guided by the Church, they must use
their own particular reason to find out which is the Church. And to that
purpose, you your selves give a great many notes, which you pretend first to be
Certain notes of the Church, and then to be Peculiar to your Church, and
agreeable to none else; but you do not so much as pretend, that either of those
pretenses is evident of it self, and therefore you go about to prove them both
by reasons; and those reasons, I hope, every particular man is to judge of,
whether they do indeed conclude and convince that which they are alleged for:
that is, that these marks are indeed certain notes of the Church; and then,
that your Church has them, and no other.

113. One of these notes, indeed the only note of a true and uncorrupted
Church, is Conformity with Antiquity; I mean, the most ancient Church of all,
that is the Primitive and Apostolic. Now, how is it possible any man should
examine your Church by this note, but he must by his own particular judgment,
find out what was the Doctrine of the Primitive Church, and what is the Doctrine
of the present Church, and be able to answer all these Arguments which are
brought to prove repugnance between them? otherwise, he shall but pretend to
make use of this note for the finding the true Church, but indeed make no use
of it, but receive the Church at a venture, as the most of you do; not one in a
hundred being able to give any tolerable reason for it. So that in stead of
reducing them to particular reasons, you reduce them to none at all, but to
chance, and passion, and prejudice, and such other ways; which, if they lead
one to the truth, they lead hundreds, nay thousands to falsehood. But it is a
pretty thing to consider, how these men can blow hot and cold out of the same
mouth to serve several purposes. Is there hope of gaining a Proselyte? Then
they will tell you, God has given every man Reason to follow; and if the blind
lead the blind, both shall fall into the Ditch. That it is no good reason for a
man's Religion, that he was born and brought up in it: For then a Turk should
have as much reason to be a Turk, as a Christian to be a Christian. That every
man has a judgment of Discretion; which if they will make use of, they shall
easily find, that the true Church has always such and such marks, and that
their Church has them, and no other but theirs. But then if any of theirs be
persuaded to a sincere and sufficient trial of their Church, even by their own
notes of it, and to try whether they be indeed so conformable to Antiquity as
they pretend, then their note is changed, You must not use your own reason, nor
your judgment, but referr all to the Church, and believe her to be conformable
to Antiquity, though they have no reason for it, nay though they have evident
reason to the contrary. For my part, I am certain that God has given us our
Reason, to discern between Truth and Falsehood, and he that makes not this use
of it, but believes things he knows not why; I say, it is by chance that he
believes the truth, and not by choice: and that I cannot but fear, that God
will not accept of this Sacrifice of fools.

114. But you that would not have men follow their Reason, what would you have
them to follow? their Passion? Or pluck out their eyes and go blindfold? No,
you say, you would have them follow Authority. On God's name let them; we also
would have them follow Authority; for it is upon the Authority of Universal
Tradition, that we would have them believe Scripture. But then as for the
Authority which you would have them follow, you will let them see reason why
they should follow it. And is not this to go a little about? to leave Reason
for a short turn, and then to come to it again; and to do that which you
condemn in others? It being indeed a plain impossibility for any man to submit
his reason but to Reason: for he that does it to Authority, must of necessity
think himself to have greater reason to believe that Authority. Therefore the
confession cited by Breerely you need not think to have been extorted from
Luther and the rest. It came very freely from them, and what they say, you
practice as much as they.

115. And whereas you say that a Protestant admits of Fathers, Councels,
Church, as far as they agree with Scripture, which upon the matter is himself:
I say, you admit neither of them, nor the Scripture it self, but only so far as
it agrees with your Church: and your Church you admit, because you think you
have reason to do so: so that by you as well as by Protestants all is finally
resolved into your own reason.

116 Nor do Heretics only, but Romish Catholics also, set up as many
Judges, as there are men and women in the Christian world. For do not your men
and women judge your Religion to be true, before they believe it, as well as
the men and women of other Religions? Oh but, you say, They receive it, not
because they think it agreeable to Scripture, but because the Church tells them
so. But then, I hope, they believe the Church, because their own reason tells
them they are to do so. So that the difference between a Papist and a
Protestant is this, not that the one judges and the other does not judge, but
that the one judges his guide to be infallible, the other his way to be
manifest. This same pernicious Doctrine is taught by Brentius, Zanchius,
Cartwright, and others. It is so, in very deed: But it is taught also by some
others, whom you little think of. It is taught by S. Paul, where he says, Try
all things, hold fast that which is good. It is taught by S. John, in these
words, Believe not every Spirit, but try the Spirits whether they be of God or
no. It is taught by S. Peter, in these, Be ye ready to render a reason of the
hope that is in you. Lastly, this very pernicious Doctrine is taught by our
Savior, in these words, If the blind lead the blind, both shall fall into the
ditch. And, Why of your selves judge you not what is right? All which speeches,
if they do not advise men to make use of their Reason for the choice of their
Religion, I must confess my self to understand nothing. Lastly, not to be
infinite, it is taught by M. Knot himself, not in one page only, or chapter of
his Book, but all his Book over; the very writing and publishing whereof,
supposes this for certain, that the Readers are to be Judges, whether his
Reasons which he brings, be strong and convincing, of which sort we have
hitherto met with none: or else captious, or impertinences, as indifferent men
shall (as I suppose) have cause to judge them.

117. But you demand, What good Statesmen would they be, who should idaeate, or
fancy such a Commonwealth, as these men have framed to themselves a Church?
T^uly if this be all the fault they have, that they say, Every man is to use
his own judgment in the choice of his Religion, and not to believe this or
that sense of Scripture, upon the bare Authority of any learned man or men,
when he conceives he has reasons to the contrary, which are of more weight
then their Authority: I know no reason but, notwithstanding all this, they
might be as good Statesmen as any of the Society. But what has this to do with
Commonwealths, where men are bound only to external obedience unto the Laws
and Judgment of Courts, but not to an internal approbation of them, no nor to
conceal their Judgment of them, if they disapprove them? As if I conceived I
had reason to mislike the law of punishing simple theft with death, as Sr.
Thomas Moore did, I might profess lawfully my judgment; and represent my
Reasons to the King or Commonwealth in a Parliament, as Sr. Thomas Moore did,
without committing any fault, or fearing any punishment.

118. To the place of S. Austin, wherewith this Paragraph is concluded, I shall
need give no other Reply, but only to desire you to speak like an honest man,
and to say, Whether it be all one for a man, to allow and disallow in every
Scripture what he pleases, which is, either to dash out of Scripture such Texts
or such Chapters, because they cross his opinion? or to say (which is worse,)
Though they be Scripture, they are not true? Whether, I say, for a man thus to
allow and disallow in Scripture what he pleases, be all one, and no greater
fault, than to allow that sense of Scripture which he conceives to be true and
genuine, and deduced out of the words, and to disallow the contrary? For Gods
sake, Sir, tell me plainly; In those Texts of Scripture, which you allege for
the Infallibility of your Church, do you not allow what sense you think true,
and disallow the contrary? And do not you this, by the direction of your
private reason? If you do, why do you condemn it in others? If you do not, I
pray you tell me what direction you follow? or whether you follow none at all?
If none at all, this is like drawing Lots, or throwing the Dice for the choice
of a Religion. If any other, I beseech you tell me what it is. Perhaps you will
say, the Churches Authority; and that will be to dance finely in a round, thus,
To believe the Churches infallible Authority, because the Scriptures avouch it;
and to believe that Scriptures say and mean so, because they are so expounded
by the Church. Is not this for a Father to beget his Son, and the Son to beget
his Father? For a foundation to support the house, and the house to support the
foundation? Would not Campian have cried out at it, Ecce quos gyros, quos
Maeandros? And to what end was this going about, when you might as well at
first have concluded the Church infallible, because she says so; as thus to
put in Scripture for a mere stale, and to say the Church is infallible because
the Scripture says so, and the Scripture means so, because the Church says
so, which is infallible? Is it not most evident therefore to every intelligent
man, that you are enforced of necessity to do that your self, which so
tragically you declaim against in others? The Church, you say, is infallible; I
am very doubtful of it: How shall I know it? The Scripture you say, affirms it,
as in the 59. of Esaias, My spirit that is in thee, etc. Well, I confess I find
there these words: but I am still doubtful, whether they be spoken of the
Church of Christ: and if they be, whether they mean as you pretend. You say,
the Church says so, which is infallible. Yea, but that is the Question; and
therefore not to be begged, but proved. Neither is it so evident as to need no
proof: otherwise, why brought you this Text to prove it? Nor is it of such a
strange quality, above all other Propositions, as to be able to prove it self.
What then remains but that you say, Reasons drawn out of the Circumstances of
the Text, will evince that this is the sense of it. Perhaps they will. But
reasons cannot convince me, unless I judge of them by my Reason; and, for every
man or woman to rely on that, in the choice of their Religion, and in the
interpreting of Scripture, you say, is a horrible absurdity; and therefore must
neither make use of your own in this matter, nor desire me to make use of it.

119. But, Universal Tradition (you say, and so do I too) is of it self
credible: and that has, in all ages, taught the Church's Infallibility with
full consent. If it have, I am ready to believe it. But that it has, I hope
you would not have me take upon your word; for that were to build my self upon
the Church, and the Church upon You. Let then the Tradition appear; for a
secret Tradition is somewhat like a silent Thunder. You will perhaps produce,
for the confirmation of it, some sayings of some Fathers, who in every Age
taught this Doctrine; (as Gualterius in his Chronology undertakes to do, but
with so ill success, that I heard an able Man of your Religion profess, that in
the first three Centuries, there was not one Authority pertinent:) but how will
you warrant that none of them teach the contrary? Again, how shall I be assured
that the places have indeed this sense in them? Seeing there is not one Father
for 500. years after Christ, that does say in plain terms, The Church of Rome
is infallible. What, shall we believe your Church that this is their meaning?
But this will be again to go into the Circle, which made us giddy before; To
prove the Church Infallible, because Tradition says so; Tradition to say so,
because the Fathers say so; The Fathers to say so, because the Church says so,
which is infallible. Yea, but reason will show this to be the meaning of them.
Yes, if we may use our Reason, and rely upon it. Otherwise, as light shows
nothing to the blind, or to him that uses not his eyes; so reason cannot prove
any thing to him that either has not, or uses not his reason to Judge of them.

120. Thus you have excluded your self from all proof of your Churches
Infallibility from Scripture or Tradition. And if you fly, lastly, to Reason
it self for succor, may not it justly say to you as Iephte said to his
Brethren, Ye have cast me out and banished me, and do you now come to me for
succor? But if there be no certainty in Reason, how shall I be assured of the
certainty of those which you allege for this purpose? Either I may judge of
them, or not: If not, why do you propose them? If I may, why do you say I may
not, and make it such a monstrous absurdity, That men in the choice of their
Religion should make use of their Reason? which yet, without all question, none
but unreasonable men can deny, to have been the chiefest end why Reason was
given them.

121. Ad 22. An Heretic he is (says D. Potter) who opposes any truth, which
to be a divine revelation he is convinced in conscience by any means
whatsoever: Be it by a Preacher or Layman, be it by reading Scripture, or
hearing them read. And from hence you infer, that he makes all these safe
Propounders of Faith. A most strange and illogical deduction! For, may not a
private man by evident reason convince another man, that such or such a Doctrine
is divine Revelation, and yet though he be a true Propounder in this point, yet
propound another thing falsely, and without proof, and consequently not be a
safe Propounder in every point? Your Preachers in their Sermons, do they not
propose to men divine Revelations, and do they not sometimes convince men in
conscience, by evident proof from Scripture, that the things they speak are
divine Revelations? And whosoever, being thus convinced, should oppose this
divine Revelation, should he not be an Heretic, according to your own
grounds, for calling Gods own Truth into question? And would you think your
self well dealt with, if I should collect from hence, that you make every
Preacher a safe, that is, an infallible Propounder of Faith? Be the means of
Proposal what it will, sufficient or insufficient, worthy of credit or not
worthy; though it were, if it it were possible, the barking of a Dog, or the
chirping of a Bird, or were it the discourse of the Devil himself, yet if I be,
I will not say convinced but persuaded, though falsely, that it is a divine
Revelation, and shall deny to believe it I shall be a formal though not a
material Heretic. For he that believes, though falsely, any thing to be a
divine Revelation, and yet will not believe it to be true, must of necessity
believe God to be false, which, according to your own Doctrine, is the formality
of an Heretic.

122. And how it can be any way advantageous to Civil government, that men
without warrant from God should usurp a Tyranny over other men's consciences,
and prescribe unto them, without reason, and sometime against reason, what they
shall believe, you must show us plainer if you desire we should believe. For to
say, Verily I do not see but that it must be so, is no good demonstration. For
whereas you say, That a man may be a passionate and seditious creature, from
whence you would have us infer, that he may make use of his interpretation to
satisfy his passion, and raise sedition: There were some color in this
consequence, if we (as you do) make private men infallible Interpreters for
others; for then indeed they might lead Disciples after them, and use them as
instruments for their vile purposes. But when we say, they can only interpret
for themselves, what harm they can do by their passionate or seditious
Interpretations, but only endanger both their temporal and eternal happiness, I
cannot imagine. For though we deny the Pope or Church of Rome to be an
infallible Judge, yet we do not deny, but that there are Judges which may
proceed with certainty enough against all seditious Persons, such as draw men
to disobedience either against Church or State, as well as against Rebels, and
Traitors, and Thieves, and Murderers.

123. Ad. 23. The next. in the beginning argues thus: For many ages there was
no Scripture in the world: and for many more, there was none in many places of
the world: yet men wanted not then and there some certain direction what to
believe: Therefore there was then an infallible Judge. Just as if I should say,
York is not my way from Oxford to London, therefore Bristol is: Or, a Dog is
not a horse, therefore he is a man. As if God had no other ways of revealing
himself to men, but only by Scripture and an infallible Church. See Chrysostom.
Hom. 1 in Mat. Isidor. Pelus. l. 3. ep. 106. and also Basil. in Ps. 28. and
then you shall confess, that by o her means besides these, God did communicate
himself unto men, and made them receive and understand his laws: See also to
the same purpose, Heb. 1.1.
S. Chrysostom and Isidorus Pelusiota conceived, He might use other means. And
Saint Paul tells us that the (...) might be known by his works; And that they
had the Law written in their hearts. Either of these ways might make some
faithful men, without either necessity of Scripture or Church.

124. But D. Potter says, you say, In the Jewish Church there was a living
Judge, endowed with an absolute infallible direction in cases of moment: as all
points belonging to divine Faith are. And where was that infallible direction
in the Jewish Church when they should have received Christ for their Messiah,
and refused him? Or perhaps this was not a case of moment. D. Potter indeed
might say very well, not that the high Priest was infallible, (for certainly he
was not) but that his determination was to be of necessity obeyed, though for
the justice of it there was no necessity that it should be believed. Besides,
it is one thing to say, that the living Judge in the Jewish Church had an
infallible direction: another, that he was necessitated to follow this
direction. This is the privilege which you challenge. But it is that, not
this, which the Doctor attributes to the Jews. As a man may truly say, the
Wisemen had an in fallible direction to Christ, without saying or thinking that
they were constrained to follow it, and could not do otherwise.

125. But either the Church retains still her Infallibility, or it was divested
of it upon the receiving of Holy Scripture; which is absurd. An Argument me
thinks like this, Either you have horns, or you have lost them: but you never
lost them, therefore you have them still. If you say, you never had horns; so,
say I, for ought appears by your reasons, the Church never had Infallibility.

126. But some Scriptures were received in some places and not in others:
therefore if Scriptures were the Judge of Controversies, some Churches had one
Judge and some another. And what great inconvenience is there in that, that one
part of England should have one Judge, and another another? especially seeing
the Books of Scripture which were received by those that received fewest, had
as much of the Doctrine of Christianity in them, as they all had which were
received by any; all the necessary parts of the Gospel being contained in every
one of the four Gospels, as I have proved: So that they which had all the Books
of the New Testament, had nothing superfluous: For, it was not superfluous but
profitable, that the same thing should be said diverse times, and be testified
by diverse witnesses: And they that had but one of the four Gospels wanted
nothing necessary: and therefore it is vainly inferred by you, that with months
and years, as new Canonical Scriptures grew to be published, the Church
altered her rule of Faith and judge of Controversies.

127. Heresies, you say, would arise after the Apostles time, and after the
writ^ng of Scriptures: These cannot be discovered, condemned, and avoided,
unless the Church be infallible; Therefore there must be a Church infallible.
But I pray tell me, Why cannot Heresies be sufficiently discovered, condemned
and avoided, by them which believe Scripture to be the rule of Faith? If
Scripture be sufficient to inform us what is the Faith, it must of necessity be
also sufficient to teach us what is Heresy: seeing Heresy is nothing but a
manifest deviation from, and an opposition to, the Faith. That which is
straight will plainly teach us what is crooked; and one contrary cannot but
manifest the other. If any one should deny, that there is a God; that this God
is omnipotent, omniscient, good, just, true, merciful, a rewarder of them that
seek him, a punisher of them that obstinately offend him; That Jesus Christ is
the Son of God, and the Savior of the World; that it is He, by obedience to
whom men must look to be saved: If any man should deny either his Birth, or
Passion, or Resurrection, or Ascension, or Sitting at the right hand of God:
his having all power given him in Heaven and Earth: That it is he whom God has
appointed to be Judge of the quick and the dead: That all men shall rise again
at the last day: That they which believe and repent shall be saved: That they
which do not believe or repent shall be damned: If a man should hold that
either the keeping of the Mosaical Law is necessary to Salvation: or that good
works are not necessary to Salvation: In a word, if any man should obstinatly
contradict the truth of any thing plainly delivered in Scripture, who does not
see, that every one which believes the Scripture, has a sufficient means to
discover, and condemn, and avoid that Heresy without any need of an infallible
guide? If you say, that the obscure places of Scripture contain matters of
Faith: I answer, that it is a matter of faith to believe that the sense of
them, whatsoever it is, which was intended by God, is true; for he that does
not do so, calls Gods Truth into question. But to believe this or that to be
the true sense of them, or, to believe the true sense of them, and to avoid the
false, is not necessary either to Faith or Salvation. For if God would have had
his meaning in these places certainly known, how could it stand with his
wisdom, to be so wanting to his own will and end, as to speak obscurely? or how
can it consist with his Justice, to require of men to know certainly the
meaning of those words, which he himself has not revealed? Suppose there were
an absolute Monarch, that in his own absence from one of his Kingdoms, had
written Laws for the government of it, some very plainly, and some very
ambiguously, and obscurely, and his Subjects should keep those that were
plainly written with all exactness, and for those that were obscure, use their
best diligence to find his meaning in them, and obey them according to the
sense of them which they conceived; should this King either with justice or
wisdom be offended with these Subjects, if, by reason of the obscurity of them,
they mistook the sense of them; and faild of performance, by reason of their
error?

128. But, It is more useful and fit, you say, for the deciding of
Controversies, to have, besides an infallible rule to go by, a living
infallible Judge to determine them: and from hence you conclude, that certainly
there is such a Judge. But why then may not another say, that it is yet more
useful for many excellent purposes, that all the Patriarchs should be
infallible, than that the Pope only should? Another, that it would be yet more
useful, that all the Archbishops, of every Province should be so, than that the
Patriarchs only should be so. Another, That it would be yet more useful, if all
the Bishops of every Diocese were so. Another, that it would be yet more
available, that all the Parsons of every Parish should be so. Another, that it
would be yet more excellent, if all the Fathers of Families were so. And
lastly, another, that it were much more to be desired that every Man and every
Woman were so: just as much as the prevention of Controversies, is better than
the decision of them; and the prevention of Heresies better then the
condemnation of them; and upon this ground conclude, by your own very
consequence, That not only a general Council, nor only the Pope, but all the
Patriarchs, Archbishops, Bishops, Pastors, Fathers, nay all the men in the
world are infallible; If you say now, as I am sure you will, that this
Conclusion is most gross, and absurd, against sense and experience, then must
also the ground be false, from which it evidently and undeniably follows, viz
that that course of dealing with men seems always more fit to Divine
providence, which seems most fit to humane reason.

129. And so likewise, That there should men succeed the Apostles, which could
show themselves to be their successors, by doing of Miracles, by speaking all
kind of languages, by delivering men to Satan, as S. Paul did Hymenaeus, and
the incestuous Corinthian; it is manifest in human reason, it were incomparably
more fit and useful for the decision of Controversies, than that the successor
of the Apostles should have none of these gifts, and for want of the signs of
Apostleship, be justly questionable, whether he be his successor or no: and
will you now conclude, That the Popes have the gift of doing Miracles, as well
as the Apostles had?

130. It were in all reason very useful and requisite, that the Pope should, by
the assistance of Gods Spirit, be freed from the vices and passions of men,
lest otherwise, the Authority given him for the good of the Church, he might
employ (as diverse Popes you well know have done) to the disturbance, and
oppression, and mischief of it. And will you conclude from hence, That Popes
are not subject to the sins and passions of other men? That there never have
been ambitious, covetous, lustful, tyrannous Popes?

131. Who sees not that for men's direction it were much more beneficial for the
Church, that Infallibility should be settled in the Popes Person, than in a
General Council: That so the means of deciding Controversies might be speedy,
easy, and perpetual, whereas that of general Councels is not so. And will you
hence infer, that not the Church Representative, but the Pope is indeed the
infallible Judge of Controversies? Certainly, if you should, the Sorbon Doctors
would not think this a good Conclusion.

132. It had been very commodious (one would think) that seeing either Gods
pleasure was, the Scripture should be translated, or else in his Providence he
knew it would be so, that he had appointed some men for this business, and by
his Spirit assisted them in it, that so we might have Translations as
Authentical as the Original: yet you see God did not think fit to do so.

133. It had been very commodious (one would think) that the Scripture should
have been, at least for all things necessary, a Rule, plain and perfect: and
yet you say, it is both imperfect and obscure, even in things necessary.

134. It had been most requisite (one would think) that the Copies of the
Bibles, should have been preserved free from variety of readings, which makes
men very uncertain in many places, Which is the Word of God, and which is the
Error or presumption of man: and yet we see God has not thought fit so to
provide for us.

135. Who can conceive, but that an Apostolic Interpretation of all the
difficult places of Scripture, would have been strangely beneficial to the
Church, especially there being such danger in mistaking the sense of them, as
is by you pretended, and God in his Providence foreseeing that the greatest
part of Christians, would not accept of the Pope for the Judge of
Controversies? And yet we see God has not so ordered the matter.

136. Who does not see, that, supposing the Bishop of Rome had been appointed
Head of the Church, and Judge of Controversies, that it would have been
infinitely beneficial to the Church, perhaps as much as all the rest of the
Bible, that in some Book of Scripture which was to be undoubtedly received,
this one Proposition had been set down in Terms, The Bishops of Rome shall be
always Monarchs of the Church, and they either alone, or with their adherents,
the Guides of Faith, and the Judges of Controversies that shall arise amongst
Christians? This, if you will deal ingenuously, you cannot but acknowledge; for
then all true Christians would have submitted to him, as willingly as to Christ
himself, neither needed you and your Fellows have troubled your self to invent
so many Sophisms for the proof of it. There would have been no more doubt of it
among Christians, than there is of the Nativity, Passion, Resurrection, or
Ascension of Christ. You were best now rubb your forehead hard, and conclude
upon us, that because this would have been so useful to have been done,
therefore it is done. Or if you be (as I know you are) too ingenuous to say so,
then must you acknowledge, that the ground of your Argument, which is the very
ground of all these absurdities, is most absurd; and that it is our duty to be
humbly thankful for those sufficient, nay abundant means, of Salvation, which
God has of his own goodness granted us: and not conclude he has done that
which he has not done, because, forsooth, in our vain judgments, it seems
convenient he should have done so.

137. But you demand, What repugnance there is betwixt infallibility in the
Church, and existence of Scripture, that the production of the one must be the
destruction of the other? Out of which words I can frame no other Argument for
you than this; There is no Repugnance between the Scripture's existence, and
the Church's infallibility, therefore the Church is infallible. Which
consequence will then be good, when you can show that nothing can be untrue,
but that only which is impossible; that whatsoever may be done, that also is
done. Which, if it were true, would conclude both you and me to be infallible,
as well as either your Church, or Pope: in as much as there is no more
repugnance between the Scripture's existence and our infallibility, than there
is between theirs.

138. But, if Protestants will have the Scripture alone for their Judge, let
them first produce some Scripture, affirming, that by the entering thereof,
infallibility went out of the Church. This Argument put in form, runs thus. No
Scripture affirms, that by the entering thereof, infallibility went out of the
Church: Therefore there is an infallible Church, and therefore the Scripture
alone is not Judge, that is, the Rule to judge by. But as no Scripture affirms,
that by the entering of it, Infallibility went out of the Church, so neither do
we, neither have we any need to do so. But we say, that it continued in the
Church even together with the Scriptures, so long as Christ and his Apostles
were living, and then departed: God in his providence having provided a plain
and infallible Rule, to supply the defect of living and infallible Guides.
Certainly, if your cause were good, so great a Wit as yours is, would devise
better Arguments to maintain it. We can show no Scripture affirming
Infallibility to have gone out of the Church, therefore it is Infallible.
Somewhat like his discourse that said, It could not be proved out of Scripture,
that the King of Sweden was dead, therefore he is still living. Methinks in
all reason, you that challenge privileges, and exemption from the condition of
Men, which is to be subject to error; You that by virtue of this privilege
usurp authority over men's consciences, should produce your Letters Patents from
the King of Heaven, and show some express warrant for this Authority you take
upon you, otherwise you know the rule is, Ubi contrarium non manifest
probatur, praesumitur pro liberate.

139. But D. Potter may remember what himself teaches, That the Church is
still endued with Infallibility in points Fundamental, and consequently that
Infallibility in the Church does well agree with the Truth, the Sanctity, yea
with the sufficiency of Scripture, for all matters necessary to salvation.
Still your discourse is so far from hitting the White, that it roves quite
besides the Butt. You conclude, that the infallibility of the Church may well
agree with the Truth, the Sanctity, the Sufficiency of Scripture. But what is
this but to abuse your Reader with the proof of that which no man denies? The
Question is not, Whether an infallible Church might agree with Scripture, but
whether there be an Infallible Church? Jam dic, Posthume, de tribus Capellis.
Besides, you must know, there is a wide difference between being infallible in
Fundamentals, and being an infallible Guide even in Fundamentals. D. Potter
says, that the Church is the former: that is, There shall be some men in the
world, while the world lasts, which err not in Fundamentals; for otherwise
there should be no Church: For to say, the Church, while it is the Church, may
err in Fundamentals, implies contradiction, and is all one as to say, The
Church while it is the Church, may not be the Church. So that to say, that the
Church is infallible in Fundamentals, signifies no more but this, There shall
be a Church in the world for ever. But we utterly deny the Church to be the
latter; for to say so, were to oblige our selves to find some certain Society
of men, of whom we might be certain, that they neither do, nor can, err in
Fundamentals, nor in declaring what is Fundamental, what is not Fundamental:
and consequently, to make any Church an infallible Guide in Fundamentals, would
be to make it infallible in all things, which she proposes and requires to be
believed. This therefore we deny both to your and all other Churches of any one
denomination, as the Greek, the Roman, the Abyssine: that is indeed, we deny it
simply to any Church. For no Church can possibly be fit to be a Guide, but only
a Church of some certain denomination. For otherwise no man can possibly know
which is the true Church, but by a pre-examination of the Doctrine
controverted, and that were, not to be guided by the Church to the true
doctrine, but by the true doctrine to the Church. Hereafter therefore, when you
hear Protestants say, The Church is Infallible in Fundamentals, you must not
conceive them as if they meant, as you do, that some Society of Christians,
which may be known by adhering to some one Head, for example, the Pope, or the
Bishop of Constantinople, is infallible in these things: but only thus, That
true Religion shall never be so far driven out of the world, but that it shall
have always, some where or other, some that believe and profess it, in all
things necessary to salvation.

140. But, You would therefore gladly know out of what Text he imagines that
the Church, by the coming of Scripture, was deprived of infallibility in some
points, and not in others? And I also would gladly know, Why you do thus frame
to your self vain imaginations, and then father them upon others? We yield unto
you, That there shall be a Church which never erreth in some points, because
(as we conceive) God has promised so much; but not, there shall be such a
Church which does or can err in no points, because we find not, that God has
promised such a Church; and therefore we may not promise such a one to our
selves. But, for the Churches being deprived by the Scripture of Infallibility,
in some points, and not in others, that is a wild notion of your own, which we
have nothing to do with.

141. But he affirms, That The Jewish Church retained Infallibility in her
self; and therefore it is unjustly, and unworthily done of him to deprive the
Church of Christ of it. That the Jews had sometimes an infallible miraculous
direction from God in some cases of moment, he does affirm, and had good
warrant: but that the Synagogue was absolutely infallible, he no where affirms;
and therefore it is unjustly and unworthily done of you to obtrude it upon him.
And indeed how can the Infallibility of the Synagogue be conceived, but only by
settling it in the High Priest, and the company adhering and subordinate unto
him? And whether the High Priest was Infallible, when he believed not Christ to
be the Messiah, but condemned and excommunicated them that so professed, and
caused him to be crucified for saying so, I leave it to Christians to judge.
But then suppose God had been so pleased to do as he did not, to appoint the
Synagogue an Infallible Guide: Could you by your rules of Logic constrain him
to appoint such an one to Christians also; or say unto him, that in wisdom he
could not do otherwise? Vain man, that will be thus alwaystying God to your
imaginations! It is well for us that he leaves us not without directions to
him; but if he will do this sometime by living Guides, sometime by written
Rules, What is that to you? May not he do what he will with his own?

142. And whereas you say, for the further enforcing of this Argument, that
there is greater reason to think the Church should be infallible, than the
Synagogue: because to the Synaggoue all Laws and Ceremonies, etc. were more
particularly, and minutely delivered, than in the new Testament is done; our
Savior leaving particulars to the determination of the Church. But I pray walk
not thus in generality, but tell us, what particulars? If you mean particular
Rites and Ceremonies, and orders for government, we grant it, and you know we
do so. Our Savior only has left a general injunction by S. Paul, Let all
things be done Decently, and in Order. But what Order is fittest, i. e. what
Time, what Place, what Manner, etc. is fittest, that he has left to the
discretion of the Governors of the Church. But, if you mean, that he has only
concerning matters of Faith, the subject in Questistion, prescribed in general
that we are to hear the Church, and left it to the Church to determine what
particulars we are to believe, The Church being nothing else but an aggregation
of Believers; this in effect is to say, He has left it to all Believers to
determine what Particulars they are to believe. Besides, it is so apparently
false, that I wonder you could content your self, or think we should be
contented with a bare saying, without any show or pretense of proof.

143. As for D. Potter's Objection against this Argument, That as well you
might infer, that Christians must have all one King, because the Jews had so.
For ought I can perceive, notwithstanding any thing answered by you, it may
stand still in force; though the truth is, it is urged by him not against the
Infallibility but the Monarchy of the Church. For whereas you say, The
disparity is very clear: He that should urge this Argument for one Monarch over
the whole world, would say that this is to deny the Conclusion, and reply unto
you, that there is disparity as matters are now ordered, but that there should
not be so. For that there was no more reason to believe that the Ecclesiastical
Government of the Jews was a Pattern for the Ecclesiastical Government of
Christians, than the Civil of the Jews, for the Civil of the Christians. He
would tell you, that the Church of Christ, and all Christian Commonwealths, and
Kingdoms, are one and the same thing: and therefore he sees no reason why the
Synagogue should be a Type and Figure of the Church, and not of the
Commonwealth. He would tell you, that as the Church succeeded the Jewish
Synagogue, so Christian Princes should succeed to Jewish Magistrates: That is,
the Temporal Governors of the Church should be Christians. He would tell you,
that as the Church is compared to a House, a Kingdom, an Army, a Body, so all
distinct Kingdoms might and should be one Army, one Family, etc. and that it is
not so, is the thing he complains of. And therefore you ought not to think it
enough to say, It is not so; but you should show, why it should not be so; and
why this Argument will not follow, The Jews had one King, therefore all
Christians ought to have: as well as this, The Jews had one High Priest over
them all, therefore all Christians also ought to have. He might tell you
moreover, that the Church may have one Master, one General, one Head, one King,
and yet he not be the Pope, but Christ. He might tell you, that you beg the
Question, in saying without proof, that it is necessary to salvation, that all
(whether Christians or Churches) have recourse to one Church, if you mean by
one Church, one particular Church which is to govern and direct all others:
and, that unless you mean so, you say nothing to the purpose. And besides, he
might tell you, and that very truly, that it may seem altogether as available
for the Temporal good of Christians to be under one Temporal Prince, or
Commonwealth; as, for their salvation, to be subordinate to one Visible Head. I
say, as necessary, both for the prevention of the effusion of the Blood of
Christians by Christians, and for the defense of Christendom, from the hostile
invasions of Turks, and Pagans. And from all this he might infer, that though
now, by the fault of men, there were in several Kingdoms, several Laws,
Governments, and Powers; yet that it were much more expedient, that there were
but one. Nay, not only expedient, but necessary; if once your ground be settled
for a general Rule, that what kind of government the Jews had that the
Christians must have. And, if you limit the generality of this Proposition, and
frame the Argument thus: What kind of Ecclesiastical government the Jews had,
that the Christians must have: But, They were governed by one High Priest,
Therefore, These must be so: He will say, that the first Proposition of this
Syllogism, is altogether as doubtful as the Conclusion; and therefore neither
fit nor sufficient to prove it, until it self be proved. And then besides, that
there is as great reason to believe this, That what kind of Civil government
the Jews had, that the Christians must have. And so D. Potter's Objection
remains still unanswered: That there is as much reason to conclude a necessity
of one King over all Christian Kingdoms, from the Jews having one King; as one
Bishop over all Churches, from their being under one High Priest.

144. Ad.. 24. Nether is this discourse confirmed by Irenaeus at all: Whether
by this discourse you mean that immediately foregoing, of the Analogy between
the Church and the Synagogue, to which this speech of Irenaeus, alleged here
by you, is utterly and plainly impertinent; Or whether by this discourse, you
mean (as I think you do) not your Discourse, but your Conclusion which you
discourse on, that is, that Your Church is the Infallible Judge in
Controversies. For neither has Irenaeus one syllable to this purpose; neither
can it be deduced out of what he says, with any color of consequence. For,
first in saying, What if the Apostles had not left Scripture, ought we not to
have followed the order of Tradition? And in saying, That to this order many
Nations yield assent, who believe in Christ, having Salvation written in their
hearts by the Spirit of GOD, without Letters or Ink, and diligently keeping
ancient Tradition: Does he not plainly show, that the Tradition he speaks of is
nothing else, but the very same that is written: nothing but to believe in
Christ? To which, whether Scripture alone, to them that believe it, be not a
sufficient guide, I leave it to you to judge. And are not his words just as if
a man should say, If God had not given us the light of the Sun, we must have
made use of Candles and Torches: If we had no eyes, we must have felt out our
way: If we had no legs, we must have used crutches. And does not this in effect
import, that while we have the Sun we need no Candles? While we have our eyes,
we need not feel out our way? While we enjoy our legs, we need not crutches?
And, by like reason, Irenaeus in saying, If we had no Scripture, we must have
followed Tradition; and they that have none, do well to do so; Does he not
plainly import, that to them that have Scripture and believe it, Tradition is
unnecessary? Which could not be, if the Scripture did not contain evidently the
whole Tradition. Which, whether Irenaeus believed or no, these words of his may
inform you, Non enim per alios, etc. we have received the disposition of our
Salvation from no others, but from them by whom the Gospel came unto us. Which
Gospel truly the Apostles first preached, and afterward by the will of God
delivered in writing to us, to be the Pillar and Foundation of our Faith. Upon
which place, Bellarmine's two Observations, and his acknowledgment ensuing upon
them are very considerable; and, as I conceive, as home to my purpose as I
would wish them. His first Notandum is, That, in the Christian Doctrine, some
things are simply necessary for the Salvation of all men; as the knowledge of
the Articles of the Apostle's Creed; and besides, the knowledge of the ten
Commandments, and some of the Sacraments. Other things are not so necessary,
but that a man may be saved without the explicit knowledge, and belief, and
profession of them. His second Note is, That those things, which were simply
necessary, the Apostles were wont to preach to all men; But of other things not
all to all; but, some things to all, to wit, those things which were profitable
for all, other things only, to Prelates and Priests. These things premised, he
acknowledges, That all those things were written by the Apostles which are
necessary for all, and which they were wont openly to preach to all; But that
other things were not all written: And therefore, when Irenaeus says, that the
Apostles wrote what they preached in the World, it is true, says he, and not
against Traditions, because they preached not to the People all things, but
only those things which were necessary or profitable for them.

145. So that at the most you can infer from hence but only a suppositive
necessity of having an infallible Guide, and that grounded upon a false
supposition, in case, we had no Scripture: but, an absolute necessity hereof,
and to them who have and believe the Scripture, which is your Assumption,
cannot with any color from hence be concluded, but rather the contrary.

146. Neither because (as He says) it was then easy to receive the Truth from
God's Church; then, in the Age next after the Apostles, Then, when all the
Ancient and Apostolic Churches were at an agreement about the Fundamentals of
Faith: Will it therefore follow, that now, 1600 years after, when the ancient
Churches are divided almost into as many Religions as they are Churches, every
one being the Church to it self, and Heretical to all other, that it is as
easy, but extremely difficult or rather impossible, to find the Church first
independently of the true Doctrine, and then to find the truth by the Church?

147. As for the last clause of the sentence, it will not any whit advantage,
but rather prejudice your Assertion. Neither will I seek to avoid the pressure
of it, by saying that he speaks of small Questions and therefore not of
Questions touching things necessary to Salvation, which can hardly be called
small Questions; But I will favor you so far, as to suppose, that saying this
of small Questions, it is probable he would have said it much more of the
Great: but I will answer that which is most certain and evident, and which I am
confident you your self, were you as impudent as I believe you modest, would
not deny, That the Ancient Apostolic Churches are not now, as they were in
Irenaeus his time: then they were all at Unity about matters of Faith, which
Unity was a good assurance that what they so agreed in, came from some one
common Fountain, and that no other than of Apostolic Preaching. And this is
the very ground of Tertullian's so often mistaken Prescription against
Heretics: Variasse debuerat Errer Ecclesiarum; quod autem apud multos unum
est, non est erratum sed traditum: If the Churches had erred, they could not
but have varied; but that which is one among so many, came not by Error but
Tradition. But now the case is altered, and the mischief is, that these ancient
Churches are divided among themselves; and if we have recourse to them, one of
them will say, This is the way to heaven, another that. So that now, in place
of receiving from them certain and clear truths, we must expect nothing but
certain and clear contradictions.

148. Neither will the Apostle's depositing with the Church all things
belonging to truth, be any proof that the Church shall certainly keep this
depositum, entire and sincere, without adding to it, or taking from it; for
this whole depositum was committed to every particular Church, nay, to every
particular man which the Apostles converted. And yet no man, I think, will say
that there was any certainty, that it should be kept whole and inviolate by
every man, and every Church. It is apparent out of Scripture it was committed
to Timothy, and by him consigned to other faithful men: and yet S. Paul thought
it not superfluous, earnestly to exhort him to the careful keeping of it: which
exhortation you must grant had been vain and superfluous, if the not keeping of
it had been impossible. And therefore though Irenaeus says, The Apostles fully
deposited in the Church all truth, yet he says not, neither can we infer from
what he says, That the Church should always infallibly keep this depositum,
entire, without the loss of any truth, and sincere without the mixture of any
falsehood.

149. Ad. 25. But you proceed and tell us, That, beside all this, the Doctrine
of Protestants is destructive of it self. For either they have certains and
infallible means not to err in interpreting; or not. If not, Scripture to them
cannot be a sufficient ground for infallible faith: If they have, and so cannot
err in interpreting Scripture, then they are able with infallibility to hear
and determine all Controversies of Faith; and so they may be, and are, Judges
of Controversies, although they use the Scripture as a Rule. And thus against
their own doctrine, they constitute another Judge of Controversies beside
Scripture alone. And may not we with as much reason substitute Church and
Papists instead of Scripture and Protestants, and say unto you, Besides all
this, the doctrine of Papists is destructive of it self? For either they have
certain and infallible means not to err in the choice of the Church, and
interpreting her Decrees, or they have not: If not, then the Church to them
cannot be a sufficient (but merely a fantastical) ground for infallible faith,
nor a meet Judge of Controversies: (For unless I be infallibly sure that the
Church is infallible, How can I be upon her Authority infallibly sure, that any
thing she says is Infallible?) If they have certain infallible means, and so
cannot err in the choice of their Church, and in interpreting her Decrees, then
they are able with Infallibility to hear, examine, and determine all
Controversies of Faith, although they pretend to make the Church their Guide.
And thus against their own Doctrine, they constitute another Judge of
Controversies, besides the Church alone. Nay every one makes himself a chuser
of his own Religion, and of his own sense of the Churches Decree, which very
thing in Protestants they so highly condemn: and so, in judging others, condemn
themselves.

150. Neither in saying thus have I only cried quittance with you: but that you
may see how much you are in my debt, I will show unto you that for your Sophism
against our way, I have given you a Demonstration against yours. First, I say,
your Argument against us is a transparent fallacy. The first Part of it lies
thus: Protestants have no means to interpret, without Error, obscure and
ambiguous places of Scripture; therefore plain places of Scripture cannot be to
them a sufficient ground of Faith. But though we pretend not to certain means
of not erring in interpreting all Scripture, particularly such places as are
obscure and ambiguous, yet this methinks, should be no impediment but that we
may have certain means of not erring in and about the sense of those places,
which are so plain and clear that they need no Interpreters; and in such we say
our Faith is contained. If you ask me, How I can be sure that I know the true
meaning of these places? I ask you again, Can you be sure, that you understand
what I, or any man else says? They that heard our Savior and the Apostles
preach, could they have sufficient assurance, that they understood at any time
what they would have them do? If not, to what end did they hear them? If they
could, Why may we not be as well assured that we understand sufficiently what
we conceive plain in their writings?

151. Again, I pray tell us, whether you do certainly know the sense of these
Scriptures, with which you pretend you are led to the knowledge of your Church?
If you do not, How know you that there is any Church Infallible, and that these
are the notes of it, and that this is the Church that has these notes? If you
do, then give us leave to have the same means, and the same abilities to know
other plain places, which you have to know these. For, if all Scripture be
obscure, how come you to know the sense of these places? If some places of it
be plain, Why should we stay here?

152. And now to come to the other part of your Dilemma; in saying, If they
have certain means, and so cannot err, methinks you forget your self very much,
and seem to make no difference between having certain means to do a thing, and
the actual doing of it. As if you should conclude, because all men have certain
means of Salvation, therefore all men certainly must be saved, and cannot do
otherwise; as if, Whosoever had a horse must presently get up and ride;
Whosoever had means to find out a way, could not neglect those means and so
mistake it. God be thanked that we have sufficient means to be certain enough
of the truth of our Faith: But the privilege of not being in possibility of
erring that we challenge not, because we have as little reason as you to do so:
and you have none at all. If you ask, seeing we may possibly err, How can we be
assured we do not? I ask you again, seeing your eyesight may deceive you, How
can you be sure you see the Sun, when you do see it? Perhaps you may be in a
dream, and perhaps you, and all the men in the World have been so, when they
thought they were awake, and then only awake, when they thought they dreamt.
But this I am sure of, as sure as that God is good, that he will require no
impossibilities of us: not an Infallible, nor a certainly-unerring belief,
unless he has given us certain means to avoid error; and, if we use those
which we have, will never require of us, that we use that which we have not.

153. Now from this mistaken ground, That it is all one to have means of
avoiding error, and to be in no danger nor possibility of error; You infer upon
us an absurd Conclusion, That we make our selves able to determine
Controversies of Faith with Infallibility, and Judges of Controversies. For the
latter part of this Inference, we acknowledge and embrace it. We do make our
selves Judges of Controversies, that is, we do make use of our own
understanding in the choice of our Religion. But this, if it be a crime, is
common to us with you, (as I have proved above) and the difference is, not that
we are chusers, and you not chusers, but that, we, as we conceive, choose
wisely, but you, being wilfully blind, choose to follow those that are so too;
not remembering what our Savior has told you, When the blind lead the blind,
both shall fall into the ditch. But then again I must tell you, You have done
ill to confound together, Judges, and Infallible Judges; unless you will say,
either that we have no Judges in our Courts of Civil Judicature, or that they
are all Infallible.

154. Thus have we cast off your Dilemma, and broken both the horns of it. But
now my retortion lies heavy upon you, and will not be turned off. For first you
content not your selves with a moral certainty of the things you believe, nor
with such a degree of assurance of them, as is sufficient to produce obedience
to the condition of the new Covenant, which is all that we require. God's
Spirit, if he please, may work more, a certainty of adherence beyond a
certainty of evidence: But neither God does, nor man may, require of us as our
duty, to give a greater assent to the conclusion, than the premises deserve;
to build an Infallible Faith upon Motives that are only highly credible, and
not infallible, as it were a great and heavy building upon a foundation that
has not strength proportionable. But though God require not of us such
unreasonable things, You do; and tell men, They cannot be saved, unless they
believe your Proposals with an infallible Faith. To which end they must believe
also your Propounder, your Church to be simply Infallible. Now how is it
possible for them to give a rational assent to the Churches infallibility,
unless they have some infallible means to know that she is infallible? Neither
can they infallibly know the infallibility of this means, but by some other,
and so on for ever: unless they can dig so deep as to come at length to the
Rock, that is, to settle all upon something evident of it self, which is not so
much as pretended. But the last resolution of all is into Motives, which indeed
upon examination will scarce appear probable, but are not so much as avouched
to be any more than very credible. For example, if I ask you, Why you do
believe Transubstantiation? What can you answer, but because it is a Revelation
of the Prime Verity. I demand again, How can you assure your self or me of
that, being ready to embrace it if it may appear to be so? And what can you
say, but that you know it to be so, because the Church says so, which is
infallible? If I ask, What mean you by your Church? You can tell me nothing but
the company of Christians which adhere to the Pope. I demand then further: Why
should I believe this company to be the infallible Propounder of Divine
Revelation? And then you tell me, that there are many Motives to induce a man
to this belief. But are these Motives lastly infallible? No say you, but very
credible. Well, let them pass for such, because now we have not leisure to
examine them. Yet methinks seeing the Motives to believe the Churches
infallibility are only very credible, it should also be but as credible that
your Church is Infallible; and as credible, and no more, perhaps somewhat less,
that her proposals, particularly Transubstantiation, are Divine Revelations.
And methinks you should require only a Moral, and modest assent to them, and
not a Divine, as you call it, and infallible Faith. But then of these Motives
to the Churches Infallibility, I hope you will give us leave to consider, and
judge whether they be indeed Motives, and sufficient; or whether they be not
Motives at all, or not sufficient; or whether these Motives or inducements to
your Church be not impeached, and opposed with Compulsives and enforcements
from it; or lastly, Whether these Motives which You use, be not indeed only
Motives to Christianity, and not to Popery: give me leave for distinction-sake
to call your Religion so. If we may not judge of these things, How can my
judgment be moved with that which comes not within its cognizance? If I may,
then at least I am to be a Judge of all these Controversies. 1. Whether every
one of these Motives be indeed a Motive to any Church? 2. If to some, whether
to Your? 3. If to Yours, whether sufficient, or insufficient? 4. Whether other
Societies have not as many, and as great Motives to draw me to them? 5. Whether
I have not greater reason to believe you do err, than that you cannot? And now
Sir, I pray let me trouble You with a few more Questions.
Am I a sufficient Judge of these Controversies, or no? If of these, why shall
I stay here, why not of others? Why not of all? Nay, does not the true
examining of these few contain and lay upon me the examination of all? What
other Motives to your Church have you, but your Notes of it? Bellarmine gives
some 14. or 15. And one of these fifteen contains in it the examination of all
Controversies; and not only so, but of all uncontroverted Doctrines. For how
shall I, or can I, know the Church of Rome's conformity with the Ancient
Church, unless I know first what the Ancient Church did hold, and then what the
Church of Rome does hold; and lastly, whether they be conformable, or, if in my
judgment they seem not conformable, I am then to think the Church of Rome not
to be the Church, for want of the Note which she pretends, is proper, and
perpetual to it. So that, for ought I can see, Judges we are, and must be of
all sides; every one for himself, and God for us all.

155. Ad. 26. I answer; This Assertion, that Scripture alone is Judge of all
Controversies in Faith; if it be taken properly, is neither a Fundamental nor
Unfundamental point of Faith, nor no point of Faith at all, but a plain
falsehood. It is not a Judge of Controversies, but a Rule to judge them by; and
that not an absolutely perfect Rule, but as perfect as a written Rule can be;
which must always need something else, which is either evidently true, or
evidently credible, to give attestation to it, and that in this case is
Universal Tradition. So that Universal Tradition is the Rule to judge all
Controversies by. But then because nothing, besides Scripture, comes to us with
as full a stream of Tradition as Scripture, Scripture alone, and no unwritten
Doctrine, nor no Infallibility of any Church, having attestation from Tradition
truly Universal; for this reason we conceive, as the Apostles persons while
they were living were the only Judges of Controversies, so their Writings, now
they are dead, are the only Rule for us to judge them by; There being nothing
unwritten, which can go in upon half so fair cards, for the Title of Apostolic
Tradition, as these things, which by the confession of both Sides are not so: I
mean the Doctrine of the Millenaries, and of the necessity of the Eucharist for
Infants.

156. Yet when we say, The Scripture is the only Rule to judge all
Controversies by; methinks you should easily conceive, that we would be
understood, of all those that are possible to be judged by Scripture, and of
those that arise among such as believe the Scripture. For, if I had a
Controversy with an Atheist whether there were a God or no, I would not say,
that the Scripture were a Rule to judge this by; seeing that, doubting whether
there be a God or no, he must needs doubt whether the Scripture be the Word of
God: or, if he does not, he grants the Question, and is not the man we speak
of. So likewise, if I had a Controversy about the Truth of Christ with a Jew,
it would be vainly done of me, should I press him with the Authority of the New
Testament which he believes not, until out of some principles common to us
both, I had persuaded him that it is the Word of God. The New Testament
therefore, while he remains a Jew, would not be a fit Rule to decide this
Controversy; in as much as that which is doubted of it self, is not fit to
determine other doubts. So likewise, if there were any that believed Christian
Religion, and yet believed not the Bible to be the Word of God, though they
believed the matter of it to be true, (which is no impossible supposition; for
I may believe a Book S. Austin's to contain nothing but the Truth of God, and
yet not to have been inspired by God himself,) against such men therefore there
were no disputing out of the Bible; because nothing in question can be a proof
to it self. When therefore we say, Scripture is a sufficient means to determine
all Controversies, we say not this, either to Atheists, Jews, Turks, or such
Christians (if there be any such) as believe not Scripture to be the Word of
God. But among such men only, as are already agreed upon this, that the
Scripture is the Word of God, we say, All Controversies that arise about Faith,
are either not at all decidable, and consequently not necessary to be believed
one way or other; or they may be determined by Scripture. In a word, That all
things necessary to be believed are evidently contained in Scripture, and what
is not there evidently contained, cannot be necessary to be believed. And our
reason hereof is convincing, because nothing can challenge our belief, but what
has descended to us from Christ by Original and Universal Tradition: Now
nothing but Scripture has thus descended to us, Therefore nothing but
Scripture can challenge our belief. Now then to come up closer to you, and to
answer to your Question, not as you put it, but as you should have put it: I
say, That this Position, Scripture alone is the Rule whereby they which believe
it to be God's Word, are to judge all Controversies in Faith, is no fundamental
point, Though not for your Reasons: For, your first and strongest reason, you
see, is plainly voided and cut off by my stating of the Question as I have
done, and supposing in it, that the parties at variance, are agreed about this,
That the Scripture is the Word of God; and consequently that this is none of
their Controversies. To your second, That Controversies cannot be ended without
some living Authority, We have said already, that Necessary Controversies may
be and are decided. And, if they be not ended, this is not through defect of
the Rule, but through the default of Men. And, for these that cannot thus be
ended, it is not necessary they should be ended. For, if God did require the
ending of them, he would have provided some certain means for the ending of
them. And, to your Third, I say, that Your pretense of using these means, is
but hypocritical; for you use them with prejudice, and with a settled resolution
not to believe any thing which these means happily may suggest into you, if it
any way cross your pre-conceived persuasion of your Church's Infallibility.
You give not your selves liberty of judgment in the use of them, nor suffer
your selves to be led by them to the Truth, to which they would lead you, would
you but be as willing to believe this Consequence, Our Church does oppose
Scripture, therefore it does err, therefore it is not infallible; as you are
resolute to believe this, The Church is infallible, therefore it does not err,
and therefore it does not oppose Scripture, though it seem to do so never so
plainly.

157. You pray, but it is not that God would bring you to the true Religion,
but that he would confirm you in your own. Youconferr places, but it is that
you may confirm, or color over with plausible disguises your erroneous doctrine
not that you may judge of them* and forsake them, if there be reason for it.
You consult the Originals, but you regard them not when they make against your
Doctrine or Translation.

158. You add not only the Authority, but the Infallibility, not of God's
Church, but of the Roman, a very corrupt and degenerous part of it: whereof. D.
Potter never confessed, that it cannot err damnably. And which being a company
made up of particular men, can afford you no help, but the industry, learning,
and wit of private men: and, that these helps may not help you out of your
error, tell you, that you must make use of none of all these to discover any
error in the Church, but only to maintain her impossibility of erring. And
lastly, D. Potter assures himself that your Doctrine and Practices are damnable
enough in themselves; Only he hopes (and spes est rei inceriae nomen) he hopes,
I say, that the Truths which you retain, especially the necessity of repentance
and faith in Christ, will be as an Antidote to you against the errors which you
maintain; and that your superstruction may burn, yet they amongst you, qui
sequuntur Absalonem in simplicitate cordis, may be saved, yet so as by fire.
Yet his thinking so, is no reason for you or me to think so, unless you suppose
him infallible; and, if you do, Why do you write against him?

159. Notwithstanding, though not for these reasons, yet for others, I conceive
this Doctrine not Fundamental: Because, if a man should believe Christian
Religion wholely, and entirely, and live according to it, such a man, though he
should not know or not believe the Scripture to be a Rule of Faith, no nor to
be the Word of God, my opinion is, he may be saved; and my reason is, because
he performs the entire condition of the new Covenant, which is, that we believe
the matter of the Gospel, and not that it is contained in these or these Books.
So that the Books of Scripture are not so much the Objects of our faith, as the
instruments of conveying it to our understanding; and not so much of the being
of the Christian Doctrine, as requisite to the wel-being of it, Irenaeus tells
us (as M. K. acknowledges) of some barbarous Nations, that believed the
Doctrine of Christ, and yet believed not the Scripture to be the Word of God;
for they never heard of it, and Faith comes by hearing: But these barbarous
people might be saved: Therefore men might be saved without believing the
Scripture to be the Word of God; much more without believing it to be a Rule,
and a perfect Rule of Faith. Neither doubt I, but if the Books of Scripture had
been proposed to them by the other parts of the Church, where they had been
before received, and had been doubted of, or even rejected by those barbarous
Nations, but still by the bare belief and practice of Christianity, they might
be saved; God requiting of us under pain of damnation, only to believe the
verities therein contained, and not the divine Authority of the Books wherein
they are contained. Not but that it were now very strange and unreasonable, if
a man should believe the matter of these Books, and not the Authority of the
Books: and therefore, if a man should profess the not-believing of these, I
should have reason to fear he did not believe that. But there is not always an
equal necessity for the belief of those things, for the belief whereof there is
an equal reason. We have, I believe, as great reason to believe there was such
a man as Henry the eighth King of England, as that Jesus Christ suffered under
Pontius Pilate: yet this is necessary to be believed, and that is not so. So
that, if any man should doubt of or d^sbelieve that, it were most unreasonably
done of him, yet it were no mortal sin, nor no sin at all: God having no where
commanded men under pain of damnation to believe all which reason induces them
to believe. Therefore as an Executor, that should perform the whole will of the
dead, should fully satisfy the Law, though he did not believe that Parchment
to be his written Will, which indeed is so: So I believe, that he, who believes
all the particular Doctrines which integrate Christianity, and lives according
to them, should be saved, though he neither believed nor knew that the Gospels
were written by the Evangelists, or the Epistles by the Apostles.

160. This disourse, whether it be rational, and concluding or no, I submit to
better judgment; but sure I am, that the Corollary, which you draw from this
Position, that this Point is not Fundamental, is very inconsequent; that is,
that we are uncertain of the truth of it, because we say, The whole Church,
much more particular Churches and private men may err in points not
Fundamental. A pretty sophism, depending upon this Principle, that whosoever
possibly may err, he cannot be certain that he does not err. And upon this
ground, what shall hinder me from concluding, that seeing you also hold, that
neither particular Churches, nor private men are infallible even in
Fundamentals, that even the Fundamentals of Christianity, remain to you
uncertain? A Judge may possibly err in judgment, can he therefore never have
assurance that he has judged right? A Traveller may possibly mistake his way,
must I therefore be doubtful whether I am in the right way from my Hall to my
Chamber? Or can our London-Carrier have no certainty, in the middle of the day,
when he is sober and in his wits, that he is in the way to London? These, you
see, are right worthy consequences, and yet they are as like your own, as an
egg to an egg, or milk to milk.

161. And, for the self same reason (you say) we are not certain, that the
Church is not Judge of Controversies: But now this self same appears to be no
reason; and therefore, for all this, we may be certain enough that the Church
is no Judge of Controversies. The ground of this sophism is very like the
former, viz. that we can be certain of the falsehood of no propositions, but
these only which are damnable errors. But, I pray good Sir, give me your
opinion of these: The Snow is black, the Fire is cold, that M. Knot is
Archbishop of Toledo, that the whole is not greater than a part of the whole,
that twice two make not four: In your opinion, good Sir, are these damnable
Heresies? Or, because they are not so, have we no certainty of the falsehood of
them? I beseech you Sir, to consider seriously, with what strange captions you
have gone about to delude your King and your Country; and, if you be convinced
they are so, give glory to God, and let the world know it by your deserting
that Religion, which stands upon such deceitful foundations.

162. Besides (you say) among public Conclusions defended in Oxford, the year
1633. to the Questions, Whether the Church have Authority to determine
Controversies of Faith? And to interpret holy Scripture? The Answer to both is
^ffirmative. But what now if I should tell you, that, in the year 1632. among
public Conclusions defended in Doway, one was, That God predeterminates men
to all their actions, good, bad, and indifferent? Will you think your self
obliged to be of this opinion? If you will, say so: If not, do as you would be
done by. Again, methinks, so subtle a man as you are, should easily apprehend
a wide difference between Authority to do a thing, and an Absolute. The former,
the Doctor, together with the Article of the Church of England, attributes to
the Church, nay to particular Churches; and I subscribe to his opinion; that
is, an Authority of determining Controversies of Faith, according to plain and
evident Scripture and Universal Tradition; and Infallibility while they proceed
according to this Rule. As if there should arise an Heretic, that should call
in question Christ's Passion and Resurrection, the Church had Authority to
decide this Controversy, and infallible direction how to do it, and to
excommunicate this man, if he should persist in error. I hope, you will not
deny but that the Judges have Authority to determine Criminal and Civil
Controversies; and yet, I hope, you will not say, that they are absolutely
infallible in their determination. Infallible while they proceed according to
Law* and if they do so: but not infallibly certain that they shall ever do so.
But that the Church should be infallibly assisted by God's Spirit to decide
rightly all emergent Controversies, even such as might be held diversely of
diverse men, Salva compage fidei, and that we might be absolutely certain that
the Church should never fail to decree the truth, whether she used means or no,
whether she proceed according to her Rule or not; or lastly, that we might be
absolutely certain that she would never fail to proceed according to her Rule,
this the Defender of these Conclusions said not: and therefore said no more to
your purpose, than you have all this while, that is, just nothing.

163. Ad. 27. To the place of S. Austin alleged in this Paragraph, I Answer,
First, that in many things you will not be tried by S. Augustin's judgment,
nor submit to his Authority; not concerning Appeals to Rome, not concerning
Transubstantiation, not touching the use and worshipping of Images, not
concerning the State of Saint's souls before the day of Judgment, not touching
the Virgin Marie's freedom from actual and original sin, not touching the
necessity of the Eucharist for Infants, not touching the damning Infants to
hell that die without Baptism, not touching the knowledge of Saints departed,
not touching Purgatory, not touching the fallibility of Councels, even general
Councels; not touching perfection and perspicuity of Scripture in matters
necessary to Salvation, not touching Auricular Confession, not touching the
half-Communion, not touching prayers in an unknown tongue; In these things, I
say, you will not stand to S. Austin's judgment, and therefore can with no
reason or equity require us to do so in this matter. 2. To S. Augustine in heat
of disputation against the Donatists, and ransacking all places for Arguments
against them, we oppose S. Austin out of this heat, delivering the Doctrine of
Christianity calmly and moderately; where he says, In iis quae aprete posita
sunt in sacris Scripturis, omnia ea reperiuntur quae continent fidem, moresque
vivendi. 3. We say, he speaks not of the Roman but the Catholic Church, of far
greater extent, and therefore of far greater credit and authority than the
Roman Church. 4. He speaks of a point not expressed, but yet not contradicted
by Scripture; whereas the errors we charge you with, are contradicted by
Scripture. 5. He says not that Christ has recommended the Church to us for an
infallible definer of all emergent Controversies* but for a credible witness of
ancient Tradition.
Whosoever therefore refuses to follow the practice of the Church (understand
of all places and ages) though he be thought to resist our Savior, what is
that to us, who cast off no practices of the Church, but such as are evidently
post-nate to the time of the Apostles, and plainly contrary to the practice of
former and purer times. Lastly, it is evident, and even to Impudence it self
undeniable, that upon this ground, of believing all things taught by the
present Church as taught by Christ, Error was held; for example, the necessity
of the Eucharist for Infants, and that in S. Austin's time, and that by S.
Austin himself: and therefore without controversy this is no certain ground
for truth, which may support falsehood as well as truth.

164. To the Argument wherewith you conclude, I answer, That though the Visible
Church shall always without fail propose so much of God's Revelation, as is
sufficient to bring men to Heaven, for otherwise it will not be the visible
Church; yet it may sometimes add to this revelation things superfluous, nay,
hurtful, nay in themselves damnable, though not unpardonable; and sometimes
take from it things very expedient and profitable; and therefore it is
possible, without sin, to resist in some things the Visible Church of Christ.
But you press us farther* and demand, What visible Church was extant, when
Luther began, whether it were the Roman or Protestant Church? As if, it must of
necessity either be Protestant or Roman; or Roman of necessity, if it were not
Protestant. Yet this is the most usual fallacy of all your Disputers, by some
specious Arguments to persuade weak men, that the Church of Protestants cannot
be the true Church; and thence to infer, that without doubt it must be the
Roman. But why may not the Roman be content to be a part of it, and the Grecian
another? And if one must be the whole, why not the Greek Church, as well as the
Roman? there being not one Note of your Church which agrees not to her as well
as to your own; unless it be; that she is poor, and oppressed by the Turk, and
you are in glory and splendour.

165. Neither is it so easy to be determined as you pretend, That Luther and
other Protestants opposed the whole visible Church in matters of Faith; neither
is it so evident, that the Visible Church may not fall into such a state
wherein she may be justly opposed. And lastly, for calling the distinction of
points into Fundamental and not Fundamental, an Evasion, I believe, you will
find it easier to call it so, than to prove it so. But that shall be the issue
of the Controversy in the next Chapter.

CHAP. III. That the distinction of Points Fundamental and not Fundamental, is
neither pertinent, nor true in our present Controversy. And that the
Catholic Visible Church cannot err, in either kind of the said Points.
THis distinction is abused by Protestants to many purposes of theirs; and
therefore if it be either untrue or impertinent (as they understand, and apply
it) the whole edifice built thereon, must be ruinous and false. For, if you
object their bitter and continued discords in matters of Faith, without any
means of agreement: they instantly tell you (as Charity Mistaken plainly shows)
that they differ only in Points not Fundamental. If you convince them, even by
their own Confessions, that the Ancient. Fathers taught diverse Points held by
the Roman Church against Protestants: they reply, that those Fathers may
nevertheless be saved, because those errors were not Fundamental. If you will
them to remember, that Christ must always have a Visible Church on earth, with
administration of Sacraments, and succession of Pastors, and that when Luther
appeared there was no Church distinct from the Roman, whose Communion and
Doctrine, Luther then forsook, and for that cause must be guilty of Schism and
Heresy: they have an Answer (such as it is) that the Catholic Church cannot
perish, yet may err in Points not Fundamental, and therefore Luther and other
Protestants were obliged to forsake her for such errors, under pain of
Damnation: as if (sorsooth) it were Damnable, to hold an error not-
Fundamental, nor Damnable. If you wonder how they can teach, that both
Catholics and Protestants may be saved in their several Professions: they
salve this contradiction, by saying, that we both agree in all Fundamental
Points of Faith, which is enough for salvation, And yet, which is prodigiously
strange, they could never be induced to give a Catalogue what Points in
particular be Fundamental, but only by some general description, or by
referring us to the Apostles Creed, without determining, what Points therein be
Fundamental, or not Fundamental for the matter: and in what sense they be, or
be not, such: And yet concerning the meaning of diverse Points contained, or
reduced to the Creed, they differ both from us, and among themselves. And
indeed, it being impossible for them to exhibit any such Catalogue, the said
distinction of Points, although it were pertinent and true, cannot serve them
to any purpose, but still they must remain uncertain, whether or not they
disagree from one another, from the ancient Fathers, and from the Catholic
Church, in Points Fundamental: which is to say, they have no certainty whether
they enjoy the substance of Christian Faith, without which they cannot hope to
be saved. But of this more hereafter.

2. And to the end, that what shall be said concerning this distinction may be
better understood, we are to observe, that there be two precepts which concern
the virtue of Faith, or our obligation to believe divine Truths. The one is by
Divines called Affirmative, whereby we are obliged to have a positive explicit
belief of some chief Articles of Christian Faith. The other is temed Negative,
which strictly binds us not to disbelieve, that is, not to believe the contrary
of any one Point sufficiently represented to our understandings, as revealed or
spoken by Almighty God. The said Affirmative Precept (according to the nature
of such commands) injoyns some Act to be performed but not at all times, nor
does it equally bind all sorts of persons, in respect of all Objects to be
believed. For Objects; we grant that some are more necessary to be explicitly,
and severally believed than other: either because they are in themselves more
great, and weighty; or else in regard they instruct us in some necessary
Christian duty toward God, our Selves, or our Neighbor. For Persons; no doubt
but some are obliged to know distinctly more than others, by reason of their
office, vocation, capacity, or the like. For Times; we are not obliged to be
still in act of exercising acts of Faith, but according as several occasions
permit, or require. The second kind of Precept called Negative, does (according
to the nature of all such commands) oblige universally, all Persons, in respect
of all Objects; and at all Times; semper and pro semper, as Divines speak, This
general Doctrine will be more clear by Examples. I am not obliged to be always
helping my Neighbor, because the Affirmative Precept of Charity binds only
in some particular cases: But I am always bound by a Negative Precept, never to
do him any hurt, or wrong. I am not always bound to utter what I know to be
true: yet I am obliged, never to speak any one least untruth, against my
knowledge. And (to come to our present purpose) there is no Affirmative
Precept, commanding us to be at all times actually believing any one, or all
Articles of Faith. But we are obliged, never to exercise any act against any
one truth, known to be revealed. All sorts of Persons are not bound explicitly
and distinctly to know all things testified by God either in Scripture, or
otherwise: but every one is obliged, not to believe the contrary of any one
Point, known to be testified by God. For that were in fact to affirm, that God
could be deceived, or would deceive, which were to overthrow the whole
certainty of our Faith, wherein the thing most principal, is not the Point
which we believe, which Divines call the Material Object, but the chiefest is
the Motive for which we believe, to wit, Almighty God's infallible Revelation,
or Authority, which they term the Formal Object of our Faith. In two senses
therefore, and with a double relation, Points of Faith may be called
Fundamental, and necessary to Salvation: The one is taken with reference to the
Affirmative Precept, when the Points are of such quality that there is
obligation to know and believe them explicitly and severally. In this sense we
grant that there is difference betwixt Points of Faith, which D. Potter Page
209.
to no purpose labors to prove against his Adversary, who in express words
does grant and explicate Charity Mistaken, c. 8. page 75.
it. But the Doctor thought good to dissemble the matter, and not to say one
pertinent word in defense of his distinction, as it was impugned by Charity
Mistaken, and as it is wont to be applied by Protestants. The other sense,
according to which Points of Faith may be called Fundamental, and necessary to
Salvation with reference to the Negative Precept of Faith, is such, that we
cannot without grievous sin, and forfeiture of Salvation disbelieve any one
Point, sufficiently propounded, as revealed by Almighty God. And in this sense
we avouch, that there is no distinction in Points of Faith, as if to reject
some must be damnable, and to reject others, equally proposed as God's Word,
might stand with Salvation. Yea, the obligation of the Negative Precept is far
more strict, than is that of the Affirmative, which God freely imposed, and may
freely release. But it is impossible, that he can dispense, or give leave to
disbelieve, or deny what he affirms; and in this sense sin and damnation are
more inseparable from Error in Points not Fundamental, than from Ignorance in
Articles Fundamental. All this I show by an example, which I wish to be
particularly noted for the present, and for diverse other occasions hereafter.
The Creed of the Apostles contains diverse Fundamental Points of Faith, as the
Deity, Trinity of Persons, Incarnation, Passion, and Resurrection of our
Savior Christ, etc. It contains also some Points, for their matter, and nature
in themselves not Fundamental; as under what Judge our Savior suffered, that
he was buried, the circumstance of the time of his Resurrection the third day,
etc. But yet nevertheless, whosoever once knows that these Points are contained
in the Apostles Creed, the denial of them is damnable, and is in that sense a
Fundamental error: and this is the precise Point of the present question.

3. And all that hitherto has been said, is so manifestly true, that no
Protestant or Christian, if he do but understand the terms, and state of the
question, can possibly deny it: In so much as I am amazed, that men who
otherwise are endued with excellent wits, should so enslave themselves to their
Predecessors in Protestantism, as still to harp on this distinction, and never
regard how impertinently, and untruly it was ^^plyed by them at first, to make
all Protestants seem to be of one Faith, because forsooth they agree in
Fundamental Points. For the difference among Protestants, consists not in that
some believe some Points, of which others are ignorant, or not bound expressly
to know (as the distinction ought to be applied;) but that some of them
disbelieve, and directly, wittingly, and willingly oppose what others do
believe to be testified by the Word of God, wherein there is no difference
between Points Fundamental, and not Fundamental; Because, till Points
Fundamental be sufficiently proposed as revealed by God, it is not against
Faith to reject them, or rather without sufficient proposition it is not
possible prudently to believe them; and the like is of Points not-Fundamental,
which as soon as they come to be sufficiently propounded as divine Truths, they
can no more be denied, than Points Fundamental propounded after the same
manner. Neither will it avail them to their other end, that, for preservation
of the Church in being, it is sufficient that she do not err in Points
Fundamental. For, if in the mean time she maintain any one Error against Gods
revelation, be the thing in it self never so small, her Error is damnable and
destructive of Salvation.

4. But D. Potter forgetting to what purpose Protestants make use of their
distinction, does finally overthrow it, and yields to as much as we can desire.
For speaking of that measure Page 211.
and quantity of Faith without which none can be saved, he says: It is enough
to believe some things by a vertual Faith, or by a general, and, as it were, a
negative Faith, whereby they are not denied or contradicted. Now our question
is in case that divine Truths, although not Fundamental, be denied and
contradicted; and therefore, even according to him, all such denial excludes
Salvation. After, he speaks more plainly. It is true (says he) whatsoever Page
212.
is revealed in Scripture, or propounded by the Church out of Scripture, is in
some sense Fundamental, in regard of the divine authority of God, and his Word,
by which it is recommended: that is, such as may not be denied, or contradicted
without Infidelity: such as every Christian is bound, with humility, and
reverence to believe, whenever the knowledge thereof is offered to him. And
further: Where Page 250.
the revealed Will or Word of God is sufficiently propounded; there he that
opposes, is convinced of Error, and he, who is thus convinced, is an Heretic,
and Heresy is a work of the flesh which excludes from heaven, ( Gal. 5.20,
21.) And hence it follows, that it is FUNDAMENTAL to a Christian's FAITH, and
necessary for his Salvation, that he believe all revealed Truths of God,
whereof he may be convinced that they are from God. Can any thing be spoken
more clearly or directly for us, that it is a Fundamental Error to deny any one
Point, though never so small, if once it be sufficiently propounded as a divine
Truth, and that there is in this sense, no distinction betwixt Points
Fundamental, and not Fundamental? And if any should chance to imagine, that it
is against the foundation of Faith, not to believe Points Fundamental, although
they be not sufficiently propounded, D. Potter does not admit of this Page 246.
difference betwixt Points Fundamental, and not-Fundamental. For he teaches,
that sufficient proposition of revealed Truth is required before a man can be
convinced, and for want of sufficient conviction he excuses the Disciples from
Heresy, although they believed not our Savior's Resurrection, Page 246.
which is a very Fundamental Point of Faith. Thus then I argue out of D.
Potter's own confession: No error is damnable unless the contrary Truth be
suffficiently propounded as revealed by God: Every Error is damnable, if the
contrary Truth be sufficiently propounded as revealed by God: Therefore all
Errors are alike for the general effect of damnation, if the difference arise
not, from the manner of being propounded. And what now is become of their
distinction?

5. I will therefore conclude with this Argument. According to all Philosophy
and Divinity, the Unity, and distinction of every thing follows the Nature
and Essence thereof; and therefore, if the Nature and Being of Faith, be not
taken from the matter which a man believes, but from the motive for which he
believes, (which is God's Word or Revelation) we must likewise affum that the
Unity and Diversity of Faith, must be measured by God's Revelation (which is
alike for all objects) and not by the smalness, or greatness of the matter
which we believe. Now, that the nature of Faith is not taken from the
greatness, or smalness of the things believed, is manifest; because otherwise
one who believes only Fundam^ntal Points, and another, who together with them,
does also believe Points not Fundamental, should have Faith of different
natures, yea there should be as many differences of Faith, as there are
different Points which men believe, according to different capacities or
instructions, etc. all which consequences are absurd, and therefore we must
say, that Unity in Faith does not depend upon Points Fundamental, or not
Fundamental, but upon Gods Revelation equally or unequally proposed: and
Protestants pretending an Unity only by reason of their agreement in
Fundamental Points, do indeed induce as great a multiplicity of Faith as there
is multitude of different objects which are believed by them, and since they
disagree in things Equally revealed by Almighty God, it is evident that they
forsake the very Formal motive of Faith, which is God's revelation, and
consequently lose all Faith, and Unity therein.

6. The first part of the Title of this Chapter (That the distinction of Points
Fundamental, and not Fundamental in the sense of Protestants, is both
impertinent and untrue) being demonstrated; let us now come to the second: That
the Church is insallible in all her definitions, whether they concern Points
Funmental, or not Fundamental. And this I prove by these reasons.

7. It has been showed in the precedent Chapter, that the Church is Judge of
Controversies; which she could not be, if she could err in any one Point; as D.
Potter would not deny, if he were once persuaded that she is Judge. Because, if
she could err in some Points, we could not rely upon her Authority and
Judgment in any one thing.

8. This same is proved by the reason we alleged before, that seeing the
Church was infallible in all her definitions ore Scripture was written (unless
we will take away all certainty of Faith for that time) we cannot with any show
of reason affirm, that she has been deprived thereof by the adjoined comfort,
and help of Sacred Writ.

9. Moreover, to say that the Catholic Church may propose any false Doctrine,
makes her liable to damnable sin and error; and yet D. Potter teaches that
the Church cannot err damnably. For if in that kind of Oath, which Divines call
Assertorium, wherein God is called to witness, every falsehood is a deadly sin
in any private person whatsoever, although the thing be of it self neither
material, nor prejudicial to any; because the quantity or greatness of that sin
is not measured so much by the thing which is affirmed, as by the manner, and
authority whereby it is avouched, and by the injury that is offered to Almighty
God in applying his testimony to a salshood: in which respect it is the
unanimous consent of all Divines, that in such k^nd of Oaths, no levitas
materiae, that is, smalness of matter, can excuse from a moral sacrilege,
against the moral virtue of Religion, which respects worship due to God: If, I
say, every least falsehood be deadly sin in the foresaid kind of Oath, much more
pernicious a sin must it be in the public person of the Catholic Church to
propound untrue Articles of Faith, thereby fastening God's prime Verity to a
falsehood, and inducing, and obliging the world to do the same. Besides,
according to the Doctrine of all Divines, it is not only injurious to God's
Eternal Verity, to disbelieve things by him revealed, but also to propose as
revealed Truths, things not revealed: as in Commonwealths it is a heinous
offense to coin either by counterfeiting, the metal or the stamp, or to apply
the King's Seal to a writing counterfeit, although the contents were supposed
to be true. And whereas to show the detestable sin of such pernicious fictions,
the Church does most exemplarly punish all broachers-of feigned revelations,
visions, miracles, prophecies, etc. as in particular appears in the Council
of Sub. Leon. 10. Sess. 11.
Lateran, excommunicating such persons; if the Church her self could propose
false revelations, she her self should have been the first, and chiefest
deserver to have been censured, and, as it were, excommunicated by her self.
For (as the holy Ghost says in Cap. 13. v. 5.
Job, Does God need your lie, that for him you may speak deceits? And that of
the Apocalypse is most truly verified in fictions revelations: If any Cap. ult.
v. 18.
shall add to these things, God will add unto him the plagues which are written
in this Book: and D. Potter says, to add Page 122.
to it (speaking of the Creed) is high presumption, almost as great as to
detract from it. And therefore to say the Church may add false revelations, is,
to accuse her of high presumption, and of pernicious error excluding Salvation.

10. Perhaps some will here reply, that although the Church may err, yet it is
nor imputed to her for sin, by reason she does not err upon malice or
wittingly, but by ignorance, or mistake.

11. But it is easily demonstrated that this excuse cannot serve. For, if the
Church be assisted only for Points Fundamental, she cannot but know, that she
may err in Points not Fundamental, at least she cannot be certain that she
cannot err, and therefore cannot be excused from headlong and pernicious
temerity, in proposing Points not Fundamental, to be believed by Christians, as
matters of Faith, wherein she can have no certainty, yea which always imply a
falsehood. For although the thing might chance to be true, and perhaps also
revealed; yet, for the matter, she for her part, does always expose her self to
danger of falsehood and error; and in fact does always err in the manner in
which she does propound any matter not Fundamental; because she proposes it as
a Point of Faith certainly true, which yet is always uncertain, if she in such
things may be deceived.

12. Besides, if the Church may err in Points not Fundamental, she may err in
proposing some Scripture for Canonical, which is not such: or else err in nor
keeping and conserving from corruptions such Scriptures as are already believed
to be Canonical. For I will suppose, that in such Apocryphal Scripture as she
delivers, there is no Fundamental Error against Faith, or that there is no
falsehood at all, but only want of Divine testification: in which case D. Potter
must either grant that it is a Fundamental Error to apply Divine revelation to
any Point not revealed, or else must yield, that the Church may err in her
Proposition, or Custody of the Canon of Scripture: and so we cannot be sure
whether she has not been deceived already, in Books recommended by her, and
accepted by Christians. And thus we shall have no certainty of Scripture, if
the Church want certainty in all her definitions. And it is worthy to be
observed, that some Books of Scripture which were not always known to be
Canonical, have been afterward received for such; but never any on* Book or
syllable defined by the Church to be Canonical, was afterward questioned, or
rejected for Apocryphal. A sign, that God's Church is infallibly assisted by
the holy Ghost, never to propose as Divine truth, any thing not revealed by
God: and that, Omission to define Points not sufficiently discussed is
laudable, but Commission in propounding things not revealed, inexcusable; into
which precipitation our Savior Christ never has, nor never will, permit his
Church to fall.

13. Nay, to limit the general promises of our Savior Christ made to his
Church to Points only Fundamental, namely, that the gates Mat. 16.18.
of hell shall not prevail against her: and that the holy Ghost Joan. 16.13.
shall lead her into all Truth, etc. is to destroy all Faith. For we may be
that Doctrine, and manner of interpreting the Scripture, limit the Infallibility
of the Apostles words, and preaching, only to Points Fundamental: and
whatsoever general Texts of Scripture shall be alleged for their
infallibility, they may be D. Potter's example be explicated, and restrained to
Points Fundamental. By the same reason it may be farther affirmed, that the
Apostles, and other Writers of Canonical Scripture, were endued with
infallibility, only in setting down Points Fundamental. For, if it be urged,
that all Scripture is divinely inspired; that it is the Word of God, etc. D.
Potter has afforded you a ready answer, to say, that Scripture is inspired,
etc. only in those parts, or parcels, wherein it delivers Fundamental Points.
In this manner D. Fotherby says: The Apostle In his Sermons. Sermon. 2. page 50.
twice in one Chapter professed, that this he speaks, and not the Lord; He is
very well content that where he lacks the warrant of the express Word of God,
that part of his writings should be esteemed as the word of man. D. Potter also
speaks very dangerously toward this purpose, Sect. 5. where he endeavors to
prove, that the infallibility of the Church is limited to Points Fundamental,
because as Nature, so God is neither defective in Page 150.
necessaries, nor lavish in superfluities. Which reason does likewise prove
that the infallibility of Scripture, and of the Apostles must be restrained to
Points necessary to Salvation, that so God be not accused, as defective in Page
150.
necessaries, or lavish insuperfluities. In the same place he has a discourse
much tending to this purpose, where speaking of these words: The Spirit shall
lead you into all Truth, and shall abide with Joan. c. 16.13 etc. 14.16.
you for ever, he says: Though that promise was Page 151, 152.
directly, and primarily made to, the Apostles (who had the Spirit's guidance
in a more high and absolute manner than any since them) yet it was made to them
for the behoof of the Church, and is verified in the Church Universal. But all
truth is not simply all, but all of some kind. To be lead into all truths, is
to know and believe them. And who is so simple, as to be ignorant, that there
are many millions of Truths (in Nature, History, Divinity) whereof the Church
is simply ignorant? How many Truths lie unrevealed in the infinite Treasury of
God's wisdom, wherewith the Church is not acquainted, etc? So then, the Truth
it self enforces us to understand by (all Truths) not simply all, not all
which God can possibly reveal, but all pertaining to the substance of Faith,
all Truth absolutely necessary to Salvation. Mark what he says. That promise
(The Spirit shall lead you into all Truth) was made directly to the Apostles,
and is verified in the Universal Church, but by all Truth is not understood
simply all, but all appertaining to the substance of Faith, and absolutely
necessary to Salvation. Does it not hence follow, that the promise made to the
Apostles of being lead into all Truth, is to be understood only of all Truth
absolutely necessary to Salvation? and consequently their preaching, and
writing were not infallible in Points not Fundamental? or, if the Apostles were
infallible in all things which they proposed as divine Truth, the like must be
affirmed of the Church, because D. Potter teaches, the said promise to be
verified in the Church. And as he limits the aforesaid words to Points
Fundamental; so may he restrain, what other Text soever, that can be brought
for the universal infallibility of the Apostles or Scriptures. So he may; and
so he must, lest otherwise he receive this answer of his own from himself, How
many Truths lie unrevealed in the infinite Treasury of God's wisdom; wherewith
the Church is not acquainted? And therefore to verify such general sayings,
they must be understood of Truths absolutely necessary to Salvation. Are not
these fearful consequences? And yet D. Potter will never be able to avoid them,
till he come to acknowledge the infallibility of the Church in all Points by
her proposed as divine Truths; and thus it is universally true that she is lead
into all Truth, in regard that our Savior never permits her to define, or
teach any falsehood.

14. All, that with any color may be replied to this Argument, is; That, if
once we call any one Book, or parcel of Scripture in question; although for the
matter it contain no Fundamental error, yet it is of great importance and
Fundamental, by reason of the consequence; because, if once we doubt of one
Book received for Canonical, the whole Canon is made doubtful and uncertain,
and therefore the infallibility of Scripture must be universal, and not
confined within compass of Points Fundamental.

15. I answer: For the thing it self it is very true, that if I doubt of any
one parcel of Scripture received for such, I may doubt of all* and thence by
the same parity I infer, that, if we did doubt of the Churches infallibility in
some Points, we could nor believe her in any one, and consequently not in
propounding Canonical Books, or any other Points Fundamental, or not
Fundamental; which thing being most absurd, and withal most impious, we must
take away the ground thereof, and believe that she cannot err in any Point
great or small: and so this reply does much more strengthen what we intend to
prove. Yet I add, that Protestants cannot make use of this reply with any good
coherence to this their distinction, and some other Doctrines which they
defend. For, if D. Potter can tell what Points in particular be Fundamental (as
in his 7. Sect. he pretends) then he might be sure, that whenever he meets
with such Points in Scripture, in them, it is infallibly true, although it may
err in others: and not only true but clear, because Protestants teach, that, in
matters necessary to Salvation, the Scripture is so clear, that all such
necessary Truths are either manifestly contained therein, or may be clearly
deduced from it. Which Doctrines being put together, to wit: That Scriptures
cannot err in Points Fundamental; that they clearly contain all such Points;
and that they can tell what Points in particular be such, I mean Fundamental;
it is manifest, that it is sufficient for Salvation, that Scripture be
infallible only in Points Fundamental. For supposing these Doctrines of theirs
to be true, they may be sure to find in Scripture all Points necessary to
Salvation, although it were fallible in other Points of less moment. Neither
will they be able to avoid this impiety against holy Scripture, till they
renounce their other Doctrines, and in particular, till they believe that
Christ's promises to his Church, are not limited to Points Fundamental.

16, Besides, from the fallibility of Christ's Catholic Church in some
Points, it follows, that no true Protestant, learned or unlearned, does or
can with assurance believe the universal Church in any one Point of Doctrine.
Not in Points of lesser moment, which they call not-Fundamental; because they
believe that in such Points she may err. Not in Fundamental; because they must
know what Points be Fundamental, before they go to learn of her, lest otherwise
they be rather deluded, than instructed; in regard that her certain, and
infallible direction extends only to Points Fundamental. Now, if before they
address themselves to the Church, they must know what Points are Fundamental,
they learn not of her, but will be as sit to teach, as to be taught by her: How
then are all Christians so often, so seriously, upon so dreadful menaces, by
Fathers, Scriptures, and our blessed Savior himself, counseled and commanded
to seek, to hear, to obey the Church? S. Austin was of a very disterent mind
from Protestants: If (says he) the Epist. 118.
Church through the whole world practice any of these things, to dispute
whether that ought to be so done, is a most insolent madness. And in another
place he says, That which Lib. 4. de Bapt. cap. 24.
the whole Church holds, and is not ordained by Councels, but has always been
kept, is most rightly believed to be delivered by Apostolical Authority. The
some holy Father teaches, that the custom of baptizing children cannot be
proved by Scripture alone, and yet that it is to be believed, as derived from
the Apostles. The custom of our Mother the Lib. 10. de Gea^si ad liter. cap. 23.
Church (says he) in baptizing Infants is in no wise to be contemned, nor to
be accounted superfluous, nor is it at all to be believed, unless it were an
Apostolical Tradition. And elsewhere. Christ Sermon. 14. de verbis Apost. cap. 18.
is of profit to Children baptized, Is he therefore of profit to persons not
believing? But, God forbid, that I should say, Infants do not believe, I have
already said, he believes in another, who sinned in another. It is said, he
believes, and it is of force, and he is reckoned among the faithful that are
baptized. This the authority of our Mother the Church has; against this
strength, against this invincible wall whosoever rusheth shall be crushed in
pieces. To this argument the Protestants in the Conference at Ratisbon, gave
this round Answer: Nos ab Augustino See protocol. Monach. edit. 2. p 367.
hac in part libere dissentimus. In this we plainly disagree from Augustine.
Now, if this Doctrine of baptizing Infants be not Fundamental in D. Potter's
sense, then according to S. Augustine, the infallibility of the Church extends
to Points not Fundamental. But if on the other side it be a Fundamental Point;
then, according to the same holy Doctor, we must rely on the authority of the
Church for some Fundamental Point not contained in Scripture, but delivered by
Tradition. The like argument I frame out of the same Father about the not
re-baptizing of those who were baptized by Heretics; whereof he excellently
to our present purpose speaks in this manner. We follow Lib. 1. cont.
Crescon. cap. 32. and 34.
indeed in this matter even the most certain authority of Canonical Scriptures.
But how? consider his words: Although verily there be brought no example for
this Point out of the Canonical Scriptures, yet even in this Point the truth of
the same Scriptures is held by us, while we do that, which the authority of
Scriptures does recommend, that so, because the holy Scripture cannot deceive
us, whosoever is afraid to be deceived by the obscurity of this question, must
have recourse to the same Church concerning it, which without any ambiguity the
holy Scripture does demonstrate to us. Among many other Points in the aforesaid
words, we are to observe, that according to this holy Father, when we prove
some Points not particularly contained in Scripture, by the authority of the
Church, even in that case we ought not to be said to believe such Points
without Scripture, because Scripture it self recommends the Church; and
therefore relying on her, we rely on Scripture, without danger of being
deceived by the obscurity of any question defined by the Church. And elsewhere
he says, Seeing this is De Unit. Eccles. c. 19.
written in no Scripture, we must believe the testimony of the Church, which
Christ declares to speak the truth. But it seems D. Potter is of opinion that
this Doctrine about not-rebaptizing such as were baptized by Heretics, is no
necessary Point of Faith, nor the contrary an Heresy: wherein he contradicts
S. Augustine, from whom we have now heard, that what the Church teaches, is
truly said to be taught by Scripture; and consequently to deny this particular
Point, delivered by the Church, is to oppose Scripture it self. Yet it he will
needs hold, that this Point is not Fundamental, we must conclude out of S.
Augustine, (as we did concerning the baptizing of Children) that the
infallibility of the Church reaches to Points not-Fundamental. The same Father
in another place, concerning this very question of the validity of Baptism
conferred by Heretics, says: The De Bapt. cont. Donat. l. 5. c. 23.
Apostles indeed have prescribed nothing of this, but this Custom ought to be
believed, to be originally taken from their Tradition, as there are many things
that the universal Church observes, which are therefore with good reason
believed to have been commanded by the Apostles, although they be not written.
No less clear is S. Chrysostom for the infallibility of the Traditions of the
Church. For, treating these words (2 These. 2. Stand, and hold the Traditions
which you have learned, whether by speech or by Epistle) he says: Hence it is
Hom. 4.
manifest that they delivered not all things by letter, but many things also
without writing, and these also are worthy of belief. Let us therefore account
the Tradition of the Church so be worthy of belief. It is a Tradition: Seek no
more. Which words are so plainly against Protestants, that Whitaker is as plain
with S. Chrysostom, saying: I answer De Sacra Script. p. 678.
that this is an inconsiderate speech, and unworthy so great a Father. But let
us conclude with S. Augustine, that the Church cannot approve any Error against
Faith, or good manners. The Church (says he) being Ep. 119.
placed between much chaff and cockle, does tolerate many things; but yet she
does not approve, nor dissemble, nor do those things which are against Faith,
or good life.

17. And, as I have proved that Protestants, according to their grounds, cannot
yield infallible assent to the Church in any one Point: so by the same reason I
prove, that they cannot rely upon Scripture it self in any one Point of Faith.
Not in Points of lesser moment (or not Fundamental) because in such Points the
Catholic Church, (according to D. Potter) and much more any Protestant may
err, and think it is contained in Scripture, when it is not. Not in Points
Fundamental, because they must first know what Points be Fundamental, before
they can be assured, that they cannot err in understanding the Scripture; and
consequently, independently of Scripture, they must foreknow all Fundamental
Points of Faith: and therefore they do not indeed rely upon Scripture either
for Fundamental, or not Fundamental Points.

18. Besides, I mainly urge D. Potter, and other Protestants, that they tell us
of certain Points which they call Fundamental, and we cannot wrest from them a
list in particular of such Points, without which no man can tell whether or no
he err in Points Fundamental, and be capable of Salvation. And which is most
lamentable, instead of giving us such a Catalogue, they fall to wrangle among
themselves about the making of it.

19. Calvin holds the Instit. l. 4. cap. 2.
Pope's Primacy, Invocation of Saints, Freewill, and such like, to be
Fundamental Errors overthrowing the Gospel. Others are not of his mind, as
Melancthon, who says, in Cent. Ep. Theol. Ep. 74.
the opinion of himself, and other his Brethren, That the Monarchy of the
Bishop of Rome is of use, or profit, to this end, that consent of Doctrine may
be retained. An agreement therefore may easily be established in this Article
of the Pope's Primacy, if either Articles could be agreed upon. If the Pope's
Primacy be a means, that consent of Doctrine may be retained, first submit to
it, and other articles will be easily agreed upon. Luther also says of the
Pope's Primacy, it may be born In Assertionib. art. 36.
withal. And why then, O Luther, did you not bear with it? And how can you,
and your followers be excused from damnable Schism, who chose rather to divide
God's Church, then to bear with that, which you confess may be born withal?
But let us go forward. That the Doctrine of Freewill, Prayer for the dead,
worshipping of Images, Worship and Invocation of Saints, Real presence,
Transubstantiation, Receiving under one kind, Satisfaction, and Merit of works,
and the Mass be not fundamental Errors, is taught (respective) by diverse
Protestants carefully alleged in the Protestants Tract. 1. c. 2. Sect. 14.
after F.
Apology, etc. as namely by Perkins, Cartwright* Frith, Fulke, Spark, Goad,
Luther, Reynolds, Whitaker, Tindal, Francis Johnson, with others. Contrary to
these, is the Confession of the Christian Faith, so called by Protestants,
which I mentioned Cap. 1. v. 4.
heretofore, wherein we are damned unto unquenchable fire, for the Doctrine of
Mass, Prayer to Saints, and for the dead, Freewill, Presence at Idol-service,
Man's merit, with such like. Justification by Faith alone is by some Protestants
affirmed to be the soul of the Chalk in the Tower disputation, the 4. days
conference.
Church: The only Principal origin of Fox Act. and Mon. p. 402.
Salvation; of all other Points of The Confession of Bohemia in the Harmony of
Confessions. p. 253.
Doctrine the chiefest and weightiest. Which yet, as we have seen is contrary to
other Protestants, who teach that merit of good works is not a Fundamental
Error; yea, diverse Protestants defend merit of good works, as may be seen in
Tract. 3. Sect. 7. under m. n. 15.
Breereley. One would think that the King's Supremacy, for which some blessed
men lost their lives, was once amongst Protestants held for a Capital Point;
but now D. Andrews late of Winchester in his Book against Bellarmine tells us,
that it is sufficient to reckon it among true Doctrins. And Wotton denies that
Protestants In his answer to a Popish pamphlet. p 68.
hold the King's Supremacy to be an essential Point of Faith O freedom of the
new Gospel! Hold with Catholics the Pope; or with Protestants, the King; or
with Puritans, neither Pope, nor King, to be Head of the Church, all is one,
you may be saved. Some, as Castalio, Vid. Gul. Reginald. Calv. Turcis. l. 2. c.
6.
and the whole Sect of the Academical Protestants, hold, that Doctrins about
the Supper, Baptism, the state, and office of Christ, how he is one with his
Father, the Trinity, Predestination, and diverse other such questions are not
necessary to Salvation. And (that you may observe how ungrounded, and partial
their Assertions be) Perkins teaches, that the Real presence of our Savior's
Body in the Sacrament, as it is believed by Catholics, is a Fundamental
Error; and yet affirms the Consubstantiation of Lutherans, not to be such,
notwithstanding that diverse chief Lutherans, to their Consubstantiation join
the prodigious Heresy of Ubiquitation. D. Usher in his Sermon of the Unity of
the Catholic Faith. grants Salvation to the Aethiopians, who yet with
Christian Baptism join Circumcision. D. Potter Page 113, 114. Morton in his
Treatise of the Kingdom of Israel. p. 94.
cites the Doctrine of some, whom he terms men of great learning and judgment:
that, all who profess to love and honor JESUS CHRIST are in the visible
Christian Church, and by Catholics to be reputed Brethren One of these men of
great learning and judgment, is Thomas Morton, by D. Potter cited in his
Margent, whose love and honor to Jesus Christ, you may perceive by this
saying, that the Churches of Arians (who denied our Savior Christ to be God)
are to be accounted the Church of God, because they do hold the foundation of
the Gospel, which is Faith in Jesus Christ the Son of God, and Savior of the
world. And, which is more, it seems by these charitable men, that for being a
member of the Church it is not necessary to believe one only God. For D. Potter
Page 121.
among the arguments to prove Hookers and Morton's opinion, brings this: The
people of the ten Tribes after their defection, notwithstanding their gross
corruption, and Idolatry, remained still a true Church. We may also, as it
seems by these men's reasoning, deny the Resurrection, and yet be members of
the true Church. For a learned man (says D. Potter Page 122.
in behalf of Hooker's and Morton's opinion) was anciently made a Bishop of the
Catholic Church, though he did professedly doubt of the last Resurrection of
our bodies. Dear Savior! What times do we behold? If one may be a member of
the true Church, and yet deny the Trinity of the Persons, the Godhead of our
Savior, the necessity of Baptism, if we may use Circumcision, and with the
worship of God join Idolatry, wherein do we differ from Turks, and Jews? or
rather, are we not worse than either of them? If they who deny our Savior's
Divinity, might be accounted the Church of God, How will they deny that savor
to those ancient Heretics, who denied our Savior's true humanity? and so the
total denial of Christ will not exclude one from being a member of the true
Church. S. Hilary Comment. in Mat. cap. 16.
makes it of equal necessity for Salvation, that we believe our Savior to be
true God, and true Man, saying: This manner of Confession we a^e to hold, that
we remember him to be the Son of God, and the Son of Man, because the one
without the other, can give no hope of Salvation. And yet D. Potter says of
the aforesaid doctrine of Hooker and Morton: The Page 123.
Reader may be pleased to approve, or reject it, as he shall find cause. And in
another place Page 253.
he shows so much good liking of this Doctrine, that he explicateth and
proves the Churches perpetual Visibility by it. And in the second Edition of
his Book, he is careful to declare, and illustrate it more at large than he had
done before: howsoever, this sufficiently shows, that they have no certainty
what Points be Fundamental. As for the Arians in particular, the Author whom D.
Potter cites for a moderate Catholic, but is indeed a plain Heretic, or
rather Atheist, Lucian-like jesting at all Religion, A moderate examination,
etc. cap. 1. panlo post initium.
places Arianism among Fundamental Errors: Bu^ contrarily, an English
Protestant Divine masked under the name of Irenaeus Philalethes, in a little
Book in Latin, entitled, Dissertatio de pace, and concordia Ecclesiae,
endeavors to prove, that even the denial of the Blessed Trinity may stand
with Salvation. Diverse Protestants have taught, that the Roman Church, erreth
in Fundamental Points. But D. Potter, and others teach the contrary, which
could not happen if they could agree what be Fundamental Points. You brand the
Donatists with the note of an Error, in the matter Page 126.
and the nature of it properly heretical; because they taught that the Church
remained only with them, in the part of Donatus. And yet many Protestants are
so far from holding that Doctrine to be a Fundamental Error, that themselves go
further, and say; that for diverse ages before Luther there was no true Visible
Church at all. It is then too too apparent, that you have no agreement in
specifying, what be Fundamental Points; neither have you any means to determine
what they be; for, if you have any such means, Why do you not agree? You tell
us, The Creed contains all Points Fundamental: which, although it were true,
yet you see it serves not to bring you to a particular knowledge, and agreement
in such Points. And no wonder. For (besides what I have said already in the
beginning of this Chapter, and am to deliver more at large in the next) after
so much labor and paper spent to p^ove that the Creed contains all Fundamental
Points, you conclude: It remains Page 241.
very probable, that the Creed is the perfect Summary of those Fundamental
truths, whereof consists the Unity of Faith, and of the Catholic Church. Very
probable? Then, according to all good Logic, the contrary may remain very
probable, and so all remain as full of uncertainty, as before. The whole Rule,
say you, and the sole Judge of your Faith, must be Scripture. Scripture does
indeed deliver divine Truths, but seldom does qualify them, or declare whether
they be, or be nor, absolutely necessary to Salvation. You fall Page 215.
heavy upon Charity Mistaken, because he demands a particular Catalogue of
Fundamental Points, which yet you are obliged in conscience to do, if you be
able. For without such a Catalogue, no man can be assured whether or no be have
Faith sufficient to Salvation. And therefore take it not in all part, if we
again and again demand such a Catalogue. And that you may see we proceed
fairly, I will perform, on our behalf, what we request of you, and do here
deliver a Catalogue, wherein are comprised all Points by us taught to be
necessary to Salvation in these words; We are obliged under pain of damnation,
to believe whatsoever the Catholic Visible Church of Christ proposes, as
revealed by Almighty God. If any be of another mind, all Catholics denounce
him to be no Catholic. But enough of this. And I go forward with the
Infallibility of the Church in all Points.

20. For, even out of your own Doctrine, that the Church cannot err in Points
necessary to Salvation, any wise man will infer, that it behooves all who have
care of their souls, not to forsake her in any one Point. 1. Because they are
assured, that although her Doctrine proved not to be true, in some Point, yet,
even according to D. Potter, the Error cannot be Fundamental, nor destructive
of Faith, and Salvation: neither can they be accused of any the least
imprudence, in erring (if it were possible) with the universal Church.
Secondly, since she is, under pain of eternal damnation, to be believed, and
obeyed in some things, wherein confessedly she is endued with infallibility; I
cannot in wisdom suspect her credit in matters of less moment. For who would
trust another in matters of highest consequence, and be afraid to rely on him
in things of less moment? Thirdly, since (as I said) we are undoubtedly obliged
not to forsake her in the chiefest, or Fundamental Points; and that there is no
Rule to know precisely what, and how many those Fundamental Points be; I cannot
without hazard of my soul leave her in any one Point, lest perhaps that Point,
or Points, wherein I forsake her, prove indeed to be Fundamental, and necessary
to Salvation. Fourthly, that Visible Church, which cannot err in Points
Fundamental, does without distinction propound all her Definitions concerning
matters of Faith to be believed under Anathema's or Curses, esteeming all those
who resist, to be deservedly cast out of her Communion, and holding it a Point
necessary to Salvation, that we believe she cannot err: wherein if she speak
true, then to deny any one point in particular, which she defines, or to
affirm in general, that she may err, puts a man into a state of damnation.
Whereas to believe her in such Points as are not necessary to Salvation, cannot
endanger Salvation; and likewise to remain in her Communion, can bring no great
harm, because she cannot maintain any damnable error, or practice: but to be
divided from her (the being Christ's Catholic Church) is most certainly
damnable. Fifthly, the true Church, being in lawful and certain possession of
Superiority and Power, to command and require Obedience, from all Christians in
some things; I cannot without grievous sin withdraw my obedience in any one,
unless I evidently know, that the thing commanded comes not within the compass
of those things to which her Power extends. And who can better inform me, how
far God's Church can proceed, than God's Church her self? Or to what Doctor can
the Children and Scholars, with greater reason, and more security fly for
direction, than to the Mother, and appointed Teacher of all Christians? In
following her, I shall sooner be excused, than in cleaving to any particular
Sect, or Person, teaching or applying Scriptures against her Doctrine, or
Interpretation. Sixthly, the fearful examples of innumerable persons, who,
forsaking the Church upon pretense of her Errors, have failed even in
Fundamental Points, and suffered shipwreck of their Salvation, ought to deter
all Christians from opposing her in any one Doctrine, or practice: as (to omit
other, both ancient and modern heresies) we see that diverse chief Protestants,
pretending to reform the corruptions of the Church, are come to affirm, that
for many ages she erred to death, and wholly perished; which D. Potter cannot
deny to be a Fundamental Error against that Article of our Creed, I believe the
Catholic Church, as he affirms it of the Donatists, because they confined
the Universal Church within Africa, or some other small tract of soil. Lest
therefore I may fall into some Fundamental Error, it is most safe for me to
believe all the Decrees of that Church which cannot err fundamentally:
especially it we add, That, according to the Doctrine of Catholic Divines, one
error in Faith, whether it be for the matter it self, great or small, destroys
Faith, as is showed in Charity Mistaken; and consequently to accuse the Church
of any one Error, is to affirm, that she lost all Faith, and erred damnably:
which very saying is damnable, because it leaves Christ no visible Church on
earth.

21. To all these Arguments I add this Demonstration: D. Potter teaches, that
there neither was Page 75.
nor can be any just cause to depart from the Church of Christ, no more than
from Christ himself. But if the Church of Christ can err in some Points of
Faith, men not only may, but must forsake her in those, (unless D. Potter will
have them to believe one thing, and profess another:) and if such errors and
corruptions should fall out to be about the Churches Liturgy, public Service,
administration of Sacraments, and the like; they who perceive such errors, must
of necessity leave her external Communion. And therefore, if once we grant the
Church may err, it follows that men may, and ought to forsake her (which is
against D. Potter's own words,) or else they are inexcusable who left the
Communion of the Roman Church, under pretense of errors, which they grant not
to be Fundamental. And, if D. Potter think good to answer this argument, he
must remember his own Doctrine to be, that even the Catholic Church may err in
Points not Fundamental.

22. Another argument for the universal Infallibility of the Church, I take out
of D. Potter's own words. If (says he) we Page 97.
did not dissent in some opinions from the present Roman Church, we could not
agree with the Church truly Catholic. These words cannot be true, unless he
presuppose that the Church truly Catholic, cannot err in Points not
Fundamental. For if she may err in such Points, the Roman Church which he
affirms to err only in Points not Fundamental, may agree with the Church
truly Catholic, if she likewise may err in Points not Fundamental. Therefore
either he must acknowledge a plain contradiction in his own words, or else must
grant that the Church truly Catholic cannot err in Points not Fundamental,
which is what we intended to prove.

23. If Words cannot persuade you, that in all Controversies you must rely
upon the infallibility of the Church; at least yield your assent to Deeds.
Hitherto I have produced Arguments drawn as it were, ex natura rei, from the
Wisdom and Goodness of God, who cannot fail to have left some infallible means
to determine Controversies, which, as we have proved, can be no other, except a
Visible Church, infallible in all her Definitions. But because both Catholics
and Protestants receive holy Scripture, we may thence also prove the
infallibility of the Church in all matters which concern Faith and Religion.
Our Savior speaks clearly: The Gates of Hell Mat. 16.
shall not prevail against her. And, I will ask my Joan. 14.
Father and he will give you another Paraclete, that he may abide with you for
ever, The Spirit of Truth. And, But when he, the Spirit of Joan. 16.
Truth comes, he shall teach you all Truth. The Apostle says, that the Church
is the Pillar, and ground of 1 Timothy c. 3.
Truth. And, He gave some Apostles, and some Prophets, and othersome
Evangelists, and othersome Pastors and Doctors, to the consummation of the
Saints unto the work of the Ministry, unto the edifying of the Body of Christ:
until we meet all into the unity of Faith, and knowledge of the Son of God,
into a perfect man, into the measure of the age of the fullness of Christ: that
now we be not children, wavering, and carried about with every wind of Doctrine
in the wickedness of men, in craftiness, to the circumvention Ephesians. 4.
of Error. All which words seem clearly enough to prove, that the Church is
universally infallible, without which, unity of Faith could not be conserved
against every wind of Doctrine. And yet D, Potter Page 151, 153.
limits these promises and privileges to Fundamental Points, in which he
grants, the Church cannot err. I urge the words of Scripture which are
universal, and do not mention any such restraint. I allege that most
reasonable, and Received Rule, that Scripture is to be understood literally, as
it sounds, unless some manifest absurdity force us to the contrary. But all
will not serve, to accord our different interpretation. In the mean time diverse
of D. Potter's Brethren step in, and reject his limitation, as over-large, and
somewhat tasting of Papistry: And therefore they restrain the mentioned Texts,
either to the Infallibility which the Apostles, and other sacred Writers had in
penning of Scripture: or else to the invisible Church of the Elect; and to
them, not absolutely, but with a double restriction, that they shall not fall
damnably, and finally; and other men have as much right as these, to interpose
their opinion and interpretation. Behold we are three at debate about the
selfsame words of Scripture: We confer diverse places and Texts: We consult the
Originals: We examine Translations: We endeavor to pray heartily: We profess
to speak sincerely: To seek nothing but Truth, and Salvation of our own souls,
and that of our Neighbors; and finally, we use all those means, which by
Protestants themselves are prescribed for finding out the true meaning of
Scripture: Nevertheless we neither do, or have any possible means to agree, as
long as we are left to our selves; and when we should chance to be agreed, the
doubt would still remain whether the thing it self be a Fundamental Point or
no: And yet it were great impiety to imagine that God, the lover of Souls, has
left no certain infallible means, to decide both this, and all other
differences arising about the interpretation of Scripture, or upon any other
occasion. Our remedy therefore in these contentions must be, to consult, and
hear Gods Visible Church, with submissive acknowledgment of her Power, and
Infallibility in whatsoever the proposes as a revealed Truth: according to
that divine advice of St. Augustine in these words: If at length De util. cred.
cap. 8.
thou seem to be sufficiently tossed, and have a desire to put an end to thy
pains, follow the way of the Catholic Discipline, which from Christ himself,
by the Apostles, has come down even to us, and from us shall descend to all
posterity. And though I conceive that the distinction of Points Fundamental,
and not Fundamental, has now been sufficiently confuted; yet that no shadow of
difficulty may remain, I will particularly refel a common saying of
Protestants, that it is sufficient for Salvation, to believe the Apostles
Creed, which they hold to be a Summary of all Fundamental Points of Faith.

The ANSWER to the THIRD CHAPTER. Wherein it is maintained, That the
distinction of Points Fundamental and not Fundamental, is in this present
Controversy good and pertinent: And that the Catholic Church may err in the
latter kind of the said Points.
1 THis Distinction is employed by Protestants to many purposes, and therefore,
if it be pertinent and good, (as they understand and apply it) the whole
edifice built thereon, must be either firm and stable; or, if it be not, it
cannot be for any default in this Distinction.

2. If you object to them discords in matter of Faith without any means of
agreement, They will answer you, that they want not good and solid means of
agreement in matters necessary to Salvation, viz. Their belief of all those
things which are plainly and undoubtedly delivered in Scripture, which who so
believes, must of necessity believe all things necessary to Salvation: and
their mutual suffering one another to abound in their several sense, in matters
not plainly and undoubtedly there delivered. And for their agreement in all
Controversies of Religion, either they have means to agree about them, or not:
If you say they have, why did you before deny it? If they have not means, why
do you find fault with them, for not agreeing?

3. You will say, that their fault is, that by remaining Protestants, they
exclude themselves from the means of agreement, which you have, and which by
submission to your Church they might have also. But if you have means of
agreement, the more shame for you that you still disagree. For who, I pray, is
more inexcusably guilty, for the omission of any duty; they that either have no
means to do it, or else know of none they have, which puts them in the same
case, if as they had none: or they which profess to have an easy and expedite
means to do it, and yet still leave it undone? If you had been blind (says our
Savior to the Pharisees) you had had no sin; but now you say you see,
therefore your sin remains.

4. If you say, you do agree in matters of Faith, I say this is ridiculous, for
you define matters of Faith to be those wherein you agree. So that to say, you
agree in matters of Faith, is to say, you agree in those things wherein you do
agree. And do not Protestants do so likewise? Do not they agree in those
things, wherein they do agree?

5. But you are all agreed, that only those things wherein you do agree are
matters of Faith. And Protestants, if they were wise, would do so too. Sure I
am they have reason enough to do so: seeing all of them agree with explicit
Faith in all those things, which are plainly and undoubtedly delivered in
Scripture, that is, in all which God has plainly revealed: and with an
implicit Faith, in that sense of the whole Scripture which God intended
whatsoever was. Secondly, That which you pretend is false; for else, why do
some of you hold it against faith, to take or allow the Oath of Allegiance;
others as learned and honest as they, that it is against Faith and unlawful to
refuse it, and allow the refusing of it? Why do some of you hold, that it is de
Fide, that the Pope is Head of the Church by divine Law, others the contrary?
Some hold it de Fide, that the blessed Virgin was free from Actual sin, others
that it is not so. Some, that the Popes Indirect power over Princes in
Temporalties is de Fide, Others the contrary. Some, that it is Universal
Tradition, and consequently de Fide, that the Virgin Mary was conceived in
original sin, Others the contrary.

6. But what shall we say now, if you be not agreed touching your pretended
means of Agreement, how then can you pretend to Unity either Actual or
Potential more than Protestants may? Some of you say, the Pope alone without a
Council may determine all Controversies: But others deny it. Some, that a
general Council without a Pope may do so: Others deny this. Some, Both in
conjunction are infallible determiners: Others again deny this. Lastly, some
among you, hold the Acceptance of the Decrees of Councels by the Universal
Church to be the only way to decide Controversies: which others deny, by
denying the Church to be Infallible. And indeed, what way of ending
Controversies can this be, when either part may pretend, that they are part of
the Church, and they receive not the Decree, therefore the whole Church has
not received it?

7. Again, Means of agreeing differences are either rational and well-grounded,
and of Gods appointment; or voluntary and taken up at the pleasure of men.
Means of the former nature, we say, you have as little as we. For where has
God appointed, that the Pope, or a Council, or a Council confirmed by the Pope,
or that Society of Christians which adhere to him, shall be the Infallible
Judge of Controversies? I desire you to show any one of these Assertions
plainly set down in Scripture, (as in all reason a thing of this nature should
be) or at least delivered with a full consent of Fathers, or at least taught in
plain terms by any one Father for four hundred years after Christ. And if you
cannot do this (as I am sure you cannot) and yet will still be obtruding your
selves upon us for our Judges, Who will not cry out, -- perisse frontem de
rebus?

8. But then for means of the other kind, such as yours are, we have great
abundance of them. For besides all the ways which you have devised, which we
may make use of when we please, we have a great many more, which you yet have
never thought of, for which we have as good color out of Scripture, as you
have for yours. For first, we could, if we would, try it by Lots, whose
Doctrine is true, and whose false. And you know it is written, Pro. 16 33
The Lot is cast into the lap, but the whole disposition of it is from the
Lord. 2. We could refer them to the King, and you know it is written, Pro.
16.10.
A Divine sentence is in the lips of the King; his mouth transgresses not in
judgment. Prove. 21 1.
The Heart of the King is in the hand of the Lord. We could refer the matter
to any Assembly of Christians assemled in the Name of Christ, seeing it is
written, Mat. 18.20.
Where two or three are gathered together in my Name, there am I in the midst
of them. We may refer it to any Priest, because it is written, Mal. 2.7.
The Priests lips shall preserve knowledge. Mat. 25.2.
The Scribes and Pharisees sit in Moses chair, etc. To any Preacher of the
Gospel, to any Pastor, or Doctor, for to every one of them Christ has
promised, Mat. 28.20.
He will be with them always even to the end of the world: and of every one of
them it is said Luke 10.16.
He that hears you, hears me, etc. To any Bishop, or Prelate; for it is
written, Heb. 13.17.
Obey your Prelates, and again, Ephesians. 4.11.
He has given Pastors, and Doctors, etc lest we should be carried about with
every wind of Doctrine. To any particular Church of Christians, seeing it is a
particular Church which is called 1 Timothy 3.15.
The house of God, the Pillar and Ground of Truth: and seeing of any particular
Church it is written, Mat. 18.17.
He that hears not the Church, let him be unto thee as a Heathen or Publican.
We might refer it to any man that prays for Gods Spirit; for it is written,
Mat. 7.8.
Every one that asks, receives: and again, Jam. 1.5.
If any man want wisdom, let him ask of God, who gives to all men liberally,
and upbraideth not. Lastly, we might refer it to the Jews, for without all
doubt of them it is written, Isa. 59.21,
My Spirit that is in thee, etc. All these means of agreement, whereof not any
one but has as much probability from Scripture, as that which you obtrude upon
us, offer themselves upon a sudden to me: happily many more might be thought on,
if we had time, but these are enough to show, that would we make use of
voluntary and devised means to determine differences, we had them in great
abundance. And if you say, These would fail us and contradict themselves: So,
as we pretend, have yours. There have been Popes against Popes: Councels
against Councels: Councels confirmed by Popes against Councels confirmed by
Popes: Lastly, the Church of some Ages against the Church of other Ages.

9. Lastly, whereas you find fault, That Protestants upbraided with their
discords, answer, that they differ only in Points not Fundamental: I desire you
tell me, Whether they do so, or do not so; If they do so, I hope you will not
find fault with the Answer; If you say, they do not so, but in Points
Fundamental also, then they are not members of the same Church one with
another, no more than with you: And therefore why should you object to any of
them, their differences from each other, any more than to your selves, their
more and greater differences from you?

10. But they are convinced sometimes even by their own confessions, that the
Ancient Fathers taught diverse Points of Popery: and then they reply, those
Fathers may nevertheless be saved, because those errors were not Fundamental.
And may not you also be convinced by the confessions of your own men, that the
Fathers taught diverse Points held by Protestants against the Church of Rome,
and diverse against Protestants and the Church of Rome? Do not your Purging
Indexes clip the tongues, and seal up the lips of a great many for such
confessions? And is not the above cited confession of your Doway Divines, plain
and full to the same purpose? And do not you also, as freely as we, charge the
Fathers with errors, and yet say they were saved? Now what else do we
understand by an unfundamental error, but such a one with which a man may
possibly be saved? So that still you proceed in condemning others for your own
faults, and urging Arguments against us, which return more strongly upon your
selves.

11. But your will is, We should remember that Christ must always have a
Visible Church. Ans. Your pleasure shall be obeyed, on condition you will not
forget, that there is a difference between perpetual Visibility, and perpetual
Purity. As for the Answer which you make for us, true it is, we believe the
Catholic Church cannot perish, yet that she may, and did, err in Points not
Fundamental; and that Protestants were obliged to forsake these errors of the
Church, as they did, though not the Church for her errors, for that they did
not, but continued still Members of the Church. For it is not all one (though
you perpetually confound them) to forsake the errors of the Church, and to
forsake the Church: or to forsake the Church in her error, and simply to
forsake the Church: no more then it is for me to renounce my Brothers or my
Friends Vices or Errors, and to renounce my Brother or my Friend. The former
then was done by Protestants, the latter was not done. Nay not only, not from
the Catholic, but not so much as from the Roman, did they separate peromnia;
but only in those practices which they conceived superstitious or impious. If
you would at this time propose a form of Liturgy, which both Sides hold lawful,
and then they would not join with you in this Liturgy, you might have some
color then to say, they renounce your Communion absolutely. But as things are
now ordered, they cannot join with you in Prayers, but they must partake with
with you in unlawful practices, and for this reason, they (not absolutely, but
thus far) separate from your Communion. And this, I say, they were obliged to
do under pain of damnation. Not as if it were damnable to hold an error not
damnable, but because it is damnable outwardly to profess and maintain it, and
to join with others in the practice of it, when inwardly they did not hold it.
Now had they continued in your Communion, that they must have done, viz. have
professed to believe, and externally practiced your Errors, whereof they were
convinced that they were Errors: which, though the matters of the Errors had
been not necessary, but only profitable, whether it had not been damnable
dissimulation and hypocrisy, I leave it to you to judge. You your self tell us
within two pages after this, That you are obliged, never to speak any one least
lie against your knowledge,. 2. Now what is this but to live in a perpetual lie?

12. As for that which in the next place you seem so to wonder at, That both
Catholics and Protestants, according to the opinion of Protestants, may be
saved in their several professions, because, forsooth, we both agree in all
Fundamental points. I Answer, this Proposition so crudely set down, as you have
here set it down, I know no Protestant will justify. For you seem to make them
teach, that it is an indifferent thing, for the attainment of Salvation,
whether a man believe the Truth or the Falsehood; and that they care not in
whether of these Religions a man live or dye, so he dye in either of them:
whereas all that they say is this, That those amongst you which want means to
find the Truth, and so dye in Error; or use the best means they can with
industry, and without partiality to find the Truth, and yet dye in error, these
men, thus qualified, notwithstanding these errors may be saved. Secondly, for
those that have means to find the Truth, and will not use them, they conceive,
though their case be dangerous, yet if they die with a general repentance for
all their sins, known and unknown, their Salvation is not desperate. The Truths
which they hold of Faith in Christ, and Repentance, being as it were an
Antidote against their Errors, and their negligence in seeking the Truth.
Especially, seeing by confession of both sides we agree in much more than is
simply, and indispensably necessary to salvation.

13. But seeing we make such various use of this Distinction, is it not
prodigiously strange that we will never be induced to give in a particular
Catalogue what points be Fundamental? And why, I pray, is it so predigiously
strange, that we give no answer to an unreasonable demand? God himself has
told us, Luk 22.48.
That where much is given, much shall be required; where little is given,
little shall be required. To Infants, Deaf-men, Madmen, nothing, for ought we
know, is given; and if it be so, of them nothing shall be required. Others
perhaps may have means only given them to believe, Heb. 11.6.
That God is, and that he is a Rewarder of them that seek him; and to whom thus
much only is given, to them it shall not be damnable, that they believe but only
thus much. Which me thinks is very manifest from the Apostle, in the Epistle to
the Hebrews, where having first said, That without Faith it is impossible to
please God, he subjoyns as his reason, For whosoever comes unto God, must
believe that God is, and that he is a Rewarder of them that seek him. Where, in
my opinion, this is plainly intimated, that this is the minimum quod sic, the
lowest degree of Faith, wherewith, in men capable of Faith, God will be
pleased: and that with this lowest degree he will be pleased, where means of
rising higher are deficient. Besides, if without this belief, That God is, and
that he is a Rewarder of them that seek him, God will not be pleased, then his
will is, that we should believe it. Now his will it cannot be, that we should
believe a Falsehood, It must be therefore true, that he is a Rewarder of them
that seek him. Now it is possible, that they which never heard of Christ, may
seek God: therefore it is true, that even they shall please him, and be
rewarded by him; I say, rewarded, not with bringing them immediately to
Salvation without Christ, but with bringing them according to his good
pleasure, first, to Faith in Christ, and so to Salvation. To which belief the
Story of Cornelius in the 10. Chapter of the Acts of the Apostles, and S.
Peter's words to him, are to me a great inducement. For first it is evident he
believed not in Christ, but was a mere Gentile, and one that knew not but men
might be worshipped, and yet we are assured that his prayers and alms (even
while he was in that state) came up for a memorial before God; That his prayer
was heard, and his Alms had in remembrance in the sight of God, ver. 4. That
upon his Then fearing God, and working righteousness, (such as it was) he was
accepted with God. But how accepted? Not to be brought immediately to
Salvation, but to be promoted to a higher degree of the knowledge of Gods will:
For so it is in the 4. and 5. v. Call for Simon whose surname is Peter, he
shall tell thee what thou ought to do: and at the 33. v. We are all here
present before God, to hear all things that are commanded thee of God. So that
though even in his Gentilism, he was accepted in his present state, yet if he
had continued in it, and refused to believe in Christ after the sufficient
revelation of the Gospel to him, and God's will to have him believe it, he that
was accepted before, would not have continued accepted still; for then that
condemnation had come upon him, That light was come unto him, and he loved
darkness more than light. So that (to proceed a step farther) to whom Faith in
Christ is sufficiently propounded, as necessary to Salvation, to them it is
simply necessary and fundamental to believe in Christ, that is, to expect
remission of sins and Salvation from him, upon the performance of the
conditions he requires; among which conditions one is, that we believe what he
has revealed, when it is sufficiently declared, to have been revealed by him:
For by doing so, we set to our seal, that God is true, and that Christ was sent
by him. Now that may be sufficiently declared to one (all things considered,)
which (all things considered) to another is not sufficiently declared: and
consequently that may be fundamental and necessary to one, which to another is
not so. Which variety of Circumstances, makes it impossible to set down an
exact Catalogue of Fundamentals, and proves your request as reasonable, as if
you should desire us (according to the Fable) to make a coat to fit the Moon in
all her changes; or to give you a garment that will fit all statures; or to
make you a Dial to serve all Meridians; or to design particularly, what
provision will serve an Army for a year: whereas there may be an Army of ten
thousand, there may be of one hundred thousand. And therefore without setting
down a Catalogue of Fundamentals in particular, (because none that can be
given, can universally serve for all men, God requiring more of them to whom he
gives more, and less of them to whom he gives less) we must content our selves
by a general description to tell you what is Fundamental. And to warrant us in
doing so, we have your own example. 19. where being engaged to give us a
Catalogue of Fundamentals, instead thereof you tell us only in general, That
all is Fundamental, and not to be disbelieved under pain of damnation, which
the Church has defined. As you therefore think it enough to say in general,
That all is fundamental which the Church has defined, without setting down in
particular a complete Catalogue of all things, which in any Age the Church has
defined (which, I believe, you will not undertake to do; and, if you do, it
will be contradicted by your Fellows:) So in reason you might think it enough
for us also to say in general, That it is sufficient for any man's salvation to
believe that the Scripture is true, and contains all things necessary for
salvation; and to do his best endeavor to find and believe the true sense of
it: without delivering any particular Catalogue of the Fundamentals of Faith.

14. Neither does the want of such a Catalogue leave us in such a perplexed
uncertainty as you pretend. For though perhaps we cannot exactly distinguish in
the Scripture, what is revealed because it is necessary, from what is
necessary, consequently and accidentally, merely because it is revealed: yet we
are sure enough, that all that is necessary any way, is there; and therefore in
believing all that is there, we are sure to believe all that is necessary. And
if we err from the true and intended sense of some, nay of many obscure and
ambiguous Texts of Scripture, yet we may be sure enough, that we err not
damnably: because, if we do indeed desire and endeavor to find the Truth, we
may be sure we do so, and as sure that it cannot consist with the revealed
goodness of God, to damn him for error, that desires and endeavors to find the
Truth.

15. Ad. 2. The effect of this Paragraph (for as much as concerns us) is this,
That for any man to deny belief to any one thing, be it great or small, known
by him, to be revealed by Almighty God for a Truth, is in effect to charge God
with falsehood: for it is to say, that God affirms that to be Truth, which he
either knows to be not a Truth, or which he does not know to be a Truth: and
therefore without all controversy this is a damnable sin. To this I subscribe
with hand and heart: adding withal, that not only he which knows, but he which
believes (nay, though it be erroneously) any thing to be revealed by God, and
yet will not believe it nor assent unto it, is in the same case, and commits
the same sin of derogation from Gods most perfect and pure Veracity.

16. Ad. 3. I said purposely (known by himself, and believes himself) For as,
without any disparagement of a man's honesty, I may believe something to be
false, which he affirms, of his certain knowledge to be true; provided I
neither know nor believe that he has so affirmed: So without any the least
dishonor to Gods eternal never-failing veracity, I may doubt of, or deny some
Truth revealed by him, if I neither know nor believe it to be revealed by him.

17. Seeing therefore the crime of calling Gods Veracity into question, and
consequently (according to your grounds) of erring Fundamentally, is chargeable
upon those only, that believe the contrary of any one point known (not by
others, but themselves) to be testified by God: I cannot but fear (though I
hope otherwise) that your heart condemned you of a great calumny and egregious
sophistry in imputing Fundamental, and damnable Errors to disagreeing
Protestants; Because forfooth, some of them disbelieve, and directly,
wittingly, and willingly oppose, what others do believe to be testified by the
Word of God: The sophistry of your Discourse will be apparent, if it be
contrived into a Syllogism: Thus therefore in effect you argue;

Whosoever disbelieves any thing known by himself to be revealed by God imputes
falsehood to God, and therefore errs fundamentally:

But some Protestants disbelieve those things, which Others believe to be
testified by God;

Therefore they impute falsehood to God, and err Fundamentally.

Neither can you with any color pretend, that in these words known to be
testified by God, you meant, not by himself, but by any other: Seeing he only
in fact affirms, that God does deceive or is deceived, who denies some things
which himself knows or believes to be revealed by God, as before I have
demonstrated. For otherwise, if I should deny belief to some things which God
had revealed secretly to such a man as I had never heard of, I should be guilty
of calling Gods Veracity into Question, which is evidently false. Besides, how
can it be avoided, but the Jesuits and Dominicans and Franciscans must upon
this ground differ Fundamentally, and one of them err damnably, seeing the one
of them disbelieves, and willingly opposes, what the others believe to be the
Word of God?

18. Whereas you say, that The difference among Protestants consists not in
this, that some believe some points, of which others are ignorant, or not bound
expressly to know: I would gladly know, whether you speak of Protestants
differing in profession only, or in opinion also. If the first, why do you say
presently after, that some disbelieve, what others of them believe? If they
differ in opinion, then sure they are ignorant of the truth of each others
opinions: it being impossible and contradictious, that a man should know one
thing to be true, and believe the contrary; or know it, and not believe it. And
if they do not know the truth of each others opinions, then, I hope, you will
grant they are ignorant of it. If your meaning were, they were not ignorant,
that each other held these Opinions, or of the sense of the opinions which they
held; I answer, This is nothing to the convincing of their understandings of
the truth of them; and these remaining unconvinced of the truth of them, they
are excusable if they do not believe.

19. But, ignorance of what we are expressly bound to know, is it self a fault,
and therefore cannot be an excuse: and therefore if you could show, that
Protestants differ in those points, the truth whereof (which can be but one)
they were bound expressly to know, I should easily yield that one side must of
necessity be in a mortal crime. But for want of proof of this, you content your
self only to say it; and therefore I also might be contented only to deny it,
yet I will not, but give a reason for my denial. And my reason is, because our
Obligation expressly to know any Divine Truth, must arise from Gods manifest
revealing of it, and his revealing unto us that he has revealed it, and that
his will is, we should believe it: Now in the Points controverted among
Protestants, he has not so dealt with us, therefore he has not laid any such
Obligation upon us. The Major of this Syllogism is evident, and therefore I
will not stand to prove it. The Minor also will be evident to him that
considers, That in all the Controversies of Protestants, there is a seeming
conflict of Scripture with Scripture, Reason with Reason, Authority with
Authority: which how it can consist with the manifest revealing of the truth of
either Side, I cannot well understand. Besides, though we grant that Scripture,
Reason, and Authority, were all on one side, and the appearances of the other
side all easily answerable: yet if we consider the strange power that
Education, and Prejudices instilled by it, have over even excellent
understandings, we may well imagine, that many truths which in themselves are
revealed plainly enough, are yet to such or such a man, prepossest with
contrary opinions, not revealed plainly. Neither doubt I but God, who knows
whereof we are made, and what passions we are subject unto, will compassionate
such infirmities, and not enter into judgment with us for those things, which,
all things considered, were unavoidable.

20. But till Fundamentals (say you) be sufficiently proposed (as revealed by
God) is is not against Faith to reject them; or rather, it is not possible,
prudently to believe them: And points unfundamental being thus sufficiently
proposed as divne Truths, may not be denied: Therefore you conclude, there is
no difference between them. Answ. A Circumstantial point may by accident become
Fundamental, because it may be so proposed, that the denial of it, will draw
after it the denial of this Fundamental truth, That all which God says is true.
Notwithstanding in themselves there is a main difference between them: Points
fundamental being those only which are revealed by God, and commanded to be
preached to all, and believed by all. Points Circumstantial, being such, as
though God has revealed them, yet the Pastors of the Church are not bound
under pain of damnation particularly to teach them unto all men every where,
and the people may be securely ignorant of them.

21. You say, Not erring in points fundamental, is not sufficient for the
preservation of the Church; because any Error maintained by it against Gods
Revelation is destructive. I answer. If you mean against Gods revelation known
by the Church to be so, it is true; but impossible that the Church should
should do so; for ipso Facto in doing it, it were a Church no longer. But, if
you mean against some Revelation, which the Church by error thinks to be no
Revelation, it is false. The Church may ignorantly dis-believe such a
Revelation, and yet continue a Church; which thus I prove: That the Gospel was
to be preached to all Nations, was a Truth revealed before our Savior's
Ascension, in these words, Go and teach all Nations, Mat. 28.19. Yet through
prejudice or inadvertence, or some other cause, the Church disbelieved it, as
it is apparent out of the 11. and 12. Chap. of the Acts, until the conversion
of Cornelius; and yet was still a Church. Therefore to disbelieve some divine
Revelation, not knowing it to be so, is not destructive of salvation, or of the
being of the Church. Again, it is a plain Revelation of God, that 1 Cor. 11.28.
the Sacrament of the Eucharist should be administered in both kinds: and 1 Cor.
14.15, 16, 26.
that the public Hymns and Prayers of the Church should be in such a language
as is most for edification; yet these Revelations the Church of Rome not
seeing, by reason of the veil before their eye, their Churches supposed
Infallibility; I hope, the denial of them shall not be laid to their charge, no
otherwise than as building hay and stubble on the Foundation, not overthrowing
the Foundation it self.

22. Ad 2. In the beginning of this Paragraph, we have this Argument against
this Distinction; It is enough ( by D. Potter 's confession) to believe some
things negatively, i.e. not to deny them; Therefore all denial of any divine
truth excludes Salvation. As if you should say, One Horse is enough for a man
to go a journey: Therefore without a Horse no man can go a journey. As if some
Divine Truths, viz. those which are plainly revealed, might not be such, as of
necessity were not to be denied: and others, for want of sufficient
declaration, deniable without danger. Indeed, if D. Potter had said there had
been no divine Truth, declared sufficiently or not declared, but must upon pain
of damnation be believed, or at least not denied; then might you justly have
concluded as you do: but now, that some may not be denied, and that some may be
denied without damnation, why they may not both stand together, I do not yet
understand.

23. In the remainder you infer out of D. Potter's words, That all errors are
alike damnable, if the manner of propounding the contrary Truths be not
different: which, for ought I know, all Protestants, and all that have sense
must grant. Yet I deny your Illation from hence, That the distinction of points
into Fundamental and Unfundamental, is vain and uneffectual for the purpose of
Protestants. For though being alike proposed as divine Truths, they are by
accident alike necessary, yet the real difference still remains between them,
that they are not alike necessary to be proposed.

24. Ad. 5. The next Paragraph, if it be brought out of the clouds, will, I
believe, have in it these Propositions. 1. Things are distinguished by their
different natures. 2. The Nature of Faith is taken, not from the matter
believed, for then they that believed different matters should have different
Faiths, but from the Motive to it. 3. This Motive is Gods Revelation. 4. This
Revelation is alike for all objects. 5. Protestants disagree in things equally
revealed by God: Therefore they forsake the formal motive of Faith: and
therefore have no Faith nor Unity therein.
Which is truly a very proper and convenient Argument to close up a weak
Discourse, wherein both the Propositions are false for matter, confused and
disordered for the form, and the Conclusion utterly inconsequent. First, for
the second Proposition; Who knows not that the Essence of all Habits (and
therefore of Faith among the rest) is taken from their Act, and their Object?
If the Habit be general, from the Act and Object in general; if the Habit be
special, from the Act and Object in special. Then for the Motive to a thing;
that it cannot be of the Essence of the thing to which it moves, who can doubt
that knows that a Motive is an efficient cause, and that the efficient is
always extrinsecal to the effect? For the fourth, that Gods Revelation is alike
for all objects, It is ambiguous: and if the sense of it be, that his
Revelation is an equal Motive to induce us to believe all objects revealed by
him, it is true, but impertinent: If the sense of it be, that all objects
revealed by God are alike (that is, alike plainly and undoubtedly) revealed by
him, it is pertinent, but most untrue. Witness the great diversity of Texts of
Scripture, whereof some are so plain and evident, that no man of ordinary sense
can mistake the sense of them. Some are so obscure and ambiguous, that to say,
this or this is the certain sense of them, were high presumption. For the
fifth; Protestants disagree in things equally revealed by God! In themselves
perhaps, but not equally to them, whose understandings by reason of their
different Educations are fashioned, and shaped for the entertainment of various
opinions, and consequently some of them, more inclined to believe such a sense
of Scripture, others to believe another; which to say that God will not take
into his consideration in judging men's opinions, is to disparage his goodness.
But to what purpose is it, that these things are equally revealed to both, (as
the light is equally revealed to all blind men) if they be not fully revealed
to either? The sense of this Scripture, Why are they then baptized for the
dead? and this, He shall be saved, yet so as by fire, and a thousand others,
are equally revealed to you and to another Interpreter, that is, certainly to
neither. He now conceives one sense of them, and you another; And would it not
be an excellent Inference, if I should conclude now as you do; That you forsake
the formal motive of Faith, which is Gods Revelation, and consequently lose all
Faith and Unity therein? So likewise the Jesuits and Dominicans, the
Franciscans and Dominicans, disagree about things equally revealed by Almighty
God: and seeing they do so, I beseech you let me understand, why this reason
will not exclude them as well as Protestants from all Faith and Unity therein?
Thus you have failed of your undertaking in your first part of your Title, and
that is a very ill omen, especially in points of so straight mutual dependence,
that we shall have but slender performance in your second Assumpt. Which is,
That the Church is infallible in all her Definitions, whether concerning Points
Fundamental, or not Fundamental.

25. Ad 7. and 8. The Reasons of these two Paragraphs, as they were alleged
before, so they were before answered, Cap. 2. and thither I remit the Reader.

26. Ad. 9, 10, 11. I grant that the Church cannot without damnable sin, either
deny any thing to be true, which she knows to be Gods Truth: or propose any
thing as his Truth, which she knows not to be so. But that she may not do this
by ignorance or mistake, and so without damnable sin, that you should have
proved, but have not. But, say you, This excuse cannot serve: for if the Church
be assisted only for Points Fundamental, she cannot but know that she may err
in points not Fundamental. Answ. It does not follow, unless you suppose, that
the Church knows that she is assisted no farther. But if, being assisted only
so far, she yet did conceive by error her assistance absolute and unlimited,
or, if knowing her assistance restrained to Fundamentals, she yet conceived by
error, that she should be guarded, from proposing any thing but what was
fundamental, then the consequence is apparently false. But at least she cannot
be certain that she cannot err, and therefore cannot be excused from headlong
and pernicious temerity in proposing points not fundamental, to be believed by
Christians as matters of Faith. Ans. Neither is this deduction worth any thing,
unless it be understood of such unfundamental points, as she is not warranted
to propose by evident Text of Scripture. Indeed, if she propose such, as
matters of Faith certainly true, she may well be questioned, Quo Warranto? She
builds without a foundation, and says, Thus says the Lord, when the Lord does
not say so: which cannot be excused from rashness and high presumption; such a
presumption, as an Ambassador should commit, who should say in his Masters
name that for which he has no Commission; Of the same nature, I say, but of a
higher strain: as much as the King of Heaven, is greater than any earthly King.
But though she may err in some points not-fundamental, yet may she have
certainty enough in proposing others; as for example, these, That Abraham begat
Isaac, that S. Paul had a cloak, that Timothy was sick; because these, though
not Fundamental, i. e. no essential parts of Christianity, yet are evidently,
and undeniably set down in Scripture, and consequently, may be without all
rashness proposed by the Church as certain divine Revelations. Neither is your
Argument, concluding, when you say, If in such things she may be deceived, she
must be always uncertain of all such things. For, my sense may sometimes
possibly deceive me, yet I am certain enough that I see what I see, and feel
what I feel. Our Judges are not infallible in their judgments, yet are they
certain enough, that they judge aright, and that they proceed according to the
Evidence that is given, when they condemn a Thief, or a murderer to the
Gallows. A Traveller is not always certain of his way, but often mistaken: and
does it therefore follow that he can have no assurance that Charing Cross is
his right way from the Temple to White Hall? The ground of your Error here is
your not distinguishing between Actual Certainty and Absolute Infallibility.
Geometricians are not infallible in their own Science: yet they are very
certain of those things which they see demonstrated. And Carpenters are not
Infallible, yet certain of the straightness of those things which agree with
their Rule and Square. So though the Church be not infallibly certain, that in
all her Definitions, whereof some are about disputable and ambiguous matters,
she shall proceed according to her Rule; yet being certain of the Infallibility
of her Rule, and that in this or that thing she does manifestly proceed
according to it, she may be certain of the Truth of some particular Decrees,
and yet not certain that she shall never decree but what is true.

27. Ad 12. But if the Church may err in points not fundamental, she may err in
proposing Scripture, and so we cannot be assured whether she have not been
deceived already. The Church may err in her Proposition or custody of the Canon
of Scripture, if you understand by the Church, any present Church of one
denomination; for example, the Roman, the Greek, or so. Yet have we sufficient
certainty of Scripture, not from the bare testimony of any present Church, but
from Universal Tradition, of which the testimony of any present Church is but a
little part. So that here you fall into the Fallacy, a dicto secundum quid ad
dictum simpliciter. For in effect this is the sense of your Argument: Unless
the Church be infallible, we can have no certainty of Scripture from the
Authority of the Church: Therefore unless the Church be infallible, we can have
no certainty hereof at all. As if a man should say, If the Vintage of France
miscarry, we can have no Wine from France: Therefore, if that Vintage miscarry,
we can have no Wine at all. And, for the incorruption of Scripture; I know no
other rational assurance we can have of it, than such as we have of the
incorruption of other ancient Books, that is, the consent of ancient Copies:
such, I mean for the kind, though it be far greater for the degree of it. And
if the Spirit of God give any man any other Assurance hereof, this is not
rational and discursive, but supernatural and infused. And Assurance it may be
to himself, but no Argument to another. As for the infallibility of the Church;
it is so far from being a proof of Scriptures Incorruption, that no proof can
be pretended for it, but incorrupted places of Scripture: which yet are as
subject to corruption as any other, and more likely to have been corrupted (if
it had been possible) than any other, and made to speak as they do, for the
advantage of those men, whose ambition it has been a long time, to bring all
under their Authority. Now then, if any man should prove the Scriptures
uncorrupted, because the Church says so, which is infallible: I would demand
again touching this very thing, That there is an Infallible Church, seeing it
is not of it self evident, how shall I be assured of it? And what can he
answer, but that the Scripture says so, in these and these places? Hereupon I
would ask him, how shall I be assured, that the Scriptures are incorrupted in
these places? seeing it is possible, and not altogether improbable, that these
men, which desire to be thought Infallible, when they had the government of all
things in their own hands, may have altered them for their purpose. If to this
he answer again, that the Church is infallible, and therefore cannot do so; I
hope it would be apparent, that he runs round in a circle, and proves the
Scriptures incorruption, by the Churches infallibility, and the Churches
infallibility, by the Scriptures incorruption; and that is in effect the
Churches infallibility by the Churches infallibility, and the Scriptures
incorruption by the Scriptures incorruption.

28. Now for your Observation, that some Books, which were not always known to
be Canonical, have been afterward received for such. But never any Book or
Syllable defined for Canonical, was afterward questioned or rejected for
Apocryphal: I demand, touching the first sort, Whether they were commended to
the Church by the Apostles as Canonical, or not? If not, seeing the whole Faith
was preached by the Apostles to the Church, and seeing, after the Apostles, the
Church pretends to no new Revelations, How can it be an Article of Faith to
believe them Canonical? And how can you pretend, that your Church, which makes
this an Article of Faith, is so assisted as not to propose any thing as a
Divine Truth which is not revealed by God? If they were, How then is the Church
an infallible keeper of the Canon of Scripture, which has suffered some Books
of Canonical Scripture to be lost? and others to lose for a long time their
being Canonical, at least, the necessity of being so esteemed, and afterward,
as it were by the law of Postliminium has restored their Authority and
Canonicalness unto them? If this was delivered by the Apostles to the Church,
the point was sufficiently discussed, and therefore your Church's omission to
teach it for some Ages, as an Article of Faith, nay degrading it from the
number of Articles of Faith, and putting it among disputable problems, was
surely not very laudable. If it were not revealed by God to the Apostles, and
by the Apostles to the Church, then can it be no Revelation, and therefore her
presumption in proposing it as such, is inexcusable.

19. And then for the other part of it, that never any Book or Syllable defined
for Canonical, was afterward questioned or rejected for Apocryphal: Certainly
it is a bold Asseveration, but extremely false. For I demand; The Book of
Ecclesiasticus and Wisdom, the Epistle of St. James, and to the Hebrews, were
they by the Apostles approved for Canonical, or no? If not, With what face dare
you approve them, and yet pretend that all your doctrine is Apostolical?
Especially, seeing it is evident that this point is not deducible by rational
discourse from any other defined by them. If they were approved by them, this,
I hope, was a sufficient definition: and therefore you were best rub your
forehead hard, and say, that these Books were never questioned. But if you do
so, then I shall be bold to ask you, what Books you meant in saying before,
Some Books which were not always known to be Canonical, have been afterward
received? Then for the Book of Macchabees, I hope, you will say it was defined
for Canonical before S. Gregorie's time: and yet he, lib. 19. Moral. c. 13.
citing a testimony out of it, prefaceth to it after this manner, Concerning
which matter we do not amiss, if we produce a testimony out of Books although
not Canonical, yet set forth for the edification of the Church. For Eleazar in
the Book of Macchabees, etc. Which, if it be not to reject it from being
Canonical, is, without question, at least to question it. Moreover, because you
are so punctual, as to talk of words and syllables, I would know whether before
Sixtus Quintus his time, your Church had a defined Canon of Scripture, or not?
If not, then was your Church surely a most Vigilant Keeper of Scripture, that
for 1500. years had not defined what was Scripture, and what was not. If it
had, then I demand, Was it that, set forth by Sixtus? or that, set forth by
Clement? or a third different from both? If it were that set forth by Sixtus,
then is it now condemned by Clement: if that of Clement, it was condemned I
say, but sure you will say contradicted and questioned by Sixtus; If different
from both, then was it questioned and condemned by both, and still lies under
the condemnation. But then lastly, Suppose it had been true, That both some
Book not known to be Canonical had been received, and that never any after
receiving had been questioned: How had this been a sign that the Church is
infallibly assisted by the Holy Ghost? In what mood or figure would this
Conclusion follow out of these Premises? Certainly, your flying to such poor
signs as these are, is to me a great sign, that you labor with penury of
better Arguments: and that thus to catch at shadows and bulrushes, is a shrewd
sign of a sinking cause.

3. Ad.. 13. We are told here, That the general promises of Infallibility to
the Church, must not be restrained only to points Fundamental; Because then the
Apostles words and writings may also be so restrained. The Argument put in
form, and made complete by supply of the concealed Proposition, runs thus;

The Infallibility promised to the present Church of any Age, is as absolute
and unlimited, as that promised to the Apostles in their Preaching and Writings:

But the Apostles Infallibility is not to be limited to Fundamentals:

Therefore neither is the Church's Infallibility thus to be limited. Or thus;

The Apostles Infallibility in their Preaching and Writing may be limited to
Fundamentals, as well as the Infallibility of the present Church: But that is
not to be done: Therefore this also is not to be done.

Now to this Argument, I answer, that, if by may be as well, in the Major
Proposition, be understood, may be as possibly: it is true, but impertinent. If
by it we understand, may be as justly and rightly, It is very pertinent, but
very false. So that as D. Potter limits the infallibility of the Present Church
unto Fundamentals, so another may limit the Apostles unto them also. He may do
it de facto, but de jure he cannot; that may be done and done lawfully: this
also may be done, but not lawfully. That may be done, and, if it be done,
cannot be confuted: This also may be done, but, if it be done, may easily be
confuted. It is done to our hand in this very Paragraph, by five words taken
out of Scripture, All Scripture is divinely inspired. Show but as much for the
Church: Show where it is written, That all the Decrees of the Church are
divinely inspired; and the Controversy will be at end. Besides, there is not
the same reason for the Church's absolute Infallibility, as for the Apostles
and Scripture's. For, if the Church fall into error, it may be reformed by
comparing it with the Rule of the Apostles Doctrine and Scripture. But, if the
Apostles have erred in delivering the Doctrine of Christianity, to whom shall
we have recourse, for the discovering and correcting their error? Again, there
is not so much strength required in the Edifice as in the Foundation: and, if
but wise men have the ordering of the building, they will make it much a surer
thing, that the foundation shall not fail the building, than that the building
shall not fall from the foundation. And though the building be to be of Brick,
or Stone, and perhaps of Wood; yet, if it may be possibly, they will have a
Rock for their Foundation, whose stability is a much more indubitable thing,
than the adherence of the structure to it. Now the Apostles, and Prophets, and
Canonical Writers, are the Foundation of the Church, according to that of S.
Paul, Built upon the Foundation of Apostles and Prophets; therefore their
stability in reason ought to be greater then the Church's, which is built upon
them. Again, a dependant Infallibility (especially if the dependence be
voluntary) cannot be so certain as that on which it depends: But the
Infallibility of the Church, depends upon the Infallibility of the Apostles, as
the straitness of the thing regulated, upon the straitness of the Rule: and
besides, this dependence is voluntary; for it is in the power of the Church to
deviate from this Rule; being nothing else but an aggregation of men, of which
every one has free will, and is subject to passions and error: Therefore the
Church's Infallibility, is not so certain as that of the Apostles.

31. Lastly, Quid verba audiam, cum facta videam? If you be so Infallible as
the Apostles were, show it as the Apostles did; They went forth (says S. Mark)
and preached every where, the Lord working with them, and confirming their
words with signs following. It is impossible that God should lie, and that the
eternal Truth should set his hand and seal to the confirmation of a falsehood,
or of such Doctrine as is partly true, and partly false. The Apostles Doctrine
was thus confirmed, therefore it was entirely true, and in no part either false
or uncertain. I say, in no part of that which they delivered constantly, as a
certain divine Truth, and which had the Attestation of Divine Miracles. For
that the Apostles themselves, even after the sending of the Holy Ghost, were,
and, through inadvertence or prejudice, continued for a time in an error,
repugnant to a revealed Truth, it is, as I have already noted, unanswerably
evident, from the Story of the Acts of the Apostles. For notwithstanding our
Savior's express Warrant and Injunction, To go and preach to all Nations, yet
until S. Peter was better informed by a Vision from Heaven, and by the
conversion of Cornelius; both he and the rest of the Church, held it unlawful
for them, to go or preach the Gospel to any but the Jews.

32. And for those things which they profess to deliver as the dictates of
humane reason and prudence, and not as divine Revelations, why we should take
them to be divine Revelations, I see no reason; nor how we can do so, and not
contradict the Apostles* and God himself. Therefore when S. Paul says, in the
1. Epist to the Corinth. 7.12. To the rest speak I, not the Lord; And again,
Concerning Virgins I have no commandment of the Lord, but I deliver my
judgment: If we will pretend that the Lord did certainly speak, what S. Paul
spoke, and that his judgment was God's commandment, shall we not plainly
contradict S. Paul, and that Spirit by which he wrote? which moved him to
write, as in other places, divine Revelations, which he certainly knew to be
such; so in this place, his own judgment, touching some things which God had
not particularly revealed unto him. And, if D. Potter did speak to this purpose
(that the Apostles were Infallible only in these things which they spoke, of
certain knowledge) I cannot see what danger there were in saying so. Yet the
Truth is, you wrong. D. Potter. It is not he, but D. Stapleton in him, that
speaks the words you cavil at. D. Stapleton, says he, p. 140. is full and
punctual to this purpose: then sets down the effect of his discourse l. 8.
Princ. Doct. 4. c. 15. and in that, the words you cavil at; and then p. 150. he
shuts up this Paragraph with these words, Thus D. Stapleton. So that, if either
the Doctrine, or the Reason, be not good, D. Stapleton not D. Potter is to
answer for it.

33. Neither do D. Potter's ensuing words limit the Apostle's infallibility to
truths absolutely necessary to salvation, if you read them with any candor: for
it is evident, he grants the Church infallible in Truths absolutely necessary;
and as evident, that he ascribes to the Apostles, the Spirit's guidance, and
consequently infallibility in a more high and absolute manner than any since
them. From whence, thus I argue: He that grants the Church infallible in
Fundamentals, and ascribes to the Apostles the infallible guidance of the
Spirit, in a more high and absolute manner than to any since them, limits not
the Apostles infallibility to Fundamentals; But D. Potter grants to the Church
such a limited infallibility, and ascribes to the Apostles, the Spirit's
infallible guidance in a more high and absolute manner; Therefore he limits not
the Apostles infallibility to Fundamentals. I once knew a man out of courtesy
help a lame dog over a style, and he for requital bit him by the fingers: Just
so you serve D. Potter. He out of courtesy grants you, that those words, The
Spirit shall lead you into all Truth, and shall abide with you ever, though in
their high and most absolute sense they agree only to the Apostles, yet in a
conditional, limited, moderate, secundary sense, they may be understood of the
Church. But says, that if they be understood of the Church, All, must not be
simply all, No, nor so large an All, as the Apostles all, but all necessary to
salvation. And you, to requite his courtesy in granting you thus much, cavil
at him, as if he had prescribed these bounds to the Apostles also, as well as
the present Church. Whereas, he has explained himself to the contrary, both in
the clause forementioned, The Apostles, who had the Spirit's guidance in a
more high and absolute manner than any since them; and in these words ensuing,
whereof the Church is simply ignorant; and again, wherewith the Church is not
acquainted. But most clearly in those which being most incompatible to the
Apostles, you with an etc, I cannot but fear, craftily have concealed: How many
obscure Texts of Scripture which she understands not? How many School-Questions
which she has not, happily cannot determine? And for matters of fact, it is
apparent that the Church may err; and then concludes, That we must understand
by All truths, not simply All, But (if you conceive the words as spoken of the
Church) All Truth absolutely necessary to salvation. And yet, beyond all this,
the negative part of his answer agrees very well to the Apostles themselves;
for that All which they were lead into, was not simply All, otherwise S. Paul
erred in saying, we know in part; but such an All as was requisite to make them
the Churches Foundations. Now such they could not be, without freedom from
error in all those things which they delivered constantly, as certain revealed
Truths. For, if we once suppose they may have erred in some things of this
nature, it will be utterly undiscernable what they have erred in, and what they
have not. Whereas though we suppose the Church has erred in some things, yet
we have means to know, what she has erred in, and what she has not. I mean by
comparing the Doctrine of the present Church, with the Doctrine of the Primitive
Church delivered in Scripture. But then, last of all, suppose the Doctor had
said (which I know he never intended) that this promise in this place made to
the Apostles, was to be understood only of Truths absolutely necessary to
salvation; Is it consequent that he makes their Preaching and Writing not
infallible in Points not Fundamental? Do you not blush for shame at this
Sophistry? The Doctor says, no more was promised in this place; Therefore he
says no more was promised! Are there not other places besides this? And may not
that be promised in other places, which is not promised in this?

34. But, if the Apostles were Infallible in all things proposed by them as
Divine Truths, the like must be affirmed of the Church, because D. Potter
teaches the said promise to be verified in the Church. True, he does so, but
not in so absolute a manner. Now what is opposed to Absolute, but Limited, or
restrained? To the Apostles then it was made, and to them only, yet the words
are true of the Church. And this very promise might have been made to it,
though here it is not. They agree to the Apostles in a higher, to the Church in
a lower sense: to the Apostles in a more absolute, to the Church in a more
limited sense. To the Apostles absolutely for the Churches direction: to the
Church Conditionally by adherence to that direction, and so far as she does
adhere to it. In a word, the Apostles were lead into all Truths by the Spirit,
efficaciter: The Church is led also into all Truth by the Apostles writings,
sufficienter. So that the Apostles and the Church, may be fitly compared to the
Star and the Wisemen. The Star was directed by the finger of God, and could not
but go right to the place where Christ was: But the Wisemen were led by the
Star to Christ; led by it, I say, not efficaciter or irresistibiliter, but
sufficienter, so that if they would, they might follow it; if they would not,
they might choose. So was it between the Apostles writing Scriptures, and the
Church. They in their writing were infallibly assisted to propose nothing as a
divine Truth, but what was so. The Church is also led into all Truth, but it is
by the intervening of the Apostles writings: But it is as the Wisemen were led
by the Star, or as a Traveller is directed by a Mercurial Statue, or as a Pilot
by his Card and Compass: led sufficiently, but not irresistibly: led as that
she may follow, not so that she must. For, seeing the Church is a Society of
men, whereof every one (according to the Doctrine of the Romish Church) has
freewill in believing, it follows, that the whole Aggregate has freewill in
believing. And if any man say that at least it is morally impossible, that of
so many whereof all may believe aright, not any should do so: I answer, It is
true, if they did all give themselves any liberty of judgment. But if all (as
the case is here) captivate their understandings to one of them, all are as
likely to err as that one. And he more likely to err than any other, because he
may err and thinks he cannot, and because he conceives the Spirit absolutely
promised to that succession of Bishops, of which many have been notoriously and
confessedly wicked men, Men of the World: whereas this Spirit is the Spirit of
Truth, whom the world cannot receive, because he sees him not, neither knows
him. Besides, let us suppose, that neither in this nor in any other place, God
had promised any more unto them, but to lead them into all Truth, necessary for
their own and other men's salvatition: Does it therefore follow that they were,
de facto, led no farther? God indeed is obliged by his Veracity to do all that
he has promised, but is there any thing that binds him to do no more? May not
he be better than his word, but you will quarrel at him? May not his Bounty
exceed his Promise? And may not we have certainty enough that oft-times it does
so? God at first did not promise to Solomon, in his vision at Gibeon, any more
than what he asked, which was wisdom to govern his people, and that he gave him.
But yet, I hope, you will not deny that we have certainty enough that he gave
him something which neither God had promised, nor he had asked. If you do, you
contradict God himself: For Behold (says God) because thou have asked this
thing, I have done according to thy word. Lo, I have given thee a Wise and an
Understanding heart, so that there was none like thee before thee, neither
after thee shall any arise like unto thee. And I have also given thee that
which thou have not asked, both riches, and honor, so that there shall not be
any among the Kings like unto thee in all thy days. God, for ought appears,
never obliged himself by promise, to show S. Paul those Unspeakable mysteries,
which in the third Heaven he showed unto him: and yet, I hope, we have
certainty enough, that he did so. God promises to those that seek his Kingdom,
and the righteousness thereof, that all things necessary shall be added unto
them, and in rigor by his promise he is obliged to do no more, and, if he give
them necessaries he has discharged his obligation: Shall we therefore be so
injurious to his bounty toward us, as to say it is determined by the narrow
bounds of mere Necessity? So, though God had obliged himself by promise to give
his Apostles infallibility only in things necessary to salvation; nevertheless
it is utterly inconsequent, that he gave them no more, than by the rigor of
his promise he was engaged to do; or that we can have no assurance of any
farther assistance that he gave them: especially when he himself, both by his
word, and by his works, has assured us, that he did assist them farther. You
see by this time that your chain of fearful consequences (as you call them) is
turned to a rope of sand, and may easily be avoided without any flying to your
imaginary infallibility of the Church in all her proposals.

35. Ad. 14. and 15 Doubting of a Book received for Canonical, may signify,
either doubting whether it be Canonical; or supposing it to be Canonical,
whether it be True. If the former sense were yours, I must then again
distinguish of the term, Received; For it may signify, either received by some
particular Church, or by the present Church Universal, or the Church of all
Ages. If you meant the word in either of the former senses, that which you say
is not true. A man may justly and reasonably doubt of some Texts, or some Book
received by some particular Church, or by the Universal Church of this present
time, whether it be Canonical or no: and yet have just reason to believe, and
no reason to doubt, but that other Books are Canonical. As Eusebius perhaps had
reason to doubt of the Epistle of S. James; the Church Rome, in Hieromes time,
of the Epistle to the Hebrews. And yet they did not doubt of all the Books of
the Canon, nor had reason to do so. If by Received, you mean Received by the
Church of all Ages, I grant, he that doubts of any one such Book, has as much
reason to doubt of all. But yet here again I tell you, that it is possible a
man may doubt of one such Book, and yet not of all: because it is possible men
may do not according to reason. If you meant your words in the latter sense;
then I confess, he that believes such a Book to be Canonical, i. e. the word of
God, and yet (to make an impossible Supposition) believes it (...) not to be
true, if he will do according to reason, must doubt of all the rest, and
believe none. For there being no greater reason to believe any thing true, than
because God has said it, nor no other reason to believe the Scripture to be
true, but only because it is Gods word; he that doubts of the Truth of any
thing said by God, has as much reason to believe nothing that he says: and
therefore, if he will do according to reason, neither must nor can believe any
thing he says. And upon this ground you conclude rightly, that the
infallibility of true Scripture must be Universal, and not confined to Points
Fundamental.

36. And this Reason why we should not refuse to believe any part of Scripture,
upon pretense that the matter of it is not Fundamental, you confess to be
convincing. But the same reason you say is as convincing for the Universal
infallibility of the Church. For (say you) unless She be infallible in all
things, we cannot believe her in any one. But by this reason your Proselytes,
knowing you are not infallible in all things, must not, nor cannot believe you
in any thing. Nay you your self must not believe your self in any thing,
because you know that you are not infallible in all things. Indeed if you had
said We could not rationally believe her for her own sake, and upon her own
word and authority in any thing, I should willingly grant the consequence. For
an authority subject to error can be no firm or stable foundation of my belief
in any thing: and if it were in any thing, then this authority being one and
the same in all proposals, I should have the same reason to believe all, that I
have to believe one: and therefore must either do unreasonably in believing any
one thing, upon the sole warrant of this authority; or unreasonably, in not
believing all things equally warranted by it. Let this therefore be granted;
and what will come of it? Why then, you say, we cannot believe her in
propounding Canonical Books. If you mean still (as you must do unless you play
the Sophister) not upon her own Authority, I grant it: For we believe Canonical
Books not upon the Authority of the present Church, but upon Universal
Tradition. If you mean, Not at all, and that with reason we cannot believe
these Books to be Canonical, which the Church proposes, I deny it. There is no
more consequence in the Argument than in this, The devil is not infallible,
therefore if he says there is one God, I cannot believe him. No Geometrician
is Infallible in all things, therefore not in these things which he
demonstrates. M. Knot is not infallible in all things, therefore he may not
believe that he wrote a Book entitled, Charity Maintained.

37. But though the Reply be good, Protestants cannot make use of it, with any
good coherence to this distinction, and some other Doctrins of theirs: because
they pretend to be able to tell what points are Fundamental and what not; and
therefore though they should believe Scripture erroneous in others, yet they
might be sure it erred not in these. To this I answer. That if without
dependence on Scripture, they did know what were Fundamental, and what not,
they might possibly believe the Scripture true in Fundamentals, and erroneous
in other things. But seeing they ground their belief, that such and such things
only are Fundamentals, only upon Scripture, and go about to prove their
assertion true, only by Scripture, then must they suppose the Scripture true
absolutely and in all things, or else the Scripture could not be a sufficient
warrant to them, to believe this thing, that these only Points are Fundamental.
For who would not laugh at them if they should argue thus, The Scripture is
true in something; the Scripture says that these Points only are Fundamental,
therefore this is true, that these only are so! For every Fresh-man in Logic
knows, that from mere particulars nothing can be certainly concluded. But on
the other side, this reason is firm, and demonstrative, The Scripture is true
in all things; But the Scripture says, that these only Points are the
Fundamentals of Christian Religion; therefore it is true, that these only are
so. So that the knowledge of Fundamentals being it self drawn from Scripture,
is so far from warranting us to believe the Scripture is, or may be, in part
True, and in part False; that it self can have no foundation, but the Universal
truth of Scripture. For, to be a Fundamental Truth, presupposes to be a Truth;
now I cannot know any Doctrine to be a Divine and supernatural Truth, or a true
part of Christianity, but only because the Scripture says so which is all
true: Therefore, much more can I not know it to be a Fundamental Truth.

38. Ad.. 16. To this Paragraph I answer. Though, the Church being not
infallible, I cannot believe her in every thing she says; yet I can and must
believe her in every thing she proves, either by Scripture, Reason, or
Universal Tradition, be it Fundamental, or be it not Fundamental. This you say,
we cannot in Points not Fundamental, because in such we believe she may err.
But this I know, we can: because though she may err in some things, yet she
does not err in what she proves, though it be not Fundamental. Again you say,
We cannot do it in Fundamentals, because we must know what Points be
Fundamental, before we go to learn of her. Not so. But seeing Faith comes by
Hearing, and by hearing those who give testimony to it which none does but the
Church and the Parts of it; I must learn of the Church, or of some part of it,
or I cannot know any thing Fundamental or not Fundamental. For how can I come
to know, that there was such a man as Christ, that he taught such Doctrine, that
he and his Apostles did such Miracles in Confirmation of it, that the Scripture
of GOD's Word, unless I be taught it? So then, the Church is, though not a
certain Foundation and proof of my Faith, yet a necessary Introduction to it.

39. But the Churches infallible Direction, extending only to Fundamentals,
unless I know them before I go to learn of her, I may be rather deluded than
instructed by her. The reason and connection of this consequence, I fear neither
I nor you do well understand. And besides, I must tell you, you are too bold in
taking that which no man grants you, That the Church is an Infallible Director
in Fundamentals. For if she were so, then must we not only learn Fundamentals
of her, but also learn of her what is Fundamental, and take all for Fundamental
which she delivers to be such. In the performance whereof, if I knew any one
Church to be Infallible, I would quickly be of that Church. But, good Sir, you
must needs do us this favor, to be so acute, as to distinguish between being
infallible in Fundamentals, and being an infallible Guide in Fundamentals. That
there shall be always a Church infallible in Fundamentals, we easily grant,
for it comes to no more but this, that there shall be alwais a Church. But that
there shall be always such a Church, which is an infallible Guide in
Fundamentals, this we deny. For this cannot be without settling a known
Infallibility in some one known Society of Christians, (as the Greek or the
Roman, or some other Church) by adhering to which Guide, men might be guided to
believe aright in all Fundamentals. A man that were destitute of all means of
communicating his thoughts to others, might yet, in himself, and to himself, be
infallible; but he could not be a Guide to others. A Man or a Church that were
invisible, so that none could know how to repair to it for direction, could not
be an infallible Guide, and yet he might be in himself infallible. You see
then, there is a wide difference between these two, and therefore I must
beseech you not to confound them, nor to take the one for the other.

40. But they that know what Points are Fundamental, otherwise than by the
Churches Authority, learn not of the Church: Yes, they may learn of the Church,
that the Scripture is the Word of God, and from the Scripture, that such Points
are Fundamental, others are not so; and consequently learn, even of the Church,
even of your Church, that all is not Fundamental, nay all is not true, which
the Church teaches to be so. Neither do I see what hinders, but a man may
learn of a Church, how to confute the errors of that Church which taught him:
as well as of my Master in Physic, or the Mathematics, I may learn those
rules and principles, by which I may confute my Master's erroneous Conclusions.

41. But you ask, If the Church be not an Infallible Teacher, why are we
commanded to hear, to seek, to obey the Church? I answer. For Commands to seek
the Church, I have not yet met with any; and, I believe, you, if you were to
show them, would be your self to seek. But yet, if you could produce some such,
we might seek the Church to many good purposes, without supposing her a Guide
infallible. And then for hearing and obeying the Church, I would fain know,
Whether none may be heard and obeyed, but those that are Infallible? Whether
particular Churches, Governors, Pastors, Paretns be not to be heard and obeyed?
Or whether all these be infallible. I wonder you will thrust upon us so often,
these worn-out Objections, without taking notice of their Answers.

42. Your Argument from S. Austines first place, is a Fallacy, A dicto secundum
quid ad dictum simpliciter. If the whole Church practice any of these things, (
matters of order and decency, for such only there he speaks of,) to dispute
whether that ought to be done, is insolent madness. And from hence you infer,
If the whole Church practice any thing, to dispute whether it ought to be done,
is insolent madness. As if there were no difference between any thing, and any
of these things? Or, as if I might not esteem it pride and folly, to contradict
and disturb the Church for matter of order, pertaining to the time and place,
and other circumstances, of Gods worship; and yet account it neither pride nor
folly, to go about to reform some errors, which the Church has suffered to
come in, and to vitiate the very substance of Gods worship. It was a practice
of the whole Church in S. Austines time, and esteemed an Apostolic Tradition,
even by Saint Austin himself, That the Eucharist should be administered to
Infants: Tell me, Sir, I beseech you; Had it been insolent madness to dispute
against this practice, or had it not? If it had, how insolent and mad are you,
that have not only disputed against it, but utterly abolished it? If it had
not, then, as I say, you must understand Saint Austines words, not simply of
all things; but (as indeed he himself restrained them) of these things, of
matter of Order, Decency, and Uniformity.

43. In the next place, you tell us out of him, That that which has been
always kept, is most rightly esteemed to come from the Apostles: Very right,
and what then? Therefore the Church cannot err in defining of Controversies.
Sir, I beseech you, when you write again, do us the favor to write nothing but
Syllogisms: for I find it still an extreme trouble to find out the concealed
Propositions, which are to connect the parts of your Enthymems. As now for
example, I profess unto you, I am at my wits end, and have done my best
endeavor, to find some glue, or sodder, or cement, or chain, or thread, or any
thing to tie this antecedent and this consequent together, and at length am
enforced to give it over, and cannot do it.

44. But the Doctrines; That Infants are to be baptized, and, those that are
baptized by Heretics, are not to re^ baptized, are neither of them to be
proved by Scripture: And yet according to S. Austine they are true Doctrines,
and we may be certain of them upon the Authority of the Church, which we could
not be, unless the Church were Infallible; therefore the Church is infallible.
I answer* that there is no repugnance but we may be certain enough, of the
Universal Traditions of the ancient Church; such, as in S. Austins account,
these were which here are spoken of, and yet not be certain enough, of the
definitions of the present Church. Unless you can show (which I am sure you can
never do) that the Infallibility of the present Church, was always a Tradition
of the Ancient Church. Now your main business is to prove the present Church
infallible, not so much in consigning ancient Tradition, as in defining
emergent Controversies* Again, it follows not, because the Churches Authority
is warrant enough for us to believe some Doctrine, touching which the Scripture
is silent; therefore it is Warrant enough to believe these, to which the
Scripture seems repugnant. Now the Doctrines, which S. Austin received upon the
Churches Authority, were of the first sort; the Doctrines for which we deny
your Churches Infallibility, are of the second. And therefore though the
Churches Authority might be strong enough to bear the weight which S. Austin
laid upon it, yet happily it may not be strong enough, to bear that which you lay
upon it. Though it may support some Doctrines without Scripture, yet surely not
against it. And last of all, to deal ingenuously with You and the World, I am
not such an Idolater of S. Austin, as to think a thing proved sufficiently
because he says it, not that all his sentences are Oracles; and particularly in
this thing, that, whatsoever was practiced or held by the Universal Church of
his time, must needs have come from the Apostles. Though, considering the
neerness of his time to the Apostles, I think it a good probable way, and
therefore am apt enough to follow it, when I see no reason to the contrary.
Yet, I profess, I must have better satisfaction, before I can induce my my self
to hold it certain and infallible. And this, not because Popery would come in
at this door, as some have vainly feared, but because by the Church Universal
of some time, and the Church Universal of other times, I see plain
contradictions held and practiced. Both which could not come from the Apostles;
for then the Apostles had been teachers of falsehood. And therefore the belief
or practice of the present Universal Church, can be no infallible proof, that
the Doctrine so believed, or the Custom so practiced, came from the Apostles. I
instance in the Doctrine of the Millenaries, and the Eucharists necessity for
Infants: both which Doctrines have been taught by the consent of the eminent
Fathers of some Ages, without any opposition from any of their Contemporaries:
and were delivered by them, not as Doctors, but as Witnesses, not as their own
opinions, but as Apostolic Traditions. And therefore measuring the Doctrine of
the Church by all the Rules which Cardinal Perron gives us for that purpose,
both these Doctrins must be acknowledged to have been the Doctrins of the
ancient Church of some Age or Ages; And that the contrary Doctrines were
Catholic at some other time, I believe you will not think it needful for me
to prove. So that either I must say, the Apostles were Fountains of
contradictious Doctrines, or that being the Universal Doctrine of the present
Church, is no sufficient proof that it came originally from the Apostles.
Besides, who can warrant us, that the Universal Traditions of the Church were
all Apostolical? seeing in that famous place for Traditions, in Tertullian, De
Corona Militis. c. 3. and 4. Where having recounted sundry unwritten Traditions
then observed by Christians, many whereof, by the way, (notwithstanding the
Council of Trents profession, To receive them and the written Word with like
affection of Piety) are now rejected and neglected by the Church of Rome: For
example, Immersion in Baptism, Tasting a mixture of milk and honey presently
after; Abstaining from Baths for a week after; Accounting it an impi^ty to
pray, kneeling on the Lord's Day, or between Easter and Pentecost: I say,
having reckoned up these and other Traditions in Chap 3. He adds another in the
4. of the Veiling of Women; And then adds, Since I find no law for this, it
follows, that Tradition must have given this observation to custom, which shall
gain in time, Apostolic Authority by the interpretation of the reason of it.
By these examples therefore it is declared, That the observing of unwritten
Tradition, being confirmed by custom, may be defended. The perseverance of the
observation, being a good testimony of the goodness of the Tradition. Now
Custom even in civil affairs where a Law is wanting, passes for a Law. Neither
is it material, on which it is grounded, Scripture or reason; seeing reason is
commendation enough for a Law. Moreover, if Law be grounded on reason, all that
must be Law, which is so grounded -- A quocunque productum -- Whosoever is the
producer of it. Do ye think it is not lawful, Omni fideli, for every faithful
man to conceive and constitute? Provided he constitute only what is not
repugnant to Gods will, what is conducible for discipline, and available to
salvation? seeing the Lord says, Why even of our selves judge ye not what is
right? And a little after, This reason now demand, saving the respect of the
Tradition -- A quocunque Traditore censetur, nec Authorem respiciens sed
Authoritatem: From whatsoever Tradition it comes, neither regard the Author but
the Authority.
Quicunque Traditor, Any Author whatsoever is Founder good enough for them. And
who can secure us that Humane inventions, and such as came a quocunque
Traditore might not in a short time, gain the reputation of Apostolic! Seeing
the Direction, then was, Hier.
Pracepta majorum Apostolicas Traditiones quisque existimat.

45. No less, you say, is S. Chrysostom, for the infallible Traditions of the
Church. But you were to prove the Church infallible, not in her Traditions
(which we willingly grant, if they be as Universal as the Tradition of the
undoubted Books of Scripture is, to be as infallible as the Scripture is; for
neither does being written make the Word of God, the more infallible, nor being
unwritten make it the less infallible:) Not therefore in her Universal
Traditions, were you to prove the Church infallible, but in all her Decrees and
definitions of Controversies. To this Point when you speak, you shall have an
Answer; but hitherto you do but wander.

46. But let us see what S. Chrysostom says, They (the Apostles) delivered not
all things in writing, (who denies it?) but many things also without writing
(who doubts of it?) and these also are worthy of belief. Yes, if we knew what
they were. But many things are worthy of belief, which are not necessary to be
believed: As, that Julius Caesar was Emperor of Rome is a thing worthy of
belief, being so well testified as it is, but yet it is not necessary to be
believed; a man may be saved without it. Those many works which our Savior did
(which S. John supposes, would not have been contained in a world of Books) if
they had been written, or if God by some other means had preserved the
knowledge of them, had been as worthy to be believed, and as necessary, as
those that are written. But to show you how much more a faithful keeper Records
are than Report, those few that were written are preserved and believed; those
infinitely more that were not written are all lost and vanished out of the
memory of men. And seeing God in his Providence has not thought fit to
preserve the memory of them, he has freed us from the Obligation of believing
them: for every Obligation cease, when it becomes impossible. Who can doubt
but the Primitive Christians, to whom the Epistles of the Apostles were
written, either of themselves understood, or were instructed by the Apostles,
touching the sense of the obscure places of them? These Traditive
Interpretations, had they been written and dispersed, as the Scriptures were,
had without question been preserved, as the Scriptures are. But to show how
excellent a Keeper of the Tradition, the Church of Rome has been, or even the
Catholic Church, for want of writing they are all lost, nay were all lost,
within a few ages after Christ. So that if we consult the Ancient Interpreters,
we shall hardly find any two of them agree about the sense of any one of them.
Cardinal Perron, in his Discourse of Traditions, having alleged this place for
them, Hold the Traditions, etc. tells us, We must not answer that S. Paul
speaks here, only of such Traditions, which (though not in this Epist. to the
These. yet) were afterward written, and in other Books of Scripture: because
it is upon occasion of Tradition (touching the cause of the hinderance of the
coming of Antichrist) which was never written, that he lays this injunction
upon them, to hold the Traditions. Well, let us grant this Argument good, and
concluding; and that the Church of the Thessalonians, or the Catholic Church
(for what S. Paul writ to one Church, he writ to all) were to hold some
unwritten Traditions, and among the rest, what was the cause of the hinderance
of the coming of Antichrist. But what if they did not perform their duty in
this point, but suffered this Tradition to be lost out of the memory of the
Church? Shall we not conclude, that seeing God would not suffer any thing
necessary to Salvation to be lost, and he has suffered this Tradition to be
lost, therefore the knowledge or belief of it, though it were a profitable
thing, yet it was not necessary? I hope you will not challenge such Authority
over us, as to oblige us to impossibilities, to do that which you cannot do
your selves. It is therefore requisite that you make this command possible to
be obeyed, before you require obedience unto it. Are you able then to instruct
us so well, as to be fit to say unto us, Now ye know what witholdeth? Or, do
you your selves know that ye may instruct us? Can ye, or dare you say, this or
this was this hinderance which S. Paul here meant, and all men under pain of
damnation are to believe it? Or if you cannot, (as I am certain you cannot) go
then, and vaunt your Church, for the only Watchful, Faithful, Infallible Keeper
of the Apostles Traditions; when here this very Tradition, which here in
particular was deposited with the Thessalonians and the Primitive Church, you
have utterly lost it, so that there is no footstep or print of it remaining,
which with Divine Faith we may rely upon. Blessed therefore be the goodness of
God, who, seeing that what was not written, was in such danger to be lost, took
order, that what was necessary should be written! Saint Chrysostom's counsel
therefore, of accounting the Churches Traditions worthy of belief, we are
willing to obey: And, if you can of any thing make it appear, that it is
Tradition, we will seek no farther. But this we say withal, that we are
persuaded you cannot make this appear in any thing, but only the Canon of
Scripture; and that there is nothing now extant, and to be known by us, which
can put in so good plea, to be the unwritten Word of God, as the unquestioned
Books of Canonical Scripture, to be the written Word of God.

47. You conclude this Paragraph with a sentence of S. Austins, who says, The
Church does not approve, nor dissemble, nor do, these things which are against
Faith or good life: and from hence you conclude, That it never has done so,
nor ever can do so. But though the argument hold in Logic a non posse, ad non
esse, yet I never heard, that it would hold back, a non esse, ad non posse. The
Church cannot do this, therefore it does not, follows with good consequence:
but The Church does not this, therefore it shall never do it, nor can never do
it, this, I believe, will hardly follow. In the Epistle next before to the same
Januarius, writing of the same matter, he has these words, It remains, that
the thing you enquire of, must be of that third kind of things, which are
different in diverse places. Let every one therefore do, that which he finds
done in the Church to which he comes; for none of them is against Faith or good
manners. And why do you not infer from hence, that no particular Church can
bring up any Custom that is against Faith or good manners? Certainly this
Consequence has as good reason for it as the former. If a man say of the
Church of England, (what S. Austin of the Church) that she neither approves,
nor dissembles, nor does any thing against Faith or good manners, would you
collect presently, that this man did either make or think the Church of England
infallible? Furthermore, it is observable out of this, and the former Epistle,
that this Church, which did not (as S. Austin, according to you, thought)
approve or dissemble, or do any thing against faith or good life, did yet
tolerate and dissemble vain superstitions, and humane presumptions, and suffer
all places to be full of them, and to be exacted, as, nay more severely than,
the Commandments of God himself. This Saint Austin himself professes in this
very Epistle. This (says he) I do infinitely grieve at, that many most wholesome
precepts of the divine Scripture, are little regarded; and in the mean time all
is so full of so many presumptions, that he is more grievously found fault
with, who during his octaves, touches the earth with his naked fooot, then he
that shall bury his soul in drunkenness. Of these he says, That they were
neither contained in Scripture, decreed by Councels, nor corroborated by the
Custom of the Universal Church. And though not against Faith, yet unprofitable
burdens of Christian liberty, which made the condition of the Jews more
tolerable then that of Christians. And therefore he professes of them,
Approbare non possum, I cannot approve them. And, Ubi facultas tribuitur,
resecanda existimo; I think they are to be cut off, wheresoever we have power.
Yet so deeply were they rooted, and spread so far, through the indiscreet
devotion of the people, always more prone to superstition than true piety, and
through the connivence of the Governors, who should have strangled them at
their birth, that himself, though he grieved at them, and could not allow them,
yet for fear of offense he durst not speak against them, Multa hujusmodi,
propter nonnullarum vel sanctarum vel turbulentarum personarum scandala
devitanda, liberius improbare non audeo. Many of these things for fear of
scandalizing many holy persons, or provoking those that are turbulent, I dare
not freely disallow. Nay, the Catholic Church it self, did see and dissemble,
and tolerate them; for these are the things of which he presently says after,
The Church of God (and you will have him speak of the true Catholic Church)
placed between Chaff and Tares, tolerates many things. Which was directly
against the command of the holy Spirit, given the Church by S. Paul, To stand
fast in that liberty wherewith Christ has made her free, and not to suffer her
self to be brought in bondage to these servile burdens. Our Savior tells the
Scribes and Pharisees, That in vain they worshipped God, teaching for Doctrines
men's Commandments: For that laying aside the Commandments of God, they held the
Traditions of men, as the washing of pots, and cups, and many other such like
things. Certainly, that which S. Austin complains of, as the general fault of
Christians of his time, was parallel to this: Multa (says he) quae in divinis
libris saluberrime praecepta sunt, minus curantur; This, I suppose, I may very
well render in our Savior's words, The Commandments of God are laid aside; And
then, Tam multis praesumptionibus sic pleana sunt omnia, All things, or all
places, are so full of so many presumptions, and those exacted with such
severity, nay with Tyranny, that he was more severly censured, who in the time
of his Octaves touched the earth with his naked feet, than he which drowned and
buried his soul in drink. Certainly, if this be not to teach for Doctrines men's
Commandments, I know not what is. And therefore these superstitious Christians
might be said to worship God in vain, as well as the Scribes and Pharisees. And
yet great variety of superstitions of this kind, were then already spread over
the Church, being different in diverse places. This is plain from these words of
S. Austin concerning them, Diversorum locorum diversis moribus innumerabiliter
variantur; and apparent, because the stream of them was grown so violent, that
he durst not oppose it, Liberius improbare non audeo, I dare not freely speak
against them. So that to say, the Catholic Church tolerated all this, and for
fear of offense, durst not abrogate or condemn it, is to say (if we judge
rightly of it) that the Church with silence and connivence generally tolerated
Christians to worship God in vain. Now how this tolerating of Universal
superstition in the Church, can consist with the assistance and direction of
Gods omnipotent Spirit to guard it from superstition, and with the
accomplishment of that pretended Prophecy of the Church, I have set Watchmen
upon thy walls, O Jerusalem, which shall never hold their peace day nor night;
Besides, how these Superstitions being thus nourished, cherished, and
strengthened by the practice of the most, and urged with great violence upon
others as the Commandments of God, and but fearfully opposed or contradicted by
any, might in time take such deep root, and spread their branches so far, as to
pass for Universal Customs of the Church, he that does not see, sees nothing.
Especially, considering the catching and contagious nature of this sin, and how
fast ill weeds spread, and how true and experimented that Rule is of the
Historian, Exempla non consistunt ubi incipiunt, sed quamlibet in tenuem
recepta tramitem latissime evagandi sibi faciunt potestatem. Nay, that some
such superstition had not already even in S. Austin's time, prevailed so far,
as to be Consuetudine universae Ecclesiae roboratum, Who can doubt that
considers, that the practice of Communicating Infants, had even then got the
credit and authority, not only of an universal Custom, but also of an
Apostolic Tradition.

48. But (you will say) notwithstanding all this, S. Austin here warrants us,
that the Church can never either approve, or dissemble, or practice any thing
against Faith or good life, and so long you may rest securely upon it. Yea, but
the same S. Austin tells us in the same place, That the Church may tolerate
humane presumptions, and vain superstitions, and those urged more severely than
the Commandments of God: And whether superstition be a sin or no, I appeal to
our Savior's words before cited, and to the consent of your Schoolmen.
Besides, if we consider it rightly, we shall find, that the Church is not truly
said only to tolerate these things, but rather, that a part, and far the
lesser, tolerated and dissembled them in silence, and a part and a far greater,
publicly avowed and practiced them, and urged them upon others with great
violence, and yet continued still a part of the Church. Now why the whole
Church might not continue the Church, and yet do so, as well as a part of the
Church might continue a part of it, and yet do so, I desire you to inform me.

49. But now after all this ado, what if S. Austin says not this which is
pretended of the Church, viz. That she neither approves, nor dissembles, nor
practices any thing against Faith or good life, but only of good men in the
Church? Certainly, though some Copies read as you would have it, yet you should
not have dissembled, that others read the place otherwise, viz. Eccclesia multa
tolerat; and tamen quae sunt contra Fidem and bonam vitam, nec bonus approbat,
etc. The Church tolerates many things, and yet what is against Faith or good
life, a good man will neither approve, nor dissemble, nor practice.

50. Ad. 17. That Abraham begat Isaac, is a point very far from being
Fundamental; and yet, I hope, you will grant, that Protestants believing
Scripture to be the Word of God, may be certain enough of the truth and
certainty of it. For what if they say that the Catholic Church, and much more
themselves may possibly err in some unfundamental points, is it therefore
consequent, they can be certain of none such? What if a wiser man than I may
mistake the sense of some obscure place of Aristotle, may I not therefore
without any arrogance or inconsequence, conceive my certain that I understand
him in some plain places, which carry their sense before them? And then for
Points Fundamental, to what purpose do you say, That we must first know what
they be, before we can be assured that we cannot err in understanding the
Scriptures; when we pretend not at all to any assurance that we cannot err, but
only to a sufficient certainty, that we do not err, but rightly understand
those things that are plain, whether Fundamental or not Fundamental: That God
is, and is a Rewarder of them that seek him: That there is no salvation but by
faith in Christ: That by Repentance from dead works, and Faith in Christ,
Remission of sins may be obtained: That there shall be a Resurrection of the
Body? These we conceive both true, because the Scripture says so, and Truths
Fundamental, because they are necessary parts of the Gospel, whereof our
Savior says Qui non crediderit, damnabitur. All which we either learn from
Scripture immediately, or learn of those that learn it of Scripture; so that
neither Learned nor Unlearned pretend to know these things independently of
Scripture. And therefore in imputing this to us, you cannot excuse your self
from having done us a palpable injury.

51. Ad. 18. And I urge you as mainly as you urge D. Potter and other
Protestants, that you tell us that all the Traditions, and all the Definitions
of the Church are Fundamental points, and we cannot wrest from you a list in
particular of all such Traditions and Definitions, without which, no man can
tell whether or no he err in points fundamental, and be capable of Salvation;
(For, I hope, erring in our fundamentals is no more exclusive of Salvation than
erring in yours.) And, which is most lamentable, instead of giving us such a
Catalogue, you also fall to wrangle among your selves about the making of it;
Some of you, as I have said above, holding some things to be matters of Faith,
which others deny to be so.

52. Ad. 19. I answer, That these differences between Protestants concerning
Errors damnable and not damnable, Truths fundamental and not-fundamental, may
be easily reconciled. For either the Error they speak of may be purely and
simply involuntary, or it may be in respect of the cause of it voluntary. If
the cause of it be some voluntary and avoidable fault, the Error is it self
sinful, and consequently in its own nature damnable; As, if by negligence in
seeking the Truth, by unwillingness to find it, by pride, by obstinacy, by
desiring that Religion should be true which suits best with my ends, by fear of
men's ill opinion, or any other wordly fear, or any other wordly hope, I betray
my self to any error contrary to any divine revealed Truth, that Error may be
justly styled a sin, and consequently of it self to such a one damnable. But if
I be guilty of none of these faults, but be desirous to know the Truth, and
diligent in seeking it, and advise not at all with flesh and blood about the
choice of my opinions, but only with God, and that Reason that he has given
me, if I be thus qualified, and yet through humane infirmity fall into error,
that error cannot be damnable. Again, the party erring may be conceived either
to die with contrition for all his sins known and unknown, or without it; If he
die without it, this error, in it self damnable, will be likewise so unto him:
If he die with contrition (as his error can be no impediment but he may) his
error though in it self damnable, to him, according to your doctrine, will not
prove so. And therefore some of those Authors whom you quote, speaking of
Errors whereunto men were betrayed, or wherein they were kept by their Fault,
or Vice, or Passion, (as for the most part men are:) Others speaking of them,
as errors simply and purely involuntary, and the effects of humane infirmity:
some, as they were retracted by Contrition (to use your own phrase); others, as
they were not; no marvel though they have past upon them, some a heavier, and
some a milder, some an absolving, and some a condemning sentence. The least of
all these errors, which here you mention, having malice enough too frequently
mixed with it, to sink a man deep enough into hell: and the greatest of them
all, being according to your Principles, either no fault at all, or very
Venial, where there is no malice of the will conjoined with it. And if it be,
yet, as the most malignant poison will not poison him that receives with it a
more powerful Antidote: so, I am confident, your own Doctrine will force you to
confess, that whosoever dies with Faith in Christ, and Contrition for all sins
known and unknown (in which heap all his sinful errors must be comprised) can
no more be hurt by any the most malignant and pestilent error, than S. Paul by
the Viper which he shook off into the fire. Now touching the necessity of
Repentance from dead works, and Faith in Christ Jesus the Son of God, and
Savior of the World, they all agree; and therefore you cannot deny, but they
agree about all that is simply necessary. Moreover, though, if they should go
about to choose out of Scripture all these Propositions and Doctrines which
integrate and make up the body of Christian Religion, peradventure there would
not be so an exact agreement amongst them, as some say there was between the
70. Interpreters, in translating the Old Testament; yet thus far without
controversy they do all agree, that in the Bible all these things are
contained, and therefore, that whosoever does truly and sincerely believe the
Scripture, must of necessity, either in hypothesi, or at least in thesi, either
formally, or at least virtually, either explicitly, or at least implicitly,
either in Act, or at least in preparation of mind, believe all things
Fundamental: It being not-Fundamental, nor required of Almighty God, to believe
the true sense of Scripture in all places, but only that we should endeavor to
do so, and be prepared in mind to do so, whenever it shall be sufficiently
propounded to us. Suppose a man in some disease were prescribed a medicine
consisting of twenty ingredients, and he, advising with Physicians should find
them differing in opinion about it, some of them telling him, that all the
ingredients were absolutely necessary; some, that only some of them were
necessary, the rest only profitable, and requisite ad melius esse; lastly,
some, that some only were necessary, some profitable, and the rest superfluous,
yet not hurtful; yet all with one accord agreeing in this, That the whole
receipt had in it all things necessary for the recovery of his health, and
that, if he made use of it, he should infallibly find it successful: what wise
man would not think they agreed sufficiently for his direction to the recovery
of his health? Just so, these Protestant Doctors, with whose discords you make
such Tragedies, agreeing in Thesi thus far, That the Scripture evidently
conteins all things necessary to Salvation, both for matter of Faith, and of
Practice, and that whosoever believes it, and endeavors to find the true sense
of it, and to conform his life unto it, shall certainly perform all things
necessary to Salvation, and undoubtedly be saved; agreeing, I say thus far,
What matters it for the direction of men to Salvation, though they differ in
opinion, touching what points are absolutely necessary, and what not? What
Errors absolutely repugnant to Salvation, and what not? Especially considering
that although they differ about the Question of the necessity of these Truths,
yet for the most part they agree in this, that Truths they are, and profitable
at least, though not simply necessary. And though they differ in the Question,
Whether the contrary Errors be destructive of Salvation, or no: yet in this
they consent, that Errors they are, and hurtful to Religion, though not
destructive of Salvation. Now that which God requires of us, is this, That we
should believe the Doctrins of the Gospel to be Truths, not all necessary
Truths, for all are not so; and consequently; the repugnant Errors to be
falsehoods: yet not all such falsehoods, as unavoidably draw with them damnation
upon all that hold them; for all do not so.

53. Yea but you say, It is very requisite we should agree upon a particular
Catalogue of Fundamental points; for without such a Catalogue, no man can be
assured whether or no, he has Faith sufficient to Salvation. This I utterly
deny as a thing evidently false, and I wonder you should content your self
magisterially to say so, without offering any proof of it. I might much more
justly think it enough barely to deny it, without refutation, but I will not.
Thus therefore I argue against it.

Without being able to make a Catalogue of Fundamentals, I may be assured of
the Truth of this Assertion, if it be true, That the Scripture contains all
necessary points of Faith, and know that I believe explicitly all that is
expressed in Scripture, and implicitly all that is contained in them: Now he
that believes all this, must of necessity believe all things necessary;
Therefore without being able to make a Catalogue of Fundamentals, I may be
assured that I believe all things necessary, and consequently that my faith is
sufficient.

I said, of the truth of this Assertion, if it be true: Because I will not here
enter into the Question of the truth of it, it being sufficient for my present
purpose, that it may be true, and may be believed without any dependence upon a
Catalogue of Fundamentals. And therefore, if this be all your reason, to demand
a particular Catalogue of Fundamentals, we cannot but think your demand
unreasonable. Especially having your self expressed the cause of the difficulty
of it, and that is, Because Scripture does deliver Divine Truths, but seldom
qualifies them, or declares whether they be or be not absolutely necessary to
salvation. Yet not so seldom, but that out of it I could give you an abstract
of the Essential parts of Christianity, if it were necessary, but I have showed
it not so, by confuting your reason, pretended for the necessity of it, and at
this time I have no leisure to do you courtesies that are so troublesome to my
self. Yet thus much I will promise, that when you deliver a particular
Catalogue of your Church-Proposals with one hand, you shall receive a
particular Catalogue of what I conceive Fundamental, with the other. For as
yet, I see no such fair proceeding as you talk of, nor any performance on your
own part of that which so clamorously you require on ours. For, as for the
Catalogue which here you have given us, in saying, You are obliged under pain
of damnation to believe whatsoever the Catholic visible Church of Christ
proposes as revealed by Almighty God, it is like a covey of one Partridge, or
a flock of one Sheep, or a Fleet composed of one Ship, or an Army of one man.
The Author of Charity mistaken, demands a particular Catalogue of Fundamental
points; And We (say you) again and again demand such a Catalogue. And surely,
If this one Proposition, which here you think to stop our mouths with, be a
Catalogue, yet at least such a Catalogue it is not, and therefore as yet you
have not performed what you require. For, if to set down such a Proposition,
wherein are comprised all points taught by us to be necessary to salvation,
will serve you instead of a Catalogue, you shall have Catalogues enough. As, we
are obliged to believe all under pain of damnation which God commands us to
believe. There Is one Catalogue. We are obliged under Pain of damnation, to
believe all, whereof we may be sufficiently assured, that Christ taught it his
Apostles, his Apostles the Church. There Is another. We are obliged under pain
of damnation to believe Gods Word, and all contained in it to be true. There Is
a third. If these generalities will not satisfy you, but you will be
importuning us to tell you in particular, what those Doctrins are which Christ
taught his Apostles, and his Apostles the Church, what points are contained in
Gods Word; Then I beseech you do us reason, and give us a particular and exact
Inventory of all your Church-proposals, without leaving out, or adding any,
such a one which all the Doctors of your Church will subscribe to, and if you
receive not then a Catalogue of Fundamentals, I for my part will give you leave
to proclaim us Bankrupts.

54. Besides this deceitful generality of your Catalogue (as you call it)
another main fault we find with it, that it is extremely ambiguous; and
therefore to draw you out of the Clouds, give me leave to propose some
Questions to you concerning it. I would know therefore, whether by Believing,
you mean explicitly or implicitly? If you mean implicitly, I would know,
Whether your Churches Infallibility be under pain of damnation to be believed
explicitly, or no? Whether any other point or points besides this, be under
the same penalty, to be believed explicitly, or no? and if any, what they be?
I would know what you esteem the Proposals of the Catholic visible Church? In
particular, whether the Decree of the Pope ex Cathedra, that is, with an intent
to oblige all Christians by it, be a sufficient and an obliging Proposal?
Whether men without danger of Damnation may examine such a Decree, and, if they
think they have just cause, refuse to obey it? Whether the Decree of a Council,
without the Pope's Confirmation, be such an obliging Proposal, or no? Whether
it be so in case there be no Pope, or in case it be doubtful who is Pope?
Whether the Decree of a general Council confirmed by the Pope, be such a
Proposal, and whether he be an Heretic that thinks otherwise? Whether the
Decree of a particular Council confirmed by the Pope, be such a Proposal?
Whether the General uncondemned practice of the Church for some Ages be such a
sufficient Proposition? Whether the consent of the most eminent Fathers of any
Age, agreeing in the affirmation of any Doctrine, not contradicted by any of
their Contemporaries, be a sufficient Proposition? Whether the Fathers
testifying such or such a Doctrine, or practice to be Tradition, or to be the
Doctrine or practice of the Church, be a sufficient assurance that it is so?
Whether we be bound under pain of damnation, to believe every Text of the
vulgar Bible, now authorized by the Roman Church, to be the true Translation of
the Originals of the Prophets, and Evangelists, and Apostles, without any the
least alteration? Whether they that lived when the Bible of Sixtus was set
forth, were bound under pain of damnation to believe the same of that? And if
not of that, of what Bible they were bound to believe it? Whether the Catholic
visible Church be always that Society of Christians which adheres to the
Bishop of Rome? Whether every Christian, that has ability and opportunity, be
not bound to endeavor to know explicitly the Proposals of the Church? Whether
Implicit Faith in the Churches Veracity, will not save him that actually and
explicitly disbelieves some Doctrine of the Church, not knowing it to be so;
and actually believes some damnable Heresy, as that God has the shape of a
man? Whether an ignorant man be bound to believe any point to be decreed by the
Church, when his Priest or ghostly Father assures him it is so? Whether his
ghostly Father may not err in telling him so, and whether any man can be
obliged under pain of damnation, to believe an Error? Whether he be bound to
believe such a thing defined, when a number of Priests, perhaps ten or twenty
tell him it is so? And what assurance he can have, that they neither err, nor
deceive him, in this matter? Why Implicit Faith in Christ or the Scriptures
should not suffice for a man's Salvation as well as implicit faith in the
Church? Whether when you say, Whatsoever the Church proposes, you mean all
that ever she proposed, or that only which she now proposes; and whether she
now proposes all that ever she did propose? Whether all the Books of Canonical
Scripture were sufficiently declared to the Church to be so, and proposed as
such by the Apostles? And if not, from whom the Church had this Declaration
afterward? If so, whether all men ever since the Apostles time, were bound
under pain of damnation to believe the Epistle of S. James, and the Epistle to
the Hebrews, to be Canonical; at least, not to disbelieve it, and believe the
contrary? Lastly, why it is not sufficient for any man's Salvation to use the
best means he can to inform his conscience, and to follow the direction of it?
To all these demands when you have given fair and ingenuous Answers, you shall
hear farther from me.

55. Ad. 20. At the first entrance into this Paragraph, From our own Doctrine,
That the Church cannot err in Points necessary, it is concluded, if we are
wise, we must forsake it in nothing, lest we should forsake it in something
necessary. To which I answer, First, that the supposition, as you understand
it, is falsely imposed upon us, and as we understand it will do you no service.
For when we say, that there shall be a Church always, some where or other,
unerring in Fundamentals, our meaning is but this, that there shall be always
a Church, to the very being whereof it is repugnant that it should err in
Fundamentals; for if it should do so, it would want the very Essence of a
Church, and therefore cease to be a Church. But we never annexed this
privilege to any one Church of any one Denomination, as the Greek or the Roman
Church: which if we had done, and set up some settled certain Society of
Christians, distinguishable from all others by adhering to such a Bishop for
our Guide in Fundamentals, then indeed, and then only, might you with some
color, though with no certainty, have concluded that we could not, in wisdom,
forsake this Church in any point, for fear of forsaking it in a necessary
point. But now that we say not this of any one determinate Church, which alone
can perform the office of Guide or Director, but indefinitely of the Church,
meaning no more but this, That there shall be always in some place or other,
some Church that errs not in Fundamentals; will you conclude from hence, that
we cannot in wisdom forsake this or that, the Roman or the Greek Church, for
fear of erring in Fundamentals?

56. Yea, but you may say, (for I will make the best I can of all your
Arguments) That this Church thus unerring in Fundamentals, when Luther arose,
was by our confession the Roman; and therefore we ought not in wisdom to have
departed from it in any thing. I answer, First, that we confess no such thing,
that the Church of Rome was then this Church, but only a Part of it, and that
the most corrupted and most incorrigible. Secondly, that if by adhering to that
Church, we could have been thus far secured, this Argument had some show of
reason. But seeing we are not warranted thus much by any privilege of that
Church, that She cannot err fundamentally, but only from Scripture, which
assures us that she does err very haynously, we collect our hope, that the
Truths she retains and the practice of them, may prove an Antidote to her
against the Errors which she maintains in such Persons, as in simplicity of
heart follow this Absalom; we should then do against the light of our
conscience, and so sin damnably if we should not abandon the profession of her
Errors though not Fundamental. Neither can we thus conclude, We may safely hold
with the Church of Rome in all her Points, for she cannot err damnably; For
this is false, she may, though perhaps she does not: But rather thus; These
Points of Christianity, which have in them the nature of Antidotes against the
poison of all sins and errors, the Church of Rome, though otherwise much
corrupted, still retains; therefore we hope she errs not Fundamentally, but
still remains a Part of the Church. But this can be no warrant to us to think
with her in all things: seeing the very same Scripture which puts us in hope
she errs not Fundamentally, assures us that in many things, and those of great
moment, she errs very grievously. And these Errors though to them that believe
them, we hope they will not be pernicious, yet the professing of them against
conscience, could not but bring to us certain Damnation. As for the fear of
departing from some Fundamental truths withal, while we depart from her
errors, Happily it might work upon us, if adhearing to her might secure us from
it, and if nothing else could: But both these are false. For first, adhering to
her in all things cannot secure us from erring in Fundamentals: Because though
de facto we hope she does not err, yet we know no privileges she has but she
may err in them her self: and therefore we had need have better security
hereof than her bare Authority. Then secondly, without dependence on her at
all, we may be secured that we do not err Fundamentally; I mean by believing
all things plainly set down in Scripture, wherein all necessary, and most things
profitable, are plainly delivered. Suppose I were traveling to London, and
knew two ways thither, the one very safe and convenient, the other very
inconvenient, and dangerous, but yet a way to London: and that I overtook a
Passenger on the way, who himself believed, and would fain persuade me, there
was no other way but the worse, and would persuade me to accompany him in it,
because I confessed his way, though very inconvenient, and very dangerous, yet
a way; so that going that way we might come to our journies end by the consent
of both parties: but he believed my way to be none at all; and therefore I
might justly fear, lest out of a desire of leaving the worst way, I left the
true and the only way: If now I should not be more secure upon my own
knowledge, than frighted by this fallacy, would you not beg me for a fool? Just
so might you think of us, if we would be frighted out of our own knowledge by
this bugbear. For the only and the main reason why we believe you not to err
in Fundamentals, is your holding the Doctrins of Faith in Christ and
Repentance: which knowing we hold as well as you, notwithstanding our departure
from you, we must needs know that we do not err in Fundamentals, as well as we
know that you in some sort do not err in Fundamentals, and therefore cannot
possibly fear the contrary. Yet let us be more liberal to you, and grant that
which can never be proved, that God had said in plain terms, The Church of Rome
shall never destroy the Foundation, but withal had said, that it might and
would lay much hay and stubble upon it; That you should never hold any Error
destructive of salvation, but yet many that were prejudicial to Edification: I
demand, Might we have dispensed with our selves in the believing and professing
these Errors in regard of the smalness of them? Or, had it not been a damnable
sin to do so, though the Errors in themselves were not damnable? Had we not had
as plain direction to depart from you in some things profitable, as to adhere
to you in things necessary? In the beginning of your Book, when it was for your
purpose to have it so, the greatness or smalness of the matter was not
considerable, the Evidence of the Revelation was all in all. But here we must
err with you in small things, for fear of losing your direction in greater:
and for fear of departing too far from you, not go from you at all, even where
we see plainly that you have departed from the Truth.

57. Beyond all this, I say, that this which you say in wisdom we are to do, is
not only unlawful, but if we will proceed according to reason, impossible. I
mean to adhere to you in all things, having no other ground for it, but because
you are (as we will now suppose) infallible in some things, that is, in
Fundamentals. For whether by skill in Architecture a large structure may be
supported by a narrow foundation, I know not; but sure I am, in reason no
Conclusion can be larger than the Principles on which it is founded. And
therefore if I consider what I do, and be persuaded that your Infallibility is
but limited, and particular, and partial, my adherence upon this ground cannot
possibly be absolute, and Universal, and Total. I am confident, that should I
meet with such a man amongst you (as I am well assured there be many) that
would grant your Church infallible only in Fundamentals, which what they are he
knows not, and therefore upon this only reason adheres to you in all things; I
say that I am confident, that it may be demonstrated, that such a man adheres
to you, with a fiducial and certain assent in nothing. To make this clear
(because at the first hearing it may seem strange) give me leave, good Sir, to
suppose you the man, and to propose to you a few questions, and to give for you
such answers to them, as upon this ground you must of necessity give, were you
present with me. First, supposing you hold your Church infallible in
Fundamentals, obnoxious to error in other things, and that you know not what
Points are Fundamental, I demand, C. Why do you believe the Doctrine of
Transubstantiation? K. Because the Church has taught it, which is infallible.
C. What? Infallible in all things, or only in Fundamentals? K. In Fundamentals
only. C. Then in other pointsshe may err? K. She may. C. And do you know what
Points are Fundamental, what not? K. No, and therefore I believe her in all
things, lest I should disbelieve her in Fundamentals. C. How know you then,
whether this be a Fundamental Point or no? K. I know not. C. It may be then
(for ought you know) an unfundamental Point? K. Yes, it may be so. C. And in
these, you said, the Church may err? K. Yes, I did so. C. Then possibly it may
err in this? K. It may do so. C. Then what certainty have you that it does not
err in it? K. None at all, but upon this supposition, that this is a
Fundamental. C. And this supposition you are uncertain of? K. Yes, I told you
so before. C. And therefore you can have no certainty of that which depends
upon this uncertainty, saving only a suppositive certainty, if it be a
Fundamental truth; which is in plain English to say, you are certain it is
true, if it be both true and necessary. Verily Sir, if you have no better Faith
than this, you are no Catholic. K. Good words I pray! I am so, and God
willing will be so. C. You mean in outward profession and practice, but in
belief you are not, no more than a Protestant is a Catholic. For every
Protestant yields such a kind of assent to all the proposals of the Church,
for surely they believe them true, if they be Fundamental truths. And therefore
you must either believe the Church Infallible in all her proposals, be they
foundations, or be they superstructions; or you must believe all Fundamental
which she proposes, or else you are no Catholic. K. But I have been taught,
that seeing I believed the Church infallible in points necessary, in wisdom I
was to believe her in every thing. C. That was a pretty plausible inducement,
to bring you hither; but now you are here, you must go farther, and believe her
infallible in all things, or else you were as good go back again, which will be
a great disparagement to you, and draw upon you both the bitter and implacable
hatred of our Part, and even, with your own, the imputation of rashness and
levity. You see, I hope by this time, that though a man did believe your Church
infallible in Fundamentals, yet he has no reason to do you the courtesy of
believing all her Proposals; nay, if he be ignorant what these Fundamentals
are, he has no certain ground to believe her, upon her Authority, in any
thing. And whereas you say, it can be no imprudence, to err with the Church; I
say, it may be very great imprudence, if the question be, Whether we should
err with the present Church, or hold true with God Almighty.

58. But we are, under pain of damnation, to believe and obey h^^ in greater
things, and therefore cannot in wisdom suspect her credit in m^^^^rs of less
moment. Answ. I have told you already, that this is falsely to suppose, that we
grant that in some certain points, some certain Church is infallibly assisted,
and under pain of damnation to be obeyed: whereas all that we say is this, that
in some place or other, some Church there shall be, which shall retain all
necessary Truths. Yet if your supposition were true, I would not grant your
Conclusion, but with this Exception, unless the matter were past suspicion, and
apparently certain, that in these things I cannot believe God, and believe the
Church. For then I hope you will grant, that be the thing of never so little
moment, were it, for instance, but that S. Paul left his cloak at Troas, yet I
were not to gratify the Church so far, as for her sake to disbelieve what God
himself has revealed.

59 Whereas you say, Since we are undoubtedly obliged to believe her in
Fundamentals, and cannot know precisely, what those Fundamentals be, we cannot
without hazard of our souls leave her in any Point; I answer, First, that this
argument proceeds upon the same false ground with the former. And then, that I
have told you formerly, that you fear where no fear is; And though we know not
precisely, just how much is Fundamental, yet we know, that the Scripture
contains all Fundamentals, and more too; and therefore that in believing that,
we believe all Fundamentals and more too. And consequently, in departing from
you, can be in no danger of departing from that which may prove a Fundamental
Truth: For we are well assured that certain Errors can never prove Fundamental
Truths.

60. Whereas you add, That that visible Church which cannot err in
Fundamentals, propounds all her definitions without distinction to be believed
under Anathema's: Answ. Again you beg the question, supposing untruly, that
there is any that visible Church. I mean any Visible Church of one
Denomination, which cannot err in Points Fundamental. Secondly, proposing
definitions to be believed under Anathema's, is no good Argument, that the
Propounders conceive themselves infallible; but only that they conceive the
Doctrine they condemn is evidently damnable. A p^ain proof hereof is this, that
particular Councils, nay, particular Men, have been very liberal of their
Anathema's, which yet were never conceived infallible, either by others or
themselves. If any man should now deny Christ to be the Savior of the world,
or deny the Resurrection, I should make no great scruple of Anathematizing his
doctrine, and yet am very far from dreaming of infallibility.

61. And for the Visible Churches holding it a Point necessary to Salvation,
that we believe she cannot err, I know no such tenet; unless by the Church,
you mean the Roman Church, which you have as much reason to do, as that petty
King in Africa has, to think himself King of all the world. And therefore your
telling us, If she speak true, what danger is it, not to believe her? and if
false, that it is not dangerous to believe her, is somewhat like your Pope's
setting your Lawyers to dispute whether Constantine's Donation were valid or
no; whereas the matter of fact was the far greater question, whether there were
any such Donation, or rather when without question there was none such. That
you may not seem to delude us in like manner, make it appear that the visible
Church does hold so as you pretend: and then whether it be true or false, we
will consider afterward. But for the present, with this invisible Tenet of the
visible Church, we will trouble our selves no farther.

62. The effect of the next Argument is this, I cannot without grievous sin
disobey the Church, unless I know she commands those things which are not in
her power to command: and how far this power extends, none can better inform me
then the Church. Therefore I am to obey, so far as the Church requires my
obedience. I answer: First, that neither has the Catholic Church, but only a
corrupt part of it, declared her self, nor required our obedience, in the
Points contested among us. This therefore is falsely, and vainly supposed here
by you, being one of the greatest Questions amongst us. Then secondly, that God
can better inform us, what are the limits of the Churches power, than the
Church her self, that is, than the Roman Clergy, who being men subject to the
same passions with other men, why they should be thought the best Judges in
their own cause, I do not well understand! But yet we oppose against them, no
humane decisive Judges, not any Sect or Person, but only God and his Word. And
therefore it is in vain to say, That in following her, you shall be sooner
excused, than in following any Sect or Man applying Scriptures against her
Doctrine: In as much as we never went about to arrogate to our selves that
Infallibility or absolute Authority, which we take away from you. But if you
would have spoken to the purpose, you should have said, that in following her
you should sooner have been excused, then in cleaving to the Scripture, and to
God himself.

63 Whereas you say, The fearful examples of innumerable persons, who forsaking
the Church, upon pretense of her errors, have failed even in Fundamental
Points, ought to deterr all Christians from opposing her in any one Doctrine or
practice; This is, just as if you should say, Diverse men have fallen into
Scylla, with going too far from Charybdis; be sure therefore ye keep close to
Charybdis: Diverse leaving Prodigality, have fallen into covertousness,
therefore be you constant to Prodigality: Many have fallen from worshipping God
perversely and foolishly, not to worship him at all; from worshipping many gods,
to worship none; this therefore ought to deterr men from leaving Superstition
or Idolatry, for fear of falling into Atheism and Impiety. This is your counsel
and Sophistry: but God says clean contrary; Take heed you swerve not, either
to the right hand or to the left: you must not do evil that good may come
thereon; therefore neither, that you may avoid a greater evil, you must not be
obstinate in a certain error, for fear of an uncertain. What if some, forsaking
the Church of Rome, have forsaken Fundamental truths? Was this because they
forsook the Church of Rome? No sure, this is non causa pro causa: for else all
that have forsaken that Church should have done so, which we say they have not.
But because they went too far from her, the golden mean, the narrow way, is
hard to be found; and hard to be kept; hard, but not impossible: hard, but yet
you must not please your self out of it, though you err on the right hand,
though you offend on the milder part, for this is the only way that leads to
life, and few there be that find it. It is true, if we said there were no
danger in being of the Roman Church, and there were danger in leaving it, it
were madness to persuade any man to leave it. But we protest and proclaim the
contrary, and that we have very little hope of their Salvation, who either out
of negligence in seeking the truth, or unwillingness to find it, live and die
in the errors and impieties of that Church: and therefore cannot but conceive
those fears to be most foolish, and ridiculous, which persuade men to be
constant in one way to hell, lest happily, if they leave it, they should fall
into another.

64. But, Not only others, but even Protestants themselves, whese example ought
most to move us, pretending to reform the Church, are come to affirm that she
perished for many ages: which D. Potter cannot deny to be a Fundamental error,
against the Article of the Creed, I believe the Catholic Church, seeing be
affirms, Donatists erred Fundamentally in confining it to Africa. To this I
answer, First, that the error of the Donatists was not, that they held it
possible that some, or many, or most, parts of Christendom, might fall away
from Christianity, and that the Church may lose much of her amplitude, and be
contracted to a narrow compass in comparison of her former extent: which is
proved not only possible, but certain, by irrefragable experience. For who
knows not that Gentilism, and Mahumetism, man's wickedness deserving it, and
Gods providence permitting it, have prevailed, to the utter extirpation of
Christianity, upon far the greater part of the world? And S. Austin when he was
out of the heat of Disputation, confesses the Militant Church to be like the
Moon, sometimes increasing, and sometimes decreasing. This therefore was no
error in the Donatists, that they held it possible, that the Church, from a
large extent, might be contracted to a lesser: nor that they held it possible
to be reduced to Africa; (For why not to Africa then, as well as within these
few Ages, you pretend it was to Europe?) But their error was, that they held de
facto, this was done when they had no just ground or reason to do so: and so,
upon a vain pretense which they could not justify, separated themselves from
the communion of all other parts of the Church: and that they required it as a
necessary condition to make a man a member of the Church, that he should be of
their communion, and divide himself from all other Communions from which they
were divided: which was a condition both unnecessary and unlawful to be
required, and therefore the exacting of it was directly opposite to the
Churches Catholicism; in the very same nature with their Errors who required
Circumcision, and the keeping of the Law of Moses, as necessary to salvation.
For whosoever requires harder or heavyer conditions of men, than God requires
of them, he it is that is properly an Enemy of the Churches Universality, by
hindering either Men or Countries from adjoining themselves to it; which, were
it not for these unnecessary and therefore unlawful conditions, in probability
would have made them members of it. And seeing the present Church of Rome
persuades men they were as good (for any hope of salvation they have) not be
Christians, as not be Roman Catholics; believe nothing at all, as not
believe all which she imposes upon them; be absolutely out of the Churches
Communion, as be out of her Communion, or be in any other, Whether she be not
guilty of the same crime, with the Donatists and those Zelots of the Mosaical
Law, I leave it to the judgment of those that understand reason! This is
sufficient to show the vanity of this Argument. But I add moreover, that you
neither have named those Protestants who held the Church to have perished for
many Ages, who perhaps held not the destruction but the corruption of the
Church; not that the true Church, but that the pure Church perished: or rather
that the Church perished not from its life and existence, but from its purity
and integrity, or perhaps from its splendour and visibility: Neither have you
proved by any one reason, but only affirmed it, to be a Fundamental Error, to
hold that the Church militant may possibly be driven out of the world, and
abolished for a time from the face of the earth.

65. But to accuse the Church of any Error in Faith, is to say, she lost all
Faith: For this is the Doctrine of Catholic Divines, that one Error in Faith
destroys Faith. To which I answer, that to accuse the Church of some Error in
Faith, is not to say, she lost all Faith: For this is not the Doctrine of all
Catholic Divines; But that he which is an Heretic in one Article, may have
true Faith of other Articles. And the contrary is only said and not showed in
Charity Mistaken.

66. Ad. 21. D. Potter says, We may not depart from the Church absolutely, and
in all things: and from hence you conclude, Therefore we may not depart from
it; in any thing. And this Argument you call a Demonstration. But, a Fallacy a
dicto simpliciter ad dictum secundum quid, was not used heretofore to be called
a Demonstration. D. Potter says not, that you may not depart from any opinion
or any practice of the Church: for you tell us in this very place, that he
says, even the Catholic may err: and every man may lawfully depart from
Error. He only says, You may not cease to be of the Church, nor depart from
those things which make it so to be; and from hence you infer a necessity of
forsaking it in nothing. Just as if you should argue thus: You may not leave
your friend or brother, therefore you may not leave the Vice of your friend, or
the Error of your brother. What he says of the Catholic Church, p. 75. the
same he extends presently after, to every true, though never so corrupted, part
of it. And why do you not conclude from hence, that no particular Church
(according to his judgment) can fall into any Error, and call this a
Demonstration too? For, as he says, p. 75. That there can be no just cause to
depart from the whole Church of Christ, no more than from Christ himself; So p.
76. he tells you, That whosoever forsakes any one true member of this body,
forsakes the whole. So that what he says of the one, he says of the other;
and tells you, that neither Universal nor particular Church, so long as they
continue so, may be forsaken; he means, Absolutely, no more than Christ himself
may be forsaken absolutely: For the Church is the body of Christ, and whosoever
forsakes either the body, or his coherence to any one part of it, must forsake
his subordination, and relation to the Head. Therefore whosoever forsakes the
Church, or any Christian, must forsake Christ himself.

67. But then he tells you plainly in the same place, That it may be lawful and
necessary to depart from a Particular Church in some Doctrins and Practices:
And this he would have said even of the Catholic Church, if there had been
occasion, but there was none. For there he was to declare and justify our
departure, not from the Catholic Church, but the Roman; which we maintain to
be a particular Church. But in other places, you confess his Doctrine to be,
that even the Catholic Church may err in points not Fundamental; which you
do not pretend that he ever imputed to Christ himself. And therefore you cannot
with any candor interpret his words, as if he had said, We may not forsake the
Church in any thing, no more than Christ himself: but only thus, We may not
cease to be of the Church, nor forsake it absolutely and totally, no more than
Christ himself. And thus we see sometimes, A mountain may travel, and the
production may be a mouse.

68. Ad. 22. But D. Potter either contradicts himself, or else must grant the
Church infallible; Because, he says, if we did not differ from the Roman, we
could not agree with the Catholic: which saying supposes, the Catholic
Church cannot err. Answer. This Argument, to give it the right name, is an
obscure and intricate Nothing. And to make it appear so, let us suppose, in
contradiction to your supposition, either that the Catholic Church may err,
but does not, but that the Roman actually does: or, that the Catholic Church
does err in some few things, but that the Roman erres in many more. And is it
not apparent in both these cases, (which yet both suppose the Churches
Fallibility) a man may truly say, Unless I dissent in some opinions from the
Roman Church, I cannot agree with the Catholic? Either therefore you must
retract you imputation laid upon D. Potter, or do that which you condemn in
him, and be driven to say, that the same man may hold some errors with the
Church of Rome, and at the same time with the Catholic Church not to hold but
condemn them. For otherwise, in neither of these cases is it possible for the
same man, at the same time, to agree both with the Roman and the Catholic.

69. In all these Texts of Scripture, which are here alleged in this last
Section of this Chapter, or in any one of them, or in any other, Does God say
clearly and plainly, The Bishop of Rome, and that Society of Christians which
adheres to him, shall be ever the infallible guide of Faith? You will confess,
I presume, he does not; and will pretend, it was not necessary. Yet if the King
should tell us, the Lord Keeper should judge such and such causes; but should
either not tell us at all, or tell us but doubtfully, who should be
Lord Keeper, should we be any thing the nearer for him to an end of
contentions? Nay rather, would not the dissentions about the Person who it is,
increase contentions, rather than end them? Just so it would have been, if God
had appointed a Church to be Judge of Controversies, and had not told us which
was that Church. Seeing therefore God does nothing in vain, and seeing it had
been in vain, to appoint a Judge of Controversies, and not to tell us plainly
who it is; and seeing lastly he has not told us plainly, no not at all who it
is; Is it not evident he has appointed none? Obj. But (you will say perhaps)
if it be granted once, that some Church of one denomination, is the infallible
Guide of Faith, it will be no difficult thing to prove, that yours is the
Church, seeing no other Church pretends to be so. Answ. Yes, the Primitive and
the Apostolic Church pretends to be so. That assures us, that the Spirit was
promised, and given to them, to lead them into all saving truth, that they
might lead others. Obj. But that Church is not now in the world, and how then
can it pretend to be the Guide of Faith? Answ. It is now in the world
sufficiently to be our Guide; not by the Persons of those men that were Members
of it, but by their Writings, which do plainly teach us, what truth they were
led into, and so lead us into the same truth. Object. But these writings, were
the writings of some particular men; and not of the Church of those times: how
then does that Church guide us by these writings? Now these places show that a
Church is to be our Guide, therefore they cannot be so avoided. Answ. If you
regard the conception and production of these writings, they were the writings
of particular men: But if you regard the Reception and Approbation of them,
they may be well called the writings of the Church, as having the attestation
of the Church, to have been written by those that were inspired and directed by
God. As a Statute, though penned by some one man, yet being ratified by the
Parliament, is called the Act, not of that man, but of the Parliament. Object.
But the words seem clearly enough to prove, that the Church, the Present Church
of every Age, is Universally Infallable. Ans. For my part, I know I am as
willing and desirous, that the Bishop or Church of Rome should be infallible,
(provided I might know it) as they are to be so esteemed. But he that would not
be deceived must take heed, that he take not his desire that a thing should be
so, for a reason that it is so. For, if you look upon Scripture, through such
spectacles as these, they will appear to you, of what color pleases your
fancies best: and will seem to say, not what they do say, but what you would
have them. As some say, the Manna, wherewith the Israelites were fed in the
Wilderness, had in every man's mouth, that very taste which was most agreeable to
his palate. For my part I profess, I have considered them a thousand times, and
have looked upon them (as they say) on both sides, and yet to me they seem to
say no such matter.

70. Not the first. For the Church may err, and yet the gates of hell not
prevail against her. It may err, and yet continue still a true Church, and
bring forth Children unto God, and send souls to Heaven. And therefore this can
do you no service, without the plain begging of the point in Question, viz.
That every error is one of the gates of Hell. Which we absolutely deny, and
therefore, you are not to suppose, but to prove it. Neither is our denial
without reason. For seeing you do, and must grant, that a particular Church,
may hold some error, and yet be still a true Member of the Church: Why may not
the Universal Church hold the same error, and yet remain the true Universal?

71. Not the Second or Third. For, the Spirit of Truth, may be with a Man, or a
Church for ever, and teach him all Truth: And yet he may fall into some error,
if this all, be not simply all, but all of some kind: which you confess to be
so unquestioned and certain, that you are offended with D. Potter, for offering
to prove it. Secondly, he may fall into some error, even contrary to the truth
which is taught him, if it be taught him only sufficiently, and not
irresistibly, so that he may learn it if he will, not so that he must and shall
whether he will or no. Now, who can ascertain me, that Spirit's teaching is not
of this nature; or, how can you possibly reconcile it, with your Doctrine of
Freewill in believing, if it be not of this nature? Besides, the word in the
Original is (...), which signifies, to be a guide and directer only, not to
compel or necessitate. Who knows not, that a Guide may set you in the right
way, and you may either negligently mistake, or willingly leave it? And to what
purpose does God complain so often, and so earnestly of some, that had eyes to
see and would not see, that stopped their ears, and closed their eyes, lest
they should hear and see? Of others that would not understand, lest they should
do good: That the light shined, and the darkness comprehended it not: That he
came unto his own, and his own received him not: That light came into the
world, and men loved darkness more than light? To what purpose should he
wonder, so few believed his report, and that to so few his Arm was revealed:
And that when he comes, he should no find no Faith upon Earth, if his outward
teaching were not of this nature, that it might be followed, and might be
resisted. And if it be, then God may teach, and the Church not learn: God may
lead, and the Church be refractory and not follow. And indeed, who can doubt,
that has not his eyes veiled with prejudice, that God has taught the Church
of Rome, plain enough in the Epistle to the Corinthians, that all things in the
Church are to be done for edification; and that in any public Prayers, or
Thanks-givings, or Hymns, or Lessons of Instruction, to use a language, which
the assistants gen^rally understand not, is not for edification? Though the
Church of Rome will not learn this, for fear of confessing an error, and so
overthrowing her Authority; yet the time will come, when it shall appear, that
not only by Scripture, they were taught this sufficiently, and commanded to
believe it, but by reason and common sense. And so for the Communion in both
kinds, who can deny but they are taught it by our Savior, Joh. 6. in these
words, according to most of your own expositions, Unless you eat the Flesh of
the Son of Man, and drink his Blood, you have no life in you. (If our Savior
speak there, of the Sacrament, as to them he does, because they conceive he
does so.) For though they may pretend, that receiving in one kind, they receive
the blood together with the body, yet they can with no face pretend that they
drink it: And so obey not our Savior's injunction according to the letter,
which yet they profess, is literally always to be obeyed, unless some impiety,
or some absurdity force us to the contrary: and they are not yet arrived to
that impudence, to pretend, that either there is impiety or absurdity in
receiving the Communion in both kinds. This therefore, they, if not others, are
plainly taught by our Savior in this place: But by S. Paul all without
exception, when he says; Let a man examine himself, and so let him eat of this
bread, and drink of this Chalice. This (a Man) that is to examine himself, is
every man, that can do it: as is confessed on all hands. And therefore it is
all one, as if he had said, Let every man examine himself, and so let him eat
of this bread and drink of this cup. They which acknowledge S. Paul's Epistles,
and S. John's Gospel, to be the Word of God, one would think should not deny,
but that they are taught these two Doctrines plain enough. Yet we see they
neither do, nor will learn them. I conclude therefore, that the Spirit may very
well teach the Church, and yet the Church fall into and continue in Error, by
not regarding what she is taught by the Spirit.

72. But all this I have spoken upon a supposition only, and showed unto you,
that though these Promises had been made unto the present Church of every Age
(I might have said though they had been to the Church of Rome by name) yet no
certainty of her Universal Infallibility could be built upon them. But the
plain truth is, that these Promises are vainly arrogated by you, and were never
made to you, but to the Apostles only. I pray deal ingenuously, and tell me,
Who were they of whom our Savior says, These things have I spoken unto you
being present with you, c. 14.25. But the Comforter shall teach you all things,
and bring all things to your remembrance, whatsoever I have told you, v. 26?
Who are they to whom he says, I go away and come again unto you; And I have
told you before it come to pass, v. 28, 29. You have been with me from the
beginning, c. 15. v. 27? And again; These things I have told you, that when the
time shall come you may remember that I told you of them: and these things I
said not to you at the beginning, because I was with you, c. 16. v. 4. And,
Because I said these things unto you, sorrow has filled your hearts, v. 6.
Lastly, Who are they of whom he says, v. 12. I have yet many things to say
unto you, but ye cannot bear them now? Do not all these circumstances
appropriate this whole discourse of our Savior to his Disciples, that were
then with him, and, consequently, restrain the Promises of the Spirit of Truth,
which was to lead them into all truth, to their Persons only? And seeing it is
so, is it not an impertinent arrogance and presumption, for you to lay claim
unto them, in the behalf of your Church? Had Christ been present with your
Church? Did the Comforter bring these things to the Remembrance of your Church,
which Christ had before taught, and she had forgotten? Was Christ then
departing from your Church? And did he tell of his departure before it came to
pass? Was your Church with him from the beginning? Was your Church filled with
sorrow, upon the mentioning of Christ's departure? Or lastly, Did he, or could
he have said to your Church, which then was not extant, I have yet many things
to say unto you, but ye cannot bear them now? as he speaks in the 13 v.
immediately before the words by you quoted. And then goes on, Howbeit when the
Spirit of Truth is come, he will guide you into all Truth. Is it not the same
You he speaks to in the 13. v. and that he speaks to in the 14? And is it not
apparent to any one that has but half an eye, that in the 13* he speaks only
to them that then were with him? Besides, in the very Text by you alleged,
there are things promised, which your Church cannot with any modesty pretend
to. For there it is said, The Spirit of Truth not only will guide you into all
Truth, but also will show you things to come. Now your Church (for ought I
could ever understand) does not so much as pretend to the spirit of Prophecy,
and knowledge of future events: And therefore has as little cause to pretend
to the former promise of being led by the Spirit into all Truth. And this is
the Reason, why both You in this place, and generally, your Writers of
Controversies, when they entreat of this Argument, cite this Text perpetually
by halfs; there being in the latter part of it, a clear, and convincing
Demonstration, that you have nothing to do with the former. Unless you will
say, which is most ridiculous, that when our Savior said, He will teach you,
etc. and he will show you, etc. he meant one You in the former clause, and
another You in the latter.

73. Object. But this is to confine God's Spirit to the Apostles only, or to
the Disciples, that then were present with him: which is directly contrary to
many places of Scripture. Answ. I confess, that to confine the Spirit of God to
those that were then present with Christ is against Scripture. But, I hope, it
is easy to conceive a difference, between confining the Spirit of God to them,
and confining the promises made in this place to them. God may do many things
which he does not promise at all; much more, which he does not promise in such
or such a place.

74. Object. But it is promised in the 14. Chap. that this Spirit shall abide
with them for ever: Now they in their persons were not to abide for ever, and
therefore the Spirit could not abide with them, in their Persons for ever,
seeing the coexistence of two things, supposes of necessity, the existence of
either. Therefore the Promise was not made to them only in their Persons, but
by them to the Church, which was to abide for ever. Answ. Your Conclusion is,
not to them only, but your Reason concludes, either nothing at all, or that
this Promise of abiding with them for ever, was not made to their Persons at
all; or, if it were, that it was not performed, Or, if you will not say (as I
hope you will not) that it was not performed, nor that it was not made to their
Persons at all; then must you grant, that the word for ever, is here used in a
sense restrained, and accommodated to the subject here entreated of; and that
it signifies, not eternally, without end of time, but perpetually, without
interruption, for the time of their lives. So that the force, and sense of the
words is, that they should never want the Spirit's assistance, in the
performance of their function: And that the Spirit would not (as Christ was to
do) stay with them for a time, and afterward leave them, but would abide with
them, if they kept their station, unto the very end of their lives, which is
man's for ever. Neither is this use of the word, for ever, any thing strange,
either in our ordinary speech, wherein we use to say, This is mine for ever,
This shall be yours for ever, without ever dreaming of the Eternity, either of
the Thing or Persons. And then in Scripture, it not only will bear, but
requires, this sense very frequently, as Exodus 21.6. Deuteronomy. 15.17. His master
shall bore his ear through with an awl, and he shall serve him for ever. Psalm.
52.9. I will praise thee for ever, Psalm. 61.4. I will abide in thy Tabernacle
for ever, Psalm. 119.111. Thy Testimonies have I taken as mine heritage for
ever. And lastly, in the Ep. to Philemon, He therefore departed from thee for a
time, that thou should receive him for ever.

75. And thus, I presume, I have showed sufficiently, that this for ever,
hinders not, but that the promise may be appropriated to the Apostles, as by
many other circumstances I have evinced it must be. But what now, if the place
produced by you, as a main pillar of your Churches Infallibility, prove upon
trial, an engine to batter and overthrow it, at least, (which is all one to my
purpose) to take away all possibility of our assurance of it? This will seem
strange news to you at first hearing, and not far from a prodigy. And I
confess, as you here in this place, and generally all your Writers of
Controversy, by whom this Text is urged, order the matter, it is very much
disabled, to do any service against you in this question. For with a bold
sacrilege, and horrible impiety, somewhat like Procrustes his cruelty, you
perpetually cut off the head and foot, the beginning and end of it; and
presenting to your Confidents, (who usually read no more of the Bible, than is
alleged by you) only these words, I will ask my Father, and he shall give you
another Paraclete, that he may abide with you for ever, even the Spirit of
Truth, conceal in the mean time, the words before, and the words after; that
so, the promise of God's Spirit, may seem to be absolute, whereas it is indeed
most clearly and expressly conditional: being does in the words before,
restrained to those only, that love GOD, and keep his Commandments: and in the
words after, flatly denied to all, whom the Scriptures style by the name of the
World, that is, as the very Antithesis gives us plainly to understand, to all
wicked and wordly men. Behold the place entire, as it is set down in your own
Bible: If ye love me keep my Commandments, and I will ask my Father, and he
shall give you another Paraclete, that he may abide with you for ever, even the
Spirit of the Truth, whom the world cannot receive. Now from the place thus
restored and vindicated from your mutilation, thus I argue against your
pretense. We can have no certainty of the Infallibility of your Church, but
upon this supposition, that your Popes are infallible in confirming the Decrees
of General Councels: we can have no certainty hereof, but upon this
supposition, that the Spirit of Truth is promised to them for their direction
in this work: And of this again we can have no certainty, but upon supposal,
that they perform the condition, whereunto the promise of the Spirit of Truth
is expressly limited, viz. That they love God and keep his Commandments: And of
this finally, not knowing the Popes heart, we can have no certainty at all;
therefore from the first to the last, we can have no certainty at all of your
Churches Infallibility. This is my first Argument. Another follows, which will
charge you as home as the former. If many of the Roman See, were such men as
could not receive the Spirit of Truth, even men of the World, that is, Wordly,
Wicked, Carnal, Diabolical men; then the Spirit of Truth is not here promised,
but flatly denied them: and consequently we can have no certainty, neither of
the Decrees of Councels, which these Popes confirm, nor of the Churches
Infallibility, which is guided by these Decrees: But many of the Roman See,
even by the confession of the most zealous Defenders of it, were such men:
Therefore the Spirit of Truth is not here promised, but denied them; and
consequently we can have no certainty, neither of the Decrees, which they
confirm, nor of the Churches Infallibility, which guides her self by these
Decrees.

76. You may take as much time as you think fit, to answer these Arguments. In
the mean while I proceed to the consideration of the next Text alleged for
this purpose by you; out of S. Paul, 1 Ep. to Timothy, where he says, as you
say, The Church is the Pillar and Ground of Truth. But the truth is, you are
somewhat too bold with S. Paul; For he says not in formal terms, what you make
him say, The Church is the Pillar and Ground of Truth, neither is it certain
that he means so: for it is neither impossible nor improbable, that these
words, the pillar and ground of truth, may have reference not to the Church,
but to Timothy, the sense of the place that thou may know how to behave thy
self, as a Pillar and Ground of the Truth, in the Church of God, which is house
of the living God, which exposition offers no violence at all to the words, but
only supposes an Ellipsis of the Particle (...), in the Greek very ordinary.
Neither wants it some likelihood, that S. Paul comparing the Church to a house,
should here exhort Timothy, to carry himself, as a Pillar in that house should
do, according as he had given other principal men in the Church, the name of
Pillars; rather then having called the Church a House, to call it presently a
Pillar; which may seem somewhat heterogeneous. Yet if you will needs have S.
Paul refer this not to Timothy, but to the Church, I will not contend about it
any farther, then to say, Possibly it may be otherwise. But then secondly, I am
to put you in mind, that the Church which S. Paul here speaks of, was that in
which Timothy conversed, and that was a Particular Church, and not the Roman;
and such you will not have to be Universally Infallible.

77. Thirdly, if we grant you out of courtesy (for nothing can enforce us to
it) that he both speaks of the Universal Church, and says this of it; then I am
to remember you, that many Attributes in Scripture, are not notes of
performance, but of duty, and reach us not what the Thing or Person is of
necessity, but what it should be. Ye are the Salt of the Earth, said our
Savior to his Disciples: not that this quality was inseparable from their
Persons, but because it was their Office to be so. For, if they must have been
so of necessity, and could not have been otherwise, in vain had he put in them
fear of that which follows, If the Salt has lost his savor, wherewith shall
it be salted? it is thenceforth good for nothing, but to be cast forth, and to
be trodden under foot. So the Church may be by duty, the pillar and ground,
that is, the Teacher of Truth, of all Truth, not only necessary, but profitable
to Salvation; and yet she may neglect and violate this duty, and be in fact the
teacher of some Error.

78. Fourthly and lastly, if we deal most liberally with you, and grant that
the Apostle here speaks of the Catholic Church, calls it the Pillar and Ground
of Truth, and that not only because it should, but because it always shall and
will be so, yet after all this, you have done nothing; your bridge is too short
to bring you to the bank where you would be, unless you can show, that by Truth
here is certainly meant, not only all necessary to salvation, but all that is
profitable, absolutely and simply All. For that the true Church always shall be
the maintainer and teacher of all necessary Truth, you know we grant, and must
grant; for it is of the essence of the Church to be so, and any company of men
were no more a Church without it, than any thing can be a man, and not be
reasonable. But as a man may be still a man, though he want a hand or an eye,
which yet are profitable parts; so the Church may be still a Church, though it
be defective in some profitable truth. And as a man may be a man that has some
biles and botches on his body; so the Church may be the Church, though it have
many corruptions both in doctrine and practice.

79. And thus you see we are at liberty from the former places; having showed
that the sense of them, either must or may be such as will do your Cause no
service. But the last you suppose will be a Gordian knot, and tie us fast
enough: The words are, He gave some Apostles, and some Prophets, etc. to the
consummation of Saints, to the work of the Ministry, etc. Until we all meet
into the Unity of faith, etc. That we be not hereafter Children, wavering and
carried up and down with every wind of Doctrine. Out of which words this is the
only Argument which you collect, or I can collect for you.

There is no means to conserve Unity of Faith, against every wind of Doctrine,
unless it be a Church universally infallible.

But it is impious to say, There is no means to conserve Unity of Faith against
every wind of Doctrine:

Therefore there must be a Church Universally Infallible. Whereunto I answer,
that your Major is so far from being confirmed, that it is plainly confuted by
the place alleged. For that tells us of another means for this purpose, to
wit, the Apostles, and Prophets, and Evangelists, and Pastors, and Doctors,
which Christ gave upon his Ascension, and that their consummating the Saints,
doing the work of the Ministry, and edifying the body of Christ, was the means
to bring those (which are there spoken of, be they who they will) to the Unity
of Faith, and to perfection in Christ, that they might not be wavering, and
carried about with every wind of false Doctrine. Now the Apostles, and Prophets,
and Evangelists, and Pastors, and Doctors, are not the present Church;
therefore the Church is not the only means for this end, nor that which is here
spoken of.

80. Peradventure by he gave, you conceive, is to be understood, he promised
that he would give unto the worlds end. But what reason have you for this
conceit? Can you show that the word (...), has this signification in other
places, and that it must have it in this place? Or, will not this
interpretation drive you presently to this blasphemous absurdity, that God has
not performed his promise? Unless you will say, which for shame I think you
will not, that you have now, and in all Ages since Christ have had Apostles,
and Prophets, and Evangelists: for as for Pastors, and Doctors alone, they will
not serve the turn. For if God promised to give all these, then you must say,
He has given all, or else that he has broke his promise. Neither may you
pretend, that the Pastors and Doctors were the same with the Apostles, and
Prophets, and Evangelists, and therefore having Pastors and Doctors, you have
all. For it is apparent, that by these names, are denoted several Orders of
men, clearly distinguished and diversified by the Original Text; but much more
plainly by your own Translations, for so you read it, some Apostles, and some
Prophets, and other some Evangelists, and other some Pastors and Doctors: and
yet more plainly in the parallel place, 1 Cor. 12. to which we are referred by
your Vulgar Translation, God has set some in the Church, first Apostles,
secondarily Prophets, thirdly Teachers; therefore this subterfuge is stopped
against you. Object. But how can they, which died in the first Age, keep us in
Unity, and guard us from Error, that live now, perhaps in the last? This seems
to be all one, as if a man should say, that Alexander, or Julius Caesar, should
quiet a mutiny in the King of Spain 's Army. Answ. I hope you will grant, that
Hippocrates, and Galen, and Euclid, and Aristotle, and Salust, and Caesar, and
Livie, were dead many Ages since; and yet that we are now preserved from error
by them, in a great part of Physic, of Geometry, of Logic, of the Roman
Story. But what if these men had writ by Divine Inspiration, and writ complete
bodies of the Sciences they professed, and writ them plainly and perspicuously?
You would then have granted, I believe, that their works had been sufficient to
keep us from error, and from dissension in these matters. And why then should
it be incongruous to say, that the Apostles, and Prophets, and Evangelists, and
Pastors, and Doctors, which Christ gave upon his Ascension, by their writings,
which some of them writ, but all approved, are even now sufficient means, to
conserve us in Unity of Faith, and guard us from error? Especially, seeing
these writings are, by the confession of all parts, true and divine, and, as we
pretend and are ready to prove, contain a plain and perfect Rule of Faith; and
as the Perron.
Chiefest of you acknowledge, contain immediately, all the Principal and
fundamental Points of Christianity, referring us to the Church and Tradition
only for some minute particularities. But tell me I pray, the Bishops that
composed the Decrees of the Council of Trent and the Pope that confirmed them,
are they means to conserve you in Unity, and keep you from Error, or are they
not? Peradventure you will say, Their Decrees are, but not their Persons: but
you will not deny I hope, that you owe your Unity, and freedom from Error, to
the Persons that made these Decrees: neither will they deny, that the writings
which they have left behind them, are sufficient for this purpose. And why may
not then the Apostles writings be as fit for such a purpose, as the Decrees of
your Doctors? Surely, their intent in writing was to conserve us in Unity of
Faith, and to keep us from error, and we are sure God spoke in them: but your
Doctors from whence they are, we are not so certain. Was the Holy Ghost then
unwilling, or unable to direct them so, that their writings should be fit and
sufficient to attain that end they aimed at in writing? For if he were both
able and willing to do so, then certainly he did do so. And then their writings
may be very sufficient means, if we would use them as we should do, to preserve
us in Unity, in all necessary points of Faith, and to guard us from all
pernicious Error.

81. If yet you be not satisfied, but will still pretend, that all these words
by you cited, seem clearly enough to prove, that the Church is Universally
Infallible, without which, Unity of Faith could not be conserved against every
wind of Doctrine: I answer, That to you which will not understand that there can
be any means to conserve the Unity of Faith, but only that which conserves your
Authority over the Faithful, it is no marvel that these words seem to prove,
that the Church, nay that your Church is universally infallible. But we that
have no such end, no such desires, but are willing to leave all men to their
liberty, provided they will not improve it to a Tyranny over others, we find it
no difficulty to discern between dedit and promisit, he gave at his Ascension,
and he promised to the worlds end. Besides, though you whom it concerns, may
happily flatter your selves, that you have not only Pastors, and Doctors, but
Prophets, and Apostles, and Evangelists, and those distinct from the former
still in your Church; yet we that are disinteressed persons, cannot but smile
at these strange imaginations. Lastly, though you are apt to think your selves
such necessary instruments for all good purposes, and that nothing can be well
done unless you do it; that no unity or constancy in Religion can be
maintained, but inevitably Christendom must fall to ruin, and confusion, unless
you support it: yet we that are indifferent, and impartial, and well content,
that God should give us his own favors, by means of his own appointment, not
of our choosing, can easily collect out of these very words, that not the
Infallibility of your, or of any Church, but the Apostles, and Prophets, and
Evangelists, etc. which Christ gave upon his Ascension, were designed by him,
for the compassing all these excellent purposes, by their preaching while they
lived, and by their writings for ever. And if they fail hereof, the Reason is
not any insufficiency or invalidity in the means, but the voluntary perverseness
of the subjects they have to deal with: who, if they would be themselves, and
be content that others should be, in the choice of their Religion, the servants
of God and not of men; if they would allow, that the way to heaven is no
narrower now, then Christ left it, his yoke no heavier then he made it; that
the belief of no more difficulties, is required now to Salvation, than was in
the Primitive Church; that no error is in it self destructive, and exclusive
from Salvation now, which was not then; if, instead of being zealous Papists,
earnest Calvinists, rigid Lutherans, they would become themselves, and be
content that others should be plain and honest Christians; if all men would
believe the Scripture, and freeing themselves from prejudice and passion, would
sincerely endeavor to find the true sense of it, and live according to it,
and require no more of others, but to do so; nor denying their Communion to any
that do so, would so order their public service of God, that all which do so
may without scruple, or hypocrisy, or protestation against any part of it,
join with them in it: who does not see that seeing (as we suppose here, and
shall prove hereafter) all necessary truths, are plainly and evidently set down
Scripture, there would of necessity be among all men, in all things necessary,
Unity of Opinion? And, notwithstanding any other differences that are or could
he, Unity of Communion, and Charity, and mutual toleration? By which means, all
Schism and Heresy would be banished the world, and those wretched contentions
which now read and tear in pieces, not the coat, but the members and bowels of
Christ, which mutual pride and Tyranny, and cursing, and killing, and damning,
would fain make immortal, should speedily receive a most blessed catastrophe.
But of this hereafter, when we shall come to the Question of Schism, wherein I
persuade my self, that I shall plainly show, that the most vehement accusers,
are the greatest offenders, and that they are indeed at this time, the greatest
Schismatiques, who make the way to heaven narrower, the yoke of Christ heavier,
the differences of Faith greater, the conditions of Ecclesiastical Communion
harder, and stricter, then they were made at the beginning by Christ and his
Apostles: they who talk of Unity, but aim at Tyraunie, and will have peace
with none, but with their slaves and vassals. In the mean while, though I have
showed how Unity of Faith, and Unity of Charity too, may be preserved without
your Churches Infallibility, yet seeing you modestly conclude from hence, not
that your Church is, but only seems to be universally infallible, meaning to
your self, of which you are a better Judge than I: Therefore I willingly grant
your Conclusion, and proceed.

83. Whereas you say, That D. Potter limits those promises and privileges to
Fundamental points; The truth is, with some of them he meddles not at all,
neither does his adversary give him occasion: Not with those out of the Epistle
to Timothy, and to the Ephesians. To the rest he gives other answer besides
this.

83. But the words of Scripture by you alleged are Universal, and mention no
such restraint to Fundamentals, as D. Potter applies to them: I answer, That,
of the five Texts which you allege, four are indefinite, and only one
universal, and that you confess is to be restrained, and are offended with D.
Potter for going about to prove it. And Whereas you say, they mention no
restraint, intimating that therefore they are not to be restrained, I tell you,
This is no good consequence; for it may appear out of the matter and
circumstances, that they are to be understood in a restrained sense,
notwithstanding no restraint be mentioned. That place quoted by S. Paul, and
applied by him to our Savior, He has put all things under his feet, mentions
no exception; yet S. Paul tells us, not only that it is true or certain, but it
is manifest, that He is excepted which did put all things under him.

84. But your interpretation is better than D. Potters, because it is literal.
I answer, His is Literal as well as yours: and you are mistaken if you think a
restrained sense may not be a literal sense; for to Restrained, Literal is not
opposed, but unlimited or absolute; and to Literal, is not opposed Restrained,
but Figurative.

85. Whereas you say, D. Potters Brethren, rejecting his limitation, restrain
the mentioned Texts to the Apostles, implying hereby a contrariety between them
and him: I answer, So does D. Potter restrain all of them which he speaks of,
in the pages by you quoted, to the Apostles, in the direct and primary sense of
the words: Though he tells you there, the words in a more restrained sense are
true, being understood of the Church Universal.

86. As for your pretense, That to find the meaning of those places, you confer
diverse Texts, you consult Originals, you examine Translations, and use all the
means by Protestants appointed, I have told you before, that all this is vain
and hypocritical, if (as your manner and your doctrine is) you give not your
selves liberty of judgment in the use of these means; if you make not your
selves Judges of, but only Advocates for, the Doctrine of your Church, refusing
to see what these means show you, if it any way make against the Doctrine of
your Church, though it be as clear as the light at noon. Remove Prejudice,
eaven the Balance, and hold it eaven, make it indifferent to you which way you
go to heaven so you go the true, which Religion be true so you be of it, then
use the means, and pray for Gods assistance, and as sure as God is true, you
shall be lead into all necessary Truth.

87. Whereas you say, you neither do, nor have any possible means to agree, as
long as you are left to your selves: The first is very true, That while you
differ, you do not agree. But for the second, That you have no possible means
of agreement, as long as you are left to your selves i. e. to your own reasons
and judgment, this sure is very false, neither do you offer any proof of it,
unless you intended this, that you do not agree, for a proof that you cannot;
which sure is no good consequence, not half so good as this which I oppose
against it: D. Potter and I, by the use of these means by you mentioned, do
agree concerning the sense of these places, therefore there is a possible means
of agreement; and therefore you also, if you would use the same means, with the
same minds, might agree so far as it is necessary, and it is not necessary that
you should agree farther. Or if there be no possible means to agree about the
sense of these Texts, whilst we are left to our selves, then sure it is
impossible that we should agree in your sense of them, which was, That the
Church is universally infallible. For if it were possible for us to agree in
this sense of them, then it were possible for us to agree. And why then said
you of the self same Texts but in the page next before, These words seem
clearly enough to prove that the Church is Universally infallible. A strange
forgetfulness, that the same man, almost in the same breath, should say of the
same words, They seem clearly enough to prove such a Conclusion true, and yet
that three indifferent men, all presumed to be lovers of Truth, and industrious
searchers of it, should have no possible means, while they follow their own
reason to agree in the Truth of this Conclusion!

88. Whereas you say, that, It were great impiety to imagine that God, the
lover of Souls, has left no certain infallible means to decide both this and
all o'her differences arising about the interpretation of Scripture, or upon
any other occasion: I desire you to take heed, you commit not an impiety in
making more impieties than Gods Commandments make. Certainly, God is no way
obliged either by his Promise or his Love to give us all things, that we may
imagine would be convenient for us, as formerly I have proved at large. It is
sufficient that he denies us nothing necessary to Salvation. Deus non deficit
in necessariis, nee redundat in superfluis: So D. Stapleton. But that the
ending of all Controversies, or having a certain means of ending them, is
necessary to Salvation, that you have often said and supposed, but never
proved, though it be the main pillar of your whole discourse. So little care
you take how slight your Foundations are, so your Building make a fair show.
And as little care, how you commit those faults your self, which you condemn in
others. For you here charge them with great impiety, who imagine that, God the
lover of Souls, has left no infallible means to determine all differences
arising about the interpretation of Scripture, or upon any other occasion: And
yet afterward being demanded by D. Potter, Why the Questions between the
Jesuits and Dominicans remain undetermined? You return him this cross
Interrogatory, Who has assured you that the Point wherein these learned men
differ, is a revealed Truth, or capable of definition; or is not rather by
plain Scripture indeterminable, or by any Rule of Faith? So then when you say,
It were great impiety to imagine that God has not left infallible means to
decide all differences; I may answer, It seems you do not believe your self.
For in this Controversy which is of as high consequence as any can be, you
seem to be doubtful whether there be any means to determine it. On the other
side, when you ask D. Potter, Who assured him that there is any means to
determine this Controversy? I answer for him, that you have; in calling it a
great impiety to imagine that there is not some infallible means to decide this
and all other differences arising about the Interpretation of Scripture, or
upon any other occasion. For what trick you can devise to show that this
difference between the Dominicans and Jesuits, which includes a difference
about the sense of many texts of Scripture and many other matters of moment,
was not included under this and all other differences, I cannot imagine. Yet if
you can find out any, thus much at least we shall gain by it, that general
speeches are not always to be understood generally, but sometimes with
exceptions and limitations.

89. But if there be any infallible means to decide all differences, I beseech
you name them. You say, it is to consult and hear Gods Visible Church with
submissive acknowledgment of her Infallibility. But suppose the difference be
(as here it is) whether your Church be infallible, what shall decide that? If
you would say (as you should do) Scripture and Reason, then you foresee that
you should be forced to grant, that these are fit means to decide this
Controversy, and therefore may be as fit to decide others. Therefore to avoid
this, you run into a most ridiculous absurdity, and tell us that this
difference also, Whether the Church be infallible, as well as others, must be
agreed by a submissive acknowledgment of the Churches Infallibility. As if you
should have said, My Brethren, I perceive there is a great Contention amongst
you, whether the Roman Church be infallible? If you will follow my advice, I
will show you a ready means to end it; you must first agree that the Roman
Church is infallible, and then your contention whether the Roman Church be
infallible, will quickly be at an end. Verily, a most excellent advice, and
most compendious way of ending all Controversies, even without troubling the
Church to determine them! For why may not you say in all other differences, as
you have done in this? Agree that the Pope is supreme head of the Church: That
the substance of the Bread and Wine in the Sacrament, is turned into the Body
and Blood of Christ: That the Communion is to be given to Laymen but in one
kind:That Pictures may be worshipped: That Saints are to be invocated: and so
in the rest: and then your differences about the Popes Supremacy,
Transubstantiation, and all the rest, will speedily be ended. If you say, the
advice is good in this, but not in other cases, I must request you, not to
expect always, to be believed upon your word, but to show us some reason, why
any one thing, namely the Churches Infallibility, is fit to prove it self; and
any other thing, by name the Popes Supremacy, or Transubstantiation, is not as
fit? Or if for shame you will at length confess, that the Churches
infallibility is not fit to decide this difference, Whether the Church be
infallible, then you must confess it is not fit to decide all: Unless you will
say, it may be fit to decide all, and yet not fit to decide this, or pretend
that this is not comprehended under all. Besides, if you grant that your
Churches Infallibility cannot possibly be well grounded upon, or decided by it
self, then having professed before, that there is no possible means besides
this, for us to agree hereupon, I hope you will give me leave to conclude, that
it is impossible upon good ground for us to agree that the Roman Church is
infallible. For certainly, light it self is not more clear than the evidence of
this Syllogism;

If there be no other means to make men agree upon your Churches Infallibility,
but only this, and this be no means; then it is simply impossible for men upon
good grounds to agree that your Church is infallible:

But there is (as you have granted) no other possible means to make men agree
hereupon, but only a submissive ackdowledgment of her Infallibility, And this
is apparently no means;

Therefore it is simply impossible for men upon good grounds to agree that your
Church is infallible.

90. Lastly, to the place of S. Austin, wherein we are advised to follow the
way of Catholic Discipline, which from Christ himself by the Apostles has
come down even to us, and from us shall descend to all posterity; I answer,
That the way which S. Austin spoke of, and the way which you commend, being
diverse ways, and in many things clean contrary, we cannot possibly follow them
both; and therefore for you to apply the same words to them is a vain
equivocation. Show us any way, and do not say, but prove it to have come from
Christ and his Apostles down to us, and we are ready to follow it. Neither do
we expect demonstration hereof, but such reasons as may make this more probable
than the contrary. But if you bring in things into your now Catholic
Discipline, which Christians in S. Austins time held abominable, (as the
picturing of God,) and which you must, and some of you do confess to have come
into the Church seven hundred years after Christ: if you will bring in things,
as you have done the half Communion, with a non obstante, notwithstanding
Christ's Institution, and the practice of the Primitive Church, were to the
contrary: If you will do such things as these, and yet would have us believe,
that your whole Religion came from Christ and his Apostles, this we conceive a
request too unreasonable for modest men to make, or for wise men to grant.

CHAP. IV. To say, that the Creed contains all Points necessarily to be
believed, is neither pertinent to the Qu^stion in hand, nor in it self true.
I SAY, neither pertinent, nor true. Not pertinent: Because our Question is
nor, What Points are necessary to be explicitly believed; but what Points may
be lawfully disbelieved, or rejected after sufficient Proposition that they are
divine Truths. You say, the Creed contains all Points necessary to be believed:
Be it so. But does it likewise contain all Points not to be disbelieved?
Certainly it does not. For how many Truths are there in holy Scripture not
contained in the Creed, which we are not obliged distinctly, and particularly
to know and believe, but are bound under pain of damnation not to reject, as
soon as we come to know that they are found in holy Scripture? And we having
already showed, that whatsoever is proposed by God's Church as a Point of
Faith, is infallibly a truth revealed by God; it follows that whosoever
denies any such Point, opposes God's sacred testimony, whether that Point be
contained in the Creed, or no. In vain then, was your care employed to prove
that all Points of Faith necessary to be explicitly believed, are contained in
the Creed. Neither was that the Catalogue which Charity Mistaken demanded. His
demand was (and it was most reasonable) that you would once give us a List of
all Fundamentals, the denial whereof destroys Salvation; whereas the denial of
other Points not Fundamental may stand with Salvation, although both these
kinds of Points be equally proposed as revealed by God. For if they be not
equally proposed, the difference will arise from diversity of the Proposal, and
not of the Matter fendamental, or not fundamental. This Catalogue only, can
show how far Protestants may disagree without breach of Unity in Faith; and
upon this, may other matters depend according to the ground of Protestants. But
you will never adventure to publish such a Catalogue, I say more: You can not
assign any one Point so great, o^ fundamental, that the denial thereof will
make a man an Heretic, if it be not sufficiently propounded, as a divine
Truth: Nor can you assign any one Point so small, that it can without heresy
be rejected, if once it be sufficiently represented as revealed by God.

2. Nay, this your instance in the Creed is not only impertinent, but directly
against you. For all Points in the Creed are not of their own nature
Fundamental, as I showed Cap. 3. n. 3.
before: And yet it is damnable to deny any one Point contained in the Creed.
So that it is clear, that to make an error damnable, it is not necessary that
the matter be of it self fundamental.

3. Moreover, you cannot ground any certainty upon the Creed it self, unless
first you presuppose that the Authority of the Church is universally
infallible, and consequently that it is damnable to oppose her Declarations,
whether they concern matters great, or small, contained, or not contained in
the Creed. This is clear. Because we must receive the Creed it self upon the
credit of the Church, without which we could not know that there was any such
thing as that which We call the Apostles Creed: and yet the Arguments whereby
you endeavor to prove, that the Creed contains all Fundamental Points, are
grounded upon supposition, that the Creed was made either by the Apostles
themselves, or by the Page 216.
Church of their times from them: which thing we could not certainly know, if
the succeeding and still continued Church, may err in her Traditions: neither
can we be assured, whether all Fundamental Articles which you say were out of
the Scriptures, summed, and contracted into the Apostles Creed, were faithfully
summed, and contracted, and not one pretermitted, altered, or mistaken, unless
we undoubtedly know that the Apostles composed the Creed; and that they
intended to contract all Fundamental Points of Faith into it; or at least that
the Church of their times (for it seems you doubt whether indeed it were
composed by the Apostles themselves) did understand the Apostles aright; and
that the Church of their times, did intend that the Creed should contain all
Fundamental Points. For if the Church may err in Points not Fundamental, may
she not also err in the particulars which I have specified? Can you show it to
be a Fundamental Point of Faith, that the Apostles intended to comprize all
Points of Faith necessary to Salvation in the Creed? Your self say no more than
that it is very Page 241.
probable; which is far from reaching to a Fundamental Point of Faith. Your
probability is grounded upon the Judgment of Antiquity, and even of the Roman
Doctors, as you say in the same place. But if the Catholic Church may err,
what certainty can you expect from Antiquity, or Doctors? Scripture is your
total Rule of Faith. Cite therefore some Text of Scripture, to prove that the
Apostles, or the Church of their times, composed the Creed, and composed it
with a purpose that it should contain all Fundamental Points of Faith. Which
being impossible to be done, you must for the Creed it self rely upon the
infallibility of the Church.

4. Moreover, the Creed consists not so much in the words, as in their sense
and meaning. All such as pretend to the name of Christians, recite the Creed,
and yet many have erred fundamentally, as well against the Articles of the
Creed, as other Points of Faith. It is then very frivolous to say, The Creed
contains all Fundamental Points, without specifying, both in what sense the
Articles of the Creed be true, and also in what true sense, they be
fundamental. For, both these taskes, you are to perform, who teach that all
Truth is not Fundamental: and you do but delude the ignorant, when you say,
that the Creed, Page 216.
taken in a Catholic (e) sense, comprehends all Points Fundamental;
because; with you, all Catholic sense is not Fundamental: for so it were
necessary to Salvation that all Christians should know the whole Scripture,
wherein every least Point has a Catholic sense. Or if, by Catholic sense,
you understand that sense which is so universally to be known, and believed by
all, that whosoever fails therein cannot be saved, you trifle, and say no more
than this, All Points of the Creed in a sense necessary to Salvation, are
necessary to Salvation. Or, All Points Fundamental, are Fundamental. After this
manner it were an easy thing to make many true Prognostications, by saying, it
will certainly rain, when it raineth. You say the Creed Page 216.
was opened and explaind, in some parts in the Creeds of Nice, etc. But how
shall we understand the other parts, not explained in those Creeds?

5. For what Article in the Creed is more Fundamental, or may seem more clear,
than that, wherein we believe JESUS CHRIST to be the Mediator, Redeemer, and
Savior of Mankind, and the Founder and Foundation of a Catholic Church
expressed in the Creed? And yet about this Article, how many different Doctrins
are there, not only of old Heretics, as Arius, Nestorius, Eutiches, etc. but
also Protestants, partly against Catholics, and partly against one another?
For the said main Article of Christ's being the only Savior of the world, etc.
according to different senses of disagreeing Sects, does involve these, and
many other such questions; That Faith in JESUS CHRIST does justify alone; that
Sacraments have no efficiency in Justification; That Baptism does not avail
Infants for Salvation, unless they have an Act of Faith; That there is no
Sacerdotal Absolution from sins; That good works proceeding from God's grace
are not meritorious; That there can be no Satisfaction for the temporal
punishment due to sin, after the guilt or offense is pardoned; No Purgatory; No
prayers for the dead; No Sacrifice of the Mass; No Invocation; No Mediation,
or Intercession of Saints; No inherent Justice; No supreme Pastor, yea no
Bishop by divine Ordinance; No Real presence; No Transubstantiation, with
diverse others. And why? Because (forsooth) these Doctrins derogate from the
Titles of Mediator, Redeemer, Advocate, Foundation, etc. Yea, and are against
the truth of our Saviors humane nature, if we believe diverse Protestants,
writing against Transubstantiation. Let then any judicious man consider,
whether D. Potter, or others, do really satisfy, when they send men to the
Creed for a perfect Catalogue, to distinguish Points Fundamental, from those
which they say are not Fundamental. If he will speak indeed to some purpose,
let him say, This Article is understood in this sense; and in this sense it is
fundamental. That other is to be understood in such a meaning; yet according to
that meaning, it is not so fundamental, but that men may disagree, and deny it
without damnation. But it were no policy for any Protestant to deal so plainly.

6. But to what end should we use many arguments? Even your self are forced to
limit your own Doctrine, and come to say, that the Creed is a perfect Catalogue
of Fundamental Points, taken as it was further opened and explained in some
parts (by occasion of emergent Heresies) in the other Catholic Creeds of
Nice, Constantinople, Page 216.
Ephesus, Chalcedon, and Athanasius. But this explication, or restriction
overthrows your assertion. For as the Apostles Creed was not to us a
sufficient Catalogue, till it was explained by the first Council, nor then till
it was declared by another, etc. So now also, as new Heresies may arise, it
will need particular explanation against such emergent errors; and so it is not
yet, nor ever will be, of it self alone, a particular Catalogue, sufficient to
distinguish betwixt fundamental, and not fundamental points.

7. I come to the second part: That the Creed does not contain all main and
principal Points of Faith. And to the end we may not strive about things either
granted by us both, or nothing concerning the point in question. I must premise
these Observations.

8. First, That it cannot be denied, but that the Creed is most full and
complete, to that purpose for which the holy Apostles, inspired by God, meant
that it should serve, and in that manner as they did intend it, which was, not
to comprehend all particular Points of Faith, but such general heads, as were
most befitting, and requisite for preaching the Faith of Christ to Jews and
Gentiles, and might be briefly and compendiously set down, and easily learned
and remembered. And therefore, in respect of Gentiles, the Creed does mention
God as Creator of all things; and for both Jews and Gentiles, the Trinity, the
Messiah, and Savior, his birth, life, death, resurrection, and glory, from
whom they were to hope remission of sins, and life everlasting, and by whose
sacred Name they were to be distinguished from all other professions, by being
called Christians. According to which purpose S. Thomas of Aquine 2.2. q. 1.
Art. 8.
does distinguish all the Articles of the Creed into-these general heads: That
some belong to the Majesty of the Godhead, others to the Mystery of our
Savior Christ's Humane nature: Which two general objects of Faith, the holy
Ghost does express and conjoyn, Joan 17. Haec est vita aete^ua, etc. This is
life everlasting, that they know thee true GOD, and whom thou have sent JESUS
CHRIST. But it was not their meaning to give us as it were a course of
Divinity, or a Catechism or a particular expression of all Poin^s of Faith,
leaving those things to be performed, as occasion should require, by their own
word or writing, for their time, and afterward for their successors in the
Catholic Church. Our question then is not, Whether the Creed be perfect, as
far as the end for which it was composed, did require; For we believe and are
ready to give our lives for this; but only we deny, that the Apostles did
intend to comprise therein all particular points of belief, necessary to
Salvation, as even by D. Potter's own Page 235.215.
confession, it does not comprehend Agenda, or things belonging to practice, as
Sacraments, Commandments, the acts of Hope, and duties of Charity, which we
are obliged not only to practice, but also to believe be divine infallible
faith. Will he therefore inter that the Creed is not perfect, because it
contains not all those necessary and fundamental Objects of Faith? He will
answer, No, because the Apostles intended only to express credenda, things to
be believed, not practiced. Let him therefore give us leave to say, that the
Creed is perfect, because it wants none of those Objects of belief which were
intended to be set down as we explicated before.

9. The second Observation is, that to satisfy our question what Points in
particular be fundamental, it will not be sufficient to allege the Creed,
unless it contains all such Points either expressly, and immediately; or else in
such manner, that by evident and necessary consequence they may be deduced from
Articles both clearly, and particularly contained therein. For if the deduction
be doubtful, we shall not be sure, that such Conclusions be fundamental: or if
the Articles themselves which are said to be fundamental, be not distinctly,
and particularly expressed, they will not serve us to know, and distinguish all
Points Fundamental, from those which they call, not Fundamental. We do not
deny, but that all Points of Faith, both fundamental and not fundamental, may
be said to be contained in the Creed, in some sense; as for example,
implicitly, generally, or in such involved manner. For when explicitly believe
the Catholic Church, we do not implicitly believe whatsoever she proposes as
belonging to Faith: Or else by way reduction, that is when we are once
instructed in the belief of particular Points of Faith, not expressed, nor by
necessary consequence deducible from the Creed; we may afterward, by some
analogy, or proportion, and resemblance, reduce it to one or-moe of those
Articles which are explicitly contained in the Symbol. Thus S. Thomas, the
Cherubim among Divines, teaches 2.2. q. 1, art. 8. ad 6.
that the miraculous existence of our blessed Saviors body in the Eucharist,
as likewise all his other miracles are reduced to God's Omnipotency, expressed
in the Creed. And D. Potter says, The Eucharist, Page 23^.
being a Seal of that holy Union which we have with Christour Head, by his
Spirit and Faith, and with the Saints his Members by Charity, is evidently
included in the Communion of Saints. But this reductive way, is far from being
sufficient to infer out of the Articles of God's Omnipotency, or of the
Communion of Saints, that our Saviors body is in the Eucharist, and much less
whether it be only in figure, or else in reality; by Transubstantiation, or
Consubstantiation, etc. and least of all, whether or no these Points be
Fundamental. And you hyperbolize, in saying, the Eucharist is evidently
included in the Communion of Saints, as if there could not have been, or was
not, a Communion of Saints, before the blessed Sacrament was instituted. Yet it
is true, that after we know, and believe, there is such a Sacrament, we may
refer it to some of those heads expressed in the Creed, and yet so, as S.
Thomas referrs it to one Article, and D. Potter to another; and in respect of
different analogies or effects, it may be referred to several Articles. The
like I say of other Points of Faith, which may in some sort be reduced to the
Creed, but nothing to D. Potter's purpose: But contrarily it shows, that your
affirming such and such Points to be Fundamental or not Fundamental, is theerly
arbitrary, to serve your turn, as necessity, and your occasions may require.
Which was an old custom amongst Heretics, as we read in De Pectat-Origai.
2.5^^.
S. Austin; Pelagius and Coelestius, desiring fraudulently to avoid the hateful
name of Heresies, affirmed that the question of Original sinue may be disputed
without danger of faith. But this holy Father affirms that it belongs to the
foundation of Faith. We may (says he) endure a disputant who errs in other
questions not yet diligently examined, not yet diligently established by the
whale Authority of the Church, their error may be borne with: but it must not
pass so far as to attempt to shake the Foundation of the Church. We see S.
Augustine places the being of a Point Fundamental or not Fundamental, in that
it has been examined, and established by the Church, although the Point of
which he speaks, namely, Orginal Sin, be not contained in the Creed.

10. Out of that which has been said, I infer, that D. Potters pains in
alleging Catholic Doctors, the ancient Fathers, and the Council of Trent, to
prove that the Creed contains all Points of Faith, was needless; since we grant
it in manner aforesaid. But D. Potter cannot in his conscience believe, that
Catholic Divines, or the Council of Trent, and the holy Fathers did intend,
that all Points in particular which we are obliged to believe, are contained
explicitly in the Creed; he knowing well enough, that all Catholics hold
themselves obliged, to believe all those Points which the said Council define
to be believed under an Anathema, and that all Christians believe the
Commandments, Sacraments etc. which are not expressed in the Creed.

11. Neither must this seem strange. For who is ignorant, that Summaries,
Epitomes, and the like brief Abstracts, are not intended to specify all
particulars of that Science, or Subject, to which they belong. For as the Creed
is said to contain all Points of Faith; so the Decalogue comprehends all
Articles (as I may term them) which concern Charity, and good life: and yet
this cannot be so understood, as if we were disobliged from performance of any
duty, or the eschewing of any vice, unless it be expressed in the ten
Commandments. For, (to omit the precepts of receiving Sacraments, which belong
to practice, or manners, and yet are not contained in the Decalogue) there are
many sins, even against the law of nature, and light of reason, which are not
contained in the ten Commandments, except only by similitude, analogy,
reduction, or some such way. For example, (...) we find not expressed in the
Decalogue, either diverse sins, as Gluttony, Drunkenness, Pride, Sloth,
Covetuousness in desiring either things superfluous, or with too much
greediness; or diverse of our chief obligations, as Obedience to Princes, and
all Superiors, not only Ecclesiastical, but also Civil, whose laws Luther,
Melancthon, Calvin, and some other Protestants do dangerously affirm not to
oblige in conscience, and yet these men think they know the ten Commandments:
as likewise diverse Protestants defend Usury, to be lawful; and the many
Treatises of Civilians, Canonists, and Casuists are witnesses, that diverse sins
against the light of reason, and Law of nature, are not distinctly expressed in
the ten Commandments; although when by others diligence they are found
unlawful, they may be reduced to some of the Commandments, and yet not so
evidently, and particularly but that diverse do it in diverse manners.

12. My third Observation is, That our present question being Whether or no the
Creed contain so fully all Fundamental Points of Faith, that whosoever do not
agree in all, and every one of those Fundamental Articles, cannot have the same
substance of Faith, nor hope of Salvation; if I can produce one, or more
Points, nor contained in the Creed, in which if two do not agree, both of them
cannot expect to be saved, I shall have performed as much as I intend; and D.
Potter must seek out some other Catalogue for Points Fundamental, than the
Creed. Neither is it material to the said purpose, whether such Fundamental
Points rest only in knowledge, and speculation, or belief, or else be farther
referred to work and practice. For the habit, o^ virtue of Faith, which
inclines, and enableth us to believe both speculative and practical verities,
is of one and the self same nature, and essence. For example, by the same
Faith, whereby I speculatively believe there is a God, I likewise believe, that
he is to be adored, served, and loved; which belong to practice. The reason is,
because the Formal Object, or motive, for which I yield assent to those
different sorts of material objects, is the same in both, to wit, the
revelation, or Word of God. Where, by the way I note, that if the Unity, or
Distinction, and nature of Faith were to be taken from the diversity of things
revealed, by one faith I should believe speculative verities and by another
such as tend to practice, which I doubt whether D. Potter himself will admit.

13. Hence it follows, that whosoever denies any one main practical revealed
truth is no less an Heretic, than if he should deny a Point resting in
belief alone. So that when D Potter (to avoid our argument, that all
Fundamental Points are not contained in the Creed, because in it there is no
mention of the Sacraments, which yet are Points of so main importance, that
Protestants make the due administration of them, to be necessary and essential
to constiture a Church) answers, that the Sacraments are to be Page 235.
reckoned, rather among the Agenda of the Church, than the Credenda; they are
rather Divine Rites and Ceremonies, than Doctrins; he either grants what we
affirm, or in effect says, Of two kinds of revealed Truths which are necessary
to be believed, the Creed contains one sort only, ergo, it contains all kind of
revealed Truths necessary to be believed. Our question is not, de nomine, but
re; not what be called Points of Faith, or of Practice, but what Points indeed
be necessarily to be believed, whether they be termed Agenda, or Credenda:
especially the chiefest part of Christian perfection consisting more in Action,
than in barren Speculation; in good works, than bare belief; in doing, than
knowing. And there are no less contentions concerning practical, than
speculative truths: as Sacraments, obtaining remission of sin, Invocation of
Saints, Prayers for dead, Adoration of Christ in the Sacrament, and many other:
all which do so much the more import, as on them, beside right belief, does
also depend our practice, and the ordering of our life. Though D. Potter could
therefore give us (as he will never be able to do) a minute, and exact
Catalogue of all Truths to be believed; that would not make me able enough to
know, whether or no I have Faith sufficient for Salvation; till he also did
bring in a particular List, of all believed Truths, which tend to practice,
declaring which of them be fundamental, which not; that so every man might
know, whether he be not in some Damnable Error, for some Article of Faith,
which farther might give influence into Damnable works.

14. These Observations being premised, I come to prove, that the Creed does
not contain all Points of Faith necessary to be known and believed. And, to
omit, that in general it does not tell us, what Points be fundamental, or not
fundamental, which in the way of Protestants is most necessary to be known; in
particular, there is no mention of the greatest evils, from which man's calamity
proceeded, I mean, the sin of the Angels, of Adam, and of Original sin in us:
nor of the greatest Good from which we expect all good, to wit, the necessity
of Grace for all works tending to piety. Nay, there is no mention of Angels
good or bad. The meaning of that most general head ( Oportet accedentem, etc.
It behooves Heb. 11.6.
him that comes to God, to believe that He is, and is a Remunerator,) is
questioned, by the denial of Merit, which makes God a Giver, but not a
Rewarder. It is not expressed whether the Article of Remission of sins be
understood by Faith alone, or else may admit the efficiency of Sacraments.
There is no mention of Ecclesiastical, Apostolical, Divine Traditions, one way
or other; or of holy Scriptures in general, and much less of every Book in
particular; nor of the Name, Nature, Number, Effects, Matter, Form, Minister,
Intention, Necessity of Sacraments; and yet the due Administration of
Sacraments, is with Protestants an essential Note, of the Church. There is
nothing for Baptism of Children, nor against Re-baptization. There is no
mention in favor, or against the Sacrifice of the Mass, or Power in the Church
to institute Rites, Holy days, etc. and to inflict Excommunication, or other
Censures: or Priesthood, Bishops, and the whole Ecclesiastical Hierarchy, which
are very Fundamental Points; of S. Peter's Primacie, which to Calvin seems a
fundamental error; not of the possibility, or impossibility to keep God's
Commandments; of the procession of the holy Ghost from the Father and Son;
of Purgatory, or Prayer for the dead, in any sense: And yet D. Potter does not
deny, but that Aerius was esteemed an Heretic, for denying Page 35.
all sort of Commemoration for the dead. Nothing of the Churches Visibility or
Invisibility, Fallibility, or Infallibility; nor of other Points controverted
betwixt Protestants themselves, and between Protestants and Catholics, which
to D. Potter seem so heinous corruptions, that they cannot without damnation
join with us in profession thereof. There is no mention of the Cessation of the
Old Law, which yet is a very main Point of Faith. And many other might be also
added.

15. But what need we labor to specify particulars? There are as many
important Points of Faith not expressed in the Creed, as, since the worlds
beginning, now, and for all future times there have been, are, and may be
innumerable, gross, damnable Heresies, whose contrary truths are not contained
in the Creed. For, every, Fundamental Error must have a contrary Fundamental
Truth; because of two contradictory Propositions in the same degree, if the one
is false, the other must be true. As for example, if it be a damnable error to
deny the blessed Trinity, or the Godhead of our Savior, the belief of them
must be a Truth necessary to Salvation; or rather, if we will speak properly,
the Error is damnable, because the opposite Truth is necessary, as death is
frightful, because life is sweet; and according to Philosophy, the Privation is
measured by the Form to which it is repugnant. If therefore the Creed contain
in particular all fundamental Points of Faith, it must explicitly, or by clear
consequence, comprehend all Truths opposite to innumerable Heresies of all Ages
past, present, and to come, which no man in his wits will affirm it to do.

16 And here I cannot omit to signify how you Page 255.
applaud the saying of D. Usher, That in those Propositions which without all
controversy are universally received in the whole Christian world, so much
Truth is contained, as being joined with holy Obedience, may be sufficient to
bring a man to everlasting Salvation; neither have we cause to doubt, but that
as many as walk according to this Rule (neither overthrowing that which they
have builded, by superinducing any damnable heresies thereupon, nor otherwise
vitiating their holy faith, with a lewd and wicked conversation) peace shall be
upon them, and upon the Israel of God. Now D. Potter knows, that the Mystery of
the B. Trinity is not universally received in the whole Christian world, as
appears by very many Heretics, in Polony, Hungary, and Transylvania, and
therefore according to this Rule of D. Usher, approved by D. Potter, the denial
of the B. Trinity, shall not exclude Salvation.

17. Let me note, by the way, that you might easily have espied a foul
contradiction in the said words of D. Usher, by you recited, and so much
applauded. For he supposes, that a man agrees with other Churches in belief,
which joined with holy Obedience may bring him to everlasting Salvation, and
yet, that he may superinduce damnable heresies. For how can he superinduce
damnable heresies, who is supposed to believe all Truths necessary to
Salvation? Can there be any damnable heresy, unless it contradict some
necessary Truth, which cannot happen in one who is supposed to believe all
necessary Truths? Besides, if one believing all Fundamental Articles in the
Creed may superinduce damnable haeresies, it follows, that the Fundamental
Truths contrary to those damnable heresies, are not contained in the Creed.

18. According to this Model of D. Potters foundation, consisting in the
agreement of scarceone Point of Faith; what a strange Church would he make of
men concurring in some one or few Articles of belief, who yet for the rest
should be holding conceits plainly contradictory: so patching up a Religion of
men, who agree only in the Article, That Christ is our Savior, but for the
rest, are like to the parts of a Chimaera; having the head of a man, the neck
of horse, the shoulder of an Ox, the foot of a Lion, etc. I wrong them not
herein. For in good Philosophy there is greater repugnancy between assent and
dissent, affirmation and negation, est, est, non, non, (especially when all
these contradictories pretend to rely upon one and the self same Motive, the
infallible Truth of Almighty God) than between the integral parts, as head,
neck, etc. of a man, horse, lion, etc. And thus Protestants are far more bold
to disagree even in matters of Faith, than Catholic Divines in questions
merely Philosophical, or not determined by the Church. And while thus they
stand only upon fundamental Articles, they do by their own confession destroy
the Church, which is the house of God. For the foundation alone of a house is
not a house, nor can they in such an imaginary Church any more expect
Salvation, than the foundation alone of a house is fit to afford a man
habitation.

19. Moreover, it is most evident that Protestants by this Chaos rather than
Church, do give unavoidable occasion of desperation to poor souls. Let some one
who is desirous to save his soul repair to D. Potter, who maintains these
grounds, to know upon whom he may rely, in a matter of so great consequence; I
suppose the Doctors answer will be, Upon the truly Catholic Church. She
cannot err damnably. What understand you by the Catholic Church? cannot
general Councels, which are the Church representative, err? Yes, they may
weakly, or Page 167.
wilfully misapply, or misunderstand, or neglect Scripture, and so err
damnably. To whom then shall I go for my particular instruction? I cannot
conferr with the united body of the whole Church about my particular
difficulties, as your self affirms, that the Catholic Church cannot be told
Page 27.
of private injuries. Must I then consult with every particular person of the
Catholic Church? So it seems by what you write in these wo^ds, The whole Page
150.
Militant Church (that is, all the members of it) cannot possibly err, either
in the whole Faith, or any necessary Article of it. You say M. Doctor, I cannot
for my instruction accquaint the universal Church with my particular scruples.
You say, the prelates of God's Church meeting in a lawful general Council may
err damnably: It remains then that for my necessary instruction, I must repair
to every particular member of the universal Church, spread over the face of the
earth: and yet you teach that the Promises Page 151.
which our Lord has made unto his Church for his assistance, are intended not
to any particular persons or Churches, but only to the Church Catholic, with
which (as I said) it is impossible for me to conferr. Alas! O most
uncomfortable ghostly Father, you drive me to desperation! How shall I confer
with every Christian soul, man and woman, by sea and by land, close prisoner or
at liberty? etc. Yet, upon supposal of this miraculous Pilgrimage for Faith,
before I have the faith of Miracles, how shall I proceed at our meeting? Or how
shall I know the man on whom I may securely rely? Procure (will you say) to
know whether he believe all Fundamental Points of Faith. For if he do, his
faith, for point of belief, is sufficient for Salvation, though he err in an
hundred things of less moment. But how shall I know, whether he hold all
Fundamental Points or no? For till you tell me this, I cannot know whether or
no his belief be sound in all Fundamental Points. Can you say the Creed? Yes
and so can many damnable Heretics. But why do you ask me this question?
Because the Creed contains all fundamental Points of Faith. Are you sure of
that? Not sure: I hold it very probable. Page 241.
Shall I hazard my soul on probabilities, or even wagers? This yields a new
cause of despair. But what? does the Creed contain all Points necessary to be
believed, whether they rest in the understanding, or else do further extend to
practice? No. It was composed to deliver Credenda, not Agenda to us; Faith, not
Practice. How then shall I know what Points of belief, which direct my
practice, be necessary to Salvation? Still you chalk out new paths for
Desperation. Well, are all Articles of the Creed, for their nature and matter,
Fundamental? I cannot say so. How then shall I know which in particular be and
which be not fundamental? Read my Answer to a late Popish Pamphlet entitled
Charity Mistaken, etc. there you shall find, that fundamental Doctrins are such
Catholic Verities, as principally and essentially pertain Page 211, 213, 214.
to be Faith, such as properly constitute a Church, and are necessary (in
ordinary course) to be distinctly believed by every Christian that will be
saved. They are those grand, and capital Doctrins which make up our Faith in
Christ; that is, that common Faith which is alike precious in all, being one
and the same in the highest Apostle, and the meanest Believer, which the
Apostle elsewhere calls the first Principles of the Oracles of God, and, the
form of sound words. But how shall I apply these general definitions, or
descriptions, or (to say the truth) these only varied words and phrases (for I
understand the word fundamental, as well as the word principal, essential,
grand, and capital doctrins, etc.) to the particular Articles of the Creed, in
such sort, as that I may be able precisely, exactly, particularly, to
distinguish Fundamental Articles from Points of less moment? You labor to tell
us what Fundamental Points be, but not which they be: and yet unless you do
this, your Doctrine serves only, either to make men despair, or else to have
recourse to those whom you call Papists, and which give one certain Rule, that
all Points defined by Christ's visible Church belong to the foundation of Faith,
in such sense, as that to deny any one cannot stand with Salvation. And seeing
your self acknowledges that these men do not err in Points Fundamental, I
cannot but hold it most safe for me to join with them, for the securing of my
soul, and the avoiding of desperation, into which this your Doctrine must cast
all them who understand, and believe it. For the whole discourse, and
inferences which here I have made, are either your own direct Assertions, or
evident Consequences clearly deduced from them.

20. But now let us answer some few Objections of D. Potters, against that
which we have said before, to avoid our argument, That the Scripture is not so
much as mentioned in the Creed, he says, The Creed is an abstract of such Page
234.
necessary Doctrins as are delivered in Scripture, or collected out of it; and
therefore needs not express the Authority of that which it supposes.

21. This Answer makes for us. For by giving a reason why it was needless that
Scripture should be expressed in the Creed you grant as much as we desire,
namely, that the Apostles judged it needless to express all necessary Points of
Faith in their Creed. Neither does the Creed suppose, or depend on Scripture,
in such sort as that we can by any probable consequence, infer from the
Articles of the Creed, that there is any Canonical Scripture at all; and much
less that such Books in particular be Canonical. Yea, the Creed might have been
the same, although holy Scripture had never been written; and, which is more,
the Creed even in priority of time, was before all the Scripture of the New
Testament; except the Gospel of S. Matthew. And so, according to this reason of
his, the Scripture should not mention Articles contained in the Creed. And I
note in a word, how little connection D. Potters arguments have, while he tells
us, that The Creed Page 234.
is an Abstract of such necessary Doctrins as are delivered in Scripture, or
collected out of it, and therefore needs not express the authority of that
which it supposes; it does not follow: The Articles of the Creed are delivered
in Scripture: therefore the Creed supposes Scripture. For two distinct
writtings may well deliver the same Truths, and yet one of them not suppose the
other, unless D. Potter be of opinion that two Doctors cannot, at one time,
speak the same truth.

22. And notwithstanding, that D. Potter has now told us, it was needless that
the Creed should express Scripture whose Authority it supposes? he comes at
length to say, that the Nicene Fathers in their Creed confessing that the holy
Ghost spoke by the Prophets, does thereby sufficiently avow the divine
Authority of all Canonical Scripture. But I would ask him, whether the Nicene
Creed be not also an Abstract of Doctrins delivered in Scripture, as he said of
the Apostles Creed, and thence did infer, that it was needless to express
Scripture, whose authority it supposes? Besides, we do not only believe in
general, that Canonical Scripture is of divine Authority, but we are also bound
under pain of damnation to believe, that such and such particular Books not
mentioned in the Nicene Creed, are Canonical. And lastly D. Potter in this
answer grants as much as we desire, which is, that all Points of Faith are not
contained in the Apostles Creed, even as it is explained by other Creeds. For
these words (who spoke by the Prophets) are no ways contained in the Apostles
Creed, and therefore contain an Addition, not an Explanation thereof.

23. But, how can it be necessary (says D. Potter) for any Christian to have
more in his Creed than the Page 221.
Apostles had, and the Church of their times? I answer, You trifle, not
distinguishing between the Apostles belief, and that abridgment of some
Articles of Faith, which we call the Apostles Creed; and withal you beg the
question, by supposing that the Apostles believed no more, than is contained in
their Creed, which every unlearned person knows and believes: and I hope you
will not deny but the Apostles were endued with greater knowledge than ordinary
persons.

24. Your pretended proof out of the Acts, that the Apostles revealed to the
Church the whole counsel of God, keeping Act. 20 27.
back nothing with your gloss (needful for our Salvation) is no proof, unless
you still beg the question, and co^suppose, that whatsoever the Apostles
revealed to the Church, is contained in the Creed. And I wonder you do not
reflect that those words were by S. Paul particularly directed to Pastors, and
Governors of the Church, as is clear by the other words, He called the Ancients
of the Church. And afterward, Take heed to your selves, and to the whole stock
wherein the holy Ghost has placed you Bishops, to rule the Church. And your
self say, that more knowledge is Page 244.
necessary in Bishops, and Priests, to whom is committed the government of the
Church, and the care of souls, than in vulgar Laics. Do you think that the
Apostles taught Christians nothing but their Creed? Said they nothing of the
Sacraments, Commandments, Duties of Hope, Charity, etc.?

25. Upon the same affected ambiguity is grounded your other Objection: To say,
the whole faith of those times Page 225, 223.
is not contained in the Apostles Creed, is all one, as if a man should say,
This is not the Apostles Creed, but a part of it. For the Faith of the Apostles
is not all one with that which we commonly call their Creed. Did not, I pray
you, S, Matthew, and S John believe their writings to be Canonical Scripture?
and yet their writings are not mentioned in the Creed. It is therefore more
than clear that the Faith of the Apostles is of larger extent, than the
Apostles Creed.

26 To your demand, Why amongst many things of equal necessity to be believed,
the Apostles should Page 223.
so distinctly set down some, and be altogether silent of others? I answer,
That you must answer your own demand. For in the Creed there be diverse Points,
in their nature, not fundamental or necessary to be explicitly and distinctly
believed, as above we showed; Why are these Points which are not fundamental
expressed, rather than other of the same quality? Why our Saviors descent to
Hell, and Burial expressed, and not his Circumcision, his Manifestation to the
three Kings, working of Miracles, etc.? Why did they not express Scriptures,
Sacraments, and all Fundamental Points of Faith tending to practice, as well as
those which rest in belief? Their intention was, particularly to deliver such
Articles as were fittest for those times, concerning the Deity, Trinity, and
Messiah, (as heretofore I have declared) leaving many things to be taught by
the Catholic Church, which in the Creed we all profess to believe. Neither
does it follow, as you infer, That as well, nay better, they might have given
no Article, but that (of the Church) and sent us to the Church for all the
rest. For in setting down others besides that, and not all, they make us
believe we have all, when Page 223.
we have not all. For by this kind of arguing, what may not be deduced? One
might, quite contrary to your inference, say, If the Apostles Creed contain all
Points necessary to Salvation, what need we any Church to teach us? and
consequently what need of the Article concerning the Church? What need we the
Creeds of Nice, Constantinople, etc.? Superfluous are you Catechisms, wherein,
besides the Articles of the Creed, you add diverse others particulars. These
would be poor consequences, and so is yours. But shall I tell you news; For so
you are pleased to esteem it. We grant your inference thus far; That our
Savior Christ referred us to his Church, by her to be taught, and by her
alone. For she was before the Creed, and Scripture; And she, to discharge this
imposed office of instructing us, has delivered us the Creed, but not it
alone, as if nothing else were to be believed. We have, besides it, holy
Scripture; we have unwritten, Divine, Apostolical, Ecclesiastical Traditions.
It were a childish Argument, The Creed contains not all things which are
necessary to be believed: Ergo, it is not profitable. Or, The Church alone, is
sufficient to teach us by some convenient means: Ergo, she must teach us
without all means, without Creeds, without. Councils, without Scripture, etc.
If the Apostles had expressed no Article, but that of the Catholic Church,
she must have taught us the other Articles in particular, by Creeds, or other
means as in fact we have even the Apostles Creed from the Tradition of the
Church. It you will believe you have all in the Creed, when you have not all,
it is not the Apostles, or the Church, that makes you so believe but it is your
own error, whereby you will needs believe that the Creed must contain all. For
neither the Apostles, nor the Church, nor the Creed it self tell you any such
matter; and what necessity is there, that one means of instruction, must
involve whatsoever is contained in all the rest? We are not to recite the Creed
with anticipated persuasions, that it must contain what we imagine it ought,
for better maintaining some opinions of our own; but we ought to say, and
believe, that it contains what we find in it; of which one Article is, to
believe the Catholic Church, surely to be taught by her, which presupposes
that we need other instruction beside the Creed: and in particular we may learn
of her, what Points be contained in the Creed, what otherwise; and so we shall
not be deceived, by beliving we have all in the Creed, when we have not all:
and you may in the same manner say, As well nay better, the Apostles might have
given us no Articles at all, as have left out Articles tending to practice. For
in setting down one sort of Articles, and not the other, they make us believe
we have all, when we have not all.

27. To our Argument, that Baptism is not contained in the Creed, D. Potter,
besides his answer, that Sacraments belong rather to practice than faith,
(which I have already confuted, and which indeed makes against himself, and
serves only to show that the Apostles intended not to comprize all Points in
the Creed which we are bond to believe) adds, that the Creed of Page 237.
Nice expressed Baptism by name [confess one Baptism for the remission of
sins.] Which answer is directly against himself, and manifestly proves that
Baptism is an Article of Faith, and yet is not contained in the Apostles Creed,
neither explicitly, nor by any necessary consequence from other Articles
expressed therein. If, to make it an Article of Faith, be sufficient that it is
contained in the Nicene Council; he will find that Protestants maintain many
errors against faith, as being repugnant to definitions of general Councils:
as, in particular, that the very Council of Nice, which (says M. Whitgift, In
his defense, page 330.
is of all wise and learned men reverenced, esteemed, and embraced, next unto
the Scriptures themselves) decreed, that to those who were chosen to the
Ministry unmarried, it was not lawful to take any wife afterward, is affirmed
by Protestants. And your grand Reformer Luther (lib. de Contiliis part prima)
says, that he understands not the holy Ghost in that Council. For in one
Canon is says that those who have gelded themselves are not fit to be made
Priests, in another it forbids them to have wives Has (says he) the holy
Ghost nothing to do in Councels, but to bind and load his Ministers with
impossible, dangerous, and unnecessary laws? I forbear to show that this very
Article, I confess one Baptism for the Remission of sins, will be understood by
Protestants in a far different sense from Catholics; yea, Protestants among
themselves do not agree, How Baptism forgives sins, nor what grace it conferrs.
Only concerning the Unity of Baptism against re-baptization of such as were
once baptized (which I noted as a Point not contained in the Apostles Creed) I
cannot omit an excellent place of S. Augustine, where, speaking of the
Donatists, he has these words: They are so bold as Lib. de Haeres. in 69.
to re-baptize Catholics, wherein they show themselves to be greater
Heretics, since it has pleased the universal Catholic Church not to make
Baptism void, even in the very Heretics themselves. In which few words, this
holy Father delivers against the Donatists these Points which do also make
against Protestants: That to make an Heresy, or an Heretic, known for such,
it is sufficient, to oppose the definition of God's Church: That a Proposition
may be Heretical, though it be not repugnant to any Texts of Scripture. For S.
Augustine teaches that the doctrine of re^baptization is heretical, and yet
acknowledges it cannot be convinced for such out of Scripture. And that,
neither the Heresy of re-baptization of those who were baptized by Heretics,
nor the contrary Catholic truth being expressed in the Apostles Creed, it
follows that it does not contain all Points of Faith necessary to Salvation.
And so we must conclude that to believe the Creed, is not sufficient for Unity
of Faith, and Spirit, in the same Church, unless there be also a total
agreement both in belief of other Points of Faith, and in external profession,
and Communion also (whereof we are to speak in the next Chapter) according to
the saying of S Augustine, Aug. ep. 48.
with us in Baptism, and in the Creed; but in the Spirit of Unity, and b^nd of
peace, and lastly in the Catholic church, you are not with us.

The ANSWER to the FOURTH CHAPTER. Wherein is showed, that the Creed contains
all necessary Points of mere Belief.
1. AD. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. Concerning the Creed's containing the Fundamentals of
Christianity, this is D. Potter's Assertion, delivered in the 207. p. of his
Book. The Creed of the Apostles (as it is explained in the latter Creeds of the
Catholic Church) is esteemed a sufficient Summary or Catalogue of
Fundamentals, by the best learned Romanists, and by Antiquity.

2. By Fundamentals he understands not the Fundamental Rules of good life and
action, (though every one of these is to be believed to come from God, and
therefore virtually includes an Article of Faith;) but the Fundamental
Doctrines of Faith, such, as though they have influence upon our lives, as
every essential doctrine of Christianity has, yet we are commanded to believe
them, and not to do them. The assent of our understandings is required to them,
but no obedience from our wills.

3. But these speculative Doctrines again he distinguishes out of Aquinas,
Occham, and Canus, and others, into two kinds: of the first are those which are
the Objects of Faith, in, and for themselves, which by their own nature and
God's prime intention, are essential parts of the Gospel: such as the Teachers
in the Church, cannot without Mortal sin omit to teach the learners: such as
are intrinsecal to the Covenant between God and man; and not only plainly
revealed by God, and so certain truths, but also commanded to be preached to all
men, and to be believed distinctly by all, and so necessary truths. Of the
second sort are Accidental, Circumstantial, Occasional objects of Faith;
millions whereof there are in holy Scripture; such as are to be believed, not
for themselves, but because they are joined with others that are necessary to
be believed, and delivered by the same Authority which delivered these. Such as
we are not bound to know to be divine Revelations, (for without any fault we
may be ignorant hereof, nay believe the contrary;) such as we are not bound to
examine, Whether or no they be divine Revelations: such as Pastors are not
bound to teach their Flock, nor their Flock bound to know and remember: no nor
the Pastors themselves to know them or believe them, or not to disbelieve them
absolutely and always; but then only when they do see, and know them to be
delivered in Scripture, as divine Revelations.

4. I say when they do so, and not only when they may do. For to lay an
obligation upon us of believing, or not disbelieving any Verity, sufficient
Revelation on God's part, is not sufficient: For then, seeing all the express
Verities of Scripture are either to all men, or at least to all learned men
sufficiently revealed by God, it should be a damnable sin, in any learned man
actually to disbelieve any one particular Historical verity contained in
Scripture, or to believe the contradiction of it, though he knew it not to be
there contained. For though he did not, yet he might have known it; it being
plainly revealed by God, and this revelation being extant in such a Book,
wherein he might have found it recorded, if with diligence he had perused it.
To make therefore any Points necessary to be believed, it is requisite, that
either we actually know them to be divine Revelations: and these though they be
not Articles of Faith, nor necessary to be believed, in and for themselves, yet
indirectly, and by accident, and by consequence, they are so: The necessity of
believing them, being in forced upon us by a necessity of believing this
Essential, and Fundamental Article of Faith, That all Divine Revelations are
true, which to disbelieve, or not to believe, is for any Christian not only
impious, but impossible. Or else it is requisite that they be, First actually,
revealed by God: Secondly, commanded under pain of damnation, to be
particularly known (I mean known to be divine Revelations,) and distinctly to
be believed. And of this latter sort of speculative divine Verities, D. Potter
affirmed, that the Apostles Creed was a sufficient summary: yet he affirmed it,
not as his own opinion, but as the doctrine of the ancient Fathers, and your own
Doctors. And besides, he affirmed it not as absolutely certain, but very
probable.

5. In brief, all that he says is this: It is very probable, that according to
the judgment of the Roman Doctors, and the Ancient Fathers, the Apostles Creed
is to be esteemed a sufficient summary of all those Doctrines which being
merely Credenda, and not Agenda, all men are ordinarily, under pain of
damnation, bound particularly to believe.

6. Now this Assertion (you say) is neither pertinent to the question in hand,
nor in it self true. Your Reasons to prove it impertinent, put into form and
divested of impertinencies, are these. 1. Because the question was not, What
Points were necessary to be explicitly believed, but what Points were
necessary not to be disbelieved after sufficient proposal. And therefore to
give a Catalogue of Points necessary to be explicitly believed, is impertinent.

7. Secondly, because errors may be damnable, though the contrary truths be not
of themselves fundamental; as, that Pontius Pilate was our Saviors Judge, is
not in it self a Fundamental Truth, yet to believe the contrary were a damnable
error. And therefore to give a Catalogue of Truths in themselves fundamental,
is no pertinent satisfaction to this demand, what errors are damnable?

8. Thirdly, because if the Church be not universally infallible, we cannot
ground any certainty upon the Creed, which we must receive upon the credit of
the Church: and, if the Church be universally infallible, it is damnable to
oppose her declaration in any thing, though not contained in the Creed.

9. Fourthly, because not to believe the Articles of the Creed in the true
sense is damnable, therefore it is frivolous to say, the Creed contains all
Fundamentals, without specifying in what sense the Articles of it are
fundamental.

10. Fifthly, because the Apostles Creed ( as D. Potter himself confesses) was
not a sufficient Catalogue, till it was explained by the first Council; nor
then until it was declared in the second, etc. by occasion of emergent
Heresies: Therefore now also, as new Heresies may arise, it will need
particular explanation; and so is not yet, nor ever will be, a complete
Catalogue of Fundamentals.

11. Now to the first of these Objections I say, First, that your distinction
between Points necessary to be believed, and necessary not to be disbelieved,
is more subtle than sound; a distinction without a difference: There being no
Point necessary to be believed; which is not necessary not to be disbelieved:
Nor no Point to any man, at any time, in any circumstances, necessary not to be
disbelieved, but it is to the same man, at the same time, in the same
circumstances, necessary to be believed. Yet that which (I believe) you would
have said, I acknowledge true, that many Points which are not necessary to be
believed absolutely, are yet necessary to be believed upon a supposition, that
they are known to be revealed by God: that is, become then necessary to be
believed, when they are known to be Divine Revelations. But then I must needs
say, you do very strangely, in saying, That the Question was, What Points might
lawfully be disbelieved, after sufficient Proposition that they are divine
Revelation. You affirm, that none may; and so does D. Potter, and with him all
Protestants, and all Christians. And how then is this the question? Who ever
said or thought, that of Divine Revelations, known to be so, some might safely
and lawfully be rejected, and disbelieved, under pretense that they are not
Fundamental? Which of us ever taught, that it was not damnable, either to deny,
or so much as doubt of the Truth of any thing, whereof we either know, or
believe that God has revealed it? What Protestant ever taught that it was not
damnable, either to give God the lie, or to call his Veracity into question?
Yet you say, The demand of Charity Mistaken was, and it was most reasonable,
that a List of Fundamentals should be given, the denial whereof destroys
Salvation, whereas the denial of other Points may stand with Salvation,
although both kinds be equally proposed, as revealed by God.

12. Let the Reader peruse Charity Mistaken, and he shall find that this
qualification, although both kinds of Points be equally proposed as revealed by
God, is your addition, and no part of the demand. And if it had, it had been
most unreasonable, seeing he and you know well enough, that (though we do not
presently without examination, fall down and worship all your Churches
Proposals, as divine Revelations) yet, we make no such distinction of known
divine Revelations, as if some only of them were necessary to be believed, and
the rest might safely be rejected. So that to demand a particular minute
Catalogue of all Points that may not be disbelieved after sufficient
Proposition, is indeed to demand a Catalogue of all Points that are or may be,
in as much as none may be disbelieved, after sufficient Proposition, that it is
a divine Revelation. At least it is to desire us, First, To transcribe into
this Catalogue, every Text of the whole Bible. Secondly, to set down
distinctly, those innumerous millions of negative and positive consequences,
which may be evidently deduced from it: For these we say, God has revealed.
And indeed you are not ashamed in plain terms to require this of us. For having
first told us, that the command was What points were necessary not to be
disbelieved, after sufficient proposition that they are Divine Truths: you come
to say, Certainly the Creed contains not all these. And this you prove by
asking, How many Truths are there in holy Scripture, not contained in the
Creed, which we are not bound to know and believe, but are bound under pain of
damnation not to reject, as soon as we come to know that they are found in holy
Scripture? So that in requiring a particular Catalogue of all Points not to be
disbelieved, after sufficient Proposal, you require us to set you down all
Points contained in Scripture, or evidently deducible from it. And yet this you
are pleased to call a reasonable, nay, a most reasonable Demand: whereas having
engaged your self to give a Catalogue of your Fundamentals, you conceive your
engagement very well satisfied by saying, All is Fundamental which the Church
proposes, without going about to give us an endless Inventory of her
Proposals. And therefore from us, instead of a perfect Particular of Divine
Revelations of all sorts, (of which with a lest Hyperbole than S. John uses,
we might say, If they were to be written, the world would not hold the books
that must be written;) methinks you should accept of this general, All Divine
Revelations are true, and to be believed. Which yet I say, not as if I thought
the belief of this General sufficient to Salvation; but because I conceive it
as sufficient as the belief of your General: and therefore I said not,
Methinks all should accept of this General, but, Methinks you should accept
of it.

13. The very truth is, The main Question in this business is not, What divine
Revelations are necessary to be believed, or not rejected when they are
sufficiently proposed: for all without exception, all without question are so;
But what Revelations are simply and absolutely necessary to be proposed to the
belief of Christians, so that that Society, which does propose, and indeed
believe them, has for matter of Faith, the essence of a true Church; that
which does not, has not. Now to this Question, though not to yours, D.
Potter's Assertion (if it be true) is apparently very pertinent. And though not
a full and total satisfaction to it, yet very effectual, and of great moment
toward it. For the main Question being, What Points are necessary to
Salvation: and Points necessary to Salvation, being of two sorts, some of
simple belief, some of Practice and Obedience, he that gives you a sufficient
summary of the first sort of necessary Points, has brought you half way
toward your journies end. And therefore that which he does, is no more to be
slighted, as vain and impertinent* than an Architect's work is to be thought
impertinent toward the making of a house, because he does it not all himself.
Sure I am, if his Assertion be true, as I believe it is, a Corollary may
presently be deduced from it, which, if it were embraced cannot in all reason,
but do infinite service, both to the Truth of Christ, and the peace of
Christendom. For seeing falsehood and error could not long stand against the
power of Truth, were they not supported by Tyranny and worldly advantages, he
that could assert Christians to that liberty which Christ and his Apostles left
them, must needs do Truth a most Heroical service. And seeing the overvaluing
of the differences among Christians, is one of the greatest maintainers of the
Schisms of Christendom, he that could demonstrate, that only those Points of
Belief are simply necessary to Salvation, wherein Christians generally agree,
should he not lay a very fair and firm foundation of the peace of Christendom?
Now the Corollary, which, I conceive, would produce these good effects, and
which flows naturally from D. Potter's Assertion, is this, That what Man or
Church soever believes the Creed, and all the evident consequences of it
sincerely and heartily, cannot possibly (if also he believe the Scripture) be
in any Error of simple belief which is offensive to God: nor therefore deserve
for any such Error to be deprived of his life, or to be cut off from the
Churches Communion, and the hope of Salvation. And the production of this again
would be this (which highly concerns the Church of Rome to think of,) That
whatsoever Man or Church does for any error of simple belief, deprive any man
so qualified as above, either of his temporal life, or livelihood, or liberty,
or of the Churches Communion, and hope of Salvation, is for the first, unjust,
cruel, and tyrannous: Schismatical, presumptuous, and uncharitable for the
second.

13. Neither yet is this (as you pretend) to take away the necessity of
believing those verities of Scripture, which are not contained in the Creed,
when once we come to know that they are written in Scripture, but rather to lay
a necessity upon men of believing all things written in Scripture, when once
they know them to be there written. For he that believes not all known Divine
Revelations to be true, How does he believe in God? Unless you will say, that
the same man, at the same time, may not believe God, and yet believe in him.
The greater difficulty is, How it will not take away the necessity of believing
Scripture to be the Word of God? But that it will not neither. For though the
Creed be granted a sufficient Summary of Articles of mere Faith, yet no man
pretends that it contains the Rules of obedience; but for them, all men are
referred to Scripture. Besides, he that pretends to believe in God, obliges
himself to believe it necessary to obey that which Reason assures him to be the
Will of God. Now Reason will assure him that believes the Creed, that it is the
Will of God he should believe the Scripture: even the very same Reason which
moves him to believe the Creed: Universal, and never-failing Tradition, having
given this testimony both to Creed and Scripture, that they both by the works
of God were sealed, and testified to be the words of God. And thus much be
spoken in Answer to your first Argument; the length whereof will be the more
excusable, if I oblige my self to say but little to the Rest.

14. I come then to your second. And, in Answer to it, deny flatly, as a thing
destructive of it self, that any Error can be damnable, unless it be repugnant
immediately or mediatly, directly or indirectly, of it self or by accident, to
some Truth for the matter of it Fundamental. And to your example of Pontius
Pilat's being Judge of Christ, I say, the denial of it in him that knows it to
be revealed by God, is manifestly destructive of this Fundamental Truth, that
All Divine Revelations are true. Neither will you find any error so much as by
accident damnable, but the rejecting of it will be necessarily laid upon us, by
areal belief of all Fundamentals, and simply necessary Truths. And I desire you
would reconcile with this, that which you have said. 15. Every Fundamental
Error must have a contrary Fundamental Truth, because, of two Contradictory
Propositions, in the same degree, the one is false, the other must be true, etc.

15. To the Third I answer, That the certainty I have of the Creed, that it was
from the Apostles, and contains the Principles of Faith, I ground it not upon
Scripture, and yet not upon the Infallibility of any present, much less of your
Church, but upon the Authority of the Ancient Church, and written Tradition,
which (as D. Potter has proved) gave this constant testimony unto it. Besides,
I tell you, it is guilty of the same fault which D. Potter's Assertion is here
accused of: having perhaps some color toward the proving it false, but none at
all to show it impertinent.

16. To the Fourth, I answer plainly thus, that you find fault with D. Potter
for his Virtues: you are offended with him for not usurping the Authority which
he had not; in a word, for not playing the Pope. Certainly, if Protestants be
faulty in this matter, it is for doing it too much, and not too little. This
presumptuous imposing of the senses of men upon the words of God, the special
senses of men upon the general words of God, and laying them upon men's
consciences together, under the equal penalty of death, and damnation; this
Vain conceit that we can speak of the things of God, better than in the words
of God: This Deifying our own Interpretations, and Tyrannous enforcing them
upon others; This restraining of the word of God from that latitude and
generality, and the understandings of men, from that liberty, wherein Christ
and the Apostles left them, This pe^^s^asion is no singularity of mine, but the
doctrine which (...) have learned ^^om Divin^s of g^e^t learning and judgment.
Let the (...) Reader be pleased to peruse the seventh book of Acont. de Strat.
Satanae And Zanch. his last Oration delivered by him after the composing of the
discord between him and Amerbachius, and he shall confess as much.
is, and has been the only fountain of all the Schisms of the Church, and that
which makes them immortal: the common incendiary of Christendom, and that which
(as I said before) tears into pieces, not the coat, but the bowels, and members
of Christ: Ridente Turca nec dolente Judaeo. Take away these Walls of
separation, and all will quickly be one. Take away this Persecuting, Burning,
Cursing, Damning of men for not subscribing to the words of men, as the words
of God; Require of Christians only to believe Christ, and to call no man Master
but him only: Let those leave claiming Infallibility, that have no title to it;
and let them that in their words disclaim it, disclaim it likewise in their
actions. In a word, take away Tyranny, which is the Devils instrument to
support errors, and superstitions, and impieties, in the several parts of the
world, which could not otherwise long withstand the power of Truth; I say, take
away Tyranny, and restore Christians to their just and full liberty of
captivating their understanding to Scripture only, and as Rivers when they have
a free passage, run all to the Ocean, so it may well be hoped by God's
blessing, that Universal Liberty thus moderated, may quickly reduce Christendom
to Truth and Unity. These thoughts of peace (I am persuaded) may come from the
God of peace, and to His blessing I commend them, and proceed.

18. Your fifth and last Objection stands upon a false and dangerous
supposition: That new Heresies may arise. For an Heresy being in it self
nothing else but a Doctrine Repugnant to some Article of the Christian Faith, to
say that new Heresies may arise, is to say, that new Articles of Faith may
arise: and so some great Ones among you stick not to profess in plain terms,
who yet at the same time are not ashamed to pretend that your whole Doctrine is
Catholic and Apostolic. So Salmeron: Non omnibus omnia dedit Deus, ut
quaelibet aetas suis gaudeat veritatibus, quas prior aetas ignoravit. God has
not given all things to 'All: So that every Age has its proper verities, which
the former Age was ignorant of: Dis. 57. in Epist. ad Romans And again in the
Margent, Habet unumquodque saeculum peculiares revelationes divinas, Every Age
has its peculiar Divine Revelations. Where that he speaks of such Revelations,
as are, or may by the Church be made matters of Faith, no man can doubt that
reads him; an example whereof, he give us a little before in these words, Unius
Augustini doctrina Assumptionis B. Deiparae cultum in Ecclesiam introduxit. The
Doctrine of Augustine only, has brought into the Church the Worship of the
Assumption of the Mother of God, etc. Others again mince and palliate the
matter with this pretense, that your Church undertakes not to coin new Articles
of Faith, but only to declare those that want sufficient Declaration. But if
sufficient declaration be necessary to make any Doctrine an Article of Faith,
then this Doctrine, which before wanted it, was not before an Article of Faith;
and your Church by giving it the Essential form, and last complement of an
Article of Faith, makes it, though not a Truth, yet certainly an Article of
Faith. But I would fain know, whether Christ and his Apostles knew this
Doctrine, which you pretend has the matter, but wants the form of an Article of
Faith, that is, sufficient declaration, whether they knew it to be a necessary
Article of the Faith, or no. If they knew it not to be so, then either they
taught what they knew not, which were very strange; or else they taught it not:
and if not, I would gladly be informed, seeing you pretend to no new
Revelations, From whom you learned it? If they knew it, then either they
concealed or declared it. To say, they concealed any necessary part of the
Gospel, is to charge them with far greater sacrilege, than what was punished
in Ananias and Saphira. It is to charge these glorious Stewards, and Dispensers
of the Mysteries of Christ, with want of the great virtue requisite in a
Steward, which is Fidelity. It is to charge them with presumption for
denouncing Anathema's, even to Angels, in case they should teach any other
Doctrine, than what they had received from them, which sure could not merit an
Anathema, if they left any necessary part of the Gospel untaught. It is in a
word, in plain terms to give them the lie, seeing they profess plainly and
frequently, that they taught Christians the whole Doctrine of Christ. If they
did know and declare it, then it was a full and formal Article of faith; and
the contrary a full and formal Heresy, without any need of further
declaration; and then their Successors either continued the declaration of it,
or discontinued it: If they did the latter, How are they such faithful
Depositaries of Apostolic Doctrine as you pretend? Or, what assurance can you
give us, that they might not bring in new and false Articles, as well as suffer
the oldand true ones to be lost? If they did continue the declaration of it,
and deliver it to their Successors, and they to theirs, and so on perpetually;
then continued it still a full and formal Article of Faith, and the repugnant
doctrine a full and formal Heresy, without and before the definition or
declaration of a Council. So that Councels, as they cannot make that a truth or
falsehood, which before was not so: so neither can they make or declare that to
be an Article of Faith, or an Heresy, which before was not so. The supposition
therefore on which this Argument stands, being false and ruinous, whatsoever'
is built upon it, must together with it fall to the ground. This explication
therefore, and restriction of this doctrine, (whereof you make your advantage)
was to my understanding unnecessary. The Fathers of the Church in aftertimes
might have just cause to declare their judgment, touching the sense of some
general Articles of the Creed: but to oblige others to receive their
declarations under pain of damnation, what warrant they had, I know not. He
that can show, either that the Church of all Ages was to have this Authority,
or that it continued in the Church for some Ages, and then expired: He that can
show either of these things, let him: for my part, I cannot. Yet I willingly
confess the judgment of a Council, though not infallible, is yet so far
directive, and obliging, that without apparent reason to the contrary, it may
be sin to reject it, at least not to afford it an outward submission for
public peace sake.

19. Ad. 7, 8, 9. Were I not peradventure more fearful than I need to be of the
imputation of tergiversation, I might very easily rid my hands of the remainder
of this Chapter: For in the Question there discussed, you grant (for ought I
see) as much as D. Potter desires; and D. Potter grants as much as you desire:
and therefore that I should disease my self, or my Reader with a punctual
examination of it, may seem superfluous. First, that which you would have, and
which your Arguments wholly drive at, is this, That the Creed does not contain
all main and principal points of Faith of all sorts, whether they be
speculative, or practical, where they contain matter of simple belief, or
whether they contain matter of practice and obedience. This D. Potter grants,
page 215.235. And you grant that he grants it,. 8. Where your words are, even
by D. Potter's own confession, it (the Creed) does not comprehend Agenda, or
things belonging to practice, as Sacraments, Commandments, the Acts of Hope,
and duties of Charity. And if you will infer from hence, that therefore C.M.
has no reason to rest in the Apostles Creed, as a perfect catalogue of
Fundamentals, and a full satisfaction to his demand, I have without any offense
of D. Potter, granted as much, if that would content you. But seeing you go on,
and, because his assertion is not (as neither is it pretended to be) a total
satisfaction to the demand, casheer it as impertinent, and nothing toward it,
here I have been bold to stop your proceeding, as unjust and unreasonable. For,
as if you should request a Friend to lend you, or demand of a debtor to pay
you, a hundred pounds, and he could or should let you have but fifty, this were
not fully to satisfy your demand, yet sure it were not, to do nothing toward
it: Or, as this rejoinder of mine, though it be not an answer to all your Book,
but only to the First considerable Part of it, and so much of the Second as is
material, and falls into the first, yet I hope you will not deal so unkindly
with me^ as for this reason, to condemn it of impertinence: So D. Potter being
demanded a Catalogue of Fundamentals of Faith, and finding them of two kinds,
and those of one kind summed up to his hand in the Apostles Creed, and this
Creed consigned unto him for such a summary by very great Authority; if upon
these considerations he has entreated his Demander to accept of thus much in
part of payment, of the Apostles Creed, as a sufficient Summary of these
Articles of Faith, which are, merely Credenda, methinks he has little reason
to complain, that he has not been fairly, and squarely dealt with. Especially,
seeing, for full satisfaction, by D. Potter and all Protestants he is referred
to Scripture, which we affirm contains evidently all necessary points of Faith,
and rules of obedience: and seeing D. Potter in this very place has subjoyned,
though not a Catalogue of Fundamentals, which (because to some more is
Fundamental, to others less, to others nothing at all) had been impossible, yet
such a comprehension of them, as may serve every one that will make a
conscionable use of it, instead of a Catalogue. For thus he says, It seems to
be Fundamental to the Faith, and for the salvation of every Member of the
Church, that he acknowledge and believe all such Points of Faith, whereof he may
be sufficiently convinced that they belong to the Doctrine of Jesus Christ. This
general rule, if I should call a Catalogue of Fundamentals, I should have a
President for it with you above exception, I mean your Self; for, Chap. 3.. 19.
just such another Proposition you have called by this name. Yet because it were
a strange figure of speech, I forbear it; only I will be bold to say, that this
Assertion is as good a Catalogue of Fundamentals, as any you will bring of your
Church Proposals, though you take as much time to do it, as he that undertook
to make an Ass speak.

20. I come now to show that you also have requited D. Potter with a mutual
courteous acknowledgment of his Assertion, That the Creed is a sufficient
Summary of all the necessary Articles of Faith, which are merely Credenda.

21. First then,. 8. you have these words, It cannot be denied that the Creed
is most full and complete to that purpose, for which the holy Apostles,
inspired by God, meant that it should serve, and in that manner as they did
intend it, which was, not to comprehend all particular. Points of Faith, but
such general heads as were most befitting and requisite for preaching the Faith
of Christ, to Jews and Gentiles, and might be briefly and compendiously set
down, and easily learned and remembered. These words, I say, being fairly
examined, without putting them on the rack, will amount to a full
acknowledgment of D. Potters. Assertion. But before I put them to the question,
I must crave thus much right of you, to grant me this most reasonable
postulate, that the Doctrine of Repentance from dead works, which S. Paul
says, was one of the two only things which he preached, and the Doctrine of
Charity, without which (the same S. Paul assures us that) the knowledge of all
mysteries, and all faith is nothing, were Doctrins more necessary and
requisite, and therefore more fit to be preached to Jews and Gentiles than
these, under what Judge our Savior suffered, that he was buried, and what time
he rose again: which you have taught us, cap. 3. 2. for their matter and nature
in themselves not to be Fundamental.

22. And upon this grant, I will ask no leave to conclude, that, whereas you
say, the Apostles Creed was intended for a comprehension of such heads of
faith, as were most befitting and requisite, for preaching the faith of Christ,
etc. You are now, for fear of too much debasing those high Doctrins of
Repentance and Charity, to restrain your Assertion, as D. Potter does his, and
(though you speak indefinitely) to say you meant it, only of those heads of
Faith, which are merely Credenda. And then the meaning of it (if it have any)
must be this, That the Creed is full for the Apostles intent, which was to
comprehend all such general heads of Faith, which being points of simple
belief, were most fit and requisite to be preached to Jews and Gentiles, and
might be briefly and compendiously set down, and easily learned and remembered.
Neither I nor you, I believe, can make any other sense of your words then this.
And upon this ground thus I subsume. But all the points of belief, which were
necessary, under pain of damnation, for the Apostles to preach, and for those
to whom the Gospel was preached, particularly to know and believe, were most
fit and requisite, nay more then so, necessary to be preached to all both Jews
and Gentiles, and might be briefly and compendiously set down, and easily
learned and remembered: Therefore the Apostle's intent by your confession was in
this Creed, to comprehend all such points. And you say, The Creed is most full
and complete, for the purpose which they intended. The Major of this Syllogism
is your own. The Minor, I should think, needs no proof, yet because all men may
not be of my mind, I will prove it by its parts; and the first part thus,

There is the same necessity, for the doing of these things; which are
commanded to be done, by the same Authority, under the same penalty.

But the same Authority, viz. Divine, under the same penalty, to wit, of
damnation, commanded the Apostles to preach all these Doctrins which we speak
of, and those to whom they were preached, particularly to know and believe
them: For we speak of those only, which were so commanded, to be preached and
believed.

Therefore all these points were alike necessary to be preached to all both
Jews and Gentiles.

Now that all these Doctrins we speak of, may be briefly and compendiously set
down, and easily learned and remembered, He that remembers, that we speak only
of such Doctrins as are necessary to be taught and learned, will require hereof
no farther demonstration. For, (not to put you in mind of what the Poet say,
Non sunt long a quibus nihil est quod demere possis,) who sees not, that seeing
the greatest part of men are of very mean capacities, that it is necessary that
that may be learned easily, which is to be learned of all? What then can hinder
me from concluding thus,

All the Articles of simple belief, which are fit and requisite to be preached,
and may easily be remembered, are by your confession comprised in the Creed:

But all the necessary Articles of Faith are requisite to be preached, and
easy to be remembered;

Therefore they are all comprised in the Creed:

Secondly, from grounds granted by you, I argue thus,

Points of belief in themselves Fundamental, are more requisite to be preached
than those which are not so, (this is evident.)

But the Apostles have put into their Creed some Points that are not in in
themselves Fundamental* so you confess, ubisupra.

Therefore if they have put in all, most requisite to be preached, they have
put in all that in themselves are Fundamental.

Thirdly and lastly, from your own words,. 26, thus I conclude for my purpose.

The Ap^stles intention was, particularly to deliver in the Creed such Articles
as were fittest for those times, concerning the Deity, Trinity, and Messiah;
(Thus you: now I subsume,)

But all points simply necessary, by virtue of Gods command, to be preached and
believed in particular, were as fit for those times as these here mentioned;

Therefore their intention was, to deliver in it particularly all the necessary
points of Belief.

23. And certainly, he that considers the matter advisedly, either must say
that the Apostles were not the Authors of it, or that this was their design in
composing it, or that they had none at all. For whereas you say, Their intent
was, to comprehend in it such general heads as were most befitting and
requisite for preaching the Faith; and elsewhere, Particularly to deliver such
Articles as were fittest for those times; Every wise man may easily see that
your desire here was, to escape away in a Cloud of indefinite terms. For
otherwise, instead of such general heads, and such Articles, why did not you
say plainly, All such, or some such? This had been plain dealing, but I fear,
cross to your design, which yet you have failed of. For that which you have
spoken (though you are loath to speak out) either signifies nothing at all, or
that which I and D. Potter, affirm, viz. That the Apostles Creed contains all
those Points of Belief, which were by Gods command, of necessity to be preached
to all, and believed by all. Neither when I say so, would I be so mistaken, as
if I said, that all points in the Creed are thus necessary: For Punies in
Logic, know that universal affirmatives, are not simply converted. And
therefore it may be true, that all such necessary points, are in the Creed;
though it be not true, that all points in the Creed are thus necessary: which I
willingly grant, of the points by you mentioned. But this rather confirms, than
any way invalidates my Assertion. For how could it stand with the Apostles
wisdom, to put in any points circumstantial and not necessary, and, at the same
time, to leave out any that were essential and necessary for that end, which
you say, they proposed to themselves, in making the Creed, that is, The
preaching of the Faith to Jews and Gentiles?

24. Neither may you hope to avoid the pressure of these acknowledgments, by
pretending as you do that you do indeed acknowledge the Creed to contain all
the necessary Articles of Faith; but yet so, that they are not either there
expressed in it, or deducible from it, by evident consequence, but only by way
of Implication or Reduction. For first, not to tell you, that no Proposition is
employed in any other, which is not deducible from it; nor secondly, that the
Article of the Catholic Church, wherein you will have all employed, implies
nothing to any purpose of yours, unless out of mere favor we will grant the
sense of it to be, that the Church is infallible, and that yours is the Church:
to pass by all this, and require no answer to it, this one thing I may not
omit; that the Apostles intent was (by your own confession) particularly to
deliver in the Creed such Articles of belief as were fittest for those times
(and all necessary Articles I have proved were such:) now to deliver
particularly, and to deliver only implicitly; to be delivered particularly in
the Creed, and only to be reducible to it; I suppose are repugnancies hardly
reconcilable. And therefore, though we desire you, not to grant, that the
Creed contains all Points of Faith of all sorts, any other way than by
implication or reduction, no, nor so neither; yet you have granted, and must
grant, of the Fundamental Points of simple belief, those which the Apostles
were commanded in particular to teach all men, and all men in particular to
know and believe, that these are delivered in the Creed, after a more
particular and punctual manner, than implication or reduction comes to.

25. Ad. 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15. It is vain for you to hope, that the
testimonies of the Ancient and Modern Doctors, alleged to this purpose by D.
Potter in great abundance, will be turned off, with this general deceitful
Answer, That the Allegation of them was needless to prove, that the Creed
contains all Points of Faith, under pretense that you grant it in manner
aforesaid. For what if you grant it in manner aforesaid, yet if you grant it
not (as indeed you do but inconstantly) in the sense which their testimonies
require, then for all this their testimonies may be alleged to very good
purpose. Now let any man read them, with any tolerable indifference, and he
shall find they say plainly; that all Points of Faith, necessary to be
particularly believed, are explicitly contained in the Creed; and that your
Gloss of Implication and Reduction, had it been confronted with their
sentences, would have been much out of countenance, as having no ground nor
color of ground in them. For example, If Azorius had thought thus of it, how
could he have called it, Azor. part. 1. c 5.
A brief comprehension of the Faith, and a sum of all things to be believed,
and, as it were, a sign or cognizance whereby Christians are to be differenced
and distinguished, from the impious and mis-believers, who profess either no
faith, or not the right? If Huntly had been of this mind, how could he have
said of it with any congruity, Cont. 2. c. 10. n. 10.
That the rule of Faith is expressly contained in it, and all the prime
foundations of Faith: And, That the Apostles were not so forgetful as to omit
any prime principal foundation of Faith in that Creed which they delivered to
be believed by all Christians. The words of Filiucius are pregnant to the same
purpose, Moral. quest. Tr. 22. c. 2. n 34.
There cannot be a fitter Rule, from whence Christians may learn what they are
explicitly to believe, than that which is contained in the Creed. Which words
cannot be justified, if all Points necessary to be believed explicitly, be not
comprised in it. To this end (says Putean) In 2.2. qu. 2. Art. 3. Dubuit.
was the Creed composed by the Apostles, that Christians might have a form
whereby they might profess themselves Catholics. But certainly, the Apostles
did this in vain, if a man might profess this, and yet for matter of Faith be
not a Catholic.

26. The words of Cardinal Richelieu Instruction du Christien Lecon pr^miere.
, exact this sense, and refuse your gloss as much as any of the former: The
Apostles Creed is the Summary and Abridgement of that Faith which is necessary
for a Christian; These holy persons being by the Commandment of Jesus Christ
to disperse themselves over the world, and in all parts by preaching the Gospel
to plant the Faith, esteemed it very necessary to reduce into a short sum, all
that which Christians ought to know, to the end that being dispersed into
diverse parts of the world, they might preach the same thing in a short Form,
that it might be the easier remembered. For this effect, they called this
Abridgement a Symbol, which signifies a mark, or sign, which might serve to
distinguish true Christians which embraced it, from Infidels which rejected it.
Now I would fain know how the composition of the Creed could serve for this
end, and secure the Preachers of it, that they should preach the same thing, if
there were other necessary Articles not comprised in it. Or how could it be a
sign to distinguish true Christians from others, if a man might believe it all,
and for want of believing something else, not be a true Christian?

27. The words of the Chapter 3. Confid. 1. Sect 5. p. 119.
Author of the Consideration of four heads propounded to King James, require
the same sense, and utterly renounce your qualification. The Symbol is a brief
yet entire Methodical sum of Christian Doctrine, including all Points of Faith,
either to be preached by the Apostles, or to be believed by their Disciples:
Delivered both for a Direction unto them, what they were to preach, and others
to believe, as also to discern and put a difference betwixt all faithful
Christians and mis-believing Infidels.

28. Lastly, 2.2. dis. 1. q. 2. p. 4. in fin.
Gregory of Valence affirms our Assertion even in terms: The Articles of Faith
contained in the Creed, are, as it were, the first principles of the Christian
Faith, in which is contained the sum of Evangelical Doctrine, which all men are
bound explicitly to believe.

29. To these Testimonies of your own Doctors, I should have added the
concurrent Suffrages of the ancient Fathers, but the full and free
acknowledgment of the same Valentia in the place above quoted will make this
labor unnecessary. So judge (says he) the holy Fathers affirming that this
Symbol of Faith was composed by the Apostles, that all might have a short sum
of those things which are to be believed, and are dispersedly contained in
Scripture.

30. Neither is there any discord between this Assertion of your Doctors, and
their holding themselves obliged to believe all the Points which the Council of
Trent defines. For Protestants and Papists may both hold, that all Points of
Belief necessary to be known and believed, are summed up in the Creed: and yet
both the one and the other think themselves bound to believe whatsoever other
Points they either know, or believe to be revealed by God. For the Articles
which are necessary to be known that they are revealed by God, may be very few;
and yet those which are necessary to be believed, when they are revealed and
known to be so, may be very many.

31. But Summaries and Abstracts are not intended to specify all the
particulars of the Science or Subject to which they belong. Yes, if they be
intended for perfect Summaries, they must not omit any necessary doctrine of
that Science whereof they are Summaries; though the Illustration and Reasons of
it they may omit. If this were not so, a man might set down forty or fifty of
the principal Definitions and Divisions, and Rules of Logic, and call it a
Summary or Abstract of Logic. But sure, this were no more a Summary, than that
were the picture of a man in little, that wanted any of the parts of a man; or
that a total sum, wherein all the particulars were not cast up. Now the
Apostles Creed, you here intimate that it was intended for a Summary; otherwise
why talk you here of Summaries, and tell us that they need not contain all the
particulars of their Science? And of what I pray may it be a Summary, but of
the Fundamentals of Christian Faith? Now you have already told us, That it is
most full and complete to that purpose for which it was intended. Lay all this
together, and I believe the product will be, That the Apostles Creed is a
perfect Summary of the Fundamentals of the Christian Faith; and what the duty
of a perfect Summary is, I have already told you.

32. Whereas therefore to disprove this Assertion, in diverse particles of this
Chapter, but especially the fourteenth, you muster up whole Armies of Doctrins,
which you pretend are necessary, and not contained in the Creed; I answer, very
briefly thus: That the Doctrins you mention, are either concerning matters of
practice, and not simple Belief; or else they are such Doctrins wherein God
has not so plainly revealed himself, but that honest and good men, true Lovers
of God and of Truth, those that desire above all things to know his will and do
it, may err, and yet commit no sin at all, or only a sin of infirmity, and not
destructive of Salvation; or lastly, they are such Doctrins which God has
plainly revealed, and so are necessary to be believed, when they are known to
be divine, but not necessary to be known and believed; not necessary to be
known for divine, that they may be believed. Now all these sorts of Doctrins
are impertinent to the present Question. For D. Potter never affirmed either
that the necessary duties of a Christian, or that all Truths piously credible,
but not necessary to be believed, or that all Truths necessary to be believed
upon the supposal of divine Revelation, were specified in the Creed. For this
he affirms, only of such speculative divine Verities, which God has commanded
particularly to be preached to all, and believed by all. Now let the Doctrins
objected by you be well considered, and let all those that are reducible to the
three former heads be discarded; and then of all these Instances against D.
Potter's Assertion, there will not remain so much as one.

33. First, the Questions touching the conditions to be performed by us to
obtain remission of sins; the Sacraments; the Commandments, and the
possibility of keeping them: the necessity of imploring the Assistance of Gods
Grace and Spirit for the keeping of them: how far obedience is due to the
Church: Prayer for the Dead: the cessation of the old Law, are all about
Agenda, and so cut off upon the first consideration.

34. Secondly the Question touching Fundamentals, is profitable, but not
fundamental. He that believes all Fundamentals, cannot be damned for any error
in Faith, though he believe more or less to be Fundamental than is so. That
also of the procession of the Holy Ghost from the Father and the Son, of
Purgatory, of the Churches Visibility, of the Books of the New Testament, which
were doubted of by a considerable part of the Primitive Church: (until I see
better reason for the contrary than the bare authority of men) I shall esteem
of the same condition.

35. Thirdly, These Doctrins, That Adam and the Angels sinned: that there are
Angels good and bad: that those Books of Scripture which were never doubted of
by any considerable part of the Church, are the Word of God: that S. Peter had
no such Primacy as you pretend: that the Scripture is a perfect Rule of Faith,
and consequently that no necessary Doctrine is unwritten: that there is no one
Society or Succession of Christians absolutely infallible: These to my
understanding are Truths plainly revealed by God, and necessary to be believed
by them who know they are so. but not so necessary, that every man and woman is
bound under pain of damnation particularly to know them to be divine
Revelations, and explicitly to believe them. And for this reason, these with
innumerable other Points, are to be referred to the third sort of Doctrins
abovementioned, which were never pretended to have place in the Creed. There
remains one only Point of all that Army you mustered together, reducible to
none of these heads, and that is, that God is, and is a Remunerator, which you
say is questioned by the denial of Merit. But if there were such a necessary
indissoluble coherence between this Point and the Doctrine of merit, methinks
with as much reason, and more charity you might conclude, That we hold Merit,
because we hold this Point; than that we deny this Point, because we deny
Merit. Besides, when Protestants deny the Doctrine of Merits, you know
right-well, for so they have declared themselves a thousand times, that they
mean nothing else, but with David, that their well-doing extends not is not
truly beneficial, to God with our Savior when they have done all which they
are commanded, they have done their duty only, and no courtesy: And lastly,
with S. Paul, that all which they can suffer for God (and yet suffering is more
then doing) is not worthy to be compared to the glory which shall be revealed.
So that you must either misunderstand their meaning in denying Merit, or you
must discharge their Doctrine of this odious consequence, or you must charge it
upon David, and Paul, and Christ himself. Nay you must either grant their
denial of true Merit just and reasonable; or you must say, that our good
actions are really profitable to God: that they are not debts already due to
him, but voluntary and undeserved Favors: and that they are equal unto and
well worthy of eternal glory which is prepared for them. As for the
inconvenience which you so much fear, That the denial of Merit makes God a
Giver only, and not a Rewarder; I tell you, good Sir, you fear where no fear
is: And that it is both most true on the one side, that you in holding good
Works meritorious of eternal glory make God a Rewarder only and not a Giver,
contrary to plain Scripture, affirming that The gift of God is eternal life;
And that it is most false on the other side, that the Doctrine of Protestants
makes God a Giver only and not a Rewarder; In as much as their Doctrine is, That
God gives not Heaven but to those which do something for it, and so his Gift is
also a Reward; but withal, that whatsoever they do is due unto God beforehand,
and worth nothing to God, and worth nothing in respect of Heaven, and so man's
work is no Merit, and Gods Reward is still a Gift.

36. Put the case the Pope, for a reward of your service done him in writing
this Book, had given you the honor and means of a Cardinal, would you not, not
only in humility, but in sincerity have professed, that you had not merited
such a Reward? And yet the Pope is neither your Creator, nor Redeemer, nor
Preserver, nor perhaps your very great Benefactor; sure I am, not so great as
God Almighty, and therefore has no such right and title to your service as God
has in respect of precedent Obligations. Besides, the work you have done him
has been really advantageous to him: and lastly not altogether
unproportionable to the forementioned Reward. And therefore if by the same
work you will pretend that either you have or hope to have deserved immortal
happiness, I beseech you consider well whether this be not to set a higher
value upon a Cardinals cap, than a Crown of immortal glory, and with that
Cardinal to prefer a part in Paris, before a part in Paradise.

37. In the next Paragraph you beat the air again, and fight manfully with your
own shadow. The Point you should have spoken to, was this, That there are some
Points of simple belief necessary to be explicitly believed, which yet are not
contained in the Creed. Instead hereof you trouble your self in vain to
demonstrate, That many important Points of Faith are not contained in it, which
yet D. Potter had freely granted, and you your self take particular notice of
his granting of it. All this pains therefore you have employed to no purpose;
saving that to some negligent Reader you may seem to have spoken to the very
Point, because that which you speak to, at the first hearing, sounds somewhat
near it. But such a one I must entreat to remember, there be many more Points
of Faith, than there be Articles of Simple belief, necessary to be explicitly
believed: And that though all of the former sort are not contained in the
Creed, yet all of the latter sort may be. As for your Distinction between
Heresies that have been, and Heresies that are, and Heresies that may be, I
have already proved it vain; and that whatsoever may be an Heresy, that is so;
and whatsoever is so, that always has been so, ever since the publication of
the Gospel of Christ. The Doctrine of your Church may like a Snow-ball increase
with rolling, and again, if you please, melt away and decrease: But as Christ
Jesus, so his Gospel, is yesterday, and today, and the same for ever.

38. Our Savior sending his Apostles to preach, gave them no other Commission
than this, Go teach all Nations, baptizing them in the Name of the Father, the
Son, and the Holy Ghost, teaching them to observe all things, whatsoever I have
commanded you. These were the bounds of their Commission. If your Church have
any larger, or if she have a Commission at large, to teach what she pleases,
and call it the Gospel of Christ, let her produce her Letters Patent from
heaven for it. But if this be all you have, then must you give me leave to
esteem it both great sacrilege in you to forbid any thing, be it never so
small or ceremonious, which Christ has commanded; as the receiving of the
Communion in both kinds: and as high a degree of presumption, to enjoin men to
believe, that there are or can be any other Fundamental Articles of the Gospel
of Christ, then what Christ himself commanded his Apostles to teach all men; or
any damnable Heresies, but such as are plainly repugnant to these prime
Verities.

39. Ad. 16, 17. The saying of the most learned Prelate, and excellent man, the
Archbishop of Armach, is only related by D. Potter, p. 155. and not applauded:
though the truth is, both the Man deserves as much applause as any man, and his
saying as much as any saying; it being as great, and as good a Truth, and as
necessary for these miserable times, as possibly can be uttered. For this is
most certain, and I believe you will easily grant it, that to reduce Christians
to Unity of Communion, there are but two ways that may be conceived probable:
The one by taking away diversity of Opinions touching matters of Religion: The
other, by showing that the diversity of Opinions, which is among the several
Sects of Christians, ought to be no hinderance to their Unity in Communion.

40. Now the former of these is not to be hoped for without a miracle, unless
that could be done, which is impossible to be performed, though it be often
pretended; that is, unless it could be made evident to all men, that God has
appointed some visible Judge of Controversies, to whose judgment all men are
to submit themselves. What then remains, but that the other way must be taken,
and Christians must be taught to set a higher value upon these high Points of
Faith and Obedience wherein they agree, than upon these matters of less moment
wherein they differ; and understand, that agreement in those, ought to be more
effectual to join them in one Communion, than their difference in other things
of less moment to divide them? When I say, in one Communion, I mean, in a
common Profession of those Articles of Faith, wherein all consent: A
joynt-worship of God, after such a way as all esteem lawful; and a mutual
performance of all those works of Charity, which Christians owe one to another.
And to such a Communion what better inducement could be thought of, than to
demonstrate that what was universally believed of al Christians, if it were
joined with a love of truth, and with holy obedience, was sufficient to bring
men to heaven? For why should men be more rigid then God? Why should any error
exclude any man from the Churches Communion, which will not deprive him of
eternal Salvation? Now that Christians do generally agree in all those Points
of Doctrine, which are necessary to Salvation, it is apparent, because they
agree with one accord in believing all those Books of the Old and New
Testament, which in the Church were never doubted of to be the undoubted Word
of God. And it is so certain that in all these Books, all necessary Doctrins
are evidently contained, that of all the four Evangelists this is very
probable, but of S. Luke most apparent, that in every one of their Books they
have comprehended the whole substance of the Gospel of Christ. For what reason
can be imagined, that any of them should leave out any thing which he knew to
be necessary, and yet (as apparently all of them have done) put in many things
which they knew to be only profitable and not necessary? What wise and honest
man that were now to write the Gospel of Christ, would do so great a work of
God after such a negligent fashion? Suppose Xaverius had been to write the
Gospel of Christ for the Indians, think you he would have left out any
Fundamental Doctrine of it? If not, I must beseech you to conceive as well of S.
Matthew, and S. Mark, and S. Luke, and S. John, as you do of Xaverius. Besides,
if every one of them have not in them all necessary Doctrins, how have they
complied with their own design, which was, as the Titles of their Books show,
to write the Gospel of Christ, and not a part of it? Or how have they not
deceived us, in giving them such Titles? By the whole Gospel of Christ, I
understand not the whole History of Christ, but all that makes up the Covenant
between God and man. Now if this be wholly contained in the Gospel of S. Mark,
and S. John, I believe every considering man will be inclinable to believe that
then without doubt, it is contained, with the advantage of many other
profitable things, in the larger Gospels of S. Matthew, and S. Luke. And that
S. Mark's Gospel wants no necessary Article of this Covenant, I presume you
will not deny, if you believe Irenaeus, when he says, Matthew to the Hebrews in
their tongue published the Scripture of the Gospel: When Peter and Paul did
preach the Gospel, and found the Church, or a Church at Rome, or of Rome, and
after their departure Mark the scholar of Peter, delivered to us in writing
those things which had been preached by Peter; and Luke, and the follower of
Paul, compiled in a Book the Gospel which was preached by him: And afterward
John, residing in Asia, in the City of Ephesus, did himself also set forth a
Gospel.

41. In which words of Irenaeus, it is remarkable that they are spoken by him
against some Heretics, that pretended (as you know who do now adays) that
some necessary Doctrins of the Gospel were unwritten, and that out of the
Scriptures, truth (he must mean sufficient truth,) cannot be found by those
which know not Tradition. Against whom to say, that part of the Gospel which
was preached by Peter, was written by S. Mark, and some other necessary parts
of it omitted, had been to speak impertinently, and rather to confirm than
confute their error. It is plain therefore, that he must mean, as I pretend,
that all the necessary Doctrine of the Gospel which was preached by S. Peter,
was written by S. Mark. Now you will not deny, I presume, that S. Peter
preached all, therefore you must not deny that S. Mark wrote all.

42. Our next inquiry let it be touching S. John's intent in writing his
Gospel, whether it were to deliver so much truth, as being believed and obeyed
would certainly bring men to eternal life, or only part of it, and to leave
part unwritten? A great man there is, but much less than the Apostle, who
says, that writing last, he purposed to supply the defects of the other
Evangelists that had wrote before him: which (if it were true) would
sufficiently justify what I have undertaken, that at least all the four
Evangelists have in them, all the necessary parts of the Gospel of Christ.
Neither will I deny, but S. John's secondary intent might be to supply the
defects of the former three Gospels, in some things very profitable. But he
that pretends, that any necessary Doctrine is in S. John, which is in none of
the other Evangelists, has not so well considered them as he should do, before
he pronounce sentence of so weighty a matter. And for his prime intent in
writing his Gospel, what that was, certainly no Father in the world understood
it better than himself. Therefore let us hear him speak: Many other signs
(says he) also did Jesus in the sight of his Disciples, which are not written
in this Book: But these are written, that you may believe that Jesus is the
Christ the Son of God, and that believing you may have life in his Name. By
(these are written) may be understood either these things are written, or these
signs are written. Take it which way you will, this conclusion will certainly
follow, That either all that which S. John wrote in his Gospel, or less then
all, and therefore all much more was sufficient to make them believe that,
which being believed with lively faith, would certainly bring them to eternal
life.

43. This which has been spoken (I hope) is enough to justify my undertaking
to the full, that it is very probable that every one of the four Evangelists
has in his Book the whole substance, all the necessary parts of the Gospel of
Christ. But for S. Luke, that he has written such a perfect Gospel, in my
judgment, it ought to be with them that believe him, no manner of question.
Consider first the introduction to his Gospel, where he declares what he
intends to write, in these words, For as much as many have taken in hand to set
forth in order a declaration of those things, which are most surely believed
amongst us, even as they delivered unto us, which from the beginning were
eyewitnesses, and Ministers of the Word, it seemed good to me also, having had
perfect understanding of things from the first, to write to thee in order, most
excellent Theophilus, that thou might know the certainty of those things
wherein thou have been instructed. Add to this place, the entrance to his
History of the Acts of the Apostles: The former Treatise have I made, O
Theophilus, of all that Jesus began both to do and teach, until the day in
which he was taken up. Weigh well these two places and then answer me freely
and ingenuously to these demands. 1. Whether S. Luke does not undertake the
very same thing which he says, many had taken in hand? 2. Whether this were not
to set forth in order, a declaration of those things which are most surely
believed amongst Christians? 3. Whether the whole Gospel of Christ, and every
necessary Doctrine of it, were not surely believed among Christians? 4. Whether
they which were Eyewitnesses and Ministers of the Word from the beginning,
delivered not the whole Gospel of Christ? 5. Whether he does not undertake to
write in order these things whereof he had perfect understanding from the
first? 6. Whether he had not perfect understanding of the whole Gospel of
Christ? 7. Whether he does not undertake to write to Theophilus of all those
things wherein he had been instructed? 8. And whether he had not been
instructed in all the necessary parts of the Gospel of Christ? 9 Whether in the
other Text, All things which Jesus began to do and teach, must not at least
imply, all the Principal and necessary things? 10. Whether this be not the very
interpretation of your Rhemish Doctors, in their Annotation upon this place?
11. Whether all these Articles of the Christian Faith, without the belief
whereof, no man can be saved, be not the Princicipal and most necessary things
which Jesus taught? 12. And lastly, Whether many things which S. Luke has
wrote in his Gospel, be not less principal, and less necessary, than all and
every one of these? When you have well considered these proposals, I believe
you will be very apt to think (if S. Luke be of credit with you) That all
things necessary to salvation, are certainly contained in his writings alone.
And from hence you will not choose but conclude, that seeing all the Christians
in the world, agree in the belief of what S. Luke has written, and not only
so, but in all other Books of Canonical Scripture, which were never doubted of,
in and by the Church, the Learned Archbishop had very just and certain ground
to say, That in these Propositions, which without Controversy are universally
received in the whole Christian world, so much truth is contained, as, being
joined with holy obedience, may be sufficient to bring a man to everlasting
Salvation; and that we have no cause to doubt, but that, as many as walk
according to this rule, neither overthrowing that which they have builded, by
superinducing any damnable Heresy thereupon, nor otherwise vitiating their
holy Faith, with a lewd and wicked conversation, peace shall be upon them, and
upon the Israel of God.

44. Against this, you object two things. The one, that by this Rule, Seeing
the Doctrine of the Trinity is not received universally among Christians, the
denial of it shall not exclude Salvation. The other; that the Bishop
contradicts himself, in supposing a man may believe all necessary Truths, and
yet superinduce some damnable Heresies.

45. To the first I answer, what I conceive he would, whose words I here
justify, that he has declared plainly in this very place, that he meant, not
an absolute, but a limited Universality, and speaks not of propositions
universally believed by all Professions of Christianity that are, but only, by
all those several Professions of Christianity that have any large spread in any
part of the world. By which words be excludes from the universality here spoken
of, the deniers of the Doctrine of the Trinity, as being but a handful of men,
in respect of all, nay in respect of any of these Professions which maintain
it. And therefore it was a great fault in you, either willingly to conceal
these words, which evacuate your Objection, or else negligently to oversee
them. Especially seeing your friend, to whom you are so much beholding, Paulus
Veridicus, in his scurrilous and sophistical Pamphler, against B. Usher's
Sermon, has so kindly offered to lead you by the hand to the observation of
them, in these words: To consider of your Coinopista, or communiter Credenda,
Articles, as you call them, universally believed of all these several
Professions of Christianity, which have any large spread in the World: These
Articles for example, may be the Unity of the Godhead, the Trinity of Persons,
the immortality of the Soul, etc. Where you see that your friend, whom you so
much magnify, has plainly confessed, that notwithstanding the Bishop's words,
the denial of the Doctrine of the Trinity may exclude Salvation; and therefore
in approving and applauding his Answer to the Bishop's Sermon, you have
unawares allowed this Answer of mine to your own greatest Objection.

46. Now for the foul contradiction, which you say the Doctor might easily have
espied in the Bishop's saying, he desires your pardon for his oversight, sight,
for Paulus Veridicus his sake; who though he set himself to find faults with
the Bishop's Sermon, yet it seems this he could not find, or else questionless
we should have heard of it from him. And therefore, if D. Potter, being the
Bishop's friend, have not been more sharp-sighted than his enemies, this, he
hopes, to indifferent Judges will seem no unpardonable offense. Yet this I say,
not as if there were any contradiction at all, much less any foul
contradiction, in the Bishop's words; but as Antipheron's picture, which he
thought he saw in the air before him, was not in the air but in his disturbed
fancy: so all the contradiction which here you descant upon, is not indeed in
the Bishop's saying, but in your imagination. For wherein, I pray, lies this
foul contradiction? In supposing (say you) a man may believe all Truths
necessary to salvation, and yet superinduce a damnable Heresy. I answer, It is
not certain that his words do suppose this: neither, if they do, does he
contradict himself. I say, it is not certain that his words import any such
matter. For ordinarily men use to speak and write so, as here he does, when
they intend not to limit or restrain, but only to repeat, and press, and
illustrate what they have said before. And I wonder, why with your Eagles eyes
you did not espy another foul contradiction in his words as well as this; and
say, that he supposes a man may walk according to the rule of holy obedience,
and yet vitiate his holy Faith with a lewd and wicked Conversation? Certainly,
a lewd Conversation is altogether as contradictious to holy Obedience, as a
damnable Heresy to necessary Truth. What then was the reason that you espied
not this foul contradiction in his words as well as that? Was it because,
according to the Spirit and Genius of your Church, your zeal is greater to that
which you conceive true doctrine, than holy obedience; and think simple error a
more capital crime than sins committed against knowledge and conscience? Or was
it because your Reason told you, that herein he meant only to repeat and not to
limit what he said before? And why then had you not so much candor to conceive
that he might have the same meaning in the former part of the disjunction; and
intend no more but this, Whosoever walks according to this rule of believing
all necessary Truths and holy Obedience, (neither poisoning his faith of those
Truths which he holds, with the mixture of any damnable Heresy, nor vitiating
it with a wicked life) Peace shall be upon him! In which words what man of any
ingenuity will not presently perceive that the words within the parenthesis,
are only a repetition of, and no exception from, those that are without? S.
Athanasius in his Creed tells us, The Catholic Faith is this, that we worship
one God in Trinity, and Trinity in Unity, neither confounding the Persons, nor
dividing the Substance; and why now do you not tell him that he contradicts
himself, and supposes that we may worship a Trinity of Persons, and one God in
substance, and yet confound the Persons, or divide the substance: which yet is
impossible, because Three remaining Three, cannot be confounded, and One
remaining One cannot be divided? If a man should say unto you, he that keeps
all the Commandments of God, committing no sin either against the love of God,
or the love of his neighbor, is a perfect man: Or thus, he that will live in
constant health had need be exact in his diet, neither eating too much, nor too
little: Or thus, he that will come to London, must go on straight forward in
such a way, and neither turn to the right hand or to the left; I verily believe
you would not find any contradiction in his words, but confess them as coherent
and confonant as any in your Book. And certainly, if you would look upon this
saying of the Bishop with any indifference, you would easily perceive it to be
of the very same kind, and capable of the very same construction. And therefore
one of the grounds of your accusation is uncertain. Neither can you assure us,
that the Bishop supposes any such matter as you pretend. Neither, if he did
suppose this (as perhaps he did) were this to contradict himself. For though
there can be no damnable Heresy, unless it contradict some necessary Truth,
yet there is no contradiction but the same man may at once believe this Heresy
and this Truth; because there is no contradiction that the same man, at the
same time, should believe contradictions. For first, whatsoever a man believes
true, that he may and must believe; But there have been some who have believed
and taught that contradictions might be true, against whom Aristotle disputes
in the third of his Metaphysics; Therefore it is not impossible that a man may
believe Contradictions. Secondly, they which believe there is no certainty in
Reason, must believe that contradictions may be true: For otherwise there will
be certainty in this Reason; This contradicts Truth, therefore it is false. But
there be now diverse in the world, who believe there is no certainty in Reason,
(and whether you be of their mind or no, I desire to be informed;) Therefore
there be diverse in the world who believe contradictions may be true. Thirdly,
They which do captivate their understandings to the belief of those things
which to their understanding seem irreconcilable contradictions, may as well
believe real contradictions: (For the difficulty of believing arises not from
their being repugnant, but from their seeming to be so:) But you do captivate
your understandings to the belief of those things which seem to your
understandings irreconcilable contradictions; Therefore it is as possible and
easy for you to believe those that indeed are so. Fourthly, some men may be
confuted in their errors, and persuaded out of them; but no man's error can be
confuted, who together with his error does not believe and grant some true
Principle that contradicts his Error: for nothing can be proved to him who
grants nothing, neither can there be (as all men know) any rational discourse
but out of grounds agreed upon by both parts. Therefore it is not impossible
but absolutely certain, that the same man at the same time may believe
contradictions. Fifthly, It is evident, neither can you without extreme madness
and uncharitableness, deny that we believe the Bible, those Books, I mean,
which we account Canonical: Otherwise why dispute you with us out of them, as
out of a common Principle? Either therefore you must retract your opinion, and
acknowledge that the same man at the same time may believe contradictions, or
else you will run into a greater inconvenience, and be forced to confess, that
no part of our Doctrine contradicts the Bible. Sixthly, I desire you to
vindicate from contradiction these following Assertions: That there should be
Length and nothing long: Breadth, and nothing broad: Thickness, and nothing
thick: Whiteness, and nothing white: Roundness, and nothing round: Weight, and
nothing heavy: Sweetness, and nothing sweet: Moisture, and nothing moist:
Fluidness, and nothing flowing* many Actions, and no Agent: many Passions, and
no Patient: That is, that there should be a long, broad, thick, white, round,
heavy, sweet moist, flowing, active, passive Nothing! That Bread should be
turned into the substance of Christ, and yet not any thing of the Bread become
any thing of Christ; neither the matter, nor the form, nor the Accidents of
Bread, be made either the matter, or the Form, or the Accidents of Christ. That
Bread should be turned into nothing, and at the same time with the same action
turned into Christ, and yet Christ should not be nothing. That the same thing
at the same time should have its just dimensions, and just distance of its
parts, one from another, and at the same time not have it, but all its parts
together in one and the self same point. That the body of Christ, which is much
greater, should be contained wholly and in its full dimensions without any
alteration, in that which is lesser, and that not once only, but as many times
over as there are several points in the Bread and Wine. That the same thing at
the same time should be wholly above it self, and wholly below it self, within
it self, and without it self, on the right hand, and on the left hand, and
round about it self. That the same thing at the same time should move to and
from it self, and lie still: Or that it should be carried from one place to
another through the middle space, and yet not move. That it should be brought
from heaven to earth, and yet not come out of Heaven, nor be at all in any of
the middle spaces between Heaven and Earth. That to be one, should be to be
undivided from it self, and yet that one and the same thing should be divided
from it self. That a thing may be, and yet be no where. That a Finite thing may
be in all places at once. That a Body may be in a place, and have there its
dimensions, and color, and all other qualities, and yet that it is not in the
power of God to make it visible, and tangible there, nor capable of doing or
suffering any thing. That there should be no certainty in our senses, and yet
that we should know something certainly, and yet know nothing but by our
senses. That that which is, and was long ago, should now begin to be. That that
is now to be made of nothing, which is not nothing but something. That the same
thing should be before and after it self. That it should be truly and really in
a place, and yet without Locality. Nay, that he which is, Omnipotent, should
not be able to give it Locality in this place, where it is, as some of you
hold: Or, if he can, as others say he can, that it should be possible, that the
same man, for example, You or I, may at the same time, be awake at London, and
not awake but asleep at Rome: There run or walk, here not run or walk, but
stand still, sit, or lie along: There study or write; here, do neither, but
dine or sup: There speak, here be silent. That he may in one place freeze for
cold, in another place burn with heat. That he may be drunk in one place, and
sober in another: Valiant in one place, and a Coward in another: A Thief in one
place, and honest in another. That he may be a Papist, and go to Mass in Rome;
A Protestant and go to Church in England. That he may die in Rome, and live in
England: or dying in both places may go to Hell from Rome, and to Heaven from
England. That the Body and Soul of Christ should cease to be where it was, and
yet not go to another place, nor be destroyed. All these, and many other of the
like nature are the unavoidable, and most of them the acknowledged Consequences
of your Doctrine of Transubstantiation, as is explained one way or other by your
Schoolmen. Now I beseech you, Sir, to try your skill, and, if you can compose
their repugnance. and make peace between them, certainly, none but you shall be
Catholic Moderator. But if you cannot do it, and that after an intelligible
manner, then you must give me leave to believe, that either you do not believe
Transubstantiation, or else, that it is no contradiction, that men should
subjugate their understandings to the belief of contradictions.

47. Lastly, I pray tell me whether you have not so much Charity in store for
the Bishop of Armach, and D. Porter, as to think that they themselves believe
this saying, which the one preached and printed, the other reprinted, and, as
you say, applauded? If you think they do, then certainly, you have done
unadvisedly, either in charging it with a foul contradiction, or, in saying, it
is impossible, that any man should at once believe contradictions. Indeed that
men should not assent to contradictions, and that it is unreasonable to do so,
I willingly grant: But to say, it is impossible to be done, is against every
man's experience, and almost as unreasonable, as to do the thing which is said
to be impossible. For though perhaps it may be very difficult for a man in his
right wits to believe a contradiction expressed in terms; especially if he
believe it to be a contradiction, yet for men being cowed and awed by
superstition, to persuade themselves upon slight and trivial grounds, that
these or these, though they seem contradictions, yet indeed are not so, and so
to believe them: or if the plain repugnance of them, be veiled or disguised a
little, with some empty unintelligible nonsense distinction; or if it be not
expressed but employed, nor direct but by consequence, so that the parties, to
whose faith the propositions are offered, are either innocently, or perhaps
affectedly ignorant of the contrariety of them: for men in such cases, easily
to swallow and digest contradictions, he that denies it possible, must be a
mere stranger in the world.

48. Ad. 18. This Paragraph consists of two immodest Untruths, obtruded upon us
without show, or shadow, of Reason: and an evident Sophism, grounded upon an
affected mistake of the sense of the word Fundamental.

49. The first Untruth is, that D. Potter makes a Church, of men agreeing
scarcely in one Point of Faith: of men concurring in some one or few Articles
of Belief, and in the rest holding conceits plainly contradictory: Agreeing
only in this one Article, that Christ is our Savior; but for the rest, like to
the parts of a Chimaera, etc. Which I say is a shameless calumny, not only
because D. Potter in this Point delivers not his own judgment, but relates the
opinion of others, M. Hooker, and M. Morton; but especially, because even these
men (as they are related by D. Potter) to the constituting of the very Essence
of a Church, in the lowest degree, require not only Faith in Christ Jesus the
Son of God and Savior of the World, but also submission to his Doctrine in mind
and will. Now I beseech you Sir, tell me ingenuously, whether the Doctrine of
Christ may be called without blasphemy, scarcely one Point of Faith? or whether
it consists only, of some one or few Articles of Belief? Or whether there be
nothing in it, but only this Article, That Christ is our Savior? Is it not
manifest to all the world, that Christians of all Professions do agree with one
consent, in the belief of all those Books of Scripture, which were not doubted
of in the Ancient Church without danger of damnation? Nay, is it not apparent
that no man at this time, can without hypocrisy, pretend to believe in Christ,
but of necessity he must do so? Seeing he can have no reason to believe in
Christ, but he must have the same to believe the Scripture. I pray then read
over the Scripture once more, or, if that be too much labor, the New Testament
only; and then say, whether there be nothing there, but scarcely one Point of
Faith? But some one or two Articles of Belief? Nothing but this Article only,
That Christ is our Savior? Say, whether there be not there an infinite number
of Divine Verities, Divine Preecepts, Divine Promises, and those so plainly and
undoubtedly delivered, that if any sees them not, it cannot be because he
cannot, but because he will not! So plainly, that whosoever submits sincerely
to the Doctrine of Christ, in mind and will, cannot possibly but submit to these
in act and performance. And in the rest, which it has pleased God, for reasons
best known to himself, to deliver obscurely or ambiguously, yet thus far at
least they agree, that the sense of them intended by God, is certainly true,
and that they are without passion or prejudice to endeavor to find it out: The
difference only is, Which is that true sense which God intended. Neither would
this long continue, if the walls of separation, whereby the Devil hopes to make
their Divisions eternal, were pulled down; and error were not supported against
Truth, by humane advantages? But for the present, God forbid the matter should
be so ill as you make it! For whereas you looking upon their Points of
difference and agreement, through I know not what strange glasses, have made
the first innumerable, and the other scarce a number: the truth is clean
contrary; That those Divine Verities Speculative and Practical, wherein they
universally agree (which you will have to be but a few, or but one, or scarcely
one) amount to many millions, (if an exact account were taken of them:) And on
the other side, the Points in variance, are in comparison but few, and those
not of such a quality, but the Error in them may well consist with the belief
and obedience of the entire Covenant, ratified by Christ between God and man.
Yet I would not be so mistaken, as if I thought the errors even of some
Protestants unconsiderable things, and matters of no moment. For the truth is,
I am very fearful, that some of their opinions, either as they are, or as they
are apt to be mistaken, (though not of themselves so damnable, but that good
and holy men may be saved with them, yet) are too frequent occasions of our
remisness, and slackness, in running the race of Christian Profession, of our
deferring Repentance, and Conversion to God, of our frequent relapses into sin,
and not seldom of security in sinning; and consequently, though not certain
causes, yet too frequent occasions of many men's damnation: and such I conceive
all these Doctrins, which either directly or obliquely, put men in hope of
eternal happiness, by any other means saving only the narrow way of sincere and
universal obedience, grounded upon a true and lively Faith. These errors
therefore, I do not elevate or extenuate: an^, on condition the ruptures made
by them might be composed, do heartily wish, that the cement were made of my
dearest blood, and only not to be an Anathema from Christ: Only this I say,
that neither are their Points of agreement so few, nor their differences so
many, as you make them; nor so great as to exclude the opposite Parties from
being Members of one Church Militant, and joynt-heirs of the glory of the
Church Triumphant.

50. Your other palpable untruth is, that Protestants are far more bold to
disagree even in matters of Faith, than Catholic Divines (you mean your own)
in Questions merely Philosophical, or not determined by the Church. For neither
do they differ at all, in matters of Faith, if you take the word in the highest
sense, and mean, by matters of Faith, such Doctrins as are absolutely necessary
to Salvation to be believed, or not to be dis-believed. And then in those
wherein they do differ, with what color or shadow of Argument, can you make
good, that they are more bold to disagree, than you are in Questions merely
Philosophical, or not determined by the Church? For is there not as great
repugnancy between your assent and dissent, your affirmation and negation, your
Est Est, Non Non, as there is between theirs? You follow your Reason, in those
things which are not determined by your Church; and they theirs, in things not
plainly determined in Scripture. And wherein then consists their greater, their
far greater boldness? And what if they in their contradictory opinions, pretend
both to rely upon the truth of God, does this make their contradictions ever a
whit the more repugnant? I had always thought, that all contradictions had been
equally contradictions, and equally repugnant; because the least of them are as
far asunder as Est and Non est can make them, and the greatest are no farther.
But then you in your differences, (by name, about Predetermination, the
Immaculate Conception, the Pope's Infallibility) upon what other motive do you
rely? Do not you cite Scripture, or Tradition, or both, on both sides? And do
you not pretend, that both these are the infallible Truths of Almighty God?

51. You close up this Section with a fallacy, proving forsooth, that we
destroy, by our confession, the Church which is the house of God, because we
stand only upon Fundamental Articles, which cannot make up the whole fabric of
the Faith, no more than the foundation of a house alone can be a house.

52. But I hope, Sir, you will not be difficult in granting, that that is a
house which has all the necessary parts belonging to a house: Now by
Fundamental Articles, we mean all those which are necessary. And you your self,
in the very leaf after this, take notice that D. Potter does so. Where to this
Question* How shall I know in particular which Points be, and which be not
Fundamental? You scurrilously bring him in making this ridiculous answer, Read
my Answer to a late Pamphlet entitled Charity Mistaken, etc. There you shall
find that Fundamental Doctrins are such Catholic Verities, as principally, and
essentially pertain to the Faith, such as properly constitute a Church, and are
necessary (in ordinary course) to be distinctly believed by every Christian
that will be saved. All which words he used, not to tell what Points be
Fundamental, as you dishonestly impose upon him, but to explain what he meant
by the word Fundamental. May it please you therefore now at last, to take
notice, that by Fundamental, we mean all and only that which is necessary; and
then I hope you will grant, that we may safely expect Salvation in a Church
which has all things Fundamental to Salvation! Unless you will you say, that
more is necessary, than that which is necessary.

53. Ad 19. This long discourse, so full of un-ingenuous dealing with your
adversary, perhaps would have done reasonably in a Farce or a Comedy, and I
doubt not but you have made your self and your courteous Readers good sport
with it. But if D. Potter, or I, had been by, when you wrote it, we should have
stopped your carere at the first starting, and have put you in mind of these old
School-Proverbs, Ex falso supposito sequitur quodlibet, and Uno absurdo dato,
sequuntur mill. For whereas you suppose, first, that to a man desirous to save
his soul, and requiring, whose direction he might rely upon? the Doctors answer
would be, Upon the truly Catholic Church, I suppose upon better reason,
because I know his mind, that he would advise him to call no man Master on
Earth, but, according to Christ's command, to rely upon the direction of God
himself. If he should enquire, where he should find this direction? He would
answer him; In his Word contained in Scripture. If he should enquire what
assurance he might have, that the Scripture is the Word of God? He would answer
him, that the doctrine it self is very fit and worthy to be thought to come from
God, nec vox hominem sonat, and that they which wrote and delivered it,
confirmed it to be the Word of God by doing such works as could not be done,
but by power from God himself. For assurance of the Truth hereof he would
advise him to rely upon that, which all wise men in all matters of belief rely
upon; and that is the consent of Ancient Records, and Universal Tradition. And
that he might not instruct him as partial in this advice, he might farther tell
him, that a Gentleman that would be nameless, that has written a Book against
him, called Charity maintained by Catholics, though in many things he differ
from him, yet agrees with him in this, that Tradition is such a principle as
may be rested in, and which requires no other proof. As indeed no wise man
doubts but there was such a man as Julius Caesar, or Cicero, that there are
such Cities as Rome or Constantinople, though he have no other assurance for
the one or the other, but only the speech of people. This tradition therefore
he would counsel him to rely upon, and to believe that the Book which we call
Scripture, was confirmed abundantly by the works of God, to be the Word of God.
Believing it the Word of God, he must of necessity believe it true: and if he
believe it true, he must believe it contains all necessary direction to eternal
happiness, because it affirms it self to do so. Nay, he might tell him that so
far is the whole Book, from wanting any necessary direction to his eternal
Salvation, that one only Author, that has writ but too little Books of it, S.
Luke by name, in the beginning of his Gospel, and in the beginning of his
Story, shows plainly that he alone has written at least so much as is
necessary. And what they wrote, they wrote by Gods direction, for the direction
of the world, not only for the Learned, but for all that would do their true
endeavor to know the will of God, and to do it; therefore you cannot but
conceive, that writing to all and for all, they wrote so as that in things
necessary they might be understood by all. Besides that, here he should find,
that God himself has engaged himself by promise, that if he would love him, and
keep his Commandments and pray earnestly for his Spirit, and be willing to be
directed by it, he should undoubtedly receive it, even the Spirit of Truth
which shall lead him into all truth; that is certainly, at least into all
necessary Truths, and suffer him to fall into no pernicious error. The sum of
his whole direction to him briefly would be this, believe the Scripture to be
the Word of God, use your true endeavor to find the true sense of it, and to
live according to it, and then you may rest securely that you are in the true
way to eternal happiness. This is the substance of that Answer which the Doctor
would make to any man in this case; and this is a way so plain, that fools,
unless they will, cannot err from it. Because, not knowing absolutely all
truth, nay not all profitable truth, and being feee from err our; but
endeavoring to know the truth and obey it, and endeavoring to be free from
err our, is by this way made the only condition of Salvation. As for your
supposition That he would advise such a man to rely upon the Catholic Church
for the finding out the doctrine of Christ; he utterly disclaims it, and truly
very justly: There being no certain way to know that any Company is a true
Church, but only by their professing the true doctrine of Christ. And therefore
as it is impossible I should know that such a company of Philosophers are
Peripateticks, or Stoics; unless I first know what was the doctrine of the
Peripateticks, and Stoics; so is it impossible that I should certainly know
any company to be the Church of Christ, before I know what is the doctrine of
Christ, the Profession whereof constitutes the visible Church, the Belief and
Obedience the invisible. And therefore whereas you would have him be directed
by the Catholic Church to the doctrine of Christ; the contrary rather is most
certain and necessary, that by the fore-knowledg of the doctrine of Christ, he
must be directed to a certain assurance, which is the Catholic Church, if he
mean not to choose at a venture, but desire to have certain direction to it.
This supposition therefore, being the hinge whereon your whole Discourse turns,
is the Minerva of your own Brain; and therefore, were it but for this, have we
not great reason to accuse you of strange immodesty, in saying as you do, That
the whole Discourse and Inferences which here you have made, are either D.
Potters own direct assertions, or evident consequences clearly deduced from
them? Especially seeing your proceeding in it, is so consonant to this ill
beginning, that it is in a manner wholly made made up, not of D. Potters
assertions, but your own fictions obtruded on him.

54. To the next Question, Cannot General Councils err? You pretend he answers,
They may err damnably. Let the Reader see the place, and he shall find,
damnably is your addition. To the third Demand, Must I consult, (about my
difficulties) with every particular person of the Catholic Church? You answer
for him, (that which is most false) that it seems so by his words; The whole
militant Church, that is, all the members of it cannot possibly err either in
the whole faith, or any necessary Article of it: which is very certain, for
should it do so, it should be the Church no longer. But what sense is there
that you should collect out of these words, that every member of the militant
Church must be consulted with? By like reason, if he had said that all men in
the world cannot err; If he said that God in his own person, or his Angels
could not err in these matters, you might have gathered from hence, that he
laid a necessity upon men in doubt, to consult with Angels, or with God in his
own person, or with All men in the world. Is it not evident to all sober men,
that to make any man or men fit to be consulted with, besides the understanding
of the matter, it is absolutely requisite that they may be spoken with? And is
it not apparently impossible, that any man should speak with all the members of
the Militant Church? Or, if he had spoken with them All, know that he had done
so? Nay does not D. Potter say as much in plain terms? Nay more, do not you
take notice that he does so in the very next words before these, where you say,
he affirms that the Catholic Church cannot be told of private injuries:
unless you will persuade us there is a difference between the Catholic
Church, and the whole Militant Church. For whereas you make him deny this of
the Catholic Church united, and affirm it of the Militant Church dispersed
into particulars; The truth is, he speaks neither of united nor dispersed, but
affirms simply (as appears to your shame by your own quotations) that the
Catholic Church cannot be told of private injuries: and then, that the whole
Militant Church cannot err. But then besides, that the united Church cannot be
consulted, and the dispersed may, What a wild imagination is it? and what a
strange injustice was it in you to father it upon him? I beseech you Sir, to
consider seriously, how far blind zeal to your superstition has transported
you beyond all bounds of honesty and discretion, and made you careless of
speaking either truth or sense, so you speak against D. Potter!

55. Again, you make him say, The Prelates of Gods Church meeting in a lawful
Council may err damnably: and from this you collect, It remains then, for your
necessary instruction you must repair to every particular member of the
Universal Church spread over the face of the earth. And this is also Pergula
pictoris, very nihil, omnia ficta. The Antecedent false (not for the matter of
it, but) that D. Potter says it, And the consequence as far from it as Gades
from Ganges; and as coherent as a rope of Sand. A general Council may err;
therefore you must travel all the world over, and consult with every particular
Christian! As if there were nothing else to be consulted with: Nay, as if
according to the Doctrine of Protestants, (for so you must say,) there were
nothing to be consulted with, but only, a general Council, or all the World!
Have you never heard that Protestants say, That men for their direction must
consult with Scripture? Nay, does not D. Potter say it often in this very Book
which you are confuting? Nay more, in this very page out of which you take this
piece of your Cento, A General Council may err damnably? are there not these
plain words, In searches of Truth (he means divine Truth) God ever directs us
to the infallible Rule of Truth, the Scripture? With what conscience then, or
modesty, can you impose upon him this unreasonable consequence, and pretend
that your whole discourse, is either his own direct assertions, or evident
consequences, clearly deduced from them? You add, that yet he teaches (as if he
contradicted himself) that the promises of God made to the Church for his
assistance, are not intended to particular persons, but only to the Catholic
Church: which sure agrees very well with any thing said by D. Potter. If it be
repugnant to what you said for him falsely, what is that to him?

56. Neither yet is this to drive any man to desperation: unless it be such a
one, as has such a strong affection to this word, Church, that he will not go
to Heaven, unless he has a Church to lead him thither. For what though a
Council may err, and the whole Church cannot be consulted with, yet this is not
to send you on the Fool's Pilgrimage for Faith, and bid you go and confer
with every Christian soul, man and woman, by Sea and by Land, close prisoner or
at liberty, as you dilate the matter: But to tell you very briefly, that
Universal Tradition directs you to the Word of God, and the Word of God directs
you to Heaven. And therefore here is no cause of desperation, no cause for you
to be so vain, and tragical, as here you would seem. Yet upon Supposal (you
say) of this miraculous pilgrimage for Faith, before I have the Faith of
Miracles, how shall I proceed at our meeting? Or how shall I know the man, on
whom I may securely rely? And hereunto you frame this Answer for the Doctor,
Procure to know whether he believe all Fundamental Points of Faith: Whereas in
all the Doctors Book, there is no such Answer to any such Question, or any like
it. Neither do you, as your custom is, note any Page where it may be found;
which makes me suspect, that sure you have some private license to use
Heretics (as you call them) at your pleasure, and make them answer any thing
to any thing.

57. Wherein I am yet more confirmed, by the Answer you put in his mouth to
your next demand, How shall I know whether he hold all Fundamental points or
no? For, whereas hereunto D. Potter having given one Answer fully satisfactory
to it, which is, If he truly believe the undoubted Books of Canonical
Scripture, he cannot but believe all Fundamentals; and another, which is but
something toward a full satisfaction of it, That the Creed contains all the
Fundamentals of simple Belief: you take no notice of the former, and pervert
the latter, and make him say, The Creed contains all Fundamentals of Faith.
Whereas you know, and, within six or seven lines after this, confess, that he
never pretended it to contain all simply, but all of one sort, all necessary
Points of simple belief. Which assertion because he modestly delivers as very
probable (being willing to conclude rather less than more than his reasons
require,) hereupon you take occasion to ask: Shall I hazard my soul on
probabilities, or even wagers! As if, whatsoever is but probable, though in the
highest degree of probability, were as likely to be false as true! Or because
it is but Morally, not Mathematically, certain that there was such a Woman as
Q. Elizabeth, such a man as H. the 8. that is in the highest degree probable,
therefore it were an even wager there were none such! By this reason, seeing
the truth of your whole Religion depends finally upon Prudential motives, which
you do but pretend to be very credible, it will be an even wager that your
Religion is false. And by the same reason, or rather infinitely greater, seeing
it is impossible for any man (according to the grounds of your Religion) to
know himself, much less another to be a true Pope, or a true Priest; nay, to
have a Moral certainty of it; because these things are abnoxious to innumerable
secret and undiscernable nullities, it will be an even wager, nay (if we
proportion things indifferently,) a hundred to one, that every Consecration and
Absolution of yours is void, and that whenever you adore the Host, you and
your Assistants commit Idolatry: That there is a nullity in any Decree that a
Pope shall make, or any Decree of a Council which he shall confirm:
Particularly, it will be, at least any even wager, that all the Decrees of the
Council of Trent are void, because it is at most but very probable that the
Pope which confirmed them was true Pope. If you mislike these Inferences, then
confess you have injured D. Potter in this also, that you have confounded and
made all one, Probabilities, and even Wagers. Whereas every ordinary Gamester
can inform you, that though it be a thousand to one that such a thing will
happen, yet it is not sure, but very probable.

58. To make the measure of your injustice yet fuller, you demand, If the Creed
contains only points of simple belief, how shall you know what points of belief
are necessary which direct our practice? D. Potter would have answered you in
our Saviors words, Search the Scriptures. But you have a great mind it seems
to be dispairing, and therefore, having proposed your Question, will not suffer
him to give you Answer, but shut your ears and tell him, still he chalks out
new paths for desperation.

59. In the rest of your interlude, I cannot but commend one thing in you, that
you keep a decorum, and observe very well the Rule given you by the great
Master of your Art, -- Servetur ad imum
Qualis ab incepto processerat, and sibi constet:


One vein of scurrility and dishonesty runs clean through it, from the
beginning to the end. Your next demand then is, Are all the Articles of the
Creed for their nature and matter Fundamental? and the Answer, I cannot say so.
Which Answer (though it be true) D. Potter no where gives it, neither has he
occasion, but you make it for him, to bring in another question: and that is,
How then shall I know, which in particular be, and which be not Fundamental? D.
Potter would have answered, It is a vain question: believe all, and you shall
be sure to believe all that is Fundamental.

60. But what says now his prevaricating Proxy? What does he make him say? This
which follows: Read my Answer to a late Popish Pamphlet, entitled, Charity
Mistaken: There you shall find that Fundamental doctrins, are such Catholic
verities, as principally and essentially pertain to the Faith, such as properly
constitute a Church, and are necessary in ordinary course, to be distinctly
believed by every Christian that will be saved. They are those Grand and
Captital Doctrins which make up our Faith, that is, the Common Faith, which is
alike precious in all; being one and the same, in the highest Apostle, and the
meanest believer, which the Apostle elsewhere calls, The first Principles of the
Oracles of God, and, The form of sound words.

61. But in earnest, Good Sir, does the Doctor in these places by you quoted,
make to this question this same sottish answer? Or do you think that against an
Heretic nothing is unlawful? Certainly, if he does answer thus, I will make
bold to say, he is a very fool. But if he does not, (as indeed he does not)
then --: But I forbear you, and beseech the Reader to consult the places of D.
Potter's Book; and there he shall find, that, in the former half of these (as
you call them) varyed words and phrases, he declared only what he meant by the
word Fundamental, which was needful to prevent mistakes, and cavilling about
the meaning of the word, which is metaphorical, and therefore ambiguous; and
that the latter half of them, are several places of Scripture employed by D.
Potter, to show that his distinction of Fundamental and not Fundamental has
express ground in it. Now of these two places, very pertinent unto two very
good purposes; you have exceeding fairly patcht together a most ridiculous
Answer, to a Question, that D. Potter never dreamed of. But the words, you will
say, are in D. Potters Book, though in diverse places, and to other purposes.
Very true: And so the words of Ausonius his obscene Fescennine, are taken out
of Virgil, yet Virgil surely was not the Author of this Poem. Besides in D.
Potters book, there are these words, Dre^d Sovereign, amongst the many
excellent virtues, which have made your Majesty's person so dear unto God, etc.
And why now may you not say as well, that in these he made Answer to your
former question, what Points of the Creed were, and what were not Fundamentals?

62. But unl^ss this question may be answered, his doctrine (you say) serves
only either to make men despair, or else to have recourse to these whom we call
Rapists. It seems, a little thing will make you despair, if you be so sullen as
to do so, because men will not trouble themselves to satisfy your curious
questions. And I pray be not offended with me for so esteeming it, because, as
before I told you, if you will believe all the Points of the Creed, you cannot
choose but believe all the Points of it that are Fundamental, though you be
ignorant which are so, and which are not so. Now, I believe, your desire to
know which are Fundamentals, proceeds only from a desire to be assured that you
do believe them; which seeing you may be assured of, without knowing which they
be, what can it be but curiosity to desire to desire to know it? Neither may
you think to mend your self herein one whit by having recourse to them whom we
call Papists; for they are as far to seek as we in this Point, which of the
Articles of the Creed are, for their nature, and matter, Fundamental, and which
are not. Particularly, you will scarce meet with any amongst their Doctors, so
adventurous as to tell you for a certain, Whether or no the conception of
Christ by the Holy Ghost, his being born of a Virgin, his Burial, his Descent
into Hell, and the Communion of Saints, be Points of their own nature and
matter Fundamental. Such I mean, as without the distinct and explicit
knowledge of them no man can be saved.

63. But you will say, at least they give this certain Rule, that all Points
defined by Christ's visible Church, belong to the foundation of faith, in such
sense, as, to deny any such, cannot stand with Salvation. So also Protestants
give you this more certain Rule, That whosoever believes heartily those books
of Scripture, which all the Christian Churches in the world acknowledge to be
Canonical, and submits himself indeed to this, as to the rule of his belief,
must of necessity believe all things Fundamental; and, if he live according to
his faith, cannot fail of Salvation. But besides, What certainty have you, that
that rule of Papists is so certain? By the visible Church it is plain, they
mean only their own: and why their own only should be the Visible Church, I do
not understand: and as little, why all Points defined by this Church should
belong to the foundation of faith. These things you had need see well and
substantially proved, before you rely upon them, otherwise you expose your self
to danger of embracing damnable errors instead of Fundamental truths. But you
will say, D. Potter himself acknowledges, that you do not err in Fundamentals.
If he did so, yet methinks you have no reason to rest upon his acknowledgement
with any security, whom you condemn of error in many other matters. Perhaps,
excess of Charity to your persons, may make him censure your errors more
favorably than he should do. But the truth is, and so I have often told you,
though the Doctor hopes that your errors are not so unpardonably destructive,
but that some men, who ignorantly hold them may be saved, yet in themselves he
professes and proclaims them damnable, and such as, he fears, will be certainly
destructive to such as you are, that is, to all those, who have eyes to see and
will not see them.

64. Ad. 20, 21, 22, (...). In the Remainder of this Chapter, you promise to
answer D. Potter's Arguments against that which you said before. But presently
forgetting your self, instead of answering his Arguments, you fall a confuting
his Answers to your own. The arguments objected by you which here you
vindicate, were two. 1. The Scripture is not so much as mentioned in the Creed,
therefore the Creed contains not all things necessary to be believed. 2.
Baptism is not contained in the Creed, therefore not all things necessary.
To both which Arguments my answer shortly is this, that they prove something,
but it is that which no man here denies. For. D. Potter (as you have also
confessed) never said, nor undertook to show, that the Apostles intended to
comprize in the Creed, all Points absolutely, which we are bound to believe, or
after sufficient proposal, not to disbelieve; which yet here and every where
you are obtruding upon him: But only that they purposed to comprize in it, all
such doctrines purely speculative, all such matters of simple belief, as are in
ordinary course, necessary to be distinctly and explicitly believed by all men.
Now neither of these objections do any way infringe or impeach the truth of
this Assertion. Not the first, because according to your own doctrine, all men
are not bound to know explicitly what books of Scripture are Canonical. Nor
the second, because Baptism is not a matter of Faith, but practice: not so much
to be believed, as to be given, and received. And against these Answers,
whether you have brought any considerable new matter, let the indifferent
Reader judge. As for the other things, which D. Potter rather glanceth at than
builds upon in answering these objections, as the Creeds being collected out of
Scripture, and, supposing the Authority of it, which Gregery of Valentia in the
place above cited, seems to me to confess, to have been the Judgment of the
Ancient Fathers: and the Nicene Creeds intimating the authority of Canonical
Scripture, and making mention of Baptism: These things were said ex abundanti;
and therefore I conceive it superfluous to examine your exceptions against
them. Prove that D. Potter did affirm that the Creed contains all things
necessary to be believed of all sorts, and then these objections will be
pertinent, and deserve an answer. Or produce some Point of simple belief,
necessary to be explicitly believed, which is not contained either in terms,
or by consequence in the Creed, and then I will either answer your Reasons, or
confess I cannot. But all this while you do but trifle, and are so far from
hitting the Mark, that you rove quite beside the Butt.

65. Ad. 23, 24, 25. D. Potter demands, How it can be necessary for any
Christian to have more in his Creed than the Apostles had, and the Church of
their times? You Answer, That he trifles, not distinguishing between the
Apostles belief, and that abridgment of some Articles of faith, which we call
the Apostles Creed. I reply, that it is you which trifle, affectedly
confounding (what D. Potter has plainly distinguished) the Apostles belief of
the whole Religion of Christ, as it comprehends both what we are to do, and
what we are to believe, with their belief of that part of it, which contains
not duties of obedience, but only the necessary Articles of simple Faith. Now
though the Apostles Belief be, in the former sense, a larger thing than that
which we call the Apostles Creed: yet in the latter sense of the word, the
Creed (I say) is a full comprehension of their belief, which you your self have
formerly confessed, though somewhat fearfully, and inconstantly: and here again
unwillingness to speak the truth, makes you speak that which is hardly sense,
and call it an abridgement of some Articles of Faith. For I demand, these some
Articles which you speak of, Which are they? Those that are out of the Creed,
or those that are in it? Those that are in it, it comprehends at large, and
therefore it is not an abridgement of them: Those that are out of it, it
comprehends not at all, and therefore it is not an abridgement of them. If you
would call it now an abridgment of the Faith, this would be sense, and signify
thus much, That all the necessary Articles of the Christian Faith are comprised
in it. For this is the proper duty of Abridgements, to leave out nothing
necessary, and to take in nothing unnecessary.

66. Moreover, in answer to this demand you tell us, that the Doctor begs the
Question, supposing that the Apostles believed no more than is contained in
their Creed, I Answer, He supposes no such matter; but only that they knew no
more necessary Articles of simple belief, than what are contained in their
Creed. So that here you abuse D. Potter and your Reader, by taking
sophistically without limitation, that which is delivered with limitation.

67. But this Demand of D. Potter's, was equivalent to a Negation, and intended
for one: How can it be necessary for any Christian, to have more in his Creed,
than the Apostles had? All one with this, It cannot be necessary, etc. And this
negation of his, he inforces with many arguments which he proposes by way of
interrogation, thus. May the Church of after Ages make the narrow way to
Heaven, narrower than our Savior left it? Shall it be a fault to straiten and
encumber the King's high way with public nuisances; and is it lawful by
adding new Articles to the Faith, to retrench any thing from the Latitude of
the King of Heavens high way to eternal Happiness? The yoke of Christ, which he
said was easy, may it be justly made heavier by the Governors of the Church in
after-ages? The Apostles profess they revealed to the Church the whole Counsel
of God, keeping back nothing needful for our Salvation: What tyranny then, to
impose any new unnecessary matters on the Faith of Christians, especially (as
the late Popes have done) under the high commanding form, Qui non crediderit,
damnabitur? If this may be done, Why then did our Savior reprehend the
Pharisees so sharply, for binding heavy burdens, and laying them on men's
shoulders? And why did he teach them, that in vain they worshipped God,
teaching for Doctrines men's Traditions? And why did the Apostles call it
tempting of God, to lay those things upon the necks of Christians, that were
not necessary?

68. All which Interrogations seem to me to contain so many plain and
convincing Arguments of the premised Assertion; to all which (one excepted,)
according to the advice of the best Masters of Rhetoric in such Cases, you
have answered very discreetly, by saying O. But when you write again, I pray
take notice of them: and, if you can devise no fair, and satisfying Answer to
them, then be so ingenuous as to grant the Conclusion, That no more can be
necessary for Christians to believe now, than was in the Apostles time. A
conclusion of great importance, for the decision of many Controversies, and the
disburdening of the Faith of Christ from many encumbrances.

69. As for that one, which you thought you could fasten upon, grounded on the
20. Act. 27. let me tell you plainly, that by your Answering this, you have
showed plainly that it was wisely done of you to decline the rest. You tell D.
Potter, That needful for salvation is his gloss, which perhaps you intended for
a piece of an Answer. But, good Sir, consult the place, and you shall find,
that there S. Paul himself says that he kept back (...), not any thing that was
profitable: and, I hope, you will make no difficulty to grant, that whatsoever
is needful for salvation, is very profitable.

70. But then you say, This is no proof unless he beg the Question, and
suppose, that whatsoever the Apostles revealed to the Church is contained in
the Creed. I Answer, it is not D. Potter that begs the Question, but you that
mistake it: which is not here in this particular place, Whether all Points of
simple Belief necessary for the salvation of the Primitive Christians, were
contained in the Apostles Symbol? (for that and the proofs of it follow after,
in the next. p. 223. of D. Potter's Book): but, Whether any thing can be
necessary for Christians to believe now, which was not so from the beginning?
D. Potter maintains the Negative; and to make good his opinion, thus he argues
S. Paul declared to the Ephesians the whole Counsel of God touching their
Salvation; Therefore that which S. Paul did not declare, can be no part of the
Counsel of God, and therefore not necessary. And again: S. Paul kept back
nothing from the Ephesians that was profitable; Therefore he taught them all
things necessary to salvation. Consider this, I pray, a little better, and
then, I hope, you will acknowledge, that here was no Petitio principii, in D.
Potter; but rather Ignoratio Elenchi, in you.

71. Neither is it material, that these words were particularly directed by S.
Paul, to the Pastors of the Church: For (to say nothing that the Point here
issuable, is not, Whom he taught, whether Priests or Laymen? But how much he
taught, and whether all things necessary?) it appears plainly out of the Text,
and I wonder you should read it so negligently as not to observe it, that
though he speaks now to the Pastors, yet he speaks of what he taught not only
them, but also the Laity as well as them. I have kept back nothing (says S.
Paul) that was profitable, but have showed, and have taught you publicly, and
from house, to house; Testifying (I pray observe) both to the Jews, and also to
the Greeks, Repentance toward God, and Faith toward our Lord Jesus Christ.
And a little after, I know that ye all, among whom I have gone Preaching the
Kingdom of God, shall see my face no more: Wherefore I take you to record this
day, that I am innocent from the blood of all men; for I have kept nothing
back, but have showed you all the Counsel of God. And again, Remember that by
the space of three years I ceased not to warn every one night and day with
tears. Certainly, though he did all these things to the Pastors among the rest,
nay above the rest, yet, without Controversy, they whom he taught publicly,
and from house to house: The Jews and Greeks to whom he testified, (1.)
preached Faith and Repentance: Those all, amongst whom he went preaching the
kingdom of God: Those Every one, whom for three years together he warned, were
not Bishops and Pastors only.

72. Neither is this to say, that the Apostles taught Christians nothing but
their Creed, nothing of the Sacraments, Commandments, etc. for that is not here
the point to be proved: but only, that they taught them all things necessary,
so that nothing can be necessary which they did not teach them. But how much of
this they put into their Creed, Whether all the necessary Points of simple
Belief, as we pretend, or only as you say, I know not what, is another Question
and which comes now to be farther examined. D. Potter in confirmation of it,
besides the authorities which you formerly shifted off, with so egregious
tergiversation, urges five several Arguments.

73. The sense of the first is this, If all the necessary Points of simple of
Belief be not comprised in the Creed, it can no way deserve the name of the
Apostles Creed, as not being their Creed in any sense, but only a part of it.
To this you Answer. 25. Upon the same affected ambiguity, etc. Answ. It is very
true that their whole faith was of a larger extent, but that was not the
Question: But whether all the Points of simple belief which they taught as
necessary to be explicitly believed, be not contained in it? And if thus much
at least of Christian Religion, be not comprised in it, I again desire you to
inform me, How it could be called the Apostles Creed!

74. Four other Reasons D. Potter urges to the same purpose, grounded upon the
practice of the Ancient Church; The last whereof you answer in the second part
of your Book. But to the rest, drawn from the ancient Churches appointing her
Infants to be instructed (for matters of simple belief,) only in the Creed:
From her admitting Catechumens unto Baptism: and of Strangers to her Communion
upon their only profession of the Creed, you have not, for ought I can
perceive, thought fit to make any kind of Answer.

75. The difficulties of the 27. and last. of this Chapter, have been
satisfied. So that there remains unexamined only the 26. Section, wherein you
exceed your self in Sophistry: Especially in that trick of Cavillers, which is
to answer objections by other objections; an excellent way to make
controversies endless! D. Potter desires to be resolved, Why amongst many
things of equal necessity to be believed, the Apostles should distinctly set
down some in the Creed, and be altogether silent of others? Instead of
resolving him in this difficulty, you put another to him, and that it is, Why
are some Points not Fundamental expressed in it, rather than others of the same
quality? Which demand is so far from satisfying the former Doubt, that it makes
it more intricate. For upon this ground it may be demanded, How was it possible
that the Apostles should leave out any Articles simply necessary, and put in
others not necessary, especially if their intention were (as you say it was) to
deliver it in such Articles as were fittest for those times? Unless (which were
wondrous strange) unnecessary Articles were fitter for those times, than
necessary. But now to your Question, the Answer is obvious: These unnecessary
things might be put in because they were circumstances of the necessary;
Pontius Pilate, of Christ's Passion; The third day, of the Resurrection.
Neither does the adding of them make the Creed ever a whit the less portable,
the less fit to be understood, and remembered. And for the contrary reasons,
other unnecessary things might be left out. Beside, who sees not, that the
addition of some unnecessary circumstances is a thing that can hardly be
avoided without affectation! And therefore not so great a fault, nor deserving
such a censure, as the omission of any thing essential to the work undertaken,
and necessary to the end proposed in it.

76. You demand again (as it is no hard matter to multiply demands) Why our
Savior's descent to Hell, and Burial was expressed, end not his Circumcision,
his manifestation to the three Kings, and working of Miracles? I answer: His
Resurrection, Ascension, and Sitting at the right hand of God are very great
Miracles, and they are expressed. Besides, S. John assures us, That the
Miracles which Christ did, were done and written not for themselves that they
might be believed; but for a farther end, that we might believe that Jesus was
the Christ, and believing have eternal life. He therefore that believe this may
be saved, though he have no explicit and distinct faith of any Miracle that
our Savior did. His Circumcision and Manifestation to the Wise men (for I know
not upon what grounds you call them Kings) are neither things simply necessary
to be known, nor have any near relation to those that are so. As for his
Descent into hell, it may (for ought you know) be put in as a thing necessary
of it self to be known. If you ask, why more than his Circumcision? I refer you
to the Apostles for an answer, who put that in, and left this out of their
Creed: and yet sure, were not so forgetful after the receiving of the Holy
Ghost, as to leave out any prime and principal foundation of the Faith, which
are the very words of your own Gordonius Huntlaeus, Contr. 2. c. 10. number.
Likewise his Burial was put in perhaps as necessary of it self to be known. But
though it were not, yet has it manifestly so near relation to these that are
necessary, his Passion, and Resurrection; (being the Consequent of the one, and
the Antecedent of the other,) that it is no marvel if for their sakes it was
put in. For though I verily believe that there is no necessary Point of this
nature, but what is in the Creed, yet I do not affirm, because I cannot prove
it, that there is nothing in the Creed but what is necessary. You demand
thirdly, Why did they not express Scriptures, Sacraments, and all Fundamental
Points of Faith tending to practice, as well as those which rest in Belief? I
answer; Because their purpose was to comprize in it only those necessary Points
which rest in Belief: which appears, because of practical Points there is not
in it so much as one.

77. D. Potter subjoyns to what is said above, That as well, nay better, they
might have given no Article but that of the Church, and sent us to the Church
for all the rest: For in setting down others besides that, and not all, they
make us believe we have all, when we have not all. This consequence you deny:
and neither give reason against it, nor satisfy his reason for it, which yet
in my judgment is good and concluding. The Proposition to be proved is this:
That, if your Doctrine were true, this short Creed, I believe the Roman Church
to be infallible, would have been better, that is, more effectual to keep the
believers of it from Heresy, and in the true Faith, than this Creed which now
we have. A Proposition so evident, that I cannot see how either you, or any of
your Religion, or indeed any sensible man can from his heart deny it. Yet
because you make show of doing so, or else, which I rather hope, do not rightly
apprehend the force of the Reason, I will endeavor briefly to add some light
and strength to it, by comparing the effects of these several supposed Creeds.

78. The former Creed therefore would certainly produce these effects in the
believers of it: An impossibility of being in any formal Heresy: A necessity
of being prepared in mind to come out of all Error in Faith, or material
Heresy; which certainly you will not deny; or, if you do, you pull down the
only pillar of your Church and Religion, and deny that which is in effect the
only thing you labor to prove through your whole Book.

79. The latter Creed which now we have, is so uneffectual for these good
purposes, that you your self tell us of innumerable, gross, damnable Heresies,
that have been, are, and may be, whose contrary Truths are neither explicitly,
nor by consequence comprehended in this Creed: So that no man by the belief of
this Creed without the former, can be possibly guarded from falling into them,
and continuing obstinate in them. Nay, so far is this Creed from guarding them
from these mischiefs, that it is more likely to ensnare them into them, by
seeming and yet not being a full comprehension of all necessary Points of
Faith: which is apt (as experience shows,) to mis-guide men into this (as you
conceive it) pernicious error, That believing the Creed, they believe all
necessary Points of Faith, whereas indeed, according to you, they do not so.
Now upon these grounds I thus conclude: That Creed, which has great
commodities and no danger, would certainly be better than that which has great
danger, and wants many of these great commodities. But the former short Creed
proposed by me, I believe the Roman Church to be infallible, (if your doctrine
be true) is of the former condition, and the latter, that is, the Apostles
Creed, is of the latter, Therefore the former (if your doctrine be true) would
without controversy be better than the latter.

80. But (say you) by this kind of arguing, one might infer quite contrary, If
the Apostles Creed contain all Points necessary to Salvation, What need have we
of any Church to teach us? And consequently what need of the Article of the
Church? To which I answer, that having compared your inference and D. Potter's
together, I cannot discover any shadow of resemblance between them, nor any
show of Reason, why the perfection of the Apostles Creed, should exclude a
necessity of some body to deliver it. Much less why the whole Creed's
containing all things necessary should make the belief of a part of it
unnecessary. As well (for ought I understand) you might avouch this inference
to be as good as D. Potters: The Apostles Creed contains all things necessary,
therefore there is no need to believe in God. Neither does it follow so well as
D. Potter's Argument follows, That if the Apostles Creed contains all things
necessary, that all other Creeds and Catechisms, wherein are added diverse other
Particulars, are superfluous. For these other Particulars may be the duties of
obedience, they may be profitable Points of Doctrine, they may be good
expositions of the Apostles Creed, and so not superfluous; and yet for all this
the Creed may still contain all Points of Belief that are simply necessary.
These therefore are poor consequences, but no more like D. Potters than an
apple is like an oister.

81. But this consequence after you have sufficiently slighted and disgraced
it, at length you promise us news, and pretend to grant it. But what is that
which you mean to grant? That the Apostles did put no Article in their Creed
but only that of the Church? Or that, if they had done so, they had done better
than now they have done? This is D. Potter's inference out of your Doctrine: and
truly, if you should grant this, this were news indeed? Yes, say you, I will
grant it, but only thus far, that Christ has referred us only to his Church.
Yea, but this is clean another thing, and no news at all, that you should grant
that, which you would fain have granted to you. So that your dealing with us is
just as if a man should proffer me a courtesy, and pretend that he would
oblige himself by a note under his hand, to give me twenty pound; and instead
of it write, that I owe him forty, and desire me to subsctibe to it and be
thankful. Of such favors as these it is very safe to be liberal.

82. You tell us afterward (but how it comes in I know not) that it were a
childish argument, The Creed contains not all things necessary; Ergo, It is not
profitable! Or, The Church alone is sufficient to teach us by some convenient
means: Ergo, She must teach us without means. These indeed are childish
arguments; but, for ought I see, you alone are the father of them: for, in D.
Potter's book, I can neither meet with them, nor any like them. He indeed tells
you, that if (by an impossible supposition) your Doctrine were true, another and
a far shorter Creed would have been more expedient: even this alone, I believe
the Roman Church to be infallible. But why you should conclude, he makes this
Creed which we have, unprofitable; because he says another that might be
conceived upon this false supposition, would be more profitable: or, that he
lays a necessity upon the Church, of teaching without means: or, of not
teaching this very Creed which now is taught; these things are so subtle that I
cannot apprehend them. To my understanding, by those words, And sent us to the
Church for all the rest, he does rather manifestly imply, that the rest might
be very well, not only profitable but necessary, and that the Church was to
teach this by Creeds, or Catechisms, or Councels, or any other means which she
should make choice of; for, being Infallible, she could not choose amiss.

83. Whereas therefore you say, If the Apostles had expressed no Article but that
of the Catholic Church, she must have taught us the other Articles in
particular by Creeds, or other means: This is very true, but no way repugnant
to the truth of this which follows, that the Apostles (if your doctrine be true)
had done better service to the Church, though they had never made this Creed of
theirs which now we have, if, in stead thereof, they had commanded in plain
terms that for men's perpetual direction in the Faith, this short Creed should
be taught all men, I believe the Roman Church shall be for ever infallible. Yet
you must not so mistake me, as if I meant, that they had done better, not to
have taught the Church the substance of Christian Religion; For then the Church
not having learnt it of them, could not have taught it us, This therefore I do
not say: but, supposing they had written these Scriptures as they have written,
wherein all the Articles of their Creed are plainly delivered, and preached
that Doctrine which they did preach, and done all other things as they have
done, besides the composing their Symbol: I say, if your doctrine were true,
they had done a work infinitely more beneficial to the Church of Christ, if
they had never composed their Symbol, which is but an imperfect comprehension
of the necessary Points of simple Belief, and no distinctive mark (as a Symbol
should be) between those that are good Christians, and those that are not so;
But instead thereof, had delivered this one Proposition, which would have been
certainly effectual for all the aforesaid good intents and purposes, The Roman
Church shall be for ever infallible in all things, which she proposes as
matters of Faith.

84. Whereas you say, If we will believe we have all in the Creed when we have
not all, it is not the Apostles fault but our own: I tell you plainly, if it be
a fault, I know not whose it should be but theirs. For sure it can be no fault
in me to follow such Guides whithersoever they lead me; Now, I say, they have
led me into this persuasion, because they have given me great reason to believe
it, and none to the contrary. The reason they have given me to believe it, is,
because it is apparent and confessed, they did propose to themselves in composing
it, some good end or ends: As that Christians might have a form, by which (for
matter of Faith) they might profess themselves Catholics. So Putean out of
Tho. Aquinas: That the faithful might know, what the Christian people is to
believe explicitly. So Vincent Filiucius: That being separated into diverse
parts of the World, they might preach the same thing: And, that, that might
serve as a mark to distinguish true Christians from Infidels, So Card, Riclieu.
Now for all these and for any other good intent, I say, it will be plainly
uneffectual, unless it contain at least all Points of simple Belief, which are,
in ordinary course, necessary to be explicitly known by all men. So that, if it
be a fault in me to believe this, it must be my fault to believe the Apostles,
wise and good men: which I cannot do if I believe not this. And therefore, what
Richardus de sancto Victore says of God himself, I make no scruple at all to
apply to the Apostles, and to say, Si error est quod credo, a vobis deceptus
sum: If it be an error which I believe, it is you, and my reverend esteem of
you and your actions, that has led me into it. For as for your suspicion, That
we are led into this persuasion, out of a hope that we may the better maintain
by it some opinions of our own, It is plainly uncharitable. I know no opinion I
have, which I would not as willingly forsake as keep, if I could see sufficient
reason to enduce me to believe, that it is the will of God I should forsake it.
Neither do I know any opinion I hold against the Church of Rome, but I have
more evident grounds then this whereupon to build it. For let but these Truths
be granted: That the authority of the Scripture is independent on your Church,
and dependent only in respect of us upon universal Tradition; That Scripture is
the only Rule of Faith: That all things necessary to Salvation are plainly
delivered in Scripture: Let, I say, these most certain and Divine Truths be
laid for Foundations, and let our superstructions be consequent and coherent to
them; and, I am confident, Peace would be restored, and Truth maintained
against you, though the Apostles Creed were not in the World.

CHAP. V. That Luther, Calvin, their Associates, and all who began or continue
the Separation from the external Communion of the Roman Church, are guilty of
the proper, and formal sin of Schism.
THE Searcher of all Hearts is witness with how unwilling minds, we Catholics
are drawn to fasten the denomination of Schismatiques, or Heretics, on them,
for whose souls, if they employed their best blood, they judge that it could
not be better spent! If we rejoice, that they are contristated at such titles,
our joy rises not from their trouble or grief, but, as that of the Apostles
did, from the fountain of Charity, because they are contristated to repentance;
that so, after unpartial examination, they finding themselves to be what we
say, may, by God's holy grace, begin to dislike, what themselves are. For our
part, we must remember that our obligation is, to keep within the mean, betwixt
uncharitable bitterness, and pernicious flattery, not yielding to worldly
respects, nor offending Christian Modesty, but uttering the substance of truth
in so Charitable manner, that not so much we, as Truth, and Charity, may seem
to speak; according to the wholesome advice of S. Gregory Nazianzen in these
divine words: We do not affect peace with Orat. 32.
prejudice of the true doctrine, that so we may get a name of being geatle, and
mild, and yet we seek to conserve peace, fighting in a lawful manner, and
containing our selves within our compass, and the rule of Spirit. And of these
things my judgment is, and, for my part, I prescribe the same law to all that
deal with souls, and treat of true Doctrine, that neither they exasperate men's
minds by harshness, nor make them haughty or insolent, by submission; but that,
in the cause of Faith they behave themselves prudently, and advisedly, and do
not in either of these things exceed the mean. With whom agrees S. Leo,
saying: it behooves us in such causes to be Epist. 8.
most careful, that without noise of contentions, both Charity be conserved,
and Truth maintained.

2. For better method, we will handle these Points in order. First, we will set
down the nature, and essence, or, as I may call it, the Quality of Schism. In
the second place, the greatness, and grievousness, or (so to term it) the
Quantity thereof. For the Nature, or Quality, will tell us who may without
injury be judged Schismatiques: and by the greatness, or quantity, such as find
themselves guilty thereof, will remain acquainted with the true state of their
soul, and whether they may conceive any hope of Salvation or no. And because
Schism will be found to be a division from the Church, which could not happen,
unless there were always a visible Church; we will, Thirdly, prove or rather
take it as a Point to be granted by all Christians, that in all Ages, There
has been such a Visible Congregation of Faithful People. Fourthly, we will
demonstrate, that Luther, Galvin, and the rest, did separate themselves from
the Communion of that always visible Church of Christ, and therefore were
guilty of Schism. And fifthly, we will make it evident, that the visible true
Church or Christ, out of which Luther and his followers departed, was no other
but the Roman Church; and consequently, that both they, and all others who
persist in the same divisions, are Schismatiques by reason of their separation
from the Church of Rome.

1. Point. The nature of Schism.
3. For the first Point touching the Nature, or Quality of Schism: As the
natural perfection of man consists in his being the Image of God his Creator,
by the powers of his soul; so his supernatural perfection is placed in
similitude with God, as his last End and Felicity; and, by having the said
spiritual faculties, his Understanding and Will is linked to him. His
Understanding is united to God by Faith; his Will, by Charity. The former
relies upon his infallible Truth: The latter carries us to his infinite
Goodness. Faith has a deadly opposite, Heresy. Contrary to the Union, or
Unity of Charity, is Separation and Division. Charity is twofold. As it
respects God, his Opposite Vice is Hatred against God: as it uniteth us to our
Neighbor, his contrary is Separation or division of affections and will, from
our Neighbor. Our Neighbor may be considered, either as one private person
has a single relation to another, or as all concur to make one Company or
Congregation, which we call the Church; and this is the most principal
reference and Union of one man with another: because the chiefest Unity is that
of the Whole, to which the particular Unity of Parts is subordinate. This
Unity, or Oneness, (if so I may call it) is effected by Charity, uniting all
the members of the Church in one Mystical Body; contrary to which, is Schism,
from the Greek word signifying Scissure, or Division. Wherefore upon the whole
matter, we find that Schism, as the Angelical Doctor, S. Thomas, defines it,
is; A voluntary separation 2.2. q. 39. art. in corp. and ad 3.
from the Unity of that Charity, whereby all the members of the Church are
united. From hence he deduceth, that Schism is a special and particular vice,
distinct from Heresy, because they are opposite to two different Virtues:
Heresy, to Faith: Schism to Charity. To which purpose he fitly alleges S.
Hierom upon these words, ( Tit. 3.) A man that is an Heretic after the first
and second admonition avoid, saying: I conceive that there is this difference
betwixt Schism and Heresy, that Heresy involves some perverse assertion:
Schism for Episcopal dissension does separate men from the Church. The same
Doctrine is delivered by S. Austin in these words: Heretics Lib. de Fid. and
Symbol. cap. 10.
and Schismatiques call their Congregations, Churches: but Heretics corrupt
the Faith by believing of God false things: but Schismatiques by wicked
divisions break from fraternal Charity, although they believe what we believe.
Therefore the Heretic belongs not to the Church, because she loves God: nor
the Schismatique, because she loves her Neighbor. And in another place he
says: It is wont to be demanded Qu. Evang* ex Mat. q. 11.
how Schismatiques, be distinguished from Heretics: and this difference is
found, that not a diverse Faith, but the divided society of Communion does make
Schismatiques. It is then evident that Schism is different from Heresy.
Nevertheless (says S. Thomas) Ubi supra,
As he who is deprived of Faith must needs want Charity: so every Heretic is
a Schismatique, but not conversively every Schismatique is an Heretic; though
because want of Charity disposes and makes way to the destruction of Faith
(according to those words of the Apostle, Which [a good conscience] some
casting off, have suffered shipwreck in their Faith) Schism speedily
degenerates to Heresy, as S. Hierom after the rehearsed words teaches,
saying: Though Schism in the beginning may in some sort be understood different
from Heresy; yet there is no Schism which does not faign some Heresy to it
self, that so it may seem to have departed from the Church upon good reason.
Nevertheless when Schism proceeds originally from Heresy, Heresy as being in
that case the predominant quality in these two peccant humors, gives the
denomination of an Heretic; as on the other side we are wont, especially in
the beginning, or for a while, to call Schismatiques, those men who first began
with only Schism, though in process of time they fell into some Heresy, and by
that means are indeed both Schismatiques and Heretics.

4. The reason why both Heresy and Schism are repugnant to the being of a good
Catholic, is: Because the Catholic, or Universal Church signifies One
Congregation, or Company of faithful people, and therefore implies not only
Faith, to make them Faithful believers, but also Communion, or common Union, to
make them One in Charity, which excludes Separation, and Division: and
therefore in the Apostles Creed, Communion of Saints, is immediately joined to
the Catholic Church.

5. From this definition of Schism may be inferred, that the guilt thereof is
contracted, not only by division from the Universal Church; but also, by a
Separation from a particular Church or Diocese which agrees with the Universal.
In this manner Meletius was a Schismatique, but not an Heretic, because, as
we read in S. Epiphanius Haeres. 68.
he was of the right Faith: for his Faith was not altered at any time from the
holy Catholic Church, etc. He made a Sect, but departed not from Faith. Yet
because he made to himself a particular Congregation against S. Peter
Archbishop of Alexandria his lawful Superior, and by that means brought in a
division in that particular Church, he was a Schismatique. And it is well worth
the noting, that the Meletians building new Churches, put this Title upon them,
The Church of Martyrs: and upon the ancient Churches of those who succeeded
Peter, was inscribed, The Catholic Church. For so it is. A new Sect must have
a new name, which though it be never so gay and specious, as the Church of
Martyrs: the Reformed Church, etc. yet the Novelty shows that it is not the
Catholic, not a true Church. And, that Schism may be committed by division
from a particular Church, we read in Optatus Milevitanus Lib. 1. con^. Parmen.
these remarkable words, (which do well declare who be Schismatiques) brought
by him to prove that not Caecilianus but Parmenianus was a Schismatique: For
Caecilianus went not out from Majorinus thy Grand Father (he means his next
predecessor, but one, in the Bishopric,) but Majorinus from Caecilianus:
neither did Caecilianus depart from the Chair of Peter, or of Cyprian (who was
but a particular Bishop,) but Majorinus, in whose Chair thou fittest, which had
no beginning before Majorinus himself. Seeing it is manifestly known that these
things were so done, it evidently appearch, that you are heirs both of
Traditors (that is, of those who delivered up the holy Bible to be burned) and
of Schismatiques. And it seems that this kind of Schism must principally be
admitted by Protestants, who acknowledge no one visible Head of the whole
Church, but hold that every particular Diocese, Church, or Country is governed
by it self independently of any one Person, or General Council, to which all
Christians have obligation to submit their judgments, and wills.

6. As for the grievousness or quantity of Schism (which was the second Point
proposed) S. Thomas teaches, 2. Point. The grievousness of Schism.
that amongst sins against our Neighbor, Schism Supra art. 2. ad 3.
is the most grievous; because it is against the spiritual good of the
multitude, or Community. And therefore as in a Kingdom or Commonwealth, there
is as great difference between the crime of rebellion or sedition, and debates
among private men, as there is inequality betwixt one man, and a whole kingdom;
so in the Church, Schism is as much more grievous than Sedition in a Kingdom,
as the spiritual good of souls surpasses the civil and political weal. And S.
Thomas adds further, and they lose the spiritual Power of Jurisdiction; and if
they go about to absolve from sin, or to excommunicate, their actions are
invalid; which he proves out of the Canon Novitianus. Causa 7 quaest. 1. which
says: He that keeps neither the Unity of spirit, nor the peace of agreement,
and separates himself from the bond of the Church, and the College of Priests,
can neither have the Power, nor dignity of a Bishop. the Power also of Order
(for example, to consecrate the Eucharist, to ordain Priests, etc.) they cannot
lawfully exercise.

7. In the judgment of the holy Fathers, Schism is a most grievous offense. S.
Chrysostom Hom. 11. in ep. ad Ephesians.
compares these Schismatical dividers of Christ's mystical body, to those who
sacrilegiously pierced his natural body, saying: Nothing does so much incense
God, as that the Church should be divided. Although we should do innumerable
good works, if we divide the full Ecclesiastical Congregation, we shall be
punished no less than they who tore his (natural) body. For that was done to
the gain of the whole world, although not with that intention: but this has no
profit at all, but there arises from it most great harm. These things are
spoken, not only to those who bear office, but also to those who are governed
by them. Behold how neither a moral good life (which conceit deceives many)
nor authority of Magistrates, nor any necessity of Obeying Superiors can
excuse Schism from being a most heinous offense. Optatus Milevitanus Lib. cont.
Parmen.
calls Schism, Ingens flagitium, a huge crime. And speaking to the Donatists,
says, that Schism is evil in the highest degree, even you are not able to
deny. No less pathetical is S. Augustine upon this subject. He reckons
Schismatiques amongst Pagans, Heretics, and Jews, saying: Religion is to be
sought, neither in the confusion of Pagans, nor Lib. de vera Relig. cap. 6.
in the filth of Heretics, nor in the languishing of Schismatiques, nor in
the Age of the Jews; but amongst those alone who are called Christian
Catholics, or Orthodox, that is, lovers of Unity in the whole body, and
followers of truth. Nay, he esteems them worse than Infidels and Idolaters,
saying: Those whom the Donatists Cont. Donatist. l. 1. cap. 8.
heal from the wound of Infidelity and Idolatry, they hurt more grievously with
the wound of Schism. Let here those men who are pleased untruly to call us
Idolaters, reflect upon themselves, and consider, that this holy Father judges
Schismatiques (as they are) to be worse than Idolaters, which they absurdly
call us. And this he proves by the example of Core, Dathan, and Abiram, and
other rebellious Schismatiques of the old Testament, who were conveyed alive
down into Hell, and punished more openly than Idolaters. No doubt (says this
holy Father) but Ibid. l. 2. c. 6.
that was committed most wickedly, which was punished most severely. In another
place he yoketh Schism with Heresy, saying upon the Eighth Beatitude: Many De
sermon. Dom. in monte, cap. 5.
Heretics, under the name of Christians, deceiving men's souls, do suffer many
such things; but therefore they are excluded from this reward, because it is
not only said, Happy are they who suffer persecution, but there is added, for
Justice. But where there is not sound Faith, there cannot be justice. Neither
can Schismatiques promise to themselves any part of this reward, because
likewise where there is no Charity, there cannot be Justice. And in another
place, yet more effectually he says: Being out of Epist. 204.
the Church, and divided from the heap of Unity, and the bond of Charity, thou
should be Punished with eternal death, though thou should be burned alive
for the name of Christ. And in another place, he has these words: If he hear
not the Church, let him be to Cont. advers. Leg. and Prophet. l. 2. cap. 17.
thee, as an Heathen or Publican; which is more grievous than if he were
smitten with the sword, consumed with flames; or cast to wild beasts. And
elsewhere: Out of the Catholic Church (says he) one De gest. cum Emerit.
may have Faith, Sacraments, Orders, and in sum all things except Salvation.
With S. Augustine, his Countryman and second self in sympathy of spirit, S.
Fulgentius agrees, saying: Believe this De fide ad Pet.
steadfastly without doubting, that every Heretic or Schismatique, baptized in
the name of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, if before the end of his
life he be not reconciled to the Catholic Church, what Alms soever he give,
yea though he should shed his blood for the name of Christ, he cannot obtain
Salvation. Mark again, how no moral honesty of life, no good deeds, no
Martyrdom, can without repentance avail any Schismatique for Salvation. Let us
also add that D. Potter says: Schism is no less Page 42.
damnable than Heresy.

8. But O you Holy, Learned, zealous Fathers, and Doctors of Gods Church; out
of these premises, of the grievousness of Schism, and of the certain damnation
which it brings (if unrepented) what conclusion draw you for the instruction
of Christians? S. Augustine makes this wholesome inference. There is Cont.
Parm. l. 2. cap. 62.
no just necessity to divide Unity. S. Irenaeus concludes: They cannot Cont.
haeres. l 4. cap. 62.
make any so important reformation, as the evil of the Schism is pernicious. S.
Denis of Alexandria says: Certainly, Apud Eusebius. Hist. Eccles. lib. 6.
all things should rather be endured, than to consent to the division of the
Church of God: those Martyrs being no less glorious, that expose themselves to
hinder the dismembring of the Church, than those that suffer rather than they
will offer sacrifice to Idols. Would to God all those who divided themselves
from that visible Church of Christ, which was upon earth when Luther appeared,
would rightly consider of these things! And thus much of the second Point.

3. Point. Perpetual Visibility of the Church.
9 We have just and necessary occasion, eternally to bless Almighty God, who
has vouchsafed to make us members of the Catholic Roman Church, from which
while men fall, they precipitate themselves into so vast absurdities, or rather
sacrilegious blasphemies, as is employed in the Doctrine of the total deficiency
of the visible Church, which yet is maintained by diverse chief Protestants, as
may at large be seen in Breerely, and others; out of whom I will here name
Jewel, saying: The truth was unknown Apol. part. 4. c. 4. divis. 2. And in his
defense printed Ann. 1571. Page 426.
at that time, and unheard of, when Martin Luther, and Ulderick Zwinglius first
came unto the knowledge and preaching of the Gospel. Perkins says: We say,
that In his Expos^t on upon the Creed, Page 400.
before the days of Luther for the space of many hund^ed years, an Universal
Apostasy overspread the whole face of the earth, and that our (Protestant)
Church was not then visible to the world. Napper upon the Revelations teaches,
that from the year of Propos. 37. Page* 68.
Christ three hundred and sixteen, the Antichristian and Papistical reign has
begun, reigning universally, and without any debatable contradiction, one
thousand two hundred sixty years, (that is, till Luther's time:) And that, from
the year of Ibid. cap. 12. Page 161. col. 3.
Christ three hundred and sixteen, God has withdrawn his Visible Church from
open Assemblies, to the hearts of particular godly men, etc. during the space
of one thousand two hundred threescore years. And that, the Ibid. in cap. 11.
Page 145.
Pope and Clergy have possessed the outward Visible Church of Christians, even
one thousand two hundred threescore years. And that, the Ibid. Page 191.
true Church abode latent, and invisible. And Brocard Fol. 110. and 123.
upon the Revelations, professes to join in opinion with Napper. Fulk
affirms, that in the Answer to a counterfeit Catholic. Page 16.
time of Boniface the third, which was the year six hundred and seven, the
Church was invisible, and fled into the wilderness, there to remain a long
season. Luther says: Primo solus eram: At the first In praef at. operum suorum.
I was alone. Jacob Hailbronerus one of the Disputants for the Protestant
Patty, in the conference at Ratisbon, affirms In suo Acatholico. vol. a. 15.
cap. 9. p. 479
that the true Church was interrupted by Apostasy from the true Faith. Calvin
says: It is absurd in the very Epist. 141.
beginning to break one from another, after we have been forced to make a
separation from the whole world. It were overlong to allege the words of
Joannes Regius, Daniel Chamierus, Beza, Ochimus, Castalio, and others to the
same purpose. The reason which cast them upon this wicked Doctrine, was a
desperate voluntary necessity: because they being resolved not to acknowledge
the Roman Church to be Christ's true Church, and yet being convinced by all
manner of evidence, that for diverse Ages before Luther there was no other
Congregation of Christians, which could be the Church of Christ; there was no
remedy but to affirm, that upon earth Christ had no visible Church: which they
would never have avouched, if they had known how to avoid the foresaid
inconvenience (as they apprehended it) of submitting themselves to the Roman
Church.

10. Against these exterminating spirits, D. Potter, and other more moderate
Protestants, profess, that Christ always had, and always will have, upon earth
a Visible Church: otherwise (says he) our Lord's Page 154.
promise of her stable Mat. 16.18.
edification should be of no value. And in another place, having affirmed that
Protestants have not left the Church of Rome, but her corruptions, and
acknowledging her still to be a member of Christ's body, he seeks to clear
himself and others from Schism, because (says he) the property Page 76.
of Schism is ( witness the Donatists and Lucit^rians) to cut off from the Body
of Christ, and the hope of Salvation, the Church from which it separates. And,
if any Z^lots amongst us have proceeded to heavier censures, their zeal may be
excused, but their charity and wisdom cannot be justified. And elsewhere he
acknowledges, that the Roman Church has those main and Page 83.
essential truths, which give her the name and essence of a Church.

11. It being therefore granted by D. Potter, and the chiefest and best learned
English Protestants, that Christ's Visible Church cannot perish, it will be
needless for me in this occasion to prove it. S. Augustine doubted not to say:
The Prophets In Psalm. 30. Com. 2.
spoke more obscurely of Christ, then of the Church: because, as I think, they
did forsee in spirit, that men were to make parties against the Church, and
that they were not to have so great strife concerning Christ: therefore that
was more plainly foretold, and more openly prophesied, about which greater
contentions were to rise, that it might turn to the condemnation of them who
have seen it, and yet gone forth. And in another place he says: How do we
confide Epist. 48.
to have received manifestly Christ himself from holy Scriptures, if we have
not also manifestly received the Church from them? And indeed to what
Congregation shall a man have recourse for the affairs of his soul, if upon
earth there be no Visible Church of Christ? Beside, to imagine a company of men
believing one thing in their heart, and with their mouth professing the
contrary, (as they must be supposed to do; for, if they had professed what they
believed, they would have become Visible) is to dream of a damned crew of
dissembling Sycophants, but not to conceive a right notion of the Church of
Christ our Lord. And therefore S. Augustine says: We cannot be saved, unless
laboring also for the S. Aug. de Fide and Symbol^ c. 1.
Salvation of others, we profess with our mouths, the same Faith which we bear
in our hearts. And if any man hold it lawful to dissemble, and deny matters of
Faith, we cannot be assured, but that they actually dissemble, and hide
Anabaptism, Arianism, yea Turcism, and even Atheism, or any other false belief,
under the outward profession of Calvinism. Do not Protestants teach that
preaching of the World, and administration of Sacraments (which cannot but make
a Church Visible) are inseparable notes of the true Church? And therefore they
must either grant a Visible Church, or none at all. No wonder then, if S.
Austin account this Heresy so gross, that he says against those who in his
time defended the like error: But this Church which In Psalm. 101.
has been of all Nations is no more, she has perished; so say they that are
in not in her. O impudent speech And afterward; This voice so abominable, so
detestable, so full of presumption and falsehood, which is sustained with no
truth, enlightened with no wisdom, seasoned with no salt, vain, rash, heady,
pernicious, the holy Ghost foresaw, etc. And peradventure some De ovib. c. ^.
one may say, there are other sheep I know not where, with which I am not
acquainted, yet God has care of them. But he is too absurd in humane sense,
that can imagine such things. And these men do not consider, that while then
deny the perpetuity of a Visible Church, they destroy their own present Church,
according to the argument, which S. Augustine urged against the Donatists in
these words De Bapt. cont. Donat.
If the Church were lost in Cyprian's (we may say in Gregory's) time, from
whence did Donatus (Luther) appear? From what earth did he spring? From what
sea is he come? From what heaven did he drop? And in another place: How can
they vaunt Lib. 3. cont* Parm.
to have any Church, if ^he have ceased ever since those times? And all Divines
by defining Schism to be a division from the true Church, suppose that there
must be a known Church, from which it is possible for men to depart. But enough
of this in these few words.

4. Point. Luther and all that follow him are Schismatiques.
12. Let us now come to the fourth, and chiefest Point, which was, to examine
whether Luther, Calvin, and the rest, did not depart from the external
Communion of Christ's Visible Church, and by that separation became guilty of
Schism. And that they are properly Schismatiques clearly follows from the
grounds which we have laid, concerning the nature of Schism, which consists in
leaving the external Communion of the Visible Church of Christ our Lord: and it
is clear by evidence of fact, that Luther and his followers forsook the
Communion of that Ancient Church.

For they did not so much as pretend to join with any Congregation, which had a
being before their time; for they would needs conceive that no Visible Company
was free from errors in Doctrine, and corruption in practice: And therefore they
opposed the Doctrine; they withdrew their obedience from the Prelates; they left
participation in Sacraments; they changed the Liturgy of public Service of
whatsoever Church then extant. And these things they pretended to do out of a
persuasion, that they were bound (forsooth) in conscience so to do, unless they
would participate with errors, corruptions, and superstitions. We dare not
(says D. Potter) communicate Page 68.
with Rome, either in her public Liturgy, which is manifestly polluted with
gross superstition, etc. or in those corrupt and ungrounded opinions, which she
has added to the Faith of Catholics,. But now let D. Potter tell me with
what visible, Church extant before Luther, he would have adventured to
communicate in her public Liturgy and Doctrine, since he durst not communicate
with Rome? He will not be able to assign any, even with any little color of
common sense. If then they departed from all visible Communities professing
Christ, it follows that they also left the Communion of the true visible
Church, which soever it was, whether that of Rome, or any other; of which Point
I do not for the present dispute. Yea this the Lutherans do not only
acknowledge, but prove, and brag of. If (says a learned Lutheran) there had
been right Georgius Milius in Aug. Confess. art. 7. de Eccles. Page 137
Believers which went before Luther in his office, there had then been no need
of a Lutheran Reformation. Another affirms it to be ridiculous, to think that
in the time Bened. Morgenstern. tract. de Eccles. Page 145.
before Luther, any had the purity of Doctrine; and that Luther should receive
it from them, and not they from Luther* Another speaks roundly, and says, It
is impudency to say, that many learned men Conrad. Schlusselb. in Theol.
Calvin. lib. 2. fol. 130.
in Germany before Luther, did hold the Doctrine of the Gospel. And I add: That
far greater impudency, it were to affirm, that Germany did not agree with the
test of Europe, and other Christian Catholic Nations, and consequently, that
it is the greatest impudency do deny, that he departed from the Communion of
the visible Catholic Church, spread over the whole world. We have heard
Calvin saying of Protestants in general; We were, even, forced Epist. 141.
to make a separation from the whole world. And, Luther of himself in
particular: In the beginning In praefat. operum suorum.
I was alone. Ergo (say I, by your good leave) you were at least a
Schismatique, divided from the Ancient Church, and a member of no new Church.
For no sole man can constitute a Church; and though he could, yet such a Church
could not be that glorious Company, of whose number, greatness, and amplitude
so much has been spoken, both in the old Testament, and in the New.

13. D. Potter endeavors to avoid this evident Argument by diverse evasions;
but by the confutation thereof I will (with God's holy assistance) take
occasion, even out of his own Answers and grounds, to bring unanswerable
reasons to convince them of Schism.

14. His chief Answer is: That they have not left the Church, but her
corruption.

15. I reply. This answer may be given either by those furious people, who
teach that those abuses, and corruptions in the Church were so enormous, that
they could not stand with the nature, or being of a true Church of Christ: Or
else by those other more calm Protestants, who affirm, that those errors did
not destroy the being, but only deform the beauty of the Church. Against both
these sorts of men, I may fitly use that unanswerable Dilemma, which S.
Augustine brings against the Donatists in these concluding words: Tell me
whether the Lib. 2. cont. Epist. Gaudent. cap. 7.
Church at that time when you say she entertained those who were guilty of all
crimes, by the contagion of those sinful persons, perished, or perished not?
Answer; Whether the Church perished, or perished not? Make choice of what you
think. If then she perished, What Church brought forth Donatus? (we may say
Luther.) But if she could not perish, because so many were incorporated into
her, without Baptism, (that is, without a second baptism, or rebaptization, and
I may say, without Luther's Reformation) answer me I pray you, what madness did
more the Sect of Donatus to separate themselves from her upon pretense to avoid
the communion of bad mea^ I beseech the Reader to ponder every one of S.
Augustine's words; and to consider, whether any thing could have been spoken
more directly against Luther, and his followers of what sort soever.

16. And now to answer more in particular; I say to those who teach that the
visible Church of Christ perished for many Ages, that I can easily afford them
the courtesy, to free them from mere Schism: but all men touched with any
spark of zeal to vindicate the wisdom and goodness of our Savior from
blasphemous injury, cannot choose but believe and proclaim them to be
superlative Arch-heretiques. Nevertheless, if they will needs have the honor
of Singularity, and desire to be both formal Heretics, and properly
Schismatiques, I will tell them, that while they dream of an invisible Church
of men, which agreed with them in Faith, they will upon due reflection find
themselves to be Schismatiques, from those corporeal Angels, or invisible men,
because they held external Communion with the visible Church of those times,
the outward Communion of which visible Church these modern hot-spurs forsaking,
were thereby divided from the outward Communion of their hidden Brethren, and
so are Separatists from the external Communion of them, with whom they agree in
Faith; which is Schism in the most formal, and proper signification thereof.
Moreover, according to D. Potter, those boisterous Creatures are properly
Schismatiques. For, the reason why he thinks himself, and such as he is, to be
cleared from Schism, notwithstanding their division from the Roman Church, is,
because (according to his Divinity) the property of Page 76.
Schism, is, ( witness the Donatists and Luciferians) to cut off from the Body
of Christ, and the hope of Salvation, the Church from which it separates: But
those Protestants of whom we now spoke, cut off from the Body of Christ. and
the hope of Salvation, the Church from which they separated themselves; and
they do it directly as the Donatists (in whom you exemplify) did, by affirming
that the true Church had perished: and therefore they cannot be cleared from
Schism, if you may be their Judge. Consider, I pray you, how many prime
Protestants both domestical and foreign you have at one blow struck off from
hope of Salvation, and condemned to the lowest pit for the grievous sin of
Schism. And withal it imports you to consider, that you also involve your
self, and other moderate Protestants in the self-same crime, and punishment,
while you communicate with those, who according to your own principles, are
properly, and formally Schismatiques. For, if you held your self obliged under
pain of damnation to forsake the Communion of the Roman Church, by reason of
her Errors and Corruptions, which yet you confess were not Fundamental; shall
it not be much more damnable for you, to live in Communion and Confraternity,
with those who defend an error of the failing of the Church; which in the
Donatists you confess Page 126.
to have been properly heretical against the Article of our Creed, I believe
the Church? And I desire the Reader, here to apply an authority of S. Cyprian (
Epist. 76.) which he shall find alleged in the next number. And this may
suffice for confutation of the aforesaid Answer, as it might have relation to
the rigid Calvinists.

17. For Confutation of those Protestants, who hold that the Church of Christ
had always a being, and cannot err in Points Fundamental, and yet teach that
she may err in matters of less moment, wherein, if they forsake her, they would
be accounted not to leave the Church, but only her corruptions; I must say that
they change the state of our present Question, not distinguishing between
internal Faith, and external Communion, not between Schism, and Heresy. This I
demonstrate out of D. Potter himself, who in express words teaches, that the
promises which our Lord has made Page 151.
unto his Church for his assistance, are intended not to any particular Persons
or Churches, but only to the Church Catholic: and they are to be extended not
to every parcel, or particularity of truth, but only to Points of Faith, or
Fundamental. And afterward speaking of the Universal Church, he says: It is
comfort Page 155.
enough for the Church, that the Lord in mercy will secure her from all capital
dangers, and conserve her on earth against all enemies; but she may not hope to
triumph over all sin and error, till she be in heaven. Out of which words I
observe, that, according to D. Potter, the self-same Church, which is the
Universal Church, remaining the Universal true Church of Christ, may fall into
errors and corruptions: from whence it clearly follows, that it is impossible
to leave the External communion of the Church so corrupted, and retain external
communion with the Catholic Church; since the Church Catholic, and the
Church so corrupted is the self-same one Church, or company of men. And the
contrary imagination talks in a dream, as if the errors and infections of the
Catholic Church were not inherent in her, but were separate from her, like to
Accidents without any Subject, or rather indeed, as if they were not Accidents,
but Hypostases, or Persons, subsisting by themselves; for men cannot be said to
live, in, or out of, the Communion of any dead creature, but with persons,
endued with life and reason; and much less can men be said to live in the
Communion of Accidents, as errors and corruptions are: and therefore it is an
absurd thing to affirm, that Protestants divided themselves from the
corruptions of the Church, but not from the Church her self, seeing the
corruptions of the Church were inherent in the Church. All this is made more
clear, if we consider, that when Luther appeared, there were not two distinct
visible true Catholic Churches, holding contrary Doctrines, and divided in
external Communion; one of the which two Churches did triumph over all error,
and corruption in Doctrine and practice; but the other was stained with both.
For to faign this diversity of two Churches, cannot stand with record of
histories, which are silent of any such matter. It is against D. Potter's own
grounds, that the Church may err in Points not Fundamental, which were not
true, if you will imagine a certain visible Catholic Church free from error
even in Points not Fundamental. It contradicts the words in which he said,
the Church may not hope to triumph over all error, till she be in heaven. It
evacuateth the brag of Protestants, that Luther reformed the whole Church: and
lastly, It makes Luther a Schismatique, for leaving the Communion of all
visible Churches, seeing (upon this supposition) there was a visible Church of
Christ free from all corruption, which therefore could not be forsaken without
just imputation of Schism. We must therefore truly affirm, that since there was
but one visible Church of Christ, which was truly Catholic, and yet was
(according to Protestants) stained with corruption; when Luther left the
external Communion of that corrupted Church, he could not remain in the
Communion of the Catholic Church, no more than it is possible to keep company
with D. Christopher Potter, and not keep company with the Provost of Queens
College in Oxford, if D. Potter and the Provost be one and the self-same man:
For so one should be, and not be, with him at the same time. This very
Argument, drawn from the Unity of God's Church, S. Cyprian urges to convince,
that Novatianus was cut ost from the Church, in these words: The Church is
Epist. 76. ad Mag.
One, which being One cannot be both within and without. If she be with
Novatianus, she was not with Cornelius; But if she were with Cornelius, who
succeeded Fabianus, by lawful ordination, Novati^nus is not in the Church. I
purposely here speak only of external Communion with the Catholic Church. For
in this Point there is great difference between internal acts of our
understanding, and will; and of external deeds. Our Understanding and Will, are
faculties (as Philsophers speak) abstractive, and able to distinguish, and, as
it were, to part things, though in themselves they be really conjoined. But
real external deeds do take things in gross as they find them, not separating
things which in reality are joined together. Thus, one man may consider and
love a sinner as he is a man, friend, benefactor, or the like; and at the same
time not consider him, nor love him as he is a sinner; because these are acts
of our Understanding and Will, which may respect their objects under some one
formality, or consideration, without reference to other things contained in the
self-same objects. But if one should strike, or kill a sinful man, he will not
be excused by alleging that he killed him, not as a man, but as a sinner;
because the self-same person being a man, and the sinner, the external act of
murder fell jointly upon the man, and the sinner. And for the same reason one
cannot avoid the company of a sinner, and at the same time be really present
with that man who is a sinner. And this is our case: and in this our
Adversaries are egregiously, and many of them affectedly mistaken. For one may
in some Points believe as the Church believes, and disagree from her in other.
One may love the truth which she holds, and detest her (pretended) corruptions.
But it is impossible that a man should really separate himself from her
external Communion, as she is corrupted, and be really within the same external
Communion as she is sound; because she is the self-same Church which is
supposed to be sound in some things, and to err in others. Now, our question
for the present does concern only this Point of external Communion: because
Schism, as it is distinguished from Heresy, is committed when one divides
himself from the External Communion of that Church with which he agrees in
Faith; Whereas Heresy does necessarily imply a difference in matter of Faith,
and belief: and therefore to say, that they left not the visible Church; but
her errors, can only excuse them from Heresy (which shall be tried in the next
Chapter) but not from Schism, as long as they are really divided from the
external Communion of the self-same visible Church; which, notwithstanding
those errors wherein they do in judgment dissent from her, does still remain
the true Catholic Church of Christ; and therefore while they forsake the
corrupted Church, they forsake the Catholic Church. Thus then it remains
clear, that their chiefest Answer changes the very state of the question;
confounds internal acts of the Understanding with the external Deeds; does
not distinguish between Schism and Heresy; and leaves this demonstrated
against them, That they divided themselves from the Communion of the visible
Catholic Church, because they conceived that she needed Reformation. But
whether this pretense of Reformation will acquit them of Schism, I refer to the
unpartial Judges heretofore Numb. 8.
alleged; as to S. Irenaeus, who plainly says: They cannot make any so
important REFORMATION, as the Evil of the Schism is pernicious. To S. Denis of
Alexandria, saying: Certainly all things should be endured rather than to
consent to the division of the Church of God: those Martyrs being no less
glorious that expose themselves to hinder the dismembring of the Church, then
those that suffer rather than they will offer sacrifice to Idols. To S.
Augustine, who tells us: That not to hear the Church, is a more grievous thing
than if he were stricken with the sword, consumed with flames, exposed to wild
Beasts. And to conclude all in few words, he gives this general prescription:
There is no just necessity to divide unity; And D. Potter may remember his own
words: There neither was Page 75.
nor can be any just cause to depart from the Church of Christ; no more than
from Christ himself. But I have showed that Luther, and the rest departed from
the Church of Christ (if Christ had any Church upon earth:) Therefore there
could be no just cause (of Reformation, or what else soever) to do as they did;
and therefore they must be contented to be held for Schismatiques.

18. Moreover, I demand whether those corruptions which moved them to forsake
the Communion of the Visible Church, were in manners, or doctrine? Corruption in
manners yields no sufficient cause to leave the Church, otherwise men must go
not only out of the Church, but out of the world, as the Apostle 1 Cor. 5.10.
says. Our blessed Savior foretold that there would be in the Church tares
with choice Corn, and sinners with just men. If then Protestants wax zealous,
with the Servants, to pluck up the weeds, let them first hearken to the wisdom
of the Master: Let both grow up. And they ought to imitate them, who as S.
Augustine says, Tolerate for the good of Ep. 162.
Unity, that which they detest for the good of equity. And to whom the more
frequent, and foul such scandals are, by so much the more is the merit of their
perseverance in the Communion of the Church, and the Martyrdom of their
patience, as the same Saint calls it. If they were offended with the life of
some Ecclesiastical persons, must they therefore deny obedience to their
Pastors, and finally break with Gods Church? The Pastor of Pastors teaches us
another lesson. Upon the Chair of Moses Mat. 33.
have sitten the Scribes and Pharisees. All things therefore whatsoever they
shall say to you, observe ye, and do ye: but according to their works, do you
not. Must people except against laws, and revolt from Magistrates, because some
are negligent, or corrupt in the execurion of the same laws, and performance of
their office? If they intended reformation of manners, they used a strange
means for the atchieving of such an end, by denying the necessity of
Confession, laughing at austerity of penance, condemning the Vows of Chastity,
Poverty, Obedience, breaking Fasts, etc. And no less unfit were the Men, than
the Means. I love not recrimination. But it is well known to how great crimes
Luther, Calvin, Zuinglius, Beza, and others of the prime Reformers were
notoriously obnoxious; as might be easily demonstrated by the only transcribing
of what others have delivered upon that subject: whereby it would appear, that
they were very far from being any such Apostolical men as God is wont to use in
so great a work. And whereas they were wont, especially in the beginning of
their revoult, maliciously to exaggerate of the faults some Clergy men, Erasmus
said well, (Ep. ad Fratres inferior is Germaniae,) Let the riot, lust,
ambition, avarice of Priests, and whatsoever other crimes be gathered together,
Heresy alone does exceed all this filthy lake of vices. Besides nothing at all
was omitted by the sacred Council of Trent, which might tend to Reformation of
manners. And finally, the vices of others are not hurtful to any but such as
imitate, and consent to them; according to the saying of S. Augustine: we
conserve Ep. 116.
innocence, not by knowing the ill deeds of men, but by not yielding conscent
to such as we know, and by not judging rashly of such faults as we know not. If
you answer, that, not corruption in manners, but the approbation of them, does
yield sufficient cause to leave the Church; I reply with S. Augustine, that the
Church does (as the pretended Reformers ought to have done) tolerate or bear
with scandals and corruptions, but neither does, nor can approve them. The
Church (says he) being placed Page 75.
betwixt much chafe and cockle, does bear with many things; but doch not
approve, nor dissemble, nor act those things which are against Faith, and good
life. But because to approve corruption in manners as lawful, were an error
against Faith, it belongs to corruption in Doctrine, which was the second part
of my demand.

19. Now then, that corruptions in Doctrine (I still speak upon the untrue
supposition of our Adversaries) could not afford any sufficient cause, or
colorable necessity to depart from that Visible Church, which was extant when
Luther rose, I demonstrate out of D. Potter's own confession; that the
Catholic Church neither has, nor can err, in Points Fundamental, as we
showed out of his own express words, which he also of set purpose delivers in
diverse other places, and all they are obliged to maintain the same, who teach
that Christ had always a visible Church upon earth: because any one
Fundamental error overthrows the being of a true Church. Now (as Schoolmen
speak) it is implicatio in terminis (a contradiction so plain, that one word
destroys the other, as if one should say, A living dead man) to affirm, that
the Church does not err in Points necessary to Salvation, or damnably; and yet
that it is damnable to remain in her Communion, because she teaches errors
which are confessed not to be damnable. For if the error be not damnable, nor
against any Fundamental Article of Faith, the belief thereof cannot be
damnable. But D. Potter teaches, that the Catholic Church cannot, and that
the Roman Church has not erred against any Fundamental Article of Faith:
Therefore it cannot be damnable to remain in her Communion; and so the
pretended corruptions in her doctrins could not induce any obligation to depart
from her Communion; nor could excuse them from Schism, who, upon pretense of
necessity in Point of Conscience, forsook her. And D. Potter will never be able
to salve a manifest contradiction in these his words: To depart from the Church
(a) of Rome in some Doctrins and practices, there might be necessary cause,
though she wanted nothing necessary to Salvation. For if, notwithstanding these
Doctrins and practices, she wanted nothing necessary to Salvation; how could it
be necessary to Salvation to forsake her? And therefore we must still conclude,
that to forsake her was properly an act of Schism.

20. From the self-same ground of the infallibility of the Church in all
Fundamental Points, I argue after this manner: The visible Church cannot be
forsaken without damnation, upon pretense that it is damnable to remain in her
Communion, by reason of corruption in Doctrine; as long as, for the truth of her
Faith and belief, she performs the duty, which she owes to God, and her
Neighbor: As long as she performs what our Savior exacts at her hands: as
long as she does, as much as lies in her power to do. But (even according to D.
Potters Assertions) the Church performs all these things, as long she erreth
not in Points Fundamental, although she were supposed to err in other Points
not Fundamental: Therefore, the Communion of the visible Church cannot be
forsaken without damnation, upon pretense that it is damnable to remain in her
Communion, by reason of corruption in Doctrine. The Major, or first Proposition,
of it self is evident. The Minor, or second Proposition, does necessarily
follow out of D. Potter's own Doctrine above-rehearsed, that the promises of our
Lord made to his Church for his assistance, are to be Page 131.
extended only to Points of Faith, or Fundamental; (Let me note here by the way
that by his (or) he seems to exclude from Faith all Points which are not
Fundamental, and so we may deny innumerable Texts of Scripture:) That, It is
Page 155.
comfort enough for the Church, that the Lord in mercy will secure her from all
capital dangers, etc. but she may not hope to triumph over all sin and error,
till she be in heaven. For it is evident, that the Church (for as much as
concerns the truth of her Doctrins and belief) ows no more duty to God and her
Neighbor; neither does our Savior exact more at her hands, nor is it in her
power to do, more than God does assist her to do; which assistance is promised
only for Points Fundamental; and consequently as long as she teaches no
Fundamental error, her Communion cannot without damnation be forsaken. And we
may fitly apply against D. Potter a Concionatory declamation which he makes
against us, where he says: May the Church of after-Ages make the narrow way to
heaven, Page 221.
narrower than our Savior lest it, etc? since he himself obliges men under
pain of damnation to forsake the Church, by reason of errors; against which our
Savior thought it needless to promise his assistance, and for which he neither
denies his grace in this life, or glory in the next. Will D. Potter oblige the
Church to do more then she may even hope for, or to perform on earth that which
is proper to heaven alone?

21. And as from your own Doctrine concerning the infallibility of the Church in
Fundamental Points, we have proved that it was a grievous sin to forsake her:
so do we take a strong argument from the fallibility of any who dare pretend to
reform the Church, which any man in his wits will believe to be endued with at
least as much infallibility as private men can challenge; and D. Potter
expressly affirms, that Christ's promises of his assistance are not intended
Page 151.
to any particular persons or Churches: and therefore to leave the Church by
reason of errors, was at best hand but to flit from one erring company to
another, without any new hope of triumphing over errors, and, without
necessity, or utility, to forsake that Communion of which S. Augustine says,
There is Ep. cont. Parmen. lib. 2. c. 1^.
no just necessity to divide Unity. Which will appear to be much more evident,
if we consider, that though the Church had maintained some false Doctrins, yet
to leave her Communion to remedy the old, were but to add a new increase of
errors, arising from the innumerable disagreements of Sectaries, which must
needs bring with it a mighty mass of fallehoods, because the truth is but one,
and indivisible. And this reason is yet stronger; if we still remember, that
even according to D. Potter, the visible Church has a blessing not to err in
Points Fundamental, in which any private Reformer may fail: and therefore they
could not pretend any necessity to forsake that Church, out of whose Communion
they were exposed to danger of falling into many more, and even into damnable
errors. Remember I pray you, what your self affirms ( page 69.) where speaking
of our Church and yours, you say: All the difference is from the weeds which
remain there, and here are taken away; Yet neither here perfectly, nor every
where alike. Behold a fair confession of corruptions, still remaining in your
Church, which you can only excuse by saying they are not Fundamental, as
likewise those in the Roman Church are confessed to be not Fundamental. What
man of judgment will be a Protestant, since that Church is confessedly a
corrupt one?

22. I still proceed to impugn you expressly upon your own grounds. You say,
That it is comfort enough for the Church, that the Lord in mercy will secure
her from all capital dangers: but she may not hope to triumph over all sin, and
error, till she be in heaven. Now if it be comfort enough to be secured from
all capital dangers, which can arise only from error in Fundamental Points: why
were not your first Reformers content with enough, but would needs dismember
the Church, out of a pernicious greediness of more than enough? For, this
enough, which according to you is attained by not erring in Points Fundamental,
was enjoyed before Luther's reformation, unless you will now against your self
affirm, that long before Luther there was no Church free from error in
Fundamental Points. Moreover if (as you say) no Church may hope to triumph over
all error till she be in heaven; You must either grant, that errors not
Fundamental cannot yield sufficient cause to forsake the Church, or else you
must affirm that all Community may, and ought to be forsaken, and so there will
be no end of Schisms: or rather indeed there can be no such thing as Schism,
because, according to you, all communities are subject to errors not
Fundamental, for which, if they may be lawfully forsaken, it follows clearly
that it is not Schism to forsake them. Lastly, since it is not lawful to leave
the Communion of the Church for abuses in life and manners, because such
miseries cannot be avoided, in this world of temptation: and since according to
your Assertion no Church may hope to triumph over all sin and error: You must
grant, that, as she ought not to be left by reason of sin; so neither by reason
of errors not Fundamental: because both sin, and error are (according to you)
impossible to be avoided, till she be in heaven.

23. Furthermore, I ask, Whether it be the Quantity and Number, or Quality and
Greatness of doctrinal errors that may yield sufficient cause to relinquish the
Churches Communion? I prove that neither. Not the Quality, which is supposed to
be beneath the degree of Points Fundamental, or necessary to Salvation. Not the
Quantity or Number: for the foundation is strong enough to support all such
unnecessary additions, as you term them. And if they once weighed so heavy as
to overthrow the foundation, they should grow to Fundamental errors, into which
your self teach the Church cannot fall. Hay and stubble (say you) and such Page
155.
unprofitable stuff, laid on the roof, destroys not the house, whilst the
main pillars are standing on the foundation. And, tell us, I pray you, the
precise number of errors which cannot be tolerated? I know you cannot do it;
and therefore being uncertain, whether or no you have cause to leave the
Church, you are certainly obliged not to forsake her. Our blessed Savior has
declared his will, that we forgive a private offender seventy seven times, that
is, without limitation of quantity of time, or quality of trespasses; and why
then dare you allege his command, that you must not pardon his Church for
errors, acknowledged to be not Fundamental? What excuse can you feign to your
selves, who for Points not necessary to Salvation, have been occasions, causes,
and Authors of so many mischiefs, as could not but unavoidably accompany so
huge a breach, in Kingdoms, in Commonwealths, in private persons, in public
Magistrates, in body, in soul, in goods, in life, in Church, in the State, by
Schisms, by rebellions, by war, by famine, by plague, by bloodshed, by all
sorts of imaginable calamities upon the whole face of the earth, wherein as in
a map of Desolation, the heaviness of your crime appears, under which the world
does pant?

24. To say for your excuse, that you left not the Church, but her errors, does
not extenuate, but aggravate your sin. For by this device, you sow seeds of
endless Schisms, and put into the mouth of a^ Separatists, a ready Answer how
to avoid the note of Schism from your Protestant Church of England, or from any
other Church whatsoever. They will, I say, answer as you do prompt, that your
Church may be forsaken, if she fall into errors, though they be not
Fundamental: and further, that no Church must hope to be free from such errors;
which two grounds being once laid, it will not be hard to infer the
consequence, that she may be forsaken.

25. From some other words of D. Potter I likewise prove, that for Errors not
Fundamental, the Church ought not to be forsaken, There neither was (says he)
nor can be Page 75.
any just cause to depart from the Church of Christ, no more than from Christ
himself. To depart from a particular Church, and namely from the Church of
Rome, in some Doctrins and practices, there might be just and necessary cause,
though the Church of Rome wanted nothing necessary to Salvation. Mark his
Doctrine, that there can be no just cause to depart from the Church of Christ:
and yet he teaches that the Church of Christ may err in Points not
Fundamental; Therefore (say I) we cannot forsake the Roman Church for Points
not Fundamental, for then we might also forsake the Church of Christ, which
your self deny: and I pray you consider, whether you do not plainly contradict
your self, while in the words above recited, you say there can be no just cause
to forsake the Catholic Church; and yet that there may be necessary cause to
depart from the Church of Rome, since you grant that the Church of Christ may
err in Points not Fundamental: and that the Roman Church has erred only in
such Points; as by and by we shall see more in particular. And thus much be
said to disprove their chiesest Answer, that they left not the Church, but her
corruptions.

26. Another evasion D. Potter brings, to avoid the imputation of Schism, and
it is, because they still acknowledge the Church of Rome to be a Member of the
body of Christ, and not cut off from the hope of Salvation. And this (says he)
clears us from the Page 76.
imputation of Schism, whose property it is, to cut off from the Body of
Christ, and the hope of Salvation, the Church from which it separates.

27. This is an Answer which perhaps you may get some one to approve, if first
you can put him out of his wits. For what prodigious Doctrins are these? Those
Protestants who believe that the Church erred in Points necessary to Salvation,
and for that cause left her, cannot be excused from damnable Schism: But others
who believed that she had no damnable errors, did very well, yea were obliged
to forsake her: and (which is more miraculous, or rather monstrous) they did
well to forsake her formally and precisely, because they judged, that she
retained all means necessary to Salvation. I say, because they so judged. For
the very reason for which he acquitteth himself, and condemns those others as
Schismatiques, is, because he holds that the Church which both of them
forsook, is not cut off from the Body of Christ, and the hope of Salvation;
whereas those other Zelors deny her to be a member of Christ's body, or capable
of Salvation, wherein alone they disagree from D. Potter: for in the effect of
separation they agree, only they do it upon a different motive or reason. Were
it not a strange excuse, if a man would think ^o cloak his rebellion, by
alleging that he held the person against whom he rebelleth to be his lawful
Sovereign? And yet D. Potter thinks himself free from Schism, because he
forsook the Church of Rome; but yet so, as that still he held her to be the
true Church, and to have all necessary means to Salvation. But I will no
further urge this most solemn foppery; and do much more willingly put all
Catholics in mind what an unspeakable comfort it is, that our Adversaries are
forced to confess, that they cannot clear themselves from Schism, otherwise
than by acknowledging that they do not, nor cannot, cut off from the hope of
Salvation out Church. Which is as much as if they should in plain terms say:
They must be damned, unless we may be saved. Moreover, this evasion does indeed
condemn your zealous brethren of Heresy, for denying the Churches perpetuity,
but does not clear your self from Schism, which consists in being divided from
that true Church, with which a man agrees in all points of Faith, as you must
profess your self to agree with the Church of Rome in all Fundamental Articles.
For otherwise, you should cut her off from the hope of Salvation, and so
condemn your self of Schism. And lastly, even according to this your own
definition of Schism, you cannot clear your self from that crime, unless you be
content to acknowledge a manifest contradiction in your own Assertions. For if
you do not cut us off from the Body of Christ, and the hope of Salvation; how
come you to say in another place, that you judge a reconciliation with us to be
Page 20.
damnable? That to depart from the Church of Rome, there might be just and
necessary Page 77.
cause? That they that have the understanding and means to discover their
error, and neglect to use them Page 79.
we dare not flatter them (say you) with so easy a censure, of hope of
Salvation? If then it be (as you say) a property of Schism, to cut off from the
hope of Salvation, the Church from which it separates: how will you clear your
self from Schism, who dare not flatter us with so easy a censure? and who
affirm that a reconciliation with us is damnable? But the truth is, there is no
constancy in your Assert^ons, by reason of d^fficulties which press you on all
sides. For, you are loath to affi^m clearly, that we may be saved, lest such a
grant might be occasion (as in all reason it ought to be) of the conversion of
Protestants to the Roman Church: And on the other side, if you affirm that our
Church erred in Points Fundamental, or necessary to Salvation, you know not
how, nor where, nor among what company of men, to find a perpetual visible
Church of Christ, before Luther: And therefore your best shift is to say, and
unsay, as your occasions command. I do not examine your Assertion, that it is
the property of Schism, to cut off from the Body of Christ, and the hope of
Salvation, the Church from which it separates: wherein you are mightily
mistaken, as appears by your own exampie of the Donatists, who were most formal
and proper Heretics, and not Schismatiques, as Schism is a vice distinct from
Heresy. Besides, although the Donatists, and Luciserians (whom you also
allege) had been mere Schismatiques, yet it were against all good Logic, from
a particular, to infer a general Rule, to determine what is the property of
Schism.

28. A third device I find in D. Potter to clear his brethren from Schism,
There is (says he) great difference between Page 75.
a Schism from them, and a Reformation of our selves.

29. This, I confess, is a quaint subtilty, by which all Schism and Sin may be
as well excused. For what devil incarnate could merely pretend a separation,
and not rather some other motive, of virtue, truth, profit, or pleasure? But
now fince their pretended Reformation consisted, as they gave out, in forsaking
the corruptions of the Church: the Reformation of themselves, and their
division from us, falls out to be one and the self-same thing. Nay we see, that
although they infinitely disagree in the particulars of their reformation, yet
they symbolize, and consent in the general Point of forsaking our pretended
corruptions: An evident sign that the thing, upon which their thoughts first
pitched, was not any particular Model, or Idaea of Religion, but a settled
resolution to forsake the Church of Rome. Wherefore this Metaphysical
speculation, that they intended only to reform themselves, cannot possibly
excuse them from Schism, unless first they be able to prove that they were
obliged to depart from us. Yet for as much as concerns the fact it self; it is
clear, that Luther's revolt did not proceed from any zeal of reformation. The
motive, which put him upon so wretched, and unfortunate a work, were,
Covetousness, Ambition, Lust, Pride, Envy, and grudging that the promulgation
of Indulgences, was not committed to himself, or such as he desired. He himself
takes God to witness, that he fell into these troubles casually, and Casu non
voluntate in has turbaslincidi, Deum ipsum testor.
against his will, not upon any intention of Reformation, not so much as
dreaming or suspecting any change which might Act. et Mon. Page 404.
happen. And he began to preach (against Indulgences) when he knew not what
Sleidan. l. 16, fol. 232.
the matter meant. For (says he) I scarcely understood Sleid. lib. 13. fol.
177.
then what the name of Indulgences meant. In so much as afterward Luther did
much misl^ke of his own undertaken course, oftentimes (says he) wishing Luth
in colloq mensal.
that I had never begun that business. And Fox says: It is apparent that Act.
Mon. Page page 404.
Luther promised Cardinal Cajeran to keep silence, provided also his
adversaries would do the like. M. Cowper reports further, that Luther by his
letter submitted Cowp. in his Chronicle.
himself to the Pope, so that he might not be compelled to recant. With much
more, which may be seen in Tract. 2. cap 2. Sect. 11. subd. 2.
Brereley. But this is sufficient to show, that Luther was far enough from
intending any Reformation. And if he judged a Reformation to be necessary, what
a huge wickedness was it in him, to promise silence, if his adversaries would
do the like? Or to submit himself to the Pope, so that he might not be
compelled to recant? Or if the Reformation were not indeed intended by him, nor
judged to be necessary, how can he be excused from damnable Schism? And this is
the true manner of Luther's revolt, taken from his own acknowledgments, and the
words of the more ancient Protestants themselves, whereby D. Potter's faltring,
and mincing the matter, is clearly discovered, and confuted. Upon what motives
our Country was divided from the Roman Church by King Henry the Eighth, and how
the Schism was continu^d by Queen Elizabeth, I have no heart to rip up. The
world knows, it was not upon any zeal of Reformation.

30. But you will prove your former evasion by a couple of Similitudes: If a
Monaestery Page 81, 82.
should reform it self, and should reduce into practice, ancient good
discipline, when others would not; in this case could it in reason be charged
with Schism from others, or with Apostasy from its rule and order? Or as in a
society of men universally infected with some disease, they that should free
themselves from the common disease could not be therefore said to separate from
the society, so neither can the reformed Churches be truly accused for making a
Schism from the Church, seeing all they did, was to reform themselves.

31. I was very glad to find you in a Monastery, but sorry when I perceived
that you were inventing ways how to forsake your Vocation, and to maintain the
lawfulness of Schism from the Church, and Put case; That a Monastery did
confessedly observe their substantial vows and all principal Statutes, or
Constitutions of the Order, though with some neglect of lesser Monastical
Observances: And that a Reformation were undertaken, not by authority of lawful
Superiors, but by some One, or very few in comparison of the rest: And those
few known to be led, not with any spirit of Reformation, but by some other
sinister intention: and that the Statutes of the House were even by those busy
fellows confessed, to have been time out of mind understood, and practiced as
now they were: And further, that the pretended Reformers acknowledge that
themselves as soon as they were gone out of their Monastery, must not hope to
be free from those or the like errors and corruptions, for which they left
their Brethren: And (which is more) that they might fall into more enormous
crimes than they did, or could do in their Monastery, which we suppose to be
secured from all substantial corruptions, for the avoiding of which they have
an infallible assistance. Put (I say) together all these my And's and then come
with your If's, If a Monastery should reform it self etc. and tell me if you
could excuse such Reformers from Sch^sm, Sedition, Rebellion, Apostasy, etc?
what would you say of such Reformers in your College? or tumultuous Persons in
a Kingdom? Remember now your own Tenants, and then reflect how fit a
similitude you have picked out, to prove your self a Schismatique. You teach
that the Church may err in Points not Fundamental, but that for all
Fundamental Points she is secured from error: You teach that no particular
Person, or Church, has any promise of assistance in Points Fundamental. You,
and the whole world can witness that when Luther began, he being but only One,
opposed himself to All, as well subjects, as superiors; and that even then
when he himself confessed that he had no intention of Reformation: You cannot
be ignorant but that many chief learned Protestants are forced to confess the
Antiquity of our Doctrine and Practice, and to several and many Controversies,
acknowledge that the Ancient Fathers stood on our Side: Consider, I say, these
Points, and see whether your similitude do not condemn your Progenitors of
Schism from God's visible Church, yea and of Apostasy also from their
Religious Orders, if they were vowed Regulars, as Luther, and diverse of them
were.

32. From the Monastery you are fled into an Hospital of persons universally
infected with some disease, where you find to be true what I supposed, that
after your departure from your Brethren you might fall into greater
inconveniences, and more infectious diseases, than those for which you left
them. But you are also upon the Point to abandon these miserable needy persons,
in whose behalf for Charities sake, let me set before you these
considerations. If the disease neither were, nor could be mortal, because in
that Company of men God had placed a Tree of life: If going thence, the sick
man might by curious tasting the Tree of Knowledge eat poison under pretense
of bettering his health: If he could not hope thereby to avoid other diseases
like those for which he had quitted the company of the first infected men: If
by his departure innumerable mischiefs were to ensue; could such a man without
senselesseness be excused by saying, that he sought to free himself from the
common disease, but not forsooth to separate from the society? Now your self
compare the Church to a man deformed with Page 154.
superfluous fingers and toes, but yet who has not lost any vital part: you
acknowledge that out of her society no man is secured from damnable Error, and
the world can bear witness what unspeakable mischiefs and calamities ensued
Luther's revolt from the Church. Pronounce then concerning them, the same
sentence which even now I have showed them to deserve, who in the manner
aforesaid should separate from persons universally infected with some disease.

33. But alas, to what pass has Heresy brought men, who term themselves
Christians, and yet blush not to compare the beloved Spouse of our Lord, the
one Dove, the purchase of our Saviors most precious blood, the holy Cathol^que
Church, I mean that visible Church of Christ which Luther sound spread over the
whole world; to a Monastery, so disordered that it must be forsaken; to the
Giant in Gath, much deformed with superfluous fingers and toes; to a society of
men universally infected with some disease! And yet all these Compar^sons, and
much worse, are neither in jurious, nor undeserved, if once it be granted, or
can be proved, that the visible Church of Christ may err in any one Point of
Faith, although not Fundamental.

34. Before I part from these similitudes, one thing I must observe against the
evasion of D. Potter, that they left not the Church, but her Corruptions. For
as those Reformers of the Monastery, or those other who left the company of men
universally infected with some disease, would deny themselves to be
Schismatiques, or any way blameworthy, but could not deny, but that they left
the said Communities: So Luther and the rest cannot so much as pretend, not to
have left the visible Church, which according to them was infected with many
diseases, but can only pretend that they did not sin in leaving her. And you
speak very strangely when you say: In a society of men universally infected
with some disease, they that should free themselves from the common disease,
could not be therefore said to separate from the Society, For if they do not
separate themselves from the Society of the infected persons; how do they free
themselves and depart from the common disease? Do they at the same time remain
in the company, and yet depart from those infected creatures? We must then
say, that they separate themselves from the persons, though it be by occasion
of the disease: Or if you say, they free their own persons from the common
disease, yet so, that they remain still in the Company infected, subject to
the Superiors and Governors thereof, eating and drinking, and keeping
public Assemblies with them; you cannot but know, that Luther and your
Reformers, the first pretended free persons from the supposed common infection
of the Roman Church, did not so: for they endeavored to force the Society
whereof they were parts, to be healed and reformed as they were; and if ^t
refused, they did, when they had forces, drive them away, even their Superiors
both Spiritual and Temporal, as is notorious. Or if they had not power to
expel that supposed infected Community, or Church of that place, they departed
from them corporally, whom mentally they had forsaken before. So that you
cannot deny, but Luther forsook the external Communion, and commpany of the
Catholic Church, for which, as your self Page 75.
confess, There neither was nor can be any just cause, no more than to depart
from Christ himself. We do therefore infer, that Luther and the rest who
forsook that visible Church which they found upon earth, were truly, and
properly Schismatiques.

25. Moreover, it is evident that there was a division between Luther and that
Church which was Visible when he arose: but that Church cannot be said to have
divided her self from him, before whose time the was, and in comparison of whom
she was a Whole, and he but a part: therefore we must say, that he divided
himself and went out of her; which is to be a Schismatique, or Heretic, or
both. By this argument, Optatus Melivitanus prove^th, that not Caecilianus, but
Parmenianus was a Schismatique, saying? For, Caecilianus went Lib. 1. cont.
Parmen.
not out of Majorinus thy Grandfather, but Majorinus from Cecilianus: neither
did Caecilianus depart from the Chair of Peter, or Cyprian, but Majorinus, in
whose Chayr thou sit, which had no beginning before Majorinus. Since it
manifestly appears that these things were acted in this manner, it is clear,
that you are heirs both of the deliverers up (of the holy Bible to be burned)
and also of Schismatiques. The Whole argument of this holy Father makes
directly both against Luther, and all those who continue the division which he
begun; and proves, That going out, convinces those who go our, to be
Schismatiques; but not those from whom they depart: That to forsake the Chair
of Peter is Schism; yea, that it is Schism to erect a Chair which had no
origin, or as it were predecessor, before it self: That to continue in a
division begun by others, is to be Heirs of Schismatiques; and lastly, that to
depart from the Communion of a particular Church (as that of S. Cyprian was) is
sufficient to make a man incur the guilt of Schism, and consequently, that
although Protestants, who deny the Pope to be supreme Head of the Church, do
think by that Heresy to clear Luther from Schism, in disobeying the Pope: Yet
that will not serve to free him from Schism, as it imports a division from
the obedience, or Communion of the particular Bishop, Diocese, Church, and
Country where he lived.

36. But it is not the Heresy of Protestants, or any other Sectaries, that can
deprive S. Peter, and his Successors, of the authority which Christ our Lord
conferred upon them over his whole militant Church: which is a Point confessed
by learned Protestants to be of great Antiquity, and for which the judgment of
diverse most ancient holy Fathers is reproved by them, as may be seen at large
in Brerely Tract. 1. Sect. 3. subd. 10.
exactly citing the places of such chief Protestants. And we must say with S.
Cyprian: Heresies Ep. 55.
have sprung, and Schisms been bred from no other cause then for that the
Priest of God is not obeyed, nor one Priest and Judge is considered to be for
the time in the Church of God. Which words do plainly condemn Luther, whether
he will understand them as spoken of the Universal, or of every particular
Church. For he withdrew himself both from the obedience of the Pope, and of all
particular Bishops, and Churches. And no less clear is the said Optatus
Melivitanus, saying: Thou can not deny Lib. 2. cont. Parmen.
but that thou know, that in the City of Rome, there was first an Episcopal
Chair placed for Peter, wherein Peter the head of all the Apostles sat,
whereof also he was called Cephas; in which one Chair, Unity was to be kept by
all, lest the other Apostles might attribute to themselves, each one his
particular Chair; and that he should be a Schismatique and sinner, who against
that one single Chair should erect another. Many other authorities of Fathers
might be alleged to this purpose, which ^omit; my intention being, not to
handle particular controversies.

37. Now, the arguments which hitherto I have brought, prove that Luther, and
his followers were Schismatiques, without examining (for as much as belongs to
this Point) whether or no the Church can err in any one thing great or small,
because it is universally true, that there can be no just cause to forsake the
Communion of the visible Church of Christ, according to S. Augustine, saying: It
is not possible Ep. 48.
that any may have just cause to separate their Communion, from the Communion
of the whole world, and call themselves the Church of Christ, as if they had
separated themselves from the Communion of all Nations upon just cause. But
since indeed the Church cannot err in any one Point of Doctrine, nor can
approve any corruption in manners; they cannot with any color avoid the just
imputation of eminent Schism, according to the verdict of the same holy Father
in these words: The most manifest De Bapt. lib. 5. cap. 1.
sacrilege of Schism is eminent, when there was no cause of separation.

38. Lastly, I prove that Protestants cannot avoid the note of Schism, at least
by reason of their mutual separation from one another. For most certain it is
that there is very great difference, for the outward face of a Church, and
profession of a different faith, between the Lutherans, the rigid Calvinists,
and Protestants of England. So that if Luther were in the right, those other
Protestants who invented Doctrins far different from his, and divided
themselves from him, must be reputed Schismatiques: and the like argument may
proportionably be aplyed to their further divisions, and subdivisions. Which
reason I yet urge more strongly out of D. Potter, Page 20.
who affirms, that to him and to such as are convicted in conscience of the
errors of the Roman Church, a reconciliation is impossible, and damnable. And
yet he teaches, that their differnce from the Roman Church, is not in
Fundamental Points. Now, since among Protestants there is such diversity of
belief, that one denies what the other affirms, they must be convicted in
conscience that one part is in error (at least not Fundamental,) and, if D.
Potter will speak consequently, that a reconciliation between them is
impossible, and damnable: and what greater division, or Schism can there be,
than when one part must judge a reconciliation with the other to be impossible,
and damnable.

39. Out of all which premises, this Conclusion follows: That Luther and his
followers were Schismatiques; from the universal visible Church; from the Pope
Christ's vicar on earth, and Successor to S. Peter; from the particular Diocese
in which they received Baptism; from the Country or Nation to which they
belonged; from the Bishop under whom they lived; many of them from the
Religious O^der in which they were professed; from one another; And Lastly,
from a man's self (as much as is possible) because the self-same Protestant to
day is convicted in conscience, that his yesterday's Opinion was an error (as
D. Potter knows a man in the world who from a Puritan was turned to a moderate
Protestant) with whom therefore a reconciliation, according to D. Potter's
grounds, is both impossible, and damnable.

40. It seems D. Potters last refuge to excuse himself and his Brethren from
Schism, is, because they proceeded according to their conscience, dictating an
obligation, under damnation, to forsake the errors maintained by the Church of
Rome. His words are: Although we confess the Page 81.
Church of Rome to be (in some sense) a true Church, and her errors to some
men not damnable: yet for us who are convinced in conscience, that she erres in
many things, a necessity lies upon us, even under pain of damnation, to forsake
her in those errors.

41. I answer: It is very strange, that you judge us extremely Uncharitable, in
saying, Protestants cannot be saved; while your self avouch the same of all
learned Catholics, whom ignorance cannot excuse. If this your pretense of
conscience may serve, what Schi^matique in the Church, what popular seditious
brain in a Kingdom, may not allege the dictamen of conscience to free
themselves from Schism, or Sedition? No man wishes them to do any thing against
their conscience; but we say, that they may, and ought to rectify, and depose
such a conscience, which is easy for them to do, even according to your own
affirmation, that we Catholics want no means necessary to Salvation. Easy to
do? Nay not to do so, to any man in his right wits must seem impossible. For
how can these two apprehensions stand together: In the Roman Church, I enjoy
all means necessary to Salvation, and yet I cannot hope to be saved in that
Church? or, Who can enjoin in one, brain (not cracked) these Assertions; After
due examination I judge the Roman errors not to be in themselves fundamental,
or damnable; and yet, I judge that according to true reason, it is damnable to
hold them? I say, according to true reason. For if you grant your conscience to
be erroneous, in judging that you cannot be saved in the Roman Church, by
reason of her errors; there is no other remedy, but that you must rectify
your erring conscience, by your other judgment, that her errors are not
fundamental, nor damnable. And this is no more Charity, than you daily afford
to such other Protestants as you term Brethren, whom you cannot deny to be in
some errors, (unless you will hold, That of contradictory Propositions both may
be true) and yet you do not judge it damnable to live in their Communion,
because you hold their errors not to be fundamental. You ought to know, that
according to the Doctrine of all Divines, there is great difference between a
speculative persuasion, and a practical dictamen of conscience: And therefore
although they had in speculation conceived the visible Church to err in some
doctrins, of themselves not damnable; yet with that speculative judgment they
might, and ought to have entertained this practical dictamen, that for Points
nor substantial to Faith, they neither were bound, nor lawfully could break the
bond of Charity, by breaking unity in God's Church. You say that, hay and
stubble Page 155.
and such unprofitable stuff (as are corruptions in Points not fundamental)
laid on the roof, destroys not the house, whilst the main pillars are standing
on the foundation. And you would think him a mad man who to be rid of such
stuff, would set his house on fire, that so he might walk in the light, as you
teach that Luther was obliged to forsake the house of God, for an unnecessary
light, not without a combustion formidable to the whole Christian world; rather
than bear with some errors which did not destroy the foundation of Faith. And
as for others who entered in at the breach first made by Luther, they might, and
ought to have guided their consciences by that most reasonable rule of
Vincentius Lyrinensis, delivered in these words, Indeed it is a matter of great
Adv. haeres. c. 27.
moment, and both most profitable to be learned, and necessary to be remembered,
and which we ought again and again to illustrate, and inculcate with weighty
heaps of examples, that almost all Catholics may know, that they ought to
receive the Doctors with the Church, and not forsake the Faith of the Church
with the Doctors: And much less should they forsake the Faith of the Church to
follow Luther, Calvin, and such other Novellists. Moreover, though your first
Reformers had conceived their own opinions to be true, yet they might, and
ought to have doubted, whether they were certain: because your self affirm,
That Infallibility was not promised to any particular Persons, or Churches. And
since in cases of uncertainties, we are not to leave our Superior, nor cast
off his obedience, or publicly oppose his Decrees; your Reformers might
easily have found a safe way to satisfy their zealous conscience, without a
public breach: especially if with this their uncertainty, we call to mind
the peaceable possession, and prescription, which by the confession of your own
Brethren, the Church, and Pope of Rome did for many Ages enjoy. I wish you
would examine the works of your Brethren, by the words your self set down to
free S. Cyprian from Schism: every syllable of which words convinces Luther,
and his Copartners to be guilty of that crime, and shows in what manner they
might with great ease, and quietness have rectified their consciences about the
pretended errors of the Church. S. Cyprian (say you) was a peaceable Page 124.
and modest man, dissented from others in his judgment, but without any breach
of Charity, condemned no man (much less any Church) for the contrary opinion.
He believed his own Opinion to be true; but believed not that it was necessary,
and therefore did not proceed rashly and peremptorily to censure others, but
lest them to their liberty. Did your Reformers imitate this manner of
proceeding? Did they censure no man, much less any Church? S. Cyprian believed
his own Opinion to be true, but believed not that it was necessary, and
THEREFORE did not proceed rashly and peremptorily to censure others. You
believe the Points wherein Luther differs from us, not to be fundamental, or
necessary; and why do you not thence infer the like THEREFORE, he should not
have proceeded to censure others? In a word, since their disagreement from us
concerned only Points which were not fundamental, they should have believed
that they might have been deceived, as well as the whole visible Church, which
you say may err in such Points; and therefore their Doctrins being not
certainly true, and certainly not necessary, they could not give sufficient
cause to depart from the Communion of the Church.

42. In other places you write so much, as may serve us to prove, that Luther
and his followers ought to have deposed, and rectified their consciences: As
for example, when you say, When the Church Page 105.
has declared herself in any matter of opinion, or of rites; her declaration
obliges all her children to peace and external obedience. Nor is it fit, or
lawful for any private man to oppose his judgment to the public, (as Luther
and his fellows did) He may offer his opinion to be considered of, so he do it
with evidence, or great probability of Scripture, or reason, and very modestly,
still containing himself within the dutiful respect which he owes: but if he
will factiously advance his own conceits (his own conceits? and yet grounded
upon evidence of Scripture) and despise the Church so far as to cut off her
Communion; he may be justly branded and condemned for a Schismatique, yea and
an Heretic also in some degree, and in foro exteriori, though his opinion
were true, and much more if it be false. Could any man, even for a Fee, have
spoken more home to condemn your Predecessors of Schism, or Heresy? Could they
have stronger Motives to oppose the Doctrine of the Church, and leave her
Communion, than evidence of Scripture? And yet according to your own words,
they should have answered, and rectified their conscience, by your Doctrine,
that though their opinion were true, and grounded upon evidence of Scripture,
or Reason; yet it was not lawful for any private man to oppose his judgment to
the public, which obliges all Christians to peace and external obedience:
and if they cast off the Communion of the Church for maintaining their own
Conceits, they may be branded for Schismatiques and Heretics in some degree,
et in foro exteriori, that is, all other Christians ought so to esteem of them,
(and why then are we accounted uncharitable for judging so of you?) and they
also are obliged to behave themselves in the face of all Christian Churches, as
if indeed they were not Reformers, but Schismatiques, and Heretics, or as
Pagans and Publicans. I thank you for your ingenuous confession: in recompense
whereof, I will do a deed of Charity, by putting you in mind, into what
Labyrinths you are brought, by teaching that the Church may err in some Points
of Faith, and yet that it is not lawful for any man to oppose his judgment, or
leave her Communion, though he have evidence of Scripture against her. Will you
have such a man to dissemble against his conscience, or externally deny a
truth, known to be contained in holy Scripture? How much more coherently do
Catholics proceed, who believe the universal infallibility of the Church, and
from thence are assured, that there can be no evidence of Scripture, or reason,
against her definitions, nor any just cause to forsake her Communion? M.
Hooker, esteemed by many Protestants an incomparable man, yields as much as we
have alleged out of you. The will of God is (says he) to have In his preface
to his Books of Ecclesiastical Policy. Sect. 6. Page 28.
them do whatsoever the sentence of judicial and final decision shall
determine, yea though it seem in their private opinion, to swarve utterly from
that which is right. Does not this man tell Luther, what the will of God was,
which he transgressing, must of necessity be guilty of Schism? And must not M.
Hooker either acknowledge the universal infallibility of the Church, or else
drive men into the perplexities and labyrinths of dissembling against their
conscience, whereof now I speak? Not unlike to this, is your Doctrine delivered
elsewhere, Before the Nicene Council (say you) many Page 132.
good Catholic Bishops, were of the same opinion with the Donatists, that the
Baptism of Heretics was ineffectual; and with the Novatians, that the Church
ought not to absolve some grievous sinners. These errors therefore (if they had
gone no further) were not in themselves Heretical, especially in the proper,
and most heavy, or bitter sense of that word; neither was it in the Churches
intention (or in her power) to make them such by her declaration. Her intention
was to silence all disputes, and to settle peace and unity in her government:
to which all wise and peacable men submitted, whatsoever their opinion was. And
those factious people, for their unreasonable and uncharitable opposition, were
very justly branded for Schismatiques. For us, the Mistaker will never prove
that we oppose any declaration of the Catholic Church, etc. and therefore he
does unjustly charge us either with Schism, or Heresy. These words manifestly
condemn your Reformers, who opposed the visible Church in many of her
Declarations, Doctrins, and Commands imposed upon them, for silencing all
disputes, and settling peace and Unity in the government, and therefore they
still remaining obstinately disobedient, are justly charged with Schism, and
Heresy. And it is to be observed, that you grant the Donatists to have been
very justly branded for Schismatiques, although their opposition against the
Church, did concern (as you hold) a Point not Fundamental to the Faith, and
which according to S. Augustine, cannot be proved out of Scripture alone; and
therefore either does evidently convince that the Church is universally
infallible, even in Points not Fundamental; or else that it is Schism, to
oppose her Declarations, in those very things wherein she may err; and
consequently that Luther, and his fellows were Schismatiques, by opposing the
visible Church of Points not Fundamental, though it were (untruly) supposed
that she erred in such Points. But, by the way, How come you on the sudden to
hold the Determination of a General Council (of Nice) to be the declaration
of the Catholic Church, seeing you teach, That General Councels may err even
fundamentally? And do you now say, with us, that to oppose the Declaration of
the Church, is sufficient that one may be branded with Heresy, which is a
Point so often impugned by you?

43. It is therefore most evident, that no pretended Scruple of conscience
could excuse Luther; which he might, and ought to have rectified by means
enough, if Pride, Ambition, Obstinacy, etc. had given him leave. I grant he was
touched with scruple of conscience, but it was because he had forsaken the
visible Church of Christ; and I beseech all Protestants for the love they bear
to that sacred ransom of their souls, the Blood of our Blessed Savior,
attentively to ponder, and unpartially to apply to their own Conscience, what
this Man spoke concerning the feelings, and remorse of his. How often (says
he) did my trembling heart Tom. 2. Germ. Ien fol. 9. et tom. 2. Wit. of anno
1562. de abrog. Miss. private. fol. 244.
beat within me, and, reprehending me, object against me that most strong
argument; Art thou only wise? Do so many words err? Were so many ages
ignorant? What, if thou errest, and drawest so many into hell to be damned
eternally with thee? And in another place he says: Do thou who art but One,
and of no Tom. 5. Ano not. brevis.
account, take upon thee so great matters? What, if thou, being but one,
offendest? If God permit such, so many, and all to err; why may he not permit
thee to err? To this belong those arguments, the Church, the Church, the
Fathers, the Fathers, the Councels, the Customs, the multitudes, and greatness
of wise men: Whom do not these Mountains of arguments, these clouds, yea these
seas of Examples overthrow? And these thoughts wrought so deep in his soul that
he often wished and desired that he had Colloq. mensal. fol. 158.
never begun this business: wishing yet further that his Writings were burned
and buried Prefat. in tom. German, Ien.
in eternal oblivion. Behold what remorse Luther felt, and how he wanted no
strength of malice to cross his own conscience: and therefore it was no
scruple, or conceived obligation of conscience, but some other motives which
induced him to oppose the Church. And if yet you doubt of his courage to
encounter, and strength to master all reluctations of conscience, hear an
example or two for that purpose, Of Communion under both kinds, thus he says:
If the Council De formula missae.
should in any case decree this, least of all would we then use both kinds; yea
rather, in despite of the Council, and the Decree, we would use either but one
kind only, or neither, or in no case both. Was not Luther persuaded in
Conscience, that to use neither kind was against our Saviors command? Is this,
only to offer his opinion to be considered of, as you said all men ought to do?
And, that you may be sure that he spoke from his heart, and, if occasion had
been offered, would have been as good as his word; mark what he says of the
Elevation of the Sacrament: I did know In parva Confess.
the Elevation of the Sacrament to be Idolatrical; yet nevertheless I did
retain it in the Church at Wittemberg, to the end I might vex the Devil
Carolostadius. Was not this a Conscience large and capaciou^ enough, that could
swallow Idolatry? Why would he not tolerate Idolatry in the Church of Rome (as
these men are wont to blaspheme) if he could retain it in his own Church at
Wittemberg? If Carolostadius, Luther's offspring, was the Devil, who but
himself must be his dam? Is Almighty God wont to lend such Furies to preach the
Gospel? And yet further (which makes most directly to the point in hand) Luther
in his Book of abrogating the Private Mass, exhorts the Augustine Friars of
Wittemberg, who first abrogated the Mass, that, even against their Conscience
accusing them, they should persist in what they had begun, Vid. Tan. tom. 2.
disput. 1. q. 2. dub. 4. n. 108.
acknowledging that in some things he himself had done the like. And Joannes
Mathesius, a Lutheran Preacher says: Antonius Musa, the Parish Priest In orat.
Germ. 12. de Luth.
of Rocklitz, recounted to me that on a time he heartily moaned himself to the
Doctor (he means Luther) that he himself could not believe what he preached to
others: And that D. Luther answered; Praise and thanks be to God, that this
happens also to others, for I had thought it had happened only to me. Are not
these conscionable, and fit Reformers? And can they be excused from Schism,
under pretense that they held themselves obliged to forsake the Roman Church?
If then it be damnable to proceed against ones Conscience, what will become of
Luther, who against his Conscience, persisted in his division from the Roman
Church?

44. Some are said to flatter themselves with another pernicious conceit, that
they (forsooth) are not guilty of sin; Because they were not the first Authors,
but only are the continuers of the Schism, which was already begun.

45. But it is hard to believe, that any man of judgment, can think this excuse
will subsist, when he shall come to give up his final account. For according to
this reason no Schism will be damnable, but only to the Beginners: Whereas
contrarily, the longer it continues the worse it grows to be, and at length
degenerates to Heresy; as Wine by long keeping grows to be Vinegar, but not by
continuance returns again to his former nature of Wine. Thus S. Augustine
says, that Heresy is Lib. 2. cont. Cresc. c. 7.
Schism inveterate. And in another place: We object to you only the Ep. 164.
crime of Schism, which you have also made to become Heresy, by evil
persevering therein. And S. Hierom says: Though Schism Upon these words ad
Tit. 3. Haereticum hominem, etc.
in the beginning may be in some sort understood to be different from Heresy;
yet there is no Schism which does not fain to it self some Heresy, that it may
seem to have departed from the Church upon just cause. And so indeed it falls
out. For men may begin upon passion, but afterward by instinct of corrupt
nature, seeking to maintain their Schism as lawful, they fall into some
Heresy, without which their Separation could not be justified with any color:
as in our present case the very affirming, that it is lawful to continue a
Schism unlawfully begun, is an error against the main principle of
Christianity, that it is not lawful for any Christian, to live out of Gods
Church, within which alone Salvation can be had; Or, that it is not damnable to
disobey her decrees, according to the words of our Savior: If he shall not
hear Mat. 18.
the Church, let him be to thee as a Pagan, or Publican. And, He Luke 10.16.
that despises you, despises me. We heard above Optatus Milevitanus saying to
Parmenianus, that both he, and all those other who continued in the Schism
begun by Majorinus, did inherit their Forefathers Schism; and yet Parmenianus,
was the third Bishop after Majorinus in his Sea, and did not begin, but only
continue the Schism. For (says this holy Father) Caecilianus Lib. 1. cont.
Parm.
went not out of Majorinus thy Grandfather, but Majorinus from Caecilianus:
neither did Caecilianus depart from the Chair of Peter, or Cyprian, but
Majorinus, in whose Chair thou fittest, which before Majorinus (Luther) had no
beginning. Seeing it is evident that these things passed in this manner, (that
for example, Luther departed from the Church, and not the Church from Luther),
it is clear that you be HEIRS both of the givers up of the Bible to be burned,
and of SCHISMATIQUES. And the Regal Power, or example of Henry the Eighth could
not excuse his subjects from Schism, according to what we have heard out of S.
Chrysostom, saying: Nothing does so much provoke Hom. 11. in ep. ad Ephesians.
the wrath of Almighty God, as that the Church should be divided. Although we
should do innumerable good deeds, if we divide the full Ecclesiastical
Congregation, we shall be punished no less, than they who did rend his
(natural) Body; for that was done to the gain of the whole world, though not
with that intention, but this has no good in it at all, but that the greatest
hurt rises from it. These things are spoken not only to those who bear office,
but to such also as are governed by them, Behold therefore, how liable both
Subjects, and Superiors, are to the sin of Schism, if they break the unity of
Gods Church. The words of S. Paul can in no occasion be verified more than in
this of which we speak. They who do such things Romans 1.31.
are worthy of death: and not only they that do them, but they also that
consent with the doers. In things which are indifferent of their own nature,
Custom may be occasion, that some act, not well begun, may in time come to be
lawfully continued. But no length of Time, no Quality of Persons, no
Circumstance of Necessity can legitimate actions which are of their own nature
unlawful: and therefore division from Christ's Mystical Body, being of the
number of those Actions, which Divines teach to be intrinsece malas, evil of
their own nature and essence, no difference of Persons or Time can ever make it
lawful. D. Potter says: There neither was, nor can be any cause to depart from
the Church of Christ, no more than from Christ himself. And who dates say, that
it is not damnable to continue a Separation from Christ? Prescription cannot in
conscience run, when the first beginner, and his successors are conscious that
the thing to be prescribed, for example, goods or lands, were unjustly
possessed at the first. Christians are not like strayes, that after a certain
time of wandering from their right home, fall from their owner to the Lord of
the Soil; but as long as they retain the indelible Character of Baptism, and
live upon earth, they are obliged to acknowledge subjection to Gods Church.
Humane Laws may come to nothing by discontinuance of time, but the Law of God,
commanding us to conserve Unity in his Church, does still remain. The continued
disobedience of Children cannot deprive Parents of their parental right, nor
can the Grandchild be undutiful to his Grandfather, because his Father was
unnatural to his own Parent. The longer Gods Church is so disobeyed; the
profession of her Doctrine denied; her Sacraments neglected; her Liturgy
condemned; her Unity violated: the more grievous the fault grows to be: As the
longer a man withholds a due debt, or retains his neighbors goods, the greater
injustice he commits. Constancy in evil does not extenuate, but aggravate the
same, which by extension of time, receives increase of strength, and addition
of greater malice. If these men's conceits were true, the Church might come to
be wholly divided by wicked Schisms, and yet after some space of time, none
could be accused of Schism, nor be obliged to return to the visible Church of
Christ: and so there should remain no one true visible Church. Let therefore
these men who pretend to honor, reverence, and believe the Doctrine, and
practice of the Visible Church, and to condemn their forefathers who forsook
her, and say, They would not have done so, if they had lived in the days of
their Fathers, and yet follow their example in remaining divided from her
Communion; consider how truly these words of our Savior fall upon them, Woe be
to you, because you build Mar. 23. ver. 29, etc.
the Prophets Sepulchers, and garnish the monuments of just men, and say: If we
had been in our Fathers days, we had not been their fellows in the blood of
the Prophets. Therefore you are a testimony to your own selves, that you are
the sons of them that killed the Prophets; and fill up the measure of your
Fathers.

46. And thus having demonstrated that Luther, his Associates, and all that
continue in the Schism by them begun, are guilty of Schism, by departing from
the visible true Church of Christ; it remains that we examine what in
particular was that visible true Church, from which they departed, that so they
may know to what Church in particular they ought to return: and then we shall
have performed what was proposed to be handled in the fifth Point.

47. That the Roman Church (I speak not for the present, of the particular
Diocese of Rome, but of all visible Churches dispersed throughout the whole
world, agreeing in Faith with the Chair of Peter, 5. Point. Luther and the rest
departed from the Roman Church.
whether that Sea were supposed to be in the City of Rome, or in any other
place:) That (I say) the Church of Rome, in this sense, was the visible
Catholic Church out of which Luther departed, is proved by your own
confession, who assign for notes of the Church, the true Preaching of Gods
Words, and due administration of Sacraments, both which for the substance you
cannot deny to the Roman Church, since you confess, that she wanted nothing
Fundamental, or necessary to Salvation, and for that very cause you think to
clear your self from Schism, whose property, as you say, is to cut off from the
Page 76.
Body of Christ, and the hope of Salvation, the Church from which it separates.
Now that Luther and his fellows were born and baptized in the Roman Church, and
that she was the Church out of which they departed, is notoriously known: and
therefore you cannot cut her off from the Body of Christ, and hope of
Salvation, unless you will acknowledge your self to deserve the just imputation
of Schism. Neither can you deny her to be truly Catholic by reason of
(pretended) corruptions, not Fundamental. For your self avouch, and endeavor
to prove, that the true Catholic Church may err in such Points. Moreover, I
hope, you will not so much as go about to prove, that when Luther rose, there
was any other true visible Church, disagreeeing from the Roman, and agreeing
with Protestants in their particular Doctrins: and you cannot deny, but that
England in those days-agreed with Rome, and other Nations with England: And
therefore either Christ had no visible Church upon Earth, or else you must
grant that it was the Church of Rome. A truth so manifest, that those
Protestants who affirm the Roman Church to have lost the nature and being of a
true Church, do by inevitable consequence grant, that for diverse ages Christ
had no visible Church on earth: from which error, because D. Potter
disclaimeth, he must of necessity maintain, that the Roman Church is free from
Fundamental, and damnable error, and that she is not cut off from the Body of
Christ, and the hope of Salvation: And if (says he) any Zelols amongst us have
proceeded Ibid.
to heavier censures, their zeal may be excused, but their Charity and wisdom
cannot be justified.

48. And to touch particulars, which perhaps some may object. No man is
ignorant that the Grecians, even the Schismatical Grecians, do in most Points
agree with Roman Catholics, and disagree from the Protestant Reformation.
They teach Transubstantiation, (which Point D. Potter also Page 225.
confesses;) Invocation of Saints and Angels; Veneration of Relics, and
Images; Auricular Confession; enjoined Satisfaction; Confirmation with Chrism;
Extreme Unction; All the seven Sacraments; Prayer, Sacrifice, Alms for the
dead; Monachism; That Priests may not marry after their Ordination. In which
Points that the Grecians agree with the Roman Church appears by a Treatise
published by the Protestant Divines of Wittemberg, entitled, Acta Theologorum
Wittembergensium. and Jeremiae Patriarchae Constantinop. de Augustana
consessione, etc. Wittembergae anno 1584. by the Protestant De statu Eccles.
Page 253.
Crispinus, and by Sir Edwin Sands in the Relation of the State of Religion of
the West. And I wonder with what color of truth (to say no worse) D. Potter
could affirm, that the Doctrins debated between the Protestants Page 22^.
, and Rome, are only the partial and particular fancies of the Roman Church;
unless happily the opinion of Transubstantiation may be excepted, wherein the
latter Grecians seem to agree with the Romanists. Beside the Protestant Authors
already cited, Petrus Arcudius a Grecian, and a learned Catholic Writer, has
published a large Volume, the Argument and Title whereof is: Of the agreement
of the Roman, and Greek Church in the seven Sacraments. As for the Heresy of
the Grecians, that the Holy Ghost proceeds not from the Son, I suppose, that
Protestants disavow them in that error, as we do.

49. D. Potter will not (I think) so much wrong his reputation, as to tell us,
that the Waldenses, Wiecliffe, Huss, or the like, were Protestants, because in
some things they disagreed from Catholics. For he well knows that the example
of such men is subject to these manifest exceptions, They were not of all
Ages^, nor in all Countries, but confined to certain places, and were
interrupted in Time, against the notion and nature of the word Catholic. They
had no Ecclesiastical Hierarchy, nor Succession of Bishops, Priests, and
Pastors. They differed among themselves, and from Protestants also. They agreed
in diverse things with us against Protestants. They held Doctrins manifestly
abusurd, and damnable heresies.

50. The Waldenses began not before the year 1218. so far were they from
Universality of all Ages. For their Doctrine: first, they denied all Judgments
which extended to the drawing of blood; and the Sabbath, for which cause they
were called In-sabbatists. Secondly, they taught that Laymen, and women might
consecrate the Sacrament, and preach (no doubt but by this means to make their
Master Waldo, a mere layman, capable of such functions.) Thirdly, that
Clergymen ought to have no possessions, or proprieties. Fourthly, that there
should be no division of Parishes, not Churches; for a walled Church they
reputed as a Barn. Fifthly, that men ought not to take an Oath in any case.
Sixthly, that those persons sinned mortally, who accompanied without hope of
issue. Seventhly, they held all things done above the girdle, by kissing,
touching, words, compression of the breasts, etc. to be done in Charity, and
not against Continency. Eighthly, that neither Priest, nor civil Magistrate,
being guilty of mortal sin, did enjoy their dignity, or were to be obeyed.
Ninthly, they condemned Princes and Judges. Tenthly, they assinned singing in
the Church to be an hellish clamor. Eleventhly, they taught that men might
dissemble their Religion, and so accordingly they went to Catholic Churches,
dissembling their Faith, and made Offerto^ies, Confessions, and Communions,
after a dissembling manner. Waldo was so unlearned, that (says Act. Mon., ^
Page 628.
Fox) he gave rewards to certain learned men to translate the holy Scripture
for him, and being thus helped did (as the same Fox there reports) conferr
the form of Religion in his time, to the insallible Word of God. A goodly
example, for such as must needs have the Scripture in English, to be read by
every simple body, with such fruit of godly Doctrine, as we have seen in the
foresaid gross heresies of Waldo. The followers of Waldo, were like their
Master, so unlearned, that some of them (says Ibid.
Fox) expounded the words, Joan. 1. Sui eum non receperunt: Swine did not
receive him. And to conclude, they agreed in diverse things with Catholics
against Protestants, as may be seen in Tract. 2. cap. 2. sect. s^^d. 3.
B^erely.

51. Neither can it be pretended, that these are slanders forged by
Catholics. For, besides that the same things are testified by Prot^stant
writers, as Illyricus, Cowper, and others, our Authors cannot be suspected of
partiality in disfavour of Protestants, unless you will say perhaps, that they
were Prophets, and some hundred years ago, did both foresee that there were to
be Protestants in the world, and that such Protestants were to be like the
Waldenses. Besides, from whence, but from our Histories are Protestants come to
know, that there were any such men as the Waldenses? and that in some Points
they agreed with the Protestants, and disagreed from them in others? And upon
what ground can they believe our Author for that part wherein the Waldenses
were like to Protestants, and imagine they lied the rest?

52. Neither could Wickliffe continue a Church never interrupted from the time
of the Waldenses, after whom he lived more than one hundred and fifty years; to
wit, the year 1371. He agreed with Catholics about the worshipping of
Relics and Images: and, about the Intercession of our blessed Lady, the ever
Immaculate Mother of God, he went so far as to say, It seems to me In sermon. de
Assump. Mariae.
impossible, that we should be rewarded without the intercession of the Virgin
Mary. He held seven Sacraments, Purgatory, and other Points. And against both
Catholics and Protestants he maintained sundry damnable Doctrins, as diverse
Protestant Writers relate. As first: If a Bishop, or Priest be in deadly sin,
he does not indeed either give Orders, Consecrate, or Baptize. Secondly, That
Ecclesiastical Ministers ought not to have any temporal possessions, nor
propriety in any thing, but should beg; and yet he himself brake into heresy,
because he had been deprived by the Archbishop of Canterbury of a certain
Benefice, as all Schisms, and Heresies begin upon passion, which they seek to
cover with the cloak of Reformation. Thirdly, he condemned lawful Oaths, like
the Anabaptists. Fourthly, he taught that all things came to pass by absolute
necessity. Fifthly, he defended humane merits as the wicked Pelagians did,
namely, as proceeding from ^atural forces, without the necessary help of Gods
grace. Sixthly, that no man is a Civil Magistrate, while he is in mortal sin,
and that the people may at their pleasure correct Princes, when they offend: by
which Doctrine he proves himself both an Heretic, and a Traitor.

53. As for Huss, his chiefest Doctrins were: That Lay people must receive in
both kinds; and, That Civil Lords, Prelates, and Bishops lose all right, and
authority, while they are in mortal sin. For other things he wholly agreed with
Catholics against Protestants; and the Bohemians his followers being demanded
in what points they disagreed from the Church of Rome, propounded only these:
The necessity of Communion under both kinds; That all Civil Dominion was
forbidden to the Clergy; That Preaching of the Word, was free for all men, and
in all places; That open crimes were in no wise to be permitted, for avoiding
of greater evil. By these particulars, if is apparent that Husse agreed with
Protestants against us, in one only Point of both kinds, which according to
Luther is a thing indifferent; because he teaches that Christ in this matter
In epist. ad Bohem^s.
commanded nothing as necessary. And he says further: If thou come to a place
De utraque specie Sacram.
where one only kind is administered, use one kind only, as others do.
Melancthon likewise holds it a a thing In Cent. epist. Theol. page 225.
indifferent: and the same is the opinion of some other Protestants. All which
considered, it is clear, that Procestants cannot challenge the Waldenses,
Wickliffe, and Husse for members of their Church: and although they could, yet
that would advantage them little toward the finding them out a perpetual
visible Church of theirs, for the reasons above Numb. 49.
specified.

54. If D. Potter would go so far off, as to fetch the Muscovites, Armenians,
Georgians, Aethiopians, or Abissines into his Church, they would prove over
dear bought: For they either hold the damnable Heresy of Eutyches, or use
Circumcision, or agree with the Greek, or Roman Church: And it is most certain
that they have nothing to do with the Doctrine of the Protestants.

55. It being therefore granted that Christ had a visible Church in all Ages,
and that there can be none assigned but the Church of Rome; it follows, that
she is the true Catholic Church; and that those pretended Corruptions for
which they forsook her, are indeed divine truths, delivered by the visible
Catholic Church of Christ: And that Luther and his followers departed from
her, and consequently are guilty of Schism, by dividing themselves from the
Communion of the Roman Church. Which is clearly convinced out of D. Potter
himself, although the Roman Church were but a particular Church. For he says:
Whosoever professes Page 67.
himself to forsake the Communion of any one member of the body of Christ; must
confess himself consequently to forsake the whole. Since therefore in the same
place he expressly acknowledges the Church of Rome to be a member of the body of
Christ, and that it is clear they have forsaken her; it evidently follows, that
they have forsaken the whole, and therefore are most properly Schismatiques.

56. And lastly, since the crime of Schism is so grievous, that, according to
the Doctrine of holy Fathers rehearsed above, no multitude of good works, no
moral honesty of life, no cruel death endured even for the profession of some
Article of Faith, can excuse any one who is guilty of that sin from damnation;
I leave it to be considered, whether it be not true Charity to speak as we
believe, and to believe as all Antiquity has taught us, That whosoever either
begins, or continues, a division from the Roman Church, which we have proved to
be Christ's true Militant Church on earth, cannot without effect^al repentance
hope to be a member of his Triumphant Church in heaven. And so I conclude with
these words of blessed S. Augustiae: It is common Cont. Parm lib. 2. c. 3.
to all Heretics to be unable to see that thing which in the world is the
most manifest, and placed in the light of all Nations: out of whose unity
whatsoever they work, though they seem to do it with great care and diligence,
can no more avail them against the wrath of God, than the Spider's web against
the extremity of cold. But now it is high time that we treat of the other sort
of Division from the Church, which is by Heresy.

The ANSWER to the FIFTH CHAPTER. The separation of Protestants from the Roman
Church, being upon just and necessary causes, is not any way guilty of Schism.
1. AD. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7. In the seven first Sections of this Chapter, there
be many things said, and many things supposed by you which are untrue, and
deserve a censure. As,

2. First, That Schism could not be a Division from the Church, or that a
Division from the Church could not happen, unless there always had been and
should be a visible Church. Which Assertion is a manifest falsehood; For
although there never had been any Church Visible or Invisible before this Age,
nor should be ever after; yet this could not hinder, but that a Schism might
now be, and be a Division from the present visible Church. As though in France
there never had been until now a lawful Monarch, nor after him ever should be;
yet this hinders not, but that now there might be a Rebellion, and that
Rebellion might be an Insurrection against Sovereign Authority.

3. That it is a point to be granted by all Christians, that in all Ages there
has been a visible Congregation of faithful people. Which Proposition
howsoever you understand it, is not absolutely certain. But if you mean by
Faithful, (as it is plain you do) free from all error in faith, then you know
all Protestants with one consent affirm it to be false; and therefore without
proof to take it for granted is to beg the Question.

4. That supposing Luther and they which did first separate from the Roman
Church were guilty of Schism, it is certainly consequent, that all who persist
in this Division must be so likewise. Which is not so certain as you pretend.
For they, which alter without necessary cause the present government of any
State, Civil or Ecclesiastical, do commit a great fault; whereof
notwithstanding they may be innocent who continue this alteration, and to the
utmost of their power oppose a change though to the former State, when
continuance of time has once settled the present. Thus have I known some of
your own Church, condemn the Low Country men who first revolted from the King
of Spain, of the sin of Rebellion; yet absolve them from it who now being of
your Religion there, are yet faithful maintainers of the common liberty against
the pretenses of the King of Spain.

5. Fourthly, That all those which a Christian is to esteem neighbors do
concur to make one company, which is the Church. Which is false: for a
Christian is to esteem those his neighbors, who are not members of the true
Church.

6. Fifthly, That all the Members of the Visible Church, are by charity united
into one Mystical body. Which is manifestly untrue; for many of them have no
Charity.

7. Sixthly, That the Catholic Church signifies one company of faithful
people, which is repugnant to your own grounds. For you require, not true
Faith, but only the Profession of it, to make men members of the visible Church.

8. Seventhly, That every Heretic is a Schismatique. Which you must
acknowledge false in those, who though they deny, or doubt of some Point
professed by your Church, and so are Heretics; yet continue still in the
Communion of the Church.

9. Eighthly, That all the Members of the Catholic Church, must of necessity
be united in external Communion. Which though it were much to be desired it
were so, yet certainly cannot be perpetually true. For a man unjustly
excommmunicated, is not in the Churches Communion, yet he is still a Member of
the Church: and diverse time it has happened, as in the case of Chrysostom and
Epiphanius, that particular men, and particular Churches, have upon an
overvalued difference, either renounced Communion mutually, or one of them
separated from the other, and yet both have continued Members of the Catholic
Church. These things are in those seven Sections, either said or supposed by
you untruly, without all show, or pretense of proof. The rest is impertinent
common place, wherein Protestants and the cause in hand, are absolutely
unconcerned. And therefore I pass to the eighth Section.

10. Ad. 8. Wherein you obtrude upon us a double Fallacy; One, in supposing and
taking for granted, that whatsoever is affirmed by three Fathers, must be true;
whereas your selves make no scruple of condemning many things of falsehood,
which yet are maintained by more than thrice three Fathers. Another, in
pretending their words to be spoken absolutely, which by them are limited and
restrained to some particular cases. For whereas you say S. Austin c. 62. l. 2.
cont. Parm. inferrs out of the former premises, That there is no necessity to
divide Unity: to let pass your want of diligence, in quoting the 62. Chapter of
that Book, which has but 23. in it: to pass by also, that these words which
are indeed in the 11. Chapter, are not inferred out of any such premises as you
pretend; this, I say, is evident, that he says not absolutely, that there never
is, or can be any necessity to divide Unity (which only were for your purpose,)
but only in such a special case, as he there sets down: That is, When good men
tolerate bad men, which can do them no spiritual hurt, to the intent they may
not be separated from these, who are spiritually good; Then (says he) there is
no necessity to divide Unity. Which very words do clearly give us to
understand, that it may fall out (as it does in our case,) that we cannot keep
Unity with bad men, without spiritual hurt, i.e. without partaking with them in
their impieties, and that then there is a necessity to divide Unity from them:
I mean, to break off conjunction with them in their impieties. Which that it
was S. Austin's mind, it is most evident out of the 21. c. of the same Book:
where, to Parmenian demanding, How can a man remain pure, being joined with
those that are corrupted? he answers, Very true, this is not possible, if he be
joined with them, that is, if he commit any evil with them, or favor them
which do commit it. But if he do neither of these, he is not joined with them.
And presently after, These two things retained, will keep such men pure and
uncorrupted; that is, neither doing ill, nor approving it. And therefore seeing
you impose upon all men of your Communion, a necessity of doing, or at least
approving many things unlawful, certainly there lies upon us an unavoidable
necessity of dividing Unity, either with you, or with God; and whether of these
is rather to be done, be ye Judges.

11. Irenaeus also says not simply (which only would do you service,) there
cannot possibly be any so important Reformation, as to justify a separation
from them who will not reform: But only, they cannot make any corruption so
great, as is the pernitiousness of a Schism: Now, They, here, is a relative,
and has an antecedent expressed in Irenaeus, which, if you had been pleased to
take notice of, you would easily have seen, that what Iraeneus says, falls
heavy upon the Church of Rome, but touches Protestants nothing at all. For the
men he speaks of, are such as Propter modicas and quaslibet causas, for
trifling or small causes, divide the body of Christ; such as speak of peace,
and make war; such as strain at gnats and swallow Camels. And these, says he,
can make no reformation of any such importance, as to countervail the danger of
a division. Now, seeing the causes of our separation from the Church of Rome,
are (as we pretend, and are ready to justify,) because we will not be
partakers with her in Superstition, Idolatry, Impiety, and most cruel Tyranny,
both upon the bodies and souls of men, Who can say, that the causes of our
separation, may be justly esteemed Modicae and quaelibet causae? On the other
side, seeing the Bishop of Rome, who was contemporary to Irenaeus, did (as much
as in him lay) cut off from the Churches unity, many great Churches, for not
conforming to him in an indifferent matter, upon a difference, Non de Catholico
dogmate, sed de Ritu, vel Ritus potius tempore; Not about any Catholic
doctrine, but only a Ceremony, or rather about the time of observing it? so
Petavius values it: which was just all one, as if the Church of France should
excommunicate those of their own Religion in England, for not keeping Christmas
upon the same day with them. And seeing he was reprehended sharply and bitterly
for it, by most of the Bishops of the world, as Eusebius testifies, Eusebius.
hist. l. 5. c. 24. Perron Replic. 3. l. 2. c.
and (as Cardinal Perron though mincing the matter, yet confesses) by this
very Irenaeus himself in particular admonished, that for so small a cause
(propter tam modicam causam,) he should not have cut off so many Provinces from
the body of the Church: and lastly, seeing the Ecclesiastical Story of those
times, mentions no other notable example of any such Schismatical presumption,
but this of Victor; certainly we have great inducement to imagine, that
Irenaeus in this place by you quoted, had a special aim at the Bishop and
Church of Rome. Once, this I am sure of, that the place fits him, and many of
his successors, as well as if it had been made purposely for them. And this
also, that be which finds fault with them who separate upon small causes,
implies clearly, that he conceived, there might be such causes as were great
and sufficient: And that then a Reformation was to be made, notwithstanding any
danger of division that might ensue upon it.

12. Lastly S. Denis of Alexandria, says indeed and very well, that all things
should be rather endured, than we should consent to the division of the Church:
I would add Rather than consent to the continuation of the division, if it
might be remedied. But then, I am to tell you, that he says not, All things
should rather be done, but only, All things should rather be endured or
suffered: wherein he speaks not of the evil of Sin, but of Pain and Misery: Not
of tolerating either Error or Sin in others (though that may be lawful,) much
less of joining with others for quietness sake, (which only were to your
purpose) in the profession of Error, and practice of Sin: but of suffering any
affliction, nay even martyrdom in our own persons, rather than consent to the
division of the Church. Omnia incommoda, so your own Christo pherson, enforced
by the circumstances of the place, translates Dionysius his words, All miseries
should rather be endured, than we should consent to the Churches division.

13. Ad. 9. In the next Paragraph you affirm two things, but prove neither,
unless a vehement Asseveration, may pass for a weak proof. You tell us first,
That the Doctrine of the total deficiency of the visible Church, which is
maintained by diverse chief Protestants, implies in it vast Absurdity, or rather
sacrilegious Blasphemy. But neither do the Protestants, alleged by you
maintain the deficiency of the Visible Church, but only of the Churches
visibility; or of the Church as it is Visible, which so acute a man as you, now
that you are minded of it, I hope, will easily distinguish: Neither do they
hold, that the visible Church has failed totally and from its Essence, but
only from its purity: and that it fell into many corruptions, but yet not to
nothing. And yet if they had held, that there was not only no pure visible
Church, but none at all: surely they had said more than they could justify;
but yet they do not show, neither can I discover, any such Vast absurdity or
Sacrilegious Blasphemy in this Assertion. You say secondly, that the Reason
which cast them upon this wicked Doctrine, was a desperate voluntary necessity,
because they were resolved not to acknowledge the Roman to be the true Church,
and were convinced by all manner of evidence, that for diverse Ages before
Luther there was no other. But this is not to dispute but to divine, and take
upon you the property of God which is to know the hearts of men. For why, I
pray, might not the Reason hereof rather be, because they were convinced by all
manner of evidence, as Scripture, Reason, Antiquity, that all the visible
Churches in the world, but above all the Roman, had degenerated from the purity
of the Gospel of Christ, and thereupon did conclude there was no visible
Church, meaning by no Church, none free from corruption, and conformable in all
things to the doctrine of Christ.

14 Ad. 10. Neither is there anyr epugnance (but in words only) between these
as you are pleased to style them, exterminating Spirits, and those other, whom
out of Courtesy you entitle, in your 10.. more moder^te Protestants. For these
affirming the Perpetual Visibility of the Church, yet neither deny, nor doubt
of her being subject to manifold and grievous corruptions, and those, of such a
nature, as, were they not mitigated by invincible, or at least a very probable
ignorance, none subject to them could be saved. And they, on the other side,
denying the Churches Visibility, yet plainly affirm, that they conceive very
good hope of the Salvation of many, of their ignorant and honest Fore fathers.
Thus declaring plainly, though in words they denied the Visibility of the true
Church, yet their meaning was not to deny the perpetuity, but the perpetual
purity and incorruption of the Visible Church.

15. Ad. 11. Let us proceed therefore to your 11. Section, where though D.
Potter and other Protestants granting the Churches perpetual Visibility, make
it needless for you to prove it, yet you will needs be doing that which is
needless. But you do it so coldly and negligently, that it is very happy for
you, that D. Potter did grant it.

16. For, What if the Prophets spoke more obscurely of Christ, than of the
Church? What if they had foreseen, that greater contentions would arise about
the Church than Christ? Which yet, he that is not a mere stranger in the story
of the Church must needs know to be untrue, and therefore not to be foreseen
by the Prophets. What if we have manifestly received the Church from the
Scriptures? Does it follow from any, or all these things, that the Church of
Christ must be always visible?

17. Besides, What Protestant ever granted (that which you presume upon so
confidently,) that every man for all the affairs of his soul must have recourse
to some Congregation? If some one Christan lived alone among Pagans in some
Country, remote from Christendom, shall we conceive it impossible for this man
to be saved, because he cannot have recourse to any Congregation, for the
affairs of his soul? will it not be sufficient, for such a ones salvation, to
know the doctrine of Christ, and live according to it? Such fancies as these,
you do very wisely to take for granted, because you know well, it is hard to
prove them.

18. Let it be as unlawful as you please, to deny and dissemble matters of
faith. Let them that do so, not be a Church, but a damned crew of Sycophants:
What is this to the Visibility of the Church? May not the Church be Invisible,
and yet these that are of it profess their faith? No, say you: Their profession
will make them visible. Very true, visible in the places where, and in the
times when they live, and to those persons, unto whom they have necessary
occasion, to make their profession: But not visible to all, or any great, or
considerable part of the world while they live, much less conspicuous to all
ages after them. Now it is a Church thus illustriously and conspicuously
visible that you require: by whose splendor all men may be directed and drawn
to repair to her, for the affairs of their souls: Neither is it the Visibility
of the Church absolutely, but this degree of it, which the most rigid
Protestants deny: which is plain enough out of the places of Napper, cited by
you in your 9^h. Part of this Chapter. Where his words are, God has withdraw
his visible Church from open Assemblies, to the hearts of particular godly men.
And this Church which had not open Assemblies, he calls The Latent and
Invisible Church. Now, I hope, Papists in England will be very apt to grant,
men may be so far Latent and Invisible, as not to profess their faith in open
Assemblies, nor to proclaim it to the world, and yet not deny, nor dissemble
it; nor deserve to be esteemed a damned crew of d^ssembling Sycophants.

19. But, Preaching of the word, and administration of the Sacraments, cannot
but make a Church visible: and these are inseparable notes of the Church. I
answer, they are so far inseparable, that wheresoever they are, there a Church
is: But not so, but that in some cases there may be a Church, where these notes
are not. Again, these notes will make the Church visible: But to whom?
Certainly not to all men, nor to most men: But to them only to whom the Word is
preached, and the Sacraments are administered. They make the Church visible, to
whom themselves are visible, but not to others. As where your Sacraments are
administered, and your Doctrine preached, it is visible, that there is a Popish
Church. But this may perhaps be visible to them only, who are present at these
performances, and to others as secret, as if they had never been performed.

20. But S. Austin says, It is an impudent, abominable, detestable speech,
etc. to say, The Church has perished. I answer; 1. All that S. Austin says, is
not true. 2. Though this were true, it were nothing to your purpose, unless you
will conceive it all one, not to be, and not to be conspicuously visible. 3.
This very speech that the Church perished, might be false and impudent in the
Donatists, and yet not so in the Protestants. For there is no incongruity, that
what has lived 500 years, may perish in 1600. But. S. Austin denied not only
the actual perishing, but the possibility of it:
and not only of its falling to nothing, but of its falling into corruption. I
answer: though no such thing appears out of those places, yet, I believe, heat
of disputation against the Donatists, and a desire to over-confute them,
transported him so far, as to urge against them more than was necessary, and
perhaps more than was true. But were he now revived, and did but confront the
doctrine of afterages, with that; his own experience would enforce him to change
his opinion. As concerning the last speech of S. Austin, I cannot but wonder
very much, why he should think it absurd for any man to say, There are sheep
which he knows not, but God knows: and no less at you, for obtruding this
sentence upon us as pertinent proof of the Churches visibility.

21. Neither do I see, how the Truth of any present Church depends upon the
Perpetual Visibility, nay nor upon the perpetuity of that which is past or
future. For what sense is there, that it should not be in the power of God
Almighty, to restore to a flourishing estate, a Church which oppression has
made Invisible? to repair that which is ruined; to reform that which was
corrupted, or to revive that which was dead? Nay, what Reason is there, but
that by ordinary means this may be done, so long as the Scriptures by Divine
Providence are preserved in their Integrity and Authority? As a Commonwealth
though never so far collapsed and overrun with disorders, is yet in
possibility of being reduced unto its Original state, so long as the Ancient
Laws, and Fundamental Constitutions are extant, and remain inviolate, from
whence men may be directed how to make such a Reformation. But S. Austine urges
this very Argument against the Donatists, and therefore it is good. I answer,
that I doubt much of the Consequence, and my Reason is, because you your selves
acknowledge, that even General Councils (and therefore much more particular
Doctors) though infallible in their determinations, are yet in their Reasons
and Arguments, whereupon they ground them, subject to like Passions and Errors
with other men.

22. Lastly, whereas you say, That all Divines define Schism, A Division from
the true Church, and from thence collect, That there must be a known Church
from which it is possible for men to depart: I might very justly question your
Antecedent, and desire you to consider, whether Schism be not rather, or at
least be not as well a division of the Church, as from it? A separation not of
a part from the whole, but of some parts from the other. And if you liked not
this definition, I might desire you to inform me in those many Schisms, which
have happened in the Church of Rome, which of the parts was the Church, and which
was divided from it. But to let this pass, certainly your consequence is most
unreasonable. For though whenever there is a Schism, it must necessarily
suppose a Church existent there, yet sure we may define a Schism that is,
declare what the word signifies (for Defining is no more) though at this
present there were neither Schism nor Church in the world. Unless you will say,
that we cannot tell what a Rose is, or what the word Rose signifies, but only
in the Summer when we have Roses: or that in the world to come, when men shall
not marry, it is impossible to know, what it is to marry: or that the Plague is
not a disease, but only when some body is infected: or that Adultery is not a
sin, unless there be Adulterers: or that before Adam had a Child, he knew not,
and God could not have told him, what it was to be a Father. Certainly Sir, you
have forgot your Metaphysics, which you so much glory in, if you know not,
that the connexions of essential predicates with their subjects, are eternal,
and depend not at all upon the actual existence of the thing defined. This
definition therefore of Schism, concludes not the existence of a Church, even
when it is defined: much less the perpetual continuance of it, and least of all
the continuance of it in perpetual visibility and purity, which is the only
thing that we deny, and you are to prove. By this time, you perceive I hope,
that I had reason to say, that it was well for you, that D. Potter granted the
Churches perpetual Visibility: for, for ought I can perceive, this Concession
of his, is the best stake in your hedge, the best pillar upon which this
conclusion stands; which yet is the only groundwork of your whole Accusation.

23. Ad 12.47, 48, 49, 50, 51, 52, 53, 54, 55. The remainder of this Chapter,
to convince Luther, and all that follow him to be Schismatiques, affords us
Arguments of two sorts: the first drawn from the nature of the thing: the
second from D. Potters words and acknowledgements. So that the former if they
be good, must be good against all Protestants: the later only against D.
Potter. I will examine them all, and doubt not to make it appear even to your
self, if you have any indifference, that there is not any sound and concluding
reason amongst them, but that they are all poor and miserable Sophisms.

24 First then to prove us Schismatiques, you urge from the nature of Schism
this only Argument.

Whosoever leave the external Communion of the visible Church, are
Schismatiques: But Luther and his followers left the external Communion of the
visible Church of Christ. Therefore they are Schismatiques.

The Major of this Syllogism you leave naked without proof; and conceive it, as
it should seem, able enough to shift for it self. The Minor or second
Proposition of this Argument, you prove by two other. The first is this.

They which forsook the external Communion of all visible Churches, must needs
forsake the external Communion of the true visible Church of Christ: But Luther
and his followers forsook the external Communion of all visible Churches:
Therefore they forsook the external Communion of the true visible Church.

The Major of this Syllogism you take for granted (as you have reason:) The
Minor you prosecute with great pomp of words, and prove with plenty of Reasons,
built upon the confessions of D. Potter, Luther, Calvin, and other Protestants;
and this you do in the 12 of this Chapter.

The second Argument to prove the Assumption of your Syllogism, stands thus.

The Roman Church, when Luther and his followers made the separation, was the
true visible Church of Christ: But Luther and his followers forsook the
external Communion of the Roman Church: Therefore they forsook the external
Communion of the true visible Church of Christ.

The Assumption of this Syllogism needs no proof: the Proposition which needs
it very much, you endeavor to confirm by these Reasons.

1. The Roman Church had the notes of the Church assigned by Protestants. i.e.
The true Preaching of the Word, and due administration of the Sacraments:
Therefore she was the true Church.

The Antecedent is proved: Because D. Potter confesses she wanted nothing
Fundamental or necessary to salvation: Therefore for the Substance of the
matter she had these notes.

2. Either the Roman Church was the true visible Church, or Protestants can
name and prove some other, disagreeing from the Roman, and agreeing with
Protestants, in their particular Doctrins; or else they must say, There was no
visible Church: But they will not say, There was no Church: They cannot name
and prove any other disagreeing from the Roman, and agreeing with Protestants,
in their particular Doctrins: because this cannot be the Greek Church, nor that
of the Waldenses, Wick ifites, Hussites, nor that of the Muscovites, Armenians,
Georgians, Aethiopians, which you confirm by several Arguments: Therefore they
must grant, that the Roman Church was the true visible Church.

And this is the business of your 47, 48, 49, 50, 51, 52, 53, 54, and 55.
Sections of this Chapter.

25. Now to all this, I answer very briefly thus: That you have played the
unwise builder, and erected a stately structure upon a false foundation. For
whereas you take for granted as an undoubted Truth, That whosoever leave the
external communion of the visible Church, are Schismatical, I tell you Sir, you
presume too much upon us, and would have us grant, that which is the main point
in Question. For either you suppose the external Communion of the Church
corrupted, and that there was a necessity for them that would communicate with
this Church to communicate in her corruptions: Or you suppose her Communion
uncorrupted. If the former, and yet will take for granted, that all
Schismatiques, that leave her Communion though it be corrupted, you beg the
Question in your Proposition. If the later, you beg the Question in your
supposition; for Protestants, you know, are Peremptory and Unanimous in the
Denial of both these things: Both that the Communion of the Visible Church was
then uncorrupted; And that they are truly Schismatiques, who leave the
Communion of the Visible Church, if corrupted; especially, if the case be so
(and Luther's was so) that they must either leave her Communion, or of
necessity Communicate with her in her corruptions. You will say perhaps, That
you have already proved it impossible, that the Church, or her Communion should
be corrupted. And therefore that they are Schismatiques, who leave the external
Communion of the visible Church, because she cannot be corrupted. And that
hereafter you will prove, that corruptions in the Churches Communion, though
the belief and profession of them be made the condition of her communion,
cannot ^ustifie a separation from it: and therefore that they are schismatics,
who leave the Churches communion though corrupted. I answer, that I have
examined your proofs of the former, and found that a vein of Sophistry runs
clean through them: And for the later it is so plain and palpable a falsehood,
that I cannot but be confident, whatsoever you bring in proof of it, will, like
the Apples of Sodom, fall to Ashes upon the first touch. And this is my first
and main exception against your former discourse: that accusing Protestants of
a very great and horrible crime, you have proved your accusation only with a
Fallacy.

26. Another is, that although it were granted Schism, to leave the external
Communion of the visible Church in what state or case so ever it be, and that
Luther and his followers were Schismatiques, for leaving the external Communion
of all visible Churches: yet you fail exceedingly of clearing the other
necessary point undertaken by you, That the Roman Church was then the Visible
Church. For neither do Protestants (as you mistake) make the true preaching of
the Word, and due administration of the Sacraments, the notes of the visible
Church, but only of a visible Church: now these you know are very different
things, the former signifying the Church Catholic, or the whole Church: the
later a Particular Church, or a part of the Catholic. And therefore, suppose
out of courtesy, we should grant, what by argument you can never evince, that
your Church had these notes, yet would it by no means follow, that your Church
were the Visible Church, but only a Visible Church: not the whole Catholic,
but only a part of it. But then besides, where does D. Potter acknowledge any
such matter as you pretend? Where does he say, that you had for the substance,
the true Preaching of the Word, or due Administration of the Sacraments? Or
where does he say, that (from which you collect this) you wanted nothing
Fundamental, or necessary to Salvation? He says indeed, that though your Errors
were in themselves damnable, and full of great impiety, yet he hopes, that
those amongst you, who were invincibly ignorant of the truth, might by Gods
great mercy, have their errors pardoned, and their souls saved: And this is all
he says, and this you confess to be all he says, in diverse places of your Book:
which is no more than you your self do, and must affirm of Protestants: and yet
I believe, you will not suffer us to infer from hence, that you grant
Protestants to have, for the substance, the true preaching of the Word, and due
administration of the Sacraments, and want nothing fundamental or necessary to
salvation. And if we should draw this consequence from your concession,
certainly we should do you injury, in regard many things may in themselves, and
in ordinary course be necessary to salvation, to those that have means to
attain them, as your Church generally has: which yet, by accident, to these
which were, by some impregnable impediment, debarred of these means, may by
Gods mercy be made unnecessary.

27. Lastly, whereas you say, that Protestants must either grant that your
Church then was the visible Church, or name some other, disagreeing from yours
and agreeing with Protestants in their particular doctrine, or acknowledge there
was no visible Church. It is all one, as if (to use S. Paul's similitude) the
head should say to the foot, Either you must grant that I am the whole body, or
name some other member that is so, or confess that there is no body. To which
the foot may answer; I acknowledge there is a body: and yet, that no member
beside you is this body: nor yet that you are it, but only a part of it. And in
like manner say we, We acknowledge a Church there was, corrupted indeed
universally; but yet such a one as we hope by Gods gracious acceptance, was
still a Church. We pretend not to name any one Society that was this Church;
and yet we see no reason, that can enforce us to confess that yours was the
Church, but only a part of it, and that one of the worst then extant in the
World. In vain therefore have you troubled your self in proving, that we cannot
pretend, that either the Greeks, Waldenses, Wickliffites, Hussites, Muscovites,
Armenians, Georgians, Abyssines, were then the visible Church. For all this
discourse proceeds upon a false and vain supposition, and begs another point in
Question between us, which is, that some Church of one denomination and one
Communion (as the Roman, the Greek, etc.) must be always exclusively to all
other Communions, the whole visible Church. And though, perhaps some weak
Protestant having this false principle settled in him, that there was to be
always some Visible Church of one denomination, pure from all error in doctrine,
might be wrought upon, and prevailed with by it, to forsake the Church of
Protestants: yet why it should induce him to go to yours, rather than the Greek
Church, or any other, which pretends to perpetual succession as well as yours,
that I do not understand; unless it be for the reason which Aeneus Sylvius
gave, why more held the Pope above a Council, than a Council above the Pope:
which was because Popes did give Bishoprics and Archbishopricks, but Councils
gave none, and therefore suing in Forma Pauperis, were not like to have their
cause very well maintained. For put the case, I should grant of mere favor,
that there must be always some Church of one Denomination and Communion, free
from all errors in doctrine, and that Protestants had not always such a Church:
it would follow indeed from thence, that I must not be a Protestant: But that I
must be a Papist, certainly it would follow by no better consequence than this;
If you will leave England, you must of necessity go to Rome. And yet with this
wretched Fallacy, have I been sometimes abused my self, and known many other
poor souls seduced, not only from their own Church, and Religion, but unto
yours. I beseech God to open the eyes of all that love the truth, that they may
not always be held captive, under such miserable delusions.

28. We see then, how unsuccessful you have been in making good your
accusation, with reasons drawn from the nature of the thing, and which may be
urged in common against all Protestants. Let us come now to the Arguments of
the other kind, which you build upon D. Potter's own words, out of which you
promise unanswerable reasons to convince Protestants of Schism.

29. But let the understanding Reader, take with him but three or four short
Remembrances, and I dare say he shall find them upon examination, not only
answerable, but already answered. The Memorandums I would commend to him, are
these,

30. 1. That not every separation, but only a causeless separation from the
external Communion of any Church, is the Sin of Schism.

31. 2. That, Imposing upon men under pain of Excommunication a necessity of
professing known errors, and practicing known corruptions, is a sufficient and
necessary cause of separation: and that this is the cause which Protestants
allege to justify their separation from the Church of Rome.

32. 3. That to leave the Church, and to leave the external Communion of a
Church, at least as D. Potter understands the words, is not the same thing:
That being done, by ceasing to be a member of it, by ceasing to have those
requisites which constitute a man a member of it, as faith and Obedience: This,
by refusing to communicate with any Church in her Liturgies and public worship
of God. This little Armor if it be rightly placed, I am persuaded, will repel
all those Batteries which you threaten shall be so furious.

33. Ad 13, 14, 15. The first is a sentence of S. Austine against Donatus,
applied to Luther thus. If the Church perished; what Church brought forth
Donatus, (you say Luther)? If she could not perish, what madness moved the sect
of Donatus to separate, upon pretense to avoid the Communion of bad men?
Whereunto, one fair answer (to let pass many others) is obvious out of the
second observation: That this sentence though it were Gospel, as it is not, is
impertinently applied to Luther and Lutherans, whose pretense of separation (be
it true, or be it false,) was not (as that of the Donatists) only to avoid the
Communion of bad men: but to free themselves from a necessity (which but by
separating was unavoidable,) of joining with bad men in their impieties. And
your not substituting Luther instead of Donatus in the later part of the
Dilemma as well as in the former, would make a suspicious man conjecture that
you your self took notice of this exception of disparity between Donatus and
Luther.

34. Ad 16. Your second onset drives only at those Protestants, who hold the
true Church was invisible for many ages. Which Doctrine (if by the true Church
be understood, the pure Church, as you do understand it) is a certain truth,
and it is easier for you to declaim (as you do) than to dispute against it. But
these men you say must be Heretics, because they separated from the Communion
of the visible Church: and therefore also from the Communion of that which they
say was invisible: In as much as the invisible Church communicated with the
visible.

35. Answ. I might very justly desire some proof of that which so confidently
you take for granted: That, there were no persecuted and oppressed maintainers
of the Truth in the days of our Forefathers, but only such as dissembled their
opinions, and lived in your Communion. And truly if I should say, there were
many of this condition, I suppose, I could make my Affirmative much more
probable, than you can make your Negative. We read in Scripture, that Elias
conceived There was none left beside himself in the whole Kingdom of Israel,
who had not revolted from God: and yet God himself assures us that he was
deceived. And if such a man, a Prophet, and one of the greatest, erred in his
judgment touching his own time, and his own country, why may not you, who are
certainly but a man, and subject to the same passions as Elias was, mistake in
thinking, that in former ages, in some country or other, there were not always
some good Christians, which did not so much as externally bow their knees to
your Baal? But this answer I am content you shall take no notice of, and think
it sufficient to tell you, that if it be true that this supposed invisible
Church did hypocritically communicate with the visible Church, in her
corruptions, then Protestants had cause, nay, necessity, to forsake their
Communion also; for otherwise they must have joined with them in the practice
of impieties: and seeing they had such cause to separate, they presume their
separation cannot be schismatical.

36. Yes, you reply, To forsake the external Communion of them with whom they
agree in faith, is the most formal and proper sin of Schism. Answ. Very true,
but I would fain know wherein. I would gladly be informed, whether I be bound,
for fear of Schism, to communicate with those that believe as I do, only in
lawful things, or absolutely in every thing: whether I am to join with them in
superstition and Idolatry, and not only in a common profession of the faith
wherein we agree, but in a common dissimulation or abjuration of it. This is
that which you would have them do, or else, forsooth, they must be
Schismatiques. But hereafter, I pray you remember, that there is no necessity
of communicating even with true Believers in wicked actions. Nay, that there is
a necessity herein to separate from them. And then I dare say, even you being
their judge, the reasonableness of their cause to separate shall, according to
my first observation, justify their separation from being schismatical.

37. Arg. But the property of Schism, according to D. Potter, is to cut off
from the hope of salvation, the Church from which it separates: And these
Protestants have this property, Therefore they are Schismatiques.

38. Ans. I deny the Syllogism, it is no better than this: One Sympton of the
Plague is a Fever,
But such a man has a Fever,
Therefore he has the Plague.


The true Conclusion which issues out of these Premises, should be this,
Therefore he has one Sympton of the Plague. And so likewise in the former,
Therefore they have one property or one quality of Schismatiques. And as in the
former instance, The man that has one sign of the Plague, may by reason of the
absence of other requisites, not have the plague: So these Protestants may have
something of Schismatiques, and yet not be Schismatiques. A Tyrant sentencing a
man to death for his pleasure, and a just judge that condemns a malefactor, do
both sentence a man to death, and so for the matter do both the same thing: yet
the one does wickedly, the other justly. What Is the reason? because the one
has cause, the other has not. In like manner Schismatiques, either always or
generally denounce damnation to them from whom they separate. The same do these
Protestants, and yet are not Schismatiques. The reason: because Schismatiques
do it, and do it without cause, and Protestants have cause for what they do.
The impieties of your Church, being, generally speaking, damnable; unless where
they are excused by ignorance, and expiated at least by a general repentance.
In fine, though perhaps it may be true, that all Schismatiques do so: yet
universal affirmatives are not converted, and therefore it follows not by any
good Logic, that all that do so, when there is just cause for it, must be
Schismatiques. The cause in this matter of separation is all in all, and that
for ought I see, you never think of. But if these rigid Protestants have just
cause to cut off your Church from the hope of salvation: How can the milder
sort allow hope of Salvation to the Members of this Church? Ans. Distinguish
the quality of the Persons censured, and this seeming repugnance of their
censures will vanish into nothing. For your Church may be considered either in
regard of those, in whom, either negligence, or pride, or worldly fear, or
hopes, or some other voluntary sin, is the cause of their ignorance, which I
fear is the case of the generality of men amongst you: or in regard of those
who owe their Errors from Truth, to want of capacity, or default of
instruction; either in respect of those that might know the truth and will not,
or of those who would know the truth, but (all things considered) cannot: In
respect of those that have eyes to see, and will not see; or those that would
gladly see, but want eyes, or light. Consider the former sort of men, (which
your more rigid censures seem especially to reflect upon,) and the heaviest
sentence will not be too heavy. Consider the later, and the mildest will not be
too mild. So that here is no difference but in words only, neither are you
flattered by the one, nor uncharitably censured by the other.

39. Your next blow is directed against the milder sort of Protestants, who
(you say) involve themselves in the sin of Schism by communicating with those
(as you call them) exterminating Spirits, whom you conceive your self to have
proved Schismatiques: And now load them further with the crime of Heresy. For,
say you, If you held your selves obliged under pain of damnation, to forsake
the Communion of the Roman-Church by reason of her Errors, which yet you
confess were not fundamental: shall it not be much more damnable, to live in
confraternity with these, who defend an Error of the failing of the Church,
which in the Donatists you confess to have been properly Heretical?

40. Answ. You mistake, in thinking that Protestants hold themselves obliged
not to communicate with you, only or principally by reason of your Errors and
Corruption. For the true reason according to my third Observation, is not so
much because you maintain Errors and Corruption, as because you impose them:
and will allow your Communion to none but to those that will hold them with
you; and have so ordered your Communion, that either we must communicate with
you in these things, or nothing. And for this very reason, though it were
granted, that these Protestants held this Doctrine which you impute to them; And
though this Error were as damnable, and as much against the Creed as you
pretend: Yet, after all this, this-parity between you and them, might make it
more lawful for us to communicate with them than you: because what they hold,
they hold to themselves, and refuse not (as you do) to communicate with them
that hold the contrary.

41. Thus we may answer your Argument, though both your former Suppositions
were granted. But then for a second answer, I am to tell you, that there is no
necessity of granting either of them. For neither do these Protestants hold the
failing of the Church from its being, but only from its visibility: which if
you conceive all one, then must you conceive that the Stars fail every day, and
the Sun every night. Neither is it certain that the doctrine of the Churches
failing is repugnant to the Creed. For as the truth of the Article of the
remission of sins, depends not upon the actual remission of any man's sins, but
upon Gods readiness and resolution to forgive the sins of all that believe and
repent; so that although unbelief or impenitence should be universal, and the
Faithful should absolutely fail from the children of men, and the Son of Man
should find no faith on the earth; yet should the Article still continue true,
that God would forgive the sins of all that repent: In like manner: It is not
certain that the truth of the Article of the Catholic Church, depends upon
the actual existence of a Catholic Church; but rather upon the right, that
the Church of Christ, or rather (to speak properly) the Gospel of Christ has
to be universally believed. And therefore the Article may be true, though there
were no Church in the world. In regard, this notwithstanding, it remains still
true, that there ought to be a Church, and this Church ought to be Catholic.
For as, of these two Propositions, There is a Church in America, and, There
should be a Church in America, the truth of the later depends not upon truth of
the former, so neither does it in these two: There is a Church diffused all the
world over, and, There should be a Church diffused all the world over.

42. Thirdly, if you understand by errors not fundamental, such as are not
damnable, it is not true, as I have often told you, that we confess your errors
not fundamental.

43. Lastly, for your desire that I should here apply an authority of St.
Cyprian alleged in your next number I would have done so very willingly, but
indeed I know not how to do it: for in my apprehension it has no more to do
with your present business of proving it unlawful, to communicate with these
men, who hold the Church was not always visible, than In nova fert animus.
Besides, I am here again to remember you, that St. Cyprians words, were they
never so pertinent, yet are by neither of the parts litigant esteemed any rule
of faith. And therefore the urging of them, and such like authorities, serves
only to make Books great, and Controversies endless.

44. Ad 17. The next Section in three long leaves, delivers us this short
sense. That those Protestants which say they have not left the Churches
external Communion, but only her corruptions, pretend to do that which is
impossible. Because these corruptions were inherent in the Churches external
Communion: and therefore he that forsakes them, cannot but forsake this.

45. Ans. But, Who are they that pretend, they forsook the Churches
corruptions, and not her external communion? Some there be that say, they have
not left the Church, that is, not ceased to be members of the Church, but only
left her corruptions: some, that they have not left the communion, but the
corruptions of it; meaning the internal communion of it, and conjunction with
it, by faith and obedience: which disagree from the former only in the manner of
speaking: for he that is in the Church, is in this kind of communion with it:
and he that is not in this internal communion, is not in the Church. Some
perhaps, that they left not your external communion in all things; meaning,
that they left it not voluntarily being not fugitivi but fugati, Casau^um. in
E^ ad Card. Perron.
as being willing to join with you in any act of piety; but were by you
necessitated and constrained to do so, because you would not suffer them to do
well with you, unless they would do ill with you. Now to do ill that you may do
well, is against the will of God, which to every good man is a high degree of
necessity. But for such Protestants, as pretend that, de facto, they fo^sook
your corruptions only and not your external communion, that is, such as pretend
to communicate with you in your Confessions and Liturgies, and participation of
Sacraments; I cannot but doubt very much, that neither you, nor I, have ever
met with any of this condition. And if perhaps you were led into error, by
thinking that to leave the Church, and to leave the external communion of it,
was all one in sense and signification, I hope by this time you are disabus'd
and begin to understand, that as a man may leave any fashion or custom of a
College, and yet remain still a member of the College; so a man may possibly
leave some opinion or practice of a Church, formerly common to himself and
others, and continue still a member of that Church: Provided that what he
forsakes be not one of those things, wherein the essence of the Church consists.
Whereas peradventure this practice may be so involved with the external
communion of this Church, that it may be simply impossible, for him to leave
this practice, and not to leave the Churches external communion.

46 You will reply perhaps, That the difficulty lies as well against those who
pretend to forsake the Churches corruptions and not the Church, as against
those who say, they forsook the Churches corruptions and not her external
communion. And that the reason is still the same: because these supposed
corruptions, were inherent in the whole Church, and therefore, by like reason
with the former, could not be forsaken, but if the whole Church were forsaken.

47. Ans. A pretty Sophism, and very fit to persuade men that it is impossible
for them, to forsake any error they hold, or any vice they are subject to,
either peculiar to themselves, or in common with others: Because, forsooth,
they cannot forsake Themselves; and Vices and Errors are things inherent in
themselves. The deceit lies, in not distinguishing between a Local and a Moral
forsaking of any thing. For as it were an absurdity, fit for the maintainers of
Transubstantiation to defend, that a man may Locally and properly depart from
the Accidents of a subject, and not from the subject it self: So is it also
against reason to deny, that a man may (by an usualphrase phrase of speech)
forsake any custom or quality, good or bad, either proper to himself, or common
to himself with any company, and yet never truly or properly forsake either his
company or himself. Thus if all the Jesuits in the Society, were given to write
Sophistically, yet you might leave this ill custom, and yet not leave your
Society. If all the Citizens of a City, were addicted to any vanity, they
might, either all, or some of them, forsake it, and yet not forsake the City.
If all the parts of a man's body were dirty or filthy, nothing hinders but that
all or some of them might cleanse themselves, and yet continue parts of the
body. And what reason then in the world is there, if the whole Visible Church
were overrun with tares and weeds of superstitions, and corruptions, but that
some members of it might reform themselves, and yet continue still true members
of the body of the Church, and not be made no members, but the better by their
Reformation? Certainly it is so obvious and sensible a Truth, that this thing
is possible, that no man in his wits, will be persuaded out of it, with all the
Quirks and Metaphysics in the world. Neither is this to say, that a man may
keep company with Christopher Potter, and not keep company with the Provost of
Qu. College: Nor that a man can avoid the company of a sinner, and at the same
time be really present with the man who is the sinner: which we leave to those
Protestants of your invention, who are so foolish, as to pretend, that a man
may really separate himself from the Churches external Communion as she is
corrupted, and yet continue in that Churches external Communion, which in this
external Communion is corrupted. But we, that say only the whole Church being
corrupted, some parts of it might and did reform themselves, and yet might and
did continue parts of the Church, though separated from the external communion
of the other parts, which would not reform, need not trouble our selves to
reconcile any such repugnance. For the case put by you, of keeping D. Potters
company, and leaving the company of the Provost of Queens College; and of
leaving a sinners company, and not the man's: are nothing at all like ours. But
if you would speak to the point, you must show, that D. Potter cannot leave
being Provost of Q. College, without ceasing to be himself: or, that a sinner
cannot leave his sin, without ceasing to be a man: or that he that is part of
any society, cannot renounce any Vice of that society, but he must relinquish
the society. If you would show any of these things, then indeed (I dare
promise) you shall find us apt enough to believe, that the particular parts of
the visible Church could not reform themselves, but they must of necessity
become no parts of it. But until we see this done, you must pardon us, if we
choose to believe sense rather than Sophistry.

48. In this Paragraph you bring in the sentence of S. Cyprian, whereto you
referred us in the former: but, Why, in a controversy of faith, do you cite any
thing, which is confessed on all hands, not to be a rule of faith? Besides, in
my apprehension, this sentence of S. Cyprian, is, in this place, and to this
purpose, merely impertinent. S. Cyprians words are, The Church (he speaks of
the particular Church, or Diocese of Rome) being one, cannot be within and
without: If she be with Novatianus, she was not with Cornelius: But if she were
with Cornelius who succeeded Fabianus by lawful Ordination, Novatianus is not
in the Church. And now, having related the words, I am only to remember the
Reader, that your business was to prove it impossible, For a man to forsake the
Churches corruptions and not the Church, and to request him to tell me Whether,
as I said, In nova fert animus, had not been as much to the purpose?

49. Toward the conclusion of this Section, you number up your Victories and
tell us, That out of your discourse it remains clear, that this our chiefest
Answer changes the very state of the Question: confounds internal Acts of
the understanding, with external dieds: does not distinguish between Schism and
Heresy, and leaves this demonstrated against us, that they (Protestants)
divided themselves from the communion of the Visible Catholic Church, because
they conceived that she needed Reformation. To which Triumphs, if any reply be
needful, then briefly thus: We do not change the state of the Question, but you
mistake it. For the Question was not, Whether they might forsake the
corruptions of the Church, and continue in her external communion, which we
confess impossible, because these corruptions were in her communion: But the
Question was, Whether they might forsake sake the corruptions of the Church,
and not the Church, but continue still the members of it. And to this Question,
there is not in your whole discourse one pertinent syllable.

50. We do not confound internal Acts of understanding with external deeds, but
acknowledge (as you would have us) that we cannot (as matters now stand)
separate from your corruptions, but we must depart from your External
communion. For you have so ordered things, that whosoever will Communicate with
you at all, must communicate with you, in your corruptions. But it is you that
will not perceive the difference, between, being a part of the Church, and
being in external Communion with all the other parts of it: taking for granted,
that which is certainly false, that no two Men or Churches, divided in external
communion, can be both true parts of the Catholic Church.

51. We are not to learn the difference between Schism and Heresy, for Heresy
we conceive, An obstinate defense of any error against any necessary Article of
the Christian faith: and Schism, A causless separation of one part of the
Church from another. But this we say, That if we convince you of errors, and
corruptions, professed and practiced in your Communion, then we cannot be
Schismatics, for refusing to join with you in the profession of these Errors,
and the practice of these corruptions. And therefore you must free either us
from Schism, or your selves from error: at least from requiring the profession
of it as a condition of your communion.

52. Lastly, whereas you say, That you have demonstrated against us, that
Protestants divided themselves from the external communion of the Visible
Church, add, which external communion was corrupted, and we shall confess the
accusation, and glory in it. But this is not that Quod erat demonstrandum, but
that we divided our selves from the Church, that is, made our selves out-lawes
from it, and no members of it. And moreover, in the Reason of our separation
from the external communion of your Church you are mistaken: for it was not so
much because she, your Church, as because your Churches external communion, was
corrupted, and needed Reformation.

53. That a pretense of Reformation will acquit no man from Schism, we grant
very willingly, and therefore say, that it concerns every man who separates
from any Churches communion, even as much as his Salvation is worth, to look
most carefully to it, that the cause of his separation be just and necessary:
For unless it be necessary, it can very hardly be sufficient. But whether a
true Reformation of our selves from errors, superstition, and impieties, will
not justify our separation in these things; our separation, I say, from them
who will not reform themselves, and, as much as in them lies, hinder others
from doing so: This is the point you should have spoken to, but have not. As
for the sentences of the Fathers to which you refer us, for the determination
of this Question, I suppose by what I have said above, the Reader understands,
by alleging them you have gained little credit to your cause or person. And
that, if they were competent Judges of this controversy, their sentence is
against you much rather than for you.

54. Lastly, whereas you desire D. Potter to remember his own words: There
neither was nor can be any just cause to depart from the Church of Christ, no
more than from Christ himself, and pretend that you have showed that Luther did
so: The Doctor remembers his words very well, and has no reason to be ashamed
of them. Only he desires you to remember that hereafter you do not confound, as
hitherto you have done, Departing from the Church ( i.e. ceasing to be a member
of it,) with departing from the Churches external communion; and then he is
persuaded it will appear to you, that against Luther and his followers you have
said many things, but showed nothing.

55. But the Church Universal, remaining the Church Universal, according to D.
Potter may fall into error: And from hence it clearly follows, that it is
impossible to leave the external communion of the Church so corrupted, and
retain external communion with the Catholic Church. Ans. The reason of this
consequence which you say is so clear, truly I cannot possibly discern; But the
conclusion inferred, methinks, is evident of it self, and therefore without
proof I grant it. I mean, that it is impossible to leave the external communion
of the Catholic Church corrupted, and to retain external communion with the
Catholic Church. But what use you can make of it, I do not understand: Unless
you will pretend, that to say a man may forsake the Churches corruptions, and
not the Church, is all one as to say, he may forsake the Churches external
communion and not forsake it. If you mean so, sure you mistake the meaning of
Protestants when they say, They forsook not the Church but her corruptions. For
in saying so, they neither affirm, nor deny that they forsook the external
communion of the Church, nor speak at all of it: But they mean only, that they
ceased not to be still members of the Church, though they ceased to believe and
practice some things which the whole Church formerly did believe and practice.
And as for the external Communion of the Visible Church, we have without
scruple formerly granted, that Protestants did forsake it, that is, renounce
the practice of some observances, in which the whole Visible Church before them
did communicate. But this we say they did without Schism, because they had
cause to do so, and no man can have cause to be a Schismatique,

56. But your Argument you conceive, will be more convincing, if we consider
that when Luther appeared, there were not two distinct Visible true Churches,
one Pure, the other Corrupted, but one Church only. Ans. The ground say,
Histories are silent of any such matter; I answer, there is no necessity, that
you or I should have read all Histories, that may be extant of this matters;
nor that all should be extant that were written, much less extant uncorrupted:
especially, considering your Church, which had lately all the power in her
hands, has been so pernitiously industrious, in corrupting the monuments of
Antiquity that made against her; nor that all Records should remain which were
written; nor that all should be recorded which was done. Neither secondly, to
suppose a Visible Church before Luther, which did not err, is it to contradict
this ground of D. Potters, that the Church may err. Unless you will have us
believe, that, May be, and Must be is all one, and that all which may be true,
is true: which rule if it were true, then sure all men would be honest, because
all men may be so; and you would not make so bad Arguments, unless you will
pretend, you cannot make better. Nor thirdly, is it to contradict these words,
The Church may not hope to triumph over all error, till she be in Heaven: For
to triumph over error is to be secure from it, to be out of danger of it, not
to be obnoxious to it. Now a Church may be free from error, and yet not secure
from it, and consequently in this Protestants, that Luther reformed the whole
Church; perhaps (though I know not who they be that say so,) by a frequent
Synecdoche, they may mean by the whole the greatest, and most illustrious part
of it, the luster whereof did much obscure the other, though it were not wholly
invisible. Besides, if their brag be evacuated, (as you call it) let it be so,
I see no harm will come of it. Lastly whereas you say, that supposing a visible
pure Church, Luther must be a Schismatic who separated from all visible
Churches: I tell you, if you will suppose a visible Church extant before and
when Luther arose, conformable to him in all points of doctrine, necessary and
profitable, then Luther separated not from this Church, but adjoined himself to
it: Not indeed in place, which was not necessary, not in external communion
which was impossible, but by the Union of faith and charity. Upon these
grounds, I say, that the ground of this Argument is no way made certain; yet
because it is not manifestly false, I am content to let it pass. And, for ought
I see, it is very safe for me to do so: for you build nothing upon it which I
may not fairly grant. For what do you rupted, Luther forsaking the external
communion of the corrupted Church, could not but forsake the external communion
of the Catholic Church? Well, let this also be granted, what will come of it?
What, that Luther must be a Schismatique? By no means: For not every
separation, but only a causless separation from the communion of the Church we
maintain to be Schismatical. Hereunto may be added, that though the whole
Church were corrupted, yet properly speaking, it is not true, that Luther and
his Followers forsook the whole corrupted Church, or the external communion of
it: But only that he forsook that Part of it which was corrupted, and still
would be so, and forsook not, but only reformed another Part, which Part they
themselves were, and I suppose you will not go about to persuade us, that they
forsook themselves or their own communion. And if you urge, that they joined
themselves to no other part, therefore they separated from the whole: I say, it
follows not, in as much as themselves were a part of it, and still continued
so: and therefore could no more separate from the whole than from themselves.
Thus though there were no part of the people of Rome, to whom the Plebeians
joined themselves, when they made their Secession into the Aventine Hill; yet
they divided themselves from the Patricians only and not from the whole people,
because themselves were a part of this people, and they divided not from
themselves.

57. Ad. 18. In the 18.. you prove that which no man denies, that Corruption in
manners yields no sufficient cause to leave the Church: yet sure, it yields
sufficient cause to cast them out of the Church, that are, after the Churches
public admonition, obstinate in notorious impieties. Neither does the cutting
off such men from the Church, lay any necessary upon us, either to go out of
the world, or out of the Church, but rather puts these men out of the Church
into the world, where we may converse with them freely, without scandal to the
Church. Our blessed Savior foretold, you say, that there should be in the
Church tares with choice corn. Look again, I pray, and you shall see, that the
field he speaks of, is not the Church, but the world: and therefore neither do
you obey our Savior's command, Let both grow up till the harvest, who teach it
to be lawful to root these tares (such are Heretics) out of the world:
neither do Protestants disobey it, if they eject manifest Hreretiques and
notorious sinners out of the Church.

58. Ad. 19. In the 19. you are so courteous as to suppose corruptions in your
doctrine: and yet undertake to prove that, neither could they afford us any
sufficient cause, or colorable necessity to depart from them. Your reason is,
Because damnable errors there were none in your Church, by D. Potters
confession, neither can it be damnable in respect oferror, to remain in any
Churches communion, whose errors are not damnable. For if the error be not
damnable, the belief thereof cannot. Ans. D. Potter confesses no such matter:
but only that he hopes that your errors though in themselves sufficiently
damnable, yet by accident did not damn all that held them: such he means and
says, as were excusably ignorant of the Truth, and amongst the number of their
unknown sins, repented daily of their unknown errors. The truth is, he thinks
as ill of your errors and their desert, as you do of ours: only he is not so
peremptory and presumptuous in judging your persons, as you are in judging
ours, but leaves them to stand or fall to their own Masters, who is infinitely
merciful, and therefore will not damn them for mere errors, who desire to find
the truth and cannot: and withal infinitely just, and therefore (it is to be
feared) will not pardon them, who might easily have come to the knowledge of
the truth, and either through Pride, or Obstinacy, or Negligence would not.

59. To your minor also, I answer almost in your own words,. 42. of this Chap.
I thank you for your courteous Supposal, that your Church may err, and in
recompense thereof, will do you a charity, by putting you in mind, into what
Labyrinths you cast your self, by supposing that the Church may err in some of
her Proposals, and yet denying it lawful for any man though he know this, which
you suppose, to oppose her judgment, or leave her communion. Will you have
such a man dissemble against his conscience, or externally deny that which he
knows true? No, that you will not for them that do so, you your self have
pronouced a damned crew of dissembling Sycophants. Or would you have him
continue in your Communion, and yet profess your Church to err? This you your
selves have made to him impossible. Or would you have him believe those things
true, which together profess your Church to err? This you your selves have
made to him impossible. Or would you have him believe those things true, which
together with him you have supposed to be Errors? This is such a one, as is
assured or persuaded of that, which you here suppose, that your Church does
err, (and such only, we say, are obliged to forsake your communion,) is, as
Schoolmen speak, Implicatio in terminis, a contradiction so plain, that one
word destroys another; as if one should say, a living dead man. For it is to
require that they which believe some part of your Doctrine false, should withal
believe it all true. Seeing therefore, for any man to believe your Church in
error, and profess the contrary, is damnable Hypocrisy; to believe it and not
believe it, a manifest repugnancy; and thirdly, to profess it and to continue
in your Communion (as matters now stand) a plain impossibility; what remians,
but that whosoever is supposed to have just reason to disbelieve any doctrine of
your Church, must of necessity forsake her Communion? Unless you would remit so
far from your present rigor, as to allow them your Churches communion, who
publicly profess that they do not believe every article of her established
doctrine. Indeed, if you would do so, you might with some coherence suppose your
Church in error, and yet find fault with men for abandoning her communion,
because they might continue in it, and suppose her in error. But to suppose
your Church in error, and to excommunicate all those that believe your own
supposition, and then to complain that they continue not in your communion, is
the most ridiculous incongruity that can be imagined. And therefore though your
corruptions in doctrine, in themselves (which yet is false) did not, yet your
obliging us to profess your doctrine uncorrupted against knowledge and
conscience, may induce an obligation to depart from your communion. As, if
there were any society of Christians, that held there were no Antipodes;
notwithstanding this error, I might communicate with them. But if I could not
do so, without professing my self of their belief in this matter, then I
suppose I should be excused from Schism, if I should forsake their communion,
rather than profess my self to believe that which I do not believe. Neither is
there any contradiction or shadow of contradiction, that it may be necessary
for my salvation to depart from this Churches communion: And that this Church
(though erring in this matter) wants nothing necessary to Salvation. And yet
this is that manifest contradiction, which D. Potter (you say) will never be
able to salve; viz. That there might be necessary cause to depart from the
Church of Rome in some Doctrins and Practices, though she wanted nothing
necessary to Salvation.

60. And your Reason wherewith you prove, that there is in these words such a
pl^in contradiction, is very notable. For (say you) if she wanted nothing
necessary to salvation, How could it be necessary to salvation to forsake her?
Truly Sir, if this be a good manner of proving, it is a very ready way to prove
any thing; for what is there that may not be proved, if it be proof enough to
ask, How it can be otherwise? Me thinks if you would convince D. Potters words
of manifest contradiction, you should show, that he affirms and denies the same
of the same. From which fault me thinks he should be very innocent, who says
only, that that may be damnable to one, which is not so to another; and that
may be necessary for one, which is not necessary for another. And this is all
that D. Potter says here: viz. That the profession of a falsehood to him that
believes it, may be not damnable: and yet damnable to him that believes the
contrary. Or that, not to profess a falsehood in him that knows it to be so, is
necessary to salvation: and yet not so, in him that by error conceives it to be
a truth. The words by you cited, and charged with unsalvable contradiction are
in the 75. page But in the progress of the same particular discourse, in the
next page but one he gives such evident reason of them, (which can hardly be
done to prove implicancy true) that whereas you say, he will never be able to
salve them from contradiction, I believe any indifferent reader, having
considered the place, will be very apt to think, that you (whatsoever you
pretend) were very able to have done this courtesy for him, if your will had
been answerable to your ability. I will set down the words, and leave the
Reader to condemn or absolve them. To forsake the errors of that Church, and
not to join with her in those practices which we account erroneous, we are
enforced by necessity. For though in the issue they are not damnable to them
which believe as they profess, yet for us to profess a vow by oath ( as the
Church of Rome enjoins) what we believe not, were without question damnable.
And they with their errors, by the grace of God might go to Heaven, when we for
our hypocrisy and dissimulation (he might have added, and perjury) should
certainly be condemned to Hell.

61. Ad 20. But a Church not erring in Fundamentals, though erring in other
matters, does what our Savior exacts at her hands, does as much as lies in her
power to do: Therefore the communion of such a Church is not upon pretense of
Error to be forsaken. The consequence is manifest. The antecedent is proved,
because God, by D. Potters confession, has promised his assistance no further,
nor is it in her power to do more than God does assist her to do. Ans. The
promise of Divine Assistance is twofold: Absolute, or Conditional. That there
shall be by Divine providence preserved in the world to the worlds end, such a
Company of Christians, who hold all things precisely and indispensably
necessary to salvation, and nothing inevitably destructive of it: This and no
more the Doctor affirms that God has promised absolutely. Yet he neither
doubts nor denies, but that a farther assistance is conditionally promised us,
even such an assistance as shall lead us, if we be not wanting to it and our
selves, into all not only necessary, but very profitable truth, and guard us
from all not only destructive, but also hurtful Errors. This, I say, he neither
denies nor questions. And should he have done so, he might have been confuted
by evident and express Text of Scripture. When therefore you say, That a Church
not erring in Fundamentals, does as much as by God's assistance lies in her
power to do, This is manifestly untrue. For God's assistance is always ready
to promote her farther. It is ready, I say, but on condition the Church does
implore it: on condition, that when it is offered in the divine directions of
Scripture and Reason, the Church be not negligent to follow it. If therefore
there be any Church, which, retaining the Foundation, builds hay and stubble
upon it; which believing what is so precisely necessary, errs shamefully and
dangerously in other things very profitable: This by no means argues defect of
divine assistance in God, but neglect of this assistance in the Church. Neither
is there any reason, why such a Church should please her self too much for
retaining fundamental truths, while she remains so regardless of others. For
though the simple defect of some truths profitable only and not simply
necessary, may consist with salvation; yet, Who is there that can give her
sufficient assurance, that the neglect of such truths is not damnable? Besides,
Who is there that can put her in sufficient caution, that these Errors about
profitable matters may not, according to the usual fecundity of error, bring
forth others of a higher quality, such as are pernicious and pestilent, and
undermine by secret consequences the very foundations of Religion and Piety?
Lastly, Who can say that she has sufficiently discharged her duty to God and
man by avoiding only Fundamental Heresies, if in the mean time she be negligent
of others, which though they do not plainly destroy Salvation, yet obscure and
hinder, and only not block up the way to it? Which though of themselves and
immediately they damn no man, yet are causes and occasions that many men run the
race of Christian piety more remisly than they should, many deferr their
repentance, many go on securely in their sins, and so at length are damned by
means and occasion of these Errors, though not for them. Such Errors as these,
(though those of the Roman Church be much worse, even in themselves damnable,
and by accident only pardonable) yet, I say, such Errors as these, if any
Church should tolerate, dissemble, and suffer them to reign, and neglect to
reform them, and not permit them to be freely, yet peaceably, opposed and
impugned; Will any wise man say, that she has sufficiently discharged her duty
to God and man? that she has with due fidelity dispensed the Gospel of Christ?
that she has done what she could, and what she ought? What shall we say then,
if these errors be taught by her, and commanded to be taught? What if she
thunder out her curses against those that will not believe them? What if she
rave and rage against them, and persecute them with fire and sword, and all
kinds of most exquisite torments? Truly I do much fear, that from such a Church
(though it hold no error absolutely unconsistent with salvation,) the
Candlestick of God, either is already removed, or will be very shortly; and
because she is negligent of profitable truths, that she will lose those that
are Necessary; and because she will not be led into all truths, that in short
time she shall be led into none. And although this should not happen, yet what
mortal man can secure us, that not only a probable unaffected ignorance, not
only a mere neglect of profitable truths, but also a retchless supine
negligence, manifest contempt, Dissimulation, Opposition, Oppression of them
may consist with salvation? I truly for my part, though I hope very well of all
such, as, seeking all truth, find that which is necessary; who endeavoring to
free themselves from all Errors, any way contrary to the purity of
Christianity, yet fail of performance and remain in some: yet if I did not find
in my self a love and desire of all profitable truth; If I did not put away
idleness, and prejudice, and worldly affections, and so examine to the bottom
all my opinions of divine matters, being prepared in mind to follow God, and
God only, which way soever He shall lead me; If I did not hope, that I either
do, or endeavor to do these things, certainly I should have little hope of
obtaining salvation.

62. But to oblige any man under pain of damnation to forsake a Church by
reason of such errors, against which Christ thought it superfluous to promise
his assistance, and for which he neither denies his grace here, nor his glory
hereafter, what is it but to make the narrow way to heaven, narrower than
Christ left it? Answ. It is not: for Christ himself has obliged us hereunto.
He has forbad us under pain of damnation to profess what we believe not, and
consequently under the same penalty, to leave that Communion, in which we
cannot remain without this hypocritical profession of those things, which we
are convinced to be erroneous. But then besides, it is here falsely supposed,
(as has been showed already) that Christ has not promised assistance to those
that seek it, but only in matters simply necessary. Neither is there any
reason, why any Church, even in this world, should despair of victory over all
errors pernicious or noxious; provided she humbly and earnestly implore divine
assistance, depend wholly upon it, and be not wanting to it. Though a Triumph
over all sin and error, that is, security that she neither does nor can err,
be rather to be desired than hoped for on earth, being a felicity reserved for
heaven.

63. Ad. 21. But at least the Roman Church is as infallible as Protestants, and
Protestants as fallible as the Roman Church: therefore to forsake the Roman
Church for errors, what is it but to flit from one erring Society to another?
Ans. The inconsequence of this Argument is too apparent: Protestants may err as
well as the Church of Rome, therefore they did so! Boys in the Schools know,
that a Posse ad Esse, the Argument follows not. He is equally fallible who
believes twice two to be four, as he that believes them to be twenty: yet in
this, he is not equally deceived, and he may be certain that he is not so. One
Architect is no more infallible than another, and yet he is more secure that
his work is right and straight who has made it by the level, than he which
has made it by guess and by chance. So he that forsakes the errors of the
Church of Rome, and therefore renounceth her communion, that he may renounce
the profession of her errors, though he knows himself fallible, as well as
those whom he has forsaken, yet he may be certain (as certain as the nature of
the thing will bear) that he is not herein deceived: because he may see the
doctrine forsaken by him repugnant to Scripture, and the doctrine embraced by him
consonant to it. At least, this he may know, that the doctrine which he has
chosen, to him seems true, and the contrary which he has forsaken, seems
false: And therefore without remorse of conscience, he may profess that, but
this he cannot.

64. But we are to remember, that, according to D. Potter, the visible Church
has a blessing not to err in Fundamentals, in which any private Reformer may
fail, therefore there was no necessity of forsaking the Church, out of whose
communion they were exposed to danger of falling into many more, and even into
damnable errors. Answ. The visible Church is free indeed from all errors
absolutely destructive and unpardonable, but not from all error which in it is
self damnable: not from all which will actually bring damnation upon them, that
keep themselves in them, by their own voluntary and avoidable fault. From such
errors which are thus damnable, D. Potter does no where say, that the visible
Church has any privilege or exemption. Nay, you your self teach, that he
plainly teaches the contrary, and thereupon will allow him to be no more
charitable to Papists, than Papists are to Protestants: and yet upon this
affected mistake your Discourse is founded in almost forty places of your Book.
Besides, any private man who truly believes the Scripture, and seriously
endeavors to know the will of God, and to do it, is as secure as the visible
Church, more secure than your Church, from the danger of erring in
fundamentals: for it is impossible, that any man so qualified should fall into
any error which to him will prove damnable. For God requires no more of any
man to his Salvation, but his true endeavor to be saved. Lastly, abiding in
your Churches Communion is so far from securing me or any man from damnable
error, that if I should abide in it, I am certain I could not be saved. For
abide in it I cannot, without professing to believe your entire doctrine true:
profess this I cannot, but I must lie perpetually, and exulcerate my
conscience. And though your errors were not in themselves damnable, yet to
resist the known Truth, and to continue in the profession of known errors and
falsehood, is certainly a capital sin, and of great affinity with the sin which
shall never be forgiven.

65. But neither is the Church of Protestants perfectly free from errors and
corruptions: so the Doctor confesses p. 69. which he can only excuse, by
saying, they are not fundamental, as likewise those in the Roman Church, are
confessed not to be fundamental. And what man of judgment will be a Protestant,
since that Church is confessedly a corrupted one? Ans. And yet you your self
make large Discourses in this very Chapter, to persuade Protestants to continue
in the Church of Rome, though supposed to have some corruptions. And why, I
pray, may not a man of judgment continue in this Communion of a Church
confessedly corrupted, as well as a Church supposed to be corrupted, requires
the belief and profession of her supposed corruptions, as the condition of her
Communion: which this Church, confessedly corrupted, does not? What man of
judgment will think it any disparagement to his judgment, to prefer the
better, though not simply the best, before that which is stark naught? To
prefer indifferent good health, before a diseased and corrupted state of Body?
To prefer a field not perfectly weeded, before a field that is quite overrun
with weeds and thorns? And therefore though Protestants have some Errors, yet
seeing they are neither so great as yours, nor imposed with such tyranny, nor
maintained with such obstinacy; he that conceives it any disparagement to his
judgment, to change your Communion for theirs, though confessed to have some
corruptions, it may well be presumed that he has but little judgment. For as
for your pretense that yours are confessed not to be Fundamental, it is an
affected mistake as already I have often told you.

66. Ad. 22. But D. Potter says, It is comfort enough for the Church, that the
Lord in mercy will secure her from all her capital dangers: but she may not
hope to triumph over all sin and error, till she be in heaven. Now if it be
comfort enough, to be secured from all capital dangers, which can arise only
from error in fundamental points, Why were not our first Reformers content
with enough, but would needs dismember the Church, out of a pernicious
greediness of more than enough? Answ. I have already showed sufficiently, how
capital danger may arise from errors, though not fundamental. I add now, that
what may be enough for men in ignorance, may be to knowing men not enough:
according to that of the Gospel, to whom much is given, of him much shall be
required: That the same error may be not capital to those who want means of
finding the truth, and capital to others who have means, and neglect to use
them: That to continue in the profession of error discovered to be so, may be
damnable, though the error be not so. These I presume are reasons enough, and
enough why the first Reformers might think, and justly, that not enough for
themselves, which yet to some of their Predecessors they hope might be enough.
This, very Argument was objected to S. Cyprian* Ep. 63. In these words. Siquis
de antecessoribus nostris, vel ignoranter vel simpliciter non hoc observavit,
and tenuit quod nos Dominus sacere Exemplo and Magisterio suo docuit, potest
simplicitati ejus, de indulgentia Domini, venia concedi: no^is vero non potest
ignosci, qui nunc a Domino admoniti and instructi sumus.
S. Cyprian upon another occasion, and also by the ^ilfridus, to Abb^t Colman
alleging that he follows the example of his Predecessors famous for
holiness, and famous for mitacles, in these words, De Patre vestro Columba and
sequacibus ejus, quorum sanctitatem vos imitari and regu^am ac praecepta
coelestibus signis confirmata sequi perhibetis, possum respondere; Quia multis
in judicio dicentibus Domino quod in nomine ejus prophetaverint and dae monia
ejecerint, and virtutes multas seceriat, responsurus sit Dominus, quia nunquam
eos noverit. Sed absit ut de patribus vestris hoc dicam, quia justius multo est
de incognitis bonum credere quam malum. U^de and illos Dei famulos and Deo
dilectos esse non nego, qui simplicitate rustica, sed intention pia Deum
dilexerum: Neque illis multum obesse Paschae talem reor observatiam, quam diu
nullus advenerat qui eis instituti persectioris decreta quae sequerentur
ostenderet. Quos utique credo, siquis tunc ad eos Catholicus circulator
adveniret, sic ejus monita suisse secuturos, quomodo ea quae noverant ac
didicerunt Dei mandata, probantur suisse secuti. Tu autem and socii tui si
audita decreta sedis Apostolicae, imo universalis Ecclesiae, and haec literis
sacris confirmata contemnitis, absque ulla dubietate peccatis.
British Quartodecimans, to the maintainers of the Doctrine of your Church; and
Beda: lib 3. Eccl. Hist. c. 25.
by both this very answer was returned; and therefore I cannot but hope that
for their sakes you will approve it.

67. But if (as the Doctor says) no Church may hope to triumph over all error
till she be in Heaven, then we must either grant, that errors not fundamental
cannot yield sufficient cause to forsake the Church, or you must affirm, that
all Communities may and ought to be forsaken. Answ. The Doctor does not say,
that no Church may hope to be free from all error, either pernicious, or any
way noxious: But that no Church may hope to be secure from all error simply,
for this were indeed truly to triumph over all. But then we say not, that the
Communion of any Church is to be forsaken for errors unfundamental, unless it
exact withal either a dissimulation of them being noxious; or a Profession of
them against the dictate of Conscience, if they be mere errors. This, if the
Church does (as certainly yours does,) then her Communion is to be forsaken,
rather than the sin of Hypocrisy to be committed. Whereas to forsake the
Churches of Protestants for such errors, there is no necessity, because they
err to themselves, and do not under pain of Excommunication exact the
profession of their errors.

68. But the Church may not be left by reason of sin, therefore neither by
reason of errors not fundamental: in as much as both sin and error are
impossible to be avoided till she be in heaven. Ans. The reason of the
consequence does not appear to me: But I answer to the Antecedent: Neither for
sin nor errors, ought a Church to be forsaken, if she does not impose and
enjoin them: but if she do, (as the Roman does) then we must forsake men rather
than God; leave the Churches communion rather than commit sin, or profess known
errors to be divine truths. For the Prophet Ezekiel has assured us, that to
say, The Lord has said so, when the Lord has not said so, is a great sin, and
a high presumption, be the matter never so small.

69. Ad. 23. But neither the quality nor the number of your Churches errors,
could warrant our forsaking of it. Not the quality, because we suppose them not
fundamental. Not the number, because the foundation is strong enough to support
them. Answ. Here again you vainly suppose, that we conceive your errors in
themselves not damnable: Though, we hope, they are not absolutely unpardonable:
but to say they are pardonable, is indeed to suppose them damnable. Secondly,
though the errors of your Church did not warrant our departure, yet your
Tyrannous Imposition of them, would be our sufficient justification. For this
lays necessity on us, either to forsake your company, or to profess what we
know to be false.

70. Our Blessed Savior has declared his will, that we forgive a private
offender seventy seven times, that is, without limitation of quantity of time,
or quality of trespasses; and then, how dare we allege his command, that we
must not pardon his Church for errors acknowledged to be not fundamental? Ans.
He that commands us to pardon our brother sinning against us so often, will not
allow us for his sake to sin with him, so much as once. He will have us do any
thing but sin, rather than offend any man. But his will is also, that we offend
all the World, rather than sin in the least matter. And therefore though his
will were, and it were in our power (which yet is false) to pardon the errors
of an erring Church; yet certainly it is not his will, that we should err with
the Church, or if we do not, that we should against conscience profess the
errors of it.

71. Ad. 24. But Schismatiques from the Church of England, or any other Church,
with this very Answer, that they forsake not the Church, but the errors of it,
may cast off from themselves the imputation of Schism. Ans. True, they may make
the same Answer, and the same defense as we do, as a murderer can cry Not
guilty, as well as an innocent person, but not so truly, nor so justly. The
question is, not what may be pretended, but what can be proved by
Schismatiques. They may object errors to other Churches, as well as we do to
yours; but that they prove their accusation so strongly as we can, that appears
not. To the Priests and Elders of the Jews, imposing that sacred silence
mentioned in the Acts of the Apostles, Saint Peter, and St. John answered, They
must obey God rather than men. The three Children to the King of Babylon, gave
in effect the same answer. Give me now any factious Hypocrite, who makes
Religion the pretense and cloak of his Rebellion, and, Who sees not that such a
one may answer for himself, in those very formal words, which the holy Apostles
and Martyrs made use of? And yet, I presume, no Christian will deny, but this
Answer was good, in the mouth of the Apostles and Martyrs, though it were
obnoxious to be abused, by Traitors, and Rebels. Certainly therefore it is no
good consequence to say, Schismatiques may make use of this Answer, therefore
all that do make use of it are Schismatiques. But moreover, it is to be
observed, that the chief part of our defense, that you deny your communion to
all that deny or doubt of any part of your doctrine, cannot with any color be
employed against Protestants: who grant their Communion to all who hold with
them, not all things, but things necessary, that is, such as are in Scripture
plainly delivered.

72. But the forsaking the Roman Church opens a way to innumerable Sects and
Schisms, and therefore it must not be forsaken. Ans. We must not do evil to
avoid evil: neither are all courses presently lawful, by which inconveniences
may be avoided. If all men would submit themselves to the chief Mufty of the
Turks, it is apparent there-would be no divisions; yet unity is not to be
purchased at so dear a rate. It were a thing much to be desired, that there
were no divisions: yet difference of opinions touching points controverted, is
rather to be chosen, than unanimous concord in damned errors: As it is better
for men to go to heaven by diverse ways, or rather by diverse paths of the same
way, than in the same path to go on peaceably to hell. Amica Pax, magis amica
Veritas!

73. But there can be no just cause to forsake the Church, so the Doctor
grants: who notwithstanding teaches that the Church may err in points not
fandamental; therefore neither is the Roman Church to be forsaken for such
errors. Ans. There can be no just cause to forsake the Church absolutely and
simply in all things, that is, to cease being a member of the Church: This I
grant, if it will do you any service. But that there can be no just cause to
forsake the Church in some things, or (to speak more properly) to forsake some
opinions and practices, which some true Church retains and defends; this I
deny, and you mistake the Doctor, if you think he affirms it.

74. Ad. 26, 27. What prodigious doctrins (say you) are these? Those
Protestants who believe that your Church erred in points necessary to
salvation, and for that cause left her, cannot be excused from damnable Schism:
But others, etc. Prodigious doctrins indeed! But who, I pray, are they that
teach them? Where does D. Potter accuse those Protestants of damnable Schism,
who left your Church because they hold it erroneous in necessary points? What
Protestant is there that holds not that you taught things contrary to the plain
precepts of Christ; both Ceremonial, in mutilating the Communion; and Moral, in
points of Superstition and Idolatry, and most bloody tyranny? which is without
question to err in necessary matters. Neither does D. Potter accuse any man of
Schism for holding so: if he should, he should call himself a Schismatique.
Only he says, such (if there be any such) as affirm, that ignorant souls among
you, who had no means to know the truth, cannot possibly be saved, that their
wisdom and charity cannot be justified. Now you your self have plainly
affirmed, That ignorant Protestants dying with contrition may be saved; and yet
would be unwilling to be thought to say, that Protestants err in no points
necessary to salvation. For that may be in it self, and in ordinary course,
where there are means of knowledge, necessary, which to a man invincibly
ignorant, will prove not necessary. Again, where does D. Potter suppose (as you
make him) that there were other Protestants, who believed that your Church had
no errors? Or, where does he say, they did well to forsake her, upon this
ridiculous reason, because they judged that she retained all means necessary to
salvation? Do you think us so stupid, as that we cannot distinguish between
that which D. Potter says, and that which you make him say? He vindicates
Protestants from Schism two ways: The one is, because they had just and great
and necessary cause to separate, which Schismatiques never have; because they
that have it, are no Schismatiques: For schism is always a causeless
separation. The other is, because they did not join with their separation, an
uncharitable damning of all those from whom they did divide themselves, as the
manner of Schismatiques is. Now that which he intends for a circumstance of our
separation, you make him, make the cause of it, and the motive to it. And
whereas he says, Though we separate from you in some things, yet we acknowledge
your Church a member of the body of Christ, and therefore are not
Schismatiques: You make him say most absurdly, We did well to forsake you,
because we judged you a member of the body of Christ. Just as if a brother
should leave his brothers company in some ill courses, and should say to him,
Herein I forsake you, yet I leave you not absolutely, for I acknowledge you
still to be my brother, and shall use you as a brother: And you perverting his
speech should pretend that he had said, I leave your company in these il
courses, and I do well to do so, because you are my brother: so making that the
cause of leaving him, which indeed is the cause that he left him no farther.

75. But you say, The very reason for which he acquitteth himself from Schism,
is, because he holds that the Church which they forsook, is not cut off from
the Body of Christ. Ans. This is true: But can you not perceive a difference
between justifying his separation from Schism by this reason, and making this
the reason of his separation? If a man denying obedience in some unlawful
matter to his lawful Sovereign, should say to him, Herein I disobey you, but
yet I am no Rebel, because I acknowledge you my Sovereign Lord, and am ready to
obey you in all things lawful; should not he be an egregious Sycophant, that
should accuse him, as if he had said, I do well to disobey you, because I
acknowledge you my lawful Sovereign? Certainly, he that joins this
acknowledgment with his necessitated obedience, does well; but he that makes
this consideration the reason of disobedience does ill. Urge therefore this (as
you call it) most solemn foppery as far as you please: For every understanding
Reader will easily perceive that this is no foppery of D. Potters, but a
calumny of yours; from which he is as far, as he is from holding yours to be
the true Church: whereas it is a sign of a great deal of Charity in him, that
he allows you to be a Part of it.

76. And whereas you pretend to find such unspeakable comfort herein, that we
cannot clear our selves from Schism, otherwise than by acknowledging that they
do not, nor cannot, cut off your Church from the hope of salvation: I beseech
you to take care that this false comfort cost you not too dear. For why this
good opinion of God Almighty, that he will not damn men for error, who were
without their own fault ignorant of the truth, should be any consolation to
them, who, having the key of knowledge, will neither use it themselves, nor
permit others to use it; who have eyes to see and will not see, who have ears
to hear and will not hear! this, I assure you, passes my capacity to
apprehend. Neither is this to make our salvation depend on yours, but only ours
and yours not desperately inconsistent, nor to say, we must be damned, unless
you may be saved; but that we assure our selves, if our lives be answerable, we
shall be saved by our knowledge. And that we hope, (and I tell you again, Spes
est rei incertae nomen) that some of you may possibly be saved by occasion of
their unaffected Ignorance.

77. For our brethren, whom you say, we condemn of heresy for denying the
Churches perpetuity, we know none that do so: unless you conceive a corrupted
Church to be none at all; and, if you do, then for ought I know, in your
account we must be all Heretics; for all of us acknowledge that the Church
might be corrupted even with errors in themselves damnable, and not only
might, but has been.

78. But Schism consists in being divided from that true Church, with which a
man agrees in all points of faith: Now we must profess, you say, that we agree
with the Church of Rome in all Fundamental Articles; Therefore we are
Schismatiques. Ans. Either in your Major, by all points of faith, you mean all
fundamental points only, or all simply and absolutely. If the former, I deny
your Major: for I may without all schism divide from that Church which errs in
any point of faith Fundamental, or otherwise, if she require the profession of
this Error among the conditions of her Communion. Now this is our case. If the
later, I deny the syllogism, as having manifestly four terms, and being
cosen-german to this,

He that obeys God in all things is innocent;
Titius obeys God in some things;
Therefore he is innocent.
79. But they who judge a reconciliation with the Church of Rome to be
damnable, they that say, there might be just and necessary cause to depart from
it, and that they of that Church which have understanding and means to discover
their Error, and neglect to use them, are not to be slattered with hope of
salvation; they do cut off that Church from the body of Christ, and the hope of
salvation, and so are Schismatiques: but D. Potter does the former; therefore
he is a schismatique. Ans. No, he does not: not cut off that whole Church from
the hope of salvation, not those members of it who were invincibly, or
excusably ignorant of the truth; but those only who having understanding and
means to discover their error, neglect to use them. Now these are not the
whole Church; and therefore he that, supposing their impenitence, cuts these
off from hope of salvation, cannot be justly said to cut off that whole Church
from the Body of Christ, and the hope of salvation.

80. Ad. 28, 29. Whereas D. Potter says, There is a great difference between a
Schism from them, and a Reformation of our selves: this, you say, is a quaint
subtilty, by which all Schism and Sin may be as well excused. It seems then in
your judgment, that thieves and adulterers, and murderers, and traitors may
say with as much probability as Protestants, that they did no hurt to others,
but only reform themselves. But then methinks it is very strange, that all
Protestants should agree with one consent in this defense of themselves from
the imputation of Schism: and that to this day, never any Thief or Murderer
should have been heard of, to make use of this Apology! And then for
Schismatiques I would know, Whether Victor Bishop of Rome, who excommunicated
the Churches of Asia, for not consorming to his Church in keeping Easter;
whether Novatian that divided from Cornelius, upon pretense that himself was
elected Bishop of Rome, when indeed he was not; whether Felicissimus and his
Crew, that went out of the Church of Carthage, and set up Altar against Altar,
because having fallen in persecution, they might not be restored to the peace
of the Church presently, upon the intercession of the Confessors; whether the
Donatists, who divided from, and damned all the World, because all the World
would not excommunicate them who were accused only, and not convicted, to have
been Traditors of the sacred Books; whether they which for the slips and
infirmities of others, which they might and ought to tolerate, or upon some
difference in matters of Order and Ceremony, or for some Error in Doctrine,
neither pernicious nor hurtful to Faith or Piety, sepatate themselves from
others, or others from themselves; or lastly, whether they that put themselves
out of the Churches unity and obedience, because their opinions are not
approved there, but reprehended and confuted, or because being of impious
conversation, they are impatient of their Churches censure: I would know, I
say, whether all, or any of these, may with any face, or without extreme
impudency, put in this plea of Protestants, and pretend with as much likelihood
as they, that they did not separate from others, but only reform themselves?
But suppose they were so impudent as to say so in their own defense falsely,
does it follow by any good Logic, that therefore this Apology is not to be
employed by Protestants, who may say so truly? We make say they) no Schism from
you, but only a reformation of our selves: This, you reply, is no good
justification, because it may be pretended by any Schismatique. Very true, any
Schismatique that can speak may say the same words, (as any Rebel that makes
Conscience the cloak of his impious disobedience, may say with Saint Peter, and
Saint John, We must obey God rather than men:) But then the question is,
whether any Schismatique may say so truly? And to this question you say just
nothing: but conclude, because this defense may be abused by some, it must be
used by none. As if you should have said, S. Peter, and S. John did ill to make
such an answer as they made, because impious Hypocrites might make use of the
same to palliate their Disobedience and Rebellion against the lawful commands
of lawful Authority.

81. But seeing their pretended Reformation consisted in forsaking the Churches
corruptions, their Reformation of themselves, and their division from you,
falls out to be one and the same thing. Just as if two men having been a long
while companions in drunkenness, one of them should turn sober; this
Reformation of himself, and desertion of his companion, in this ill custom,
would be one and the same thing, and yet there is no necessity that he should
leave his love to him at all, or his society in other things. So Protestants
forsaking their own former corruptions, which were common to them with you,
could not choose but withal forsake you in the practice of these corruptions:
yet this they might, and would have done without breach of Charity toward you;
and without a renunciation of your company in any act of piety and devotion,
confessedly lawful. And therefore though both these were by accident joined
together, yet this hinders not but that the end they aimed at, was not a
separation from you, but a reformation of themselves.

82. Neither does their disagreement in the particulars of the Reformation,
(which yet when you measure it without partiality, you will find to be far
short of infinite) nor their symbolizing in the general of forsaking your
corruptions, prove any thing to the contrary, or any way advantage your design
or make for your purpose. For it is not any sign at all, much less an evident
sign, that they had no settled design, but only to forsake the Church of Rome:
for nothing but malice can deny, that their intent at least was, to reduce
Religion to that original purity from which it was fallen. The declination from
which, some conceiving to have begun (though secretly) in the Apostles times,
(the mystery of iniquity being then in work;) and after their departure to have
showed it self more openly: Others again believing, that the Church continued
pure for some Ages after the Apostles, and then declined: And consequently some
aiming at an exact conformity with the Apostolic times: Others thinking they
should do God and Men good service, could they reduce the Church to the
condition of the fourth and fifth Ages: Some taking their direction in this
work of Reformation, only from Scripture; others, from the writings of Fathers,
and the Decrees of Councels of the first five Ages: certainly, it is no great
marvail, that there was, as you say, disagreement between them, in the
particulars of their Reformation; nay morally speaking, it was impossible it
should be otherwise. Yet let me tell you, the difference between them
(especially in comparison of your Church and Religion,) is not the difference
between good and bad, but between good and better: And they did best that
followed Scripture interpreted by Catholic written-Tradition: which Rule the
reformers of the Church of England, proposed to themselves to follow.

83. Ad 30, 31, 32. To this effect D. Potter, p. 81, 82. of his Book, speaks
thus. If a Monastery should reformat it self, and should reduce into practice
ancient good discipline, when others would not: In this case could it be
charged with Schism from others, or with Apostasy from its rule and order? So
in a Society of men universally infected with some disease, they that should
free themselves from it, could they be therefore said to separate from the
Society? He presumes they could not, and from hence concludes, that neither can
the Reformed Churches be truly accused for making a Schism, (that is,
separating from the Church, and making themselves no members of it) if all they
did was (as indeed it was) to reform themselves. Which Cases, I believe, any
understanding man will plainly see to have in them an exact parity of Reason,
and that therefore the Argument drawn from them is pressing and unanswerable.
And it may well be suspected, that you were partly of this mind, otherwise you
would not have so presumed upon the simplicity of your Reader, as pretending to
answer it, to put another of your own making in place of it, and then to answer
that.

84. This you do 31, 32. of this Chapter, in these words, I was very glad to
find you in a Monastery, etc. Where I beseech the Reader to observe these
things to detect the cunning of your tergiversation: First, That you have no
reason to say, That you found D. Potter in a Monastery: and as little, That you
find him inventing ways how to forsake his vocation, and to maintain the
lawfulness of Schism from the Church, and Apostasy from a Religious Order.
Certainly the innocent case put by the Doctor, of a Monastery reforming it
self, has not deserved such grievous accusations. Unless Reformation with you
be all one with Apostasy: and to forsake sin and disorder, be to forsake ones
Vocation. And surely, if it be so, your vocations are not very lawlful, and
your Religious Orders not very religious. Secondly, that you quite pervert and
change D. Potters cases, and instead of the case, of a whole Monastery
reforming it self, when other Monasteries of their Order would not; and of some
men freeing themselves from the common disease of their Society, when others
would not: you substitute two others, which you think you can better deal with;
of some particular Monks, upon pretense of the neglect of lesser monastical
observances going out of their Monastery, which Monastery yet did confessedly
observe their substantial Vows, and all Principal Statutes: And of a diseased
Reason, quitting the company of those that were infected with the same disease:
though in their company, there was no danger from his disease, it being
impossible that should be mortal: and out of it, no hope of escaping others
like that for which he forsook the first infected Company. I appeal now to any
indifferent judge, whether these cases be the same or near the same with D.
Potters? Whether this be fair and ingenuous dealing, in stead of his two
Instances, which plainly showed it possible in other Societies, and
consequently in that of the Church, to leave the faults of a Society, and not
leave being of it, to foist in two others clean cross to the Doctors purpose,
of men under color of faults, abandoning the Society wherein they lived? I
know not what others may think of this dealing, but, to me, this declining D.
Potter's cases and conveying others into their place, is a great assurance,
that as they were put by him, you could say nothing to them,

85. But that no suspicion of tergiversation may be fastened upon me, I am
content to deal with you a little, at your own weapons. Put the case then,
though not just as you would have it, yet with as much favor to you, as in
reason you can expect, That a Monastery did observe her substantial vows, and
all Principal Statutes; but yet did generally practice, and also enjoin the
violation of some lesser, yet obliging observances, and had done so time out of
mind: And that some inferior Monks more conscientious than the rest,
discovering this abuse, should first with all earnestness solicit their
Superiors for a general and orderly reformation of these, though small and
venial corruptions, yet corruptions: But finding they hoped and labored in
vain to effect this, should reform these faults in themselves, and refuse to
join in the practice of them, with the rest of their Confraternity, and
persisting resolutely in such a refusal, should by their Superiors be cast out
of their Monastery, and being not to be readmitted without a promise of
remitting from their stiffeness in these things, and of condescending to others
in the practice of these small faults, should choose rather to continue exiles,
than to re-enter upon such conditions: I would know whether you would condemn
such men of Apostasy from the Order? Without doubt, if you should, you would
find the stream of your Casuists against you; and, besides, involve S. Paul in
the same condemnation, who plainly tells us, that we may not do the least evil,
that we may do the greatest good. Put case again, you should be part of a
Society universally infected with some disease, and discovering a certain
remedy for this disease, should persuade the whole company to make use of it,
but find the greatest part of them so far in love with their disease, that
they were resolved to keep it; nay so fond of it, that they should make a
decree, that whosoever would leave it, should leave their company. Suppose now,
that your self and some few others, should notwithstanding their injunction to
the contrary, free your selves from this disease, and thereupon they should
absolutely forsake and reject you: I would know in this case who deserves to be
condemned, whether you of uncharitable desertion of your company, or they of a
tyrannical peevishness? And if in these cases you will (as I verily believe you
will,) acquit the inferiors and condemn the superiors, absolve the minor part
and condemn the major, then can you with no reason condemn Protestants, for
choosing rather to be ejected from the communion of the Roman Church, than with
her to persist (as of necessity they were to do, if they would continue in her
communion) in the profession of errors, though not destructive of salvation*
yet hindering edification; and in the Practice, or at least approbation of many
(suppose not mortal but venial) corruptions.

86. Thirdly, the Reader may be pleased to be advertised that you censure too
partially the corrupt estate of your Church in comparing it to a Monastery,
which did confessedly observe their substantial vows, and all principal
Statutes of their Order, and moreover was secured by an infallible assistance,
for the avoiding of all substantial corruptions: for of your Church we confess
no such matter, but say plainly, That she not only might fall into substantial
corruptions, but did so; that she did not only generally violate, but of all
the members of her communion, either in act or approbation, require and exact
the violation of many substantial laws of Christ, both Ceremonial and Moral,
which though we hope it was pardonable in them, who had not means to know their
error, yet, of its own nature, and to them who did or might have known their
error, was certainly damnable. And that it was not the tything of Mint, and
Annise, and Cummin, the neglect whereof we impute unto you, but the neglect of
judgment, justice, and the weightier matters of the Law.

87. Fourthly, I am to represent unto you, that you use Protestants very
strangely, in comparing them to a company, who all were known to be led to
their pretended Reformation, not with an intent of Reformation, but with some
other sinister Intention; which is impossible to be known of you, and therefore
to judge so, is against Christian charity, and common equity: and to such a
Company as acknowledge that themselves, as soon as they were gone out from the
Monastery that refused to reform, must not hope to be free from those or the
like Errors, and Corruptions, for which they left their Brethren: seeing this
very hope and nothing else, moved them to leave your Communion: and this speech
of yours, so far as it concerns the same errors, plainly destroys it self.
For how can they possibly fall into the same errors by forsaking your
Communion, which that they may forsake they do forsake your Communion? And then
for other errors of the like nature and quality, or more enormious than yours,
though they deny it not possible, but by their negligence and wickedness they
may fall into them, yet they are so far from acknowledging that they have no
hope to avoid this mischief, that they proclaim to all the world, that it is
most prone and easy to do so, to all those that fear God and love the Truth;
and hardly possible for them to do otherwise, without supine negligence and
extreme impiety.

88. To fit the Reddition of your perverted Simile, to the Proposition of it,
you tell us that we teach, that for all fundamental points, the Church is
secured from error. I answer, Fundamental errors may signify, either such as
are repugnant to Gods command, and so in their own nature damnable, though to
those which out of invincible ignorance practice them, not unpardonable: or
such as are not only meritoriously, but remedilessly pernicious and destructive
of Salvation. We hope that yours, and the Greek, and other Churches before the
Reformation, had not so far apostated from Christ, as to be guilty of errors of
the later sort. We say, that not only the Catholic Church, but every
particular true Church, so long as it continues a Church, is secured from
Fundamental errors of this kind, but secured not absolutely by any promise of
divine assistance, which being not ordinarily irresistible, but tempered to the
nature of the Receivers, may be neglected, and therefore withdrawn; but by the
Repugnance of any error in this sense fundamental to the essence and nature of
a Church. So that, to speak properly, not any set known company of men is
secured, that, though they neglect the means of avoiding error, yet certainly,
they shall not err in fundamentals, which were necessary for the constitution
of an infallible guide of faith: But rather they which know what is meant by a
Church, are secured or rather certain that a Church remaining a Church cannot
fall into fundamental errors; because, when it does so, it is no longer a
Church. As they are certain, that men cannot become unreasonable creatures,
because when they do so, they are no longer men. But for fundamental errors of
the former sort, which yet, I hope, will warrant our departure from any
Communion infected with them and requiring the profession of them; from such
fundamental errors, we do not teach so much as that the Church Catholic, much
less, (which only were for your purpose,) that your Church has any protection
or security, but know for a certain, that many errors of this nature, had
prevailed against you; and that a vain presumption of an absolute divine
assistance (which yet is promised but upon conditions,) made both your present
errors incurable and exposed you to the imminent danger of more and greater.
This therefore is either to abuse what we say, or to impose falsely upon us
what we say not. And to this you presently add another manifest falsehood, viz.
that we say, That no particular person, or Church, has any promise of
assistance in points fundamental. Whereas, cross to this in diameter, there is
no Protestant but holds, and must hold, that there is no particular Church; no,
nor person; but has promise of divine assistance to lead them into all
necessary truth, if they seek it as they should, by the means which God has
appointed. And should we say otherwise, we should contrary plain Scripture,
which assures us plainly, That every one that seeks finds, and every one
that as keth receives: and that if we being evil, can give good gifts to our
children, much more shall our heavenly Father, give his Spirit to them that ask
it: and that, if any man want wisdom (especially spiritual wisdom) he is to ask
of God, who gives to all men, and upbraideth not.

89. You obtrude upon us thirdly, That when Luther began, he being but one,
opposed himself to all, as well Subjects as Superiors. Ans. If he did so in the
cause of God, it was heroically done of him. This had been without
hyperbolizing, Mundus contra Athanasium, and Athanasius contra Mundum: neither
is it impossible, that the whole world should so far lie in wickedness, (as S.
John speaks) that it may be lawful and noble for one man to oppose the world.
But yet were we put to our oaths, we should surely not testify any such thing
for you; for how can we say properly and without streining, that he opposed
himself to All, unless we could say also, that All opposed themselves to him?
And how can we say so, seeing the world can witness, that so many thousands,
nay millions, followed his standard as soon as it was advanced?

90. But, none that lived immediately before him thought or spoke as he did.
This is first nothing to the purpose. The Church was then corrupted, and sure
it was no dishonor to him to begin the Reformation. In the Christian warfare,
every man ought to strive to be foremost. Secondly, it is more than you can
justify. For though no man before him lifted up his voice like a trumpet, as
Luther did; yet who can assure us, but that many before him, both thought, and
spoke in the lower voice of petitions and remonstrances, in many points, as he
did.

91. Fourthly and lastly, whereas you say, that many chief learned
Protetestants, are forced to confess the Antiquity of your Doctrine and
Practice: I answer: Of many Doctrins and Practices of yours, this is not true,
nor pretended to be true by those that have dealt in this Argument. Search your
Storehouse, M. Brerely, who has travailed as far in this Northwest discovery,
as it was possible for humane industry, and when you have done so, I pray
inform me, what confessions of Protestants have you, for the Antiquity of the
Doctrine of the Communion in one kind: the lawfulness and expedience of the
Latin-Service: For the present use of Indulgences: For the Popes power in
Temporalities over Princes: For the picturing of the Trinity: For the
lawfulness of the worship of Pictures: For your Beads and Rosary, and Ladies
Psalter; and in a word, for your whole worship of the Blessed Virgin: For your
Oblations by way of Consumption, and therefore in the quality of Sacrifices to
the Virgin Mary, and other Saints: For your saying of Pater-nosters, and Creeds
to the honor of Saints, and of Ave-Maries to the honor of other Saints besides
the Blessed Virgin: For the infallibility of the Bishop or Church of Rome: For
your prohibiting the Scripture to be read publicly in the Church, in such
languages as all may understand: For your Doctrine of the blessed Virgin's
immunity from actual sin; and for your doctrine and worship of her immaculate
Conception: For the necessity of Auricular Confession: For the necessity of the
Priests Intention to obtain benefit by any of your Sacraments: And lastly, (not
to trouble my self with finding out more) for this very Doctrine of
Licentiousness, That though a man live and die without the Practice of
Christian virtues, and with the habits of many damnable sins unmortified; yet
if in the last moment of life, he have any sorrow for his sins, and join
confession with it, certainly he shall be saved? Secondly, they that confess
some of your doctrins to have been the Doctrine of the Fathers, may be mistaken,
being abused by many words and phrases of the Fathers, which have the Roman
sound, when they are far from the sense. Some of them I am sure are so, I will
name Goulartius, who in his Commentaries on S. Cyprian's 35. Ep. grants that
the sentence [ Heresies have sprung, etc.] quoted by you. 36. of this Chapter,
was meant of Cornelius: whereas it will be very plain to any attentive Reader,
that S. Cyprian speaks there of himself. Thirdly, though some Protestants
confess some of your Doctrine to be Ancient, yet this is nothing, so long as it
is evident, even by the confession of all sides, that many errors, I instance
in that of the Millenaries, and the communicating of Insants, were more
ancient. Not any Antiquity therefore, unless it be absolute and primitive, is a
certain sign of true Doctrine. For if the Church were obnoxious to corruption
(as we pretend it was), who can possibly warrant us, that, part of this
corruption might not get in and prevail in the 5. or 4. or 3. or 2. age?
Especially seeing the Apostles assure us, that the mystery of iniquity was
working, though more secretly even in their times. If any man ask, How could it
become universal in so short a time? Let him tell me how the Error of the
Millenaries, and the communicating of Infants, became so soon universal; and
then he shall acknowledge, what was done in some, was possible in others.
Lastly, to cry quittance with you: as there are Protestants who confess the
antiquity, but always post-nate to Apostolic, of some points of your Doctrine:
so there want not Papists who acknowledge as freely, the Novelty of many of
them, and the Antiquity of ours. A collection of whose testimony, we have
(without thanks to you) in your Indices expurgatorii: The divine Providence,
blessedly abusing for the readier manifestation of the Truth this engine
intended by you for the subversion and suppression of it. Here is no place to
stand upon particulars: only one general ingenuous confession of that great
Erasmus, may not be passed over in silence. Non desunt magni Theologi, qui
nonverentur affirmare, Erasm. Ep. lib. 15. Ep ad God^schalcum Ros.
Nihil esse in Luthero, quin per probatos authors defendi possit: There want
not great Divines, which stick not to affirm, that there is nothing in Luther,
which may not be defended by good and allowed authors. Whereas therefore you
close up this Simile with consider these points, and see whether your
Similitude do not condemn your Progenitors of Schism from God's visible Church:
I assure you, I have well considered them, and do plainly see that this is not
D. Potter's similitude, but your own; and besides, that it is wholly made up of
mistakes and falsehoods, and is at no hand, a sufficient proof of this great
Accusation.

92. Let us come now to the second similitude of your making: in the entrance
whereunto you tell us, that from the Monastery D. Potter is fled to an Hospital
of persons Universally infected with some disease, where he finds to be true,
what you supposed, that, after his departure from his Brethren, he might fall
into greater inconveniences, and more infectious diseases than those for which
he left them. Thus you. But, to deal truly with you, I find nothing of all
this, nor how it is consequent from any thing said by you, or done by D.
Potter. But this I find, that you have composed this your similitude as you did
the former, of a heap of vain Suspicions, pretended to be grounded on our
confessions. As first, that your diseases which we forsook, neither were nor
could be mortal: whereas we assure our selves and are ready to justify, that
they are and were mortal in themselves, and would have been so to us, if, when
light came to us, we had loved darkness more than light. And D. Potter, though
he hope your Church wanted no necessary vital part, that is, that some in your
Church by ignorance might be saved; yet he nothing doubts but that it is full
of ulcers without, and diseases within, and is far from so extenuating your
errors as to make them only like the superfluous fingers of the giant of Gath.
Secondly, that we had no hope to avoid other diseases like those for which we
forsook your company, nor to be secure out of it from damnable errors: whereas
the hope hereof was the only motive of our departure; and we assure our selves
that the means to be secured from damnable error, is not to be secure as you
are, but carefully to use those means of avoiding it, to which God has
promised, and will never fail to give a blessing. Thirdly, that those
innumerable mischiefs which followed upon the departure of Protestants, were
caused by it as by a proper cause: whereas their doctrine was no otherwise the
occasion of them, than the Gospel of Christ of the division of the world. The
only fountain of all these mischiefs, being indeed no other than your pouring
out a flood of persecutions against Protestants, only because they would not
sin and be damned with you for company. Unless we may add the impatience of
some Protestants, who not enduring to be torn in p^eces like sheep by a company
of wolves without resistance, choose rather to die like Soldiers than Martyrs.

93. But you proceed; and falling into a fit of admiration, cry out and say
thus, To what pass has Heresy brought men, who blush not to compare the
beloved Spouse of the Lord, the only Dove, etc. to a Monastery that must be
forsaken; to the giant in Gath with superfluous fingers! But this Spouse of
Christ, this only Dove, this purchase of our Saviors blood, this Catholic
Church, which you thus almost deifie, what is it but a Society of men, whereof
every particular, and by consequence, the whole company is or may be guilty of
many sins daily committed against knowledge and conscience? Now I would fain
understand why one error in faith, especially if not fundamental, should not
consist with the holiness of this Spouse, this Dove, this Church, as well as
many and great sins committed against knowledge and conscience? If this be not
to strain at gnats and swollow camels, I would fain understand what it is! And
here, by the way, I desire you to consider whether as it were with one stroke
of a sponge you do not wipe out all that you have said, to prove Protestants
Schismatiques for separating from your Church, though supposed to be in some
errors not fundamental! For if any such error may make her deserve to be
compared to a Monastery so disordered that it must be forsaken; then if you
suppose (as here you do) your Church in such errors, your Church is so
disordered that it must, and therefore without question may, be forsaken, I
mean in those her disorders and corruptions, and no farther.

94. And yet you have not done with those similitudes, But must observe (you
say) one thing, and that is, That as these Reformers of the Monastery, and
others who left the diseased company, could not deny but that they left the
said communities: So Luther and the rest cannot pretend, not to have left the
visible Church. And that D. Potter speaks very strangely when he says, In a
society of men universally infected with some disease, they that should free
themselves from the common disease, could not be therefore said to separate
from the society. For if they do not separate themselves from the society of
the infected persons, how do they free themselves frrom the common disease? To
which I answer: That indeed, if you speak of the Reformers of a Monastery and
of the Desertors of the diseased company, as you put the cases, that is, of
those which left these communities, then is it as true as Gospel, that they
cannot deny but that they left the said communities. But it appears not to me,
how it will ensue hereupon, That Luther and the rest cannot pretend not to have
left the visible Church. For, to my apprehension, this argument is very weak,

They which left some communities cannot truly deny but that they left them;
therefore Luther and his followers cannot deny but that they left the visible
Church.

Where, me thinks, you prove little, but take for granted that which is one of
the greatest Questions amongst us, that is, That the Company which Luther left,
was the whole Visible Church: whereas you know we say, It was but a part of it,
and that corrupted, and obstinate in her corruptions. Indeed, that Luther and
his followers left off the Practice of those Corruptions wherein the whole
Visible Church did communicate formerly, (which I meant when I acknowledged
above that they forsook the external Communion of the Visible Church,) or that
they left that part of the Visible Church in her corruptions which would not be
reformed: These things, if you desire, I shall be willing to grant; and that,
by a Synecdoche of the whole for the part, he might be said to forsake the
Visible Church, that is, a part of it, and the greater part. But that, properly
speaking, he forsook the whole Visible Church, I hope you will excuse me if I
grant not this, until you bring better proof of it, than your former
similitude. And my reason is this, because he and his Followers were a part of
this Church, and ceased not to be so by the Reformation. Now he and his
followers certainly forsook not themselves, Therefore not every part of the
Church, Therefore not the whole Church. But then if you speak of D. Potter's
cases, according as he put them, and answer not your own Arguments, when you
make show of answering his: methinks, it should not be so unreasonable as you
make it, for the persons he speaks of to deny that they left the Communities
whereof they were Members. For example, that the Monks of Saint Benets Order
make one Body, whereof their several Monasteries are several members, I presume
it will be easily granted. Suppose now, that all these Monasteries being quite
out of Order, some 20. or 30. of them should reform themselves, the rest
persisting still in their irregular courses: were it such a monstrous impudence
as you make it, for these Monasteries, which we suppose reformed, to deny that
they forsook their Order or the Community whereof they were parts? In my
Opinion it is no such matter. Let the world judge. Again, whereas the Doctor
says, that in a Society of men Universally infected with some disease, they
that should free them selves from the common disease, could not therefore be
said to separate from the Society: It is very strange to me that you should
say, he speaks very strangely. Truly, Sir, I am extremely deceived if his words
be not plain English, and plain sense, and contain such a manifest Truth as
cannot be denied with modesty, nor gone about to be proved without vanity. For
whatsoever is proved, must be proved by somet^ing more evident: Now what can be
more evident than this; That if some whole Family were taken with Agues, if the
Father of this Family should free himself from his, that he should not
therefore deservedly be thought to abandon and disert his Family? But (say you)
if they dot no separate themselves from the Society of the wicked persons, how
do they free themselves from the common disease? Do they at the same time
remain in the company and yet depart from those infected creatures? Me thinks,
a Writer of Controversies should not be ignorant how this may be done without
any such difficulty! But if you do not know, I Will tell you, There is no
necessity they should leave the company of these infected persons at all: much
less, that they should at once depart from it and remain with it, which I
confess were very difficult. But if they will free themselves from their
disease, let them stay were they are, and take physic. Or if you would be
better informed how this strange thing may be done, learn from your self, They
may free their own persons from the common disease, yet so that they remain
still in the company infected, eating and drinking with them, etc. Which are
your own words within four or five lines after this: plainly showing that your
mistaking D. Potter's meaning, and your wondering at his words as at some
strange monster's, was all this while affected, and that you are conscious to
your self of perverting his Argument that you may seem to say something, when
indeed you say nothing. Whereas therefore you add, We must then say that they
separate themselves from the persons, though it be by occasion of the disease;
I assure you, good Sir, you must not do so at any hand; for then you alter and
spoil D. Potter's case quite, and fight not with his reason but your own
shadow. For the Instanceof a man freeing himself from the disease of his
company, and not leaving his company, is very fit to prove, by the parity of
reason, that it is very possible, a man may leave the corruptions of a Church,
and not leave the Church, that is, not cease to be a member of it: But yours of
a man leaving his company by occasion of their disease, has no analogy at all
with this business.

95. But Luther and his followers did not continue in the company of those from
whose diseases they pretend to free themselves. Very true, neither was it said
they did so. There is no necessity that that which is compared to another thing
should agree with it in all things: it is sufficient, if it agree in that
wherein it is compared. A man freeing himself from the common disease of a
society, and yet continuing a part of it, is here compared to Luther and his
followers, freeing themselves from the corruptions of the visible Church, and
continuing a part of the Church. As for accompanying the other parts of it in
all things, it was neither necessary, nor without destroying our supposition of
their forsaking the corruptions of the Church, possible. Not necessary; for
they may be parts of the Church which do not join with other parts of it in all
observances. Nor possible, for had he accompanied them in all things, he had
not freed himself from the common corruptions.

96. But they endeavored to force the society whereof they were parts, to be
healed and reformed as they were; and, if it refused, they did, when they had
power, drive them away, even their superiors both Spiritual and Temporal, as
is notorious. The proofs hereof are wanting, and therefore I might deferr my
answer until they were produced; yet take this before hand: If they did so,
then herein, in my opinion, they did amiss; for I have learnt from the ancient
Fathers of the Church, that nothing is more against Religion than to force
Religion; and of S. Paul, The weapons of the Christian warfare are not carnal.
And great reason: For, humane violence may make men counterfeit, but cannot
make them believe, and is therefore fit for nothing but to breed form without,
and Atheism within. Besides, if this means of bringing men to embrace any
Religion were generally used (as if it may be justly used in any place by those
that have power, and think they have truth, certainly they cannot with reason
deny but that it may be used in every place, by those that have power as well
as they, and think they have truth as well as they,) what could follow but the
maintenance perhaps of truth, but perhaps only of the profession of it in one
place, and the oppression of it in a hundred? What will follow from it but the
preservation peradventure of unity, but peradventure only of uniformity, in
particular States and Churches; but the immortalizing the greater and more
lamentable divisions of Christendom and the world? And therefore what can
follow from it, but perhaps in the judgment of carnal policy, the temporal
benefit and tranquillity of temporal States and Kingdoms, but the infinite
prejudice, if not the desolation, of the Kingdom of Christ? And therefore it
well becomes them who have have their portions in this life, who serve no
higher State than that of England or Spain, or France, nor this neither any
further than they may serve themselves by it; who think of no other happiness
but the preservation of their own fortunes and tranquillity in this world; who
think of no other means to preserve States, but human power and Machivilian
policy, and believe no other Creed but this, Regi aut Civitati imperium habenti
nihil injustum, quod utile! Such men as these it may become to maintain by
worldly power and violence their State-instrument, Religion. For if all be vain
and false, (as in their judgment it is) the present whatsoever, is better than
any, because it is already settled: an alteration of it may draw with it change
of States, and the change of State the subversion of their fortune. But they
that are indeed servants and lovers of Christ, of Truth, of the Church, and of
Mankind, ought with all courage to oppose themselves against it, as a common
enemy of all these. They that know there is a King of Kings, and Lord of Lords,
by whose will and pleasure Kings and Kingdoms stand and fall, they know, that
to no King or State any thing can be profitable which is unjust; and that
nothing can be more evidently unjust, than to force weak men by the profession
of a Religion which they believe not, to lose their own eternal happiness, out
of a vain and needless fear, lest they may possibly disturb their temporal
quietness. There being no danger to any State from any man's opinion; unless it
be such an opinion by which disobedience to authority, or impiety, is taught or
licensed: which sort, I confess, may justly be punished as well as other
faults; or, unless this sanguinary doctrine be joined with it, That it is lawful
for him by human violence to enforce others to it. Therefore if Protestants did
offer violence to other men's consciences and compel them to embrace their
Reformation, I excuse them not: much less, if they did so to the sacred Persons
of Kings, and those that were in authority over them, who ought to be so
secured from violence, that even their unjust und tyrannous violence, though it
may be avoided (according to that of our Savior, When they persecute you in
one City fly into another,) yet may it not be resisted by opposing violence
against it. Protestants therefore that were guilty of this crime are not to be
excused, and blessed had they been had they chosen rather to be Martyrs than
Murderers, and to die for their religion rather than to fight for it. But of
all the men in the world you are most unfit to accuse them hereof, against whom
the souls of the Martyrs from under the Altar cry much louder than against all
their other Persecutors together: Who for these many ages together have daily
sacrificed Hecatombs of innocent Christians* under the name of Heretics, to
blind zeal and furious superstition. Who teach plainly, that you may propagate
your Religion whenever you have power, by deposing of Kings and invasion of
Kingdoms, and think when you kill the adversaries of it, you do God good
service. But for their departing corporally from them, whom mentally they had
forsaken: For their forsaking the external Communion and company of the
unreformed part of the Church, in their superstitions and impieties: thus much
of your accusation we embrace and glory in it; And say, though some Protestants
might offend in the manner or degree of their separation, yet certainly their
separation it self was not Schismatical, but innocent; and not only so, but
just and necessary. And as for your obtruding upon D. Potter that he should
say, There neither was nor could be just cause to do so, no more than to depart
from Christ himself. I have showed diverse times already, that you deal very
injuriously with him, confounding together, Departing from the Church, and
Departing from some general opinions and practices, which did not constitute
but vitiate, not make the Church but mar it. For though he says, that which
is most true, that there can be no just cause to depart from the Church, that
is, to cease being a member of the Church, no more than to depart from Christ
himself, in as much as these are not diverse but the same thing; yet he nowhere
denies, but there might be just and necessary cause to depart from some
opinions and practices of your Church, nay of the Catholic Church. And
therefore you do vainly to infer, that, Luther and his followers for so doing,
were Schismatiques.

97. Ad. 35. I answer in a word, that neither are Optatus his sayings rules of
Faith, and therefore not fit to determine Controversies of Faith: And then that
Majorinus might well be a Schismatique for departing from Caecilianus, and the
Chayr of Cyprian and Peter without cause; and yet Luther and his followers who
departed from the Communion of the Bishop of Rome, and the Bishop of their own
Diocese be none, because they had just and necessary cause of their departure.
For otherwise they must have continued in the profession of known Errors and
the practice of manifest Corruptions.

98. Ad. 36 In the next Section you tell us, that Christ our Lord gave S. Peter
and his successors authority over his whole Militant Church. And for proof
hereof you first refer us to Brerely, citing exactly the places of such chief
Protestants as have confessed the antiquity of this point. Where first you fall
into the Fallacy which is called Ignoratio Elenchi, or mistaking the Question;
for being to prove this point true, you only prove it ancient. Which, to what
purpose is it, when both the parties litigant are agreed that many errors were
held by many of the ancient Doctors, much more ancient than any of those who
are pretended to be confessed by Protestants to have held with you in this
matter: and when those whom you have to do with, and whom it is vain to dispute
against but out of Principles received by them, are all peremptory, that though
novelty be a certain note of falsehood, yet no Antiquity less than Apostolical,
is a certain note of truth? Yet this I say, not as if I did acknowledge what
you pretend, that Protestants did confess the Fathers against them in this
point. For the point here issuable is not, Whether S. Peter were head of the
Church? Nor, whether the Bishop of Rome had any priority in the Church? Nor,
whether he had authority over it given him by the Church? But whether by Divine
right, and by Christ's appointment he were Head of the Catholic Church? Now
having perused Breely, I cannot find any one Protestant confessing any one
Father to have concurred in opinion with you in this point. And the Reader has
reason to suspect, that you also out of all the Fathers could not find any one
authority pertinent to this purpose: for otherwise you were much to blame,
citing so few, to make choice of such as are impertinent. For let the
understanding Reader peruse the 55. Epist. of S. Cyprian, with any ordinary
attention, out of which you take your first place, and I am confident he shall
find that he means nothing else by the words quoted by you, But that in one
particular Church at one time there ought to be but one Bishop, and that he
should be obeyed in all things lawful: The nonperformance whereof, was one of
the most ordinary causes of Heresies against the Faith, and Schism from the
Communion of the Church Universal. He shall find, secondly, and that by many
convincing Arguments, that though he write to Cornelius Bishop of Rome, yet he
speaks not of him, but of himself then Bishop of Carthage, against whom a
faction of Schismatiques had then set up another. And therefore here your
ingenuity is to be commended above many of your side: For whereas they
ordinarily abuse this place to prove, that in the whole Church there ought to
be but one Priest and one Judge; you seem somewhat diffident hereof, and
thereupon say, That these words plainly condemn Luther, whether he will
understand them as spoken of the Universal, or of every Particular Church. But
whether they condemn Luther, is another question. The question here is, Whether
they plainly prove the Pope's Supremacy over all other Bishops? which certainly
they are as far from proving, as from proving the Supremacy of any other
Bishop: seeing it is evident they were intended not of one Bishop over the
whole Catholic Church, but of one Bishop in one particular Church.

99. And no less impertinent is your saying out of Optatus, if it be well looked
into, though at the first sight it may seem otherwise; because Optatus his
scene happened to be Rome, whereas S. Cyprians was Carthage. The truth is, the
Donatists had set up at Rome a Bishop of their faction: not with intent to make
him Bishop of the whole Church but of that Church in particular. Now Optatus
going upon S. Cyprians abovementioned ground of one Bishop in one Church,
proves them Schismatiques for so doing, and he proves it by this Argument: S.
Peter was first Bishop of Rome, neither did the Apostles attribute to
themselves each one his particular Chair, (understand in that City; for in
other places others, I hope, had Chairs besides S. Peter) and therefore he is a
Schismatique, who against that one single Chair erects another (understand as
before, in that place) making another Bishop of that Diocese besides him who
was lawfully elected to it.

100. But yet by the way he styles S. Peter head of the Apostles, and says,
that from thence he was called Cephas. Ans. Perhaps he was abused into this
opinion, by thinking Cephas derived from the Greek word (...) a head: whereas
it is a Syriack word and signifies a stone. Besides, S. Peter might be head of
the Apostles, that is, first in order and honor among them, and not have
Supreme Authority over them. And indeed that S. Peter should have Authority
over all the Apostles, and yet exercise no one act of Authority over any one of
them, and that they should show to him no sign of subjection, methinks is as
strange, as that a King of England for twenty five years together should do no
Act of Regality, nor receive any one acknowledgement of it. As strange methinks
it is, that you, so many ages after, should know this so certainly, as you
pretend to do, and that the Apostles (after that those words were spoken in
their hearing, by virtue whereof S. Peter is pretended to have been made their
head,) should still be so ignorant of it, as to question which of them should
be the greatest? yet more strange, that our Savior should not bring them out
of their error, by telling them S. Peter was the man, but rather confirm it by
saying, the Kings of the Gentiles exercise authority over them, but it should
not be so among them. No less a wonder was it that S. Paul should so far forget
S. Peter and himself, as that, first mentioning of him often, he should do it
without any title of Honor. Secondly, speaking of the several degrees of men
in the Church, he should not give S. Peter the highest, but place him in
equipage with the rest of the Apostles, and say, God has appointed (not first
Peter, then the rest of the Apostles, but) first Apostles, secondly Prophets.
Certainly, if the Apostles were all first, to me it is very probable, that no
one of them was before the rest. For by First, all men understand either that
which is before all, or that before which is nothing. Now in the former sense,
the Apostles could not be all first, for then every one of them must have been
before every one of the rest. And therefore they must be First in the other
sense. And therefore No man, and therefore Not S. Peter, must be before any of
them. Thirdly and Lastly, that speaking of himself in particular, and perhaps
comparing himself with S. Peter in particular, rather than any other, he should
say in plain terms, I am in nothing inferior to the very chiefest Apostles. But
besides all this, Though we should grant, against all these probabilities and
many more, that Optatus meant that S. Peter was head of the Apostles, not in
our but in your sense, and that S. Peter indeed was so; yet still you are very
far from showing, that in the judgment of Optatus, the Bishop of Rome, was to
be at all, much less by divine right, successor to S. Peter in this his
Headship and Authority. For what incongruity is there, if we say, that he might
succeed S. Peter in that part of his care, the government of that particular
Church, (as sure he did even while S, Peter was living,) and yet that neither
he nor any man was to succeed him in his Apostleship, nor in his government of
the Church Universal? Especially seeing S. Peter and the rest of the Apostles,
by laying the foundations of the Church, were to be the Foundations of it, and
accordingly are so called in Scripture. And therefore as in a Building it is
incongruous that Foundations should succeed Foundations: So it may be in the
Church, that any other Apostles should succeed the first.

101. Ad. 37. The next Paragraph I might well pass over, as having no Argument
in it. For there is nothing in it but two sayings of S. Austin, which I have
great reason to esteem no Argument, until you will promise me, to grant
whatsoever I shall prove by two sayings of S. Austin. But moreover, the second
of these sentences seems to me, to imply the contradiction of the first. For to
say, That the Sacrilege of Schism, is eminent, when there is no cause of
separation, implies, to my understanding, that there may be a cause of
Separation. Now in the first, he says plainly, That this is impossible. Neither
does any reconciliation of his words occur to me, but only this, that in the
former he speaks upon supposition, that the Public service of God, wherein
men are to communicate is unpolluted, and no unlawful thing practiced in their
communion, which was so true of their communion, that the Donatists who
separated did not deny it. And to make this answer no improbable evasion, it is
observable out of S. Austin and Optatus, that though the Donatists, at the
beginning of their Separation, pretended no cause of it, but only that the men
from whom they separated, were defiled with the contagion of Traditors; yet
afterward, to make the continuance of it more justifiable, they did invent and
spread abroad this calumny against Catholics, that they set pictures upon
their altars: which when S. Austin comes to Answer, he does not deny the
possibility of the thing, for that had been to deny the Catholic Church to be
made up of men, all which had free will to evil, and therefore might possibly
agree in doing it, and, had he denied this, the Action of after-Ages had been
his refutation; Neither does he say, (as you would have done,) that it was
true, they placed pictures there, and moreover worshipped them, but yet not for
their own sakes, but for theirs who were represented by them: Neither does he
say, (as you do in this Chapter) that though this were granted a Corruption,
yet were they not to separate for it. What then does he? Certainly nothing
else, but abhor the thing, and deny the imputation: Which way of answering,
does not, I confess, plainly show, but yet it somewhat intimates, that he had
nothing else to answer; and that if he could not have denied this, he could not
have denied the Donatists separation from them to have been just. If this
Answer to this little Argument seem not sufficient, I add moreover, that if it
be applied to Luther's separation, it has the common fault of all your
Allegations out of Fathers, Impertinence. For it is one thing to separate from
the communion of the whole world, another to separate form all the Communions
in the world: One thing to divide from them who are united among themselves,
another to divide from them who are divided among themselves. Now the Donatists
separated from the whole world of Christians, united in one Communion,
professing the same Faith, serving God after the same manner, which was a very
great Argument, that they could not have just cause to leave them: according to
that of Tertullian, Variasse debuer at error Ecclesiarum; quod autem apud
multos unum est, non est Erratum sed Traditum. But Luther and his followers did
not so. The world, I mean of Christians and Catholics, was divided and
subdivided long before he divided from it; and by their divisions had much
weakened their own authority, and taken away from you this plea of S. Austin,
which stands upon no other Foundation, but the Unity of the whole worlds
Communion.

102. Ad. 38. If Luther were in the right, most certain those Protestants that
differed from him were in the wrong: But that either he or they were
Schismatiques, it follows not. Or if it does, then either the Jesuits are
Schismatiques from the Dominicans, or they from the Jesuits; The Canonists from
the Jesuits, or the Jesuits from the Canonists: The Scotists from the Thomists,
or they from the Scotists: The Franciscans from the Dominicans, or the
Dominicans from the Franciscans. For between all these the world knows that, in
point of Doctin, there is a plain and irreconcilable contradiction; and
therefore one Part must be in error, at least not Fundamental. Thus your
Argument returns upon your self, and, if it be good, proves the Roman Church in
a manner to be made up of Schismatiques. But the answer to it, is, that it
begges this very false and vain Supposition; That whosoever in any point of
doctrine is a Schismatique.

103. Ad. 39. In the next place you number up your victories, and tell us, that
out of these premises, this conclusion follows, That Luther and his followers
were Schismatiques from the Visible Church, the Pope, the Diocese wherein they
were baptized; from the Bishop under whom they lived, from the Country to
which they belonged; from their Religious order, wherein they were professed;
from one another, and lastly, from a man's self: Because the self same
Protestant is convicted to day, that his yesterdayes opinion was an error. To
which I Answer, that Luther and his followers separated from many of these, in
some opinions and practices: But that they did it without cause, which only can
make them Schismatiques, that was the only thing you should have proved, and to
that you have not urged one reason of any moment. All of them for weight and
strength were cosen-germans to this pretty device, wherewith you will prove
them Schismatiques from themselves, because the self same Protestant to day is
convicted in conscience, that his yesterdayes opinion was an error. It seems
then, that they that hold errors, must hold them fast, and take special care of
being convicted in conscience that they are in error, for fear of being
Schismatiques! Protestants must continue Protestants, and Puritans Puritans,
and Papists Papists; nay Jews, and Turks, and Pagans, must remain Jews, and
Turks, and Pagans, and go on constantly to the Devil, or else, forsooth, they
must be Schismatiques and that from themselves. And this perhaps is the cause
that makes Papists so obstinate, not only in their common superstition, but
also in adhering to the proper phancies of their several Sects: so that it is a
miracle to hear of any Jesuit that has forsaken the opinion of the Jesuits, or
any Dominican that has changed his for the Jesuits. Whithout question, this
Gentleman my adversary knows none such, or else methinks he should not have
objected it to D. Potter, That he knew a man in the world, who, from a Puritan,
was turned to a moderate Protestant, which is likely to be true. But sure, if
this be all his fault, he has no reason to be ashamed of his acquaintance. For
possibly it may be a fault to be in error, because many times it proceeds from
a fault: But sure, the forsaking of error cannot be a sin, unless to be in
error be a virtue. And therefore to do as you do, to damn men for false
opinions, and to call them Schismatiques for leaving them; to make pertinacy in
error, that is, an unwillingness to be convicted, or a resolution not to be
convicted, the form of Heresy, and to find fault with men, for being convicted
in conscience that they are in error, is the most incoherent and contradictious
injustice that ever was heard of. But Sir, if this be a strange matter to you,
that which I shall tell you will be much stranger. I know a man that of a
moderate Protestant turned a Papist, and, the day that he did so, (as all
things that are done are perfected some day or other,) and yet thinks he was no
Schismatique for doing so, and desires to be informed by you, whether or no he
was mistaken? The same man afterward, upon better consideration, became a
doubting Papist, and of a doubting Papist a confirmed Protestant. And yet this
man thinks himself no more to blame for all these changes, than a Travailer,
who using all diligence to find the right way to some remote City, where he had
never been, (as the party I speak of had never been in Heaven,) did yet mistake
it, and after find his error, and amend it. Nay, he stands upon his
justification so far as to maintain that his alterations, not only to you, but
also from you by Gods mercy, were the most satisfactory actions to himself,
that ever he did, and the greatest victories that ever he obtained over
himself, and his affections to those things which in this world are most
precious; as wherein for Gods sake, and (as he was verily persuaded,) out of
love to the Truth, he went upon a cerain expectation of those inconveniences,
which to ingenuous natures are of all most terrible. So that though there were
much weakness in some of these alterations, yet certainly there was no
wickedness. Neither does he yield his weakness altogether without Apology,
seeing his deductions were rational, and out of some Principles commonly
received by Protestants as well as Papists, and which by his education had got
possession of his understanding.

Ad. 40, 41. D. Potter p. 81. of his Book, to prove our Separation from you,
not only lawful but necessary, has these words, Although we confess the Church
of Rome, (in some sense) to be a true Church, and her errors (to some men) not
damnable; yet for us who are convinced in conscience, that she errs in many
things, a necessity lies upon us, even under pain of damnation, to forsake her
in those errors. He means not, in the belief of those errors; for that is
presupposed to be done already: for whosoever is convinced in Conscience that
she errs, has for matter of belief forsaken, that is, ceased to believe those
errors. This therefore he meant not, nor could (...) mean: but that, whosoever
is convinced in Conscience that the Church of Rome erres, cannot with a good
conscience, but forsake her in the profession and practice of these errors:
And the reason hereof is manifest; because otherwise, he must profess what he
believes not, and practice what he approves not. Which is no more than your
self in thesi have diverse times affirmed. For in one place, you say, It is
unlawful to speak any the least untruth: Now he that professes your Religion,
and believes it not, what else does he but live in a perpetual lie? Again in
another, you have called them that profess one thing and believe another, a
damned crew of dissembling Sycophants: And therefore in inveighing against
Protestants for forsaking the Profession of these errors, the belief whereof
they had already forsaken, what do you but rail at them for not being a damned
crew of dissembling Sycophants? And lastly,. 42. of this Chapter, within three
leaves after this, whereas D. Potter grants but only a necessity of peaceable
external obedience to the Declaration of the Church, though perhaps erroneous,
(provided it be in matter not of Faith, but of Opinions or Rites,) condemning
those men, who by occasion of errors of this quality, disturb the Churches
peace, and cast off her Communion: Upon this occasion you come upon him with
this bitter Sarcasm, I thank you for your ingenuous confession, in recompense
whereof I will do a deed of Charity, by putting you in mind into what
Labyrinths you are brought, by teaching that the Church may err in some points
of Faith, and yet that it is not lawful for any man to oppose his judgment, or
leave her Communion, though he have evidence of Scripture against her! Will you
have such a man dissemble against his Conscience, or externally deny Truth
known to be contained in holy Scripture? I answer for him, No: It is not he,
but you, that would have men do so: not he who says plainly, that whosoever is
convinced in Conscience that any Church errs, is bound under pain of damnation
to forsake her in her profession and practice of these errors: but you, who
find fault with him, and make long discourses against him, for thus affirming:
Not he who can easily wind himself out of your Imaginary Labyrinth, by telling
you, that he no where denies it lawful for any man to oppose any Church, erring
in matter of Faith, for that he speaks not of matters of Faith at all, but only
of Rites and Opinions. And in such matters, he says indeed at first, It is not
lawful for any man to oppose his judgment to the public: But he presently
explains himself by saying, not only that he may hold an opinion contrary to
the public resolution, but besides that he may offer it to be considered of,
(so far is he from requiring any sinful dissimulation); Provided, he do it with
great Probability of Reason, very modestly and respectfully, and without
separation from the Churches Communion. It is not therefore in this case,
opposing a man's private judgment to the public simply, which the Doctor finds
fault with: But the degree only and malice of this Opposition, opposing it
factiously. And not holding a man's own conceit, different from the Church
absolutely, which here he censures: But a factious advancing it, and despising
the Church, so far as to cast off her Communion, because, forsooth, she errs
in some opinion, or uses some inconvenient, though not impious Rites and
Ceremonies. Little reason therefore have you to accuse him there, as if he
required. That men should dissemble against their Conscience, or externally
deny a truth known to be contained in holy Scripture. But certainly a great
deal less, to quarrel with him, for saying (which is all that here he says,)
That men under pain of damnation, are not to dissemble, but if they be
convinced in conscience, that your, or any other Church (for the reason is
alike for all) errs in many things, are of necessity to forsake that Church, in
the Profession and practice of those errors.

105. But to consider your exception to this speech of the Doctors, somewhat
what more particularly: I say your whole discourse against it, is compounded of
falsehoods and impertinencies. The first falsehood is, that he in these words
avoucheth, that no learned Catholics can be saved: Unless you will suppose,
that all learned Catholics are convinced in conscience, that your Church errs
in many things. It may well be feared that many are so convinced, and yet
profess what they believe not. Many more have been, and have stifled their
consciences, by thinking it an act of humility, to do so. Many more would have
been, had they with liberty and indifference of judgment, examined the grounds
of the Religion which they profess. But to think that all the Learned of your
side, are actually convinced of errors in your Church, and yet will not forsake
the profession of them, this is so great an uncharitableness, that I verily
believe D. Potter abhorres it. Your next falsehood is, That the Doctor affirms,
that you Catholics want no means of Salvation: and that he judges the Roman
errors not to be in themselves fundamental or damna^le. Which calumny I have
very often confuted: and in this very place it is confuted by D. Potter, and
confessed by your self. For in the beginning of this Answer you tell us, that
the Doctor avouches of all Catholics whom ignorance cannot excuse, that they
cannot be saved. Certainly then he must needs esteem them to want something
necessary to Salvation. And then in the Doctor's saying, it is remarkable, that
he confesses, your errors to some men not damnable: which clearly imports, that
according to his judgment, they were damnable in themselves, though by
accident to them who lived and died in invincible ignorance, and with
repentance, they might prove not damnable. A Third is, that these Assertions,
the Roman Errors are in themselves not damnable, and yet it is damnable for me
(who know them to be errors,) to hold and confess them, are absolutely
inconsistent; which is false; for, be the matter what it will, yet for a man to
tell a lie, especially in matter of Religion, cannot but be damnable. How much
more then, to go on in a course of lying by professing to believe these things
divine Truths, which he verily believes to be falsehoods and fables? A fourth
is, that if we erred in thinking that your Church holds errors, this error or
erroneous conscience might be rectified and deposed, by judging those errors
not damnable. For, what repugnance is there between these two Suppositions,
that, you do hold some errors, and, that they are not damnable? And if there be
no repugnance between them, how can the belief of the later remove or destroy,
or it be erroneous, rectify the belief of the former? Nay seeing there is a
manifest consent between them, how can it be avoided, but the belief of the
later will maintain and preserve the belief of the former? For who can conjoyn
in one brain not cracked, (pardon me, if I speak to you in your own words,)
these Assertions, In the Roman Church there are errors not damnable; and, In
the Roman Church there are no errors at all? Or what sober understanding would
ever think this a good collection, I esteem the errors of the Roman Church not
damnable, therefore I do amiss to think that she erres at all? If therefore you
would have us alter our judgment, that your Church is erroneous; your only way
is to show, your doctrine consonant, at least not evidently repugnant, to
Scripture and Reason. For as for this device, this short cut of persuading our
selves that you hold no errors, because we believe your errors are not
damnable, assure your self it will never hold.

106. A fifth falsehood is, That we daily do this favor for Protestants you
must mean (if you speak consequently) to judge they have no errors, because we
judge they have none damnable. Which the world knows to be most untrue. And for
our continuing in their communion notwithstanding their errors, the
justification hereof is not so much, that their errors are not damble: as that
they require not the belief and profession of these errors among the conditions
of their communion. Which puts a main difference between them and you: because
we may continue in their communion without professing to believe their
opinions, but in yours we cannot. A fixed is, that, according to the Doctrine of
all Divines, there is any difference between a Speculative Persuasion of
conscience, of the unlawfulness of any thing, and a Practical Dictamen that the
same thing is unlawful. For these are but diverse words signifying the same
thing; neither is such persuasion wholly speculative, but tending to practice:
nor such a dictamen wholly practical, but grounded upon speculation. A seventh
is, That Protestants did only conceive in speculation that the Church of Rome
erred in some doctrins, and had not also a practical dictamen, that it was
damnable for them to continue in the profession of these errors. An eighth is,
that it is not lawful to separate from any Churches communion, for errors not
appertaning to the substance of Faith: Which is not universally true, but with
this exception, unless that Church requires the belief and profession of them.
The ninth is, that D. Potter teaches, that Luther was bound to forsake the
house of God, for an unnecessary light. Confuted manifestly by D. Potter in
this very place, for by the house of God you mean the Roman Church, and of her
the Doctor says, That a necessity did lie upon him, even under pain of
damnation, to forsake the Church of Rome in her errors. This sure is not to
say, that he was obliged to forsake her, for an unnecessary light. The tenth is
covertly vented in your intimation, That Luther and his followers were the
proper cause of the Christian worlds Combustion: Whereas indeed the true cause
of this lamentable effect, was your violent persecution of them, for serving
God according to their conscience, which if it be done to you, you condemn of
horrible impiety, and therefore may not hope to be excused, if you do it to
others.

107. The eleventh is, that our first reformers ought to have doubted whether
their opinions were certain. Which is to say, that they ought to have doubted
of the certainty of Scripture: which in formal and express terms, contains many
of these opinions. And the reason of this assertion is very vain: for though
they had not an absolute infallibility promised unto them, yet may they be of
some things infallibly certain. As Euclide sure was not infallible, yet was he
certain enough, that twice two were four, and that every whole was greater than
a part of that whole. And so though Calvin and Melancthon were not infallible
in all things, yet they might and did know well enough, that your Latin
Service was condemned by Saint Paul, and that the Communion in both kinds was
taught by our Savior. The twelfth and last is this, that your Church was in
peaceable possession (you must mean of her Doctrine, and the Professors of it,)
and enjoyed prescription for many ages. For, besides that Doctrine is not a
thing that may be possessed: And the professors of it were the Church it self,
and in nature of possessors, (If we speak improperly,) rather than the thing
possessed, with whom no man has reason to be offended, if they think fit to
quit their own possession: I say that the possession, which the governors of
your Church held for some ages, of the party governed, was not peaceable, but
got by fraud, and held by violence.

108. These are the Falsehoods which in this Answer offer themselves to any
attentive Reader, and that which remains is mere impertinence. As first, that a
pretense of conscience will not serve to justify Separation, from being
Schismatical. Which is true, but little to the purpose, seeing it was not an
erroneous persuasion, much less an Hypocritical pretense, but a true and well
grounded conviction of conscience, which D. Potter alleged to justify
Protestants from being Schismatical. And therefore though seditious men in
Church and State, may pretend conscience, for a cloak of their rebellion: yet
this, I hope, hinders not, but that an honest man ought to obey his rightly
informed conscience, rather than the unjust commands of his tyrannous
Superiors. Otherwise, With what color can you defend either your own refusing
the oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy? or the ancient Martyrs, and Apostles,
and Prophets, who oftentimes disobeyed the commands of men in authority, and
for their disobedience made no other but this Apology, We must obey God rather
than men? It is therefore most apparent that this answer must be merely
impertinent: seeing it will serve against the Martyrs and Apostles and
Prophets, and even against your selves, as well as against Protestants. To as
little purpose is your rule out of Lyrinensis against them that followed
Luther, seeing they pretend and are ready to justify, that they forsook not,
with the Doctors, the faith, but only the corruption of the Church. As vain
altogether is that which follows: That in cases of uncertainty we are not to
leave our Superior, or cast off his obedience, nor publicly oppose his
decrees. From whence it will follow very evidently, that seeing it is not a
matter of faith, but disputed question amongst you, Whether the Oath of
Allegiance be lawful: that either you acknowledge not the King your Superior,
or do against conscience, in opposing his and the Kingdoms decree, requiring
the taking of this Oath. This good use, I say, may very fairly be made of it,
and is by men of your religion. But then it is so far from being a confutation,
that it is rather a confirmation of D. Potter's assertion. For he that uses
these words, Does he not plainly import (and such was the case of Protestants)
that we are to leave our Superiors, to cast off obedience to them, and
publicly, to oppose their Decrees, when we are certain (as Protestants were,)
that what they command, God does countermand. Lastly, S. Cyprians example is
against Protestants impertinently, and even ridiculously, alleged. For, what
if S. Cyprian holding his opinion true but not necessary, condemned no man
(much less any Church) for holding the contrary? Yet, me thinks, this should
lay no obligation upon Luther to do so likewise: seeing he held his own opinions
not only true but also necessary, and the doctrine of the Roman Church not only
false but damnable. And therefore seeing the condition and state of the parties
censured by S. Cyprian and Luther was so different, no marvel though their
censures also were different according to the supposed merit of the parties
delinquent. For as for your obtruding again upon us, That we believe the points
of difference not Fundamental or necessary, you have been often told, that it
is a Calumny. We hold your errors as damnable in themselves as you do ours,
only by accident through invincible ignorance, we hope they are not
unpardonable: and you also profess to think the same of ours.

109. Ad. 42. The former part of this discourse, grounded on D. Potter's words
p. 105. I have already in passing examined and confuted: I add in this place,
1. That though the Doctor say, It is not fit for any private man to oppose his
judgment to the public; that is, his own judgment and bare authority: yet
he denies not, but occasions may happen wherein it may be warrantable, to
oppose his reason or the authority of Scripture against it; and is not then to
be esteemed to oppose his own judggment to the public, but the judgment of
God to the judgment of men. Which his following words seem to import, He may
offer his opinion to be considered of, so he do it with evidence or great
probability of Scripture or Reason. Secondly, I am to tell you that you have no
ground from him, to enterline his words with that Interrogatory (his own
conceits, and yet grounded upon evidence of Scripture?) For these things are in
his words opposed, and not confounded; and the latter, not intended for a
repetition (as you mistake it) but for an Antithesis of the former. He may
offer (says he) his opinion to be considered of, so he do it with evidence of
Scripture. But if he will factiously advance his own conceits, (that is, say I,
clean contrary to your gloss,) Such as have not evident nor very probable
ground in Scripture, (for these conceits are properly his own) he may justly be
branded, etc. Now that this of the two is the better gloss, it is proved by
your own interrogation. For that imputes absurdity to D. Potter, for calling
them a man's own conceits, which were grounded upon evidence of Scripture. And
therefore you have showed little candor or equity, in fastening upon them this
absurd construction: They not only bearing, but even requiring another more
fair and more sensible. Every man ought to be presumed to speak sense, rather
than nonsense; coherently, rather than contradictiously; if his words be
fairly capable of a better construction, For M. Hooker; if, writing against
Puritans, he had said something unawares that might give advantage to Papists,
it were not inexcusable: seeing it is a matter of such extreme difficulty, to
hold such a temper in opposing one extreme opinion, as not to seem to favor
the other. Yet if his words be rightly considered, there is nothing in them
that will do you any service. For though he says that men are bound to do
whatsoever the sentence of final Decision shall determine, as it is plain me
are bound to yield such an obedience to all Courts of civil judicature: yet he
says not, they are bound to think that determination lawful, and that sentence
just. Nay it is plain he says, that they must do according to the Judge's
sentence, though in their private opinion it seem unjust. As if I be cast
wrongfully in a suit at law, and sentenced to pay an hundred pound, I am bound
to pay the money; yet I know no law of God or man, that binds me in conscience
to acquit the Judge of error in his sentence. The question therefore being only
what men ought to think, it is vain for you to tell us what M. Hooker says at
all. For M. Hooker, though an excellant man, was but a man. And much more vain,
to tell us out of him, what men ought to do, for point of external obedience.
When, in the very same place, he supposes and allows, that in their private
opinion they may think, This sentence to which they yield a passive obedience,
to swarve utterly from that which is right. If you will draw his words to such
a construction, as if he had said, they must think the sentence of judicial and
final decision just and right, though it seem in their private opinion to
swerve utterly from what is right; It is manifest, you make him contradict
himself, and make him say in effect, They must think thus, though at the same
time they think the contrary. Neither is there any necessity, that he must
either acknowledge the universal infallibility of the Church, or drive men into
dissembling against their conscience, seeing nothing hinders, but I may obey
the sentence of a Judge paying the money he awards me to pay, or forgoing the
house or land which he has judged from me, and yet withal plainly profess,
that in my conscience I conceive his judgment erroneous. To which purpose,
they have a saying in France, that whosoever is cast in any cause, has liberty
for ten days after, to rayl at his Judges.

110. This answer to this place, the words themselves offered me, even as they
are alleged by you: But upon perusal of the place in the Author himself, I
find that here, as elsewhere, you and M. Brerely wrong him extremely. For,
mutilating his words, you make him say that absolutely, which he there expressly
limits to some certain cases. In litigious and controverted causes of such a
quality (says he), the will of God is, to have them do whatsoever the sentence
of judicial and final Decision shall determine. Observe, I pray, He says not
absolutely and in all causes, this is the will of God: But only in litigious
causes, of the quality of those whereof he there entreats. In such matters, as
have plain Scripture or Reason, neither for them nor against them, and wherein
men are persuaded this or that way, Upon their own only probable collection; In
such cases, This persuasion (says he) ought to be fully settled in men's hearts,
that the will of God is, that they should not disobey the certain commands of
their lawful superiors, upon uncertain grounds: But do that which the sentence
of judicial and final decision shall determine. For the purpose, a Question
there is, Whether a Surplice may be worn in Divine service: The Authority of
Superiors injoynes this Ceremony, and neither Scripture nor Reason plainly
forbids it. Sempronius notwithstanding, is, by some inducements, which he
confesses to be only probable, let to this persuasion, that the thing is
unlawful. The quaere is, Whether he ought for matter of practice to follow the
injunction of authority, or his own private and only probable persuasion? M.
Hooker resolves for the former, upon this ground, that the certain commands of
the Church we live in, are to be obeyed in all things, not certainly unlawful.
Which rule is your own, and by you extended to the commands of all Superiors,
in the very next Section before this, in these words, In cases of uncertainty
we are not to leave our Superior, nor cast off his obedience, or publicly
oppose his decrees. And yet, if a man should conclude upon you, that either you
make all Superiors universally infallible, or else drive men into perplexities
and labyrinths of doing against conscience, I presume you would not think your
self fairly dealt with; but allege, that your words are not extended to all
cases, but limited to cases of uncertainty. As little therefore ought you to
make this deduction from M. Hooker's words which are apparently also restrained
to cases of uncertainty. For as for requiring a blind and an unlimited
obedience, to Ecclesiastical decisions universally and in all cases, even when
plain Texts or reason seems to control them, M. Hooker is as far from making
such an Idol of Ecclesiastical Authority, as the Puritans whom he writes
against: I grant (says he) that proof derived from the authority of man's
judgment, is not able to work that assurance which does grow by a stronger
proof. And therefore although ten thousand General Councils would set down one
and the same definitive Sentence, concerning any point of Religion whatsoever;
yet one demonstrative Reason alleged, or one manifest Testimony cited from the
Word of God himself, to the contrary, could not choose, but over-weigh them all:
in as much as for them to be deceived, it is not impossible; it is, that
Demonstrative Reason, or Divine Testimony, should deceive. And again, Where as
it is thought, that, especially with the Church, and those that are called,
man's authority ought not to prevail: It must and does prevail even with them,
yea with them especially, as far as equity requires, and farther we maintain
it not. For men to be tied and led by authority, as it were with a kind of
captivity of judgment; and, though there be reason to the contrary, not to
listen to it, but follow like Beasts, the first in the Heard, this were
brutish. Again, That authority of men should prevail with men either against or
above reason, is no part of our belief. Companies of learned men, be they never
so great and reverend, are to yield unto reason, the weight whereof, is no whit
prejudiced by the simplicity of his person which does allege it, but being
found to be sound and good, the bare opinion of men to the contrary, must of
necessity stoop and give place. Thus M Hooker in his 7. Sect. Book 2. which
place because it is far distant from that which is alleged by you, the
oversight of it might be excusable, did you not impute it to D. Potter as a
fault, that he cites some clauses of some Books, without reading the whole. But
besides, in that very Sect. out of which you take this corrupted sentence, he
has very pregnant words to the same effect: as for the orders established,
since equity and reason favor that which is in being, till orderly judgment of
decision be given against it, it is but justice to exact of you, and
perverseness in you it should be to deny thereunto your willing obedience. Not
that I judge it as a thing allowable, for men to observe those Laws, which in
their hearts they are steadfastly persuaded, to be against the Law of God: But
your persuasion in this case, ye are all bound for the time to suspend; and, in
otherwise doing, ye offend against God, by troubling his Church without just
and necessary cause. Be it that there are some reasons inducing you to think
hardly of our Laws: Are those Reasons demonstrative, are they necessary, or but
mere probabilities only? An argument necessary and demonstrative is such, as,
being proposed to any man and understood, the mind cannot choose but inwardly
assent. Any one such reason discharges, I grant, the Conscience, and sets
it at full liberty. For the public approbation given by the body of this
whole Church, unto those things which are established, does make it but
probable that they are good. And therefore unto a necessary proof that they are
not good, is must give place. This plain declaration of his judgment in this
matter, this express limitation of his former resolution, he makes in the very
same Section, which affords your former quotation; and therefore what Apology
can be made for you, and your Storehouse M. Brerely, for dissembling of it, I
cannot possibly imagine.

111. D. Potter p. 131. says, That errors of the Donatists and Novatians, were
not in themselves Heresies, nor could be made so by the Churches determination.
But that the Churches intention was only to silence disputes, and to settle
peace and unity in her government: which because they factiously opposed, they
were justly esteemed Schismatiques. From hence you conclude that the same
condemnation must pass against the first Reformers, seeing they also opposed
the commands of the Church, imposed on them, for silencing all Disputes, and
settling Peace and Unity in Government. But this Collection is deceitful, and
the reason is: Because, though the first Reformers, as well as the Donatists
and Novatians, opposed herein the Commands of the Visible Church, that is, of a
great part of it: yet the Reformers had reason, nay necessity to do so, the
Church being then corrupted with damnable errors: which was not true of the
Church, when it was opposed by the Novatians and Donatists. And therefore
though they, and the Reformers, did the same action, yet doing it upon
different grounds, it might in these merit applause, and in them condemnation.

112 Ad. 43. The next. has in it some objections against Luther's person, and
none against his cause, which alone I have undertaken to justify, and
therefore I pass it over. Yet this I promise, that when you, or any of your
side, shall publish a good defense, of all that your Popes have said and done,
especially of them whom Bellarmine believes, in such a long train to have gone
to the Devil: then you shall receive an ample Apology for all the actions and
words of Luther. In the mean time, I hope, all reasonable and equitable judges,
will esteem it not unpardonable in the great and Heroical spirit of Luther, if,
being opposed, and perpetually baited with a world of Furies, he were
transported sometimes, and made somewhat furious. As for you, I desire you to
be quiet, and to demand no more, whether God be wont to send such Furies to
preach the Gospel? Unless you desire to hear of your killing of Kings:
Massacring of Peoples; Blowing up of Parliaments: and have a mind to be asked,
Whether it be probable, that that should be Gods cause, which needs to be
maintained by such Divellish means?

113 Ad. 44, 45. In the two next Particles, which are all of this Chapter, that
remain unspoken to, you spend a great deal of reading, and wit, and reason,
against some men, who pretending to honor and believe the Doctrine and practice
of the visible Church, (you mean, your own,) and condemning their Forefathers
who forsook her, say, they would not have done so, yet remain divided from her
Communion. Which men in my judgment cannot be defended. For if they believe the
Doctrine of your Church, then must they believe this doctrine, that they are to
return to your Communion. And therefore if they do not so, it cannot be avoided
but they must be (...), and so I leave them: only I am to remember you, that
these men cannot pretend to be Protestants, because they pretend to believe
your Doctrine, which is opposite in Diameter unto the doctrine of Protestants;
and therefore in a Work which you profess to have written merely against
Protestants, all this might have been spared.

CHAP. VI. That Luther, and the rest of Protestants have added Heresy unto
Schism.
BEcause Vice is best known by the contrary Virtue, we cannot well determine
what Heresy is, nor who be Heretics, but by the opposite virtue of Faith,
whose Nature being once understood as far as belongs to our present purpose, we
shall pass on, with ease, to the definition of heresy, and so be able to
discern who be Heretics. And this I intend to do, not by entering into such
particular Questions, as are controverted between Catholics and Protestants,
but only by applying some general grounds, either already proved, or else
yielded to, on all sides.

2 Almighty God having ordained Man to a supernatural End of Beatitude by
supernatural means, it was requisite that his understanding should be enabled
to apprehend that End, and Means, by a supernatural knowledge. And because if
such a knowledge were no more than probable, it could not be able sufficiently
to overbear our will, and encounter with human probabilities, being backed with
the strength of flesh and blood; It was further necessary, that this
supernatural knowledge should be most certain and infallible; and that Faith
should believe nothing more certainly than that it self is a most certain
Belief, and so be able to bear down all gay probabilities of humane Opinion.
And because the aforesaid means and end of Beatifical V^sion, do fat exceed the
reach of natural wit, the certainty of faith could not always be joined with
such evidence of reason, as is wont to be found in the Principles, or
Conclusions, of humane natural Sciences, that so all flesh might not glory in
the arm of flesh, but he, who glories, should glory 2 Cor. 1^.
in our Lord. Moreover, it was expedient that our belief or assent to divine
truths, should not only be unknown, or inevident by any humane discourse, but
that absolutely also it should be obscure in it self, and (ordinarily speaking)
be void even of supernatural evidence, that so we might have occasion to
actuate, and testify the obedience which we ow to our God, not only by
submitting our will to his Will and Commands, but by subjecting also our
Understanding to his Wisdom and words, captivating (as the Apostle speaks) the
same Understanding 2 Cor. 10.5.
to the Obedience of Faith: Which occasion had been wanting, if Almighty God
had made clear to us, the truths which now are certainly, but not evidently,
presented to our minds. For where truth does manifestly open it self, not
obedience but necessity commands our assent. For this reason, Divines teach,
that the Objects of faith, being not evident to humane reason, it is in man's
power not only to abstain from believing, by suspending our Judgments, or
exercising no act one way or other; but also to disbelieve, that is, to believe
the contrary of that which faith proposes; as the example of innumerable
Arch-heretiques can bear witness. This obscurity of faith we learn from holy
Scripture, according to those words of the Apostle. Faith is the Heb. 11.
substance of things to be hoped for, the argument of things not appearing.
And, We see by a glass 1 Cor. 13.
in a dark manner: but then face to face. And, accordingly, S. Peter faith:
Which you do well attending unto, as to 2 Pet. 1.19.
a Candle shining in a dark place.

3 Faith being then obscure (whereby it differs from natural Sciences) and
yet being most certain and infallible (wherein it surpasses humane Opinion) it
must rely upon some motive and ground, which may be able to give it certainly,
and yet not release it from Obscurity. For if this motive, ground, or formal
Object of Faith, were any thing evidently presented to our understanding: and
if also we did evidently know, that it had a necessary connection with the
Articles which we believe, our assent to such Articles could not be obscure,
but evident; which, as we said, is against the nature of our faith. If likewise
the motive and ground of our faith were obscurely propounded to us, but were
not in it self infallible, it would leave our assent in obscurity, but could
not endue it with certainty. We must therefore for the ground of our faith,
find out a motive obscure to us, but most certain in it self, that the act of
faith may remain both obscure, and certain. Such a motive as this, can be no
other but the divine authority of Almighty God, revealing, or speaking those
truths which our faith believes. For it is manifest, that God's infallible
testimony may transf^^^ Certainty to our faith, and yet not draw it out of
obscurity; because no humane discourse, or demonstration can evince, that God
reveals any supernatural truth, since God has been no less perfect than he
is, although h^^^^ never revealed any of those objects which we now believe.

4 Nevertheless, because Almighty God out of his infinite wisdom and sweetness
does conour with his Creatures in such sort as may befit the temper, and
exigence of their natures; and because Man is a Creature endued with reason,
God does not exact of his Will or Understanding any other then, as the Apostle
faith, rationabile Romans 12.1.
obsequium, an Obedience, sweetened with good reason; which could not so appear,
if our Understanding were summoned to believe with certainty, things no way
represented as infallible and certain. And therefore Almighty God obliging us
under pain of eternal camnation to believe with greatest certainty diverse
verities, not known by the light of natural reason, cannot fail to furnish our
Understanding, with such inducements, motives, and arguments as may
sufficiently persuade any mind which is not partial or passionate, that the
objects which we believe, proceed from an Authority so Wise, that it cannot be
deceived, so Good that it cannot deceive; according to the words of David: Thy
Testimonies are made Psalm. 92.
credible exceedingly. These inducements are by Divines, called argumenta
credibilitatis, arguments of credibility, which though they cannot make us
evidently see what we believe yet they evidently convince that, in one wisdom,
and prudence, the objects of faith deserve credit, and ought to be accepted as
things revealed by God. For without such reasons and inducements, our judgment
of faith could not be conceived prudent, holy Scripture telling us, that, be
who soon Eccles. 19.^.
believes, is light of heart. By these arguments and inducements our
Understanding is both satisfied with evidence of credibility, and the objects
of faith retain their obsenrity: because it is a different thing to be
evidently credible, and evidently true; as those who were present at the
Miracles wrought by our blessed Savior, and his Apostles, did not evidently
see their doctrine to be true (for then it had not been Faith but Science, and
all had been necessitated to believe, which we see fell out otherwise) but they
were evidently convinced, that the things confirmed by such Miracles, were most
credible, and worthy to be embraced as truth revealed by God.

5 These evident arguments of Credibility are in great abundance found in the
Visible Church of Christ, perpetually existing on earth. For, that there has
been a company of men professing such and such doctrines, we have from our next
Predecessors, and these from theirs upward, till we come to the Apostles, and
our Blessed Savior; which gradation is known by evidence of sense, by reading
books, or hearing what one man delivers to another. And it is evident that
there was neither cause, nor possibility, that men so distant in place, so
different in temper, so repugnant in private ends, did, or could agree to tell
one and the self same thing, if it had been but a fiction invented by
themselves, as ancient Tertullian well says: How is it likely that so many
Praescript. c. 28.
and so great Churches should err in one says? Among many events there is not
one issue, the error of the Churches must needs have varied. But that which
among many is sound to be One, is not mistaken, but delivered. Dare then any
body say, that they erred who delivered it? With this never-interrupted
existence of the Church are joined the many and great miracles wrought by m^n
of that Congregation or Church; the sanctity of the persons; the renowned
victories over so many persecutions, both of all sorts of men, and of the
infernal spirits; and lastly, the perpetual existence of so holy a Church,
being brought up to the Apostles themselves, she comes to partake of the same
assurance of truth, which They by so many powerful ways, did communicate to
their Doctrine, and to the Church of their times, together with the divine
Certainty which they received from our blessed Savior himself, revealing to
Mankind what he heard from his Father; and so we conclude with Tertullian: We
receive it from the Churches, the Churches Praese. c. 21. and 37.
from the Apostles, the Apostles from Christ, Christ from his Father: And if we
once interrupt this line of succession, most certainly made known by means of
holy Tradition, we cannot conjoyn the present Church, and doctrine, with the
Church, and doctrine of the Apostles, bu^ must invent some new means, and
arguments sufficient of themselves to find out, and prove a true Church, and
faith independently of the preaching, and writing of the Apostles; neither of
which can be known but by Tradition; as is truly observed by Tertullian saying:
I will prescribe, that Praesc. c. 22.
there is no means to prove what the Apostles preached, but by the same Church
which they sounded.

6 Thus then we are to proceed: By evidence of manifest and incorrupt
Tradition, I know that there has always been a never interrupted Succession of
men from the Apostles time, believing, professing, and practicing such and such
doctrines: By evident arguments of credibility, as Miracles, Sanctity, Unity,
etc. and, by all those ways whereby the Apostles, and our Blessed Savior
himself confirmed their doctrine, we are assured that what the said
never-interrupted Church proposes, does deserve to be accepted and
acknowledged as a divine truth: By evidence of Sense, we see that the same
Church proposes such and such doctrins as divine truths, that is, as revealed
and testified by Almighty God. By this divine Testimony we are infallibly
assured of what we believe: and so the last period, ground, motive, and formal
object of our Faith, is, the infallible testimony of that supreme Verity, which
neither can deceive, nor be deceived.

7 By this orderly deduction our Faith comes to be endued with those qualities
which we said were requisite thereto; namely Certainty, Obscurity, and
Prudence. Certainty proceeds from the infallible Testimony of God propounded
and conveyed to our understanding by such a mean as is infallible in it self,
and to us is evidently known that it proposes this point or that, and which
can manifestly declare in what sense it proposes them; which means we have
proved to be only the visible Church of Christ. Obscurity, from the manner in
which God speaks to Mankind, which ordinarily is such, that it does not
manifeilly show the person who speaks, nor the truth of the thing spoken.
Prudence is not wanting, because our faith is accompanied with so many
arguments of Credibility, that every well disposed Understanding, may and ought
to judge, that the doctrins so confirmed deserve to be believed, as proceeding
from divine Authority.

8 And thus from what has been said, we may easily gather the particular
nature, or definition of Faith. For, it is a voluntary, or free, infallible,
obscure assent to some truth, because it is testified by God, and is
sufficiently propounded to us for such: which proposal is ordinarily made by
the Visible Church of Christ. I say, Sufficiently propused by the Church; not
that I purpose to dispute whether the proposal of the Church enter into the
formal Object, or Motive of Faith: or whether any error be an heresy, formally
and precisely, because it is against the proposition of the Church, as if such
proposal were the formal Object of Faith, which D. Potter, to no purpose at
all, labors so very hard to disprove: But I only affirm, that when the Church
propounds any Truth, as revealed by God, we are assured that it is such indeed;
and so it instantly grows, to be a fit object for Christian faith, which
inclines and enables us to believe whatsoever is duly presented, as a thing
revealed by Almighty God. And in the same manner we are sure, that whosoever
opposes any doctrine proposed by the Church, does thereby contradict a truth,
which is testified by God: As when any lawful Superior notifies his will, by
the means, and, as it were, proposal of some faithful messenger, the subject of
such a Superior in performing, or neglecting what is delivered by the
Messenger, is said to obey, or disobey his own lawful Superior. And therefore
because the testimony of God is notified by the Church, we may, and we do most
truly say, that not to believe what the Church proposes, is, to deny God's
holy word or testimony signified to us by the Church, according to that saying
of S. Irenaeus, We need not go Lib. 3. com. Haeres. cap. 4.
to any other to seck the truth, which we may easily receive from the Church.

9 From this definition of faith we may also know what Heresy is, by taking
the contrary terms, as Heresy is contrary to Faith, and saying: Heresy is a
voluntary error against that which God has revealed, and the Church has
proposed for such. Neither does it import, whether the error concern points in
themselves great or small, fundamental or not fundamental. For more being
required to an act of Virtue, than of Vice, if any truth though never so small
may be believed by faith as scon as we know it to be testified by divine
revelation; much more will it be a formal Heresy to deny any least point
sufficiently propounded as a thing witnessed by God.

10 This divine Faith is divided into Actual, and Habitual. Actual faith, or
faith actuated, is when we are in act of consideration, and belief of some
mystery of Faith; for example, that our Savior Christ, is true God, and Man,
etc. Habitual faith, is that from which we are denominated Faithful, or
Believers, as by Actual faith they are styled Believing. This Habit of faith is
a Quality enabling us most firmly to believe Objects above humane discourse,
and it remains permanently in our Soul, even when we are sleeping, or not
thinking of any Mystery of faith. This is the first among the three
Theological Virtues. For Charity unites us to God, as he is infinitely Good in
himself; Hope ties us to him, as he is unspeakably Good to us. Faith joins us
to him, as he is the Supreme immovable Verity. Charity relies on his Goodness;
Hope on his Power; Faith on his divine Wisdom. From hence it follows, that
Faith being one of the Virtues which Divines term Infused (that is, which
cannot be acquired by humane wit, or industry, but are in their Nature and
Essence supernatural,) it has this property; that it is not destroy^d by
little and little, (contrarily to the Habits, called acquisiti, that is, gotten
by humane endeavor, which as they are successively produced, so also are they
lost successively, or by little and little) but it must either be conserved
entire, or wholly destroyed: And since it cannot stand entire with any one act
which is directly contrary, it must be totally overthrown, and, as it were,
demolished, and razed by every such act. Wherefore, as Charity, or the love of
God, is expelled from our soul by any one act of Hatred, or any other mortal
sin against his Divine Majesty: and as Hope is destroyed by any one act of
voluntary Desperation: so Faith must perish by any one act of Heresy, because
every such act is directly, and formally opposite thereunto. I know that some
sins which (as Divines speak) are ex genere suo, in their kind, grievous and
mo^tal, may be much lessened, and fall to be venial, ob levitatem materiae,
because they may happen to be exercised in a matter of small consideration; as
for example, to steal a penny is venial, although Theft in his kind be a deadly
sin. But it is likewise true, that this Rule is not general for all sorts of
sins; there being some so inexcusably wicked of their own nature, that no
smalness of matter, nor paucity in number can defend them from being deadly
sins. For, to give an instance, what blasphemy against God, or voluntary false
Oath is not a deadly sin? Certainly none at all, although the salvation of the
whole world should depend upon swearing such a falsehood. The like happens in
our present case of Heresy, the iniquity redounding to the injury of God's
supreme wisdom and goodness, is always great, and enormous. They were no
precious stones which David 1. Reg. 17.
picked out of the water, to encounter Golias, and yet if a man take from the
number but one, and say they were but four, against the Scripture affirming
them to have been five, he is instantly guilty of a damnable sin. Why? Because
by this substraction of One, he does deprive God's Word and Testimony of all
credit and infallibility. For, if either he could deceive, or be deceived in
any one thing, it were but wisdom to suspect him in all. And seeing every
Heresy opposes some Truth revealed by God: it is no wonder that no one can be
excused from deadly, and damnable sin; for, if voluntary Blasphemy, and
Perjury, which are opposed only to the infused Moral Virtue of Religion, can
never be excused from mortal sin: much less can Heresy be excused, which
opposes the Theological Virtue of Faith.

11 If any object, that Schism may seem to be a greater sin than Heresy:
because the Virtue of Charity (to which Schism is opposite) is greater than
Faith, according to the Apostle, saying: Now there remain 1 Cor. 13.13.
Faith, Hope, Charity; but the greater of these is Charity. S. Thomas answers
in these words: Charity has two Objects, one principal, to wit, the Divine
2.2. q. 39. ar. 2. in corp and ad 3.
Goodness; and another secondary, namely the good of our Neighbor; But Schism
and other sins which are committed against our Neighbor, are opposite to
Charity in respect of this secondary good, which is less than the object of
Faith, which is God, as he is the Prime Verity, on which Faith does rely; and
therefore these sins are less than Infidelity. He takes Infidelity after a
general manner, as it comprehends Heresy, and other vices against Faith.

12 Having therefore sufficiently declared, wherein Heresy consists; Let us
come to prove that which we proposed in this Chapter. Where I desire, it be
still remembered: That the visible Catholic Church cannot err damnably, as D.
Potter confesses. And, that when Luther appeared, there was no other visible
true Church of Christ disagreeing from the Roman, as we have demonstrated in
the next precedent Chapter.

13 Now, that Luther and his followers cannot be excused from formal Heresy, I
prove by these reasons. To oppose any truth propounded by the visible true
Church as revealed by God, is formal Heresy, as we have showed out of the
desinition of Heresy: But Luther, Calvin, and the rest did oppose diverse
truths propounded by the visible Church as revealed by God; yea they did
therefore oppose her, because she propounded, as divine revealed truths, things
which they judged either to be false, or humane inventions: Therefore they
committed formal Heresy.

14 Moreover, every Error against any doctrine revealed by God, is a damnable
Heresy, whether the matter in it self be great or small, as I proved before:
and therefore either the Protestants or the Roman Church must be guilty of
formal Heresy, because one of them must err against the word and testimony of
God: but you grant (perforce) that the Roman Church does not err damnably, and
I add that she cannot err damnably because she is the truly Catholic Church,
which, you confess, cannot err damnably: Therefore Protestants must be guilty
of formal Heresy.

15 Besides, we have showed that the visible Church is Judge of Controversies,
and therefore must be infallible in all her Proposals; which being once
supposed, it manifestly follows, that to oppose what she delivers as
revealed by God, is not so much to oppose her, as God himself; and therefore
cannot be excused from grievous Heresy.

16 Again, if Luther were an Heretic, for those points wherein he disagreed
from the Roman Church; All they who agree with him in those very points, must
likewise be Heretics. Now, that Luther was a formal Heretic I demonstrate
in this manner. To say, that God's visible true Church is not universal, but
confined to one only place or corner of the world, is according to your own
express words Page 126.
properly Heresy, against that Article of the Creed, wherein we profess to
believe the holy Catholic Church: And you brand Donatus with heresy, because
he limited the universal Church to Africa. But it is manifest, and acknowledged
by Luther himself, and other chief Protestants that Luther's Reformation when
it first began (and much more for diverse ages before) was not Universal, nor
spread over the world, but was confined to that compass of ground which did
contain Luther's body. Therefore his Reformation cannot be excused from formal
Heresy. If S. Augustine in those times said to the Donatists, There are
innumerable testimonies Epist. 50.
of holy Scripture in which it appears that the Church of Christ is not only
in Africa, as these men with most impudent vanity do rave, but that she is
spread over the whole earth: much more may it be said; It appears by
innumerable testimonies of holy Scripture that the Church of Christ cannot be
confined to the City of Wittemberg, or to the place where Luther's feet stood,
but must be spread over the whole world. It is therefore most impudent vanity,
and dotage to limit her to Luthers Reformation. In another place also this holy
Father writes no less effectually against Luther than against the Donatists.
For having out of those words, In thy seed all Nations shall be blessed, proved
that God's Church must be universal, he says: Why De Unit. Eccles. cap. 6.
do you superadd, by saying that Christ remains heir in no part of the earth,
except where he may have Donatus for his Coheir. Give me this (Universal)
Church if it be among you: show your selves to all Nations, which we already
show to be blessed in this Seed: Give us this (Church) or else laying aside all
fury, receive her from us. But it is evident, that Luther could not, When he
said, At the beginning I was alone, give us an universal Church: Therefore
happy had he been, if he had then, and his followers would now, receive her
from us. And therefore we must conclude with the same holy Father, saying in
another place of the universal Church: She has this Cont. lit. Petil. lib. 1.
cap. 104.
most certain mark, that she cannot be hidden: She is then known to all
Nations. The Sect of Donatus is unknown to many Nations; therefore that cannot
be she. The Sect of Luther (at least when he began, and much more before his
beginning) was unknown to many Nations, therefore that cannot be she.

17 And that it may yet further appear how perfectly Luther agreed with the
Donatists: It is to be noted, that they never taught, that the Catholic
Church ought not to extend it self further than that part of Africa, where
their faction reigned, but only that in fact it was so confined, because all
the rest of the Church was profaned, by communicating with Caecilianus, whom
they falsely affirmed to have been ordained Bishop by those who were Traditors,
or givers up of the Bible to the Persecutors to be burned: yea at that very
time they had some of their Sect residing in Rome, and sent thither one Victor,
a Bishop, under color to take care of the Brethren in that City, but indeed,
as Baronius Anno 321. nu. 2. Spond.
observes, that the world might account them Catholics by communicating with
the Bishop of Rome, to communicate with whom was ever taken by the Ancient
Fathers as an assured sign of being a true Catholic. They had also, as S.
Augustine witnesses, a pretended De U^i. Eccles. c 3.
Church in the house and territory of a Spanish Lady called Lucilla, who went
flying out of the Catholic Church, because she had been justly checked by
Caecilianus. And the same Saint speaking of the conference he had with
Fortunius the Donatist, says: Here did he first Ep. 163.
attempt to affirm that his Communion was spread over the whole Earth, etc. but
because the thing was evidently false, they got out of this discourse by
confusion of language whereby nevertheless they sufficiently declared, that
they did not hold that the true Church ought necessarily to be confined to one
place, but only by mere necessity were forced to yield that it was so in fact,
because their Sect which they held to be the only true Church was not spread
over the world: In which point Fortunius, and the rest were more modest, than
he who should affirm that Luther's reformation in the very beginning was spread
over the whole Earth; being at that time by many degrees not so far diffused as
the Sect of the Donatists. I have no desire to prosecure the similitude of
Protestanes with Donatists, by remembering that the Sect of these men was begun
and promoted by the passion of Lucilla; and, Who is ignorant what influence two
women, the Mother, and Daughter, ministered to Protestancy in England? Nor will
I stand to observe their very likeness of phrase with the Donatists, who called
the Chair of Rome, the Chair of pestilence, and the Roman Church an Harlot,
which is D. Potter's own phrase, wherein he is less excusable than they,
because he maintains her to be a true Church of Christ: and therefore let him
duly ponder these words of S. Augustine against the Donatists, If I persecute
him justly who detracts Conc. super gest. cum Emerit.
from his Neighbor, why should I not presecute him who detracts from the
Church of Christ, and says, This is not she, but this is an Harlot? And least
of all, will I consider, whether you may not be well compared to one Ticonius a
Dona is it, who wrote against Parmenianus likewise a Donatist, who blasphemed,
that the Church of Christ had perished (as you do even in this your Book write
against some of your Protestant Brethren, or as you call them Zelots among you,
who hold the very same or rather a worse Heresy) and yet remained among them,
even after Parmenianus had excommunicated him (as those your Zealous Brethren
would proceed against you if it were in their power,) and yet, like Ticonius,
you remain in their Communion, and come nor into that Church which is, has
been, and shall ever be universal: For which very cause S. Augustine complains
of Ticonius, that although he wrote against the Donatists, yet he was of an
heart De doctr. Christ. lib. 3. cap. 30.
so extremely absurd, as not to forsake them altogether. And speaking of the
same thing in another place he observes, that although Ticonius did manifestly
confute them who affirmed that the Church had perished; yet he saw not (says
this holy Father) that which in good consequence Cont. Parm. l. 1. cap. 1.
he should have seen, that those Christians of Africa belonged to the Church
spread over the whole world, who remained united, not with them who were
divided from the communion and unity of the same world, but with such as did
communicate with the whole world. But Parmenianus, and the rest of the
Donatists saw that consequence, and resolved rather to settle their mind in
obstinacy against the most manifest truth which Ticonius maintained, than by
yielding thereto, to be overcome by those Churches in Africa, which enjoyed the
Communion of that Unity which Ticonius defended, from which they had divided
themselves. How firly these words agree to Catholics in England in respect of
the Protestants, I desire the Reader to consider. But these and the like
resemblances of Protestants to the Donatists, I willingly let pass, and only
urge the main point: That since Luther's Reformed Church was not in being for
diverse Centuries before Luther, and yet was (because so forsooth they will
needs have it) in the Apostles time, they must of necessity affirm heretically
with the Donatists, that the true and unsported Church of Christ perished; and
that she which remained on earth was (O blasphemy!) an Harlot. Moreover the
same heresy follows out of the doctrine of D. Potter, and other Protestants,
that the Church may err in points not fundamental, because we have showed that
every error against any one revealed truth, is Heresy, and damnable, whether
the matter be otherwise, of it self, great or small. And how can the Church
more truly be said to perish, than when she is permitted to maintain a damnable
Heresy? Besides, we will hereafter prove, that by any act of Heresy, all
divine faith is lost; and to imagine a true Church of faithful persons without
any faith, is as much as to fancy a living man without life. It is therefore
clear, that Donatist-like they hold that the Church of Christ perished: yea
they are worse than the Donatists, who said, that the Church remained at least
in Africa; whereas Protestants must of necessity be forced to grant, that for a
long space before Luther, she was no where at all. But let us go forward to
other reasons.

18 The holy Scripture, and Ancient Fathers do assign Separation from the
Visible Church as a mark of Heresy; according to that of S. John: They went
out 2. Joan. 19.
from us. And, Some who Act. 15.24.
went out from us. And, Out of you shall Act. 20.30
arise men speaking perverse things. And accordingly Vincentius Lyrinensis
says: Who ever Lib. adversus haer. c. 34.
began heresies, who did not first separate himself from the Universality,
Antiquity, and Consent of the Catholic Church? But it is manifest, that when
Luther appeared, there was no visible Church distinct from the Roman, out of
which she could depart, as it is likewise well known that Luther, and his
followers departed out of her: Therefore she is no way liable to this Mark of
Heresy, but Protestants cannot possibly avoid it. To this purpose S. Prosper
has these pithy words: A Christian communicating Dimid. temp. cap. 5.
with the universal Church is a Catholic, and he who is divided from her, is
an Heretic, and Antichrist. But Luther in his first Reformation could not
communicate with the visible Catholic Church of those times, because he began
his Reformation by opposing the supposed Errors of the then visible Church: we
must therefore say with S. Prosper, that he was an Heretic, etc. Which
likewise is no less clearly proved out of S. Cyprian, saying: Not we Ep. 57. ad
Damas.
departed from them, but they from us, and since Heresies and Schisms are bred
afterward; while they make to themselves diverse Conventicles, they have
forsaken the head and origin of Truth.

19. And that we might not remain doubtful what Separation it is, which is the
mark of Heresy, the Ancient Fathers tell us more in particular, that it is
from the Church of Rome, as it is the Sea of Peter. And therefore D. Potter
need not to be so hot with us, because we say, and write, that the Church of
Rome, in that sense as she is the Mother Church of all others, and with which
all the rest agree, is truly called the Catholic Church. S. Hierome writing
to Pope Damasus, says: I am in the Communion Lib. 1. Apolog.
of the Chair of Peter; I know that the Church is built upon that Rock.
Whosoever shall eat the Lamb out of this house, he is profane. If any shall
not be in the Ark of Noe, he shall perish in the time of the deluge. Whosoever
does not gather with thee, does scatter, that is, he that is not of Christ is
of Antichrist. And elsewhere, Which does he Ibid. lib. 3.
call his faith? That of the Roman Church? Or that which is contained in the
Books of Origin? If he answer, The Roman; then we are Catholics, who have
translated nothing of the error of Origin. And yet farther: Know thou, that the
(k) Roman faith commended by the voice of the Apostle does not receive these
delusions, though an Angel should denounce otherwise than it has once been
preached. S. Ambrose recounting how his Brother Satyrus inquiring for a Church
wherein to give thanks for his delivery from shipwreck, says, He called unto
him De obitu Satyri fratris.
the Bishop, neither did he esteem any favor to be true, except that of the
true faith, and he asked of him whether be agreed with the Catholic Bishops;
that is, with the Roman Church? And having understood that he was a
Schismatique, that is, separated from the Roman Church, he abstained from
communicating with him. Where we see the priv^ledge of the Roman Church
confirmed both by word and deed, by doctrine and practice. And the same Saint
says of the Roman Church: From thence the Rites Lib. 1. ep. 4. ad Imperatores.
of Venerable Communion do flow to all. Saint Cyprian says: They are bold
Epist. 55. ad Cornel.
to sail to the Chair of Peter, and to the principal Church, from whence
Priestly Unity has sprung. Neither do they consider, that they are Romans,
whose faith was commended by the preaching of the Apostle, to whom falsehood
cannot have access. Where we see this holy Father joins together the principal
Church, and the Chair of Peter; and affirm^th that falsehood not only has not
had, but cannot have, access to that Sea: And elsewhere: Thou wrotest that I
should send Epist 52.
a Copy of the same letters to Cornelius our Colleague, that, laying aside all
solicitude, he might now be assured that thou did communicate with him, that
is, with the Catholic Church. What think you M. Doctor of these words? Is it
so strange a thing to take for one and the same thing, to communicate with the
Church and Pope of Rome, and to communicate with the Catholic Church! S.
Irenaeus says: Because it were long to number the succession of all Chu^ches,
Lib. 3 cont. haer c. 3.
we declaring the Tradition (and faith preached to men, and coming to us by
Tradition,) of the most great, most ancient, and most known Church, founded by
the two most glorious Apostles Peter and Paul, which Tradition it has from the
Apostles, coming to us by succession of Bishops; we confound all those who any
way either by evil complacence of themselves, or vain glory, or by blindness;
or ill opinion, do gather otherwise than they ought. For to this Church for a
more powerful Principality, it is necessary that all Churches resort, that is,
all faithful people of what place soever: in which (Roman Church) the Tradition
which is from the Apostles has always been conserved from those who are every
where. Saint Augustine says: It grieves us In Psalm. co^t. patr^m Donati.
to see you so to lie cut off. Number the Priests even from the Sea of Peter;
and consider in that order of Fathers who succeeded to whom. She is the Rock
which the proud Gates of Hell do not overcome. And in another place, speaking
of Caecilianus, he says: He might contem^ the conspiring Ep. 162.
multitude of his Enemies, because he knew himself to be united, by
Communicatory letters both to the Roman Church in which the Principality of the
Sea Apostolic did always flourish; and to other Count^ies from whence the
Gospel came first into Africa. Ancient Tertullian says: If thou be near Italy,
thou have Rome, whose Praescr. cap. 36.
Authority is n^er at hand to us: a happy Church, into which the Apostles have
poured all Doctrine, together with their blood. Saint Basil in a letter to the
Bishop of Rome says, In very deed that which was given Epist. ad Pont. Romans
by our Lord to thy Piety, is worthy of that must excellent voice which
proc^^^med thee Blessed, to wit, that thou may discern betwixt that which is
counterfeit, and that which is lawful and pure, and without any diminution
may preach the faith of our Ancestors. Maxim^nianus Bishop of
Constantinople about twelve hundred years ago, said: All the bounds of the
earth who have si^ccrely acknowledged our Lord, and Catholics through the
whole world professing the true faith look upon the power of the Bishop of
Rome, as upon the Sun, etc. For the Creator of the world, amongst all men of
the world elected him, (he speaks of S. Peter) to whom he granted the Chair of
Dectour to be principally possessed by a perpetual right of Privilege; that
whosoever is desirous to know any Divine and profound thing, may have recourse
to the Oracle, and Doctrine of this Instruction. John Patriarch of
Constantinople, more than eleven hundred years ago in an Epistle to Pope
Hormisda, writes thus: Because Epist ad Hormis. P. P.
the beginning of salvation is to conserve the rule of right Faith, and in no
wise to swarve from the Tradition of our Fore Fathers; because the words of our
Lord cannot fail, saying: Thou art Peter, and upon this Rock will I build my
Church; the proofs of deeds have made good those words, because in the Sea
Apostolical the Catholic Religion is always conserved inviolable. And again:
We promise hereafter not to recite in the sacred Mysteries the names of them
who are excluded from the Communion of the Catholic Church, that is to say,
who consent not fully with the Sea Apostolic. Many other Authorities of the
Ancient Fathers might be produced to this purpose; but these may serve to show;
that both the Latin, and Greek Fathers held for a Note of being a Catholic,
or an Heretic, To have been united, or divided from the Sea of Rome. And I
have purposely alleged only such Authorities of Fathers, as speak of the
privileges of the Sea of Rome, as of things permanent, and depending on our
Savior's promise to S. Peter, from which a general rule, and ground ought to
be taken for all Ages, because Heaven and Earth shall Mat. 24.35.
pass, but the word of our Lord shall remain for ever. So that I here conclude,
that seeing it is manifest that Luther and his followers divided themselves
from the Sea of Rome, they bear the inseparable Mark of Heresy.

20. And though my meaning be not to treat the point of Ordination, or
Succession, in the Protestants Church; because the Fathers alleged in the
last reason, assign Succession as one mark of the true Church, I must not omit
to say, that according to the grounds of Protestants themselves, they can
neither pretend personal Succession of Bishops, nor Succession of Doctrine. For
whereas Succession of Bishops signifies a never-interrupted line of Persons,
endued with an indelible Quality, which Divines call a Character, which cannot
be taken away by deposition, degradation, or other means whatsoever; and endued
also with Jurisdiction and Authority to teach, to preach, to govern the Church
by laws, precepts, censures, etc. Protestants cannot pretend Succession in
either of these. For (besides that there was never Protestant Bishop before
Luther, and that there can be no continuance of Succession, where there was no
beginning to succeed,) they commonly acknowledge no Character, and consequently
must affirm that when their pretended Bishops, or Priests are deprived of
Jurisdiction, or degraded, they remain mere lay persons as before their
Ordination; fulfilling what Tertullian objects as a mark of Heresy: To day a
Priest, to morrow Praescr. cap. 41.
a Layman. For if here be no immovable Character, their power of Order must
consist only in Jurisdiction, and authority, or in a kind of moral deputation
to some function, which therefore may be taken away by the same power, by which
it was given. Neither can they pretend Succession in Authority, or
Jurisdiction. For all the Authority, or Jurisdiction, which they had, was
conferred by the Church of Rome, that is, by the Pope: Because the whole Church
collectively does not meet to ordain Bishops or Priests, or to give them
Authority. But, according to their own doctrine, they believe that the Pope
neither has, or ought to have any Jurisdiction, Power, Superiority,
Pre-eminence, or Authority Ecclesiastical, or Spiritual within this Realm,
which they swear even when they are ordained Bishops, Priests, and Deacons: How
then can the Pope give Jurisdiction where they swear he neither has, or OUGHT
to have, any? Or, if yet he had, how could they without Schism withdraw
themselves from his obedience? Besides, the Roman Church never gave them
Authority to oppose Her, by whom it was given. But grant, their first Bishops
had such Authority from the Church of Rome: after the decease of those men, Who
gave Authority to their pretended Successors? The Primate of England? But from
whom had he such Authority? And after his decease, who shall conferr Authority
upon his Successors? The Temporal Magistrate? King Henry, neither a Catholic,
nor a Protestant? King Edward, a Child? Queen Elizabeth a Woman? An Infant of
one hours Age, is true King in case of his Predecessor's dec^ase: But shall
your Church lie fallow till that Infant-King and green Head of the Church come
to years of discretion? Do your Bishops, your Hierarchy, your Succession, your
Sacraments, your being, or not being. Heretics for want of Succession, depend
on this newfound Supremacy-doctrin brought in by such a man merely upon base
occasions, and for shameful ends; impugned by Calvin, and his followers;
derided by the Christian world; and even by chief Protestants, as D. Andrews,
Wotton, etc. not held for any necessary point of Faith? And from whom I pray
you, had Bishops their Authority when there were no Christian Kings? Must the
Greek Patriarchs receive spiritual Jurisdiction from the Great Turk? Did the
Pope by the Baptism of Princes, lose the spiritual Power he formerly had of
conferring spiritual Jurisdiction upon Bishops? Has the Temporal Magistrate
authority to preach, to assoil from sins, to inflict Excommunications, and
other Censures? Why has he not power to excommunicate, as well as to dispense
in Irregularity, as our late Sovereign Lord King James, either dispensed with
the late Archbishop of Canterbury, or else gave commission to some Bishops to
do it? And since they were subject to their Primate, and not he to them, it is
clear, that they had no power to dispense with him, but that power must proceed
from the Prince, as Superior to them all, and head of the Protestants Church
in England. If he have no such authority, how can he give to others what
himself has not? Your Ordination, or Consecration of Bishops and Priests
imprinting no Character, can only consist in giving a Power. Authority,
Jurisdiction, or (as I said before) some kind of Depuration to exercise
Episcopal, or Priestly functions: If then, the Temporal Magistrate conferrs
this power, etc. he can, nay he cannot choose but, Ordain and Consecrate
Bishops, and Priests, as often as he conferrs Authority or Jurisdiction: and
your Bishops as soon as they are designed and confirmed by the King, must ipso
facto be Ordained and Consecrated by him without intervention of Bishops, or
Matter and Form of Ordination: Which absurdities you will be more unwilling to
grant, than well able to avoid, if you will be true to your own doctrins. The
Pope from whom originally you must beg your Succession of Bishops, never
received, nor will, nor can acknowledge to receive any Spiritual Jurisdiction
from any Temporal Prince, and therefore if Jurisdiction must be derived from
Princes, he has none at all: and yet either you must acknowledge, that he has
true Spiritual Jurisdiction, or that your selves can receive none from him.

21. Moreover, this new Reformation, or Reformed Church of Protestants, will by
them be pretended to be Catholic or Universal, and not confined to England
alone, as the Sect of the Donatists was to Africa: and therefore it must
comprehend all the Reformed Churches in Germany, Holland, Scotland, France,
etc. In which number, they of Germany, Holland, and France are not governed by
Bishops, nor regard any personal succession, unless of such fat-beneficed
Bishops as Nicholas Amsfordius, who was consecrated by Luther, (though Luther
himself was never Bishop) as witnesses In Millenario sexto Page 187.
Dresserus. And though Scotland has of late admitted some Bishops, I much
doubt whether they hold them to be necessary, or of divine Institution; and so
their enforced admitting of them, does not so much furnish that Kingdom with
personal succession of Bishops, as it does convince them to want succession of
doctrine; since in this their neglect of Bishops, they disagree both from the
milder Protestants of England, and the true Catholic Church: And by this want
of a continued personal Succession of Bishops, they retain the note of Schism,
and Heresy. So that the Church of Protestants must either not be universal, as
being confined to England; Or if you will needs comprehend all those Churches
which want succession, you must confess, that your Church does not only
communicate with Schismatical and Heretical Churches, but is also compounded of
such Churches, and your selves cannot avoid the note of Schismatiques, or
Heretics, if it were but for participating with such heretical Churches. For
it is impossible to retain Communion with the true Catholic Church, and yet
agree with them who are divided from her by Schism, or Heresy; because that
were to affirm, that for the self same time, they could be within and without
the Catholic Church, as proportionably I discoursed in the next precedent
Chapter, concerning the communicating of moderate Protestants with those who
maintain that Heresy of the Latency and Invisibility of Gods Church, where I
brought a place of S. Cyprian to this purpose, which the Reader may be pleased
to review in the fifth Chapter, and 17 Number.

22 But besides this defect in the personal Succession of Protestant Bishops,
there is another of great moment; which is, that they want the right Form of
ordaining Bishops, and Priests, because the manner which they use is so much
different from that of the Roman Church (at least according to the common
opinion of Divines) that it cannot be sufficient for the Essence of Ordination;
as I could demonstrate if this were the proper place of such a Treat^fe, and
will not fa^l to do if D. Potter give me occasion. In the mean time the Reader
may be pleased to read the Author See Adam. Tannerum tom. 4. disp. 7. quaest.
2. dub. 3. and 4.
cited here in the margent, and the compare the form of our Ordination with
that of Protestants; and to remember that if the form which they use either in
consecrating Bishops, or in ordaining Priests be at least doubtful, they can
neither have undoubted Priests, nor Bishops. For Priests cannot be ordained but
by true Bishops, nor can any be a true Bishop, unless he first be Priest. I
say, their Ordination is at least doubtful; because that suffices for my
present purpose. For Bishops and Priests, whose Ordination is notoriously known
to be but doubtful, are not to be esteemed Bishops, or Priests: and no man
without Sacrilege can receive Sacraments from them; all which they administer
unlawfully: And (if we except Baptism, with manifest danger of invalidity, and
with obligation to be at least conditionally repeated) so Protestants must
remain doubtful of Remission of sins, of their Ecclesiastical Hierarchy and may
not pretend to be a true Church; which cannot subsist without undoubted true
Bishops and Priests, nor without due administration of Sacraments, which
(according to Protestants) is an essential note of the true Church. And it is a
world to observe the proceeding of English Protestants in this point of their
Ordinations. For first, An 3. Edw. 6. cap. 2. when he was a Child about 12.
years of age, It was enacted, that such Dyer. fol. 234. term. Mich. 6, and 7.
Eliz.
form of making, and consecrating of Bishops and Priests, as by six Prelates,
and six other to be appointed by the King, should be divised (mark this word
devised) and set forth under the great Seal; should be used, and none other.
But after this Act was repealed 1. Mar. Sess 2. in so much as that when
afterward An. 6. and 7. Reg. Eliz. Bishop Bonner being endicted upon a
certificate made by D. Horn a Protestant Bishop of Winchester, for his refusal
of the Oath of Supremacy; and he excepting against the indictment because D.
Horn was no Bishop; all the Judges resolved that his exception was good, if
indeed D. Horn was not Bishop, and they were all at a stand, till An S. Eliz.
cap. 1. the Act of Edw 6. was renewed and confirmed, with a particular proviso,
that no man should be impeached or molested by means of any certificate by any
Bishop or Archbishop made before this last Act. Whereby it is clear, that they
made some doubt of their own ordination, and that there is nothing but
uncertainty in the whole business of their Ordination, which (forsooth) must
depend upon Six Prelates, the great Seal, Acts of Parliament being contrary one
to another, and the like.

23 But though they want Personal Succession, yet at least they have succession
of Doctrine as they say, and pretend to prove, because they believe as the
Apostles believed. This is to beg the Question, and to take what, they may be
sure, will never be granted. For if they want Personal Succession, and slight
Ecclesiastical Tradition, how will they persuade any man, that they agree with
the doctrine of the Apostles? We have heard Tertullian saying: I will prescribe
Sup. c. 5.
(against all Heretics) that there is no means to prove what the Apustles
preached, but by the same Churches which they founded. And S. Irenaeus tells us
that, We may L. 3. c. 5.
behold the Tradition of the Apostles in every Church, if men be desirous to
hear the truth, and we can number them who were made Bishops by the Apostles in
Churches, and their Successors even to us. And the same Father in another place
says: We ought to obey L. 4. c. 43.
those Priests who are in the Church, who have Succession from the Apostles,
and who together with Succession in their Bishoprics have received the certain
gift of truth. S. Augustine says: I am kept in the Church Cont^ epist. Fundam.
c. 4.
by the succession of Priests from the very Sea of Peter the Apostle, to whom
our Savior after his Resurrection committed his sheep to be fed, even to the
present Bishop. Origin to this purpose gives us a good and wholesome Rule
(happy, if himself had followed the same) in these excellent words: Since there
be many who think Praef. ad lib. Periarchon.
they believe the things which are of Christ, and some are of different opinion
from those who went before them; let the preaching of the Church be kept, which
is delivered by the Apostles by order of Succession, and remains in the Church
to this very day; that only is to be believed for truth, which in nothing
disagrees from the Tradition of the Church. In vain then do these men brag of
the doctrine of the Apostles, unless first they can demonstrate that they
enjoyed a continued succession of Bishops from the Apostles, and can show us a
Church which, according to S. Austin, is deduced by undoubted SUCCESSION from
the Sea Cont. Faust. cap. 2.
of the Apostles, even to the present Bishops.

24 But yet nevertheless, suppose it were granted, that they agreed with the
doctrine of the Apostles this were not sufficient to prove a Succession in
Doctrine. For Succession, besides agreement or similitude, does also require a
never-interrupted conveying of such doctrine, from the time of the Apostles,
till the days of those persons, who challenge such a Succession. And so S
Augustine says: we are to believe that Gospel which from the time of the
Apostles, the Lib. 28. cont. Faust. cap. 2.
Church has brought down to our days by a never-interrupted course of times
and by undoubted succession of connection. Now, that the Reformation, begun by
Luther, was interrupted for diverse ages before him, is manifest our of History,
and by his endeavoring a Reformation, which must presuppose Abuses. He cannot
therefore pretend a continued Succession of that Doctrine which he sought to
revive, and reduce to the knowledge, and practice of men. And they ought not to
prove that they have a Succession of doctrine, because they agreee with the
doctrine of the Apostles; but contrarily we must infer, that they agree not with
the Apostles, because they cannot pretend a never-interrupted succession of
doctrine from the times of the Apostles, till Luther. And here it is not amiss
to note, that although the Waldeases, Wickliff, etc. had agreed with
Protestants in all points of doctrine; yet they could not brag of Succession
from them, because their doctrine has not been free from interruption, which
necessarily crosses Succession.

25 And as want of Succession of Persons and Doctrine, cannot stand with that
Universality of Time, which is inseparable from the Catholic Church; so
likewise the disagreeing Sects which are dispersed throughout diverse Countries,
and Nations, cannot help toward that Universality of Place, wherewith the true
Church must be endued: but rather such local multiplication, does more and more
lay open their division, and want of succession in Doctrine. For the excellent
Observation of S. Augustine does punctually agree with all modern Heretics;
wherein this holy Father having cited these words our of the Prophet Ezechiel,
Cap. 24.
My flocks are dispersed upon the whole face of the Earth; he adds this
remarkable sentence: Not all Heretics Lib. de Pastorib. c. 8.
are spread over the face of the Earth, and yet there are Heretics spread
over the whole face of the Earth, some here, some there, yet they are wanting
in no place, they know not one another. One Sect for example in Africa, another
Heresy in the East, another in Egypt, another in Mesopotania. In diverse places
there are diverse: one Mother, pride has begot them all; as our own Mother the
Catholic Church has brought forth all saithful people dispersed throughout
the whole world. No wonder then, if Pride breed Dissension, and Charity Union.
And in another place applying to Heretics those words of the Canticles: If
thou know not Cant. 1.
thy self, go forth, and follow after the steps of the flocks, and seed the
kids; he says: If thou know not thy self, go Ep. 48.
thou forth, I do not cast thee out, but go thou out, that it may be said of
thee; They went from us, but they were not of us. Go thou out in the steps of
the flocks; not in my steps, but in the steps of the flocks; nor of one flock,
but of diverse and wandering flocks; And feed thy Kids, not as Peter, to whom is
said, Feed thy sheep: but seed thy kids in the Tabernacle of the Pastors, not
in the Tabernacle of the Pastor, where there is one flock, and one Pastor. In
which words this holy Father does set down the Marks of Heresy, to wit, going
out from the Church, and Want of Unity among themselves, which proceed from not
acknowledging one supreme Visible Pastor and Head under Christ. And so it being
Proved, that Protestants hav^^ neither succession of Persons, nor Doctrine, nor
Universality of Time, or Place, cannot avoid the just note of Heresy.

26 Hitherto we have brought arguments to prove, that Luther, and all
Protestants are guilty of Heresy against the Negative Precept of says, which
obliges (...) under pain of damnation, not to embrace any one error, contrary
to any Truth sufficiently propounded, as testified or revealed by Almighty God.
Which were enough to make good, that among Persons who disagree in any one
Point of Faith, one part only can be saved: Yet we will now prove that
whosoever erreth in any one point, does also break the Affirmative Precept of
Faith, whereby we are obliged positively, to believe some revealed truth with
an infallible, and supernatural Faith, which is necessary to salvation, even
necessitate sinis, or medii, as Divines speak; that is, so necessary that not
any, after he is come to the use of Reason, was or can be saved without it,
according to the words of the Apostle: Without says Heb. 11.6.
it is impossible to please God.

27 In the beginning of this Chapter I showed, that to Christian Catholic
faith are required Certainty, Obscurity, Prudence, and Supernaturality; All
which Conditions we will prove to be wanting in the belief of Protestants even
in those points which are true in themselves, and to which they yield assent,
as happens in all those particulars, wherein they agree with us; from whence
it will follow, that they wanting true Divine says, want means absolutely
necessary to salvation.

The faith of Protestants wants Certainty.
28 And first, that their belief wants Certainty I prove, because they denying
the Universal infallibility of the Church can have no certain ground to know
what Objects are revealed, or testified by God. Holy Scripture is in it self
most true and infallible; but without the direction and declaration of the
Church, we can neither have certain means to know what Sc^ipture is Canonical,
nor what Translations be faithful, nor what is the true meaning of Scripture.
Every Protestant, as I suppose, is persuaded that his own opinions be true, and
that he has used such means as are wont to be prescribed for understanding the
Scripture, as Prayer, Conferring of diverse Texts, etc. and yet their
disagreements show that some of them are deceived: And therefore it is clear
that they have no one certain ground whereon to rely for understanding of
Scripture. And seeing they hold all the Articles of Faith, even concerning
fundamental points, upon the self same ground of Scripture, interpreted, not by
the Churches Authority, according to some other Rules, which, as experience of
their contradictions teach, do sometimes fail; it is clear that the ground of
their faith is infallible in no point at all. And albeit sometime it chance to
hit on the truth, yet it is likewise apt to lead them to error: As all
Arch-heretiques believing some truths, and withal diverse errors upon the same
ground and motive, have indeed no true divine infallible faith, but only a
fallible humane opinion, and persuasion. For if the ground upon which they rely
were certain, it could never produce any error.

29 Another cause of uncertainty in the faith of Protestants, must rise from
their distinction of points fundamental, and not fundamental. For since they
acknowledge, that every error in fundamental points destroys the substance of
faith, and yet cannot determine what points be fundamental, it follows that
they must remain uncertain whether or no they be not in some fundamental error,
and so want the substance of faith, without which there can be no hope of
Salvation.

30 And that he who erreth against any one revealed truth (as certainly some
Protestants must de, because contradictory Propositions cannot both be true)
does lose all Divine says, is a very true doctrine delivered by Catholic
Divines, with so general a consent, that the contrary is wont to be censured as
temerarious. The Angelical Doctor S. Thomas proposes this Question: Whether 23
q. ^ a^^ 3. in corp.
he who denies one Article of says, may retain says in other Articles? and
resolves that he cannot: which he proves, (Argumento, sed contra) because, As
deadly sin is opposite to charity; so to deny one Article of says is opposite
to says. But charity does not remain with any one deadly sin; Therefore faith
does not remain after the denial of any one Article of faith. Whereof he gives
this farther reason: Because (says he) the nature of every habit does depend
upon the formal Motive and Object thereof, which Motive being taken away, the
nature of the habit cannot remain. But the formal object of says is the
supreme Truth as it is manifesied in Scriptures, and in the doctrine of the
Church which proceed from the same supreme Verity. Whosoever therefore does not
rely upon the doctrine of the Church (which proceeds from the supreme Verity,
manifested in Scripture) as upon an infallible Rule, he has not the habit of
faith, but believes those things which belong to faith, by some other means
than by faith: as, if one should remember some conclusion, and not know the
reason of that demonstration, it is clear that he has not certain Knowledge,
but only Opinion. Now it is manifest, that he who relies on the doctrine of the
Church, as upon an infallible Rule, will yield his assent to all, that the
Church teaches. For, if among those things which she teaches, he hold what he
will, and does not hold what he will not, he does not rely upon the doctrine of
the Church, as upon an infallible Rule, but only upon his own will. And so it
is clear, that an Heretic, who with pertinacity denies one Article of says,
is not ready to follow the doctrine of the Church in all things: And therefore
it is manifest, that whosoever is an Heretic in any one Article of faith,
concerning other Articles, has not faith, but a kind of Opinion, or his own
Will. Thus far S. Thomas. And afterward: A man does believe Ad. 2.
all the Articles of faith for one and the self same reason, to wit, for the
Prime Verity proposed to us in the Scripture, understood aright according to
the Doctrine of the Church: and therefore whosoever falls from this reason, or
motive, is totally deprived of says. From this true doctrine we are to infe^r,
that to retain, or want the substance o^ faith, does not consist in the matter,
or multitude of the Articles, but in the opposition against God's divine
testimony, which is involved in every least error against faith. And since some
Protestants must needs e^r, and that they have no certain rule to know, why
rather one than another; it manifestly follows that none of them have any
Certainty for the substance of their faith in any one point. Moreover D.
Potter, being forced to confess that the Roman Church wants not the substance
of faith, it follows that she does not err in any one point against faith,
because, as we have seen out of S. Thomas, every such error destroys the
substance of faith. Now, if the Roman Church did not err in any one point of
faith, it is manifest that Protestants err in all those points wherein they are
contrary to her. And this may suffice to prove that the faith of Protestants
wants Infallibility.

They want the second Condition of Faith: Obscurity.
31 And now for the second Condition of faith, I say: If Protestants have
Certainly, they want Obscurity, and so have not that faith, which, as the
Apostle says, is of things not appearing, or no^ necessitating our
understanding to an assent. For the whole edifice of the faith of Protestants,
is settled on these two Principles; These particular Books are Canonical
Scripture: And the sense and meaning of these Canonical Scriptures, is clear
and evident, at least in all points necessary to Salvation. Now th^se
Principles being once supposed, it clearly follows that what Protestants
believe as necessary to salvation is evidently known by them to be true, by
this argument: It is certain and evident, that whatsoever is contained in the
word of God, is true. But it is certain and evident, that these Books in
particular are the word of God: Therefore it is certain and evident, that
whatsoever is contained in these Books is true. Which Conclusion I take for a
Major in a second Argument, and say thus: It is certain and evident, that
whatsoever is contained in these Books is true: But it is certain and evident,
that such particular Articles (for example, The Trinity, Incarnation, Original
sin, etc.) are contained in these Books: Therefor it is certain and evident,
that these particular Objects are true. Neither will it avail you to say, that
the said Principles are not evident by natural discourse, but only to the eye
of reason cleared by grace, as you speak. For supernatural evidence, no less
(yea rather more) draws and excludes obscurity, than natural evidence does:
neither can the party so enlightened be said voluntarily to caprivate his
understanding to that light, but rather his understanding is by a necessity
made captive, and forced not to disbelieve, what is presented by so clear a
light: And therefore your imaginary faith is not the true faith defined by the
Apostle, but an invention of your own.

Their faith wants Prudence.
32 That the faith of Protestants wants the third Condition which was
Prudence, is deduced from all that hitherto h^th been said. What wisdom was it,
to forsake a Church confessedly very ancient, and besides which, there could be
demonstrated no other visible Church of Christ upon earth? A Church
acknowledged to want nothing necessary to Salvation; endued with Succession of
Bishops, with Visibility and Universality of Time and Place; A Church which if
it be not the true Church, her enemies cannot pretend to have any Church,
Ordination, Scriptures, Succession, etc. and are forced for their own sake, to
maintain her perpetual Existence, and Being. To leave, I say, such a Church,
and frame a Community, without either Unity, or means to procure it; a Church
which at Luther's first re-revolt had no larger extent than where his body was;
a Church without Universality of Place or Time; A Church which can pretend no
Visibility or Being, except only in that former Church which it opposes; a
Church void of Succession of Persons or Doctrine? What wisdom was it to follow
such men as Luther, in an opposition against the Visible Church of Christ,
begun upon mere passion? What wisdom is it to receive from Us, a Church,
Ordination, Scriptures, Personal Succession, and not Succession of Doctrine? Is
not this to verefie the name of Heresy, which signifies Election or Choice?
Whereby they cannot avoid that note of Imprudency, or (as S. Augustine calls
it) Foolishness, set down by him against the Manichees, and by me recited
before. I would not (says he) believe Cont. ep. Fund. c. 5.
the Gospel, unless the Authority of the Church did move me. Those therefore
whom I obeyed, saying. Believe the Gospel, why should I not obey the same men
saying to me, Do not believe Manichaeus, (Luther, Calvin, etc.). Choose what
thou please: If thou say, Believe the Catholics; they warn me not to
believe thee. Wherefore if I believe them, I cannot believe thee. If thou say,
Do not believe the Catholics, thou shall not do well, in forcing me to the
says of Manichaeus, because by the Preaching of Catholics, I believed the
Gospel it self. If thou say; you did well to believe them (Catholics)
commending the Gospel, but you did not well to believe them, discommending
Manichaeus; do thou think me so very FOOLISH, that, without any reason at
all, I should believe what thou will, and not believe, what thou will not? Nay,
this holy Father is not content to call it Fool shness, but mere Madness, in
these words: Why should I not most diligently enquire Lib de util. Cred. c. 14.
what Christ commanded of those before all others, by whose Authority I was
moved to believe, that Christ commanded any good thing? Can thou better
declare to me, what he said, whom I would not have thought to have been, or to
be, if the Belief thereof had been recommended by thee to me? This therefore I
believed by fame, strengthened with Celebrity, Consent, Antiquity. But every one
may see that you, so few, so turbulent, so new, can produce nothing which
deserves Authority. What MADNESS is this? Believe them (Catholics) that we
ought to believe Christ; but learn of us what Christ said, why I beseech thee?
Surely if they (Catholics) were not at all, and could not teach me any thing,
I would more easily persuade my self, that I were not to believe Christ, then I
should learn any thing concerning him from other than those, by whom I believed
him. Lastly, I ask, What wisdom it could be to leave all visible Churches; and
consequently the true Catholic Church of Christ, which you confess cannot err
in points necessary to salvation, and the Roman Church which you grant does not
err in fundamentals, and follow private men who may err even in points
necessary to salvation? Especially, if we add, that when Luther rose, there was
no visible true Catholic Church besides that of Rome, and them who agreed
with her; in which sense, she was, and is, the only true Church of Christ and
not capable of any Error in faith. Nay, even Luther, who first opposed the
Roman Church, yet coming to dispute against other Heretics, he is forced to
give the Lie both to his own words and deeds, in saying: We freely confess In
epist. cont. Anab. ad duos Paroches to. 2. Germ. Wit. fol. 229 and 230.
that in the Papacy there are many good things, worthy the name of Christian,
which have come from them to us. Namely, we consess that in the Papacy there is
true Scripture, true Baptism; the true Sacrament of the Altar, the true keys
for the remission of sins, the true office of Preaching, true Catechism, as our
Lords Prayer, Ten Commandments, Articles of faith, etc. And afterward: I
avouch, that under the Papacy is true Christianity, yea the K^^n^land Marrow of
Christianity, and many pious and great Saints. And again he affirms, that the
Church of Rome has the true Spirit, Gospel, Faith, Baptism, Sacraments, the
Keys, the Office of Preaching, Prayer, Holy Scripture, and whatsoever
Christianity ought to have. And a little before: I hear and see that they bring
in Anabaptism only to this end, that they may spite the Pope, as men that will
receive nothing from Antichrist; no otherwise than the Sacramentaries do, who
therefore believe only Bread and Wine to be in the Sacrament, merely in hatred
against the Bishop of Rome; and they think that by this means they shall
overcome the Papacy. Verily these men rely upon a weak ground; for by this
means they must deny the whole Scripture, and the Office of Preaching. For we
have all these things from the Pope, otherwise we must go make a new Scripture.
O Truth, more forcible (as S. Austin says) to wring out Cont. Donat. past
collat. c 24.
Confession, then is any rack, or torment! And so we may truly say with Moses:
Inimici nostri sunt Judices: Our very Enemies give Deuteronomy. 32.31. Their faith
wants Supernaturality.
sentence for us.

33 Lastly, since your faith wants Certainty and Prudence, it is easy to
infer that it wants the fourth Condition, Supernaturality. For being but an
Humane persuasion, or Opinion, it is not, in nature or essence Supernatural.
And being imprudent and rash, it cannot proceed from Divine Motion, and grace;
and therefore it is neither supernatural in it self, not in the cause from
which it proceeds.

34 Since therefore we have proved, that whosoever errs against any one point
of faith, loses all divine faith, even concerning those other Articles wherein
he does not err; and that although he could still retain true faith for some
points, yet any one error in whatsoever matter concerning faith, is a grievous
sin; it clearly follows, that when two or more hold different doctrins
concerning faith and Religion, there can be but one Part saved. For declaring
of which truth, if Catholics be charged with want of Charity, and Modesty,
and be accused of rashness, ambition, and fury, as D. Potter is very free in
this kind: I desire every one to ponder the whole words of S. Chrysostom, who
teaches, that every least error overthrows all faith, and whosoever is guilty
thereof is in the Church, like one, who in the Common wealth forgeth false
coin. Let them hear (says this holy Father) what S. Paul says: Namely, that
they who brought in some small, error Gal. 1.7.
had overthrown the Gospel. For, to show how small a thing ill mingled does
corrupt the whole, he said, that the Gospel was subverted. For as he who clips
a little of the stamp from the King's money, makes the whole piece of no value:
so whosoever takes away ^he least particle of sound faith, is wholly corrupted,
always going from that beginning to worse things. Where then are they, who
condemn us as contentious persons, because we cannot agree with Heretics: and
do often say, that there is no difference betwixt us and them, but that our
disagreement proceeds from Ambition to domineer? And thus having showed that
Protestants want true Faith, it remains that, according to my first design, I
examine whether they do not also want Charity, as it respects a man's self.

The ANSWER to the SIXTH CHAPTER, That Protestants are not Heretics.
HE that will accuse any one man, much more any great multitude of men, of any
great and horrible crime, should in all reason and justice take care that the
greatness of his Evidence do equal, if not exceed, the quality of the crime.
And such an accusation you would here make show of, by pretending, first, Ad.
Sect. 1.
to lay such grounds of it, as are either already proved; or else yielded on
all sides: and after to raise a firm and stable structure of convincing
arguments upon them. But both these I find to be mere and vain pretenses, and
having considered this Chapter also without prejudice or passion, as I did the
former, I am enforced by the light of Truth, to pronounce your whole discourse,
a painted and ruinous building upon a weak and sandy Foundation.

2 Ad. 2, 3. First for your grounds; a great part of them, is falsely said to
be either proved or granted. It is true indeed, that Man by his natural wit or
industry could never have attained to the knowledge of Gods will to give him a
supernatural and eternal happiness; nor of the means, by which his pleasure was
to bestow this happiness upon him. And therefore your first ground is good,
That is was requisite his understanding should be enabled to apprehend that end
and means, by a knowledge supernatural. I say this is good, if you mean by
knowledge, an apprehension or belief. But, if you take the word properly and
exactly, it is both false; for faith is not knowledge, no more than three is
four, but eminently contained in it: so that he that knows, believes and
something more; but he that believes, many times does not know; nay, if he does
barely and merely believe he does never know: and besides, it is retracted by
your self presently, where you require, That the object of faith must be both
naturally and supernaturally unknown. And again in the next page, where you
say, Faith differs from science in regard of the object's obscurity. For that
science and knowledge properly taken are Synonymous terms, and that a knowledge
of a thing absolutely unknown is a plain implicancy; I think, are things so
plain, that you will not require any proof of them.

3 But then whereas you add, that, if such a knowledge were no more than
probable, it could not be able sufficiently to overbear our will, and encounter
with humane probabilities, being backed with the strength of flesh and blood,
and therefore conclude, that it was farther necessary, that this supernatural
knowledge should be most certain and infallible: To this I answer, that I do
heartily acknowledge and believe, the Articles of our faith be in themselves
Truths, as certain and infallible as the very common Principles of Geometry and
Metaphysics. But that there is required of us a knowledge of them, and an
adherence to them, as certain as that offense or science; that such a certainty
is required of us under pain of damnation, so that no man can hope to be in the
state of salvation, but he that finds in himself such a degree of faith, such a
strength of adherence: This I have already demonstrated to be a great error,
and of dangerous and pernicious consequence. And because I am more and more
confirmed in my persuasion that the truth which I there delivered, is of great
and singular use, I will here confirm it with more reasons. And to satisfy you
that this is no singularity of my own, my Margent presents you with a M. Hooker
in his answer to Travers his Supplication; I have taught, that the assurance of
things which we believe by the word, is not so certain as of that we perceive
by sense. And is it as certain? Yea I taught, that the things which God does
promise in his world are surer unto us than any thing we touch, handle, or see.
But are we so sure and certain of them? If we be, why does God so often prove
his promises unto us, as he does, by arguments taken from our sensible
experience? We must be surer of the proof than the thing proved, otherwise it
is no proof. How is it that if ten men do all look upon the Moon, every one of
them knows it as certainly to be the Moon as another: but many believing one
and the same promises, all have not one and the same fullness of persuasion? How
falls it our, that men being assured of any thing by sense can be no surer of
it than they are? whereas the strongest in faith that lives upon the earth,
had always need to labor, and strive, and pray, that his assurance concerning
heavenly and spiritual things may grow, increase, and be augmented.
Protestant Divine of great authority, and no way singular in his opinions, who
has long since preached and justified the same doctrine.

4 I say, that every Text of Scripture which makes mention of any that were
weak, or of any that were strong in faith: of any that were of little, or any
that were of great faith: of any that abounded, or any that were rich in faith;
of increasing, growing, rooting grounding, establishing, confirming in faith:
Every such Text, is a demonstrative refutation of this vain fancy: proving that
faith, even true and saving faith, is not a thing consisting in such an
indivisible point of perfection as you make it, but capable of augmentation and
diminution. Every prayer you make to God to increase your faith, or (if you
conceive such a prayer derogatory from the perfection of your faith,) the
Apostles praying to Christ to increase their faith, is a convincing argument of
the same conclusion. Moreover, if this doctrine of yours were true, then, seeing
not any the least doubting can consist with a most infallible certainty, it
will follow that every least doubting in any matter of faith, though resisted
and involuntary, is a damnable sin, absolutely destructive, so long as it
lasts, of all true and saving faith: which you are so far from granting, that
you make it no sin at all, but only an occasion of merit: and if you should
esteem it a sin, then must you acknowledge, contrary to your own Principles,
that there are Actual sins merely involuntary. The same is furthermore
invincibly confirmed by every deliberate sin that any Christian commits; by any
progress in Charity that he makes. For seeing, as S. John assures us, our faith
is the victory which overcomes the world, certainly if the faith of all true
Believers were perfect, (and, if true faith be capable of no imperfection, if
all faith be a knowledge most certain and infallible, all faith must be
perfect; for the most imperfect that is, according to your doctrine, if it be
true, must be most certain; and sure the most perfect that is cannot be more
than most certain,) then certainly their victory over the world, and therefore
over the flesh, and therefore over sin, must of necessity be perfect, and so it
should be impossible for any true believer to commit any deliberate sin, and
therefore he that commits any sin, must not think himself a true believer.
Besides, seeing faith works by Charity, and Charity is the effect of faith:
certainly if the cause were perfect, the effect would be perfect, and
consequently as you make no degrees in Faith, so there would be none in
Charity, and so no man could possibly make any progress in it, but all crew
believers should be equal in Charity, as in faith you make them equal: and from
thence it would follow unavoidably, that whosoever finds in himself any true
faith, must presently persuade himself that he is perfect in Charity: and
whosoever, on the other side, discovers in his charity any imperfection must
not believe that he has any true faith. These, you see, are strange and
portentous consequences, and yet the deduction of them from your doctrine is
clear and apparent; which shows this doctrine of yours, which you would fain
have true, that there might be some necessity of your Churches infallibility,
to be indeed plainly repugnant not only to Truth but even to all Religion and
Piety, and fit for nothing but to make men negligent of making any progress in
Faith or Charity. And therefore I must entreat and adjure you either to
discover unto me (which I take God to witness I cannot perceive,) some fallacy
in my reasons against it, or never hereafter to open your mouth in defense of
it.

5 As for that one single reason which you produce to confirm it, it will
appear upon examination to be resolved finally into a groundless. Assertion of
your own, contrary to all Truth and experience, and that is, That no degree of
faith, less than a most certain and infallible knowledge, can be able
sufficiently to overbear our will, and encounter with humane probabilities,
being backed with the strength of Flesh and Blood. For who sees not that many
millions in the world forgo many times their present ease and pleasure, undergo
great and toilsom labors, encounter great difficulties, adventure upon great
dangers, and all this not upon any certain expectation, but upon a probable
hope of some future gain and commodity, and that not infinite and eternal, but
finite and temporal? Who sees not that many men abstain from many things they
exceedingly desire, not upon any certain assurance, but a probable fear of
danger that may come after? What man ever was there so madly in love with a
present penny, but that he would willingly spend it upon any little hope that
by doing so he might gain an hundred thousand pound? And I would fain know,
what gay probabilities you could devise to dissuade him from this Resolution.
And, if you can devise none, what reason then, or sense is there, but that a
probable hope of infinite and eternal happiness, provided for all those that
obey Christ Jesus, and much more a firm faith, though not so certain, in some
sort, as sense or science, may be able to sway our will to obedience, and
encounter with all those temptations which Flesh and Blood can suggest to avert
us from it? Men may talk their pleasure of an absolute and most infallible
certainty, but did they general believe that obedience to Christ were the only
way to present and eternal felicity, but as firmly and undoubtedly as that
there is such a City as Constantinople, nay but as much as Caesar's
Commentaries, or the History of Salust; I believe the lives of most men, both
Papists and Protestants would be better than they are. Thus therefore out of
your own words I argue against you: He that requires to true faith, an absolute
and infallible certainty, for this only Reason because any less degree, could
not be able to overbear our will, etc. imports, that if a less degree of faith
were able to do this, then a less degree of faith may be true and divine and
saving Faith: But, experience shows, and reason confirms, that a firm faith,
though not so certain as sense or science, may be able to encounter and
overcome our will and affections: And therefore it follows from your own
reason, that faith, which is not a most certain and infallible knowledge, may
be true and divine and saving faith.

6 All these Reasons I have employed to show that such a most certain and
infallible faith as here you talk of, is not so necessary, but that without
such a high degree of it, it is possible to please God. And therefore the
Doctrins delivered by you. 26 are most presumptuous and uncharitable: viz. That
such a most certain and infallible faith is necessary to salvation, Necessitate
Finis, or Medii; so necessary, that after a man is come to the use of reason,
no man ever was or can be saved without it. Wherein you boldly intrude into the
judgment-feat of God, and damn men for breaking Laws, not of God's but your own
making. But withal, you clearly contradict yourself, not only where you
affirm, That your faith depends finally upon the Tradition of Age to Age, of
Father to Son, which cannot be a fit ground, but only for a Moral Assurance;
nor only, where you pretend, that not alone Hearing and Seeing, but also
Histories, Letters, Relations of many (which certainly are things not certain
and infallible,) are yet foundations good enough to support your faith; Which
Doctrine, if it were good and allowable, Protestants might then hope that their
Histories, and Letters, and Relations might also pass for means sufficient of a
sufficient Certainty, and that they should not be excluded from Salvation for
want of such a Certainty. But indeed the pressure of the present difficulty
compelled you to speak here, what I believe you will not justify, and with a
pretty tergiversation to show D. Potter your means of moral certainty; whereas
the Objection was, that you had no means or possibility of infallible
certainty, for which you are plainly at as great a loss, and as far to seek, as
any of your Adversaries. And therefore it concerns you highly not to damn
others for want of it, lest you involve your selves in the same condemnation;
according to those terrible words of S. Paul, Thou art inexcusable, O Man,
whosoever thou art that judge: For, wherein thou judge another, thou
condemnest thy self; for thou that judge do the same things, etc. In this
therefore you plainly contradict your self. And lastly most plainly, in saying
as you do here, you contradict and retract your pretense of Charity to
Protestants in the beginning of your Book: For there you make profession, that
you have no assurance but that Protestants dying Protestants, may possibly die
with contrition, and be saved: And here you are very peremptory, that they
cannot but want a means absolutely necessary to salvation, and wanting that
cannot but be damned.

The third Condition you require to faith, is, that our assent to divine Truths
should not only be unknown and unevident by any humane discourse, but that
absolutely also it should be obscure in it self, and, ordinarily speaking, be
void even of supernatural evidence. Which words must have a very favorable
construction, or else they will not be sense. For who can make any thing of
these words taken properly, that faith must be an unknown unevident assent or
an assent absolutely obscure? I had always thought, that known and unknown,
obscure and evident had been affections, not of our Assent, but the Object of
it, not of our belief, but the thing believed. For well may we assent to a
thing unknown, obscure, or unevident; but that our assent it self should be
called therefore unknown or obscure, seems to me as great an impropriety, as if
I should say, Your sight were green or blew, because you see something that is
so. In other places, therefore, I answer your words, but here I must answer
your meaning: which I conceive to be, That it is necessary to faith that the
Objects of it, the points which we believe, should not be so evidently certain,
as to necessitate our understanding to an Assent, that so there might be some
merit in faith, as you love to speak (who will not receive no not from God
himself, but a pennyworth for a penny,) but, as we, some obedience in it,
which can hardly have place where there is no possibility of disobedience; as
there is not, where the understanding does all, and the will nothing. Now
seeing the Religion of Protestants, thought it be much more credible than
yours, yet is not pretended to have the absolute evidence of sense or
demonstration; therefore I might let this doctrine pass without exception, for
any prejudice that can redound to us by it. But yet I must not forbear to tell
you; that your discourse proves indeed this condition requisite to the merit,
but yet not to the essence of faith: without it faith were not an act of
obedience, but yet faith may be faith without it; and this you must confess,
unless you will say either the Apostles believed not the whole Gospel which
they preached, or that they were not cy-witnesses of a great part of it: unless
you will question S. John for saying that which we have seen with our eyes, and
which our hands have handled, etc declare we unto you: nay our Savior himself
for saying, Thomas because thou see, thou believe, Blessed are they which
have not seen and yet have believed. Yet, if you will say that in respect of
the things which they saw, the Apostles assent was not pure and proper and mere
faith, but somewhat more; an assent containing faith but superadding to it, I
will not contend with you; for it will be a contention about words. But then
again I must crave leave to tell you, that the requiring this condition, is in
my judgment a plain revocation of the former. For had you made the matter of
faith either naturally or supernaturally evident, it might have been a fitly
attempered and duly proportioned object for an absolute certainty natural or
supernatural: But requiring as you do, that faith should be an absolute
knowledge of a thing not absolutely known, an infallible certainty of a thing,
which, though it be in it self, yet it is not made appear to us to be,
infallibly certain, to my understanding you speak impossibilities. And truly
for one of your Religion to do so, is but a good Decorum. For the matter and
object of your Faith being so full of contradictions, a contradictions faith
may very well become a contradictious Religion. Your faith therefore, if you
please to have it so, let it be a free necessitated, certain uncertain, evident
obscure, prudent and foolish, natural and supernatural unnatural assent. But
they which are unwilling to believe nonsense themselves, or to persuade others
to do so, it is but reason they should make the faith wherewith they believe,
an intelligible, compossible, consistent thing, and not define it by
repugnancies. Now nothing is more repugnant, than that a man should be required
to give most certain credit unto that which cannot be made appear most
certainly credible: and, if it appear to him to be so, then is it not obscure
that it is so. For, if you speak of an acquired, rational, discursive faith,
certainly these Reasons which make the object seem credible, must be the cause
of it, and consequently the strength and firmity of my assent must rise and
fall, together with the apparent credibility of the object. If you speak of a
supernatural infused faith, then you either suppose it infused by the former
means, and then that which was said before must be said again: for whatsoever
effect is wrought merely by means, must bear proportion to, and cannot exceed
the virtue of the means, by which it is wrought: As nothing by water can be
made more cold than water, nor by fire more hot than fire, nor by honey more
sweet than honey, nor by gall more bitter than gall: Or, if you will suppose it
infused without means, then that power which infuseth into the understanding
assent which bears Analogy to sight in the eye, must also infuse Evidence, that
is, Visibility into the Object: and look what degree of assent is infused into
the understanding, at least the same degree of evidence must be infused into
the Object. And for you to require a strength of credit beyond the appearance
of the object's credibility, is all one as if you should require me to go ten
miles an hour upon an horse that will go but five: to discern a man certainly
through a mist or cloud that makes him not certainly discernable; to hear and
sound more clearly than it is audible; to understand a thing more fully than it
is intelligible: and he that does so, I may well expect that his next
injunction will be, that I must see something that is invisible, hear something
inaudible, understand something that is wholly unintelligible. For he that
demands ten of me, knowing I have but five, does in effect, as if he demanded
five, knowing that I have none: and by like reason, you requiring that I should
see things farther then they are visible, require I should see something
invisible; and in requiring that I believe something more firmly than it is
made to me evidently credible, you require in effect that I believe some thing
which appears to me incredible, and while it does so. I deny not but that I am
bound to believe the truth of many Texts of Scripture, the sense whereof is to
me obscure; and the truth of many Articles of faith, the manner whereof is
obscure, and to humane understandings incomprehensible; But then it is to be
observed, that not the sense of such Texts, not the manner of these things is
that which I am bound to believe, but the truth of them. But that I should
believe the truth of any thing, the truth whereof cannot be made evident with
an evidence proportionable to the degree of faith required of me, this I say
for any man to be bound to, is unjust and unreasonable, because to do it is
impossible.

8 Ad. 4, 5, 6, 7, 8.9, 10, 11, and 12. Yet though I deny that it is required
of us to be certain in the highest degree, infallibly certain of the truth of
the things which we believe (for this were to know and not believe, neither is
it possible unless our evidence of it, be it natural or supernatural, were of
the highest degree;) yet I deny not, but we ought to be and may be infallibly
certain that we are to believe the Religion of Christ. For first, this is most
certain, that we are in all things to do according to wisdom and reason, rather
than against it. Secondly this is as certain, That wisdom and Reason require,
that we should believe those things which are by many degrees more credible and
probable than the contrary. Thirdly, this is as certain, that to every man who
considers impartially what great things may be said for the truth of
Christianity, and what poor things they are which may be said against it,
either for any other Religion or for none at all, it cannot but appear by many
degrees more credible, that Christian Religion is true, than the contrary. And
from all these premises, this conclusion evidently follows that it is
infallibly certain, that we are firmly to believe the truth of Christian
Religion.

9 Your discourse therefore touching the fourth requisite to faith which is
Prudence, I admit so far as to grant. 1. That if we were required to believe
with certainty (I mean a Moral certainty,) things no way represented as
infallible and certain (I mean morally,) an unreasonable obedience were
required of us. And so likewise were it, were we required to believe as
absolutely certain, that which is no way represented to us as absolutely
certain. 2. That whom God obliges to believe any thing, he will not fail to
furnish their understandings with such inducements, as are sufficient (if they
be not negligent or perverse) to persuade them to believe. 3. That there is an
abundance of Arguments exceedingly credible, inducing men to believe the Truth
of Christianity: I say so credible, that though they cannot make us evidently
see what we believe, yet they evidently convince that in true wisdom and
prudence, the Articles of it deserve credit, and ought to be accepted as things
revealed by God. 4. That without such reasons and inducements, our choice even
of the true faith, is not to be commended as prudent, but to be condemned of
rashness and levity.

10 But then for your making Prudence, not only a commendation of a believer,
and a justification of his faith, but also essential to it, and part of the
definition of it, in that questionless you were mistaken, and have done as if
being to say what a man is, you should define him, A Reasonable creature that
has skill in Astronomy. For as all Astronomers are men, but all men are not
Astronomers, and therefore Astronomy ought not to be put into the definition of
Men, where nothing should have place, but what agrees to all men: So though all
that are truly wise (that is, wise for eternity,) will believe aright, yet many
may believe aright which are not wise. I could wish with all my heart, as Moses
did, that all the Lords people could Prophecy: That all that believe the true
Religion were able (according to S. Peter's injunction) to give a reason of the
hope that is in them, a reason why they hope for eternal happiness by this way
rather than any other! neither do I think it any great difficulty that men of
ordinary capacities, if they would give their mind to it, might quickly be
enabled to do so. But should I affirm that all true believers can do so, I
suppose it would be as much against experience and modesty, as it is against
Truth and Charity, to say as you do, that they which cannot do so, either are
not at all, or to no purpose true believers. And thus we see that the
foundations you build upon, are ruinous and deceitful, and so unfit to support
your Fabric that they destroy one another. I come now to show that your
Arguments to prove Protestants Heretics, are all of the same quality with
your former grounds: which I will do, by opposing clear and satisfying Answers
in order to them.

11 Ad. 13. To the first then, delivered by you. 13. That Protestants must be
Heretics, because they opposed diverse Truths propounded for divine by the
Visible Church: I answer, It is not heresy to oppose any truth propounded by
the Church, but only such a Truth as is an essential part of the Gospel of
Christ. 2. The Doctrins which Protestants opposed, were not Truths, but plain
and impious falsehoods: Neither, thirdly, were they propounded as Truths by the
Visible Church, but only by a Part of it, and that a corrupted Part.

12 Ad. 14. The next Argument, in the next Particle tell us, That every error
against any doctrine revealed by God is damnable Heresy: Now either Protestants
or the Roman Church must err against the word of God: But the Roman Church we
grant (perforce) does not err damnably, neither can she, because she is the
Catholic Church, which we (you say) confess cannot err damnably: Therefore
Protestants must err against God's word, and consequently are guilty of formal
Heresy. Whereunto I answer plainly, that there be in this argument almost as
many falsehoods as assertions. For neither is every error against any Doctrine
revealed by God a damnable Heresy, unless it be revealed publicly and
plainly with a command that a I should believe it. 2. D. Potter no where
grants, that the Errors of the Roman Church are not in themselves damnable,
though he hopes by accident they may not actually damn some men amongst you:
and this you your self confess in diverse places of your Book, where you tell
us, that he allows no hope of Salvation to those amongst you, whom ignorance
cannot exouse. 3. You beg the Question twice in taking for granted, First, That
the Roman Church is the truly Catholic Church, which without much favor can
hardly pass for a part of it. And again, that the Catholic Church cannot fall
into any error of it self damnable; for it may do so, and still be the
Catholic Church, if it retain those Truths which may be an antidote against
the malignity of this error, to those that held it out of a simple un-affected
ignorance. Lastly, though the thing be true, yet I might well require some
proof of it from you, that either Protestants or the Roman Church must err
against God's word. For, if their contradiction be your only reason, then also
you or the Dominicans must be Heretics, because you contradict one another as
much as Protestants and Papists.

13 Ad. 15. The third Argument, pretends that you have showed already, that the
Visible Church is Judge of Controversies, and therefore infallible, from whence
you suppose that it follows, that to oppose her, is to oppose God. To which I
answer, that you have said only, and not showed, that the, Visible Church is
Judge of Controversies. And indeed how can she be Judge of them if she cannot
decide them? And how can she decide them, if it be a question Whether she be
judge of them? That which is questioned it self cannot with any sense be
pretended to be fit to decide other questions; and much less this question,
Whether it have Authority to judge and decide all questions? 2. If she were
Judge, it would not follow that she were infallible; for we have many Judges in
our Courts of Judicature, yet none infallible. Nay, you cannot with any modesty
deny, that every man in the world ought to judge for himself, what Religion is
truest; and yet you will not say that every man is infallible. 3. If the Church
were supposed infallible, yet it would not follow at all, much less manifestly,
that to oppose her Declaration, is to oppose God: unless you suppose also that
as she is infallible, so by her opposers, she is known or believed to be so.
Lastly, If all this were true (as it is all most false) yet were it to little
purpose, seeing you have omitted to prove that the Visible Church is the Roman.

14 Ad. 16. Instead of a fourth Argument this is presented to us, That, if
Luther were an Heretic, then they that agreed with him must be so. And that
Luther was a formal Heretic, you endeavor to prove by this most formal
Syllogism; To say the Visible Church is not Universal, is properly an Heresy:
But Luther 's Reformation was not Universal: Therefore it cannot be excused
from formal Heresy. Whereunto I Answer, first to the first part, that it is no
way impossible that Luther, had he been the inventor and first broacher of a
false Doctrine, (as he was not) might have been a formal Heretic, and yet that
those who follow him may be only so materially and improperly, and indeed no
Heretics. Your own men out of St. Austin distinguish between Haeretici and
Haereticorum sequaces: And you your self though you pronounce the leaders among
the Arrians formal Heretics, yet confess that Salvian was at least doubtful
whether those Arrians, who in simplicity followed their Teachers, might not be
excused by ignorance. And about this suspension of his you also seem suspended;
for you neither approve nor condemn it. Secondly, to the second part, I say,
that, had you not presumed upon our ignorance in Logic as well as Metaphysics
and School Divinity, you would never have obtruded upon us this rope of sand
for a formal Syllogism. It is even Consen-German to this, To deny the
Resurrection is properly an Heresy, But Luther's Reformation was not
Universal, Therefore it cannot be excused from formal Heresy! Or to this, To
say the Visible Church is not Universal is properly an Heresy: But the
preaching of the Gospel at the beginning was not Universal: Therefore it cannot
be excused from formal Heresy. For as he whose Reformation is but particular,
may yet not deny the Resurrection, so many he also not deny the Churches
Universality. And as the Apostles who preached the Gospel in the beginning, did
believe the Church Universal, though their preaching at the beginning was not
so: So Luther also might and did believe the Church Universal, though his
Reformation were but particular. I say, he did believe it Universal, even in
your own sense, that is, Universal de jure, though not de facto. And as for
Universality in fact, he believed the Church much more Universal than his
Reformation: For he did conceive (as appears by your own Allegations out of
him) that not only the Part reformed was the true Church, but also that they
were Part of it who needed Reformation. Neither did he ever pretend to make a
new Church but to reform the old one. Thirdly and lastly, to the first
proposition of this unsyllogistical syllogism, I answer, That to say the true
Church is not always de facto universal, is so far from being an Heresy, that
it is a certain truth known to all those that know the world, and what
Religions possess far the greater part of it. Donatus therefore was not to
blame, for saying, that the Church might possibly be confined to Africa; but
for saying without ground, that then it was so. And S. Augustine, as he was in
the right, in thinking that the Church was then extended farther than Africa;
so was he in the wrong, if he thought that of necessity it always must be so;
but most palpably mistaken in conceiving that it was then spread over the whole
earth, and known to all nations; which, if passion did not trouble you, and
make you forget how lately almost half the world was discovered, and in what
estate it was then found, you would very easily see and confess.

15 Ad. 17. In the next Section you pretend that you have no desire to
prosecute the similitude of Protestants with the Donatists; and yet you do it
with as much spite and malice as could well be devised, but in vain: For
Lucilla might do ill in promoting the Sect of the Donatists, and yet the mother
and the daughter, whom you glance at, might do well in ministering influence (as
you phrase it) to Protestants in England. Unless you will conclude, because one
woman did one thing ill, therefore no woman can do any thing well: or because
it was ill done to promote one Sect, therefore it must be ill done, to maintain
any.

16 The Donatists might do ill in calling the Chair of Rome the Chair of
Pestilence, and the Roman Church an Harlot; and yet, the state of the Church
being altered, Protestants might do well to do so: and therefore though S.
Austin might perhaps have reason to persecute the Donatists for detracting from
the Church, and calling her harlot, when she was not so; yet you may have none
to threaten D. Potter that you would persecute him (as the Application of this
place intimates you would,) if it were in your power: plainly showing that you
are a cursed Cow though your horns be short, seeing the Roman Church is not now
what it was in S. Austin's time. And hereof the conclusion of your own book
affords us a very pregnant testimony: where you tell us out of Saint Austin,
that one grand impediment, which among many kept the seduced followers of the
faction of Donatus from the Churches Communion, was, a calumny raised against
the Catholics, That they did set some strange thing upon their Altar. To how
many (says S. Austin) did the reports of ill tongues shut up the way to enter,
who said, that we put I know not what upon the Altar? Out of detestation of the
calumny, and just indignation against it, he would not so much as name the
impiety wherewith they were charged, and therefore by a Rhetorical figure calls
it, I know not what. But compare with him Optatus, writing of the same matter,
and you shall plainly perceive that this (I know not what) pretended to be set
upon the Altar, was indeed a Picture, which the Donatists (knowing how
detestable a thing it was to all Christians at that time, to set up any
Pictures in a Church to worship them, as your new fashion is) bruited abroad to
be done in the Churches of the Catholic Church. But what answer does S.
Austin and Optatus make to this Accusation? Do they confess and maintain it? Do
they say, as you would now, It is true we do set Pictures upon our Altar, and
that not only for ornament or memory, but for worship also; but we do well to
do so, and this ought not to trouble you, or affright you from our Communion?
What other answer your Church, could now make to such an objection, is very
hard to imagine: And therefore were your Doctrine the same with the Doctrine of
the Fathers in this point, they must have answered so likewise. But they to the
contrary not only deny the crime, but abhor and detest it. To little purpose
therefore do you hunt after these poor shadows of resemblances between us and
the Donatists: unless you could show an exact resemblance between the present
Church of Rome and the ancient: which seeing by this, and many other
particulars, it is demonstrated to be impossible; that Church which was then a
Virgin may be now a Harlot, and that which was detraction in the Donatists, may
be in Protestants a just accusation.

17 As ill success have you in comparing D. Potter with Tyconius whom as S.
Austin finds fault with for continuing in the Donatists separation, having
forsaken the ground of it, the Doctrine of the Churches perishing: so you
condemn the Doctor, for continuing in their communion, who hold (as you say)
the very same Heresy. But if this were indeed the Doctrine of the Donatists,
how is it that you say presently after; that the Protestants who hold the
Church of Christ perished, were worse than Donatists, who said that the Church
remained at least in Africa? These things methinks hang not well together. But
to let this pass; The truth is, this difference, for which you would fain raise
such a horrible dissension between D. Potter and his Brethren, if it be well
considered is only in words and the manner of expression: They affirming only,
that the Church perished from its integrity, and fell into many corruptions
which he denies not: And the Doctor denying only that it fell from its essence,
and became no Church at all, which they affirm not.

18 These therefore are but velitations, and you would seem to make but small
account of them. But the main point you say is, that since Luther 's Reformed
Church was not in being for diverse Centuries before Luther, and yet was in the
Apostles time, they must of necessity affirm heretically with the Donatists,
that the true unspotted Church of Christ perished, and that she which remained
on earth, was (O Blasphemy!) an Harlot. By which words it seems you are
resolute perpetually to confound True and Unspotted; and to put no difference
between a corrupted Church and none at all. But what is this, but to make no
difference between a diseased and a dead man? Nay what is it but to contradict
your selves, who cannot deny but that sins are as great stains and spots and
deformities in the sight of God, as errors; and confess your Church to be a
congregation of men, whereof every particular, not one excepted, (and
consequently the generality which is nothing but a collection of them) is
polluted and defiled with sin? You proceed.

19 But, say you, The same heresy follows out of D. Potter and other
Protestants, that the Church may err in points not fundamental; because we have
showed that every error against any revealed truth is Heresy and Damnable,
whether the matter be great or small: And how can the Church more truly be said
to perish, than when she is permitted to maintain damnable Heresy? Besides, we
will hereafter prove that by every act of Heresy all divine faith is lost, and
to maintain a true Church without any faith, is to fancy a living man without
life. Answ. What you have said before, has been answered before; and what you
shall say hereafter, shall be confuted hereafter. But if it be such a certain
ground, that every error against any one revealed truth is a damnable Heresy,
then, I hope I shall have your leave to subsume, That the Dominicans in your
account must hold a damnable heresy, who hold an error against the immaculate
Conception: which you must needs esteem a revealed truth, or otherwise why are
you so urgent and importunate to have it defined? seeing your rule is, Nothing
may be defined, unless it be first revealed. But, without your leave, I will
make bold to conclude, that, if either that or the contrary assertion be a
revealed truth, you or they, choose you whether, must without contradiction hold
a damnable Heresy: if this ground be true that every contradiction of a
revealed Truth is such. And now I dare say, for fear of inconvenience you will
begin to temper the crudeness of your former assertion, and tell us, that
neither of you are Heretics, because the Truth against which you err though
revealed, is not sufficiently propounded. And so say I, Neither is your doctrine
which Protestants contradict sufficiently propounded. For though it be plain
enough, that your Church proposes it, yet still, methinks, it is as plain
that your Churches proposition is not sufficient; and I desire you would not
say but prove the contrary. Lastly, to your Question, How can the Church more
truly be said to perish, than when she is permitted to maintain a damnable
Heresy? I Answer, she may be more truly said to perish, when she is not only
permitted to do so, but de facto does maintain a damnable Heresy. Again, she
may be more truly said to perish, when she falls into an Heresy, which is not
only damnable in it self, and ex natura rei, as you speak, but such an Heresy,
the belief of whose contrary Truth is necessary, not only necessitate praecepti
but medii, and therefore the Heresy so absolutely and indispensably
destructive of salvation, that no ignorance can excuse it, nor any general
repentance, without a dereliction of it, can beg a pardon for it. Such an
heresy if the Church should fall into, it might be more truly said to perish,
then if it fell only into some heresy of its own nature damnable. For, in that
state, all the members of it, without exception, all without mercy must needs
perish for ever: In this, although those that might see the truth and would
not, cannot upon any good ground hope for salvation, yet without question, it
might send many souls to heaven, who would gladly have embraced the truth, but
that they wanted means to discover it. Thirdly and lastly, she may yet more
truly be said to perish when she Apostates from christ absolutely, or rejects
even those Truths out of which her Heresies may be reformed; as if she should
directly deny Jesus to be the Christ, or the Scripture to be the Word of God.
Toward which state of Perdition it may well be feared that the Church of Rome
does somewhat incline, by her superinducing upon the rest of her errors the
Doctrine of her own infallibility, whereby her errors are made incurable; and by
her pretending that the Scripture is to be interpreted according to her
doctrine; and not her doctrine to be judged of by Scripture, whereby she makes
the Scripture uneffectual for her Reformation.

20. Ad. 18. I was very glad when I heard you say The Holy Scripture and
ancient Fathers do assign Separation from the visible Church as a mark of
Heresy: for I was in good hope, that no Christian would so belie the
Scripture, as to say so of it, unless he could have produced some one Text at
least, wherein this was plainly affirmed, or from whence it might be
undoubtedly and undeniably collected. For assure your self, good Sir, it is a
very heinous crime to say, Thus says the Lord, when the Lord does not say so.
I expected therefore some Scripture should have been alleged, wherein it
should have been said, Whosoever separates from the Roman Church is an
Heretic: or the Roman Church is infallible, or the Guide of faith: or, at
least, There shall be always some visible Church infallible in matters of
faith. Some such direction as this I hoped for: And, I pray consider, whether I
had not reason! The Evangelists and Apostles who wrote the new Testament, we
all suppose were good men, and very desirous to direct us the surest and
plainest way to heaven; we suppose them likewise very sufficiently instructed
by the Spirit of God in all the necessary points of the Christian faith, and
therefore certainly not ignorant of this Unum Necessarium, this most necessary
point of all others, without which, as you pretend and teach, all faith is no
Faith, that is, that the Church of Rome was designed by God the guide of Faith.
We suppose them lastly wise men, especially being assisted by the spirit of
wisdom, and such as knew that a doubtful and questionable Guide was for men's
direction as good as none at all. And after all these suppositions, which I
presume no good Christian will call into question, is it possible that any
Christian heart can believe, that not One amongst them all should ad rei
memoriam write this necessary doctrine, plainly so much as once? Certainly in
all reason they had provided much better for the good of Christians, if they
had wrote this, though they had writ nothing else. Methinks, the Evangelists,
undertaking to write the Gospel of Christ, could not possibly have omitted, any
one of them, this most necessary point of faith, had they known it necessary,
(S. Luke especially, who plainly professes that his intent was to write all
things necessary.) Methinks S. Paul writing to the Romans could not but have
congratulated this their Privilege to them! Methinks, instead of saying, Your
faith is spoken of, all the world over (which you have no reason to be very
proud of, for he says the very same thing to the Thessalonians,) he could not
have failed to have told them, once at least in plain terms, that their Faith
was the Rule for all the World for ever. But then sure he would have forborne to
put them in fear of an impossibility, as he does in his eleventh Chapter, that
they also, nay the whole Church of the Gentiles, if they did not look to their
standing, might fall away to infidelity, as the Jews had done. Methinks, in
all his other Epistles, at least in some, at least in one of them, he could not
have failed to have given the world this direction, had he known it to be a
true one, that all men were to be guided by the Church of Rome, and none to
separate from it under pain of damnation. Methinks writing so often of
Heretics and Antichrist, he should have given the world this (as you pretend)
only sure preservative from them. How was it possible that S. Peter writing two
Catholic Epistles, mentioning his own departure, writing to preserve
Christians in the faith, should in neither of them commend them to the guidance
of his pretended Successors, the Bishops of Rome? How was it possible that S.
James, and S. Jude in their Catholic Epistles should not give this Catholic
direction? Methinks, S. John instead of saying, He that believes that Jesus
is the Christ, is born of God, (The force of which direction your glosses do
quite enervate, and make unavailable to discern who are the sons of God,)
should have said, He that adheres to the doctrine of the Roman Church, and lives
according to it, he is a good Christian, and by this mark ye shall know him!
What man not quite out of his wits, if he consider as he should, the pretended
necessity of this doctrine, that without the belief hereof no man ordinarily can
be saved, can possibly force himself to conceive that all these good and holy
men, so desirous of men's salvation, and so well assured of it (as it is
pretended,) should be so deeply and affectedly silent in it, and not One of
them say it plainly so much as once, but leave it to be collected from
uncertain Principles, by many more uncertain Consequences? Certainly, he that
can judge so uncharitably of them, it is no marvel if he censure other
inferior servants of Christ as Atheists, and Hypocrites, and what he pleases.
Plain places therefore I did and had reason to look for, when I heard you say,
the holy Scripture assigns separation from the visible Church as a Mark of
Heresy. But instead hereof what have you brought us, but mere impertinencies?
S. John says of some who pretended to be Christians and were not so, and
therefore when it was for their advantage forsook their profession, They went
out from us, but they were not of us; for if they had been of us, they would no
doubt have continued with us Of some, who before the decree of the Council to
the contrary, were persuaded and accordingly taught, that the convert Gentiles
were to keep the Law of Moses, it is said in the Acts, Some who went out from
us. And again S. Paul in the same book forwarns the Ephesians that out of them
should arise men speaking perverse things. And from these places, which it
seems are the plainest you have, you collect, that separation from the Visible
Church is assigned by Scripture as a Mark of Heresy. Which is certainly a
strange and unheard of strain of Logic. Unless you will say that every Text
wherein it is said, that some body goes out from some body, affords an Argument
for this purpose! For the first place, there is no certainty that it speaks of
Heretics; but, no Christians, of Antichrists, of such as denied Jesus to be
the Christ: See the place and you shall confess as much. The second place, it
is certain, you must not say it speaks of Heretics; for it speaks only of
some who believed and taught an Error, while it was yet a question, and not
evident, and therefore according to your doctrine no formal Heresy. The third
says indeed, that of the Professors of Christianity, some shall arise that
shall teach Heresy: But not one of them all that says or intimates, that
whosoever separates from the Visible Church in what state soever is certainly
an heretic. Heretics, I confess, do always do so; But they that do so, are
are not always Heretics; for perhaps the state of the Church may make it
necessary for them to do so; as Rebels always disobey the command of their
King, yet they, which disobey a King's command (which perhaps may be unjust)
are not presently Rebels.

21 Your Allegations out of Vincentius, Prosper, and Cyprian, are liable to
these exceptions. 1. That they are the sayings of men not assisted by the
Spirit of God, and whose Authority your selves will not submit to in all
things. 2. That the first and last are merely impertinent, neither of them
affirming or intimating, that separation from the present Visible Church is a
mark of Heresy: and the former speaking plainly of separation from
Universality, Consent, and Antiquity, which, if you will presume without proof
that we did and you did not, you beg the Question. For you know we pretend that
we separated only from that present Church which had separated from the doctrine
of the Ancient, and because she had done so, and so far forth as she had done
so and no farther. And lastly, the latter part of Prospers words cannot be
generally true, according to your own grounds; For you say a man may be divided
from the Church upon mere Schism without any mixture of Heresy: And a man may
be justly excommunicated for many other sufficient causes besides Heresy.
Lastly, a man may be divided by an unjust excommunication, and be hoth before
and after a very good Catholic; and therefore you cannot maintain it
Universally true, That he who is divided from the Church, is an Heretic, and
Antichrist.


22. In the 19.. we have the Authority of eight Fathers urged to prove That the
separation from the Church of Rome, as it is the Sea of S. Peter, (I conceive
you mean, as it is that particular Church) is the mark of Heresy. Which kind
of argument I might well refuse to answer, unless you would first promise me,
that whenever I should produce as plain sentences, of as great a number of
Fathers as ancient, for any doctrine whatsoever, that you will subscribe to it,
though it fall out to be contrary to the doctrine of the Roman Church. For I
conceive nothing in the world more unequal or unreasonable then that you should
press us with such Authorities as these, and think your selves at liberty from
them; and that you should account them Fathers when they are for you, and
Children when they are against you. Yet I would not you should interpret this
as if I had not great assurance, that it is not possible for you ever to gain
this cause at the tribunal of the Fathers; nay, not of the Fathers, whose
sentences are here alleged. Let us consider them in order, and I doubt not to
make it appear that far the greater part of them; nay, al of them that are any
way considerable, fall short of your purpose.

23. S. Hierome (you say) writing to Pope Damasus, says, I am in the Communion
of the Chair of Peter, etc. But then I pray consider he says it to Pope
Damasus: and this will much weaken the Authority, with them who know how great
over-truths men usually write to one another in Letters. Consider again, that
he says only, that he was then in Communion with the Chair of Peter, Not that
he always would, or of necessity must be so: for his resolution to the
contrary is too evident out of that which he says elsewhere which shall be
produced hereafter. He says, that the Church at that present was built upon
that Rock; but, Not that only, Nor that always. Nay his judgment, as shall
appear, is express to the contrary. And so likewise the rest of his expressions
(if we mean to reconcile Hierome with Hierome) must be conceived as intended by
him, of that Bishop and Sea of Rome, at that present time, and in the present
State, and in respect of that doctrine which he there entreats of. For
otherwise, had he conceived it necessary for him and all men to conform their
judgment in matters of faith, to the judgment of the Bishop and Church of Rome,
how came it to pass that he chose rather to believe the Epistle to the Hebrews
Canonical, upon the authority of the Eastern Church, than to reject it from the
Canon upon the authority of the Roman? How comes it to pass that he dissented
from the Authority of that Church, touching the Canon of the Old Testament? For
if you say, that the Church then consented with S. Hierome, I fear you will
lose your Fort by maintaining your Outworks; and by avoiding this, run into a
greater danger of being forced to confess the present Roman Church opposite
herein to the Ancient. How was it possible, that he should ever believe that
Liberius Bishop of Rome, either was or could have been brought over by the
solicitation of Fortunatianus Bishop of Aquileia, Hierom. de scrip Eccl. tit.
Fortunatianus.
and brought after two years banishment to subscribe Heresy? Which Act of
Liberius, though some fondly question, being so vain as to expect we should
rather believe them that lived but yesterday. 1300 years almost after the thing
is said to be done, and speaking for themselves in their own Cause, rather than
the dis-interessed time-fellows, or immediate-Successors of Liberius himself:
yet, I hope, they will not proceed to such a degree of immodesty, as once to
question, Whether S. Hierome thought so. And if this cannot be denied, I demand
then, If he had lived in Liberius his time, could he, or would he, have written
so to Liberius, as he does to Damasus? Would he have said to him, I am in the
Communion of the Chair of Peter, I know that the Church is built upon this
Rock, Whosoever gathers not with thee, scatters. Would he then have said,
the Roman faith and the Catholic were the same: or, that the Roman faith
received no delusions, no not from an Angel? I suppose, he could not have said
so with any coherence to his own belief; and therefore conceive it undeniable
that what he said then to Damasus, he said it (though perhaps he streined too
high) only of Damasus, and never conceived that his words would have been
extended to all his Predecessors and all his Successors.

24. The same Answer I make to the first place of S. Ambrose, viz. That no more
can be certainly concluded from it, but that the Catholic Bishops and the
Roman Church were then at unity; so that whosoever agreed with the later could
not then but agree with the former. But that this Rule was perpetual, and that
no man could ever agree with the Catholic Bishops, but he must agree with the
Roman Church, this he says not, nor gives you any ground to conclude from him.
Athanasius when he was excommunicated by Liberius, agreed very ill with the
Roman Church; and yet you will not gainsay, but he agreed well enough with the
Catholic Bishops. The second, I am uncertain what the sense of it is, and
what truth is in it; but most certain, that it makes nothing to your present
purpose. For it neither affirms nor imports, that separation from the Roman
Church is a certain mark of Heresy. For the Rights of Communion (whatsoever it
signifies,) might be said to flow from it, if that Church were, by
Ecclesiastical Law, the head of all other Churches: But unless it were made so
by divine Authority, and that absolutely, Separation from it could not be a
mark of Heresy.

25. For S. Cyprian; all the world knows that he It is conf^ssed by Baronius
Anno 238. N. 41. By Bellar. l 4. de R Pont. c. 7. Sect. Tertia ratio.
resolutely opposed a Decree of the Roman Bishop, and all that adhered to him
in the point of Rebaptizing, which that Church at that time delivered as a
necessary Tradition. So necessary, that by the Bishop of Rome, Firmilianus and
other Bishops of Cappadocia, Cilicia and Galatia, and generally all who
persisted in the contrary opinion, Confessed by Baronius. An 258. N. 14. and
15. By Card. Perron Repl. l. 1. c. 25.
were therefore deprived of the Churches Communion, (which Excommunication
could not but involve S. Cyprian, who defended the same opinion as resolutely
as Firmilianus, though Cardinal Perron magisterially and without all color of
proof affirm the contrary) and Cyprian in particular so far cast off, as for it
to be pronounced by Stephen, A false Christ. ^bid.
Again, so necessary, that the Bishops which were sent by Cyprian from Africa
to Rome, were not admitted to the Communion of ordinary conference: But all men
who were subject to the Bishop of Romes Authority, were commanded by him not
only to deny them the Churches peace and Communion, but even lodging and
entertainment: manifestly declaring, that they reckoned them among those whom
S. John forbids to receive to house, or to say God speed to them. All these
terrors notwithstanding, S. Cyprian holds still his former opinion. And though
our of respect to the Churches peace Vide Conc. Carth. apud. sur. To 1.
he judged no man, nor cut off any man from the right of Communion, for
thinking otherwise then he held, yet he conceived Stephen and his adherents,
Bell l. 2. de Con. c 5. Aug. ep. 48. and l. 1. de Bap. c. 18.
to hold a pernicious error. And S. Austin, (though disputing with the
Donatists he uses some Tergiversation in the point;) yet confesses elsewhere,
that it is not found that Cyprian did ever change his opinion. And so far was
he from conceiving any necessity of doing so, by submitting to the judgment of
the Bishop and Church of Rome, that he plainly professes that no other Bishop,
but our Lord Jesus only, had power to judge (with authority) of his judgment;
and as plainly intimates that Stephen, for usurping such a power, and making
himself a judge over Bishops, was little better than a Tyrant: and as heavily
almost he censures him, and peremptorily opposes him as obstinate in error, in
that very place where he delivers that famous saying, How can he have God for
his Father, who has not the Church for his Mo^her? little doubting, it seems,
but a man might have the Church for his Mother, who stood in opposition to the
Church of Rome, and being far from thinking what you fondly obtrude upon him,
that to be united to the Roman Church, and to the Church was all one, and that
separation from S. Peter's Chair was a mark (I mean, a certain mark) either of
Schism or Heresy. If after all this, you will catch at a phrase or a
complement of S. Cyprians, and, with that, hope to persuade Protestants, who
know this story as well as their own name, that S. Cyprian did believe that
falsehood could not have access to the Roman Church, and that opposition to it
was the brand of an Heretic: may we not well expect, that you will the next
time you write, vouch Luther and Calvin also for Abettors of this Fancy, and
make us poor men believe not only (as you say) that we have no Metaphysics,
but that we have no sense? And when you have done so, it will be no great
difficulty for you, to assure us that we read no such thing in Bellarmine,
Bell. l. 2. de Con. c. 5. Sect. 1. Can^sius. in Initio Gatech. e Spt. die 14.
as that Cyprian was always accounted in the number of Catholics; nor in
Canisius, that he was a most excellent Doctor and a glorious Martyr; nor in
your Calender, that he is a Saint and a Martyr; but that all these are
deceptions of our sight, and that you ever esteemed him a very Schismatique and
an Heretic, as having on him the Mark of the Beast, opposition to the Chair
of Peter. Nay that he (what ever he pretended) knew and believed himself to be
so; in as much as he knew (as you pretend,) and esteemed this opposition to be
the Mark of Heresy, and knew himself to stand, and stand out, in such an
opposition.

26. But we need not seek so far for matter to refute the vanity of this
pretense. Let the reader but peruse this very Epistle out of which this
sentence is alleged, and he shall need no farther satisfaction against it. For
he shall find, first, that you have helped the dice a little with a false, or
at least with a very bold and streined, Translation: for S. Cyprian says not,
to whom falsehood cannot have access, by which many of your favorable Readers,
I doubt, understood, that Cyprian had exempted that Church from a possibility
of error, but to whom perfidiousness cannot have access, meaning by
perfidiousness in the abstract, according to a common figure of speech, those
perfidious Schismatiques whom he there complains of: and of these by a
Rhetorical insinuation, he says, that with such good Christians as the Romans
were, it was not possible they should find favorable entertainment. Not that
he conceived it any way impossible they should do so (for the very writing this
Epistle, and many passages in it, plainly show the contrary;) but because he
was confident, or at least would seem to be confident, they never would, and so
by his good opinion and confidence in the Romans, lay an obligation upon them,
to do as he presumed they would do; as also in the end of his Epistle, he says
even of the people of the Church of Rome, that being defended by the providence
of their Bishop, nay, by their own Vigilance sufficiently guarded, they could
not be taken nor deceived with the poisons of Heretics. Not that indeed he
thought either this or the former any way impossible: For to what purpose, but
for prevention hereof, did he write this long and accurate and vehement Epistle
to Cornelius? which sure had been most vainly done, to prevent that which he
knew or believed impossible! Or how can this consist with his taking notice in
the beginning of it, That Cornelius was somewhat moved and wrought upon by the
attempts of his Adversaries, with his reprehending him for being so, and with
his vehement exhorting him to courage and constancy, or with his request to
him, in the conclusion of his Epistle, that it should be read publicly to the
whole Clergy and Laity of Rome, to the intent, that if any contagion of their
poisoned speech and pestiferous semination, had crept in amongst them, it might
be wholly taken away from the ears and the hearts of the Brethren: and that the
entire and sincere charity of good men might be purged from all dross of
heretical detraction: Or lastly, with his vehement persuasions to them to
decline, for the time to come, and resolutely avoid their word and conference,
because their speech crept as a canker, as the Apostle says; because evil
communication would corrupt good manners, because wicked men carry perdition in
their mouths, and hide fire in their lips? All which had been but vain and
ridiculous pageantry, had he verily believed the Romans such inaccessable
Forts, such immovable Rocks, as the former sentences would seem to import, if
we will expound them rigidly and strictly, according to the exigence of the
words, and not allow him who was a professed Master of the Art, to have used
here a little Rhetorique, and to say, That could not be, whereof he had no
absolute certainty but that it might be, but only had, or would seem to have a
great confidence that it never would be, Ut fides habita fidem obligaret, that
he professing to be confident of the Romans, might lay an obligation upon them
to do as he promised himself they would do. For as for joining the principal
Church and the Chair of Peter, how that will serve for your present purpose, of
proving separation from the Roman Church a mark of Heresy, I suppose it is
hard to understand! Nor indeed how it will advantage you in any other design
against us, who do not altogether deny, but that the Church of Rome might be
called the Chair of Peter, in regard he is said to have preached the Gospel
there; and the Principal Church, because the City was the Principal and
Imperial City: which Prerogative of the City, if we believe the Fathers of the
Council of Chalcedon, was the ground and occasion, why the Fathers of former
time (I pray observe,) conferred upon this Church, this Prerogative above other
Churches.

27. And as far am I from understanding, how you can collect from the other
sentence, that to communicate with the Church and Pope of Rome, and to
communicate with the Catholic Church, is always (for that is your Assumpt)
one and the same thing. Saint Cyprian speaks not of the Church of Rome at all,
but of the Bishop only, who when he does communicate with the Catholic
Church, as Cornelius at that time did, then whosoever communicates with him,
cannot but communicate with the Catholic Church: and then by accident one
might truly say, such a one communicates with you, that is, with the Catholic
Church, and that to communicate with him is to communicate with the Catholic
Church. As if Titius and Sempronius be together, he that is in company with
Titius, cannot but be at that time in company with Sempronius. As if a General
be marching to some place with an Army, he that then is with the General must
at that time be with the Army: And a man may say without absurdity, Such a time
I was with the General, that is, with the Army, and that to be with the General
is to be with the Army. Or as if a man's hand be joined to his body, the finger
which is joined to the hand is joined to the body, and a man may say truly of
it, This finger is joined to the hand, that is, to the body, and, to be joined
to the hand is to be joined to the body; because all these things are by
accident true. And yet I hope you would not deny, but the finger might possibly
be joined to the hand, and yet not to the body, the hand being cut off from the
body; and a man might another time, be with his General and not with his Army,
he being absent from the Army. And therefore by like reason your collection is
sophistical, being in effect but this, to communicate with such a Bishop of
Rome, who did communicate with the Catholic Church, was to communicate with
the Catholic Church, therefore absolutely and always it must be true, that,
To communicate with him, is by consequent to communicate with the Catholic
Church, and to be divided from his Communion, is to be an Heretic.

28. In urging the place of Irenaeus, you have showed much more ingenuity than
many of your Fellows. For whereas they usually begin at, Declaring the
Tradition of the, etc and conceal what goes before; you have set it down,
though not so completely as you should have done, yet sufficiently to show,
that what authority in the matter he attributed to the Roman Church in
particular, the same for the kind (though parhaps not in the same degree) he
attributed to all other Apostolic Churches. Either therefore you must say,
that he conceived the Testimony of other Apostolic Churches divine and
infallible, (which certainly he did not, neither do you pretend he did, and if
he had, the confessed Errors and Heresies which after they fell into would
demonstrate plainly that he had erred) or else that he conceived the testimony
of the Roman Church only humane and credible, though perhaps more credible than
any one Church beside, (as one man's Testimony is more credible than another;)
but certainly much more credible, which was enough for his purpose, than that
secret Tradition, to which those Heretics pretended, against whom he wrote
over-bearing them with an argument of their own kind, far stronger than their
own. Now if Irenaeus thought the Testimony of the Roman Church in this point
only humane and fallible, then surely he could never think, either adhering to
it a certain mark of a Catholic, or separation from it a certain mark of an
Heretic.

29. Again, whereas your great Achilles Cardinal Perron in French; as also his
Noble Translatress, misled by him, in English, knowing that men's resorting to
Rome would do his cause little service, has made bold with the Latin tongue,
as he does very often with the Greek, and rendered Ad hanc Ecclesiam necesse est
omnem convenire Ecclesiam, To this Church it is necessary that every Church
should agree, you have Translated it, as it should be; to this Church it is
necessary that all Churches resort: wherein you have showed more sincerity, and
have had more regard to make the Author speak sense. For if he had said, By
showing the Tradition of the Roman Church we confound all Heretics; For, to
this Church, all Churches must agree, what had this been, but to give for a
reason, that which was more questionable than the thing in question: as being
neither evident in it self, and plainly denied by his adversaries, and not at
all proved nor offered to be proved here or elsewhere by Irenaeus. To speak
thus therefore had been weak and ridiculous. But on the other side, if we
conceive him to say thus, You Heretics decline a trial of your Doctrine by
Scripture, as being corrupted and imperfect, and not fit to determine
Controversies without recourse to Tradition, and, instead hereof, you fly for a
refuge to a secret Tradition, which you pretend that you received from your
Ancestors, and they from the Apostles; certainly, your calumnies against
Scripture are most unjust and unreasonable: but yet moreever, assure your
selves, that if you will be tried by Tradition, even by that also you will be
overthrown. For our Tradition is far more famous, more constant, and in all
respects more credible, than that which you pretend to. It were easy for me,
to muster up against you the uninterrupted successions of all the Churches
founded by the Apostles, all conspiring in their Testimonies against you: But
because it were too long to number up the Successions of all Churches, I will
content my self with the Tradition of the most ancient and most glorious Church
of Rome, which alone is sufficient for the confutation and confusion of your
Doctrine, as being in credit and authority, as far beyond the Tradition you
build upon, as the light of the Sun is beyond the light of a Gloworm. For to
this Church; by reason it is placed in the Imperial City, whither all men's
affairs do necessarily draw them, or by reason of the powerful principality it
has over all the adjacent Churches, there is, and always has been, a
necessity of a perpetual recourse of all the faithful round about: who if there
had been any alteration in the Church of Rome, could not in all probability but
have observed it. But they to the contrary* have always observed in this Church
the very Tradition which came from the Apostles and no other. I say, if we
conceive his meaning thus, his words will be intelligible and rational: which
if instead of resort we put in agree will be quite lost. Herein therefore we
have been beholding to your honesty, which makes me think you did not wittingly
falsify, but only twice in this sentence mistake Undique for Ubique, and
translate it, every where, and of what place soever, in stead of round about.
For that it was necessary for all the faithful of what place soever to resort
to Rome, is not true. That The Apostolic Tradition has always been
conserved there from those who are every where, is not Sense. Now instead of
conservata read observata, as in all probability it should be, and translate
undique truly round about, and then the sense will be both plain and good; for
then it must be rendered thus, For to this Church, by reason of a more powerful
principality, there is a necessity that all the Churches, that is, all the
faithful round about, should resort, in which the Apostolic Tradition has
been always observed by those who were round about. If any man say, I have
been too bold a Critic in substituting observata instead of conservata, I
desire him to know, that the conjecture is not mine, and therefore as I expect
no praise for it, so, I hope, I shall be far from censure. But I would entreat
him to consider, whether it be not likely that the same Greek word signifying
observo and conservo, the Translater of Irenaeus, who could hardly speak Latin,
might not easily mistake, and translate (...), conservata est, instead of
observata est; Or, whether it be not likely, that those men which anciently
wrote Books, and understood them not, might not easily commit such an error;
Or, whether the sense of the place can be salved any other way; if it can, in
God's name let it; if not, I hope, he is not to be condemned, who with such a
little alteration has made that sense which he found nonsense.

30. But whether you will have it Observata or Conservata, the new sumpsimus or
the old mumpsimus, possibly it may be something to Irenaeus, but to us, or our
cause, it is no way material. For if the rest be rightly translated, neither
will Conservata afford you any argument against us, nor Observata help us to
any evasion. For though at the first hearing of the glorious attributes here
given, (and that justly) to the Church of Rome, The confounding Heretics with
her Tradition, and saying, It is necessary for all Churches to resort to her,
may sound like Arguments for you; yet he that is attentive, I hope, will easily
discover, that it might be good and rational in Irenaeus, having to do with
Heretics, who, somewhat like those, who would be the only Catholics,
declined a trial by Scripture, as not containing the Truth of Christ perfectly,
and not fit to decide Controversies, without recourse to Tradition: I say, he
will easily perceive that it might be rational in Irenaeus to urge them, with
any Tradition of more credit than their own, especially a Tradition consonant
to Scripture, and even contained in it; and yet that it may be irrational in
you to urge us, who do not decline Scripture, but appeal to it as a perfect
rule of faith, with a Tradition which we pretend is many ways repugnant to
Scripture; and repugnant to a Tradition far more general than it self, which
gives Testimony to Scripture; and lastly, repugnant to it self as giving
attestation both to Scripture, and to Doctrins plainly contrary to Scripture.
Secondly, that the Authority of the Roman Church was then a far greater
Argument of the Truth of her Tradition when it was United with all other
Apostolic Churches, than now when it is divided from them, according to that
of Tertullian, Had the Churches erred they would have varied, but that which is
the same in all, cannot be Error but Tradition; and therefore Irenaeus his
Argument may be very probable, yet yours may be worth nothing. Thirdly, that
fourteen hundred years may have made a great deal of alteration in the Roman
Church: as Rivers, though near the fountain they may retain their native and
unmixt sincerity, yet in long progress cannot but take in much mixture that
came not from the fountain. And therefore the Roman Tradition, though then
pure, may now be corruptand impure: and so this Argument (being one of those
things which are the worse for wearing) might in Irenaeus his time be strong
and vigorous, and after declining and decaying may long since have fallen to
nothing. Especially, considering that Irenaeus plays the Historian only, and
not the Prophet, and says only, that the Apostolic Tradition had been
always there as in other Apostolic Churches conserved or observed, choose
you whether, but that it should be always so, he says not, neither had he any
warrant. He knew well enough that there was foretold a great falling away of
the Churches of Christ to Antichrist: that the Roman Church in particular was
forewarned that she also, Romans 11.
Nay the whole Church of the Gentiles might fall if they looked not to their
standing: and therefore to secure her that she should stand for ever, he had no
Reason, nor Authority. Fourthly, that it appears manifestly out of this Book of
Irenaeus quoted by you, that the doctrine of the Chiliasts was in his judgment
Apostolic Tradition, as also it was esteemed (for ought appears to the
contrary) by all the Doctors, and Saints, and Martyrs of or about his time, for
all that speak of it, or whose judgments in the point are any way recorded,
are for it: and Justin Martyr professes that all good and Orthodox Christians
of his time believed it, and those that did not, In Dial. cum Tryphon.
he reckons amongst Heretics. Now I demand, was this Tradition one of those
that was conserved, and observed in the Church of Rome, or was it not? If not,
had Irenaeus known so much, he must have retracted this commendation of that
Church. If it was, then the Tradition of the present Church of Rome contradicts
the Ancient, and accounts it Heretical, and then sure it can be no certain note
of Heresy to depart from them, who have departed from themselves, and prove
themselves subject unto Error by holding contradictions. Fifthly and lastly,
that out of the Story of the Church it is as manifest as the light at noon,
that though Irenaeus did esteem the Roman Tradition a great Argument of the
doctrine which he there delivers and defends against the Heretics of his ^ime,
viz. That there is one God, yet he was very far from thinking that Church was,
and ever should be a safe keeper, and an infallible witness of Tradition in
general: Inasmuch as in his own life, his action proclaimed the contrary. For
when Victor Bishop of Rome obtruded the Roman Tradition touching the time of
Easter upon Asian Bishops under the pain of Excommunication, and damnation;
Irenaeus, and all the other Western Bishops, though agreeing with him in his
observation, yet sharply reprehended him for excommunicating the Asian Bishops
for their disagreeing, plainly showing that they esteemed that not a necessary
doctrine and a sufficient ground of excommunication, which the Bishop of Rome
and his adherents did so account of: For otherwise how could they have
reprehended him for excommunicating them, had they conceived the cause of this
Excommunication just and sufficient? And besides, evidently declaring that they
esteemed not separation from the Roman Church a certain mark of Heresy, seeing
they esteemed not them Heretics though separated and cut off from the Roman
Church.

Cardinal Perron to avoid the stroke of this convincing argument, raises a
cloud of eloquent words, Lib. 3. cap. 2. Of his Reply to King James. c. 2.
sect. 32.
which because you borrow them of him in your Second part, I will here insert,
and with short censures dispel; and let his Idolaters see that Truth is not
afraid of Giants: His words are these.

The first instance then that Calvin alleges against the Popes censures, is
taken from Eusebius (a) an Arrian author, and from Ruffinus (b) enemy to the
Roman Church his translator; who writ, (c) that S. IRENAEUS reprehended Pope
Victor for having excommunicated the Churches of Asia for the question of the
day of Pasche, which they observed according to a particular tradition that S.
JOHN had introduced (d) for a time in their Provinces, Calv. ubi supra.
because of the neighborhood of the Jews, and to bury the Synagogue with
honor and not according to the universal Tradition of the Apostles. Irenaeus (
says Calvin) reprehended Pope Victor bitterly, because for a light cause he
had moved a great and perilous contention in the Church. There is this in the
Text that Calvin produces, he reprehended him, that he had not done well, to
cut off from the body of unity, so many and so great Churches. But against whom
makes this, Ruffin. in verse. hist. Eccl Eus. l. 5 c. 24.
but (e) against those that object it? for who sees not, that S. IRENAEUS, does
not there reprehend the Pope for the (f) want of power, but for the ill use of
his power; and does not reproach to the Pope, that he could not excommunicate
the Asians, but admonishes him, that for (g) so small a cause he should not
have cut off so many Provinces from the body of the Church? Eusebius hist. Eccl.
l. 5. c. 24.
Irenaeus ( says Eusebius) did fitly exhort Pope Victor, that he should not
cut off all the Churches of God which ^eld this ancient tradition. And Ruffinus
translating and envenoming Eusebius says; Ruffin. ib. c. 24. Iren l. 3. c.
3.1. Book. Chapter 25.
He questioned Victor, that he had not done well in cutting off from the Body
of Unity so many and so great Churches of God. And in truth, how could S.
IRENAEUS have reprehended the Pope for want of power; he that cites: To the
Roman Church, because of a more powerful principality; (that is to say) as
above appears, (h) because of a principality more powerful than the temporal:
or (as we have expounded otherwhere) because of a more powerful Original: (i)
It is necessary that every Church should agree? And (k) therefore also S.
IRENAEUS alleges not to Pope Victor, the example of him, and of the other
Bishops of the Gauls assembled in a Council holden expressly for this effect,
who had not excommunicated the Asians: Eusebius. hist. Eccl. l. 5. c. 22.
nor the example of Narcissus Bishop of Jerusalem, and of the Bishops of
Palestina assembled in another Council, holden expressly for the same effect,
who had not excommunicated them; nor the example of Palmas, and of the other
Bishops of Pontus assembled in the same manner, and for the same cause in the
Region of Pontus, who had not excommunicated them; but only alleadges to him
the example of the Popes his predecessors: Iren. apud Eusebius. hist. Eccl. 5. c.
26.
The Prelates (says he) who have presided before Soter in the Church where
thou presidest, Anisius, Pius, Hyginus, Telesphorus, and Sixtus, have not
observed this custom, etc. and nevertheless. none of those that observed it,
have been excommunicated. And yet, O admirable providence of God, the (l)
success of the after-ages showed, that even in the use of his power, the Popes
proceeding was just. For after the death of Victor, the Councils of Nicea, of
Constantinople, and of Ephesus, Conc. Antioch. c. 1. Conc. Constable. c. 7. Conc.
Ephesians. p. 2. act. 6.
excommunicated again those that held the same custom with the Provinces, that
the Pope had excommunicated, and placed them in the Catalogue of Heretics,
under the titles of heretics Quarto-decumans.

But to this instance Calvin's Sect do annex two new Observations; the first,
that the Pope having threatened the Bishops of Asia to excommunicate them,
Polycrates the Bishop of Ephesus and Metropolitan of Asia, despised the Popes
threats, as it appears by the answer of the same Polycrates to Pope Victor,
Eusebius. hist. Eccl. l. 5. c. 24. Hieron. in Hieron. in script. Eccl. in Polyer.
which is inserted in the writings of Eusebius, and of Saint JEROME, and which
JEROME seems to approve, when he says, he reports it to show the spirit and
authority of the man. And the second, that when the Pope pronounced anciently
his Excommunications, he did no other thing but separate himself from the
Communion of those that he excommunicated, and did not thereby separate them
from the universal communion of the Church. To the first then we say, that so
far is this Epistle of Polycrates from abating and diminishing the Popes
authority, that contrariwise it greatly magnifies and exalts it. For although
Polycrates blinded with the love of the custom of his Nation, which he believed
to be grounded upon the Word of God, who had assigned the fourteenth of the
Month of March, for the observation of the Pasche, and upon the example of S.
JOHN'S tradition, maintains it obstinately; Nevertheless, this that he answers,
speaking in his own Name, Exodus 12. Hieronym. ubi supra.
and in the name of the Council of the Bishops of Asia, to whom he presided; I
fear not those that threeaten us; for my Elders have said, It is better to obey
God than man: Does it not show, that had it not been, that be believed the
Pope's threat, was against the express Word of God, there had been cause to
fear it, and he had been obliged to obey him; for (m) who knows not, that this
answer, It is better to obey God than men, is not to be made but to those whom
we were obliged to obey, if their commundements were not contrary to the
commandments of God; And that he adds, that he had called the Bishops of Asia,
Eusebius. Hist. Eccl l. 5. c. 23.
to a National Council, being (n) summoned to it by the Pope; does it not
insinuate, that the other Councils whereof Eusebius speaks, that were holden
about this matter, through all the Provinces of the Earth, and particularly
that of Palestina, B^da in frag. de Aequinociio ve^^a^.
which if you believe the act that Beda said came to his hands, Theophilus
Archbishop of Cesarea had called by the auctority of Victor, were holden at the
instance of the Pope, and consequently, that the Pope was the first mover of
the Universal Church? And that the Councils of Nicea, of Constantinople, of
Ephesus, embraced the Censure of Victor, and excommunicated those that observed
the custom of Polycrates that was deceived, in believing that the Popes
commandment, was against Gods commandment? And that S. JEROME himself
celebrates the Paschal Homilies of Theophilus Patriarch of Alexandria, which
followed the Order of Nicea concerning the Pasche; does it not justify, that
when S. JEROME says, That he reports the Epistle of Polycrates, to show the
spirit, and authority of the man, he intends by authority, not authority of
right, but of fact; that is to say, the credit that Polycrates had amongst the
Asians, and other Quarto decimans?

These are the Cardinal's words, the most material and considerable passages
whereof, to save the trouble of repetition, I have noted with letters of
reference: whereunto my answers noted respectively with the same letters,
follow now in order.

(a) If Eusebius were an Arrian author, it is nothing to the purpose; what he
writes there is no Arrianism, nor any thing toward it. Never any error was
imputed to the Arrians for denying the Authority or the infallibility of the
Bishop or Church of Rome. Besides, what Eusebius says, he says out of Irenaeus:
Neither does, or can the Cardinal deny the story to be true, and therefore he
goes about by indirect Arts to foil it, and cast a blurr upon it. Lastly,
whenever Eusebius says any thing, which the Cardinal thinks for the advantage
of his side, he cites him, and then he is no Arrian: or at least he would not
take that for an answer to the arguments he draws out of him.

(b) That Ruffinus was enemy to the Roman Church, is said, but not proved,
neither can it be.

(c) Eusebius says the same also of caeteri omnes Episcopi, all the other
Bishops, That they advised Victor to keep those things, that belonged to peace
and unity, and that they sharply reprehended Victor, for having done otherwise.

(d) This is said, but no offer made of any proof of it: The Cardinal thinks we
must take every thing upon his word. They to whom the Tradition was delivered,
Polycrates and the Asian Bishops, knew no such matter, nay, professed the
contrary. And who is more likely to know the Truth, they which lived within two
ages of the fountain of it, or the Cardinal who lived sixteen ages after it?

(e) How can it make against those that object it: seeing it is evident from
Irenaeus his Reprehension, that he thought Victor and the Roman Church, no
infallible nor sufficient Judge, of what was necessary to be believed and done,
what not: what was universal Tradition, what not: what was a sufficient ground
of Excommunication, and what not: and consequently, that there was no such
necessity as is pretended, that all other Churches should, in matters of faith,
conform themselves to the Church of Rome?

(f) This is to suppose, that Excommunication is an Act, or Argument, or sign
of Power and Authority in the party excommunicating, over the party
excommunicated; whereas it is undeniably evident out of the Church-Story, that
it was often used by Equals upon Equals, and by Inferiors upon Superiors, if
the Equals or Inferiors, thought their Equals or Superiors did any thing
which deserved it.

(g) And what is this but to confess, that they thought that a small cause of
Excommunication and unsufficient, which Victor and his adherents thought great
and sufficient? And consequently, that Victor and his Part declared that to be
a matter of faith and of necessity, which they thought not so; And where was
then their conformity?

(h) True, you have so expounded it, but not proved nor offered any proof of
your exception. This also we must take upon your Authority. Irenaeus speaks not
one Word of any other power, to which he compares, or before which he preferrs,
the power of the Roman-Church. And it is evident out of the Council of
Chalcedon; Cant. 28.
That all the Principality which it had, was given it (not by God, but) by the
Church, in regard it was seated in the Imperial City. Whereupon, when
afterward Constantinople was the Imperial City, they decreed that that Church
should have equal Privileges and dignity and pre-eminence with the Church of
Rome. All the Fathers agreed in this Decree, saving only the Legates of the
Bishop of Rome: showing plainly, that they never thought of any Supremacy given
the Bishops of Rome by God, or grounded upon Scripture, but only by the Church,
and therefore alterable at the Churches pleasure.

(i) This is falsely translated. Convenire ad Romanam Ecclesiam, every body
knows, signifies no more but to resort or come to the Roman Church: which then
there was a necessity that men should do, because that the affairs of the
Empire were transacted in that place. But yet Irenaeus says not so of every
Church simply, which had not been true but only of the Adjacent Churches: for
so he expounds himself in saying, To this Church it is necessary that every
Church, that is, all the faithful, round about should resort. With much more
reason therefore we return the Argument thus. Had Irenaeus thought that all
Churches must of necessity agree with the Roman, how could he and all other
Bishops have then pronounced, that to be no matter of Faith, no sufficient
ground of Excommunication, which Victor and his adherents thought to be so? And
how then could they have reprehended Victor so much, for the ill use of his
power, as Cardinal Perron confesses they did* seeing, if that was true which is
pretended, in this also as well as other things, it was necessary for them to
agree with the Church of Rome?

Some there are that say but more wittily than truly, that all Cardinal
Bellarmines works, are so consonant to themselves, as if he had written them in
two hours. Had Cardinal Perron wrote his Book in two hours, sure he would not
have done that here in the middle of the Book, which he condemns in the
beginning of it. For here he urges a Consequence, drawn from the mistaken
words of Irenaeus against his lively and actual practice: which Proceeding,
there he justly condemns of evident injustice. His words are In his Letter to
Casaubon, toward the end.
For who knows not that it is too great an injustice to allege consequences
from passages, and even those ill interpreted and misunderstood, and in whose
Illation there is always some Paralogism hid against the express words, and the
lively and actual practice of the same Fathers from whom they are collected:
and that it may be good, to take the Fathers for Adversaries, and to accuse
them for want of sense or memory: but not to take them for Judges, and to
submit themselves to the observation of what they have believed and practiced.

(k) This is nothing to the purpose: he might choose these examples, not as of
greater force and authority in themselves, but as fitter to be employed against
Victor, as domestique examples are fitter and more effectual than foreign: and
for his omitting to press him with his own example and others, to what purpose
had it been to use them, seeing their Letters sent to Victor from all parts,
wherein they reprehend his presumption, showed him sufficiently, that their
example was against him. But besides, he that reads Irenaeus his Letter, shall
see, that in the matter of the Lent-Fast, and the great variety about the
celebration of it, which he parallels with this of Easter, he presses Victor
with the example of himself and others, not Bishops of Rome; Both they (says
he, speaking of other Bishops), notwithstanding this difference, retained peace
among themselves; and we also among our selves retain it; inferring from his
example, that Victor also ought to do so.

(l) If the Pope's proceeding was just, then the Churches of Asia were indeed,
and in the sight of God excommunicate, and out of the state of Salvation: which
Irenaeus, and all the other ancient Bishops never thought. And if they were so,
why do you account them Saints and Martyrs? But the truth is, that these
Councels did no way show the Pope's proceedings just, but rather the contrary.
For though they settled an uniformity in this matter, yet they settled it as a
matter formerly indifferent, and not as a matrer of faith or necessity, as it
is evident out of In ep. ad Episcopos in Africa: Where he clearly shows that
this question was not a question was not a question of faith, by saying, The
Council of Nice was celebrated, by occasion of the Arrian Heresy and the
difference about Easter. In so much as they in Syria and Cilicia and
Mesopotamia, did differ herein from us, and kept this Feast on the same day
with the Jews: But thanks be to God, an agreement was made, as concerning the
Faith, so also concerning this holy Feast.
Athanasius; and consequently, they rather declare Victor's proceeding unjust,
who excommunicated so many Churches, for differing from him in an indifferent
matter.

(m) It seems then Polycrates might be a Saint and a Martyr, and yet think the
commands of the Roman Church, enjoined upon pain of damnation, contrary to the
commandments of God. Besides, S. Peter himself, the head of the Church, the
Vicar of Christ (as you pretend), made this very answer to the high Priest; yet
I hope, you will not say, he was his inferior and obliged to obey him. Lastly,
who sees not, that when the Pope commands us any thing unjust, as to
communicate Laymen in one kind, to use the Latin Service, etc. we may very
fitly say to him, It is better to obey God than men, and yet never think of any
authority he has over us?

(n) Between requesting and summoning, methinks, there should be some
difference; and Polycrates says no more, but he was requested by the Church of
Rome to call them, and did so. Here then (as very often) the Cardinal is fain
to help the dice with a false translation; and, his pretense being false, every
one must see that that which he pretends to be insinuated by it, is clearly
inconsequent.

(o) Polycrates was deceived, if he believed it to be against Gods
Commandment, and the Pope deceived as much, in thinking it to be Gods
commandment, for it was neither one nor the other, but an indifferent matter,
wherein God had not interposed his Authority. Neither did the Council of Nice
embrace the Censure of Victor, by acknowledging his Excommunication to be just
and well grounded, for which the Cardinal neither does pretend, nor can produce
any proof, any way comparable to the fore-alledged words of Athanasius
testifying the contrary; though perventure, having settled the observation, and
reduced it to an uniformity, they might excommunicate those who afterward
should trouble the Churches peace for an indifferent matter* And thus much for
Irenaeus.

31 I come now to S. Austin, and to the first place out of him, where he seems
to say, that the Succession in the Sea of Peter, was the Rock which our Savior
meant when he said, Upon this Rock, etc. I answer, first, we have no reason to
be confident of the truth hereof, because S. Austin himself was not, but
retracts it as uncertain, and leaves to the Reader whether he will think that,
or another more probable. Retr. l. 1. c. 26. Secondly, What he says of the
Succession in the Roman Church in this place, he says it elsewhere, of all the
Successions in all other Apostolic Churches. Thirdly, that as in this place
he urges the Donatists with separation from the Roman Church, an Argument of
their Error: So, elsewhere he presses them with their Separation from other
Apostolic Churches, nay more from these than from that, because in Rome the
Donatists had a Bishop though not a perpetual Succession of them; but in other
Apostolic Churches they wanted both. These scattered men (says he of the
Donatists Epist. 165.) read in the holy books the Churches to which the
Apostles wrote, and have no Bishop in them: But what is more perverse and mad,
than to the Lectors reading these Epistles to say, Peace with you, and to
separate from the peace of these Churches, to which these Epistles were
written? So Optatus, having done you (as it might seem, great service) in
upbraiding the Donatists as Schismatiques, because they had not Communion with
the Church of Rome, overthrows and undoes it all again, and as it were with a
sponge wipes out all that he has said for you, by adding after, that they were
Schismatiques, because They had not the fellowship of Communion with the seven
Churches of Asia, to which S. John writes: whereof he pronounces confidently,
(though I know not upon what ground) Extraseptem Ecclesias quicquid foris est,
alienum est. Now, I pray tell me, do you esteem the Authority of these Fathers
a sufficient assurance, that separation from these other Apostolic Churches,
was a certain mark of Heresy, or not? If so, then your Church has been for
many Ages heretical. If not, How is their authority, a greater Argument for the
Roman, than for the other Churches? If you say, they conceived separation from
these Churches a note of Schism, only when they were united to the Roman: so
also they might conceive of the Roman, only when it was united to them. If you
say, they urged this only as a probable, and not as a certain Argument, so also
they might do that. In a word, whatsoever answer you can devise to show, that
these Fathers made not separation from these other Churches a mark of Heresy,
apply that to your own Argument, and it will be satisfied.

32 The other place is evidently impertinent to the present question, nor is
there it in any thing but this, That Caecilian might contemn the multitude of
his adversaries, because those that were united with him were more, and of more
account than those that were against him. Had he preferred the Roman Church
alone, before Caecilian's enemies, this had been little, but something; but
when other Countries from which the Gospel came first into Africa, are joined
in this Patent, with the Church of Rome, how she can build any singular
privilege upon it I am yet to learn! Neither do I see what can be concluded
from it, but that in the Roman Church was the Principality of an You do ill to
translate it the Principality of the Sea Apostolic, as if there were but one;
whereas Saint Austin presently after speaks of Apostolical Churches, in the
plural number; and makes the Bishops of them joynt-Commissioners for the
judging of Ecclesiastical causes.
Apostolic Sea, which no man doubts: or that the Roman Church, was not the
Mother Church, because the Gospel came first into Africa, not from her, but
from other Churches.

33. Thus you see his words make very little, or indeed nothing for you. But
now his Action, which according to Cardinal Perron's rule, is much more to be
regarded than his words, as not being so obnoxious to misinterpretation, I mean
his famous opposition of three Bishops of Rome in Succession, touching the
great question of Appeals, wherein he and the rest of the African Bishops
proceeded so far in the first or second Milevitan Council, as to The words of
the Decree ( which also Bellarm l. 1. de Matrim. c. 17. assures us to be
performed by S. Austin) are these. Si qui (Africani) ab Episcopis provocandum
putaverint, non nisi ad Africana provocent Concilia, vel ad Primates
provinciarum suarum. Ad transmarina autem qui putaverit apellandum, a nullo
intra Africam in Communionem suscipiatur. This decree is by Gratian most
impudently corrupted. For whereas the Fathers of that Council intended it
particularly against the Church of Rome, he tells us they forbad Appeals to All,
excepting only the Church of Rome.
decree any African Excommunicate, that should appeal to any man out of Africa,
and therein continued resolute unto death: I say this famous Action of his,
makes clearly, and evidently, and infinitely against you. For, had Boniface,
and the rest of the African Bishops, a great part whereof were Saints and
Martyrs, believed as an Article of faith, that Union and Conformity with the
doctrine of the Roman Church, in all things which she held necessary, was a
certain note of a good Catholic, and by God's Command necessary to Salvation,
how was it possible they should have opposed it in this? Unless you will say
they were all so foolish as to believe at once direct contradictions, viz. that
conformity to the Roman Church was necessary in all points, and not necessary
in this: or so horribly impious, as believing this doctrine of the Roman Church
true, and her power to receive Appeals, derived from divine Authority,
notwithstanding to oppose and condemn it, and to Anathematize all those
Africans, of what condition soever, that should appeal unto it. I say, of what
condition soever: For it is evident, that they concluded in their
determination, Bishops as well as the inferior Clergy and Laity: And Cardinal
P^rron's pretense of the contrary, is a shameless falsehood, repugnant to the
plain words of the The words are these. Praefato debito salutationis officio,
impendio deprecamur; ut deinceps ad aures vestras hinc venientes, non sacilius
admittat is; nec a nobis excommunicatos ultra in Communionem velitis recipere,
quia hoc etiam Niceno Concilio de finitum facile advertet venerabilitastus. Nam
si de inferioribus Clericis vel Laicis videtur id praecaveri, quanto magis hoc
de Episcopis voluit observari.
Remonstrance of the African Bishops to Celestine Bishop of Rome.

34 Your allegation of Tertullian is a manifest conviction of your want of
sincerity: For you produce with great ostentation what he says of the Church
of Rome: but you and your fellows always conceal and dissemble, that immediately
before these words he artributes as much, for point of direction, to any other
Apostolic Church, and that as he sends them to Rome who lived near Italy, so
those near Achaia he sends to Corinth, those about Macedonia to Philippi and
Thessalonica, those of Asia to Ephesus. His words are, Go to now, thou that
wilt better employ thy curiosity in the business of thy salvation, run over the
Apostolical Churches, wherein the Chairs of the Apostles are yet sat upon in
their places, wherein the Authentic Epistles are recited, sounding out the
voice, and representing the face of every one! Is Achaia near thee? there thou
have Corinth: If thou art not far from Macedonia, thou have Philippi, thou have
Thessalonica: If thou can go into Asia, there thou have Ephesus: If thou be
adjacent to Italy, thou have Rome, whose Authority is near at hand to us (in
Africa:) A happy Church, into which the Apostles powered forth all their Doctrine
together with their blood, etc. Now I pray you Sir tell me, if you can for
blushing, why this place might not have been urged by a Corinthian, or
Philippian, or Thessalonian, or an Ephesian, to show that in the judgment of
Tertullian, separation from any of their Churches is a certain mark of Heresy,
as justly and rationally as you allege it to vindicate this privilege to the
Roman Church only? Certainly, if you will stand to Tertullian's judgment, you
must either grant the authority of the Roman Church (though at that time a good
Topical Argument, and perhaps a better than any the Heretics had, especially
in conjunction with other Apostolic Churches:) yet, I say, you must grant it
perforce but a fallible Guide as well as that of Ephesus, and Thessalonica, and
Philippi, and Corinth: or you must maintain the Authority of every one of these
infallible, as well as the Roman. For though he make a Panegyric of the Roman
Church in particular, and of the rest only in general, yet, as I have said, for
point of direction he makes them all equal, and therefore makes them (choose you
whether) either all fallible, or all infallible: Now you will and must
acknowledge that he never intended to attribute infallibility to the Churches
of Ephesus, or Corinth: or, if he did, that (as experience shows) he erred in
doing so; and what can hinder, but then we may say also that he never intended
to attribute infallibility to the Roman Church, or, if he did, that he erred in
doing so?

35 From the saying of S. Basil, certainly nothing can be gathered; but only
that the Bishop of Rome may discern between that which is counterfeit, and that
which is lawful and pure, and without any diminution may preach the faith of
our Ancestors. Which certainly he might do, if ambition and covetousness did
not hinder him, or else I should never condemn him for doing otherwise. But is
there no difference between may and must? Between he may do so, and he cannot
but do so? Or does it follow, because he may do so, therefore he always shall
or will do so? In my opinion rather the contrary should follow! For he that
says, you may do thus, implies according to the ordinary sense of words, that
if he will he may do otherwise. You certainly may, if you please, leave abusing
the world with such Sophistry as this; but whether you will or no, of that I
have no assurance.

36 Your next Witness I would willingly have examined, but it seems you are
unwilling he should be found, otherwise you would have given us your direction
where we might have him. Of that Maximianus who succeeded Nestorius, I can find
no such thing in the Councels: Neither can I believe that any Patriarch of
Constantinople twelve hundred years ago was so base a parasite of the Sea of
Rome.

37 Your last Witness John of Constantinople, I confess, speaks home, and
advances the Roman Sea, even to heaven: But I fear it is, that his own may go
up with it, which he there professes to be all one sea with the sea of Rome;
and therefore his Testimony, as speaking in his own case, is not much to be
regarded. But besides, I have little reason to be confident that this Epistle
is not a forgery; for certainly, Binius has obtruded upon us many a hundred
such. This though written by a Grecian is not extant in Greek but in Latin
only. Lastly it comes out of a supicious place, an old book of the Vatican
Library: which Library the world knows to have been the Mint of very many
Impostures.

38 Ad. 20, 21, 22, 23. The sum of your discourse in the four next Sections, if
it be pertinent to the Question in agitation, must be this: Want of succession
of Bishops and Pastors, holding always the same doctrine, and of the forms of
ordaining Bishops and Priests which are in use in the Roman Church, is a
certain mark of Heresy: but Protestants want all these things: Therefore they
are Heretics. To which I answer, that nothing but want of truth and holding
error can make or prove any man or Church heretical. For if he be a true
Aristotelian, or Platonist, or Pyrrhonian, or Epicurean, who holds the doctrine
of Aristotle, or Plato, or Pirrho, or Epicurus, although he cannot assign any
that held it before him for many ages together; why should I not be made a true
and orthodox Christian, by believing all the doctrine of Christ, though I cannot
derive my descent from a perpetual Succession that believed it before me? By
this reason you should say as well, that no man can be a good Bishop or Pastor,
or King or Magistrate, or Father, that succeeds a bad one. For, if I may
conform my will and actions to the Commandments of God, why may I not embrace
his doctrine with my understanding, although my predecessor do not so? You have
above in this Chapter defined Faith, A free Infallible, obscure, supernatural
assent to divine Truths, because they are revealed by God and sufficiently
propounded: This definition is very phanrastical; but for the present I will
let it pass, and desire you to give me some piece or shadow of reason, why I
may not do all this without a perpetual Succession of Bishops and Pastors that
have done so before me? You may judge as uncharitably, and speak as maliciously
of me, as your blind zeal to your Superstition shall direct you, but certainly
I know, (and with all your Sophistry you cannot make me doubt of what I know,)
that I do believe the Gospel of Christ (as it is delivered in the undoubted
books of Canonical Scripture,) as verily as that it is now day, that I see the
light, that I am now writing: and I believe it upon this Motive, because I
conceive it sufficiently, abundantly, superabundantly proved to be divine
Revelation: and yet in this, I do not depend upon any Succession of men that
have always believed it without any mixture of Error; nay I am fully
persuaded, there has been no succession, and yet do not find my self any way
weakened in my faith by the want of it, but so fully assured of the truth of it,
that not only though your Devils at Lowden do tricks against it, but though an
Angel from heaven should gainsay it or any part of it, I persuade my self that
I should not be moved. This I say, and this I am sure is true: and if you will
be so hypersceptical as to persuade me, that I am not sure that I do believe
all this, I desire you to tell me, how are you sure that you believe the Church
of Rome? For, if a man may persuade himself he does believe what he does not
believe, then may you think you believe the Church of Rome, and yet not believe
it. But if no man can err concerning what he believes, then you must give me
leave to assure my self that I do believe, and consequently, that any man may
believe the foresaid truths upon the foresaid motives, without any dependence
upon any succession that has believed it always. And as from your definition
of Faith, so from your definition of Heresy, this fancy may be refuted. For
questionless no man can be an Heretic but he that holds an Heresy, and an
Heresy you say is a Voluntary error; therefore no man can be necessitated to
be an Heretic whether he will or no, by want of such a thing that is not in
his power to have: But that there should have been a perpetual Succession of
Believers in all points Orthodox, is not a thing which is in our own power,
therefore our being or not being Heretics depends not on it. Besides, What is
more certain, than that he may make a straight line who has a Rule to make it
by, though never man in the world had made any before: and why then may not he
that believes the Scripture to be the word of God, and the Rule of faith,
regulate his faith by it, and consequently believe aright, without much
regarding what other men will do or have done? It is true indeed there is a
necessity that if God will have his word believed, he by his Providence must
take order, that, either by succession of men, or by some other means natural
or supernatural, it be preserved and delivered, and sufficiently notified to be
his word; but that this should be done by a Succession of men that holds no
error against it, certainly there is no more necessity, than that it should be
done by a Succession of men that commit no sin against it. For if men may
preserve the Records of a Law, and yet transgress it, certainly they may also
preserve directions for their faith, and yet not follow them. I doubt not but
Lawyers at the Bar do find by frequent experience, that many men preserve and
produce evidences, which being examined, of times make against themselves. This
they do ignorantly, it being in their power to suppress, or perhaps to alter
them. And why then should any man conceive it strange, that an erroncous and
corrupted Church should preserve and deliver the Scriptures uncorrupted, when
indeed for many reasons which I have formerly alleged, it was impossible for
them to corrupt them? Seeing therefore this is all the necessity that is
pretended of a perpetual Succession of men otthodox in all points, certainly
there is no necessity at all of any such, neither can the want of it prove any
man or any Church Heretical.

39 When therefore you have produced some proof of this, which was your Major
in your former Syllogism, That want of Succession is a certain mark of Heresy,
you shall then receive a full answer to your Minor. We shall then consider
whether your indelibe Character be any reality, or whether it be a creature of
your own making, a fancy of your own imagination? And if it be a thing, and not
only a word, whether our Bishops and Priests have it not as well as yours; and
whether some men's persuasion that there is no such thing, can hinder them from
having it, or prove that they have it not if there be any such thing! (Any more
than a man's persuasion that he has not taken Physic or Poison, will make him
not to have taken it if he has, or hinder the operation of it?) And whether
Tertullian in the place quoted by you, speak of a Priest made a Layman, by just
deposition or degradation, and not by a voluntary desertion of his Order? And
whether in the same place he set not some mark upon Heretics that will agree
to your Church? Whether all the Authority of our Bishops in England before the
Reformation, was conferred on them by the Pope? And if it were, whether it were
the Pope's right, or an usurpation? If it were his right, Whether by Divine Law
or Ecclesiastical? And, if by Ecclesiastical only, Whether he might possibly so
abuse his power, as to deserve to lose it? Whether de facto he had done so?
Whether, supposing he had deserved to lose it, those that deprived him of it,
had power to make it from him? Or if not, Whether they had power to suspend him
from the use of it, until good caution were put in, and good assurance given,
that, if he had it again, he would not abuse it as he had formerly done?
Whether in case, they had done unlawfully that took his power from him, it may
not (things being now settled, and the present Government established) be as
unlawful to go about to restore it? Whether it be not a Fallacy to conclude,
Because we believe the Pope has no power in England, now when the King and
State and Church has deprived him upon just grounds of it, therefore we cannot
believe that he had any before his deprivation? Whether, without Schism, a man
may not withdraw obedience from an usurped Authority commanding unlawful
things? Whether the Roman Church might not give authority to Bishops and
Priests to oppose her errors, as well as a King gives Authority to a Judge to
judge against him, if his cause be bad; as well as Trajan gave his sword to his
Prefect with this Commission, that, If he governed well, he should use it for
him; if ill, against him. Whether the Roman Church gave not Authority to her
Bishops and Priests to preach against her corruptions in manners? And if so,
Why not against her errors in doctrine, if she had any? Whether she gave them
not authority to preach the whole Gospel of Christ, and consequently against
her doctrine, if it should contradict any part of the Gospel of Christ? Whether
it be not acknowledged lawful in the Church of Rome, for any Layman or woman,
that has ability, to persuade others by word or by writing from error, and
unto truth? And why this liberty may not be practiced against their Religion,
if it be false; as well as for it, if it be true? Whether any man need any
other commission or vocation than that of a Christian, to do a work of charity?
And whether it be not one of the greatest works of charity (if it be done after
a peaceable manner, and without any unnecessary disturbance of order) to
persuade men out a false, unto a true way of eternal happiness? Especially, the
Apostle having assured us, that he (whosoever he is) who converteth a sinner
from the error of his way, shall save a soul from death, and shall hide a
multitude of sins? Whether the first Reformed Bishops died all at once, so that
there were not enough to ordain Others in the places that were vacant? Whether
the Bishops of England may not consecrate a Metropolitan of England, as well as
the Cardinals do the Pope? Whether the King or Queen of England, or they that
have the government in their hands, in the minority of the Prince, may not
lawfully commend one to them to be consecrated, against whom there is no
Canonical exception? Whether the Doctrine, that the King is Supreme Head of the
Church of England, (as the Kings of Judah, and the first Christian Emperors
were of the Jewish and Christian Church) be any new found doctrine? Whether it
may not be true, that Bishops being made Bishops, have their authority
immediately from Christ, though this or that man be not made Bishop without the
King's authority; as well as you say, the Pope being Pope, has authority
immediately from Christ, and yet this or that man cannot be made Pope without
the authority of the Cardinals? Whether you do well to suppose, that Christian
Kings have no more authority in ordering the affairs of the Church, than the
great Turk, or the Pagan Emperors? Whether the King may not give authority to a
Bishop to exercise his function in some part of his Kingdom, and yet not be
capable of doing it himself: as well as a Bishop may give authority to a
Physician to practice Physic in his Diocese, which the Bishop cannot do
himself? Whether, if Nero the Emperor would have commanded S. Peter or S. Paul
to preach the Gospel of Christ, and to exercise the office of a Bishop of Rome,
whether they would have questioned his Authority to do so? Whether there were
any Law of God or man; that prohibited King JAMES to give Commission to
Bishops, nay to lay his Injunction upon them, to do any thing that is lawful?
Whether a casual irregularity may not be lawfully dispensed with? Whether the
Pope's irregularities, if he should chance to incur any, be indispensable? And
if not, who is he, or who are they, whom the Pope is so subject unto, that they
may dispense with him? Whether that be certain which you take for granted; That
your Ordination imprints a character, and ours does not? Whether the power of
consecrating and ordaining by imposition of hands, may not reside in the
Bishops, and be derived unto them, not from the King but God; and yet the King
have authority to command them to apply this power to such a fit person, whom
he shall commend unto them: As well as if some Architects only had the faculty
of architecture, and had it immediately by infusion from God himself, yet, if
they were the King's subjects, he wants not authority to command them to build
him a Palace for his use, or a Fortress for his service: Or as the King of
France pretends not to have power to make Priests himself, yet, I hope, you
will not deny him power to command any of his subjects that has this power, to
ordain any fit person Priest, whom he shall desire to be ordained? Whether it
do not follow, that whenever the King commands an house to be built, a
message to be delivered, or a murderer to be executed, that all these things
are presently done without intervention of the Archirect, messenger, or
executioner: As well as, that they are ipso facto ordained and consecrated, who
by the King's authority are commended to the Bishops to be ordained and
consecrated: Especially, seeing the King will not deny, but that these Bishops
may refuse to do what he requires to be done, lawfully if the person be
unworthy; if worthy, unlawfully indeed, but yet de facto they may refuse: and,
in case they should do so, whether justly or unjustly; neither the King
himself, nor any body else, would esteem the person Bishop upon the King's
designation? Whether many Popes, though they were not consecrated Bishops by
any temporal Prince, yet might not, or did not receive authority from the
Emperor to exercise their Episcopal function in this or that place? And whether
the Emperors had not authority, upon their desert, to deprive them of their
jurisdiction, by imprisonment or banishment? Whether Protestants do indeed
pretend that their Reformation is universal? Whether in saying, the Donatists
Sect was confined to Africa, you do not forget your self, and contradict what
you said above, in. 17. of this Chapter where you tell us, they had some of
their Sect residing in Rome? Whether it be certain, that none can admit of
Bishops willingly, but those that hold them of divine institution? Whether they
may not be willing to have them, conceiving that way of government the best,
though not absolutely necessary? Whether all those Protestants that conceive
the distinction between Priests and Bishops not to be of divine institution, be
Schismatical and Heretical for thinking so? Whether your form of ordaining
Bishops and Priests, be essential to the constitution of a true Church? Whether
the forms of the Church of England differ essentially from your forms? Whether
in saying, that the true Church cannot subsist without undoubted true Bishops
and Priests, you have not overthrown the truth of your own Church: wherein I
have proved it plainly impossible, that any man should be so much as morally
certain, either of his own Priesthood or any other man? Lastly, Whether any one
kind of these external forms and orders, and government, be so necessary to the
being of a Church, but that they may be diverse in diverse places, and that a
good and peaceable Christian may and ought to submit himself to the Government
of the place where he lives, whatsoever it be? All these questions will be
necessary to be discussed for the clearing of the truth of the Minor
proposition of your former Syllogism, and your proofs of it: and I will promise
to debate them fairly with you, if first you will bring some better proof of
the Major, That want of Succession is a certain note of Heresy, which for the
present remains both unprov'd and unprobable.

40 Ad. 23. The Fathers, you say, assign Succession as one mark of the true
Church: I confess, they did urge Tradition as an Argument of the truth of their
doctrine and of the falsehood of the contrary; and thus far they agree with you.
But now see the difference: They urged it not against all Heretics that ever
should be, but against them who rejected a great part of the Scripture, for no
other reason but because it was repugnant to their doctrine, and corrupted other
parts with their additions and detractions, and perverted the remainder with
diverse absurd interpretations: So Tertullian not a leaf before the words by you
cited. Nay they urged it against them who when they were confuted out of
Scripture, fell to accuse the Scriptures themselves as if they were not right,
and came not from good authority, as if they were various one from another, and
as if truth could not be found out of them, by those who know not Tradition,
for that it was not delivered in writing, (they did mean wholly,) but by word
of mouth: And that thereupon Paul also said, we speak wisdom amongst the
perfect. So Irenaeus in the very next Chapter before that which you allege.
Against these men being thus necessitated to do so, they did urge Tradition,
but what or whose Tradition was it? Certainly no other, but the joint Tradition
of all the Apostolic Churches with one mouth and one voice teaching the same
doctrine. Or if, for brevity sake, they produced the Tradition of any one
Church, yet is it apparent, that, that one was then in conjunction with all the
rest; Irenaeus, Tertullian, Origin, testify as much in the words cited, and S.
Austin, in the place before alleged by me. This Tradition they did urge
against these men, and in a time, in comparison of ours, almost contiguous to
the Apostles: So near, that one of them, Irenaeus, was Scholar to one who was
Scholar to S. John the Apostle. Tertullian and Origin were not an age removed
from him: and the last of them all, little more then an age from them. Yet
after all this they urged it not as a demonstration, but only as a very
probable argument, far greater then any their Adversaries could oppose against
it. So Tertullian in the place above quoted. 5. How is it likely that so many
and so great Churches should err in one faith (it should be, should have erred
into one faith.) And this was the condition of this argument as the Fathers
urged it. Now if you having to deal with us, who question no Book of Scripture,
which was not anciently questioned by some whom you your selves esteem good
Catholics; nay who refuse not to be tried by your own Canon, and your own
Translation, who in interpreting Scriptures are content to allow of all those
rules which you propose, only except that we will not allow you to be our
Judges; if you will come fifteen hundred years after the Apostles, a fair time
for the purest Church to gather much dross and corruption, and for the mystery
of iniquity to bring its work to some perfection, which in the Apostles time
began to work; If (I say) you will come thus long after, and urge us with the
single Tradition of one of these Churches, being now Catholic to it self
alone, and Heretical to all the rest: nay not only with her ancient and
original Traditions, but also with her post-nate introduced Definitions, and
these, as we pretend, repugnant to Scripture, and ancient Tradition, and all
this to decline an indifferent trial by Scripture, under pretense (wherein also
you agree with the calumny of the old Heretics) that all necessary truth
cannot be found in them without recourse to Tradition: If, I say,
notwithstanding all these differences, you will still be urging us with this
argument, as the very same and of the same force with that wherewith the
forementioned Fathers urged the old Heretics: certainly this must needs
proceed from a confidence you have, not only that we have no School Divinity,
nor Metaphysics, but no Logic or common sense; that we are but pictures of
men, and have the definition of rational creatures given us in vain.

41 But now suppose I should be liberal to you, and grant what you cannot
prove, that the Fathers make Succession a certain and perpetual mark of the
true Church; I beseech you what will come of it? What, that want of Succession
is a certain sign of an Heretical company? Truly if you say so, either you want
Logic, which is a certain sign of an ill disputer: or are not pleased to use
it, which is a worse. For speech is a certain sign of a living man, yet want of
speech is no sure argument that he is dead: for he may be dumb and yet living
still, and we may have other evident tokens that he is so, as eating, drinking,
breathing, moving: So, though the constant and universal delivery of any
doctrine by the Apostolic Churches, ever since the Apostles, be a very great
argument of the truth of it, yet there is no certainty, but that truth, even
Divine truth, may, through men's wickedness, be contracted from its
universality, and interrupted in its perpetuity, and so lose this argument, and
yet not want others to justify and support it self. For it may be one of those
principles which God has written in all men's hearts, or a conclusion evidently
arising from them: It may be either contained in Scripture in express terms, or
deducible from it by appar^^^ consequence. If therefore you intend to prove
want of a perpetual Succession of Professors a certain note of Heresy, you
must not content your self to show, that, having it, is one sign of truth; but
you must show it to be the only sign of it and inseparable from it. But this,
if you be well advised, you will never undertake; First, because it is an
impossible attempt: and then because, if you do it, you will mar all: for by
proving this an inseparable sign of Catholic doctrine, you will prove your
own, which apparently wants it in many points, not to be Catholic. For
whereas you say this Succession requires two things, agreement with the
Apostles doctrine, and an uninterrupted conveyance of it down to them that
challenge it: It will be proved against you, that you fail in both points; and
that some things wherein you agree with the Apostles have not been held
always, as, your condemning the Doctrine of the Chiliasts, and holding the
Eucharist not necessary for Infants; and that in many other things you agree
not with them, nor with the Church for many ages after. For example; In
mutilation of the Communion, in having your Service in such a language as the
Assistants generally understand not, your offering to Saints, your picturing of
God, your worshipping of Pictures.

42 Ad. 24. As for Universality of place, the want whereof you object to
Protestants as a mark of Heresy: You have not set down clearly and univocally
what you mean by it, Whether universality of fact, or of right: and if of fact,
Whether absolute or comparative: and if comparative, Whether of the Church in
comparison of any other Religion, or only of heretical Christians: or, if in
comparison of these, whether in comparison of all other Sects conjoined, or in
comparison only of any One of them. Nor have you proved it by any good argument
in any sense to be a certain mark of heresy: For those places of S. Austin do
not deserve the name. And truly in my judgment you have done advisedly in
proving it no better. For as for Universality of right, or a right to
Universality, all Religions claim it, but only the true has it; and which has
it, cannot be determined, unless it be first determined which is the true. An
absolute Universality and diffusion through all the world if you should pretend
to, all the world would laugh at you. If you should contend for latitude with
any one Religion, Mahumetism would carry the victory from you. If you should
oppose yourselves against all other Christians besides you, it is certain you
would be cast in this suit also. If lastly, being hard driven you should please
your selves with being more than any one Sect of Christians, it would presently
be replied, that it is uncertain whether now you are so, but most certain that
the time has been when you have not been so. Then when the Hier. Cont.
Luciferian^s.
whole world wondered that it was become Arrian: then when Athanasius opposed
the world, and the world Athanasius: then when In Th^od. Hist. l. 16. c. 2.
your Liberius having the contemptible paucity of his adherents objected to him
as a note of error, answered for himself, There was a time when there were but
three opposed the decree of the King, and yet those three were in the right,
and the rest in the wrong: then when the Professors of error surpassed the
number of the Professors of truth in proportion, as the sands of the Sea, do
the Stars of the Heaven. (As In ep. 43 ad Vincentium.
S. Austin acknowledges:) then when Commen. torii. lib. 1. c. 4.
Vincentius confesses, that the poison of the Arrians had contaminated, not
now some certain portion, but almost the whole World: then when the author of
Nazianzen's life testifies, That In ^^ta Nazianz.
the Heresy of Arrius, (...) possessed in a manner the whole extent of the
world; and when Nazianzen found cause to cry out, In Ores. Arian. and pro
seipso.
Where are they who reproach us with our poverty, who define the Church by the
multitude, and despise the little flock? They have the People, but we the
Faith. And lastly, when Athanasius was so overborn with Sholes and Floods of
Arrians, that he was enforced to write a Treatise on purpose To. 2.
against those, who judge of the truth only by plurality of adherents. So that
if you had proved want of Universality, even thus restrained, to be an
infallible note of heresy, there would have been no remedy but you must have
confessed, that the time was when you were heretics. And besides, I see not
how you would have avoided this great inconvenience, of laying grounds and
storing up arguments for Antichrist, against he comes, by which he may prove
his Company the true Church. For it is evident out of Scripture, and confessed
by you, that though his time be not long, his dominion shall be very large; and
that the true Church shall be then, the woman driven into the wilderness.

43 Ad. 25. and 26. The remainder of this Chapter if I would deal strictly with
you, I might let pass as impertinent to the question now disputed. For whereas
your argument promises that this whole Chapter shall be employed in proving
Luther and the Protestants guilty of Heresy, here you desert this question,
and strike out into another accusation of them, that their faith even of the
truth they hold, is not indeed true faith. But put case it were not, does it
follow, that the having of this faith makes them Heretics, or that they are
therefore Heretics because they have this faith? Aristotle believed there
were Intelligences which moved the Spears; he believed this with an humane
persuasion, and not with a certain, obscure, prudent, supernatural faith: and
will you make Aristotle an Heretic, because he believed so? You believe there
was such a man as Julius Caesar, that there is such a City as Constantinople,
and your belief hereof has not these qualifications which you require to divine
faith: And will you be content that this shall pass for a sufficient proof that
you are an Heretic? Heresy you have defined above to be a voluntary error:
but he that believes truth, though his belief be not qualified according to
your mind, yet sure in believing truth he believes no error; and from hence
according to ordinary Logic methinks it should follow, that such a man for
doing so, cannot be guilty of Heresy.

44 But you will say, though he be not guilty of Heresy for believing these
truths, yet if his faith be not saving, to what purpose will it be? Truly very
little to the purpose of Salvation, as little as it is to your proving
Protestants guilty of Heresy. But out of our wonted indulgence, let us pardon
this fault also, and do you the favor to hear what you can say, to beget this
faith in us, that indeed we have no faith, or at least not such a faith,
without which it is impossible to please God. Your discourse upon this point,
you have, I know not upon what policy, dis-joynted, and given us the grounds of
it in the beginning of the Chapter, and the superstructure here in the end.
Them I have already examined, and for a great part of them, proved them vain
and deceitful. I have showed by many certain arguments, that though the subject
matter of our faith be in it self most certain, yet that absolute certainly of
adherence, is not required to the essence of faith, no nor to make it
acceptable with God, but that to both these effects it is sufficient, if it be
firm enough to produce Obedience and Charity. I have showed besides, that
Prudence is rather commendable in faith, than intrinsecal and essential to it.
So that whatsoever is here said, to prove the faith of Protestants no faith,
for want of certainty or for want of prudence, is already answered before it is
objected: for the foundation being destroyed, the building cannot stand. Yet
for the fuller refutation of all pretenses, I will here make good, that to
prove our faith destitute of these qualifications, you have produced but vain
Sophisms, and for the most part, such arguments as return most violently upon
your selves. Thus then you say.

45 First, that their belief wants certainty, I prove, because they denying
the universal Infallibility of the Church, can have no certain ground to know
what objects are revealed or testified by God. But if there be no other ground
of certainty but your Churches infallibility, upon what certain ground do you
know that your Church is infallible? Upon what certain ground do you know all
those things which must be known before you can know that your Church is
infallible? As, that there is a God: that God has promised his assistance to
your Church in all her Decrees: that the Scripture wherein this promise is
extant, is the word of God: that those texts of Scripture which you allege for
your infallibility, are incorrupted: that that which you pretend is the true
fense of them? When you have produced certain grounds for all these things, I
doubt not but it will appear, that we also may have grounds certain enough to
believe our whole Religion, which is nothing else but the Bible, without
dependence on the Churches infallibility. Suppose you should meet with a man
that, for the present, believes neither Church, nor Scripture, nor God, but is
ready and willing to believe them all, if you can show some sufficient grounds
to build his faith upon; will you tell such a man, There are no certain
grounds, by which he may be converted; or there are? If you say the first, you
make all Religion an uncertain thing: If the second; then either you must
ridiculously persuade, that your Church is infallible because it is infallible,
or else that there are other certain grounds besides your Churches
infallibility.

46. But you proced and tell us, that Holy Scripture is in it self most true
and infallible, but without the direction and declaration of the Church, we can
neither have certain means to know what Scripture is Canonical, nor what
Translations be faithful, nor what is the true meaning of Scripture. Answ. But
all these things must be known, before we can know the direction of your Church
to be infallible, for no other proof of it can be pretended, but only some
Texts of Canonical Scripture, truly interpreted: Therefore either you are
mistaken, in thinking there is no other means to know these things, but your
Churches infallible direction; or we are excluded from all means of knowing her
direction to be infallible.

47 But Protestants, though, as you suppose, they are persuaded their own
opinions are true, and that they have used such means as are wont to be
prescribed for understanding the Scripture, as Prayer, conferring of Texts,
etc. yet by their disagreement show, that some of them are deceived. Now they
hold all the Articles of their faith, upon this only ground of Scripture,
interpreted by these rules, and therefore it is clear, that the ground of their
faith is infallible in no point at all. The first of these suppositions must
needs be true, but the second is apparently false: I mean, that every
Protestant is persuaded that he has used those means which are prescribed for
understanding of Scripture. But that which you collect from these suppositions
is clearly inconsequent: and by as good Logic you might conclude, that Logic
and Geometry stand upon no certain grounds, that the rules of the one, and the
principles of the other do sometimes fail, because the disagreement of
Logicians and Geometricians show, that some of them are deceived. Might not a
Jew conclude as well against all Christians, that they have no certain ground
whereon to rely in their understanding of Scripture, because their
disagreements show that some are deceived; because some deduce from it the
infallibility of a Church, and others no such matter. So likewise a Turk might
use the same argument against both Jews and Christians, and an Atheist against
all Religions, and a Sceptick against all Reason* Might not one say, Men's
disagreement in Religion, shows that there is no certainty in any; and the
other, that experience of their contradictions teaches, that the rules of
reason do sometimes fail? Do not you see and feel how void of reason and how
full of impiety your sophistry is? And how, transported with zeal against
Protestants, you urge arguments against them, which if they could not be
answered, would overthrow not only your own, but all Religion? But God be
thanked, the answer is easy and obvious! For let men but remember not to
impute the faults of men but only to men, and then it will easily appear, that
there may be sufficient certainty in Reason, in Religion, in the rules of
interpreting Scripture, though men through their faults, take not care to make
use of them, and so run into diverse errors and dissentions.

48. But Protestants cannot determine what points be fundamental, and therefore
must remain uncertain, whether or no they be not in some fundamental error.
Answ. By like reason since you acknowledge, that every error in points defined
and declared by your Church destroies the substance of faith, and yet cannot
determine what points be defined, it follows that you must remain uncertain,
whether or no you be not in some fundamental error, and so want the substance
of faith, without which there can be no hope of salvation. Now that you are
uncertain what points are defined, appears from your own words, c. 4.. 3. of
your second Part, where, say you, No less impertinent is your discourse
concerning the difficulty to know what is Heresy: For we grant that it is not
always easy to determine in particular occasions, whether this or that Doctrine
be such, because it may be doubtful, whether it be against any Scripture, or
divine Tradition, or definition of the Church. Neither were it difficult to
extort from you this confession, by naming diverse Points, which some of you say
are defined, others the contrary. And others hang in suspense, and know not
what to determine. But this I have done elsewhere: as also I have showed plainly
enough that though we cannot perhaps say in particular, Thus much, and no more
is fundamental, yet believing all the Bible, we are certain enough that we
believe all that is fundamental. As he that, in a Receipt, takes twenty
ingredients, whereof ten only are necessary, though he know not which those ten
are, yet taking the whole twenty he is sure enough that he has taken all that
are necessary.

49. Ad. 29. But that he who erreth against any one revealed truth loses all
Divine Faith, is a very true doctrine delivered by Catholic Divines, (you mean
your own) with so general a consent, that the contrary is wont to be censured
as temerarious: Now certainly some Protestants must do so, because they hold
contradictions which cannot all be true: Therefore some of them at least, have
no divine faith. Answ. I pass by your weakness, in urging Protestants with the
authority of your Divines, which yet in you might very deservedly be censured.
For when D. Potter, to show the many actual dissentions between the Romish
Doctors, notwithstanding their braggs of potential Unity, referres to Pappus,
who has collected out of Bellar. their contradictions, and set them down in his
own words to the number of 237. and to Flacius, de Sectis and Controversiis
Religionis Papisticae; you making the very same use of M. Breerely against
Protestants, yet jeer and scorn D. Potter, as if he offered you for a proof,
the bare authority of Pappus and Flacius, and tell him, which is all the Answer
you vouchsafe him, It is pretty that he brings Pappus and Flacius, flat
Heretics, to prove your many contradictions: As if he had proved this with
the bare authority, the bare judgment of these men, which sure he does not,
but with the formal words of Bellarmine faithfully collected by Pappus. And
why then might not we say to you, Is it not pretty that you bring Breerely as
flat an Heretic as Pappus or Flacius, to prove the contradictions of
Protestants? Yet had he been so vain as to press you with the mere authority of
Protestant Divines in any point, methinks, for your own sake, you should have
pardoned him, who here and in many other places, urge us with the judgment of
your Divines as with weighty arguments. Yet if the authority of your Divines
were even Canonical, certainly nothing could be concluded from it in this
matter, there being not one of them, who delivers for true doctrine this
Position of yours, thus nakedly set down, That any error against any one
revealed truth destroies all divine faith. For they all require, (not your self
excepted) that this truth must not only be revealed, but revealed publicly,
and (all things considered) sufficiently propounded to the erring Party, to be
one of those, which God under pain of damnation commands all men to believe.
And therefore the contradiction of Protestants, (though this vain doctrine of
your Divines were supposed true) is but a weak argument* That any of them have
no divine Faith seeing you neither have, nor ever can prove, (without begging
the Question of your Churches infallibility,) that the truths about which they
differ, are of this quality and condition. But though out of courtesy we may
suppose this doctrine true, yet we have no reason to grant it, nor to think it
any thing but a vain and groundless fancy: and that this very weak and
inartificial argument, from the authority of your Divines, is the strongest
pillar which it has to support it. Two reasons you allege for it out of
Thomas Aquinas, the first whereof vainly supposes against reason and
experience, that by the commission of any deadly sin, the habit of Charity
is quite exstirpated. And for the second, though you cry it up for an Achilles,
and think, like the Gorgons head, it will turn us all into stone, and in
confidence of it, insult upon Doctor Potter as if he durst not come near it,
yet in very truth having considered it well, I find it a serious, grave,
prolixe, and profound nothing. I could answer it in a word, by telling you,
that it begges without all proof or color of proof, the main Question between
us, That the infallibility of your Church is either the formal motive, or
rule, or a necessary condition of faith: which you know we flatly deny, and
therefore all that is built upon it has nothing but wind for a foundation. But
to this answer I will add a large consutation of this vain fancy, out of one
of the most rational and profound Doctors of your own Church, I mean Essius,
who upon the third of the Sent. the 23. did. the 13.. writes thus, It is
disputed (says he) whether in him who believes some of the Articles of our
faith, and disbelieves others, or perhaps some one, there be faith properly so
called in respect of that which he does believe? In which question we must
before all, carefully distinguish between those, who retaining a general
readiness to believe whatsoever the Church believes, yet err by ignorance in
some Doctrine of faith, because it is not as yet sufficiently declared to them
that the Church does so believe; and those who after sufficient manifestation
of the Churches Doctrine, do yet choose to dissent from it, either by doubting
of it, or affirming the contrary. For of the former the answer is easy; but of
these, that is, of Heretics retaining some part of wholesome Doctrine, the
question is more difficult, and on both sides by the Doctors probably disputed.
For that there is in them true faith of the Articles wherein they do not err,
first experience seems to convince: For many at this day denying, for example
sake, Purgatory or Invocation of Saints, nevertheless firmly hold, as by divine
revelation, that God is Three and One, that the Son of God was incarnate and
suffered, and other like things. As anciently the Novatians, excepting their
peculiar error, of denying reconciliation to those that fell in persecution,
held other things in common with Catholics: So that they assisted them very
much against the Arrians, as Socrates relates in his Eccl. Hist. Moreover the
same is proved by the example of the Apostles, who in the time of Christ's
passion being scandalized, lost their faith in him: as also, Christ after his
resurrection upbraids them with their incredulity, and calls Thomas
incredulous, for denying the Resurrection, John 20. Whereupon S. Austin also in
his preface upon the 96 Psalm says, That after the Resurrection of Christ,
the faith of those that fell was restored again. And yet we must not say, that
the Apostles then lost the faith of the Trinity, of the Creation of the world,
of Eternal life, and such like other Articles. Besides, the Jews before
Christ's coming, held the faith of one God the Creator of Heaven and Earth: who
although they lost the true faith of the Messiah by not receiving Christ; yet
we cannot say, that they lost the faith of one God, but still retained this
Article as firmly as they did before.

Add hereunto, that neither Jews nor Heretics seem to lie, in saying, they
believe either the books of the Prophets, or the four Gospels: it being
apparent enough, that they acknowledge in them Divine Authority, though they
hold not the true sense of them, to which purpose is that in the Acts, chap.
20. Believe thou the Propheis? I know that thou believe. Lastly, it is
manifest, that many gifts of God, are found even in bad men, and such as are
out of the Church; therefore nothing hinders but that Jews and Heretics,
though they err in many things, yet in other things may be so divinely
illuminated as to believe aright. So S. Austine seems to teach in his book De
Unico Baptismo contra Petilianum c. 3. in these words: When a Jew comes to us
to be made a Christian, we destroy not in him God's good things, but his own
ill. That he believes, One God is to be worshipped, that he hopes for eternal
life, that he doubts not of the Resurrection we approve and commend him: we
acknowledge, that as he did believe these things, so he is still to believe
them; and as he did hold, so he is still to hold them. Thus he: subjoyning more
to the same purpose in the next, and again in the 26 Chapter, and in his third
Book, De Bapt. contr. Donat. cap. ult. and upon Psalm. 64. But now this reason
seems to persuade the contrary: Because the formal object of faith seems to be
the first verity, as it is manifested by the Churches Doctrine as the Divine and
infallible Rule; wherefore, whosoever adheres not to this Rule, although he
assent to some matters of faith, yet he embraces them not with faith, but with
some other kind of assent: as if a man assent to a conclusion, not knowing the
reason by which it is demonstrated, he has not true knowledge, but an opinion
only of the same conclusion. Now that an Heretic adheres not to the rule
aforesaid, it is manifest: Because if he did adhere to it, as divine and
infallible, he would receive all without exception, which the Church teaches,
and so would not be an Heretic. After this manner discourses Saint Thom.
2.2. q. 5. art. 3. From whom yet Durand dissents upon this distinction,
thinking there may be in an Heretic true faith, in respect of the Article in
which he does not err. Others, as Scotus and Bonaventure, define not the
matter plainly, but seem to choose a middle way.

To the authority of S. Austin and these Schoolmen, this may be adjoined, That
it is usual with good Christians to say, that Heretics have not the entire
faith. Whereby it seems to be intimated, that some part of it they do retain.
Whereof this may be another reason: That if the truths which a Jew or a
Heretic holds, be should not hold (...) by faith, but after some other
manner, to wit, by his own proper will and judgment, it will follow, that all
the excellent knowledge of God and divine things, which is found in them, is to
be attributed not to the grace of God, but the strength of Free Will: which is
against S. Austine, both elsewhere, and especially in the end of his book De
potentia.

As for the reason alleged to the contrary, We answer: It is impertinent to
faith, by what means we believe the prime Verity, that is by what means God
uses to confer upon men the gift of faith. For although now the ordinary means
be the Testimony and teaching of the Church, yet it is certain that by other
means, faith has been given heretofore and is given still. For many of the
Ancients, as Adam, Abraham, Melchisedeck, Job, received faith by special
revelation; the Apostles by the Miracles and preaching of Christ; others again
by the preaching and miracles of the Apostles; And Lastly others, by other
means, when as yet they had heard nothing of the infallibility of the Church.
To little Children by Baptism, without any other help, faith is infused: And
therefore it is possible, that a man not adhering to the Churches doctrine as a
Rule infallible, yet may receive some things for the word of God, which do
indeed truly belong to the faith, either because they are now, or heretofore
have been confirmed by miracles; or because he manifestly sees that the ancient
Church taught so; or upon some other inducement. And yet nevertheless we must
not say, that Heretics and Jews do hold the Faith, but only some part of the
Faith. For the Faith signifies an entire thing, and complete in all parts;
whereupon an Heretic is said to be simply an Infidel, to have lost the Faith,
and, according to the Apostle, 1 Timothy 1. to have made shipwreck of it, although
he holds some things, with the same strength of assent and readiness of will,
wherewith by others are held all those points which appertain to the Faith. And
thus far Aestius. Whose discourse I presume may pass for a sufficient
refutation of your argument out of Aquinas. And therefore your Corollaries
drawn from it, That every error aqainst faith, involves opposition against
God's testimony, That Protestants have no Faith, no certainty, And that you
have all Faith, must together with it fall to the ground.

50. But, If Protestants have certainty, they want obscurity, and so have not
that faith, which as the Apostle says is of things not appearing. This
argument you prosecute in the next Paragraph; But I can find nothing in it, to
convince or persuade me that Protestants cannot have as much certainty as is
required to faith, of an object not so evident as to beget science. If
obscurity will not consist with certainty in the highest degree, then you are
to blame for requiring to faith contradicting conditions. If certainty and
obscurity will stand together, what reason can be imagined that a Protestant
may not entertain them both as well as a Papist? Your bodies and souls, your
understandings and wills are, I think, of the same condition with ours: And why
then may not we be certain of an obscure thing as well as you? And as you make
this long discourse against Protestants, why may not we putting Church instead
of Scripture, send it back again to you? And say; If Papists have certainty,
they want obscurity, and so have not that faith, which, as the Apostle says,
is of things not appearing, or not necessitating our understanding to an
assent? For the whole edifice of the faith of Papists is settled on these two
principles, These particular propositions are the propositions of the Church,
And the sense and meaning of them is clear and evident, at least in all points
necessary to salvation. Now these principles being once supposed, it clearly
follows, that what Papists believe as necessary to salvation is evidently
known by them to be true, by this argument; It is certain and evident, that
whatsoever is the word of God or Divine Revelation is true; But it is certain
and evident that these propositions of the Church in particular are the word of
God and Divine Revelations; Therefore it is certain and evident, that all
propositions of the Church are true; Which conclusion I take for a Major in a
second argument, and say thus; It is certain and evident that all propositions
of the Church are true; But it is certain and evident, that such particulars,
for example, The lawfulness of the half Communion, The lawfulness and
expedience of Latin Service, the Doctrine of Transubstantiation, Indulgences,
etc. are the Propositions of the Church; Therefore it is certain and evident
that these particular objects are true. Neither will it avail you to say, that
the said principles are not evident by natural discourse, but only by the eye
of reason cleared by grace: For supernatural evidence, no less (yea rather
more) drowns and excludes obscurity, than natural evidence does. Neither can
the Party so enlightened, be said voluntarily to captivate his understanding to
that light, but rather his understanding is by necessity made captive and
forced not to disbelieve what is presented by so clear a light. And therefore
your imaginary faith is not the true faith defined by the Apostle, but an
invention of your own.

And having thus cried quittance with you, I must entreat you to devise (for
truly I cannot) some answer to this argument, which will not serve in
proportion to your own. For I hope you will not pretend that I have done you
injury, in settling your faith upon principles which you disclaim. And if you
allege this disparitie, That you are more certain of your principles than we
of ours, and yet you do not pretend that your principles are so evident, as we
do that ours are: what is this to say, but that you are more confident than we,
but confess you have less reason for it? For the evidence of the thing assented
to, be it more or less, is the reason and cause of the assent in the
understanding. But then besides, I am to tell you, that you are here, as every
where extremely, if not affectedly, mistaken in the doctrine of Protestants;
who though they acknowledge, that the things which they believe are in
themselves as certain as any demonstrable or sensible verities, yet pretend not
that their certainty of adherence is most perfect and absolute, but such as may
be perfected and increased as long as they walk by faith and not by sight. And
consonant hereunto is their doctrine touching the evidence of the objects
whereunto they adhere. For you abuse the world and them, if you pretend that
they hold the first of your two principles, That these particular Books are the
word of God, (for so I think you mean) either to be in it self evidently
certain, or of it self, and being divested of the motives of credibility,
evidently credible: For they are not so fond as to conceive, nor so vain as to
pretend, that all men do assent to it, which they would if it were evidently
certain; nor so ridiculous as to imagine, that if an Indian that never heard of
Christ or Scripture, should by chance find a Bible in his own Language, and
were able to read it, that upon the reading it, he would certainly without a
miracle believe it to be the word of God: which he could not choose if it were
evidently credible. What then do they affirm of it? Certainly, no more than
this, that whatsoever man that is not of a perverse mind, shall weigh with
serious and mature deliberation, those great moments of reason which may
incline him to believe the Divine authority of Scripture, and compare them with
the leight objections, that in prudence can be made against it, he shall not
choose but find sufficient, nay abundant inducements, to yield unto it firm
faith and sincere obedience. Let that learned man Hugo Grotius speak for all
the rest, in his Book of the truth of Christian Religion; which Book whosoever
attentively peruses, shall find that a man may have great reason to be a
Christian without dependence upon your Church for any part of it: and that your
Religion is no foundation of, but rather a scandal and an objection against,
Christianity. He then in the last Chapter of his second Book has these
excellent words, If any be not satisfied with these arguments abovesaid, but
desires more forcible reasons for confirmation of the excellency of Christian
Religion, let such know that as there are variety of things which be true, so
are there diverse ways of proving or manifesting the truth. Thus is there one
way in Mathematics, another in Physics, a third in Ethics, and lastly
another kind when a matter of fact is in question: wherein verily we must rest
content with such testimonies as are free from all suspicion of untruth;
otherwise down goes all the frame and use of history, and a great part of the
Art of Physic, together with all dutifulness that ought to be between parents
and children: for matters of practice can no way else be known but by such
testimonies. Now it is the pleasure of Almighty God that those things which he
would have us to believe (so that the very belief thereof may be imputed to us
for obedience) should not so evidently appear, as those things which are
apprehended by sense and plain demonstration, but only be so far forth
revealed as may beget faith, and a persuasion thereof, in the hearts and minds
of such as are not obstinate: That so the Gospel may be as a touchstone for
trial of men's judgments, whether they be sound or unsound. For, seeing these
arguments whereof we have spoken, have induced so many honest, godly, and wise
men to approve of this Religion, it is thereby plain enough that the fault of
other men's infidelity is not for want of sufficient testimony, but because they
would not have that to be had and embraced for truth, which is contrary to
their wilful desires; it being a hard matter for them to relinquish their
honors, and set at naught other commodities; which thing they know they ought
to do, if they admit of Christ's doctrine and obey what he has commanded. And
this is the rather to be noted of them, for that many other historical
narrations are approved by them to be true, which notwithstanding are only
manifest by authority, and not by any such strong proofs, and persuasions, or
tokens, as do declare the history of Christ to be true.

52. And now you see, I hope, that Protestants neither do need nor protend to
any such evidence in the doctrine they believe, as cannot well consist both with
the essence and the obedience of faith. Let us come now to the last Nullity
which you impute to the faith of Protestants, and that is, want of Prudence.
Touching which point, as I have already demonstrated, that wisdom is not
essential to faith, but that a man may truly believe truth, though upon
insufficient motives; So I doubt not but I shall make good, that if prudence
were necessary to faith, we have better title to it than you; and that if a
wiser then Solomon were here, he should have better reason to believe the
Religion of Protestants than Papists, the Bible rather than the Council of
Trent. But let us hear what you can say!

53. Ad 31. You demand then first of all, What wisdom was it to forsake a
Church confessedly very ancient, and besides which there could be demonstrated
no other Visible Church of Christ upon earth? I answer: Against God and truth
there lies no Prescription, and therefore certainly it might be great wisdom
to forsake ancient errors for more ancient Truths. One God is rather to be
followed then innumerable worlds of men: And therefore it might be great
wisdom either for the whole Visible Church, nay for all the men in the world,
having wandered from the way of Truth, to return unto it; or for a part of it,
nay for one man to do so, although all the world besides were madly resolute to
do the contrary. It might be great wisdom to forsake the errors though of the
only Visible Church, much more of the Roman, which in conceiving her self the
whole Visible Church, does somewhat like the Frog in the Fable, which thought
the ditch he lived in, to be all the world.

54. You demand again What wisdom was it to forsake a Church acknowledged to
want nothing necessary to Salvation, endued with Succession of Bishops, etc.
usque ad Election or Choice? I answer: Yet might it be great wisdom to forsake
a Church not acknowledged to want nothing necessary to salvation, but accused
and convicted of Many damnable errors: certainly damnable to them who were
convicted of them, had they still persisted in them after their conviction;
though perhaps pardonable (which is all that is acknowledged) to such as
ignorantly continued in them. A Church vainly arrogating, without possibility
of proof, a perpetual Succession of Bishops, holding always the same doctrine;
and with a ridiculous impudence pretending perpetual possession of all the
world: whereas the world knows, that a little before Luther's arising, your
Church was confined to a part of a part of it. Lastly a Church vainly glorying
in the dependence of other Churches upon her, which yet she supports no more
than those crouching Anticks which seem in great buildings to labor under the
weight they bear, do indeed support the Fabric. For a corrupted and salfe
Church may give authority to preach the truth, and consequently against her own
falsehoods and corruptions. Besides, a false Church may preserve the Scripture
trure, (as now the old Testament is preserved by the Jews,) either not being
arrived to that height of impiety as to attempt the corruption of it, or not
able to effect it, or not perceiving, or not regarding the opposition of it to
her corruptions. And so we might receive from you lawful Ordination and true
Scriptures, though you were a false Church; and receiving the Scriptures from
you (though not from you alone,) I hope you cannot hinder us, neither need we
ask your leave, to believe and obey them. And this, though you be a false
Church, is enough to make us a true one. As for a Succession of men that held
with us in all points of Doctrine, it is a thing we need not, and you have as
little as we. So that if we acknowledge that your Church before Luther was a
true Church, it is not for any ends, for any dependence that we have upon you;
but because we conceive that in a charitable construction, you may pass for a
true Church. Such a Church (and no better) as you do sometimes acknowledge
Protestants to be, that is, a Company of men, wherein some ignorant souls may
be saved. So that in this ballancing of Religion against Religion, and Church
against Church, it seems you have nothing of weight and moment to put into your
scale; nothing but smoke and wind, vain shadows and fantastical pretenses. Yet
if Protestants, on the other side, had nothing to put in their Scale but those
negative commendations which you are pleased to afford them; nothing but, No
unity, nor means to procure it; no farther extent when Luther arose than
Luthers body; no Universality of time or place; no Visibility or being, except
only in your Church; no Succession of persons or doctrine; no leader but Luther,
in a quarrel begun upon no ground but passion; no Church, no Ordination, no
Scriptures but such as they received from you; if all this were true, and this
were all that could be pleaded for Protestants, possibly with an allowance of
three grains of partiality your Scale might seem to turn. But then, if it may
appear that part of these objections are falsely made against them, the rest
vainly; that whatsoever of truth is in these imputations, is impertinent to
this trial, and whatsoever is pertinent is untrue; and besides, that plenty of
good matter may be alleged for Protestants which is here dissembled: Then, I
hope, our cause may be good, notwithstanding these pretenses.

55. I say then that want of Universality of time and place, The invisibility
or not existence of the professors of Protestant Doctrine before Luther,
Luther's being alone when he first opposed your Church, Our having our Church,
Ordination, Scriptures, personal and yet not doctrinal Succession from you, are
vain and impertinent allegations, against the truth of our Doctrine and Church.
That the entire truth of Christ without any mixture of error should be
professed or believed in all places at any time, or in any place at all times,
is not a thing evident in reason, neither have we any Revelation for it. And
therefore in relying so confidently on it, you build your house upon the sand.
And what obligation we had either to be so peevish, as to take nothing of
yours, or so foolish as to take all, I do not understand. For whereas you say
that this is to be choosers and therefore Heretics, I tell you that though
all Heretics are choosers, yet all choosers are not Heretics; otherwise
they also, which choose your Religion must be Heretics. As for our wanting
Unity and Means of proving it, Luther 's opposing your Church upon mere
passion, Our following private men rather than the Catholic Church, the first
and last are mere untruths, for we want not Unity, nor Means to procure it, in
things necessary. Plain places of Scripture, and such as need no interpreter,
are our means to obtain it. Neither do we follow any private men, but only the
Scripture, the word of God as our rule; and reason, which is also the gift of
God, given to direct us in all our actions, in the use of this rule. And then
for Luther's opposing your Church upon mere passion, it is a thing I will not
deny, because I know not his heart, and for the same reason you should not have
affirmed it. Sure I am, whether he opposed your Church upon reason or no, he
had reason enough to oppose it. And therefore if he did it upon passion, we
will follow him only in his action and not in his passion; in his opposition,
not in the manner of it; and then I presume you will have no reason to condemn
us, unless you will say that a good action cannot be done with reason, because
some body before us has done it upon passion. You see then, how imprudent you
have been in the choice of your arguments, to prove Protestants unwise in the
choice of their Religion.

56. It remains now, that I should show that many reasons of moment may be
alleged for the justification of Protestants, which are dissembled by you, and
not put into the balance. Know then Sir, that when I say, The Religion of
Protestants, is in prudence to be preferred before yours: as, on the one side I
do not understand by your Religion, the doctrine of Bellarmin or Baronius, or
any other private man amongst you, nor the Doctrine of the Sorbon, or of the
Jesuits, or of the Dominicans, or of any other particular Company among you,
but that wherein you all agree, or profess to agree, the Doctrine of the Council
of Trent: so accordingly on the other side, by the Religion of Protestants, I
do not understand the Doctrine of Luther, or Calvin, or Melancthon; nor the
confession of Augusta, or Geneva, nor the Catechism of Heidelberg, nor the
Articles of the Church of England, no nor the Harmony of Protestant
Confessions; but that wherein they all agree, and which they all subscribe with
a greater Harmony, as a perfect rule of their faith and actions, that is, The
BIBLE. The BIBLE, I say, The BIBLE only, is the Religion of Protestants!
Whatsoever else they believe, besides It, and the plain, irrefragable,
indubitable consequences of of it, well may they hold it as a matter of
Opinion; but as matter of Faith and Religion, neither can they with coherence
to their own grounds, believe it themselves, nor require the belief of it of
others, without most high and most Schismatical presumption. I for my part
after a long and (as I verily believe and hope) impartial search of the true
way to eternal hapiness, do profess plainly that I cannot find any rest for the
sole of my foot, but upon this Rock only. I see plainly and with mine own eyes,
that there are Popes against Popes, Councels against Councels, some Fathers
against others, the same Fathers against themselves, a Consent of Fathers of
one age against a Consent of Fathers of another age, the Church of one age
against the Church of another age. Traditive interpretations of Scripture are
pretended, but there are few or none to be found: No Tradition but only of
Scripture, can derive it self from the Fountain, but may be plainly proved,
either to have been brought in, in such an age after Christ; or that in such an
age, it was not in. In a word, there is no sufficient certainty but of
Scripture only, for any considering man to build upon. This therefore, and this
only I have reason to believe: This I will profess, according to this I will
live, and for this, if there be occasion, I will not only willingly, but even
gladly lose my life, though I should be sorry that Christians should take it
from me. Propose me any thing out of this Book, and require whether I believe
or no, and, seem it never so incomprehensible to human reason, I will subscribe
it with hand and heart, as knowing no Demonstration can be stronger than this,
God has said so therefore it is true. In other things, I will take no man's
Liberty of judgment from him; neither shall any man take mine from me. I will
think no man the worse man, nor the worse Christian: I will love no man the
less, for differing in opinion from me. And what measure I mete to others, I
expect from them again. I am fully assured that God does not, and therefore
that men ought not to require any more of any man than this, To believe the
Scripture to be God's word, to endeavor to find the true sense of it, and to
live according to it.

57. This is the Religion which I have chosen after a long deliberation, and I
am verily persuaded that I have chosen wisely, much more wisely than if I had
guided my self according to your Churches authority. For the Scripture being
all true, I am secured by believing nothing else, that I shall believe no
falsehood as matter of faith. And if I mistake the sense of Scripture, and so
fall into error, yet am I secure from any danger thereby, if but your grounds
be true: because endeavoring to find the true sense of Scripture, I cannot
but hold my error without pertinacy, and be ready to forsake it when a more
true and a more probable sense shall appear unto me. And then all necessary
truth being, as I have proved, plainly set down in Scripture, I am certain by
believing Scripture, to believe all necessary Truth: And he that does so, if
his life be answerable to his faith, how is it possible he should said of
Salvation?

58. Besides, whatsoever may be pretended to gain to your Church the credit of
a Guide, all that and much more may be said for the Scripture. Has your Church
been ancient? The Scripture is more ancient. Is your Church a means to keep men
at unity? So is the Scripture, to keep those that believe it and will obey it,
in unity of belief, in matters necessary, or very profitable; and in unity of
Charity, in points unnecessary. Is your Church universal for time or place?
Certainly the Scripture is more universal. For all the Christians in the world
(those I mean that in truth deserve this name,) do now, and always have
believed the Scripture to be the word of God, so much of it at least, as
contains all things necessary; whereas only you say, that you only are the
Church of God, and all Christians besides you deny it.

59. Thirdly, following the Scripture, I follow that whereby you prove your
Churches infallibility, (whereof were it not for Scripture what pretense could
you have, or what notion could we have?) and by so doing tacitly confess, that
your selves are surer of the truth of the Scripture than of your Churches
authority. For we must be surer of the proof than of the thing proved,
otherwise it is no proof.

60, Fourthly, following the Scripture, I follow that which must be true if
your Church be true: for your Church gives attestation to it. Whereas if I
follow your Church, I must follow that which, though Scripture be true, may be
false; nay which, if Scripture be true, must be false, because the Scripture
testifies against it.

61. Fifthly, to follow the Scripture I have God's express warrant and command,
and no color of any prohibition: But to believe your Church infallible, I have
no command at all, much less an express command. Nay I have reason to fear that
I am prohibited to do so in these words: Call no man Master on earth: They fell
by infidelity, Thou stand by faith, Be not high minded but fear: The spirit
of truth the world cannot receive.

62. Following your Church I must hold many things not only above reason but
against it; if any thing be against it: whereas following the Scripture I shall
believe many mysteries but no impossibilities; many things above reason, but
nothing against it; many things which had they not been revealed, reason could
never have discovered, but nothing which by true reason may be confuted: many
things which reason cannot comprehend how they can be, but nothing which reason
can comprehend that it cannot be. Nay I shall believe nothing which reason will
not convince that I ought to believe it: For reason will convince any man,
unless he be of a perverse mind, that the Scripture is the word of God: And
then no reason can be greater than this; God says so, therefore it is true.

63. Following your Church I must hold many things which to any man's judgment,
that will give himself the liberty of judgment, will seem much more plainly
contradicted by Scripture, than the infalliblity of your Church appears to be
confirmed by it: and consequently must be so foolish, as to believe your Church
exempted from error, upon less evidence, rather than subject to the common
condition of mankind, upon greater evidence. Now if I take the Scripture only
for my Guide, I shall not need to do any thing so unreasonable.

64. If I will follow your Church I must believe impossibilities, and that with
an absolute certainty, upon motives which are confessed to be but only
Prudential and probable: That is with a weak foundation I must firmly support a
heavy, a monstrous heavy building: Now following the Scripture I shall have no
necessity to undergo any such difficulties.

65. Following your Church I must be servant of Christ and a subject of the
King, but only ad placitum Papae. I must be prepared in mind to renounce my
allegiance to the King, when the Pope shall declare him an Heretic and
command me not to obey him: and I must be prepared in mind to esteem Virtue
Vice, and Vice Virtue, if the Pope shall so determine. Indeed you say it is
impossible he should do the later; but that you know is a great question,
neither is it fit my obedience to God and the King should depend upon a
questionable foundation. And howsoever, you must grant that if, by an
impossible supposition, the Pope's commands should be contrary to the law of
Christ, that they of your Religion must resolve to obey, rather the commands of
the Pope, than the law of Christ,. Whereas if I follow the Scripture, I may,
nay I must, obey my Sovereign in lawful things, though an Heretic, though a
Tyrant; and though, I do not say the Pope, but the Apostles themselves, nay an
Angel from heaven, should teach any thing against the Gospel of Christ, I may,
nay I must denounce Anathema to him.

66. Following the Scripture I shall believe a Religion, which being contrary
to flesh and blood, without any assistance from worldly power, wit, or policy,
nay against all the power and policy of the world, prevailed and enlarged it
self in a very short time all the world over; Whereas it is too too apparent,
that your Church has got and still maintains her authority over men's
conscience, by counterfeiting false miracles, forging false stories, by
obtruding on the world supposititions writings, by corrupting the monuments of
former times, and defacing out of them all which any way makes against you, by
Wars, by Persecutions, by Massacres, by Treasons, by Rebellions; in short, by
all manner of carnal means whether violent or fraudulent.

67. Following the Scripture I shall believe a Religion, the first preachers
and Professors whereof, it is most certain, they could have no worldly ends
upon the world, that they should not project to themselves by it any of the
profits or honors or pleasures of this world; but rather were to expect the
contrary, even all the miseries which the world could lay upon them. On the
other side, the Head of your Church, the pretended Successor of the Apostles,
and Guide of faith, it is even palpable, that he makes your Religion the
instrument of his ambition, and by it seeks to entitle himself directly or
indirectly to the Monarchy of the world. And besides, it is evident to any man
that has but half an eye, that most of those Doctrins which you add to the
Scripture do make one way or other, for the honor or temporal profit of the
Teachers of them.

68. Following the Scripture only, I shall embrace a Religion of admirable
simplicity consisting in a manner wholly in the worship of God in spirit and
truth. Whereas your Church and Doctrine is even loaded with an infinity of
weak, childish, ridiculous, unsavory Superstitions and Ceremonies, and full of
that righteousness for which Christ shall judge the world.

69. Following the Scriptures I shall believe that which Universal,
never-failing Tradition assures me, that it was by the admitable supernatural
works of God confirmed to be the word of God: whereas never any miracle was
wrought, never so much as a lame horse cured in confirmation of your Churches
authority and infallibility. And if any strange things have been done, which
may seem to give attestation to some parts of your doctrine, yet this proves
nothing but the truth of the Scripture, which foretold that (God's providence
permitting it, and the wickedness of the world deserving it) strange signs and
wonders should be wrought to confirm false doctrine, that they which love not
the truth, may be given over to strong delusions. Neither does it seem to me
any strange thing, that God should permit some true wonders to be done, to
delude them, who have forged so many to deceive the world.

70. If I follow the Scripture, I must not promise my self Salvation without
effectual dereliction and mortification of all vices, and the effectual
practice of all Christian Virtues: But your Church opens an easier and a
broader way to Heaven, and though I continve all my life long in a course of
sin, and without the practice of any virtue, yet gives me assurance that I may
be let into heaven at a postern gate, even by an Act of Attrition at the hour
of death, if it be joined with confession, or by an act of Contrition without
confession.

71. Admirable are the Precepts of piety and humility, of innocence and
patience, of liberality, frugality, temperance, sobriety, justice, meekness,
fortitude, constancy and gravity, contempt of the world, love of God and the
love of mankind; In a word, of all virtues, and against all vice, which the
Scriptures impose upon us, to be obeyed under pain of damnation: The sum
whereof is in manner comprised in our Saviors Sermon upon the Mount, recorded
in the 5.6. and 7. of S. Matthew, which if they were generally obeyed, could
not but make the world generally happy, and the goodness of them alone were
sufficient to make any wise and good man believe that this Religion rather than
any other, came from God the Fountain of all goodness. And that they may be
generally obeyed our Savior has ratified them all in the close of his Sermon,
with these universal Sanctions, Not every one that says Lord, Lord, shall
enter into the Kingdom, but he that does the will of my Father which is in
Heaven: and again, Whosoever hears these sayings of mine and does them not,
shall be likned unto a foolish man which built his house upon the sand, and the
rain descended, and the flood came, and the winds blew, and it fell, and great
was the fall thereof. Now your Church, notwithstanding all this, enervates and
in a manner dissolves and abrogates many of these precepts, teaching men that
they are not laws for all Christians, but Counsels of perfection and matters
of Supererogation: that a man shall do well if he do observe them, but he shall
not sin if he observe them not; That they are for them who aim at high places
in heaven, who aspire with the two sons of Zebede, to the right hand or to
the left hand of Christ: But if a man will be content barely to go to heaven,
and to be a doorkeeper in the house of God, especially if he will be content
to taste of Purgatory in the way, he may obtain it at an easier purchase.
Therefore the Religion of your Church is not so holy nor so good as the Doctrine
of Christ delivered in Scripture, and therefore not so likely to come from the
Fountain of holiness and goodness.

72. Lastly, if I follow your Church for my Guide, I shall do all one, as if I
should follow a Company of blind men in a judgment of colors, or in the
choice of a way. For every unconsidering man is blind in that which he does not
consider. Now what is your Church but a company of unconsidering men, who
comfort themselves, because they are a great company together; but all of them,
either out of idleness, refuse the trouble of a fevere trial of their
Religion, (as if heaven were not worth it); or out of superstition, fear the
event of such a trial, that they may be scrupled and staggered and disquieted
by it; and therefore, for the most part do it not at all, Or if they do it,
they do it negligently, and hypocritically, and perfunctorily, rather for the
satisfaction of others than themselves: but certainly without indifference,
without liberty of judgment, without a resolution to doubt of it, if upon
examination the grounds of it prove uncertain, or to leave it, if they prove
apparently false. My own experience assures me, that in this imputation I do
you no injury: but it is very apparent to all men from your ranking doubting of
any part of your Doctrine, among mortal sins. For from hence it follows, that
seeing every man must resolve that he will never commit mortal sin, that he
must never examine the grounds of it at all, for fear he should be moved to
doubt: or if he do, he must resolve that no motives, be they never so strong,
shall move him to doubt, but that with his will and resolution he will uphold
himself in a firm belief of your Religion, though his reason and his
understanding fail him. And seeing this is the condition of all those whom you
esteem good Catholics; who can deny, but you are a Company of men unwilling
and afraid to understand, lest you should do good! That have eyes to see and
will not see, that have not the love of truth (which is only to be known by an
indifferent trial,) and therefore deserve to be given over to strong
delusions; men that love darkness more than light: in a word, that you are the
blind leading the blind; and what prudence, there can be, in following such
Guides, our Savior has taught us in saying, If the blind lead the blind, both
shall fall into the ditch.

73. There remains unspoken to in this Section, some places out of S. Austin,
and some sayings of Luther wherein he confesses that in the Papacy are many
good things. But the former I have already considered, and returned the
argument grounded on them. As for Luther's speeches, I told you, not long
since, that we follow no private men, and regard not much what he says either
against the Church of Rome, or for it, but what he proves. He was a man of a
vehement spirit, and very often what he took in hand, he did not do it but
over-do it. He that will justify all his speeches, especially such as he wrote
in heat of opposition, I believe will have work enough. Yet in these sentences,
though he overreach in the particulars, yet what he says in general we
confess true, and confess with him that in the Papacy are many good things,
which have come from them to us; but withal we say there are many bad, neither
do we think our selves bound in prudence either to reject the good with the
bad, or to retain the bad with the good, but rather conceive it a high point of
wisdom, to separate between the precious and the vile, to sever the good from
the bad, and to put the good in vessels to be kept, and to cast the bad away;
to try all things, and to hold that which is good.

74. Ad. 32. Your next and last argument against the faith of Protestants is,
because wanting Certainty and Prudence, it must also want the fourth condition,
Supernaturality. For that being a humane persuasion, it is not in the essence
of it supernatural: and being imprudent and rash, it cannot proceed from Divine
motion, and so is not supernatural in respect of the cause from which it
proceeds. Ans. This little discourse stands wholly upon what went before, and
therefore must fall together with it. I have proved the Faith of Protestants as
certain, and as prudent as the faith of Papists; and therefore if these be
certain grounds of supernaturality, our faith may have it as well as yours. I
would here furthermore be informed how you can assure us that your faith is not
your persuasion or opinion (for you make them all one) that your Churches
Doctrine is true? Or if you grant it your persuasion, why is it not the
persuasion of men, and, in respect of the subject of it, an humane persuasion?
I desire also to know, what sense there is in pretending that your persuasion
is, not in regard of the object only and cause of it, but in the nature or
essence of it, supernatural? Lastly, whereas you say, that being imprudent it
cannot come from divine motion: certainly by this reason all they that believe
your own Religion, and cannot give a wise and sufficient reason for it, (as
millions amongst you cannot) must be condemned to have no supernatural faith:
or if not, then without question nothing can hinder, but that the imprudent
faith of Protestants may proceed from divine motion, as well as the imprudent
faith of Papists.

75. And thus having weighed your whole discourse, and found it altogether
lighter than vanity, why should I not invert your conclusion, and say, Seeing
you have not proved that whosoever errs against any one point of Faith loses
all divine Faith: nor that any error whatsoever concerning that which by the
Parties litigant may be esteemed a matter of faith, is a grievous sin, it
follows not at all, that when two men hold different doctrins concerning
Religion, that but one can be saved? Not that I deny, but that the sentence of
Saint Chrysostom with which you conclude this Chapter may in a good sense, be
true: for oftimes by the faith is meant only that Doctrine which is necessary to
Salvation, and to say that salvation may be had without any the least thing
which is necessary to salvation, implies a repugnance and destroys it self.
Besides, not to believe all necessary points, and to believe none at all, is
for the purpose of salvation, all one; and therefore he that does so, may
justly be said to destroy the Gospel of Christ, seeing he makes it uneffectual
to the end for which it was intended, the Salvation of men's souls. But why you
should conceive that all differences about Religion are concerning matters of
faith, in this high notion of the word, for that I conceive no reason.

CHAP. VII. In regard of the Precept of Charity toward ones self, Protestants
are in state of Sin, as long as they remain separated from the Roman-Church.
THAT, due Order is to be observed in the Theological Virtue of Charity,
whereby we are directed to prefer some Objects before others, is a truth
taught by all Divines, and declared in these words of holy Scripture: He has
ordered Cant. 2, 4,
Charity in me. The reason whereof is, because the infinite Goodness of God,
which is the formal object, or Motive of Charity, and for which all other
things are loved, is differently participated by different Objects; and
therefore the love we bear to them for Gods sake, must accordingly be unequal.
In the virtue of Faith, the case is far otherwise; because all the Objects, or
points which we believe, do equally participate the divine Testimony or
Revelation, for which we believe alike all things propounded for such. For it
is as impossible for God, to speak an untruth in a small, as in a great matter.
And this is the ground for which we have so often affirmed, that any least
error against Faith, is in jurious to God and destructive of Salvation.

2. This order in Charity may be considered; Toward God; Our own soul; The
soul of our Neighbor; Our own life, or goods; and the life or goods of our
Nighbour. God is to be beloved above all things, both Objective (as the Divines
speak) that is, we must with or desire to God, a good more great, perfect and
noble than to any, ^or all other things: namely, all that indeed He is, a
Nature Infinite, Independent, Immense etc. and also Appretiative, that is, we
must sooner lose what good soever, than leave, and abandon him. In the other
Objects of Charity, of which I spoke, this order is to be kept. We may but are
not bound, to prefer the life and goods of Neighbor before our own: we are
bound to prefer the soul of our Neighbor before our own temporal goods or
life, if he happen to be in extreme spiritual necessity, and that we by our
assistance can succor him, according to the saying of Saint John: In this we
have known 1. Joan. 3. v. 16.
the Charity of God, because he has yielded his life for us, and we ought to
yield our life for our Brethren. And S. Augustine likewise says: A Christian
will not doubt De mendac. cap. 6.
to lose his own temporal life, for the eternal life of his Neighbor. Lastly
we are to prefer the spiritual good of our own soul, before both the
spiritual and temporal good of our Neighbor, because as Charity does of its
own Nature, chiefly incline the person in whom it resides, to love God, and to
be united with him: so of it self it enclines him to procure those things
whereby the said Union with God is effected, rather to himself then to others.
And from hence it follows, that in things necessary to salvation, no man ought
in any case, or in any respect whatsoever, to prefer the spiritual good,
either of any particular person, or of the whole world before his own soul;
according to those words of our Blessed Savior: What does it Mat. 6,
avail a man, if he gain the whole would, and sustain the damage of his own
soul? And therefore (to come to our present purpose) it is directly against the
Order of Charity, or against Charity as it has a reference to our selves,
which Divines call Charitas propria, to adventure either the omitting of any
means necessary to salvation, or the committing of any thing repugnant to it,
for whatsoever respect; and consequently, if by living out of the Roman Church
w^ put our selves in hazard either to want something necessarily required to
salvation, or else to perform some act against it, we commit a most grievous
sin against the virtue of Charity, as it respects our selves, and so cannot
hope for salvation without repentance.

3. Now of things necessary to salvation, there are two sorts, according to the
doctrine of all Divines. Somethings (say they) are necessary to salvation,
necessitate praecepti, necessary only because they are commanded; For, If thou will Matthew. 19.17.
enter into life, keep the Commandments. In which kind of things, as probable
ignorance of the Law, or of the commandment, does excuse the party from all
faulty breach thereof; so likewise does it not exclude salvation in case of
ignorance. Some other things are said to be necessary to salvation necessitate
medii, finis, or salutis; because they are Means appointed by God to attain our
End of eternal salvation, in so strict a manner, that it were Presumption to
hope for Salvation without them. And as the former means are said to be
necessary, because they are commanded; so the latter are commonly said to be
commanded, because they are necessary, that is: Although there were no other
special precept concerning them; yet supposing they be once appointed as means
absolutely necessary to salvation, there cannot but arise an obligation of
procuring to have them, in virtue of that universal precept of Charity, which
obliges every man to procure the salvation of his own soul. In this sort
divine infallible Faith is necessary to salvation; as likewise Repentance of
every deadly sin, and in the doctrine of Catholics, Baptism in re, that is, in
Act, to Children, and for those who are come to the use of reason, in voto, or
hearty desire, when they cannot have it in act. And as Baptism is necessary for
remission of Original and Actual sin committed before it; so the Sacrament of
Confession, or penance is necessary in re or in voto, in act or desire, for
the remission of mortal sins, committed after Baptism. The minister of which
Sacrament of Penance being necessarily a true Priest, true Ordination is
necessary in the Church of God for remission of sins by this Sacrament, as also
for other ends not belonging to our present purpose. From hence it rises, that
no ignorance or impossibility can supply the want of those means which are
absolutely necessary to salvation. As if, for example, a sinner depart this
world without repenting himself of all deadly sins, although he die suddenly,
or unexpectedly fall out of his wits, and so commit no new sin by omission of
repentance; yet he shall be eternally punished for his former sins committed,
and never repented of. If an Infant die without Baptism, he cannot be saved;
not by reason of any actual sin committed by him in omitting Baptism, but for
Original sin, not forgiven, by the means which God has ordained to that
purpose. Which doctrine, all, or most Protestants will (for ought I know) grant
to be true, in the Children of Infidels; yea not only Lutherans, but also some
other Protestants, as M. Bilson late of Winchester In his true difference etc.
Part. 4. page 168. and 369.
and others, hold it to be true, even in the Children of the faithful. And if
Protestants in general disagree from Catholics in this point, it cannot be
denied but that our disagreement is in a point very fundamental. And the like I
say of the Sacrament of Penance, which they deny to be necessary to salvation,
either in act or in desire; which error is likewise fundamental, because it
concerns (as I said) a thing necessary to salvation: And for the same reason,
if their Priesthood and Ordination be doubtful, as certainly it is, they are in
danger to want a means without which they cannot be saved. Neither ought this
rigor to seem strange, or unjust: For almighty God having, of his own
Goodness, without our merit, first ordained man to a supernatural end of
eternal felicity; and then, after our fall in Adam vouchsafed to reduce us to
the attaining of that End, if his blessed Will be pleased to limit the
attaining of that End, to some means which in his infinite Wisdom he thinks
most fit; who can say, Why do thou so? Or who can hope for that End, without
such means? Blessed be his divine Majesty, for vouchsafing to ordain us, base
creatures, to so sublime an End, by any means at all!

4 Out of the foresaid difference follows another, that (generally speaking)
in things necessary only because they are commanded, it is sufficient for
avoiding sin, that we proceed prudently, and by the conduct of some probable
opinion, maturely weighed and approved by men of virtue, learning and wisdom.
Neither are we always obliged to follow the most strict, and severe, or secure
part, as long as the doctrine which we embrace, proceeds upon such reasons, as
may warrant it to be truly probable, and prudent, though the contrary part want
not also probable grounds. For in humane affairs and discourse, evidence and
certainty cannot be always expected. But when we treat not precisely of
avoiding sin, but moreover of procuring some thing without which I cannot
saved; I am obliged by the Law and Order of Charity, to procure as great
certainty as morally I am able, and am not to follow every probable opinion or
dictamen, but tutiorem partem, the safer part, because, if my probability prove
false, I shall not probably but certainly come short of Salvation. Nay in such
case, I shall incur a new sin against the Virtue of Charity toward my self,
which obliges every one not to expose his soul to the hazard of eternal
perdition, when it is in his power, with the assistance of Gods grace, to make
the matter sure. From this very ground it is, that although some Divines be of
opinion, that it is not a sin to use some. Matter or Form of Sacraments, only
probable, if we respect precisely the reverence or respect which is due to
Sacraments, as they belong to the Moral infused Virtue of Religion; yet when
they are such Sacraments, as the invalidity thereof may endanger the salvation
of souls, all do with one consent agree, that it is a grievous offense to use a
doubtful, or only probable Matter or Form, when it is in our power to procure
certainty. If therefore it may appear, that though it were not certain that
Protestancy unrepented destroys Salvation (as we have proved to be very
certain) yet at least that it is probable, and withal, that there is a way more
safe; it will follow out of the grounds already laid, that they are obliged by
the law of Charity to embrace that safe way.

5. Now that Protestants have reason, at least to doubt in what case they
stand, is deduced from what we have said, and proved about the universal
infallibility of the Church, and of her being Judge of Controversies, to whom
all Christians ought to submit their Judgment (as even some Protestants
grant,) and whom to oppose in any one of her definitions, is a grievous sin: As
also from what we have said of the Unity, Universality and Visibility of the
Church, and of Succession of Persons, and Doctrine; Of the conditions of Divine
Faith, Certainty, Obscurity, Prudence, and Supernaturality, which are wanting
in the faith of Protestants; Of the frivolous distinction of points fundamental
and not fundamental, (the confutation whereof proves that Heretics
disagreeing among themselves in any least point, cannot have the same faith,
nor be of the same Church:) Of Schism; of Heresy; of the Persons who first
revolted from Rome, and of their Motives; of the Nature of Faith, which is
destroyed by any least error, and it is certain that some of them must be in
error and want the substance of true faith; and since all pretend the like
certainty, it is clear that none of them have any certainty at all, but that
they want true faith which is a means most absolutely necessary to Salvation.
Moreover, as I said heretofore, since it is granted that every Error in
fundamental points is damnable, and that they cannot tell in particular, what
points be fundamental, it follows that none of them knows whether he, or his
Brethren, do not err damnably, it being certain that amongst so many
disagreeing Persons some must err. Upon the same ground of not being able to
assign what points be fundamental, I say they cannot be sure whether the
difference among them be fundamental or no, and consequently whether they agree
in the substance of faith and hope of Salvation. I omit to add that you want
the Sacrament of Penance, instituted for remission of sins, or at least you
must confess that you hold it not necessary; and yet your own Brethren, for
example the Century-Writers do Cent. 3 cap. 6. Col. 127.
acknowledge that in times of Cyprian, and Tertullian, Private Confession even
of Thoughts was used; and that it was then commanded and thought necessary. The
like, I say, concerning your Ordination, which at least is very doubtful, and
consequently all that depends thereon.

6. On the other side, that the Roman Church is the safer way to Heaven (not to
repeat what has been already said upon diverse occasions) I will again put you
in mind, that unless the Roman Church was the true Church there was no visible
true Church upon earth. A thing so manifest, that Protestants themselves
confess that more than one thousand years the Roman Church possessed the whole
world, as we have showed heretofore, out of their own Chap. 5. Number. 9.
words: from whence it follows, that unless Ours be the true Church, you
cannot pretend to any perpetual visible Church of your Own; but Ours does not
depend on yours, before which it was. And here I wish you to consider with fear
and trembling, how all Roman Catholics, not one excepted; that is, those very
men whom you must hold not to err damnably in their belief, unless you will
destroy your own Church, and salvation; do with unanimous consent believe, and
profess that Protestancy unrepented destroys Salvation; and then tell me, as
you will answer at the last day, Whether it be not more safe, to live and die
in that Church, which even your selves are forced to acknowledge not to be cut
off from hope of Salvation, (which are your own words) than to live in a
Church, which the said confessedly true Church does firmly believe, and
constantly profess not to be capable of Salvation. And therefore I conclude
that, by the most strict obligation of Charity toward your own soul, you are
bound to place it in safety, by returning to that Church, from which your
Progenitors Schismatically departed; lest too late you find that saying of the
holy Ghost verified in your selves: He that loves Eccl. 3.27.
the danger, shall perish therein.

7. Against this last argumant of the greater security of the Roman Church
drawn from your own confession, you bring an Objection; which in the end will
be found to make for us, against your self. It is taken from the words of the
Donatists, speaking to Catholics in this manner: Your selves confess Page 112.
our Baptism, Sacraments, and Faith (here you put an Explication of your own,
and say, for the most parts, as if any small error in faith did not destroy all
Faith) to be good and available. We deny yours to be so, and say, There is no
Church, no salvation amongst you; Therefore it is safest for all to join with
us.

8. By your leave our Argument is not: (as you say) for simple people alone,
but for all them who have care to save their souls. Neither is it grounded upon
your Charitable Judgment (as you Page. 81.
speak) but upon an inevitable necessity for you, either to grant salvation to
our Church, or to entail certain damnation upon your own: because yours can
have no being till Luther, unless ours be supposed to have been the true Church
of Christ. And since you term this Argument a Charm, take heed you be none of
those, who, according to the Prophet David, do not hear the vice of him Ps.
57.6.
who charmeth wisely. But to come to the purpose: Catholics never granted
that the Donatists had a true Church, or might be saved: And therefore you
having cited out of S. Augustine, the words of the Catholics, that the
Donatists had true Baptism, when you come to the contrary words of the
Donatists, you add, No Church, No Salvation; making the Argument to have
quinq: terminos; without which Addition you did see, it made nothing against
us: For, as I said, the Catholics never yielded, that among the Donatists
there was a true Church, or hope of Salvation. And your self, a few leaves
after, acknowledge that the Donatists maintained an error, which was in the
Matter and Nature of it properly heretical, against that Article of the Creed,
wherein we profess to believe the holy Page. 126.
Catholic Church: and consequently, you cannot allow salvationi to them, as
you do, and must do to us. And therefore the Donatists could not make the like
argument agains Catholics, as Catholics make against you, who grant us
salvation, which we deny to you. But at least (you will say) this Argument for
the Certainty of their Baptism, was like to Ours touching the Security and
Certainty of our Salvation; and therefore that Catholics should have esteemed
the Baptism of the Donatists more certain than their own, and so have allowed
Rebaptization of such as were baptized by Heretics, or sinners, as the
Donatists esteemed all Catholics to be. I answer, No. Because it being a
matter of faith, that Baptism administered by Heretics, observing due Matter,
Form, etc. is valid: to rebaptize any so baptized, had been both a sacrilege
in reiterating a Sacrament not reiterable, and a profession also of a damnable
Heresy, and therefore had not been more safe, but certainly damnable. But you
confess that in the doctrine or practice of the Roman Church, there is no
belief, or profession of any damnable error, which if there were, even your
Church should certainly be no Church. To believe therefore and profess as we
do, cannot exclude Salvation, as Rebaptization must have done. But if the
Donatists could have affirmed with truth, that, in the opinion both of
Catholics and themselves, their Baptism was good, yea and good in such sort
as that unless theirs was good, that of the Catholics could not be such: but
theirs might be good, though that of the Catholics were not: and further,
that it was no damnable error to believe, that Baptism administered by the
Catholics was not good, nor that it was any Sacrilege to reiterate the same
Baptism of Catholics: If, I say, they could have truly affirmed these things,
they had said somewhat, which at least had seemed to the purpose. But these
things they could not say with any color of truth, and therefore their
argument was fond, and impious. But we with truth say to Protestants: You
cannot but confess that our doctrine contains no damnable error, and that our
Church is so certainly a true Church, that unless ours be true, you cannot
pretend any; Yea you grant, that you should be guilty of Schism, if you did cut
off our Church from the Body of Christ, and the hope of salvation: But we
neither do, aor can grant that yours is a true Church, or that within it there
is hope of salvation: Therefore it is safest for you to join with us. And now
against whom has your Objection greatest force?

9. But I wonder nor (...) little, and so I think will ever body else, what the
reason may be, that you do not so much as go about to answer the argument of
the Donatists, which you say is all one with Ours, but refer us to S.
Augustine there to read it; as if every one carried with him a Library, or were
able to examine the place in S. Augustine: and yet you might be sure your Reader
would be greedy to see some solid answer to an argument so often urged by us,
and which indeed, unless you can confute it, ought alone to move every one who
has care of his soul, to take the safest way, by incorporating himself in our
Church. But we may easily imagine the true reason of your silence: For the
answer which S. Augustine gives to the Donatists, is directly against your self,
and the same which I have given, Namely, that Catholics Ad lit. Petil. l. 2.
cap. 108.
approve the Baptism of Donatists, but abhor their heresy of Rebaptization.
And that as gold is good (which is the Similitude used by Contra Cresc. lib. 1.
cap. 21.
S. Augustine) yet not to be sought in company of thieves; so though Baptism be
good, yet it must not be sought for in the Conventicles of Donatists. But you
free us from damnable heresy, and yield us salvation, which I hope is to be
embraced in whatsoever Company it is found; or rather, that Company is to be
embraced before all other, in which all sides agree, that salvation may be
found. We therefore must infer, that it is safest for you to seek salvation
among us. You had good reason to conceal S. Augustines answer to the Donatists.

10. You frame another argument in our behalf, and make us speak thus: If
Protestants believe the Page 79.
Religion of Catholics to be a safe way to Heaven, why do they not follow it?
which wise argument of your own, you answer at large, and confirm your answer
by this instance; The Jesuits and Dominicans hold different Opinions, touching
Predetermination, and the Immaculate Conception of the Virgin: Yet so, that the
Jesuit holds the Dominicans way safe, that is, his error not damnable; and the
Dominicans hold the same of the Jesuits; Yet neither of them with good
consequence can press the other to believe his opinion, because by his own
confession it is no damnable error.

11. But what Catholic makes such a wise demand as you put into our mouths?
If our Religion be a safe way to heaven, that is, not damnable; why do you not
follow it? As if every thing that is good, must be of necessity embraced by
every body! But what think you of the Argument framed thus? Our Religion is
safe even by your confession, therefore you ought to grant that all may embrace
it. And yet further, thus: Among different Religons and contrary ways to
heaven, one only can be safe: But ours, by your own confession, is safe,
whereas we hold that in yours there is no hope of salvation: Therefore you may
and ought to embrace ours. This is our Argument^. And if the Dominicans and
Jesuits did say one to another as we say you; then one of them might with good
consequence press the other to believe his opinion. You have still the hard
fortune to be beaten with your own weapon.

12. It remains then, that both in regard of Faith, and Charity, Protestants
are obliged to unite themselves with the Church of Rome. And I may add also,
in regard of the Theological Virtue of Hope, without which none can hope to be
saved; and which you want, either by excess of Confidence, or defect (...)
Despair, not unlike to your Faith, which I showed to be either deficient in
Certainty, or excessive in Evidence; as likewise, according to the rigid
Calvinists, it is either so strong, that once had, it can never be lost: or so
more than weak, and so much nothing; that it can never be gotten. For the true
Theological Hope of Christians, is a Hope which keeps a mean between
Presumption, and Desperation; which moves us to work our salvation with fear
and trembling; which conducts us to make sure our salvation by good works, as
holy Scripture advises: But, contrarily, Protestants do either exclude Hope by
Despair, with the Doctrine, That our Savior died not for all, and, that such
want grace sufficient to salvation; or else by vain Presumption, grounded upon
a fantastical persuasion, that they are Predestinate; which Faith must exclude
all fear, and trembling. Neither can they make their Calling certain by good
works, who do certainly believe, that before any good works they are justified,
and justified even by Faith alone, and by that Faith whereby they certainly
believe they are justified. Which point some Protestants do expressly affirm to
be the soul of the Church, the principal Origin of salvation, of all other
points of Doctrine the chiefest and weightiest; as already I have noted Chap. 3.
n. 19. And if some Protestants do now relent from the rigor of the foresaid
doctrine, we must affirm, that at least some of them want the Theological Virtue
of Hope; yea that none of them can have true Hope, while they hope to be saved
in the Communion of those, who defend such doctrins, as do directly overthrow
all true Christian Hope. And for as much as concerns Faith, we must also
infer, that they want Unity therein (and consequently have none at all) by
their disagreement about the soul of the Church; the principal Origin of
salvation, of all other points of Doctrine the chiefest and weightiest. And if
you want true Faith, you must by consequence want Hope; or if you hold that
this point is not to be so indivisible on either side, but that it has
latitude sufficient to embrace all parties, without prejudice to their
salvation; notwithstanding that your Brethren hold it to be the soul of the
Church, etc. I must repeat what I have said heretofore, that, even by this
Example, it is clear, you cannot agree what points be fundamental. And so (to
whatsoever answer you fly) I press you in the same manner, and say, that you
have no Certainty, whether you agree in fundamental points; or Unity and
substance of Faith, which cannot stand with difference in fundamentals. And so,
upon the whole matter, I leave it to be considered, whether, Want of Charity
can be justly charged on us, because we affirm, that they cannot (without
repentance) be saved, who want, of all other, the most necessary means to
salvation, which are the three Theological Virtues, FAITH, HOPE, and CHARITY.

13. And now I end this first part, having, as I conceive, complied with my
first design, (in that measure, which Time, Commodity, scarcity of Books, and
my own small Abilities could afford) which was to show, that Amongst men of
different Religions, one side only can be saved. For since there must be some
infallible Means to decide all Controversies concerning Religion, and to
propound truth revealed by Almighty God; and this means can be no other, but
the Visible Church of Christ, which at the time of Luther's appearance was only
the Church of Rome, and such as agreed with her: We must conclude, that
whosoever opposes himself to her definitions, or forsakes her Communion, does
resist God himself, whose Spouse she is, and whose divine truth she propounds;
and therefore becomes guilty of Schism and Heresy, which since Luther, his
Associates, and Protestants have done, and still continue to do; it is not Want
of Charity, but abundance of evident cause, that forces us to declare this
necessary Truth, PROTESTANCY UNREPENTED DESTROIES SALVATION.

The ANSWER to the SEVENTH CHAPTER.
That Protestants are not bound by the Charity which they owe to themselves, to
reunite themselves to the Roman-Church.
THE first four Paragraphs of this Chapter, are wholly spent in an unnecessary
introduction unto a truth, which I presume, never was, nor will be, by any man
in his right wits, either denied or questioned; and that is, That every man in
Wisdom and Charity to himself, is to take the safest way to his eternal
Salvation.

2. The sift and sixth are nothing in a manner, but references to discourses,
already answered by me, and confuted in their proper places.

3. The seventh, eighth, ninth, tenth, and eleventh, have no other foundation
but this false pretense, That we confess the Roman Church free from damnable
error.

4. In the twelfth there is something that has some probability to persuade
some Protestants to forsake some of their opinions, or others to leave their
communion; but to prove Protestants in general, to be in the state of sin while
they remain separate from the Roman Church, there is not one word or syllable:
and besides, whatsoever argument there is in it for any purpose, it may be as
forcibly returned upon Papists, as it is urged against Protestants; in as much
as all Papists, either hold the doctrine of Predetermination, and absolute
Election, or communicate with those that do hold it. Now from this doctrine,
what is more prone and obvious, than for every natural man (without Gods
especial preventing grace) to make this practical collection, Either I am
elected or not elected; If I be, no impiety possible can ever damn me: If not,
no possible industry can ever save me? Now whether this disjunctive persuasion
be not as likely (as any doctrine of any Protestants) to extinguish Christian
hope, and filial fear, and to lead some men to despair, others to
presumption, all to a wretchless and impious life, I desire you ingeniously to
inform me! and if you deny it, assure your self you shall be contradicted and
confuted by men of your own Religion and your own Society, and taught at length
this charitable Doctrine, that though men's opinions may be charged with the
absurd consequencs which naturally flow from them, yet the men themselves are
not; I mean, if they perceive not the consequence of these absurdities, nor do
not own and acknowledge, but disclaim and detest them. And this is all the
answer which I should make to this discourse* if I should deal rigidly and
strictly with you. Yet that you may not think your self contemned, nor have
occasion to pretend, that your arguments are evaded, I will entreat leave of my
Reader to bring to the test every particle of it, and to censure what deserves
a censure, and to answer what may any way seem to require an answer: and then I
doubt not, but what I have affirmed in general will appear in particular.

Ad. 1. To the First then I say. 1. It was needless to prove, that due Order is
to be observed in anything; much more in Charity, which being one of the best
things, may be spoiled by being disordered! Yet if it stood in need of proof, I
fear this place of the Canticles, He has ordered Charity in me, would be no
enforcing demonstration of it. 2. The reason alleged by you why we ought to
love one object more then another, because one thing participates the Divine
Goodness more then another, is fantastical, and repugnant to what you say
presently after. For by this rule, no man should love himself more than all the
world; which yet you require, unless he were first vainly persuaded that he
does more participate the Divine Goodness than all the world. But the true
reason why one thing ought to be loved more then another, is, because one thing
is better then another, or because it is better to us, or because God commands
us to do so, or because God himself does so, and we are to conform our
affections to the will of God. 3. It is not true, that all objects which we
believe, do equally participate the Divine Testimony or Revelation^: For some
are testified more evidently, and some more obscurely; and therefore whatsoever
you have built upon this ground, must of necessity fall together with it. And
thus much for the first number.


6. Ad. 2. In the Second, many passages deserve a censure. For 1. it is not
true that we are to wish or desire to God a nature infinite, independent,
immense: For it is impossible I should desire to any person that which he has
already, if I know that he has it; nor the perpetuity of it, if I know it
impossible but he must have it for perpetuity. And therefore, Rejoicing only
and not Welwishing is here the proper work of love. 2. Whereas you say, That
in things necessary to salvation, no man ought in any case or in any respect
whatsoever, to prefer the spiritual good of the whole world before his own
soul: In saying this, you seem to me to condemn one of the greatest acts of
Charity, of one of the greatest Saints that ever was, I mean S. Paul, who for
his brethren desired to be an Anathema from Christ. And as for the Text
alleged by you in confirmation of your saying, What does it avail a man if he
gain the whole world, and sustain the damage of his own soul! It is nothing to
the purpose: For without all question, it is not profitable for a man to do so;
but the question is, whether it be not lawful for a man to forgo and part with
his own particular profit, to procure the universal, spiritual, and eternal
benefit of others? 3. Whereas you say, It is directly against Charity to our
selves, to adventure the omitting of any means necessary to salvation, this is
true: But so is this also, that it is directly against the same Charity, to
adventure the omitting any thing, that may any way help or conduce to my
salvation, that may make the way to it more secure or less dangerous. And
therefore if the errors of the Roman Church do but hinder me in this way, or
any way endanger it, I am, in Charity to my self, bound to forsake them, though
they be not destructive of it. 4. Whereas you conclude, That if by living out
of the Roman- Church we put our selves in hazard to want something necessary
to Salvation, we commit a grievous sin against the virtue of Charity as it
respects our selves: This consequence may be good in those which are thus
persuaded of the Roman Church, and yet live out of it. But the supposition is
certainly false. We may live and die out of the Roman Church, without putting
our selves in any such hazard: Nay to live and dye in it is as dangerous as to
shoot a gulf, which though some good ignorant souls may do and escape, yet it
may well be feared that not one in a hundred but miscarries.


Ad. 3. I proceed now to the third Section; and herein first I observe this
acknowledgement of yours, That in things necessary only because commanded, a
probable ignorance of the commandment excuses the Party from all fault, and
does not exclude Salvation. From which Doctrine it seems to me to follow, that
seeing obedience to the Roman Church cannot be pretended to be necessary, but
only because it is commanded, therefore not only an invincible, but even a
probable ignorance of this pretended command, must excuse us from all faulty
breach of it, and cannot exclude Salvation. Now seeing this command is not
pretended to be expressly delivered, but only to be deduced from the word of
God, and that not by the most clear and evident consequences that may be; and
seeing an infinity of great Objections lies against it, which seem strongly to
prove that that is no such command, with what Charity can you suppose, that our
ignorance of this command, is not at the least probable, if not, all things
considered, plainly invincible? Sure I am, for my part, that I have done my
true endeavor to find it true, and am still willing to do so; but the more I
seek, the farther I am from finding, and therefore if it be true, certainly my
not finding it is very excusable, and you have reason to be very charitable in
your censures of me. 2. Whereas you say, that besides these things necessary
because commanded, there are other things, which are commanded because
necessary: of which number you make Divine infallible faith, Baptism in act for
Children, and in Desire for those who are come to the use of Reason, and the
Sacrament of Confession for those who have committed mortal sin: In these words
you seem to me to deliver a strange Paradoxe, viz. That Faith, and Baptism, and
Confession, are not therefore necessary for us, because God appointed them, but
are therefore appointed by God, because they were necessary for us,
antecedently to his appointment. which if it were true, I wonder what it was
beside God that made them necessary, and made it necessary for God to command
them! Besides, in making Faith one of these necessary means, you seem to
exclude Infants from Salvation: For, Faith comes by hearing, and they have not
heard. In requiring that this Faith should be divine and infallible, you cast
your Credence into infinite perplexity, who cannot possibly by any sure Mark
discern whether their Faith be Divine or humane; or if you have any certain
sign, whereby they may discern whether they believe your Churches
infallibility with Divine or only with humane faith, I pray produce it, for
perhaps it may serve us to show, that our faith is divine as well as yours.
Moreover, in affirming that Baptism in act is necessary for Infants, and for
men only in desire, You seem to me in the later to destroy the foundation of
the former. For if a desire of Baptism will serve men in stead of Baptism, then
those words of our Savior* Unless a man be born again of water, etc. are not
to be understood literally and rigidly of external Baptism; for a desire of
Baptism is not Baptism, and so your foundation of the absolute necessity of
Baptism is destroyed. And if you may gloss the Text so far, as that men may be
saved by the desire, without Baptism it self, because they cannot have, it, Why
should you not gloss it a little farther, that there may be some hope of the
salvation of unbaptized infants: to whom it was more impossible to have a
desire of Baptism, than for the former to have the thing it self? Lastly, for
your Sacrament of Confession, we know none such, nor any such absolute
necessity of it. They that confess their sins and forsake them shall find
mercy, though they confess them to God only and not to men. They that confess
them both to God and men, if they do not effectually and in time forsake them,
shall not find mercy, 3. Whereas you fay, that supposing these means once
appointed as absolutely necessary to salvation, there cannot but arise an
obligation of procuring to have them; you must suppose, I hope, that we know
them to be so appointed, and that it is in our power to procure them: otherwise
though it may be our ill fortune to fail of the end, for want of the means,
certainly we cannot be obliged to procure them. For the rule of the Law is also
the dictate of common reason and equity, That no man can be obliged to what is
impossible. We can be obliged to nothing but by virtue of some command: now it
is impossible that God should command in earnest any thing which he knows to be
impossible. For to command in earnest, is to command with an intent to be
obeyed which is not possible he should do, when he knows the thing commanded to
be impossible. Lastly, whosoever is obliged to do any thing, and does it not,
commits a fault; but Infants commit no fault in not procuring to have Baptism;
therefore no obligation lies upon them to procure it. 4. Whereas you say, that
if Protestants dissent from you in the point of the necessity of Baptism for
infants, it cannot be denied but that our disagreement it in a point
fundamental; If you mean a point esteemed so by you, this indeed cannot be
denied: But if you mean a point that indeed is fundamental, this may certainly
be denied: for I deny it, and say, that it does not appear to me any way
necessary to Salvation to hold the truth, or not to hold an error, touching
the condition of these Infants. This is certain, and we must believe that God
will not deal unjustly with them* but how in particular he will deal with them
concerns not us, and therefore we need not much regard it. 5. Whereas you say
the like of your Sacrament of Penance, you only say so, but your proofs are
wanting. Lastly, whereas you say, This rigor ought not to seem strange or
unjust in God, but that we are rather to bless him for ordaining us to
Salvation by any means: I answer, that it is true, we are not to question the
known will of God, of injustice; yet whether that which you pretend to be Gods
will be so indeed, or only your presumption, this I hope may be questioned
lawfully and without presumption; and if we have occasion we may safely put you
in mind of Ezechiel's commination, against all those who say, Thus says the
Lord, when they have no certain warrant or authority from him to do so.

8. Ad. 4. In the fourth Paragraph, you deliver this false and wicked Doctrine,
that for the procuring our own salvation we are always boundunder pain of
mortal sin, to take the safest way; but for avoiding sin we are not bound to do
so, but may follow the opinion of any probable Doctors, though the contrary way
be certainly free from sin, and theirs be doubtful. Which doctrine in the
former part of it, is apparently false. For though wisdom and Charity to our
selves would persuade us always to do so, yet many times, that way which to
our selves and our salvation is more full of hazard, is notwithstanding not
only lawful but more charitable and more noble. For example, to fly from a
persecution and so to avoid the temptation of it, may be the safer way for a
man's own salvation; yet I presume no man ought to condemn him of impiety, who
should resolve not to use his liberty in this matter, but for Gods greater
glory, the greater honor of truth, and the greater confirmation of his
brethren in the faith, choose to stand out the storm and endure the fiery
trial, rather than avoid it; rather to put his own soul to the hazard of a
temptation, in hope of Gods assistance to go through with it, than to baulk the
opportunity of doing God and his brethren so great a service. This part
therefore of this Doctrine is manifestly untrue. The other, not only false but
impious; for therein you plainly give us to understand, that in your judgment,
a resolution to avoid sin, to the uttermost of your power, is no necessary
means of Salvation; nay that a man may resolve not to do so, without any danger
of damnation. Therein you teach us that we are to do more for the love of our
selves, and our own happiness, than for the love of God; and in so doing
contradict our Savior, who expressly commands us, to love the Lord our God with
all our heart, with all our soul, and with all our strength; and has taught
us, that the love of God consists in avoiding sin and keeping his
commandments. Therein you directly cross S. Paul's doctrine, who though he were
a very probable Doctor, and had delivered his judgment for the lawfulness of
eating meats offered to Idols; yet he assures us that he which should make
scruple of doing so, and forbear upon his scruple, should not sin, but only be
a weak brother; whereas he, who should do it with a doubtful conscience,
(though the action were by S. Paul warranted lawful, yet) sheuld sin and be
condemned for so doing. You pretend indeed to be rigid defenders and stout
champions for the necessity of good works; but the truth is, you speak lies in
hypocrisy, and, when the matter is well examined, will appear to make your
selves and your own functions necessary, but obedience to God unnecessary:
Which will appear to any man who considers what strict necessity the Scripture
imposes upon all men, of effectual mortification of the habits of all vices,
and effectual conversion to newness of life, and universal obedience, and
withal remembers that an act of Attrition, which you say with Priestly
Absolution is sufficient to salvation, is not mortification, which being a work
of difficulty and time, cannot be performed in an instant. But for the present,
it appears sufficiently our of this impious assertion, which makes it
absolutely necessary for men, either in Act, if it be possible, or if not, in
Desire, to be Baptized and Absolved by you, and that with intention: and in the
mean time warrants them that for avoiding of sin, they may safely follow the
uncertain guidance of vain man, who you cannot deny may either be deceived
himself, or out of malice deceive them, and neglect the certain direction of
God himself, and their own consciences. What wicked use is made of this
Doctrine, your own long experience can better inform you, than it is possible
for me to do: yet my own little conversation with you affoords one memorable
example to this purpose. For upon this ground I knew a young Scholar in Doway,
licensed by a great Casuist to swear a thing as upon his certain knowledge,
whereof he had yet no knowledge but only a great presumption, because
(forsooth) it was the opinion of one Doctor that he might do so. And upon the
same ground, whenever you shall come to have a prevailing party in this
Kingdom, and power sufficient to restore your Religion, you may do it by
deposing or killing the King, by blowing up of Parliaments, and by rooting out
all others of a different faith from you. Nay this you may do, though in your
own opinion it be unlawful, because Bellar. Contr. Barcl c. 7 In 7 c. refutare
cona^ur Barcl. verba illa Romu^s. Veteres illos imperatores Coasta^^ium,
Va^entem, and caeteros n^n id^o toleravit Ecclesia quod legi^ime successissen,
sed quod illos sine populi detrime^^o co^rcere ^on potera. Et miratur hoc idem
scripsisse Bell ^minun. l 5 de Po^tif c. 7. Sed ut magis miretur, sciat hoc
idem sensisse S. Thomam 2.2. q 12. art. 2. ad 1. Vbi dicit Eccl^siam ^nlerasse
ut fid^les obed^re^^ Juliano Aposta^ae, quia sui novitate noadu^n habebant
vires compescendi Principes te^reaos. Et postea, Sanctus Gregorius dicit,
Nullum adversus juliani perse cutio^^m suiss^ r^m^dium prae ter Lacrimas, quo
^am ^oa b^bebat Ecclesia vires, qu^bus ill us ty^a^^idi resistere Posset.
Bellarmine, a man with you of approved virtue, learning, and judgment, has
declared his opinion for the lawfulness of it in saying, that want of power to
maintain a rebellion, was the only reason that the primitive Christians did not
rebel against their persecuting Emperors. By the same rule, seeing the Priests
and Scribes and Pharisees, men of greatest repute among the Jews for virtue,
learning and wisdom, held it a lawful and a pious work to persecute Christ and
his Apostles, it was lawful for their people to follow their leaders: for
herein, according to your Doctrine, they proceeded prudently, and according to
the conduct of opinion, maturely weighed and approved by men (as it seemed to
them) of virtue, learning and wisdom; nay by such as sat in Moses chair, and
of whom it was said, Whatsoever they bid you observe, that observe and do:
which Universal you pretend is to be understood universally, and without any
restriction or limitation. And as lawful was it for the Pagans to persecute the
Primitive Christians, because Trajan and Pliny, men of great virtue and wisdom
were of this opinion. Lastly, that most impious and detestable Doctrine, (which
by a foul calumny you impute to me, who abhor and detest it,) that men may be
saved in any Religion, follows from this ground unavoidably. For certainly,
Religion is one of those things which is necessary only because it is
commanded: for if none were commanded under pain of damnation, how could it be
damnable to be of any or to be of none? Neither can it be damnable to be of a
false Religion; unless it be a sin to be so. For neither are men saved by good
luck, but only by obedience; neither are they damned for their ill fortune, but
for sin and disobedience. Death is the wages of nothing but sin: and S. James
sure intended to deliver the adequate cause of sin and death in those words,
Lust when it has conceived brings forth sin and sin, when it is finished
brings forth death. Seeing therefore in such things, according to your
doctrine, it is sufficient for avoiding of sin that we proceed prudently, and by
the conduct of some probable opinion, mature y weighed and approved by men of
learning, virtue and wisdom: and seeing neither Jews want their Gamaliels, nor
Pagans their Antoninus's, nor any sect of Christians such professors and
maintainers of their several sects, as are esteemed by the people, which know
no better (and that very reasonably) men of virtue, learning, and wisdom, it
follows evidently that the embracing their religion proceeds upon such reason
as may warrent their action to be prudent, and this (say you) is sufficient for
avoiding of sin, and therefore certainly for avoiding damnation, for that in
humane offairs and discourse, evidence and certainty cannot be always
expected. I have stood the longer upon the refutation of this doctrine, not only
because it is impious, and because bad use is made of it, and worse may be; but
(...) because the contrary position, That men are bound for avoiding sin
always to take the safest way, is a fair and sure foundation, for a clear
confutation of the main Conclusion, which in this Chapter you labor in vain to
prove, and a certain proof that in regard of the precept of charity toward
ones self, and of obedience to God, Papists (unless ignorance excuse them) are
in state of sin, as long as they remain in subjection to the Roman Church.

9. For if the safer way for avoiding sin, be also the safer way for avoiding
damnation, then certainly it will not be hard to determine, that the way of
Protestants must be more secure, and the Roman way more dangerous: Take but
into your consideration these ensuing controversies: Whether it be lawful to
worship Pictures? to picture the Trinity? to invocate Saints and Angels? to
deny Laymen the Cup in the Sacrament? to adore the Sacrament? to prohibit
certain Orders of men and women to marry? to celebrate the public service of
God in a language which the assistants generally understand not; and you will
not choose but confess that in all these you are on the more dangerous side for
the committing of sin, and we on that which is more secure. For in all these
things, if we say true, you do that which is impious: on the other side, if you
were in the right, yet we might be secure enough, for we should only not do
something which you confess not necessary to be done. We pretend, and are ready
to justify out of principles agreed upon between us, that in all these things,
you violate the manifest commandments of God; and allege such texts of
Scripture against you, as, if you would weigh them with any indifference, would
put the matter out of question, but certainly you cannot with any modest deny,
but that at least they make it questionable. On the other side, you cannot with
any face pretend, and, if you should, know not how to go about to prove, that
there is any necessity of doing any of these things; that it is unlawful not to
worship pictures, not to picture the Trinity, not to invocate Saints and
Angels, not to give all men the entire Sacrament, not to adore the Eucharist,
not to prohibit marriage, not to celebrate divine service in an unknown tongue:
I say, you neither do nor can pretend that there is any law of God which
enjoins us, no nor so much as an Evangelical Counsel that advises us to do any
of these things. Now where no law is, there can be no sin, for sin is the
transgression of the law; It remains therefore that if your Church should
forbear to do these things, she must undoubtedly herein be free from all danger
and suspicion of sin; whereas your acting of them, must be, if not certainly
impious, without all condradiction questionable and dangerous. I conclude
therefore that which was to be concluded, that if the safer way for avoiding
sin, be also (as most certainly it is) the safer way for avoiding damnation,
then certainly the way of Protestants must be more safe, and the Roman way more
dangerous. You will say, I know, that these things being by your Church
concluded lawful, we are obliged by God, though not to do, yet to approve them:
at least in your judgment we are so, and therefore our condition is as
questionable as yours. I answ. The Authority of your Church is no common
principle agreed upon between us, and therefore from that you are not to
dispute against us. We might press you with our judgment as well and as justly
as you do us with yours. Besides, this very thing that your Church has
determined these things lawful, and commanded the approbation of them, is that
whereof she is accused by us, and we maintain you have done wickedly, or at
least very dangerously, in so determining; because in these very
determinations, you have forsaken that way which was secure from sin, and have
chosen that which you cannot but know to be very questionable and doubtful; and
consequently have forsaken the safe way to heaven, and taken a way which is
full of danger. And therefore, although if your obedience to your Church were
questioned, you might fly for shelter to your Churches determinations, yet
when these very determinations are accused, me thinks they should not be
alleag'd in defense of themselves. But you will say, Your Church is infallible,
and therefore her determinations not unlawful. Answ. They that accuse your
Church of error, you may be sure do question her infallibility: show therefore
where it is written, that your Church is infallible, and the dispute will be
ended. But till you do so, give me leave rather to conclude thus, Your Church
in many of her determinations, chooses not that way which is most secure from
sin, and therefore not the safest way to salvation; than vainly to imagine her
infallible, and thereupon to believe, though she teach not the securest way to
avoid sin, yet she teaches the certainst way to obtain salvation.

10. In the close of this Number, you say as follows, If it may appear though
not certain, yet at least probable, that Protestancy unrepented destroys
salvation, and withal that there is a safer way, it will follow that they are
obliged by the law of Charity to that safe way. Ans. Make this appear, and I
will never persuade any man to continue a Protestant; for if I should, I should
persuade him to continue a fool. But after all these prolix discourses, still
we see you are at, If it may appear: From whence without all Ifs and Ands, that
appears sufficiently, which I said in the beginning of the Chapter, that the
four first Paragraphs of this Chapter are wholly spent in an unnecessary
introduction, unto that which never by any man in his right wits was denied,
That men in wisdom and charity to themselves are to take the safest way to
eternal salvation.

11. Ad. 5. In the fifth you begin to make some show of arguing, and tell us,
that Protestants have reason to doubt in what case they stand, from what you
have said about the Churches universal infallibility, and of her being Judge of
Controversies, etc. Ans. From all that which you have said, they have reason
only to conclude that you have nothing to say. They have as much reason to
doubt, whether there can be any Motion, from what Zeno says in Aristotle's
Physics, as to doubt, from what you have said, Whether the Roman Church may
possibly err. For this I dare say, that not the weakest of Zeno's arguments
but is stronger than the strongest of yours, and that you would be more
perplexed in answering any one of them, than I have been in answering all yours.
You are pleased to repeat two or three of them in this Section, and in all
probability so wise a man as you are, if he would repeat any, would repeat the
best; and therefore if I desire the Reader by these to judge of the rest, I
shall desire but ordinary justice.

12. The first of them being put into form stands thus, Every least error in
faith destroys the nature of faith; It is certain that some Protestants do
err, And therefore they want the substance of Faith. The Major of which
Syllogism I have formerly confuted by unanswerable arguments out of one of your
own best Authors, who shows plainly that he has amongst you, as strange as
you make it, many other abettors. Besides, if it were true, it would conclude
that either you or the Dominicans have no faith, in as much as you oppose one
another as much as Arminians and Calvinists.

13. The second Argument stands thus, Since all Protestants pretend the like
certainty, it is clear that none of them have any certainty at all? Which
argument if it were good, then what can hinder but this must also be so, Since
Protestants and papists pretend the like certainty, it is clear that none of
them have any certainty at all! And this too: Since all Christians pretend the
like certainty, it is clear that none of them have any certainty, at all! And
thirdly this: Since men of all religions pretend a like certainty, it is clear
that none of them have any at all! And lastly this: Since oft-times they which
are abused with a specious Paralogism, pretend the like certainty with them
which demonstrate, it is clear that none of them have any certainty at all!
Certainly, Sir, Zeal and the Devil did strangely blind you, if you did not see
that these horrid impieties were the immediate consequences of your positions,
if you did see it, and yet would set them down, you deserve a worse censure.
Yet such as these, are all the arguments wherewith you conceive your self to
have proved undoubtedly, that Protestants have reason, at least to doubt in
what case they stand. Neither am I afraid to venture my life upon it, that your
self shall not choose so much as one out of all the pack, which I will not show
before indifferent Judges, either to be impertinent to the question,
inconsequent in the deduction, or grounded upon some false, or at least
uncertain foundation.

14. Your third and fourth argument may be thus put into one; Protestants
cannot tell what points in particular be fundamental; therefore they cannot
tell, whether they or their brethren do not err fundamentally, and whether
their difference be not fundamental. Both which deductions I have formerly
showed to be most inconsequent; for knowing the Scripture to contain all
fundamentals (though many more points besides, which makes it difficult to say
precisely what is fundamental, and what not,) knowing this, I say, and
believing it, what can hinder but that I may be well assured, that I believe
all fundamentals, and that all who believe the Scripture sincerely as well as
I, do not differ from me in any thing fundamental?

15. In the close of this Section, you say, that you omit to add that we want
the Sacrament of Repentance, instituted for the remission of sins, or at least
we must confess, that we hold it not necessary: and yet our own brethren the
Century-writers acknowledge that in the times of Cyprian and Tertullian,
private confession even of thoughts was used, and that it was then commanded
and thought necessary; and then our Ordination, you say, is very doubtful, and
all that depends upon it. Ans. I also omit to answer, 1. That your brother
Rhenanus, acknowledges the contrary, and assures us, That the confession then
required and in use, was public, and before the Church, and that your
auricular Confession was not then in the world; for which his mouth is stopped
by your Index Expurgatorious. 2. That your brother Arcudius acknowledges, that
the Eucharist was in Cyprians time given to Infants, and esteemed necessary, or
at least profitable for them, and the giving it shows no less; and now I would
know, whether you will acknowledge your Church bound to give it, and to esteem
so of it? 3. That it might be then commanded, and being commanded, be thought
necessary, and yet be but a Church-Constitution. Neither will I deny, if the
present Church, could, and would so order it, that the abuses of it might be
prevented, and conceiving it profitable, should enjoin the use of it, but that
being commanded it would be necessary. 4. Concerning our Ordinations, besides
that I have proved it impossible that they should be so doubtful as yours,
according to your own principles; I answer, that experience shows them
certainly sufficient to bring men to faith and repentance, and consequently to
salvation; and that if there were any secret defect of any thing necessary,
which we cannot help, God will certainly supply it.


16. Ad. 6. In the sixth, you say, you will not repeat, but only put us again
in mind that unless the Roman Church were the true Charch there was no visible
Church upon earth, a thing so manifest that Protestants themselves confess,
etc. Answ. Neither will I repeat, but only put you in mind that you have not
proved that there is any necessity that there should be any true Church in your
sense visible; nor if there were, that there was no other besides the Roman.
For as for the confession of Protestants which here you insist upon, it is
evident out of their own words cited by your self, that by the whole world,
they meant only the greatest part of it, which is an usual figure of speech,
and never intended to deny that besides the Church then reigning and triumphing
in this world, there was an other militant Church, other Christians visible
enough though persecuted and oppressed. Nor thirdly do you here make good so
much as with one fallacy, that if the Roman Church were then the visible
Church, it must needs be now the only or the safer way to heaven; and yet the
connection of this consequence was very necessary to be shown. For, for ought I
know, it was not impossible that it might then be the only visible Church, and
yet now a very dangerous way to heaven, or perhaps none at all.

17. Afterward you vainly pretend that all Roman Catholics, not one
excepted, profess, that protestancy unrepented destroys salvation. From which
generality we may except two at least to my knowledge, and those are, your
self, and Franciscus de Sancta Clara, who assures us that Ignorance and
Repentance may excuse a Protestant from damnation though dying in his error.
And this is all the Charity, which by your own confession also, the most
favorable Protestans allow to Papists; and therefore with strange repugnance
to your self you subjoyn, that these are the men whom we must hold not to err
dumnably, unless we will destroy our own Church and Salvation. Whereas, as I
have said before, though you were Turks, and Pagans, we might be good
Christians. Neither is it necessary for perpetuating of a Church before Luther,
that your errors even then should not be damnable, but only not actually
damning to some ignorant souls among you. In vain therefore you do make such
tragedies as here you do! In vain you conjure us with fear and trembling to
consider these things! We have considered them again and again, and looked upon
them on both sides, and find neither terror nor truth in them. Let Children and
Fools be terrified with bug-bears, men of understanding will not regard them.

18. Ad. 7, 8, 9, 10, 11. Your whole discourse in your fiv^ next Paragraphs, I
have in the beginning of this Chapter fully confuted, by saying, that it stands
altogether upon the false foundation of this affected mistake, that we do and
must confess the Roman Church free from damnable error; which will presently be
apparent, to any one who considers, that the seventh and tenth are nothing but
D. Potter's words; and that in the other three, you obtrude upon us this Crambe
no fewer then seven times. May you be pleased to look back to your own Book,
and you shall find it so as I have said: and that at least in a hundred other
places you make your advantage of this false imputation: which when you have
observed, and withal considered that your self plainly intimate, that D.
Potter's discourses, which here you censure, would be good and concluding, if
we did not (as we do not) free you from damnable error; I hope you will
acknowledge that my vouchsafing these Sections the honor of any farther
answer, is a great supererogation in point of civility. Nevertheless partly
that I may the more ingratiate my self with you, but especially, that I may
stop their mouths who will be apt to say, that every word of yours which I
should omit to speak to, is an unanswerable argument, I will hold my purpose of
answering them more punctally and particularly.

19. First then, to your little parenthesis, which you interline among D.
Potter's words,. 7. That any small error in faith destroys all faith, (To omit
what has been said before,) I answer here what is proper for this place: that
S. Austin, whose authority is here stood upon, thought otherwise: He conceived
the Donatists to hold some error in faith, and yet not to have no faith. His
words of them to this purpose are most pregnant and evident, You are with us
(says he to the Donatists. Ep. 48.) as Baptism, in the Creed, and the other
Sacraments: And again, Super gestis cum emerit: Thou have proved to me that
thou have Faith: prove to me likewise that thou have Charity. Parallel to which
words are these of Optatus, Amongst us and you is one Ecclesiastical
conversation, common lessons, the same faith, the same Sacraments. Where, by
the way, we may observe, that in the judgment of these Fathers, even
Donatists, though Heretics and Scismatiques, gave true Ordination, the true
Sacrament of Matrimony, true Sacramental Absolution, Confirmation, the true
Sacrament of the Eucharist, true Extreme Unction; or else (choose you whether)
some of these were not then esteemed Sacraments. But for Ordination, whether he
held it a Sacrament or no, certainly he held that it remained with them entire:
for so he says in express terms, in his book against Parmenianus his Epistle.
Which Doctrine if you can reconcile with the present Doctrine of the Roman
Church, Eris mihi magnus Apollo.

20. Whereas, in the beginning of the 8. Sect. You deny that your argument
drawn from our confessing the possibility of your Salvation, is for simple
people alone, but for all men: I answer, Certainly whosoever is moved with it,
must be so simple as to think this a good and a concluding reason; Some
ignorant men in the Roman Church may be saved, by the confession of
Protestants, (which is indeed all that they confess,) therefore it is safe for
me to be of the Roman Church; and he that does think so, what reason is there
why he should not think this as good; Ignorant Protestants may be saved, by the
confession of Papists, (by name, Mr. K.) therefore it is safe for me to be of
the Protestant Church? Whereas you say, that this your argument is grounded
upon an inevitable necessity for us, either to grant Salvation to your Church,
or to entail certain damnation upon our own, because ours can have no being
till Luther, unless yours be supposed to have been the true Church. I answer,
This cause is no cause: For first, as Luther had no being before Luther, and
yet he was when he was, though he was not before; so there is no repugnance in
the terms, but that there might be a true Church after Luther, though there
were none for some ages before; as, since Columbus his time, there have been
Christians in America, though before there were none for many ages. For neither
do you show, neither does it appear, that the genetation of Churches is
univocal, that nothing but a Church can possibly beget a Church; nor that the
present being of a true Church, depends necessarily upon the perpetuity of a
Church in all ages; any more than the present being of Peripateticks or Stoics
depends upon a perpetual pedigree of them. For though I at no hand deny the
Churches perpetuity, yet I see nothing in your book to make me understand, that
the truth of the present depends upon it, nor any thing that can hinder, but
that a false Church, (Gods providence over-watching and overruling it,) may
preserve the means of confuting their own Heresies, and reducing men to truth,
and so raising a true Church, I mean the integrity and the authority of the
word of God with men. Thus the Jews preserve means to make men Christians, and
Papists preserve means to make men Protestants, and Protestants (which you say
are a false Church) do, as you pretend, preserve means to make men Papists;
that is, their own Bibles, out of which you pretend to be able to prove that
they are to be Papists. Secondly, you show not, nor does it appear, that the
perpetuity of the Church depends on the truth of yours. For though you talk
vainly, as if you were the only men in the world before Luther, yet the world
knows that this is but talk, and that there were other Christians besides you,
which might have perpetuated the Church though you had not been. Lastly, you
show not, neither does it appear, that your being acknowledged in some sense a
true Church, does necessarily import, that we must grant Salvation to it,
unless, by it, you understand the ignorant members of it, which is a very
unusual Synechdoche.

21. Whereas you say, that Catholics never granted that the Donatists had a
true Church or might be saved. I answ. S. Austin himself granted that those
among them, who sought the Truth, being ready when they found it to correct
their error, were not Heretics, and therefore, notwithstanding their error,
might be saved. And this is all the Charity that Protestants allow to Papists.

22. Whereas you say, that D. Potter having cited out of S. Austin the words of
the Catholics, that the Donatists had true Baptism, when he comes to the
contrary words of the Donatists, adds, No Church, no salvation! Ans. You wrong
D. Potter, who pretends not to cite S. Austins formal words but only his sense,
which in him is complete and full for that purpose, whereto it is alleged by
D. Potter. His words are, Pertilianus dixit, Venite ad Ecclesiam Populi and
aufugi^e Traditores, si perire non vultis: Petilian says, Come to the Church
ye people, and fly from the Traditours, if ye will not be damned: for, that
ye may know that they being guilty, esteem very well of our Faith, Behold I
Baptize these whom they have infected, but they receive those whom we have
Baptized. Where it is plain, that Petilian by his words makes the Donatists the
Church, and excludes the Catholics from salvation absolutely. And therefore
no Church, no salvation was not D. Potter's addition. And whereas you say, the
Catholics never yield that among the Donatists there was a true Church and
hope of Salvation: I say, it appears by what I have alleged out of S. Austin,
that they yielded both these were among the Donatists, as much as we yield them
to be among the Papists. As for D. Potter's acknowledgement, that They
maintained an error in the matter and nature of it Heretical: This proves them
but Material Heretics, whom you do not exclude from possibility of Salvation.
So that, all things considered, this argument must be much more forcible from
the Donatists against the Catholics, than from Papists against Protestants,
in regard Protestants grant Papists no more hope of salvation than Papists
grant Protestants: whereas the Donatists excluded absolutely all but their own
Part from hope of Salvation, so far as to acount them no Christians that were
not of it: the Catholics mean while accounting them Brethren, and freeing
those among them, from the imputation of Heresy, who being in error quaerebant
cauta sollicitudine veritatem, corrigi parati cum invenerint,

23. Whereas you say, That the Argument for the certainty of their Baptism
(because it was confessed good by Catholics, whereas the Baptism of
Catholics was not confessed by them to be good,) is not so good as yours,
touching the certainty of your salvation grounded on the confession of
Protestants, because we confess there is no damnable error in the Doctrine or
practice of the Roman Church: I Ans. No: we confess no such matter, and though
you say so a hundred times, no repetition will make it true. We profess
plainly, that many damnable errors, plainly repugnant to the precepts of Christ
both Ceremonial and Moral, more plainly than this of Rebaptization, and
therefore more damnable, are believed and professed by you. And therefore,
seeing this is the only disparity you can devise, and this is vanished, it
remains that as good an Answer as the Catholics made touching the certainty
of their Baptism, as good may we make, and with much more evidence of Reason,
touching the security and certainty of our Salvation.

24. By the way, I desire to be informed, seeing you affirm that Rebaptizing
those whom Heretics had baptized was a sacrilege, and a profession of a
damnable Heresy, When it began to be so? If from the beginning it were so,
then was Cyprian a sacrilegious professor of a damnable heresy, and yet a
Saint and a Martyr. If it were not so, then did your Church excommunicate
Firmilian and others, and separate from them without sufficient ground of
Excommunication or Separation, which is Schismatical. You see what difficulties
you run into, on both sides; choose whether you will, but certainly both can
hardly be avoided.

25. Whereas again in this. you obtrude upon us, That we cannot but confess
that your Doctrine contains no damnable error, and that yours is so certainly a
true Church, that unless yours be true we cannot pretend any: I answer, there
is in this neither truth nor modesty, to outface us that we cannot but confess
what indeed we cannot but deny. For my part, if I were upon the rack, I
persuade my self I should not confess the one nor the other.

26 Whereas again presently you add, that D. Potter grants we should be guilty
of Schism, if we did cut off your Church from the body of Christ and the hope
of Salvation: I have showed above, that he grants no such matter. He says
indeed, that our not doing so frees us from the imputation of Schism, and from
hence you sophistically infer, that he must grant, If we did so, we were
Schismatiques, and then make your Reader believe, that this is D. Potter's
confession, it being indeed your own collection. For as every one that is not a
Papist, is not a Jesuit: and yet not every one that is a Papist is a Jesuit:
As, whosoever comes not into England, comes not to London, and yet many may
come into England, and not come to London: As, whosoever is not a man, is not a
King, and yet many are men that are not Kings: So likewise it may be certain,
that whosoever does not so is free from Schism, and yet they that do so (if
there be sufficient cause), may be not guilty of it.

27. Whereas you pretend to wonder that the Doctor did not answer the argument
of the Donatists, which he says is all one with yours, but referres you to
Saint Austine there to read it, as if every one carried with him a Library, or
were able to examine the places in Saint Austine: I answer, The parity of the
Arguments was that which the Doctor was to declare, whereto it was impertinent
what the answer was: But sufficient it was to show that the Donatists argument
which you would never grant good, was yet as good as yours, and therefore yours
could not be good. Now to this purpose as the concealing the answer was no way
advantageous, so to produce it was not necessary; and therefore he did you more
service then he was bound to, in referring you to St. Austin for an answer to
it. Whereas you say, he had reason to conceal it, because it makes directly
against himself: I say, it is so far from doing so, that it will serve in
proportion to the argument, as fitly as if it had been made for it: for, as
Saint Austin says, that Catholics approve the Doctrine of Donatists, but
abhor their Heresy of Re-baptization: so we say, that we approve those
fundamental and simple necessary Truths which you retain, by which some good
souls among you may be saved, but abhor your many Superstitions and Heresies.
And as he says that as Gold is good, yet ought not to be sought for among a
company of Thieves; and Baptism good, but not to be sought for in the
Conventicles of Donatists: so say we, that the Truths you retain are good, and
as we hope sufficient to bring good ignorant souls among you to salvation, yet
are not to be sought for in the Conventicles of Papists, who hold with them a
mixture of many vanities, and many impieties. For, as for our freeing you from
damnable Heresy, and yielding you Salvation, (which stone here again you
stumble at,) neither he nor any other Protestant is guilty of it; and therefore
you must confess that this very answer will serve Protestants against this
charm of Papists, as well as Saint Austin against the Donatists, and that
indeed it was not Doctor Potter but You, that, without a Sarcasm, had reason to
conceal it.

28. The last piece of D. Potter's book, which you are pleased to take notice
of in this first Part of yours, is an argument he makes in your behalf p. 79.
of his book, where he makes you speak thus, If Protestants believe the Religion
of Papists to be a safe way to heaven, why do they not follow it? This argument
you like not, because many things may be good and yet not necessary to be
embraced by every body, and therefore scoff at it, and call it an argument of
his own, a wife argument, a wise demand: and then ask of him, what he thinks
of it being framed thus, Our Religion is safe even by your confession; and
therefore you ought to grant that a^ may embrace it. And yet farther thus,
Among different Religions one only can be safe: But yours by our own confession
is safe; whereas you hold that in ours there is no hope of salvation; therefore
we ought to embrace yours. Ans. I have advised with him, and am to tell you
from him, that he thinks reasonable well of the arguments, but very ill of him
that makes them, as affirming so often without shame and conscience, what he
cannot but know to be plainly false: and his reason is, because he is so far
from confessing, or giving you any ground to pretend he does confess, that your
Religion is safe for all that are of it, from whence only it will follow that
all may safely embrace it, that in this very place, from which you take these
words, he professes plainly, that it is extremely dangerous if not certainly
damnable to all such as profess it, when either they do, or, if their hearts
were upright and not perversely obstinate, might believe the contrary, and that
for us who are convinced in conscience that she ( the Roman Church) errs in
many things, it lies upon us, even under pain of damnation, to forsake her in
those errors. And though here you take upon you a show of great rigor, and
will seem to hold that in our way there is no hope of Salvation; yet formerly
you have been more liberal of your Charity toward us, and will needs vye and
contend with Doctor Potter, Which of the two shall be more Charitable, assuring
us that you allow Protestants as much Charity as D. Potter spares you, for whom
he makes Ignorance the best hope of Salvation. And now I appeal to any
indiffer^^^ reader, whether our disavowing to confess you free from damnable
error, were not (as I pretend) a full confutation of all that you say in these
five foregoing Paragraphs: And as for you I wonder, what answer, what evasion,
what shift you can devise to clear your self from dishonesty, for imputing to
him almost a hundred times, this acknowledgement which he never makes, but very
often, and that so plainly that you take notice of it, professes the contrary!

29. The best defense that possibly can be made for you, I conceive, is this,
that you were led into this error, by mistaking a supposition of a confession,
for a confession; a Rhetorical concession of the Doctors for a positive
assertion. He says indeed of your errors, Though of themselves they be not
damnable to them which believe as they profess, yet for us to profess what we
believe not, were without question damnable. But to say, Though your errors be
not damnable, we may not profess them, is not to say your errors are not
damnable, but only though they be not. As if you should say, though the Church
err in points not fundamental, yet you may not separate from it: Or, though we
do err in believing Christ really present, yet our error frees us from
Idolatry: Or, as if a Protestant should say, Though you do not commit Idolatry
in adoring the Host, yet being uncertain of the Priests Intention to
consecrate, at least you expose your self to the danger of it: I presume you
would not think it fairly done, if any man should interpret either this last
speech as an acknowledgement, that you do not commit Idolatry, or the former as
confessions, that you do err in points not fundamental, that you do err in
believing the real presence. And therefore you ought not so to have mistaken D.
Potter's words, as if he had confessed the errors of your Church not damnable,
when he says no more but this, though they be so, or, suppose, or put the case
they be so, yet being errors, we that know them may not profess them to be
divine truths. Yet this mistake might have been pardonable, had not Doctor
Potter in many places of his book, by declaring his judgment touching the
quality and malignity of your errors, taken away from you all occasion of
error. But now that he says plainly, That your Church has many ways played
the Harlot, and in that regard, deserved a Bill of divorce from Christ, and the
detestation of Christians, page 11. That for that Mass of errors and abuses in
judgment and practice which is proper to her, and wherein she differs from us,
we judge a reconciliation impossible, and to us (who are convicted in
conscience of her corruptions) damnable, page 20. That popery is the contagion
or plague of the Church, page 60. That we cannot, we dare not communicate with
her in her public Liturgy, which is manifestly polluted with gross
Superstition. page 68. That they who in former ages dyed in the Church of Rome,
dyed in many sinful errors, page 78. That they that have understanding and
means to discover their errors and neglect to use them, he dares not flatter
them with so easy a censure, as to give them hope of salvation, page 79. That
the way of the Roman Religion is not safe, but very dangerous, if not certainly
damnable, to such as profess it, when they believe (or, if their hearts were
upright and not perversely obstinate, might believe) the contrary, p. 79. That
your Church is but (in some sense) a true Church: and your errors, only to some
men not damnable, and that we who are convinced in conscience that she errs in
many things are, under pain of damnation, to forsake her in those errors.
Seeing, I say, he s^^^ all this so plainly and so frequently; certainly your
charging him falsely with this acknowledgement, and building a great part not
only of your discourse in this Chapter, but of your whole book upon it,
possibly it may be palliated with some excuse, but it can no way be defended
with any lust apology. Especially seeing you your self more than once or
twice, take notice of these his severer censures of your Church, and the errors
of it, and make your advantage of them. In the first number of your first
Chapter, you set down three of the former places; and from thence infer, That
as you affirm Protestancy unrepented destroys Salvation, so D. Potter
pronounces the like heavy doom against Roman Catholics: And again. 4. of the
same chapter, We allow Protestants as much charity as D. Potter spares us, for
whom he makes ignorance the best hope of salvation. And c. 5.. 41. you have
these words: It is very strange that you judge us extremely uncharitable in
saying Protestants cannot be saved, while your self avouch the same of all
Learned Catholics, whom Ignorance cannot excuse! Thus out of the same mouth
you blow hot and cold; and one while, when it is for your purpose, you profess
D. Potter censures your errors as heavily as you do ours; which is very true,
for he gives hope of Salvation to none among you, but to those whose ignorance
was the cause of their error, and no sin cause of their ignorance: and
presently after, when another project comes in your head, you make his words
softer than oil toward you: you pretend he does and must confess, That your
doctrine contains no damnable error, that your Church is certainly a true
Church, that your way to heaven is a safe way, and all these acknowledgments
you set down simple and absolute, without any restriction or limitation;
whereas in the Doctor they are all so qualified, that no knowing Papist can
promise himself any security or comfort from them. We confess (says he) the
Church of Rome to be (in some sense) a true Church, and her errors (to some
men) not damnable: we believe her Religion safe, that is, by Gods great mercy
not damnable, to some such as believe what they profess: But we believe it not
safe, but very dangerous, if not certainly damnable to such as profess it, when
they believe (or if their hearts were upright and not perversely obstinate might
believe) the contrary. Observe, I pray you, these restraining terms which
formerly you have dissembled, A true Church in some sense, not damnable to some
men, a safe way, that is, by Gods great mercy, not damnable to some: And then
seeing you have pretended these Confessions to be absolute, which are thus
plainly limited, how can you avoid the imputation of an egregious Sophister?
You quarrel with the Doctor, in the end of your Preface, for using in his Book
such ambiguous terms as these, in some sort* in some sense, in some degree: and
desire him, if he make any reply, either to forbear them, or to tell you
roundly in what sort, in what sense, in what degree, he understands these and
the like mincing phrases. But the truth is, he has not left them so ambiguous
and undetermined as you pretend; but told you plainly, in what sense your
Church may pass for a true Church, viz. in regard we may hope that she retains
those truths which are simply, absolutely, and indispensably necessary to
Salvation, which may suffice to bring those good souls to heaven, who wanted
means of discovering their errors; this is the charitable construction in which
you may pass for a Church: And to what men your Religion may be safe, and your
errors not damnable, viz. to such whom Ignorance may excuse; and therefore he
has more cause to complain of you, for quoting his words without those
qualifications, than you to find fault with him for using of them.

30. That your Discourse in the 12. presses you as forcibly as Protestants, I
have showed above: I add here, 1. Whereas you say, that faith, according to
your rigid Calvinists, is either so strong, that once had, it can never he
lost; or so more than weak, and so much nothing, that it can never be gotten:
That these are words without sense. Never any Calvinist affirmed that faith was
so weak, and so much nothing, that it can never be got^en: but it seems you
wanted matter to make up your Antithesis, and therefore were resolved to speak
empty words, rather than lose your figure, -- Crimina rasis
Librat in antithetis, doctas posuisse Figuras
Laudatur. --
2. That there is no Calvinist that will deny the Truth of this Proposition,
Christ died for all; nor to subscribe to that sense of it, which your
Dominicans put upon it; neither can you, with coherence to the received Doctrine
of your own Society, deny that they as well as the Calvinists, take away the
distinction of sufficient and effectual grace, and indeed hold none to be
sufficient, but only that which is effectual. 3. Whereas you say, They cannot
make their calling certain by good works, who do certainly believe that before
any good works they are justified, and justified by faith alone, and by that
faith whereby they certainly believe they are justified: I answ.
There is no Protestant but believes that Faith, Repentance, and universal
Obedience, are necessary to the obtaining of Gods favor and eternal happiness.
This being granted, the rest is but a speculative Controversy, a Question
about words, which would quickly vanish, but that men affect not to understand
one another. As if a company of Physicians were in consultation, and should all
agree, that three medicines and no more were necessary for the recovery of the
Patients health, this were sufficient for his direction toward the recovery of
his health; though concerning the proper and specifical effects of these three
medicines, there should be amongst them as many differences as men: So likewise
being generally at accord that these three things, Faith, Hope, and Charity,
are necessary to salvation, so that whosoever wants any of them, cannot obtain
it, and he which has them all cannot fail of it, is it not very evident that
they are sufficiently agreed for men's directions to eternal Salvation? And
seeing Charity is a full comprehension of all good works, they requiring
Charity as a necessary qualification in him that will be saved, what sense is
there in saying, they cannot make their calling certain by good works? They
know what salvation is as well as you, and have as much reason to desire it:
They believe it as heartily as you, that there is no good work but shall have
its proper reward, and that there is no possibility of obtaining the eternal
reward without good works: and why then may not this Doctrine be a sufficient
incitement and provocation unto good works?

31. You say, that they certainly believe that before any good works they are
justified: But this is a calumny. There is no Protestant but requires to
Justification, Remission of sins, and to Remission of sins they all require
Repentance, and Repentance I presume may not be denied the name of a good work;
being indeed, if it be rightly understood, and according to the sense of the
word in Scripture, an effectual conversion from all sin to all holiness. But
though it be taken for mere Sorrow for sins past, and a bare Purpose of
amendment, yet even this is a good work; and therefore Protestants requiring
this to Remission of sins, and Remission of sins to Justification, cannot with
candor be pretended to believe, that they are justified before any good work.

32. You say, They believe themselves justified by faith alone, and that by
that faith whereby they believe themselves justified: Some peradventure do so,
but withal they believe that that faith which is alone, and unaccompanied with
sincere and universal obedience, is to be esteemed not faith but presumption,
and is at no hand sufficient to justification: that though Charity be not
imputed unto justification, yet is it required as a necessary disposition in
the person to be justified, and that though in regard of the imperfection of
it, no man can be justified by it, yet that, on the other side, no man can be
justified without it. So that upon the whole matter, a man may truly and safely
say, that the Doctrine of these Protestants, taken altogether, is not a Doctrine
of Liberty, not a Doctrine that turns hope into presumtion and carnal security:
though it may justly be feared, that many licentious persons, taking it by
halfes have made this wicked use of it. For my part, I do heartily wish, that
by public Authority it were so ordered, that no man should ever preach or
print this Doctrine that Faith alone justifies, unless he joins this together
with it, that Universal Obedience is necessary to salvation And besides that
those Chapters of Saint Paul, which entreat of justification by faith, without
the works of the Law, were never read in the Church, but when the 13. Chapter
of the 1. Epistle to the Corinth. concerning the absolute necessity of Charity,
should be, to prevent misprision, read together with them.

33. Whereas you say, that some Protestants do expressly affirm the former point
to be the soul of the Church, etc. and therefore they must want the Theological
virtue of Hope, and that none can have true hope, while they hope to be saved
in their communion. I answ. They have great reason to believe the Doctrine of
justification, by faith only, a point of great weight and importance, if it be
rightly understood: that is, they have reason to esteem it a principal and
necessary duty of a Christian, to place his hope of justification and
salvation, not in the perfection of his own righteousness (which if it be
imperfect will not justify,) but only in the mercies of God through Christ's
satisfaction; and yet, notwithstanding this, nay the rather for this, may
preserve themselves in the right temper of good Christians, which is a happy
mixture and sweet composition of confidence and fear. If this Doctrine be
otherwise expounded than I have here expounded, I will not undertake the
justification of it: only I will say (that which I may do truly) that I never
knew any Protestant such a soli-sidian, but that he did believe these divine
truths* That he must make his calling certain by good works: That he must work
out his salvation with Fear and Trembling, and that while he does not so, he
can have no well grounded hope of Salvation: I say, I never met with any who
did not believe these divine Truths, and that with a more firm, and a more
unshaken assent, than he does that himself is predestinate, and that he is
justified by believing himself justified. I never met with any such, who if he
saw there were a necessity to do either, would not rather forgo his belief of
these Doctrins, than the former: these which he sees disputed and contradicted
and opposed with a great multitude of very potent Arguments; than those, which
being the express words of Scripture whosoever should call into question, could
not with any modesty pretend to the title of Christian. And therefore, there is
no reason but we may believe, that their full assurance of the former Doctrine,
does very well qualify their persuasion of the later; and that the former (as
also the lives of may of them do sufficiently testify) are more effectual to
temper their hope, and to keep it at a stay of a filial and modest assurance of
Gods favor, built upon the conscience of his love and fear, than the later can
be to swell and puff them up into vain confidence and ungrounded presumption
This reason joined with our experience of the honest and religious conversation
of many men of this opinion, is a sufficient ground for Charity, to hope well
of their Hope: and to assure our selves, that it cannot be offensive, but
rather most acceptable to God, if, notwithstanding this diversity of opinion,
we embrace each other with the strict embraces of love and communion. To you
and your Church we leave it, to separate Christians from the Church, and to
proscribe them from heaven upon trivial and trifling causes: As for our selves,
we conceive a charitable judgment of our Brethren and their errors, though
untrue, much more pleasing to God than a true judgment, if it be uncharitable;
and therefore shall always choose (if we do err) to err on the milder and more
merciful part, and rather to retain those in our Communion which deserve to be
ejected, than eject those that deserve to be retained.

34. Lastly, whereas you say, that seeing Protestants differ about the point of
Justification, you must needs infer that they want Unity in faith, and
consequently all faith, and then that they cannot agree what points are
fundamental; I answer, to the first of these inferences, that, as well might
you infer it upon Victor Bishop of Rome and Polycrates; upon Stephen Bishop
of Rome and Saint Cyprian: in as much as it is undeniably evident that what one
of those esteemed necessary to salvation the other esteemed not so. But points
of Doctrine (as all other things) are as they are, and not as they are esteemed:
neither can a necessary point be made unnecessary by being so accounted, nor an
unnecessary point be made necessary by being overvalued. But as the ancient
Philosophers, (whose different opinions about the Soul of man you may read in
Aristotle de anima, and Cicero's Tusculan Questions,) notwithstanding their
diverse opinions touching the nature of the soul, yet all of them had souls,
and souls of the same nature: Or as those Physicians who dispute whether the
Brain or Heart be the principal part of a man, yet all of them have brains and
have hearts, and herein agree sufficiently: So likewise, though some
Protestants esteem that Doctrine the soul of the Church, which others do not
so highly value, yet this hinders not but that which is indeed the soul of the
Church may be in both sorts of them: And though one account that a necessary
truth which others account neither necessary nor perhaps true; yet, this
notwithstanding, in those truths which are truly and really necessary they may
all agree. For no Argument can be more sophistical than this; They differ in
some points which they esteem necessary; Therefore they differ in some that
indeed and in truth are so.

35. Now as concerning the other Inference, That they cannot agree what points
are fundamental: I have said and proved formerly that there is no such
necessity as you imagine or pretend, that men should certainly know what is,
and what is not fundamental. They that believe all things plainly delivered in
Scripture, believe all things fundamental, and are at sufficient Unity in
matters of Faith, though they cannot precisely and exactly distinguish between
what is fundamental, and what is profitable: nay though by error they mistake
some vain, or perhaps some hurtful, opinions for necessary and fundamental
Truths. C 3. Sect. 54. and alibi.
Besides, I have showed above, that as Protestants do not agree (for you
overreach in saying, they cannot) touching what points are fundamental; so
neither do you agree what points are defined and so to be accounted, and what
are not: nay, nor concerning the subject in which God has placed this
pretended Authority of defining: some of you settling it in the Pope himself,
though alone without a Council, Others in a Council, though divided from the
Pope: Others only in the conjunction of Council and Pope: Others not in this
neither, but in the acceptance of the present Church Universal: Lastly, others
not attributing it to this neither, but only to the perpetual Succession of the
Church of all ages: of which divided Company, it is very evident and
undeniable, that every former may be and are obliged to hold many things
defined and therefore necessary, which the latter, according to their own
grounds, have no obligation to do, nay cannot do so upon any firm and sure and
infallible foundation.

THE CONCLUSION.
AND thus, by God's assistance, and the advantage of a good cause, I am at
length, through a passage rather tyring than difficult, arrived at the end of
my undertaken Voyage; and have, as I suppose, made appear, to all
dis-interessed and unprejudicate Readers, what in the beginning I undertook,
that a vein of Sophistry and Calumny runs clean through this first part of your
Book: wherein though I never thought of the directions you have been pleased to
give me in your Pamphlet entitled A direction to N. N. yet upon consideration
of my Answer, I find that I have proceeded, as if I had had it always before
my eyes, and steered my course by it as by a card and compass.

For first, I have not proceeded by a mere destructive way (as you call it) nor
objected such difficulties against your Religion, as, upon examination, tend to
the overthrow of all Religion, but have showed that the truth of Christianity
is clearly independent upon the truth of Popery: and that on the other side,
the arguments you urge, and the courses you take, for the maintenance of your
Religion, do manifestly tend (if they be closely and consequently followed) to
the destruction of all Religion, and lead men by the hand to Atheism and
Impiety; whereof I have given you ocular demonstrations in diverse places of my
book, but especially, in my answer to your Direction to N. N.

Neither can I discover any repugnance between any one part of my answer and
any other, though I have used many more judicious and more searching eyes than
mine own, to make, if it were possible, such a discovery: and therefore am in
good hope, that, though the music I have made be but dull and flat, and even
downright plain-song, even your curious and critical ears shall discover no
discord in it; but on the other side, I have charged you frequently, and very
justly, with manifest contradiction and retractation of your own assertions,
and not seldom of the main grounds you build upon, and the principal
conclusions which you endeavor to maintain: which I conceive my self to have
made apparent even to the eye, c. 2.. 5. c. 3.. 88. c. 4.. 14. and 24. c. 5..
93. c. 6.. 6, 7, 12, 17. c. 7.. 29. and in many other parts of my Answer.

And though I did never pretend to defend D. Potter absolutely and in all
things, but only so far as he defends Truth; (neither did D. Potter desire
me, nor any law of God or man oblige me, to defend him any farther,) yet I do
not find that I have cause to differ from him in any matter of moment:
particularly, not concerning the infallibility of God's Church, which I grant
with him to be infallible in fundamentals, because if it should err in
fundamentals, it were not the Church: Nor concerning the supernaturality of
Faith, which I know and believe as well as you, to be the gift of God, and that
flesh and blood revealed it not unto us, but our Father which is in heaven. But
now if it were demanded, What defense you can make for deserting Charity
Mistaken, in the main Question disputed between him and Dr. Potter, Whether
Protestancy, without a particular repentance and dereliction of it, destroy
Salvation, whereof I have convinced you? I believe your answer would be much
like that which Ulysses makes in the Metamorphosis for his running away from
his friend Nestor, that is, none at all.

For Opposing the Articles of the Church of England, the Approbation, I
presume, cleers my Book from this imputation.

And whereas you give me a Caution, that my grounds destroy not the belief of
diverse Doctrins which all good Christians believe, yea and of all verities
that cannot be proved by natural reason: I profess sincerely, that I do not
know nor believe, that any ground laid by me in my whole Book, is any way
inconsistent with any one such Doctrine, or with any verity revealed in the Word
of God, though never so improbable or incomprehensible to Natural Reason: and
if I thought there were, I would deal with it, as those primitive Converts
dealt with their curious Books in the Acts of the Apostles.

For the Epistle of St. James, and those other Books which were anciently
controverted, and are now received by the Church of England as Canonical; I am
so far from relying upon any Principles which must (to my apprehension) bring
with them the denial of the authority of them, that I my self believe them all
to be Canonical.

For the overthrowing the Infallibility of all Scripture, my Book is so
innocent of it, that the Infallibility of Scripture is the chiefest of all my
grounds.

And lastly, for Arguments tending to prove an impossibility of all Divine,
Supernatural, Infallible Faith and Religion, I assure my self, that if you were
ten times more a Spider than you are, you could suck no such poison from them.
My heart, I am sure, is innocent of any such intention: and the Searcher of all
hearts knows, that I had no other end in writing this Book, but to confirm, to
the uttermost of my ability, the truth of the Divine and Infallible Religion of
our dearest Lord and Savior Christ Jesus, which I am ready to seal and
confirm, not with my Arguments only, but my Blood!

Now these are the Directions which you have been pleased to give me, whether
out of a fear that I might otherwise deviate from them, or out of a desire to
make others think so: But howsoever, I have not, to my understanding, swarved
from them in any thing, which puts me in good hope, that my Answer to this
first Part of your Book will give even to you your self indifferent good
satisfaction.

I have also provided, though this were more than I undertook, a just and
punctual examination and refutation of your second Part: But (if you will give
your consent) I am resolved to suppress it, and that for diverse sufficient and
reasonable considerations.

First, because the discussion of the Controversies entreated of in the first
Part (if we shall think fit to proceed in it, as I for my part shall, so long
as I have truth to reply,) will, I conceive, be sufficient employment for us,
though we cast off the burden of those many lesser disputes which remain behind
in the Second. And perhaps we may do God and his Church more service by exactly
discussing and fully clearing the truth in these few, ^^an by handling many
after a slight and perfunctory manner.

Secondly, because the addition of the Second Part, whether for your purpose or
mine, is clearly unnecessary: there being no understanding man, Papist or
Protestant, but will confess, that (for as much as concerns the main question
now in agitation, about the saveableness of Protestants) if the first part of
your Book be answered, there needs no reply to the Second: as on the other
side, I shall willingly grant, if I have not answered the First, I cannot
answer a great part of the Second.

Thirdly, because the addition of the Second not only is unnecessary, but in
effect by your self confessed to be so. For in your preamble to your Second
Part you tell us, That the substance of the present Controversy is handled in
the first: and therein also you pretend to have answered the chief grounds of
D. Potters book: So that in replying to your Second Part, I shall do little
else but pursue shadows.

Fourthly, because your Second Part (setting aside Repetitions and References)
is in a manner made up of Disputes about particular matters, which you are very
importunate to have forborne, as suspecting, at least pretending to suspect,
that they were brought in purposely by D. Potter to dazzle the Reader's eyes and
distract his mind, that he might not see the clearness of the reasons brought
in defense of the General Doctrine delivered in Charity Mistaken. All which you
are likely enough (if there be occasion) to say again to me; and therefore I am
resolved for once even to humor you so far as to keep my discourse within
those very lists and limits which your self have prescribed, and to deal with
you upon no other arguments, but only those wherein you conceive your chief
advantage and principal strength, and, as it were, your Sampson's lock to lie:
wherein if I gain the cause clearly from you (as I verily hope by Gods help I
shall do) it cannot but redound much to the honor of the truth maintained by
me, which by so weak a Champion can overcome such an Achilles for error, even
in his strongest holds.

For these reasons, although I have made ready an answer to your Second Part,
and therein have made it sufficiently evident: That for shifting evasions from
D. Potter's arguments: for impertinent cavills, and frivolous exceptions, and
injurious calumnies against him for his misalleadging of Authors: For
proceeding upon false and ungrounded principles; for making inconsequent and
sophistical deductions, and, in a word, for all the virtues of an ill answer
your Second Part is no way second to the first. Yet notwithstanding all this
advantage, I am resolved, if you will give me leave, either wholly to suppress
it, or at least to defer the publication of it until I see what exceptions,
upon a twelve-months examination (for so long I am well assured you have had it
in your hands) you can take at this which is now published, that so if my
grounds be discovered false I may give over building on them: or (if it shall
be thought fit) build on more securely when it shall appear that nothing
material and of moment, is or can be objected against them. This I say, upon a
supposition that your self will allow these reasons for satisfying and
sufficient, and not repent of the motion which your self has made, of reducing
the Controversy between us to this short Issue. But in case your mind be
altered, upon the least intimation you shall give me, that you do but desire to
have it out, your desire shall prevail with me above all other reasons, and you
shall not fail to receive it with all convenient speed.

Only that my Answer may be complete, and that I may have all my work together,
and not be troubled my self, nor enforced to trouble you, with
after-reckonings, I would first entreat you to make good your Promise of not
omitting to answer all the particles of D. Potters book, which may any way
import, and now at least to take notice of some (as it seems to me) not
unconsiderable passages of it, which between your first and second Part, as it
were between two stools, have been suffered hitherto to fall to the ground, and
not been vouchsafed any answer at all.

For after this neglectful fashion you have passed by in silence, First, his
discourse, wherein he proves briefly, but very effectually, that Protestants
may be saved, and that the Roman Church, especially the Jesuits are very
uncharitable. S. 1. p. 6, 7, 8, 9. Secondly, the authorities whereby he
justifies, That the ancient Fathers, by the Roman understood always a
particular, and never the Catholic Church: to which purpose he alleges the
words of Ignatius, Ambrose, Innocentius, Celestine, Nicolaus, S. 1. p. 10.
Whereunto you say nothing, neither do you infringe his Observation with any one
Instance to the contrary.

Thirdly, the greatest and most substantial part of his answers to the
Arguments of Charity Mistaken, built upon Deuteronomy. 17. Numb. 16. Mat. 28.20. Mat.
18.17. and in particular many pregnant and convincing Texts of Scripture,
quoted in the margent of his book, p. 25. to prove that the Judges of the
Synagogue (whose Infallibility yet you make an Argument of yours, and therefore
must be more credible then yours) are vainly pretended to have been infallible:
but as they were obliged to judge according to the Law, so were obnoxious to
deviations from it. S. 2. p. 23, 24, 25, 26, 27.

Fourthly, his discourse wherein he shows the difference between the Prayers
for the dead used by the Ancients, and those now in use in the Roman Church.

Fifthly, the Authority of three Ancient, and above twenty modern Doctors of
your own Church alleged by him, to show that in their opinion even Pagans,
and therefore much more erring Christians (if their lives were morally honest)
by Gods extraordinary mercy and Christ's merit may be saved. S. 2. p. 45.

Sixthly, a great part of his discourse whereby he declares that actual and
external Communion with the Church is not of absolute necessity to Salvation:
nay that those might be saved whom the Church utterly refused to admit to her
Communion. S. 2. p. 46, 47, 48, 49.

Seventhly, his discourse concerning the Churches latitude, which has in it a
clear determination of the main Controversy against you: For therein he proves
plainly, that all appertain to the Church, who believe that Jesus is the Christ
the son of God and Savior of the world with submission to his Doctrine in
mind and will: which he irrefragably demonstrates by many evident Texts of
Scripture, containing the substance of his Assertion even in terms. S. 4. p.
114, 115, 116, 117.

Eighthly, that wherein he shows by many pertinent examples, that gross error
and true Faith, may be lodged together in the same mind: And that men are not
chargeable with the damnable consequences of their erroneous opinions. S. 4 p.
112.

Ninthly a very great part of his Chapter touching the dissentions of the
Roman-Church, which he shows (against the pretenses of Charity Mistaken) to be
no less than ours, for the importance of the matter, and the pursuit of them to
be exceedingly uncharitable. S. 6. p. 188, 189, 190, 191, 193, 194, 195, 196,
197.

Tenthly, his clear refutation and just reprehension of the Doctrine of
implicit Faith, as it is delivered by the Doctors of your Church: which he
proves very consonant to the Doctrine of Heretics and Infidels, but evidently
repugnant to the word of God. Ibid. p. 201, 202, 203, 204, 205.

Lastly, his discourse wherein he shows that it is unlawful for the Church of
after Ages to add any thing to the Faith of the Apostles: And many of his
Arguments whereby he proves that in the judgment of the Ancient Church the
Apostles Creed was esteemed a sufficient summary of the necessary Points of
simple belief, and a great number of great authorities, to justify the Doctrine
of the Church of England touching the Canon of Scripture, especially the old
Testament, S. 7. p. 221, 223, 228, 229.

All these parts of Doctor Potter's book, for reason best known to your self,
you have dealt with, as the Priest and Levite in the Gospel did with the
wounded Samaritan, that is, only looked upon them and passed by: But now at
least when you are admonish't of it, that my Reply to your second part (if you
desire it,) may be perfect, I would entreat you to take them into your
consideration, and to make some show of saying something to them, lest
otherwise the world should interpret your obstinate silence a plain confession
that you can say nothing.

FINIS.
THE Apostolical Institution OF EPISCOPACY DEMONSTRATED.

BY WILL. CHILLINGWORTH Master of Arts of the UNIVERSITY of OXFORD.

NOSCE TE IPSVM NE QUID NIMIS printer's or publisher's device

LONDON, Printed by E. Cotes dwelling in Aldersgate Street. Anno Dom. M.DC.LXIV.

THE Apostolical Institution OF EPISCOPACY DEMONSTRATED.
SECT. I.
IF we abstract from Episcopal Government all accidentals, and consider only
what is essential and necessary to it; we shall find in it no more but this:
An appointment of one man of eminent sanctity and sufficiency to have the care
of all the Churches, within a certain Precinct or Diocese; and furnishing him
with authority (not absolute or arbitrary, but regulated and bounded by Laws,
and moderated by joining to him a convenient number of assistants) to the
intent that all the Churches under him may be provided of good and able
Pastors: and that both of Pastors and people, conformity to Laws, and
performance of their duties may be required, under penalties, not left to
discretion, but by Law appointed.

SECT. II.
To this kind of Government, I am not by any particular interest so devoted, as
to think it ought to be maintained, either in opposition to Apostolic
Institution; or to the much desired reformation of men's lives, and restoration
of Primitive discipline; or to any Law or Precept of our Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ: for that were to maintain a means contrary to the end; for Obedience to
our Savior, is the end for which Church Government is appointed. But if it may
be demonstrated (or made much more probable than the contrary) as I verily
think it may: I. That it is not repugnant to the government settled in and for
the Church by the Apostles. II. That it is as complyable with the Reformation
of any evil which we desire to reform either in Church or State, or the
introduction of any good which we desire to introduce as any other kind of
Government: And, III. That there is no Law, no Record of our Savior against it:
Then, I hope, it will not be thought an unreasonable Motion, if we humbly
desire those that are in Authority, especially the High Court of Parliament,
That it may not be sacrificed to Clamor, or overborn by Violence: and though
(which God forbid) the greater part of the Multitude should cry, Crucify,
Crucify; yet our Governors would be so full of Justice and Counage, as not to
give it up, until they perfectly understand concerning Episcopacy it self, Quid
mali fecit?

SECT. III.
I shall speak at this time only of the first of these three points: That
Episcopacy is not repugnant to the Government settled in the Church for
perpetuity by the Apostles. Whereof I conceive this which follows is as clear a
Demonstration, as any thing of this nature is capable of.

That this Government was received universally in the Church, either in the
Apostles time, or presently after, is so evident and unquestionable, that the
most learned adversaries of this Government do themselves confess it.

SECT. IV.
Petrus Molinaeus in his Book De munere pastorali, purposely written in defense
of the Presbyterial-government, acknowledges: That presently after the
Apostles times, or even in their time (as Ecclesiastical story witnesses) it
was ordained, That in every City one of the Presbytery should be called a
Bishop, who should have pre-eminence over his Colleagues; to avoid confusion
which often times arises out of equality. And truly, this form of Government all
Churches every where received.

SECT. V.
Theodorus Beza in his Tract, De triplici Episcopatus genere, confesses in
effect the same thing. For, having distinguished Episcopacy into three kinds,
Divine, Humane, and Satanical; and attributing to the second (which he calls
Humane, but we maintain and conceive to be Apostolical) not only a priority of
Order, but a superiority of Power and Authority over other Presbyters, bounded
yet by Laws and Canons provided against Tyranny: he clearly professes that of
this kind of Episcopacy, is to be understood whatsoever we read concerning the
authority of Bishops (or Presidents, as Justin Martyr calls them) in Ignatius,
and other more ancient Writers.

SECT. VI.
Certainly, from To whom two others also from Geneva may be added: Daniel
Chamierus (in Panstratia, tom. 2. lib. 10. cap. 6. Sect. 24.) and Nicol.
Vedelius (Exereitat. 3. in epist. Ignatii ad Philadelph. cap. 14. and Exercit.
8. in Epist. ad Mariam, cap. 3.) which is fully also demonstrated in D.
Hammond's Dissertations against Blondel (which never were answered, and never
will) by the testimonies of those who wrote in the very next Age after the
Apostles.
these two great Defenders of the Presbytery, we should never have had this
free acknowledgement, (so prejudicial to their own pretense, and so
advantageous to their adversaries purpose) had not the evidence of clear and
undeniable truth enforced them to it. It will not therefore be necessary, to
spend any time in confuting that uningenuous assertion of the anonymous Author
of the Catalogue of Testimonies, for the equality of Bishops and Presbyters,
who affirms, That their disparity began long after the Apostles times: But we
may safely take for granted that which these two learned Adversaries have
confessed; and see, whether upon this foundation laid by them, we may not by
unanswerable reason raise this superstructure;

That seeing Episcopal Government is confessedly so Ancient and so Catholic,
it cannot with reason be denied to be Apostolic.

SECT. VII.
For so great a change, as between Presbyterial Government and Episcopal, could
not possibly have prevailed all the world over in a little time. Had Episcopal
Government been an aberration from (or a corruption of) the Government left in
the Churches by the Apostles, it had been very strange, that it should have
been received inany one Church so suddenly, or that it should have prevailed
in all for many Ages after. Variasse debuerat error Ecclesiarum: quod autem
apud omnes unum est, non est erratum, sed traditum. Had the Churches erred,
they would have varied: What therefore is one and the same amongst all, came
not sure by error, but tradition. Thus Tertullian argues very probably, from
the consent of the Churches of his time, not long after the Apostles, and that
in matter of opinion much more subject to unobserved alteration. But that in
the frame and substance of the necessary Government of the Church, a thing
always in use and practice, there should be so sudden a change as presently
after the Apostles times; and so universal, as received in all the Churches;
this is clearly impossible.

SECT. VIII.
For, What universal cause can be assigned or feigned of this universal
Apostasy? You will not imagine that the Apostles, all or any of them, made any
decree for this change, when they were living; or left order for it in any Will
or Testament, when they were dying. This were to grant the question; to wit,
That the Apostles, being to leave the Government of the Churches themselves,
and either seeing by experience, or foreseeing by the Spirit of God, the
distractions and disorders, which would arise from a multitude of equals,
substituted Episcopal Government instead of their own. General Councels to make
a Law for a general change, for many ages there was none. There was no
Christian Emperor, no coercive power over the Church to enforce it. Or, if
there had been any, we know no force was equal to the courage of the Christians
of those times. Their lives were then at command (for they had not then learnt
to fight for Christ) but their obedience to any thing against his Law was not
to be commanded (for they had perfectly learned to die for him.) Therefore
there was no power then to command this change; or if there had been any, it
had been in vain.

SECT. IX.
What device then shall we study, or to what fountain shall we reduce this
strange pretended alteration? Can it enter into our hearts to think, that all
the Presbyters and other Christians then, being the Apostles Scholars, could
be generally ignorant of the Will of Christ, touching the necessity of a
Presbyterial Government? Or, dare we adventure to think them so strangely
wicked all the World over, as against knowledge and conscience to conspire
against it? Imagine the spirit of Diotrephes had entered into some, or a great
many of the Presbyters, and possessed them with an ambitious desire of a
forbidden superiority, was it possible they should attempt and atchieve it once
without any opposition or contradiction? and besides, that the contagion of
this ambition, should spread it self and prevail without stop or control; nay,
without any noise or notice taken of it, through all the Churches in the World;
all the watchmen in the mean time being so fast asleep, and all the dogs so
dumb, that not so much as one should open his mouth against it?

SECT. X.
But let us suppose (though it be a horrible untruth) that the Presbyters and
people then, were not so good Christians as the Presbyterians are now; that
they were generally so negligent to retain the government of Christ's Church
commanded by Christ, which we now are so zealous to restore: yet certainly we
must not forget nor deny, that they were men as we are. And if we look upon
them but as mere natural men; yet, knowing by experience, how hard a thing it
is, even for Policy armed with Power by many attempts and contrivances, and in
along time, to gain upon the liberty of any one people; undoubtedly we shall
never entertain so wild an imagination, as that, among all the Christian
Presbyteries in the World, neither conscience of duty, nor love of liberty, nor
aversness from pride and usurpation of others over them, should prevail so much
with any one, as to oppose this pretended universal invasion of the Kingdom of
Jesus Christ, and the liberty of Christians.

SECT. XI.
When I shall-see therefore all the Fables in the Metamorphosis acted and prove
Stories; when I shall see all the Democracies and Aristocracies in the World
lie down and sleep, and awake into Monarchies: then will I begin to believe
that Presbyterial Government, having continued in the Church during the
Apostles times, should presently after (against the Apostles doctrine and the
will of Christ) be whirled about like a scene in a masque, and transformed into
Episcopacy. In the mean time, while these things remain thus incredible, and,
in humane reason, impossible, I hope I shall have leave to conclude thus:

Episcopal Government is acknowledged to have been universally received in the
Church, presently after the Apostles times.

Between the Apostles times and this presently after, there was not time enough
for, nor possibility of, so great an alteration.

And therefore there was no such alteration as is pretended. And therefore
Episcopacy, being confessed to be so Ancient and Catholic, must be granted
also to be Apostolic, Quod erat demonstrandum.

FINIS.
NINE SERMONS: The First Preached before His MAJESTY King CHARLES the FIRST:
The other Eight upon special and eminent Occasions.

BY WILL. CHILLINGWORTH Master of Arts of the UNIVERSITY of OXFORD.

NOSCE TE IPSVM NE QUID NIMIS printer's or publisher's device

LONDON, Printed by E. Cotes dwelling in Aldersgate Street. Anno Dom. M.DC.LXIV.

TO THE READER.
Christian Reader,
THese Sermons were, by the Godly and Learned Author of them, fitted to the
Congregations to which he was to speak; and no doubt intended only for the
benefit of Hearers, not of Readers. Nevertheless, it was the desire of many
that they might be published, upon the hope of good that might be done to the
Church of God by them. There is need of plain Instructions to incite men to
holiness of life, as well as accurate Treatises in Points Controverted, to
discern Truth from Error. For which end I dare promise these Sermons will make
much, where they find an honest and humble Reader. It was the Author's greatest
care ( as you may find in the reading of them) To handle the Word of God by
manifestation of the truth, commending himself to every man's conscience in the
fight of God: as once St. Paul pleaded for himself, 2 Cor. 4.2. And if that be
the property (which they say) of an eloquent and good speaker; Non ex ore, sed
ex pectore, To speak from his heart rather than his tongue; then surely this
Author was an excellent Orator, one that spoke out of sound understanding with
true affection.

How great his parts were, and how well improved, as may appear by these his
Labors, so they were fully known, and the loss of them sufficiently bewailed
by those among whom he lived and conversed.

Many excellencies there were in him, for which his memory remains; but this
above all was his crown, that he unfeignedly sought God's glory, and the good
of men's souls. It remains, that these Sermons be read by thee with a care to
profit, and thanks to God for the benefit thou have by them, since they are such
talents, as in the use of which he requires and expects to be glorified.
Farewell.

The First Sermon.
2 TIMOTHY III. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. This know also, that in the last days perilous
times shall come.

For men shall be lovers of their own selves, covetous, boasters, proud,
blasphemers, disobedient to Parents, unthankful, unholy,

Without natural affection, truce breakers, false accusers, incontinent,
fierce, despisers of those that are good,

Traitors, heady, high-minded, lovers of pleasures more then lovers of God;

Having a form of godliness, but denying the power thereof.


TO a discourse upon these words, I cannot think of any fitter Introduction,
then that wherewith our Savior sometime began a Sermon of his, This day is
this Scriture fulfilled. And I would to God, there were not great occasion to
fear, that a great part of it may be fulfilled in this place.

Two things are contained in it. First, the real wickedness of the generality
of the men of the Latter-times, in the four first verses. For by men shall be
lovers of themselves, covetous, boasters, proud, etc. I conceive is meant, men
generally shall be so; otherwise this were nothing peculiar to the last, but
common to all times: for in all times some, nay many, have been lovers of
themselves, covetous, boasters, proud, etc. Secondly, we have here the formal
and hypocritical godliness of the same times, in the last verse, Having a form
of godliness, but denying the power thereof; which latter, ordinarily and
naturally accompanies the former. For, as the shadows are longest when the Sun
is lowest, and as vines and other fruit trees bear the less fruit, when they
are suffered to luxuriate and spend their sap upon superfluous suckers, and
abundance of leaves: So commonly, we may observe both in Civil conversation,
where there is great store of formality, there is little sincerity: and in
Religion, where there is a decay of true and cordial piety, there men entertain
and please themselves, and vainly hope to please God with external formalities,
and performances, and great store of that righteousness for which Christ shall
judge the world.

It were no difficult matter to show that the truth of St. Paul's prediction is
by experience justified in both parts of it; but my purpose is to restrain my
self to the latter, and to endeavor to clear unto you, that that in our times
is generally accomplished: That almost in all places the power of Godliness is
decayed and vanished; the form and profession of it only remaining: That the
spirit, and soul, and life of Religion, is for the most part gone; only the
outward body or carcass, or rather the picture or shadow of it being left
behind: This is the Doctrine which at this time I shall deliver to you; and the
Use, which I desire most heartily you should make of it, is this, To take care
that you confute so far as it concerns your particulars, what I fear I shall
prove too true in the general.

To come then to our business, without further complement, let us examine our
ways, and consider impartially, What the Religion of most men is.

We are baptized in our infancy, that is, as I conceive, dedicated and devoted
to God's service, by our Parents and the Church, as young Samuel was by his
Mother Anna, and there we take a Solemn Vow, To forsake the Devil and all his
works, the vain pomp and glory of the world, with all the covetous desires of
it; to forsake also all the carnal desires of the flesh, and not to follow nor
be led by them. This vow we take when we be children and understand it not:
and, How many are there, who know, and consider, and regard what they have
vowed, when they are become men, almost as little as they did being children:
Consider the lives, and public actions of most men of all conditions, in
Court, City, and Country, and then deny it, if you can, that those three things
which we have renounced in our Baptism; the profits, honors, and pleasures of
the World, are not the very Gods which divide the world amongst them, are not
served more devoutly, confided in more heartily, loved more affectionately,
then the Father, Son, and hol^ Ghost, in whose name we are baptized? deny, if
you can, the daily and constant employment of all men, to be either a violent
prosecution of the vain pomp and glory of the world, or of the power, riches,
and contemptible profits of it, or of the momentary or unsatisfying pleasures
of the flesh, or else of the more diabolical humors of pride, malice, revenge,
and such like: and yet with this empty form we please and satisfy our selves,
as well as if we were lively born again by the Spirit of God, not knowing or
not regarding what St. Peter has taught us, That the Baptism which must save
us, is, Not the putting away of the filth of the flesh, 1 Pet. 3.21.
but the answer of a good conscience unto God.

When we are come to years capable of instruction, many, which is lamentable to
consider, are so little regarded by themselves or others, that they continue
little better then Pagans in a Commonwealth of Christians, and know little
more of God or of Christ, then if they had been bred in the Indies. A
lamentable case, and which will one day lie heavy upon their account, which
might have amended it and did not. But many, I confess, are taught to act over
this play of Religion, and learned to say, Our Father which art in Heaven; and,
I believe in God the Father Almighty: but, Where are the men that live so, as
if they did believe in earnest, that God is their Almighty Father? Where are
they that fear him, and trust him, and depend upon him only, for their whole
happiness, and love him, and obey him, as in reason we ought to do to an
Almighty Father? Who, if he be our Father, and we be indeed his children, will
do for us all the good he can; and if he be Almighty, can do for us all the
good he will; and yet, how few are there, who love him with half that affection
as children usually do their Parents, or believe him with half that simplicity,
or serve him with half that diligence? And then for the Lords Prayer, the plain
truth is, we lie unto God for the most part clean through it, and for want of
desiring indeed, what in word we pray for, tell him to his face as many false
tales as we make Petitions. For who shows by his endeavors, that he desires
heartily that God's name should be hallowed; that is, holily and religiously
worshipped and adored by all men? That his Kingdom should be advanced and
enlarged? That his blessed will should be universally obeyed? Who shows by his
forsaking sin, that he desires so much as he should do the forgiveness of it?
Nay who does not revenge, upon all occasions, the affronts, contempts, and
injuries put upon him, and so upon the matter curse himself, as often as he
says, Forgive us our trespasses as we forgive them that trespass against us?
How few depend upon God only for their daily bread, viz. the good things of
this life, as upon the only giver of them, so as neither to get nor keep any of
them, by any means which they know or fear to be offensive unto God? How few
desire in earnest to avoid temptation? Nay, who almost is there, that takes not
the Devils Office out of his hand, and is not himself a tempter both to himself
and others? Lastly, who almost is there that desires heartily and above all
things so much as the thing deserves, to be delivered from the greatest evil,
Sin, I mean, and the Anger of God? Now, beloved, this is certain; he that
imployes not requisite industry, to obtain what he pretends to desire, does not
desire indeed, but only pretends to do so: He that desires not what he prays
for, prays with tongue only, and not with his heart, indeed does not pray to
God, but play and dally with him. And yet this is all which men generally do,
and therefore herein also accomplish this prophecy, Having a form of godliness,
but denying the power thereof.

And this were ill enough, were it in private, but we abuse God Almighty also
with our public and solemn formalities, we make the Church a Stage whereon to
act our parts, and play our Pageants; there we make a profession every day of
confessing our sins with humble; lowly, and obedient hearts, and yet when we
have talked after this manner, 20, 30, 40, years together, our hearts for the
most part continue as proud, as impenitent, as disobedient, as they were in the
beginning. We make great Protestations, when we assemble and meet together to
render thanks to God Almighty, for the benefits received at his hands; and if
this were to be performed with words, with Hosanna's, and Hallelujahs, and
Gloria Patri's and Psalms and Hymns, and such like outward matters,
peradventure we should do it very sufficiently: but in the mean time with our
lives and actions, we provoke the Almighty, and that to his face, with all
variety of grievous and bitter provocations; we do daily and hourly such things
as we know, and he has assured us, to be odious unto him, and contrary to his
nature; as any thing in the world is to the nature of any man in the world; and
all this upon poor, trifling, trivial, no temptations. If a man whom you had
dealt well with, should deal so with you; one whom ye had redeemed from the
Turkish slavery, and instated in some indifferent good inheritance, should make
you fine Speeches, entertain you with Panegyricks, and have your praises
always in your mouth; but all this while do nothing that pleases you, but upon
all occasions, put all affronts and indignities upon you, Would you say, this
were a thankful man? Nay, would you not make heaven and earth ring of his
unthankfulness, and detest him almost as much for his fair speeches, as his
foul actions. Beloved, such is our unthankfulness to our God and Creator, to
our Lord and Savior; our tongues ingeminate, and cry aloud Hosanna, Hosanna,
but the louder voice of our lives and actions is Crucify him, Crucify him: We
Court God Almighty, and complement with him, and profess to esteem his service
perfect freedom; but if any thing be to be done, much more if any thing be to
be suffered for him, here we leave him. We bow the knee before him, and put a
reed in his hand, and a Crown upon his head, and cry, Hail King of the Jews:
But then with our customary sins, we give him gall to eat, and vinegar to
drink, we thrust a spear in his side, nail him to the Cross, and crucify to
our selves the Lord of Glory. This is not the office of a friend to bewail a
dead friend with vain lamentation. Sed quae voluerit meminisse, quae mandaverit
exequi, to remember what he desires, and execute what he commands; so said a
dying Roman to his friend, and so say I to you, To be thankful to God is not to
say, God be praised, or, God be thanked, but to remember what he desires, and
execute what he commands. To be thankful to God, is certainly to love him, and
to love him is to keep his Commandments, so says our Savior, Joh. 19. If ye
love me, keep my Commandments: If we do so, we may justly pretend to
thankfulness; which, believe me, is not a word, nor to be performed with words;
But if we do not so, as general y we do not, our talk of thankfulness is
nothing else but mere talk; and we accomplish Saint Paul's prophecy herein
also: Having a form of thankfulness, but not the reality, not the power of it.

If I should reckon up unto you, how many direct lies every wicked man tells to
God Almighty, as often as he says Amen, to this form of godliness, which our
Church has prescribed; If I should present unto you all our acting of Piety,
and playing of Humiliation, and personating of devotion in the Psalms, the
Letanies, the Collects, and generally in the whole Service, I should be
infinite: And therefore I have thought good to draw a vail over a great part of
our Hypocrisy, and to restrain the remainder of our discourse to the
contrariety between our profession and performance, only in two things, I mean,
Faith and Repentance.

And first for Faith: We profess, and indeed generally, because it is not safe
to do otherwise, that we believe the Scripture to be true, and that it contains
the plain and only way to infinite and eternal happiness: But if we did
generally believe what we do profess, if this were the language of our hearts
as well as our tongues, How comes it to pass that the Study of it is so
generally neglected?

Let a book that treats of the Philosophers stone, promise never so many
mountains of gold, and even the restoring of the golden age again, yet were it
not marvail, if few should study it; and the reason is, because few would
believe it. But if there were a book extant, and ordinary to be had, as the
Bible is, which men did generally believe to contain a plain and easy way for
all men to become rich, and to live in health and pleasure, and this worlds
happiness, can any man imagine that this book would be unstudied by any man?
and why then should I not believe, That if the Scriture were firmly and
heartily believed, the certain and only way to happiness, which is perfect and
eternal, it would be studied by all men with all diligence? Seeing therefore
most Christians are so cold and negligent in the study of it, prefer all other
business, all other pleasures before it; is there not great reason to fear,
that many who pretend to believe firmly, believe it not at all, or very weakly
and faintly? If the General of an Army, or an Ambassador to some Prince or
State, were assured by the King his Master, that the transgressing any point of
his Commission, should cost him his life; and the exact performance of it, be
recompensed with as high a reward as were in the Kings power to bestow upon
him: can it be imagined that any man who believes this, and is in his right
mind, can be so supinely and studiply negligent of this charge, which so much
imports him, as to oversee, through want of care, any one necessary Article, or
part of his Commission; especially if it be delivered to him in writing, and at
his pleasure to peruse it every day? Certainly this absurd negligence is a
thing without example, and such as peradventure will never happen to any sober
man to the worlds end: And by the same reason, if we were firmly persuaded,
that this Book does indeed contain that charge and commission, which infinitely
more concerns us, it were not in reason possible, but that to such a
persuasion, our care and diligence about it, should be in some measure
answerable: seeing therefore most of us are so strangely careless, so grossly
negligent of it, is there not great reason to fear, that though we have
professors and protestors in abundance; yet the faithful, the truly and
sincerely faithful, are, in a manner, failed from the children of men. What but
this can be the cause that men are so commonly ignorant of so many articles,
and particular mandates of it, which yet are as manifest in it, as if they were
written with the beams of the Sun? For example; how few of our Ladies and
Gentlewomen, do or will understand, that a voluptuous life, is damnable and
prohibited to them? Yet St. Paul says so very plainly, She that lives in
pleasure is dead while she lives. 1 Timothy 5.6.
I believe this case divinely regards not the Sex, He would say, He as well as
She, if there had been occasion. How few of the Gallants of our time do or will
understand, that it is not lawful for them to be as expensive and costly in
apparel, as their means, or perhaps, their credit will extend unto? which is to
sacrifice unto vanity, that, which by the law of Christ, is due unto Charity;
and yet the same St. Paul forbids plainly this excess even to women -- also let
women (he would have said it much rather to the men) array themselves in comely
apparel, with shamefastness and modesty, not with embroidered hair, 1 Timothy 2.3.
or gold, or pearls, or costly apparel; and to make our ignorance the more
inexcusable, the very same rule is delivered by St. Peter also, 1 Epist. 3.3.

How few rich men are or will be persuaded, That the law of Christ permits them
not to heap up riches for ever, nor perpetually to add house to house, and land
to land, though by lawful means, but requires of them thus much Charity at
least, that ever while they are providing for their Wives and Children, they
should, out of the increase wherewith God blesses their industry, allot the
Poor a just and free proportion? and when they have provided for them in a
convenient manner, (such as they themselves shall judge sufficient and
convenient in others) that then they should give over making purchase after
purchase, but, with the surplussage of their revenue beyond their expense,
procure, as much as lies in them, that no Christian remain miserably poor: few
rich men, I fear, are or will be thus persuaded, and their daily actions show
as much; yet undoubtedly, either our Savior's general command, of loving our
neighbors as our selves, which can hardly consist with our keeping vainly, or
spending vainly, what he wants for his ordinary subsistence, lays upon us a
necessity of this high liberality: or his special command concerning this
matter, Quod superest date pauperibus; That which remains give to the poor: or
that which St. John says, 1 Epist. 3.17. reaches home unto it, Whosoever has
this worlds good, and sees his brother have need, and shuts up the bowels
of his compassion from him, how dwells the love of God in him? which is in
effect, as if he had said, He that keeps from any brother in Christ, that
which his brother wants, and he wants not, does but vainly think that he loves
God, and therefore vainly hope that God loves him.

Where almost are the men that are or will be persuaded the Gospel of Christ
requires of men Humility, like to that of little Children, and that under the
highest pain of damnation? That is, that we should no more overvalue our
selves, or desire to be highly esteemed by others; no more undervalue, scorn,
or despise others; no more affect preeminence over others, then little children
do, before we have put that pride into them, which afterward we charge wholly
upon their natural corruption: and yet our blessed Savior requires nothing
more rigidly, nor more plainly, than this high degree of humility; Verily,
says he, I say unto you (he speaks to his Disciples affecting high places, and
demanding, which of them should be greatest) Except ye be converted and become
as little Children, ye shall not enter into the Kingdom of heaven.

Would it not be strange news to a great many, that not only adultery and
fornication, but even uncleanness and lasciviousness; not only idolatry and
witchcraft, but hatred, variance, emulations, wrath and contentions; not only
murders, but envying; not drunkenness only, but revelling, are things
prohibited to Christians, and such as if we forsake them not, we cannot inherit
the Kingdom of Heaven? and yet these things, as strange as they may seem, are
plainly written; some of them by St. Peter, 1 Ep. 4. Chapter but all of them by St.
Paul, Gal. 5.19. Now the works of the flesh are manifest, which are these,
adultery, fornication, uncleanness, lasciviousness, etc. of the which I tell
you before, as I have told you in times past, that they who do such things,
shall not inherit the Kingdom of God.

If I should tell you, that all bitterness and evil speaking (nay such is the
modesty and gravity which Christianity requires of us) foolish talk and
jesting, are things not allowed to Christians, would not many cry out, These
are hard and strange sayings, who can hear them? and yet, as strange as they
may seem, they have been written well nigh 1600 years, and are yet extant in
very legible Characters, in the Epist. to the Ephesians. the end of the 4 and the
beginning of the 5 chap.

To come a little nearer to the business of our times, The chief Actours in
this bloody Tragedy, which is now upon the Stage, who have robbed our Sovereign
Lord the King of his Forts, Towns, Treasure, Ammunition, Houses, of the Persons
of many of his Subjects, and (as much as lies in them) of the hearts of all of
them: Is it credible that they know, and remember, and consider the example of
David recorded for their instruction? Whose heart smote him when he had but cut
off the hem of Saul's garment.

They that make no scruple at all of fighting with his Sacred Majesty, and
shooting Muskets and Ordnance at Him (which sure have not the skill, to choose
a Subject from a King) to the extreme hazard of his Sacred Person, whom by all
possible obligations they are bound to defend; do they know, think you, the
general rule, without exception or limitation, left by the Holy Ghost for our
direction in all such cases, 1 Samuel 26.9.
Who can lift up his hand against the Lords Anointed, and be innocent? Or, do
they consider his command in the Proverbs of Solomon, My son fear God and the
King, Prove. 24.21.
and meddle not with them that desire change. Or, his counsel in the Book of
Ecclesiastes, I counsel thee to keep the Kings Commandment, Eccles. 8.2.
and that in regard of the Oath of God. Or, because they possibly may pretend
that they are exempted from, or unconcerned in, the commands of obedience
delivered in the Old Testament, Do they know and remember, the precept given to
all Christians by St. Peter, Submit your selves to every Ordinance of man, for
the Lords sake, whether it be to the King as Supreme, or unto Governors, as
unto them that are sent by him? Or, that terrible sanction of the same command,
They that resist shall receive to themselves damnation, left us by St. Paul in
his Ep. to the Romans, who then were the miserable Subjects of the worst King,
the worst man, nay, I think I may add truly, the worst beast in the world; that
so all Rebels mouths might be stopped for ever, and left without all color or
pretense whatsoever, to justify resistance of Sovereign Power. Undoubtedly, if
they did know and consider, and lay close to their hearts, these places of
Scripture; or the fearful judgment which befell Corah, Dathan, and Abiram, for
this very sin which now they commit, and with a high hand still proceed in, it
would be impossible but their hearts would smite them, as David's did, upon an
infinitely less occasion, and affright them out of those ways of present
confusion, and eternal damnation. And then on the other side, they that
maintain the Kings righteous cause with the hazard of their lives and
fortunes, but by their oaths and curses, by their drunkenness and debauchery,
by their irreligion and prophanness, fight more powerfully against their party,
then by all other means they do or can fight for it; are not, I fear, very well
acquainted with any part of the Bible: but, that strict caution which properly
concerns themselves, in the Book of Leviticus, I much doubt they have scarce
ever heard of it, When thou go to war with thine Enemies, then take heed
there be no wicked thing in thee; not only no wickedness in the cause thou
maintainest, nor no wickedness in the means by which thou maintainest it; but
no personal impieties in the persons that maintain it. Beloved, for the former
two, we have reason to be full of comfort and confidence; For, what is our
cause? what is that which you fight, and we pray for? but to deliver the King
and all his good Subjects out of the power of their Enemies, who will have no
peace but with their slaves and vassals: and for the means by which it is
maintained, it is not by lying, it is not by calumnies, it is not by running
first our selves, and then forcing the people to universal perjury? but by a
just war, because necessary; and by as fair and merciful a war, as if they
were not Rebels and Traitors you fight against, but Competitours in a doubtful
Title. But now for the third part of the caution, that, to deal ingenuously
with you, and to deliver my own soul, if I cannot other men's, that I cannot
think of with half so much comfort as the former; but seeing so many Jonasses
imbarqued in the same ship, the same cause with us, and so many Achans entering
into Battle with us against the Cananites; seeing Publicans and sinners on the
one side, against Scribes and Pharisees on the other; on the one side
Hypocrisy, on the other Profaneness; no honesty nor justice on the one side,
and very little piety on the other: On the one side horrible oaths, curses, and
blasphemies; on the other, pestilent lies, calumnies, and perjury: When I see
amongst them the pretense of Reformation, if not the desire, pursued by
Antichristian, Mahumetan, Devilish means; and amongst us little or no zeal for
Reformation of what is indeed amiss, little or no care to remove the cause of
God's anger toward us, by just, lawful, and Christian means; I profess
plainly, I cannot without trembling consider, what is likely to be the event of
these Distractions; I cannot but fear, that the goodness of our cause, may sink
under the burden of our sins: And that God in his justice, because we will not
suffer his Judgments to atchieve their prime scope and intention, which is our
amendment and reformation, may either deliver us up to the blind zeal and fury
of our Enemies; or else, which I rather fear, make us instruments of his
Justice each against other, and of our own just and deserved confusion. This, I
profess plainly, is my fear, and I would to God it were the fear of every
Soldier of his Majesty's Army: but that which increases my fear is, that I
see very many of them have very little or none at all: I mean not, that they
are fearless toward their Enemies, (that is our joy and triumph) but that they
show their courage even against God, and fear not him, whom it is madness not
to fear. Now from whence can their not fearing Him proceed, but from their not
knowing him, their not knowing his will and their own duty? not knowing how
highly it concerns Soldiers, above other professions, to be Religious; and
then, if ever, when they are engaged in dangerous adventures, and every moment
have their lives in their hands. When they go to war with their Enemies, then
to take heed there be no wicked thing in them.

You see, Beloved, how many instances and examples I have given you of our
gross ignorance of what is necessary and easy for us to know; and to these, it
were no difficult matter to add more. Now from whence can this ignorance
proceed, but from supine negligence? and from whence this negligence, but from
our not believing what we pretend to believe? For, did we believe firmly and
heartily, that this Book were given us by God for the rule of our Actions, and
that obedience to it were the certain and only way to eternal happiness, it
were impossible we should be such enemies to our selves, such Traitors to our
own souls, as not to search it, at least, with so much diligence, that no
necessary point of our duty plainly taught in it, could possibly escape us. But
it is certain, and apparent to all the world, that the greatest part of
Christians, through gross and wilful negligence, remain utterly ignorant of
many necessary points of their duty to God and Man: and therefore it is much to
be feared, that this Book, and the Religion of Christ contained in it, among an
infinite of professors, labors with great penury of true believers.

It were an easy matter (if the time would permit) to present unto you many
other demonstrations of the same conclusion; but to this drawn from our willing
ignorance of that which is easy and necessary for us to know, I will content
my self to add only one more, taken from our voluntary and presumptuous neglect
to do those things which we know and acknowledge to be necessary.

If a man should say unto me, That it concerns him as much as his life is
worth, to go presently to such a place, and that he knows but one way to it,
and I should see him stand still or go some other way, Had I any reason to
believe that this man believes himself? Quid Verba audiam, cum facta videam?
says he in the Comedy; Protestatio contra factum non valet, says the Law; and
why should I believe, that that man believes obedience to Christ the only way
to present and eternal happiness, whom I see wittingly, and willingly, and
constantly, and customarily to disobay him? The time was, that we all knew that
the King could reward those that did him service, and punish those that did him
dis-service, and then all men were ready to obey his Command, and he was a rare
man that durst do any thing to his face that offended him. Beloved, if we did
but believe in God, so much as most Subjects do in their King; did we as verily
believe, that God could and would make us perfectly happy, if we serve him,
though all the world conspire to make us miserable, and that he could and would
make us miserable if we serve him not, though all the world should conspire to
to make us happy, How were it possible that to such a faith our lives should
not be conformable? Who was there ever so madly in love with a present penny,
as to run the least hazard of the loss of 10000 l. a year to gain it, or not
readily to part with it upon any probable hope or light persuasion, much more a
firm belief that by doing so he should gain 100000 l. Now, beloved, the
happiness which the servants of Christ are promised in the Scripture, we all
pretend to believe, that it exceeds the conjunction of all the good things of
the world, and much more such a portion as we may possibly enjoy, infinitely
more then 10000 l. a year, or 100000 l. does a penny; for, 100000 l. is but a
penny so many times over, and 10000 l. a year is worth but a certain number of
pence; but between heaven and earth, between finite and infinite, between
eternity and a moment, there is utterly no proportion; and therefore seeing we
are so apt, upon trifling occasions, to hazard this heaven for this earth, this
infinite for this finite, this all for this nothing; is it not much to be
feared, that though many of us pretend to much faith, we have indeed very
little or none at all? The sum of all which has been spoken concerning this
point is this: Were we firmly persuaded, that obedience to the Gospel of
Christ, is the true and only way to present and eternal happiness, (without
which faith, no man living can be justified) then the innate desire of our own
happiness could not but make us studious inquirers of the will of Christ, and
conscionable performers of it; but there are (as experience shows) very few,
who make it their care and business to know the will of Christ; and of those
few again, very many who make no conscience at all of doing what they know:
therefore though they profess and protest they have faith, yet their
protestations are not to be regarded against their actions, but we may safely
and reasonably conclude what was to be concluded, That the Doctrine of Christ,
amongst an infinite of professors, labors with great scarcity of true, and
serious, and hearty believers; and that herein also we accomplish St. Paul's
prediction, Having a form of godliness, but denying, etc.

But perhaps the truth and reality of our repentance may make some kind of
satisfaction to God Almighty for our hypocritical dallying with him in all the
rest; truly, I should be heartily glad it were so: but I am so far from being
of this faith, that herein I fear we are most of all hypocritical, and that the
generality of professors is so far from a real practice of true Repentance,
that scarce one in an hundred understands truly what it is.

Some satisfy themselves with a bare confession and acknowledgement either
that they are sinners in general, or that they have committed such and such
sins in particular; which acknowledgement comes not yet from the heart of a
great many, but only from their lips and tongues: For how many are there that
do rather complain and murmr that they are sinners, then acknowledge and
confess it? and make it, upon the matter, rather their unhappiness and
misfortune, then their true fault, that they are so? Such are all they who
impute all their commissions of evil to the unavoydable want of restraining
grace, and all their omission of good to the like want of effectual exciting
grace. All such as pretend that the Commandments of God are impossible to be
kept any better then they are kept; and that the World, the Flesh, and the
Devil, are even omnipotent enemies; and that God neither does, nor will, give
sufficient strength to resist and overcome them. All such as lay all their
faults upon Adam, and say with those rebellious Israelites (whom God assures,
That they neither had nor should have just reason to say so) That their Fathers
had eaten sour grapes, and their teeth were set on edge. Lastly, all such as
lay all their sins upon divine prescience, and predestination, saying with
their tongues, O what wretched sinners have we been; but in their hearts, How
could we help it, we were predestinate to it, we could not do otherwise.

All such as seriously so persuade themselves, and think to hide their
nakedness with such fig leaves as these, can no more be said to acknowledge
themselves guilty of a fault, then a man that was born blind or lame, with the
Stone or Gout, can accuse himself of any fault for being born so; well may such
a one complain and bemone himself, and say, O wretched man that I am, who shall
deliver me from this unhappiness! but such a complaint is as far from being a
true acknowledgement of any fault, as a bare acknowledgement of a fault is far
from true repentance: for, to confess a fault, is, to acknowledge, that, freely
and willingly, without any constraint, or unavoydable necessity, we have
transgressed the law of God, it being in our power by God's grace, to have done
otherwise. To aggravate this fault is to confess we have done so, when we might
easily have avoided it, and had no great nor violent temptation to it; to
pretend any great difficulty in the matter, is to excuse and extenuate it: but
to say, that, all things considered, it was absolutely impossible for you to
avoid it, is flatly to deny it. Others there are that think they have done
enough, if to confession of sin, they add some sorrow for it; if when the
present fit of sin is past, and they are returned to themselves, the sting
remaining, breed some remorse of conscience, some complaints against their
wickedness and folly for having done so, and some intentions to forsake it,
though vanishing and ineffectual: These heat-drops, this morning dew of sorrow,
though it presently vanish, and they return to their sin again upon the next
temptation as a dog to his vomit, when the pang is over; yet in the pauses
between, while they are in their good mood, they conceive themselves to have
very true, and very good repentance; so that if they should have the good
fortune to be taken away in one of these Intervalla, one of these sober moods,
they should certainly be saved; which is just as if a man in a Quartane Ague,
or the Stone, or Gout, should think himself rid of his disease as often as he is
out of his fit.

But if repentance were no more but so; how could St. Paul have truly said,
That godly sorrow works repentance? 1 Cor. 7.10.
Every man knows that nothing can work it self. The Architect is not the house
which he builds, the Father is not the Son which he begets, the Tradesman is
not the work which he makes; and therefore if sorrow, godly sorrow, works
repentance, certainly sorrow is not repentance: the same St. Paul tells us in
the same place, That the sorrow of the world works death; and you will give
me leave to conclude from hence, therefore it is not death; and what shall
hinder me from concluding thus also, Godly sorrow works repentance, therefore
it is not repentance.

To this purpose it is worth the observing, that when the Scripture speaks of
that kind of repentance, which is only sorrow for something done, and wishing
it undone, it constantly uses the word (...), to which forgiveness of sins is
no where promised. So it is written of Judas the son of perdition, Matthew. 27.5.
(...), he repented and went and hanged himself, and so constantly in other
places. But that repentance to which remission of sins and salvation is
promised, is perpetually expressed by the word (...), which signifies a
through change of the heart and soul, of the life and actions, (...), Mat. 3.2.
which is rendered in our last translation, Repent, for the Kingdom of heaven is
at hand: But much better, because freer from ambiguity in the entrance to our
Common Prayer Book, Amend your lives, for the kingdom of heaven is at hand.
From whence, by the way, we may observe, That in the judgment of those holy and
learned Martyrs, Repentance, and amendment of life are all one: And I would to
God, the same men, out of the same care of avoiding mistakes, and to take away
occasion of cavilling our Liturgy from them that seek it, and out of fear of
encouraging carnal men to security in sinning, had been so provident, as to set
down in terms, the first sentence taken out of the 18th. of Ezekiel, and not
have put in the place of it an ambiguous, and (though not in it self, yet
accidentally, by reason of the mistake to which it is subject,) I fear very
often a pernicious paraphrase; for whereas thus they make it, At what time
soever a sinner does repent him of his sins from the bottom of his heart, I
will put all his wickedness out of my remembrance, says the Lord; The plain
truth, if you will hear it, is, the Lord does not say so, these are not the
very words of God, but the paraphrase of men: the words of God are as follows
-- If the wicked turn from all the sins which he has committed, and keep all
my Statutes, and do that which is lawful and right, he shall surely live, he
shall not die; where, I hope, you easily observe that there is no such word as,
At what time soever a sinner does repent, etc. and that there is a wide
difference between this (as the word repent usually sounds in the ears of the
people) and turning from all sins, and keeping all Gods Statutes: that indeed,
having no more in it but sorrow and good purposes, may be done easily and
certainly at the last gasp, and it is very strange that any Christian, who dies
in his right senses, and knows the difference between heaven and hell, should
fail of the performing it: but this work of turning, keeping, and doing, is
(though not impossible by extraordinary mercy to be performed at last) yet
ordinarily a work of time, a long and laborious work (but yet heaven is very
well worth it) and if you mean to go through with it, you had need go about it
presently. Yet seeing the Composers of our Liturgy thought fit to abreviate,
Turning from all sin, and keeping all God's Statutes, and doing that which is
lawful and right, into this one word, Repenting, it is easy and obvious to
collect from hence, as I did before, from the other place, that by Repentance,
they understood not only sorrow for sin, but conversion from it. The same word
(...), Mat. 12.42. is used in speaking of the Repentance of the Ninivites: And,
how real, hearty, and effectual a Conversion that was, you may see Jonas 3.
from the 5 to the last verse. The People of Niniveh believed God, and put on
sackcloth from the greatest of them to the least of them; for word came to the
King of Niniveh, and he arose from his Throne, and he cast his Robe from him,
and covered him with sackcloth, and sat in ashes; and he caused it to be
proclaimed and published throughout Niniveh, by the decree of the King and of
his Nobles, saying: Let neither man nor beast, heard, nor flock, taste any
thing, let them not feed, nor drink water; but let man and beast be covered
with sackcloth, and cry mightily unto God; yea, let every one turn from his
evil way, and from the violence which is in their hands, who can tell if God
will turn and repent, and turn away his fierce anger that we perish not?

Which words contain an excellent and lively pattern for all true penitents to
follow, and whereunto to conform themselves in their humiliation and
repentance. And truly, though there be no Jonas sent expressly from God to cry
unto us, Yet forty days and Niniveh shall be destroyed; yet seeing the mouth
of Eternal Truth has taught us, that a Kingdom divided is in such danger of
ruin and destruction, that morally speaking, if it continue divided it cannot
stand; and seeing the strange and miserable condition of our Nation at this
time, may give any considerable man just cause to fear, that as in Rehoboam's
case, so likewise in ours, The thing is of the Lord, intending to bring his
heavy judgment upon us, for our great sins, and our stupid, and stupendous
security in sinning, and to make us instruments of his designed vengeance, one
upon another; peradventure it would be a seasonable and necessary motion to be
made to our King and his Nobles -- To revive this old Proclamation of the King
of Nineveh, and to send it with authority through His Majesty's dominions, and
to try whether it will produce some good effect: Who can tell if God will turn
and repent, and turn away from his fierce anger, that we perish not? Who can
tell, whether he that has the hearts of King and People in his hand, and
turns them whithersoever he thinks best, may not upon our repentance take
our extremity for his opportunity, and at last open our eyes that we may see
those things that belong to our peace, and show us the way of Peace, which
hitherto we have not known: but this by the way; For my purpose, I observe,
That this Repentance, which, when the sword of God was drawn, and his arm
advanced for a blow, stayed his hand, and sheathed his sword again, was not a
mere sorrow for their sins, and a purpose to leave them; nay, it was not only
laying aside their gallantry and bravery, and putting on sackcloth and sitting
in ashes, and crying mightily unto God, of which yet we are come very short:
but it was also, and that chiefly, their universal turning from their evil way,
which above all the rest was prevalent and effectual with God Almighty: for so
it is written, And God saw their works that they turned from their evil way,
and God repented him of the evil that he said he would do, and he did it not.

In the Gospel of S. Luke, cap. 24. The condition of the new Covenant, to which
remission of sins is promised, is expressed by the word (...). -- Thus it
behoved Christ to suffer, and to rise from the dead, and that ((...))
Repentance and remission of sins should be preached in his name. Which place,
if ye compare with that in the Gospel of S. Matthew. Go teach all Nations
baptizing them in the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the
Holy Ghost, teaching them to observe all whatsoever I shall command you; It
will be no difficulty to collect, that what out Savior calls in one place
(...), repentance, that he calls, in another, Observing all that he has
commanded; which, if repentance were no more but sorrow for sin, and intending
to leave it, certainly he never could, nor would, have done: And as little
could S. Paul, Act. 20.21. profess, that the whole matter of his preaching was
nothing else but (...), Repentance toward God, and Faith in our Lord Jesus
Christ: It being manifest in his Epistles, he preaches and presses every where,
the necessity of mortification, regeneration, new, and sincere obedience, all
which are evidently not contained under the head of Faith; and therefore it is
evident he comprised all these under the name of Repentance.

In which words moreover it is very considerable, as also in another place,
Heb. 6. where among the fundamentals of Christianity the first place is given
to (...), I say, it is very considerable, that though the word may not very
absolutely be rendered Repentance; yet we shall do much right to the places, and
make them much more clear and intelligible, if instead of repentance, we should
put conversion, as it is in some of the best Latin Translations: So, for
example, if instead of repentance to God, Act. 20. and repentance from dead
works, in the Epistle to the Heb. which our English tongue will hardly bear; we
should read conversion to God, and conversion from dead works, every one sees,
it would be more perspicuous and more natural; whereas, on the other side, if,
instead of repentance, we should substitute sorrow (as every true genuine
interpretation may with advantage to the clearness of the sense, be put in
place of the word interpreted), and read the place sorrow toward God, and
sorrow from dead works, it is apparent that this reading would be unnatural,
and almost ridiculous: which is a great argument, that (...), to which
forgivenes of sins is promised in the Gospel, is not only sorrow for sin, but
conversion from sin.

And yet if it be not so, but that Heaven may be purchased at easier, and
cheaper rates: how comes it to pass, that in the New Testament, we are so
plainly, and so frequently assured, that without actual, and effectual
amendment, and newness of life; without actual, and effectual mortification,
regeneration, sanctification; there is no hope, no possibility of Salvation.

Every tree that brings not forth good fruit is hewn down and cast into the
fire. So S. John Baptist preaches repentance. Matthew. 3.9.
It is not then the leaves of a fair profession, no nor the blossoms of good
purposes and intentions, but the fruit, the fruit only, that can save us from
the fire; neither is it enough not to bear ill fruit, unless we bring forth
good. Every tree that brings not forth good fruit is hewn down and cast into
the fire.

Not every one that says unto me, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the Kingdom of
Heaven, but he that does the will of my Father which is in Heaven: So our
Savior, Matthew. 7.21. And again, after he had delivered his most divine
Precepts in his Sermon on the Mount, (which Sermon contains the substance of
the Gospel of Christ:) he closes up all with saying: He that hears these
sayings of mine, and does them not, (and yet these were the hardest sayings
that ever he said) I will liken him to a foolish man, which built his house
upon the sand, (that is, his hope of Salvation, upon a sandy and false ground)
and when the rain descended, and the floods came, and the winds blew, and beat
upon that House, it fell, and great was the fall of it.

They that are Christ's have crucified the flesh with the affections and lusts:
So S. Paul, Gal. 5.24. They then that have not done so, nor crucified the flesh
with the affections and lusts, let them be as sorrowful as they please, let
them intend what they please they as yet are none of Christ's, and, good Lord!
What a multitude of Christians then are there in the world that do not belong
to Christ?

The works of the flesh, Gal. 5.19, 20, 21.
says the same S. Paul, are manifest, which are these, Adultery, Fornication,
Uncleanness, Lasciviousness, Idolatry, Witchcraft, Hatred, Variance,
Emulations, Wrath, Strife, Seditions, Heresies, Envyings, Murders,
Drunkenness, Revellings; of which I tell you before, as I have told you in
times past, that they which do such things shall not inherit the Kingdom of
God. He does not say, they which have done such things shall not be saved, but
manifestly to the contrary, -- Such were some of you, but ye are washed, but ye
are sanctified; but he says; they which do such things, and without amendment
of life shall continue doing them, shall not be excused, by any pretense of
sorrow and good purposes. They shall not inherit the Kingdom of Heaven.

And again in another Epistle, Know ye not, that the unrighteous shall not
inherit the Kingdom of God? Be not deceived, neither Fornicators, nor
Idolaters, nor Adulterers, nor abusers of themselves with mankind, nor
Thieves, nor Covetous, nor Drunkards, nor Revilers, shall inherit the Kingdom
of God.

In Christ Jesus (says the same S. Paul, in other places) nothing avails but
faith: nothing but a new creature: nothing but keeping the Commandments of
God; it is not then a wishing, but a working faith; not wishing you were a new
Creature, nor sorrowing you are not, but being a new creature; not wishing you
had kept, nor sorrowing you have not kept, nor purposing vainly to keep, but
keeping his Commandments must, prevail with him.

Follow peace with all men, and holiness, (says the Divine Author of the
Epistle to the Heb.) without which no man shall see the Lord.

Saint Peter in his second Epistle, commends unto us a golden chain of
Christian perfections; consisting of these links, Faith, virtue, knowledge,
temperance, patience, godliness, brotherly kindness, charity: and then adds, --
He that lacks these things, is blind, and knows not that he was purged from
his old sins. Let his sorrow be never so great, and his desires never so good,
yet if he lack these things, he is blind; and was purged from his old sins, but
is not.

Lastly, St. John; He that has this hope purifieth himself, even as he is
pure, the meaning is not with the same degree of purity, for that is
impossible, but with the same kind, the same truth of purity, he that does not
purify himself may, nay does, flatter himself, and, without warrant, presume
upon God's favor, but this hope he has not; and again, Little Children, let
no man deceive you, he that does righteousness, is righteous, even as he is
righteous; And thus you see all the divine Writers of the New Testament, with
one consent, and with one mouth, proclaim the necessity of real holiness, and
labor together to disinchant us, from this vain fancy, That men may be
saved, by sorrowing for their sin and intending to leave it, without effectual
conversion and reformation of life; which, it may well be feared, has sent
thousands of souls to hell, in a golden dream of heaven.

But is not this to preach works as the Papists do? No certainly, it is not;
but to preach works as Christ and his Apostles do: it is to preach the
necessity of them, which no good Protestant, no good Christian ever denied; but
it is not to preach the merit of them, which is the error of the Papists.

But is it not to preach the Law in time of the Gospel? No certainly, it is
not: for the Law forgives no sins, but requires exact obedience, and curses
every one which from the beginning to the end of his life, continues not in
all things which are written in the Law to do them; but the Gospel says, and
accordingly I have said unto you, that there is mercy always in store, for
those who know the day of their visitation, and forsake their sins in time of
mercy, and that God will pardon their imperfections in the progress of
holiness, who miscall not presuptuous and deliberate Sins by the name of
Imperfections; but seriously and truly endeavor to be perfect: Only I forewarn
you that you must never look to be admitted to the wedding feast of the Kings
Son, either in the impure rags of any customary sin, or without the wedding
garment of Christian holiness; only I forewarn you, that whosoever looks to be
made partaker of the joys of heaven, must make it the chief, if not the only,
business of his life, to know the will of God, and to do it; that, great
violence is required by our Savior for the taking of this Kingdom, that the
race we are to run is a long race, the building we are to erect is a great
building, and will hardly, ^ery hardly be finished in a day; that the work we
have to do of mortifying all vices, and acquiring all Christian virtues, is a
long work; we may easily deferr it too long, we cannot possibly begin it too
soon. Only I would persuade you, and I hope I have done it, that that
Repentance which is not effectual to true and timely Conversion, will never be
available unto eternal Salvation. And if I have proved unto you, that this is
indeed the nature of true Repentance, then certainly, I have proved withal,
that that Repentance wherewith the generality of Christians content themselves,
notwithstanding their great professions what they are, and their glorious
protestations of what they intend to be, is not the power but the form; not the
truth but the shadow of true Repentance; and that herein also we accomplish St.
Paul's prediction, Having a form of godliness, etc.

And now what remains, but that (as I said in the beginning) I should humbly
entreat, and earnestly exhort every man that has heard me this day, to confute
in his particular, what I have proved true in the general; To take care that
the sin of formality, though it be the sin of our times, may yet not be the sin
of our persons, that we satisfy not our selves with the shadows of Religion,
without the substance of it, nor with the form of godliness without the power
of it.

To this purpose I shall beseech you to consider, That though sacrificing,
burning incense, celebrating of set festivals, praying, fasting, and such like,
were, under the Law, the service of God commanded by himself; yet whenever
they proceed not from, nor were joined with, the sincerity of an honest heart;
he professes frequently almost in all the Prophets, not only his scorn and
contempt of them all, as fond, empty, and ridiculous; but also his hating,
loathing, and detesting of them as abominable and impious.

The Sacrifice of the wicked is abomination to God, Prove. 15.8. What have I to
do with the multitude of your Sacrifices? says the Lord, Esaias the first, I am
full of the burnt offerings of Rams, and of the fat of fed beasts, when ye come
to appear before me, who required this at your hands? Bring no more vain
oblations: Incense is an abomination to me, I cannot suffer your new moons, nor
sabbaths, nor solemn days, it is iniquity even your solemn assemblies: My soul
hates your new moons, and your appointed feasts, they are a burden to me, I
am weary to bear them; and when you shall stretch out your hands, I will hide
mine eyes from you, and though you make many prayers I will not hear, for your
hands are full of blood.

And again, Isa. 66.3. He that kills an Ox is as if he slew a man, be that
sacrifices a Lamb as if he cut off a Dogs neck, he that offers an Oblation
as if he offered Swines-flesh, he that burns incense as if he blessed an
Idol; and what is the reason of this strange aversion of God from his own
Ordinances? it follows in the next words, They have chosen their own ways, and
their soul delights in their abominations.

Terrible are the words which he speaks to the same purpose in the prophecy
of Amos, chap. 5. v. 21, 22, 23. I hate, I despise your feast days, and I will
not smell in your solemn assemblies, though you offer me burnt offerings and
meat offerings, I will not accept them, nor will I regard your peace offerings.

Now, beloved, if this hypocrisy, this resting in outward performances were so
odious to God under the law, a religion full of shadows, and ceremonies;
certainly it will be much more odious to do so under the Gospel, a religion of
much more simplicity, and exacting so much the greater sincerity of the heart,
even because it disburdens the outward man of the performance of Legal rites
and observances. And therefore if we now under the Gospel, shall think to
delude God Almighty, as Michol did Saul, with an Idol handsomely dressed instead
of the true David; if we shall content and please our selves, with being of
such or such a Sect or Profession; with going to Church, saying, or hearing of
Prayers, receiving of Sacraments, hearing, repeating or preaching of Sermons,
with zeal for Ceremonies, or zeal against them; or, indeed, with any thing
besides constant piety toward God, Loyalty and obedience toward our
Sovereign, justice and charity toward all our Neighbors, temperance,
chastity, and sobriety toward our selves, certainly we shall one day find,
that we have not mocked God, but our selves, and that our portion among
Hypocrites shall be greater than theirs.

In the next place, let me entreat you to consider the fearful judgment which
God has particularly threatened to this very sin of Drawing nigh unto him with
our lips, when our hearts are far from him: It is the great judgment of being
given over to the spirii of slumber and security, the usual forerunner of
speedy desolation and destruction, as we may see in the 29 Chap. of Isaiah,
from the 9 to the 14 verse. Stay your selves and wonder, cry ye out, and cry,
They are drunken but not with wine, they stagger but not with strong drink: for
the Lord has powered out upon you the spirit of deep sleep, and has closed
your eyes. The Prophets, and your Rulers, the Seers has he covered: and after,
at the 14 verse, The wisdom of their Wisemen shall perish, and the
understanding of their Prudent-men shall be hid. Certainly, this judgment if
ever it were upon any people, we have cause to fear it is now upon us. For, if
the spirit of deep sleep were not upon us, How could we sleep so securely even
upon the brink of the pit of perdition? How could we proceed on so confidently
in our mirth and jollity, nay, in our crying sins and horrible impieties; now
when the hand of God is upon us, and wrath is gone out and even ready to
consume us? and if the wisdom of our Wisemen were not perished, How were it
possible they should so obstinately refuse the security offered of our Laws,
Liberties, and Religion, by the King's Oath, by his Execrations on himself, and
his posterity, in case he should violate it; by the Oaths of all his Ministers
not to consent to, or be instruments in, such a Violation; by the so much
desired Triennial Parliament, from which no transgressor can possibly be
secure; and instead of all this security, seek for it by a Civil War, the
continuance whereof, must bring us to destruction and desolation, or else He
has deceived us by whom we are taught, That a Kingdom divided against it self
cannot stand.

Now what was the sin which provoked this fearful judgment? What but that
which I have labored to convince you of, and to dissuade you from, even the
sin of Hypocrisy; as we may see at the 12 verse, Wherefore says the Lord, for
as much as this people draw near me with their mouth, and with their lips do
honor me, but have removed their heart far from me; and their fear toward me
is taught by the precepts of men: therefore, behold, I will proceed to do a
mavelous work amongst them; for the wisdom of their Wisemen shall perish,
etc.

Consider, Thirdly, what woes, and woes, and woes our Savior thunders out
against the Scribes and Pharisees for their Hypocrisy, Woe be unto you Scribes,
and Pharisees, Hypocrites; and again and again, Woe be unto you Scribes, and
Pharisees, Hypocrites: Beloved, if we be Hypocrites as they were, Tithe mint and
cumin, and neglect the weighty matters of the Law, judgment, and justice, and
mercy, as they did: Make long prayers, and under a pretense devour Widows
houses, as they did: Wash the outside of the dish and platter, while within we
are full of ravening and wickedness; write God's Commandments very large and
fair upon our Phylacteries, but shut them quite out of our hearts: Build the
Sepulchers of the old Prophets, and kill their successors: in fine, if we be
like painted Sepulchers, as they were, outwardly garnished and beautiful, but
within full of dead men's bones and rottenness; we are then to make account that
all these woes belong to us, and will one day overtake us.

Consider, lastly, the terrible example of Ananias and Sapphira, and how they
were snatched away in the very act of their sin, and that their fault was (as
the Text tells us) that they lied unto God. Beloved, we have done so a thousand
thousand times: our whole lives (if sincerely examined) would appear, I fear,
little less but a perpetual Lie; hitherto God has been merciful to us, and
given us time to repent; but let us not proceed still in imitating their fact,
lest at length we be made partakers of their fall.

God of his infinite mercy prevent this in every one of us, even for his Son
our Savior Jesus Christ's sake; by whom and with whom, in the unity of the
holy Spirit, be all honor and glory to the eternal Father, world without end:
Amen.

The Second Sermon.
PSALM XIV. 1. The Fool has said in his heart, There is no God.


IF you will turn over some few leaves, as far as the 53 Psalm, you shall not
only find my Text, but this whole Psalm; without any alteration, save only in
the fifth verse, and that not at all in the sense neither. What shall we say?
Took the holy Spirit of God such especial particular notice of the sayings and
deeds of a Fool, that one expression of them would not serve the turn? Or, does
the babbling and madness of a Fool so much concern us, as that we need to have
them urged upon us once and again, and a third time in the 3d. of the Romans?
Surely not any one of us present here, is this Fool: Nay, if any one of us
could but tell were to find such a Fool as this, that would offer to say,
though in his heart, There is no God; he should not rest in quiet, he should
soon perceive we were not of his faction.

2. We! that are able to tell David an Article or two of faith, more then ever
he was acquainted with! Nay more: Can we, with any imaginable ground of reason
be supposed liable to any suspicion of Atheism, that are able to read to David
a Lecture out of his own Psalms, and explain the meaning of his own Prophecies,
much clearer then himself, which held the pen to the holy Spirit of God? Though
we cannot deny, but that in other things there may be found some spice of folly
and imperfection in us: But it cannot be imagined, that we who are almost
cloyed with the heavenly Manna of God's Word, that can instruct our Teachers,
and are able to maintain Opinions and Tenants, the scruples whereof not both
the Universities of this Land, nor the whole Clergy, are able to resolve; that
it should be possible for us ever to come to that perfection and excellency of
Folly and Madness, as to entertain a thought, that there is no God: Nay, we are
not so uncharitable as to charge a Turk or an Infidel with such an horrible
imputation as this.

3. Beloved Christians, be not wise in your own conceits: If you will
seriously examine the 3d. of the Romans (which I mentioned before) you shall
find that St. Paul, out of this Psalm, and the like words of Isaiah, does
conclude the whole posterity of Adam (Christ only excepted) under sin and the
curse of God: which inference of his were weak and inconcluding, unless every
man of his own nature, were such a one as the Prophet here describes; and the
same Apostle in another place expresses, Even altogether without God in the
world; i. e. not maintaining it as an opinion which they would undertake by
force of argument to confirm, That there is no God: For, we read not of above 3
or 4 among the Heathens, that were of any fashion; which went thus far? But
such as, though in their discourse and serious thoughts they do not question a
Deity, but would abhor any man that would not liberally allow unto God all his
glorious Attributes; yet in their hearts and affections they deny him; they
live as if there was no God, having no respect at all to him in all their
projects, and therefore indeed, and in God's esteem, become formally, and in
strict propriety of speech, very Atheists.

4. That this is most true, and that therefore many, who, because they are
Orthodox in opinion, have thereupon a great conceit of their faith toward God;
yet, being strictly exam^ned, shall be found to have built such glorious
buildings in show upon Sand; or, which is worse, to have made hay and stubble
(matter fit only for the fire) foundations of many golden hopes, and glorious
presumptions, must be showed at large hereafter.

5. The words now read, are a secret confession which the Fool whispers to his
own heart: He neither can nor dare profess this openly, and when he calls his
reason to counsel about this business, the question is far otherwise stated.
The words do not run thus, The Fool being convinced by evidence of reason and
demonstration, has concluded, There is no God; no, this is no Heathenish
Philosophical fool, he is quite of another temper: This is a worldly, proud,
malicious, projecting wise fool, a fool that knows it is for his advantage to
put God out of his thoughts; and therefore does forcibly captivate, and
wilfully hoodwink his understanding, and thinks he has obtained a great
victory, if he can contrive any course to bring himself to that pass, that no
cold melancholy thoughts of God or Hell, may interrupt or restrain him from
freely wallowing in the lusts and uncleanness of his heart, without any
remorse, without any reluctance or griping within him. It is for his Heart's
sake, the love that he bears to the lusts thereof, that makes him an Atheist:
If it could stand with that course and trade of life that he is resolved upon,
to entertain contrary thoughts, he would as soon work his judgment and thoughts
another way. And therefore in his open profession, it sometimes falls out, that
even when he wishes there were no God, yet he is a very forward zealous
acknowledger in general of God and his glorious Attributes: So that the same
desire of a quiet and uninterrupted enjoying the scope and freedom of the lusts
and affections of his heart, makes him both a resolute secret Atheist, and
withal wise enough to keep his folly to himself, and to make none else
acquainted with his curious art and method of such woeful self-deceiving, but
his dearly beloved Heart. The Fool, etc.

6. The discussion of these words, does not engage me to a dividing or
descanting upon the whole Psam: Let it suffice, that we may most probably
conceive, that David in this Psalm intends the description of the woeful estate
of that Kingdom, after God had taken away his good Spirit from Saul; wherein
the secret Enemies of God did greedily lay hold on that occasion to vex and
despite, and, as much as was in their power, to lay waste the heritage of God.

7. The Fool (who is the person that through the whole Psalm works all the
mischief), in the Original is, Nabal: which has the signification of fading,
dying, or falling away, as does a leaf, or flower, Isai. 40.8. And is a Title
given to the foolish man, as having lost the juice and sap of wisdom, reason,
honesty, and godliness; being fallen from grace, ungrateful, and without the
life of God: As a dead carcass (which of this word is called Nebalah, Levit.
11.40.) and therefore ignoble and of vile esteem, opposed to the Nobleman,
Isa. 32.5. The Apostle in the Greek turns it imprudent, or without
understanding, Romans 10.19 from Deuteronomy. 32.21.

8. Has said in his Heart, There, etc. i. e. Not so much persuades himself in
secret, that there is no God; But rather expresses so in his life, or in his
affections, which are called the Heart, in the phrase of God: proportionable to
the same expression of David, Psalm. 10.4.
Psalm. 10.4. The wicked through the pride of his countenance will not seek
after God, God is not in all his crafty purposes. If you would have the full
sense of my Text more largely expressed, Tit. 1.16.
turn to Tit. 1.16. where persons of the same mould that the Prophet here
complains of, are thus described, They profess that they know God, but in works
they deny him, being abominable, and disobedient, and to every good work void
of judgment.

9. Where are observable First, the cause of this Practical Atheism, in these
last words of the verse, They were to every good work, (...), and that was
Ignorance, or rather Imprudence, Inconsiderance: Implying not a bare want of
knowledge; but an abusing thereof, in not reducing it to practice, in hiding the
light which was in them under a bushel. Secondly, Then we have the manner of
the expression of this Atheism, viz. not in words, or opinion, to deny God;
but, which is worse, in the carriage and course of our life; to allow him his
Attributes, and yet not to fear him, not to stand in awe of his power, which he
acknowledges to be infinite, to distrust his Providence, to slight his
Promises, neglect his Threatenings, which is in effect, as much as in him lies,
to tear and ravish from him all his glorious Attributes, by living, as if God
himself were less powerful, less wise then himself, improvident, not deserving
so much fear of his power, or respect to his command, as he would perform to a
wretched mortal man, that is a little richer, or in some place of Authority
above him.

10. I need travel no further for a division to my own Text: Here we may
observe likewise, First, The cause of Atheism, and by consequence, Nabal, The
Fool: Secondly, We have the expression of it, not by word of mouth, per motum
cordis, by the inclination of the heart, or affections.

11. In the prosecution of the former part (which may very well take up and
spend this Hourglass) I shall proceed thus: First, And there I will show you,
The extreme folly for a man to seek to increase his knowledge of his Master's
will, without a desire and resolution

12. Now I take it for granted, that I have hit right in declaring wherein the
folly of Nabal in my Text consists, namely, in an unfruitful knowledge, a
knowledge that lies fallow, is not exercised: which if it were not allowed me, I
would only referr my self for proof unto some of David's Psalms, and almost all
his Sons Proverbs: I should sin against the plenty of matter in my Text more
worth our consideration, if I should enlarge my self in this point: Only one
place of David shall suffice, and that is in Psalm. 111.10. where he repeats
that old divine Proverb made by God himself, Psalm. 111.10.
the Lord knows how long since, and by him delivered to man, as Job tells us,
chapter 28. v. 28. The Psalmists words are these, The fear of God is the beginning
of wisdom, and a good understanding have all they that do thereafter.

13. I do not now exclude Ignorance from making up some part of this Fool; but
because the other piece of extreme desperate folly is rather the sin of these
days, namely, a barren uneffectual Knowledge; Therefore I shall rather insist
upon it: Yet, by the way, I shall not fail to discover to you the danger of the
other too.

14. It is a pretty Observation, that the Author of the Narration of the
English Seminary founded in Rome, has concerning the Method and Order the Devil
has used in assailing and disturbing the peace and quiet of the Church, with
Heresies and Schisms,: He began (says he) with the first Article of our Creed,
concerning one God the Father Almighty, Creator of Heaven and Earth, against
which in the first 300. years he armed the Simonians, Menandrians, Basilidians,
Valentinians, Marcionites, Manichees, and Gnostics. After the 300th year he
opposed the second Article, concerning the Divinity of our Lord Jesus Christ,
by his beloved Servants the Noetians, Sabellians, Paullians, Photinians* and
Arrians: After the four hundredth year he sought to undermine the fourth, fifth,
sixth, and seventh Articles of the Incarnation, Passion, Resurrection,
Ascension, and the second coming to Judgment, by the Heresies of Nestorius,
Theodorus, Eutyches, Dioscorus, Cnapheus, Sergius, etc. After the eight hundred
and sixtieth, he assailed the eighth Article concerning the Holy Ghost, by the
Heresy and Schism of the Greek Church: Lastly, since the year one thousand,
till these times, his business and craft has especially expressed it self in
seeking to subvert the ninth and tenth concerning the Holy Catholic Church,
and forgiveness of sins, by the aid and Ministry of the Pontificians,
Anabaptists, Familists, and the like; And with the deceipts and snares of these
his cunning Ministers has he entangled the greatest part of the now Christian
world.

15. But (our blessed and gracious God be praised for it) we, and some with us,
have escaped as a Bird out of the snare of the Fowler, the Net was broken and
we were delivered. The whole Doctrine of Christian Faith is restored to the
Primitive luster and integrity: Nay more, (which is a greater happiness then
God ever created to those his chosen good servants which lived in the Infancy
of the Church) the profession of a pure unspotted Religion is so far from being
dangerous, or infamous, that we have the Sword of the Civil Magistrate, the
power and inforcement of the Laws and Statutes, to maintain this our precious
Faith without stain and undefiled against all Heretical and Schismatical
oppugners thereof.

16. If ever we forget the goodness and mercy of God in this our deliverance;
then let our tongues cleave to the roof of our mouths; Nay, if in our Songs of
joyfulness and melody we remember not our escape, wherewith the Lord snatched
us out of Egypt, and our victorious passage through a Red Sea of Blood and
Ruin, Thou O Lord wilt not hear our prayers.

27. It was a seasonable admonition that the Apostle Saint Paul gave to other
Gentiles after such a glorious victory and deliverance as this of our's, Be not
high-minded, but fear. Romans 11.20.
Heresy is not the only Engine that Satan is furnished with to assault and
infest the Church of Christ, neither is it the most dangerous: He has the
cunning to destroy Foundations, and make no use of Heresy in the work neither.
You would wonder how it should be possible for the Devil to make an Orthodox
Christian, one perfect and studied in all the Points of the Creed, and one that
can for a need maintain the Truth thereof against all gainsayers; I say, it
would seem strange for the Devil to make such a one to destroy and utterly
demolish the very Foundations of his Faith, and yet not at all to alter his
opinions neither: Yet, that it is not only a possible contrivance, but too too
ordinary and familiar in these times, woeful Experience has made it evident.

18. The Art and cunning whereby this great work of the Devil's is brought
about, is clearly detected by our Savior in his Exposition of the Parable of
the Sower, in these words, When they have heard, then comes the Devil, and
takes away the Word out of their Hearts, Luke 7.12.
i. e. The Devil will give such people leave freely to hear the Word of God
preached, to study it, dispute it, to know and be acquainted with all the
curious intricate subtilties of it, upon condition that they will promise to
resolve not to be a jot the better disposed for it in their lives. He can well
suffer it to swim in the Brain, that the Understanding should be enlightened,
the fancy affected and pleased with it, so that he may have leave to stop the
secret intercourse and passages thence to the Heart: It troubles him not to
have the precious seed of the Word entertained by a man, so that it may be kept
up safe in Granaries: and not multiply: so that the heart be not plough'd up,
and furrowed for the receiving of it; as long as there is no fruitful Harvest
there, all goes well.

19. He will be so far from hindering such from going to the Church, so that
their errant be to learn what they may be able to talk of, and maintain
discourse with, that he could wish every day were a Sunday for them, that they
might be able by abundance of knowledge, fruitless, and void of practice, to
hasten and aggravate their own damnation.

20. Now whom the Devil thus uses, whom he thus baits, nay, contents and
satisfies with an empty, speculative, aerial knowledge, a knowledge only fruitful
in increasing their guilt, and torment, who can deny to be sottish ignorant,
easy fools, childishly affected with a knowledge, glorious only in show,
without any substance, or depth at all. And yet this was a temptation strong
enough for Paradise; for just so did the Devil entrap Adam at the first; so
that, in him, we have received one foil already, at this weapon: And he
proceeds daily, in acting that over again: For what was it which destroyed
Adam, but the preferring of the Tree of Knowledge, before the Tree of Life?

21. St. James speaking of such persons so ensnared, seems to take much of the
envy and guilt of so cruel a deceit and cousenage as this is, from off the
Devil, Jam. 1.22.
and to lay it upon themselves: Be not hearers of the Word only, but doers
also, deceiving your selves. He confesses such to be fools, cousened and
deceived people; but themselves, says he, are their own cheaters: wherein lies
a strong emphasis, expressing the extreme unhappiness of such poor deceived
wretches. If the cunning insinuation of one, that for his own ends pretends
friendship to me, draw me into some inconvenience, or danger; the world will
think me a fool for being so caught, and not being able to dive and pierce
into his secret purposes; But this folly is not of so perfect a strain, but
that it may deserve both excuse, and pity: But that man that spends his whole
life in contriving and plotting, and laying snares for his own soul; if after
all this ado he be indeed caught in the pit, that with so much pains he dug
only for himself, Would not any man forfeit his discretion, that should either
excuse, or pity him? And in such, or worse a case, is he that contents himself
with bare hearing and knowing the Word.

22. Who do you think would undertake to excuse a Pharisee, if he should be
condemned for want of spiritual wisdom: one whose profession it was, whose
trade and course of life, to be conversant in the Scriptures: who had spent his
age in reading the Holy Writ, and teaching others out of it: One that was so
curious in having the Scripture always near him, that he wore it continually
about him; It was a trimming and ornament to his Apparel; It was always in his
eyes; It was guarded about the wrists of his arms, and instead of a-lace or
fringe at the bottom of his garment. If one after all this curiosity of
dressing, sedulity in reading, industry in teaching, should at length, with so
good parts, in such good clothes go down into Hell, and, so dye for want of
true knowledge; Who would adventure to excuse him, who would dare to pity him?

23. Yet not one, or two, but the whole College, the whole faction of them,
Matthew. 23.
you shall find in Matthew. 23. very near their end. No less then eight woes
denounced against them by our Savior himself, (who is not very forward to
destroy, he came upon a far other business) and all those woes for their folly
and blindness? In the denouncing of every Woe, but one, he styles them
Hypocrites. (And an Hypocrite, you know, is the veryest fool in the world, for
he thinks to cosen and put a cheat upon God, whom yet himself confesses to be
Omniscient, and who knows all things.) In that single woe, he calls them
blind guides, elsewhere Fools, and blind. This was our Savior's judgment of
them, and you may rest upon it, that it was upon sufficient grounds.

24. But their folly and ridiculous madness will yet more appear, if you take
notice of the opinion and judgment that these very Pharisees gave of
themselves. It is in Joh. 7.48, 49. The occasion of it, was this. The great
Council of the Sanhedrin, seeing so many of the ignorant people, (as they
thought) seduced by our Savior; To remedy any further spreading of so
dangerous a contagion, They by common advice send Officers to attach him, and
to make him sure enough for preaching: The Officers find him busy instructing
the people, and, instead of laying hands on him, themselves are even caught,
and almost bereft of their Infidelity: When Sermon was done, they return to
their Masters, the Rulers and Pharisees, without their Prisoner, and give a
good account why they did not fulfill their command, in telling them, they never
heard a better Preacher in their lives, Never man, say they, spoke like this
man. Joh. 7.46.
These wise Magistrates pitying the simplicity and easiness of their Sergeants,
answer them thus; Ver. 47, 48, 49.
Are ye also deceived? Have any of the Rulers, or of the Pharisees believed on
him? But this people who know not the Law, are cursed. Implying, that if the
people had been as well read in the Law of God, as their Teachers were, they
would have kept themselves safe enough from the ensnaring Sermons of Christ:
But now they may see what difference there is between men utterly unacquainted
with Gods Word, and themselves, how subject they are to destruction, and to be
cursed of God.

25. How is it possible, for the wit of man, to imagine folly and madness of a
more perfect strain? Our Savior Christ, who is Truth it self, did not exact
Faith from his followers merely for his Miracles sake, but sent them to search
the Scriptures, For they, says he, testify of me: Joh. 5.39.
And yet these wise men, impute it to their knowledge of the Law, that they were
freed from this curse into which the poor ignorant people fell. How cunningly
have these fooss laid a snare for their own lives?

26. Alas, What could the poor people think, when they heard their Doctors, and
Magistrates, (men that were gods to them, that sat in Moses Chair), condemned
of such extreme folly and indiscretion? What will become of us, (might they
say), if the Pharisees (from whom all that we know, is but a thin thrifty
gleaning) have so many Woes denounced against them for want of spiritual
knowledge?

27. Certain it was, There were many poor souls, whom the Pharisees kept out of
Heaven for company. Our Savior tells them so much; Ye neither go into Heaven
your selves, nor suffer others to go in: But they were such as they had
infected with their Leaven: Such as made those rotten superstructions, which
those great Doctors built upon the Word, foundations of their Faith and Hope:
And as certain it is, that many there were, upon whom God out of his gracious
favor and mercy, had not bestowed such piercing brains, and enquiring heads,
as to make them acquainted with their dangerous Opinions and Traditions. They
were such as made better use of that little knowledge they had, than to vent it
in discourse, or in maintaining Opinions and Tenants against the Church. They
heard the Word with an humble honest heart, submitting themselves wholly to it,
and restored their Faith to its proper seat, the Heart and Affections, and it
was fruitful in their lives and practice. The wisdom of Solomon himself, as
long as he gave himself to Idolarty, and Luxury, was folly and madness, to the
discretion and prudence of these poor despised people.

28. Thus you see, The Fool, that in my Text, is so madd, as to say, There is
no God, may have wit enough to understand more; nay, in the opinion of the
world, may make a silly fool of him, that has laid up in his heart unvaluable
treasures of spiritual wisdom, and knowledge. And therefore the Latin
Translation following St. Paul, might more significantly have styled him
Imprudens, than Insipiens. For the wisdom which is according to Godliness, does
most exactly answer to that Prudence which moral Philosophers make a general
overruling Virtue, to give bounds and limits to all our Actions, and to find
out a temper and mean wherein we ought to walk: And therefore a most learned
Divine, of our Church, yet alive, knew very well what he said, when he desin'd
our Faith to be A spiritual Prudence; Implying, that Faith bears the same
office and sway in the life and practice of a Christian, as Prudence of a moral
honest man.

29. Now, says Aristotle, there may be many intemperate, youthful, dissolute
spirits, which may have an admirable, piercing, discerning judgment in
speculative Sciences, as the Mathematics, Metaphysics, and the like; because
the dwelling upon such contemplations, does not at all cross, or trouble, those
rude untamed passions and affections of theirs: yea they may be cunning in the
speculative knowledge of virtues: But all this while they are notwithstanding
utterly, invincibly, imprudent; because Prudence requires not only a good
discerning judgment and apprehension, but a serenity and calmness in the
passions.

30. Therefore the same Philosopher does worthily reprehend some Ancients, who
called all virtues, Sciences; and said, that each particular virtue was a
several Art: requiring only an enlightening or informing of the Reason, and
Understanding, which any, for a little cost and small painstaking in
frequenting the learned Lectures of Philosophers, need not doubt but easily to
obtain.

31. This conceit, of so learned a man, does very well deserve our prosecution:
And it will not be at all swerving from the business in hand: Therefore I shall
show you, how the Moralist by the force of natural Reason, has framed to
himself a Divinity and Religion, resembling, both in method and many
substantial parts, the glorious learning of a Christian. I told you the
forenamed Doctor did very well to call our Faith, or Assent to supernatural
Mysteries, A spiritual Prudence.

32. Now besides moral prudence, nay, before the moralist can make any use
thereof, or exercise it in the work of any virtue, there is required another
general Virtue, which the Philosopher calls Universal Justice, which is nothing
else, but a sobriety and temper in the affections, whereby they are subdued and
captived unto well informed Reason. So that whatsoever it commands to be done,
there is no rebellion, no unwillingness in the Passions, but they proceed
readily to execution, though it be never so distasteful to sense.

33. Now how well does this express the nature of Charity: for, What else is
Love, but a sweet breathing of the Holy Spirit upon our Passions, whereby the
Holy Ghost does, as it did in the beginning of Genesis, incubare aquis, move by
a cherishing, quieting virtue, upon the Sea of our Passions? Did not the same
Spirit come to Eliah in a soft whisper? He walks not in Turbine, in a strong
wind to raise a Tempest in our Affections. Now when we have received this
ipsissiman Dei particulam, (as Plato said of the Soul) this shred or portion of
the Holy Spirit, which is Charity, how evenly and temperately do we behave our
selves to God, and all the world besides? How willingly and obediently do we
submit our selves to the performance of whatsoever Faith, out of Gods Word,
does enjoin us?

34. But yet the Analogy and proportion between these two is more evident and
observable: That Universal Justice is no particular singular virtue, neither
has it any particular singular object. (As other virtues have; For example,
Temperance, or Abstinence, which has to do with sensual delights and
pleasures, and none else.) But when it is determined to, and fastens on, the
object of a particular virtue, it is converted into, and incorporates with that
very virtue: for example, If I do exercise this general Habit of observing a
mean and temper, in things that concern diet, or sensual pleasures, it becomes
Abstinence; if upon objects of terror, it becomes Fortitude, or Magnanimity:
Just so is it with Charity. For,

35. Charity is a virtue which never goes alone, and is busied in solitary
places, being reserved, and excluded, from the society and communion of other
Graces; But it is that which seasons, gives life and efficacy to all the rest;
without which, if it were possible for me to enjoy all the Graces that the
bountiful hand of God ever showred upon reasonable Creature; yet, if St. Paul
speak truth, I should be nothing worth: It is that which fulfils all the
Commandments: This is evident to all that shall but slightly and in haste
read over 1 Cor. 13. beginning with verse. 4. and so onwards: 1 Cor. 13.4, etc.
where we may behold almost all the virtues that can be named, enwrapped in one
virtue of Charity; and Love, according to the several Acts thereof, changed and
transformed into so many several Graces. It suffers long, and so it is
Longanimity; It is kind, and so it is Courtesy; It vaunteth not it self, and so
it is Modesty; It is not puffed up, and so it is Humility; It is not easily
provoked, and so it is Lenity; It thinks no evil, and so it is Simplicity; It
rejoices in the Truth, and so it is Verity; It bears all things, and so it is
Fortitude; It believes all things, and so it is Faith; It hops all things,
and so it is Confidence: It endures all things, and so it is Patience; It never
fails, and so it is Perseverance.

36. You see two glorious and divine Virtues, namely, Faith and Charity, though
not naturally expressed, yet pretty well counterfeited by the Moralist. And to
make up the Analogy complete, we have the third Royal virtue, which is Hope,
reasonably well shadowed out in that which they call Inten^io Finis: which is
nothing else but a fore-tasting of the happiness which they propose to
themselves as a sufficient reward for all their severe and melancholic
endeavors.

37. What shall we say, (my beloved Friends), Shall the Heathenish Moralist,
merely out of the strength of natural Reason, conclude, that the knowledge of
what is good and fit to be done, without a practice of it upon our affections,
and outward actions, to be nothing worth, nay, ridiculous and contemptible? And
shall we, who have the Oracles of God; nay, the whole perfect will of God fully
set down in the holy Scriptures, in every page almost whereof, we find this
urged and pressed upon us, That to know our Masters will, without performing,
it, is fruitless unto us; nay, will intend the heat, and add virtue and power
to the lake of fire and brimstone; reserved for such empty unfruitful
Christians: and shall we, I say, content our selves any longer with bare
hearing and knowing of the Word, and no more? God forbid, Rather let us utterly
avoid this holy Temple of God: Let us rather cast his Word behind our backs,
and be as ignorant of his holy Will as ever our forefathers were: Let us
contrive any course to cut off all commerce and intercourse, all communion and
acquaintance with our God, rather then when we profess to know him, and
willingly to allow him all those glorious Titles and Attributes by which he
has made himself known unto us in his Word, in our hearts to deny him, in our
lives and practices to dishonor him and use him despightfully.

38. It were no hard matter, I think, to persuade any, but resolved hardened
minds, that Fruit is necessary before any admission into heaven, only by
proposing to your considerations the form and process of that Judgment, to
which you every man in his own person, must submit. The Authors word may be
taken for the truth of what I shall tell you: for the story we receive from his
mouth that shall be Judge of all, and therefore is likely to know what course
and order himself will observe.

39. In the General Resurrection, when sentence of absolution, or condemnation,
shall be passed upon every one according to his deserts, Knowledge is on no side
mentioned: but one, because he has clothed the naked, and fed the hungry, and
done such like works of Charity, he is taken; and the rest, that have not done
so much, are refused: Will it avail any one then to say, Lord, we confess, we
have not done these works, but we have spent many an hour in hearing and
talking of thy Word; nay, we have maintained to the utmost of our power, and to
our own great prejudice, many Opinions and Tenants: Alas! we little thought,
that any spotted imperfect work of ours was requisite, we were resolved that
for working thou had done enough for us to get us to heaven: Will any such
excuses as these serve the turn? Far be it from us to think so.

40. If you will turn to Matthew. 7.22. you shall find stronger and better
excuses then these to no purpose: Mat. 7.22.
Many shall say unto me, (says Christ), Lord, have not we prophesied in thy
Name? These were something more then hearers, they had spent their time in
preaching and converting souls unto Christ, (which is a work, if directed to a
right end, of the most precious and admirable value, that it is possible for a
creature to perform): And yet whiles they did not practice themselves what they
taught others, they became Cast-aways. Others there were, that had cast out
Devils, and done many miracles; And yet so loved the unclean spirits, that
themselves were possessed withal, that they could not endure to part company
then, and now were never likely.

41. But have not I all this while mistaken my Auditory? Were not these
Instructions fitter for the Universities? Had it not been more fit and
seasonable for me to have instructed and catechis'd mine hearers, rather than
to give them cautions and warnings, lest they should abuse their knowledge? No
surely! Instructions to make use of knowledge in our practice and conversation,
and not to content our selves with mere knowing, and hearing, and talking of
the mysteries of our Salvation, cannot in the most ignorant Congregation be
unseasonable. Even the Heathen which were utter strangers from the knowledge of
Gods ways, did notwithstanding render themselves inexcusable, for deteining
some part of the Truth* as it were, naturally ingrafted in them, in
unrighteousness. So, that there is no man in the world, but knows much more
then he practices, every man hides some part, at least, of his Talent in a
Napkin, wherefore let every man, even the most ignorant that hears me this day,
search the most inward secret corners of his heart for this treasure of
knowledge, and let him take it forth, and put it into the Usurers hands, and
trade thriftily with it, that he may return his Lord his own with increase,
Blessed is that servant whom his Lord when he comes shall find so doing:
Verily I say unto you, he shall make him Ruler over all his Household.

42. And thus I have gone through one member of my First General, namely, the
consideration, wherein the Imprudence of the Fool in my Text does consist. In
the prosecution whereof, I have discovered unto you, how severally Satan plants
his Engines for the subversion of the Church; In the Primitive times, when
Religion was more stirring and active, and Charity in Fashion, He assayed to
corrupt men's understandings with Heresies; and there, by the way, was observed
his order and method, how distinctly beginning in those first times with the
first Article he has orderly succeeded to corrupt the next following, and now
in these last days, he is got to even the last end of the Creed. But since, by
the mercy and goodness of God, we are delivered, and stand firm in the Faith
once delivered to the Saints; he has raised another Engine against us that
stand, and that is To work, that our Orthodox Opinions do us no good; which he
performs by snatching the Word out of our Hearts, and making it unfruitful in
our Lives: Now those that are thus enveagl'd and wrought upon, are merely
befooled by the Devil, or rather by themselves, for so I told you, that Saint
James says: And for an example, I proposed the learned Pharisees, who for all
their learning and knowledge in the Scripture, yet our Savior denounces eight
several Woes against them for being Fools and blind Guides. So that the Fool in
hand was not opposed to a Learned man, but to a Prudent man: And therefore a
worthy Doctor of our Church did well define Faith to be A spiritual Prudence,
that is, a knowledge sought out only for practice. And there I compared Faith
with moral Prudence, and the fruit thereof Charity with the virtue of Universal
Justice. Therefore lest the very Heathen should rise up in judgment against us
for not doing so much with the help and advantage of Gods Word as they could
without it; I did, and do, beseech you not to content your selves with mere
knowing and hearing, with only a conceit of Faith without Works, for that was
an ancient Heresy in the Nicolaitans, (whom God, by name, professes an Hatred
to, as Eusebius tells us.) And for an effectual motive, I told you, how at the
last great Trial, you shall not be catechis'd, How well you can say your Creed,
or how many Catechisms without Book, but, How fruitful in works of Charity your
Faith has been. And so I come to the second member of the First General,
namely, the consideration how dangerous and grievous a burden Knowledge will be,
where it is fruitless and ineffectual: of which, briefly.

43. I will once again repeat that divine sentence of the Psalmist in Psalm.
111.10. The fear of God is the beginning of wisdom, Psalm. 111.10.
and a good understanding have all they that do thereafter. i.e. Till a man put
his knowledge in practice he is so far from being a good man, that he is scarce
a man, has not the understanding of a man till he do, till he fall a work; he
was wiser a great deal before he gained his knowledge: Knowledge alone is a
goodly purchase in the mean time. It is so worthy a purchase, that, as it
should seem by our Saviors account, till a man have obtained some competency
in knowledge, he has gotten no right to the Kingdom of Darkness and Hell.

44. For certainly, no man can justly challenge damnation, but he that is
burdened with Sin: Now he that has no knowledge, but is utterly blind in his
understanding, has no sin, that is, in comparison; the words are ( Joh. 9.39,
etc.) And Jesus said, for judgment I am come into this world, Joh. 9.39, etc.
that they which see not might see, and that they which see might be made
blind; Not as if Christ did imprint, or inflict, blindness upon any man, but
only occasionally, that is, those which walk in darkness, and love it: when the
light comes upon them, and discovers their wandering, they hate it, and turn
their eyes from it, and become more perversely and obstinately blind. In the
same sense that St. Paul says, ( Romans 7.) Sin taking occasion by the Law
becomes more sinful; whilst sin is not opposed, it goes on in its course
quietly; but when the Commandment comes and discovers and rebukes it, it
becomes furious and abominable, and much more raging and violent.

45. There follows, Verse. 40.
And some of the Pharisees which were with him, heard these words, and said
unto him, Are we blind also? There is nothing in the world, that a Pharisee can
with less patience endure than to hear any intimation given, that he may be
suspected of folly: And therefore they were not so sensible, or conceited of
some wrong received, when our Savior called them Generation of Vipers, as they
are when their wisdom and discretion are called in question. Witness this
answer; when no man spoke to them, they suspiciously demand, whether Christ in
his last words meant them or no. But what answers our Savior?

46. Jesus said unto them: Verse. 41.
If ye were blind, ye should have no sin; but now ye say, We see, therefore
your sin remains. As if he had said, So little shall this supposed knowledge
and wisdom, that ye have, profit you, that you shall curse the time that ever
you saw the holy Word of God, and wish that all the Sermons that ever you
heard, all the gracious Invitations and sweet Promises which God by the
ministry of his Servants the Prophets, has sent unto you, had been sentences
of some horrible death and torments, from the mouth of a severe Judge. For, your
sins, which otherwise had not been so insupportable, now by your abusing the
knowledge which God has given you, by your wilful contempt of those many
invitations, which have continually sounded in your ears, are become as a
Mountain upon you to crush you into powder: You have hanged a Millstone about
your own necks, which shall irrecoverably sink you into the bottomless
comfortless pit, whereas otherwise there might have been some hope of escape.

47. And yet for all this, let not any one favor and cherish himself in this
conceit, That, he thanks God, he is ignorant enough, that a very little
practice will serve his turn, his knowledge is not so much that it should put
him to too great a labor in expressing it in the course of his life: For
whosoever he be that dares entertain, or give way to such a thought as this is,
Let him be sure that if he do not know so much as God requires at his hands,
(especially now that God has sealed up the Scripture-Canon, now that the whole
Will of God is revealed) this very ignorance alone will be a thousand weights,
to fasten him on the earth, to make him sure for ever ascending to God, in whom
there is no darkness at all.

48. For it is not so with an ignorant man, as it is with one that is blind,
who, if he will be sure not to tempt God by venturing and rushing forward in
paths unknown unto him, may live as long and as safe as he that is most
quick-sighted: No, Ignorance alone, though it be not active and fruitful in
works of darkness, is crime enough. For with what color of reason will such a
one expect the reward of the Just? Such a one will not doubt, but that the
Gates of Heaven are barred against the sottish blind ignorant Heathen, to whom
God never revealed any part of his Will; yet himself may fare well enough. Is
not this a degree beyond madness it self? What? does such a one think, that
because he lives among religious people, and such as are well acquainted with
the way to Heaven, that himself shall be sure to go for company? Does he make
no doubt of his part in the Resurrection of the Just, because he was born in
England, or in such a year of our Lord when the Gospel flourished? Nay, shall
it not be much more tolerable for the worst of the Heathen than for a such a
man?

49. For if the Heathen were left without excuse, because they knew not God,
or, if they knew him, they did not honor him as God, whereas they were only
instructed by the Book of Nature: The very main Principle of all Religion,
namely, That there is a God, was a business of great labor, and required a
good understanding to find out, being a Conclusion to be collected and deduced
from many experiments of his power, providence, and the like. Shall those hope
to escape, that pretend ignorance, after they may, if they refuse it not, have
use of all that ever Reason found out; nay, have before their eyes the sum and
effect of all the Sermons and Instructions, that ever any Prophet or Apostle
made since the world began: If after all this, there be any safety to be hoped
for from Ignorance, then have the Apostles traveled, Christ preached, nay
died, in vain.

50. But to return to our business in hand. Knowledge, at least, in some measure
there must necessarily be, else no hope of Salvation: And with Knowledge, there
must of necessity be joined some proportionable measure of Practice, else a
greater and more insupportable burden of woe and destruction. And the reason is
evident out of those words of our Savior, To whom much is given of him shall
much be required. We must know, that there is not any good thing in the world
wherein we have any propriety; We are only Stewards, and have such things
committed to our trust, and one day there will certainly be exacted a strict
account. As of our riches, health, education, but much more our knowledge, and
especially that knowledge, which is perfected only in practice, such is the
wisdom of a Christian.

51. What reason can be imagined why God should take such pains, give such
royal and precious graces to his Servants the Prophets and Apostles to enable
them to make known his good will and pleasure, and what he commands us, and
expects at our hands, Was all this performed, think we, to afford us only
matter of Table-talk? Does he exhort and persuade us to hear and discourse? No
surely, He gave it us to profit withal, both our selves and others. And
therefore where there is a more abundant plenty of knowledge lent us, the Bill
of Account must arise proportionably, or for what is wanting in the sum, we
remain debtors; and when once the Creditor catches us by the throat and casts
us into Prison, there is no coming out, till all, even the uttermost Farthing,
be discharged: he might as well have said Never, for it comes all to one end.

52. It will be worth our consideration, and very material, to press this so
necessary a point, to take notice of the nature and fashion of the Judgment,
which shall befall the Fool in my Text, and such companions of his, as are
content to enjoy a fruitless in-effectual knowledge, how fit and suitable it is
to their offense. You shall find it expressed in Luke 13.25, etc. in these
terms. Luke 13.25.
Many in that day shall begin to say, We have eaten and drunk in thy presence,
and thou have taught in our streets: This is something more then hearing
Sermons, or learning Catechisms by heart. These had heard him preach, nay, were
familiarly acquainted with him, and yet in that day will get but a comfortless
answer from him in the following verse, Verse. 26.
But he shall say, I tell you, I know not whence you are; Depart from me ye
workers of Iniquity. St. Matthew has it more sharply, I never knew you. They
might else have imputed his not knowing them to the weakness of his memory: But
he stops that conceit, and professes* He never knew them: i.e. He denies not,
but he had often seen them at Sermon when he preached, and, it may be, he had
eaten and drunk with them, yet for all this, He never knew them; they were
strangers to him, he never acknowledged them to be his flock, and therefore was
not bound to take notice of them: But there is one will own them, even Satan,
whom before they acknowledged for their Lord; and to his Kingdom they may, nay
they must, go.

53. Are not these men right served? are not they justly and righteously dealt
withal? They had eaten and drunk in his presence, it is true; Nay,
peradventure, they had eaten him and drunk him in his Sacrament: They had often
heard him preach in their streets, and could for a need repeat a good deal of
the substance of his Sermons: But, in very deed, they never knew him, nor one
word that ever he spoke: that is, they took no especial notice of him, they did
not acknowledge him for their Lord, neither cared they to perform any thing that
he commanded. And now he is quit with them, He remembers well enough what kind
of people they were, even his very Enemies and Deriders; and as he never did
acknowledge them for his sheep, so neither now will he admit them into his sold.
A most righteous, yet withal, a most heavy doom.

54. And here I will briefly end my other member of the First General, namely,
how dangerous and heavy a burden Knowledge will be, where it is fruitless and
ineffectual. Where you have heard how poor and worthless a purchase Knowledge
alone is; nay, how without it, a man has scarce any title at all unto Hell,
there is no guilt without it; Alone it is a good qualification, a fair towardly
disposition toward our ruin. Our Savior professes that the Pharisees
themselves, (A Nation, the very proverb of perverseness and infidelity) if they
had been blind, i.e. without knowledge, they had had no sin. Yet for all this,
though Knowledge be so dangerous a ware (it is something like Gunpowder; a man
when he has it must take heed how he uses it): yet this is by no means a
sufficient excuse for any one utterly to neglect the purchase of it, at least,
in some measure: For it is true, Knowledge not used, or ill used, will aggravate
our torment, and adds even fire unto Hell: Yet withal, it is true, that an
utter neglect of all Knowledge, especially, in these times of light, when it is
to be had at so cheap a rate, will make damnation as sure to a man as the
former. Now the reason, why Knowledge, where it is fruitless in practice, will
be abundantly fruitful in torment, is taken from that maxim of our Savior, To
whom much is given, of him shall much be required. i. e. We being only Stewards
of Gods blessings, no proprietaries in them, must expect one day to give
account of them all, but especially Knowledge, which is a Ware of the chiefest
Trade. Now where there are great receipts, and no disbursements, the debt must
needs be exceeding great; and when once the Sergeant has arrested us for it,
The Lord knows when we shall pay it. The last thing that I proposed to your
thoughts, was the suitableness of the punishment that will attend such an
offense: For the Fool, in my Text, when he would give himself leave to think,
knew well enough that there was a God, and that all his love and service was
due to him: But these were melancholic thoughts, and such as would hinder him
in the prosecution of his designed projects, and therefore he put them far
from him: So that, in effect, and in Gods account, he was utterly ignorant of
him, did not, at all know him. Just so shall they be served: Christ knows all
the world better then any man knows his own heart: Yet in that great day he
shall prove to be a very stranger, utterly ignorant of the greatest part of the
world, though many of them had been his acquaintance here; nay, though through
faith, in his power, they had unawares by wonders and miracles, brought many to
Heaven, and had been good helpers to destroy the Infernal Kingdom, whereof
before they were in Affection, and now for ever must, indeed, be Inhabitants.

55. There remains the other main General, which is, indeed, the substance of
the whole Text, namely, the fruit of this folly, and that is, Atheism, not in
opinion, but practice: In the prosecution whereof, I shall mainly insist upon
this, to demonstrate, by infallible deductions out of Gods Word, that men who
profess Religion, and a perfect Knowledge of God, yet whiles they allow him only
the Brain, and not (what he only desires) the Heart and Affections, may prove,
in Gods account, very Atheists. Or, to bring it nearer home, I will show how
that many, the ordinary courses, and the most incontrouled practices, of men of
this age do utterly contradict, and formally destroy the very Foundations and
Principles of the glorious Religion which they profess. But this will require a
much longer time then your patience can allow me: Therefore I will only add
some few words of Application, of what has been spoken, and so conclude.

56. That Jewel which our Savior so magnifies, ( Matthew. 13.) and so commends
the wisdom of the Merchant for selling all, even utterly undoing himself to
purchase it, is the Gospel of the Kingdom of Heaven. Which though it be of most
precious and inestimable value, worthy the selling of the whole world to buy
it, yet is every man's money, every man has riches enough to adventure upon it,
so he will but sell all that he has, so he will be content to turn bankrupt for
it, and upon no other terms can he have it.

57. That advice which Christ gave the rich young man, that had a good mind to
follow him, viz. that he should sell all that he had, and take up his Cross,
was not any extraordinary unusual trial, but we have all accepted the same
offer upon the very same conditions: We must of necessity sell all, deny and
renounce the keeping and possessing of any thing besides this Pearl; We must
even sell our selves, deny and renounce our own souls, they are both become
Gods own, and we are but borrowers of them: Now if we be not Masters of our
goods, nor of our selves, neither then may we do our own actions, we must not
think our own thoughts. They were such Fools as this great notorious one in my
Text, who in Psalm. 12. say, Our tongues are our own, we may say what we list.
We are all bought with a price; yea all that we have, is bought.

58. Yet though we must sell all, and deny our own selves, yet we need not part
with our goods, or riches, we need not make away our selves. For example: when
our Savior says, He that hates not Father and Mother, and Brethren, and
Sisters, and all the world besides, for my Names sake, and the Gospels, is not
worthy of me: This speech does not bind me to hate, persecute, and destroy all
the kindred I have; no, but rather to love and honor them, to spend, and be
spent for them: Yet if those persons, or if it be possible for ought else, to
be more dear and precious then they, stand in my way to hinder me from coming
to Christ; then it is time for me to hate them, then I must trample them under
my feet. So that a man is no more bound to sell his Goods, that is, to throw
them away, than he is to hate his Parents; Only neither of them may by any
means offend us, or annoy us, in our journey to Christ.

59. Now to bring this home to our purpose. Can any face be so impudent, as to
profess he has already sold all, himself to boot, and is ready to part with
them when God shall call for them, who contents himself only with knowing and
hearing Stories of him, and reserves his heart to his own use, which is all
that God requires? Can he with any reason in the world be said to sell all for
the Gospel of Christ, that sees Christ himself every day almost hungry, and
does not feed him; naked, and does not clothe him; in prison, and does not
visit him? For in as much as they do not these offices of Charity to his beloved
little ones, they deny them to him. Will he be found to be worthy of Christ,
that for his sake will not renounce one delightful sin, which a Heathen would
easily have done, only for the empty reward of fame? That for his sake will not
forgive his Brother some small injury received; nay, perhaps some great
kindness offered as a seasonable reproof, or loving disswasion, from sinning?
That for his sake will not undergo the least trouble in furthering his own
Salvation?

60. Far from us (beloved Christians) be so barren a Profession, a Profession
having only the vizzard and form of Godliness, but denying the power thereof.
No let us with thankful hearts, and tongues, recount and consider, what God
has done for our souls, how he has given us his Word, abundantly sufficient
to instruct us. How he has spoke the word, and great is the multitude of
Preachers. Yet withal, let us consider, that it is in our power to turn these
unvaluable Treasures of Gods favors into horrible curses. Let us consider how
God has sent out his Word, and it will not return unto him empty, it will be
effectual one way or other, it will perform some great work in us. God does but
expect what entertainment it finds upon earth, and will proportion a reward
accordingly on them which detain the truth; in unrighteousness he will rain
snares, fire, and brimstone: But to such as with meek hearts, and due reverence
receive it into good ground, and express the power thereof in their lives,
there remains an exceeding eternal weight of Joy and Glory. Let us therefore
walk as children of the light; and not content our selves with a bare empty
Profession of Religion: Let him that but names the Name of the Lord, depart
from Iniquity. Brethren, consider what I say, and the Lord give you
understanding in all things. To God, etc.

The Third Sermon.
PSALM XIV. 1. The Fool has said in his heart, There is no God.


I Will not be ashamed to be so far my own Plagiary, as, for your sakes, that
you may be the better able to go along with me in what remains of this Text,
briefly to discover unto you, how far I have already, in another Auditory,
proceeded in it.

2. First therefore, I conceived (by attending to the there is no God, For even
among the very Heathens, we read not of above three or four, of any account,
which have proceeded to this excelling degree and height of Impiety.

3. But this Person (whether Doeg the Edomite, or whosoever he were), is such a
one, as though, in his Profession, and even serious thoughts, Psalm. 10.4.
Psalm. 10.4.) in all his crafty purposes.

4. I yet willingly confess, that this, Saying in the Heart, There is no God,
may reasonably be interpreted to be a secret whispering-suggestion, an inward
persuasion, by fits, which a wretched worldling may have, that, since he has
thrived so well by his carelessness in observing Gods Word, and obstinate
opposing himself to his will, it may be possible there is indeed no God at all;
or, if there be, that he will not vouchsafe to descend so low, as to take
notice what is done here on earth, or to observe how each particular person,
behaves himself in this life. Now, because I will not set up one of these
Expositions against the other* I will hereafter, as occasion shall offer it
self, make use of them both.

5. Having therefore conceived the sense of the Text to be such as I have now
told you; Nabal, i. e. The Fool, which is, Folly; i. e. Ignorance, or rather,
Incogitancy, Inconsideration. Secondly,

6. The Second General Part: which is the effect and fruit of the folly, or
inconsideration of Nabal, (the Fool) in my Text, which is Atheism practical,
not of the Understanding, but the Will and Affections. But, the time being
spent in the prosecution of the former General Part, I was forced to reserve
this Second General, to be the employment of another Hour.

7. Only thus much, I then made promise of; (which debt I purpose now to
discharge to you) namely, To demonstrate by infallible deductions out of Gods
Word, that many, who profess Religion, and a perfect knowledge of Gods Word, yet
whiles they allow him only the Brain, and not (what he almost only requires)
the Heart, and Affections, may prove in Gods account very Atheists. Or to bring
it nearer home, I promised to show, how that many the ordinary courses, and
most incontrouled practices of men of this age, do utterly contradict, and
formally destroy the very Foundations and Principles of that glorious Religion
which they profess. Of these, etc.

8. At the first sight, indeed, a man would think, that of all the places in
Holy Scripture, and of all the ages which have been since the world began, That
this Text, and these times, should suit worst together: For first, if a man
would strive with all the carnestness, and even spite, he could, in all the
abominable odious colors to describe the worst of all humane creatures, even
the Idolatrous, self-devouring Indians, What more horrible expression could he
imagine to himself, then to call them Fools, and such Fools, who say in their
Heart, There is no God. Again, if we shall enquire and ask the former Ages, if
ever the world was so stored, and even oppressed with knowledge: They will tell
us, That the Light was never a burden, nor Knowledge a vice before now: Never
till now did all sorts and conditions of men pretend to be able to state the
most intricate profound questions of our Religion. Never till now was Moses his
wish fulfilled, I would to God, that all the people of the Lord were Prophets:
though in a sense which would scarce have pleased him.

9. These things considered, were it not fit (think you), that I should
renounce my Text, or travel to find out a Nation whom it may concern, and who
have need to hear Atheists condemned? I would to God, (my Beloved Brethren),
that whatsoever I shall speak against that fearful sin of Atheism, may prove
vain unprofitable words, words which may return empty, having found none to
fasten upon: I would to God, that I might strive now, as one that beats the
air, so that you, (even you, who know so much) were innocent. But David found
this a Doctrine fit to be pressed in his days, which were none of the worst
neither: Yea, he has a second time, (in Psalm. 51.) almost in terminis
terminantibus, repeated whatsoever he here speaks of the Atheist: We find not
such an example through the whole Scripture, (except it be in a History, or
where the quotation is mentioned.) Therefore surely it may be pertinent, and
sometimes useful even in the Church to have Atheism discovered, to have this
Doctrine preached and re-preach'd: it was so in David's times: and it shall go
hard, but we shall show, that we our selves, (though never so wise and learned
and knowing in our own opinion): yet that we also ought not to take it to
heart, if sometimes we be suspected and challenged of Atheism:

10. That Temptation which the Devil found hard enough for himself, even when
he was an Angel of Light, namely, Ero similis Altissimo; I shall be like the
most Highest: Now that it is his Office, and employment, to become a Tempter,
He has since scarce ever varied: At the first exercise of his Trade, with his
first customers, Adam and Eve, he begun with it, Ye shall be as Gods, knowing
Good and Evil. And if we shall unpartially examine our own thoughts, we shall
find almost in every suggestion, at least, some degree and tincture of Atheism:
either we do exalt and Deifie our own selves, or else we do dishonor, and, in
a manner, degrade Almighty God, deposing him from that sovereignty and sway
which he ought to exercise in our Hearts and Consciences.

11. This, I say, is true in some measure, in all temptations, in all sins
whatsoever, there is some quantity of Atheism, though the sins be but of an
ordinary size and rank: But this is not that which I would now stand upon: It
concerns me, to show, that though men be never so Orthodox in their Opinions,
though they pretend to never so much zeal of the Truth, which they profess, yet
unless that Divine Truth be powerful and persuasive enough to the performance
and practice of such Duties, as bear a natural resemblance and proportion unto
it: They that make such a Profession of Gods Truth, do but flatter themselves,
they only think they believe, but indeed, and in truth, there is no such thing
as Faith in them. For, we must know, that there is no Divine Truth so utterly
speculative, but that there naturally and infallibly flows and results from it
(as necessarily as warmth from light) a Duty to be practiced and put in
execution: Insomuch, that it is impossible for a man to be truly persuaded of
the one, but he shall infallibly be persuaded to the other: 1 John 2 4.
So that he which says, He knows God, and keeps not his Commandments, is
a Liar, and the Truth is not in him. And this I shall endeavor to confirm by
Induction, examining the truth and reality of our assent to the chief
Fundamental. Points of our Religion, by our practices answerable thereto, and
concluding, that where the latter is not to be found, it is but a vain
persuasion and fantastical illusion for a man to think he has the former.

12. But in the first place, that we may be the better able, and without
interruption proceed in this designed course, I will first remove an Objection,
which may seem to prevail against that which has been spoken: to this effect:
Jam. 11.19.
The Devils (as Saint James says), believe and tremble: They do indeed assent
unto the Truth of all the mysteries of our Salvation: In the place of St.
James, they acknowledge One God: In Matthew. 8.28. they acknowledge the second
Article of our Faith, allowing Christ to be Son of God. And the like may be
said of the others following; And yet if we examine their practice: How
absolutely contradicting and warring is it with their profession? Therefore, it
may seem, that where there is a firm assent to Divine Truths, there may consist
with it a contrary repugnant practice.

13. For answer therefore we must know, Heb. 11.1.
the promises of God shall be Yea and Amen, they shall infallibly attain those
joys which exceed man's understanding to comprehend: Yet, these things to them
are only as a Tale which is told; or rather they are to them occasion of
horror and gnashing of Teeth, that there should be such glorious comfortable
things, which do nothing concern them, and of malice and hatred to those who
have an interest in them, and are in a fair possibility of attaining unto them:
And therefore no marvail if such a Faith as this be barren and unfruitful of
Good Works. Whereas our Faith (says St. Paul) is the substance of things hoped
for, of things which concern us, we do not only acknowledge, that the Precepts
of God are good, but also necessarily to be performed by us: and that the
promises of God are not only desirable in themselves, but also that being
such, they were revealed for our sakes, and are infallibly destined unto us,
when we shall have performed such conditions as may by the assistance of God be
executed by us, even with ease and pleasure: Now wheresoever such persuasions
as these are, it is impossible (even if the Devils themselves could be supposed
capable of them) but that there should accompany them earnest and serious
endeavors not to come short of the Glory of God. This difficulty therefore
being dissolved, I shall pursue the examination of our belief of the
Foundations of our Religion, by the fruits and issues of it in the practices of
our lives.

14. We will begin with some of Gods Attributes: Whosoever thou art, that
professest thy self a Christian, thou believe, that God whom thou servest is
present every where, both in Heaven and Earth, insomuch, that it is altogether
impossible for thee to exclude him from thy company; wheresoever thou go, he
will pursue thee: Though thou should cloth thy self with darkness, as it
were with a garment, the darkness would be to Him as the Noonday: And though
it were possible for thee to deceive the eyes and observation of Men and
Angels, yea, even of thine own Conscience, yet to him thou would be open and
transparent; (...), as it were, Dissected, and having thy very Entrails exposed
to his sight.

15. Thou can hide therefore nothing which thou do from his eyes, he
takes notice of every word which thou speak, he hears even the very
whispering of thy thoughts: And all this, thou say, thou acknowledgest. Out
of thy own mouth shall thou be condemned, thou wicked Servant: Dare thou then
make thy Master a witness of thy Rebellion and Disobedience? When thou art
about the fulfilling of any of thine ungodly lusts, thou retirest thy self from
company, and art afraid of the faces of men; thou abhorrest the light: And yet
dare outface him whose Eyes are ten thousand times brighter then the Sun.
Thou would not have the confidence to commit filthiness, if thy friend were
in company: And yet, what injury is done to him by it? what Commandment of his
do thou transgress in it? Or if thou did, What power, or authority, has he
over thee to punish thee? Thou would be ashamed to commit such a sin, if thy
Servant were by, one whom thou art so far from being afraid of, that himself,
his words, almost his very thoughts, are in thy power: Nay, if a child were in
company, thou would not have the face to do it.

16. Thou can not deny, but respect to a friend, to a servant, even to a
child, will withold thee from such practices, and yet withal confessest,
that Almighty God, whom thou professest, to serve, to fear, and to love, that
he all the while looks upon thee, and observes thee; his Eyes are never removed
from thee, and which is worse, though thou may endeavor to forget, and
blot, such actions out of thy remembrance, yet it is impossible he should ever
forget them: He keeps a Register of all thy sins, which no time shall ever be
able to deface: And what will it then profit thee to live a close concealed
sinner from the world, or to gain amongst men the reputation of a devout
religious Christian, when in the mean time thine own Heart and Conscience shall
condemn thee; Nay, when Almighty God who is greater then thy Heart, and knows
all things, when he shall be able to object unto thee all thy close ungodly
projects, all thy bosom private lusts; yea, when that conceit (wherein thou
did so much please thy self) of being able to delude and blind the
observation of the World shall nothing avail thee, but whatsoever mischiefs
thou have contrived in thy Closet; whatsoever abominations thou have practiced
in thy. Bed; all these, with each aggravating Circumstance, shall be discovered
in the presence of all men, and Angels, and Devils: when Satan, whom before
thou made an Instrument and Bawd unto thy lusts, to whose counsels and
suggestions thou before would only hearken, shall be the most forward and
eager to appeach thee.

17. When thou art brought to such an exigent as this (which, without a timely
unfeigned repentance, as sure as there is a God in Heaven, thou shall at last
be brought to) what will then they orthodox opinions do thee good? what will it
then profit thee, to say, Thou never did maintain any impious dishonorable
Tenants concerning God, or any of his glorious Attributes? Yea, how happy had
thou been, if worse than the most ignorant heathenish Atheist, no thought or
consideration of God had entered into thy heart? For this professing thy self a
Christian rightly instructed in the knowledge of God, will prove heavier to
thee than a thousand milstones hanged about thy neck, to sink thee into the
bottom of that comfortless Lake of fire and brimstone? For, for example: What
a strange plea would it be, for a Murderer to say, I confess I have committed
such or such a murder; but all the excuse which I can allege for my self, is,
that I was well studied in the Laws which forbad murder, and I knew that my
Judge who tied me to the observance of this Law, upon pain of death, was
present, and observed me when I committed the Fact: Surely it would be more
tolerable for him to say, I never heard of any such Law or Judge; or if I have
been told of such things, I gave but little heed to the report, I did not at
all believe it. For though this plea will be very insufficient to acquit the
malefactor; yet it will be much more advantageous than the former: for what
were that, but to flour the Judge to his face, and to pretend a respectful
worthy opinion of him, for this end, that his contempt and negligence in
performing his Commandments, may be more extreme and inexcusable; and by
consequence, without all hope or expectation of pardon. I need make no
application of the example, the Similitude does sufficiently apply it self.

18. Therefore it I were to advise any man who is resolved by his practice to
contradict that opinion which he says he has of God; or, that is not resolved
to live with that reverence and awfulness due to the Majesty of Almighty God,
in whose presence he always is; I would counsel him not to believe himself,
when he professes the Omnipresence, or Omniscience of God: For without all
contradiction, though by living in a Nation where every one with whom he
converses, professes so much, he may have learned to say, There is a God, and
that this God is every where present; and takes particular notice of whatsoever
is done in heaven and earth: yet if this Notion were firmly rooted in his soul,
as a matter of Religion, as a business upon which depends the everlasting
welfare of his soul and body; it is altogether impossible for him to continue
in an habitual practice of such things as are evidently repugnant and
destructive to such a conceit. For tell me, Would any man in his right senses,
when he shall see another drink down a poison which he knows will suddenly
prove mortal unto him; I say, will any man be so mad as to believe such a one,
though he should, with all the most earnest protestations that can be imagined,
profess that he is not weary of his life, but intends to prolong it as long as
God and Nature will give him leave?

19. The Case is altogether in each point and circumstance the same: For he
which says, He believes or assenteth to any doctrine, as a fundamental point
of his Religion, intends thus much by it, that he has bound himself in certain
bonds unto Almighty God (for so the very name of Religion does import) to
expect no benefit at all from him, but upon condition of believing such divine
Truths as it shall please him to reveal unto him, namely, as means and helps of
a devout religious life and worship of him: For God reveals nothing of himself
to any man for this end, to satisfy his curiosity, or to afford him matter of
discourse or news; but to instruct him how he may behave himself here in this
life, that he may attain those promises which shall be fulfilled to those who
sincerely and devoutly serve and obey him.

20. Therefore he that shall say, I believe such a Truth revealed by God, and
yet lives as if he had never heard of such a thing; yea, as if he had been
persuaded of the contrary; is as much to be believed, as if he should say, I
will drink a deadly poison to quench my thirst, or will stab my self to the
heart, for physic, to let out superfluous blood: So that that man who is not
resolved to break off his wicked courses by repentance, and conversion unto
God; that lives as if the Devil only were every where, and he resolved to
please and delight him with his ungodly life; let not such a one use himself to
say, I believe that God is always present with me, and a spectator of my
actions; for thereby, he shall only add a lie to the rest of his sins, and
fuel to the lake of fire and brimstone: He shall never persuade God to believe
him, that he was of such an opinion; but that whatsoever his tongue said, and
his fancy now and then apprehended, yet in his conscience he was always a
constant resolved Atheist, and in his heart he said, There is no God.

21. In the second place, thou acknowledgest, that God whom thou professest
obedience to, is infinitely Righteous; insomuch that it is impossible that he
should not hate and abhor unrighteousness in whomsoever he finds it: Yea, so
natural and essential is his Justice unto him, that he should deny himself, if
he should accept any man's person, if he should not be avenged on sin, if he
should not most severely punish it. Thou can not be ignorant how many vows
and protestations he has made almost every where through the Holy Scripture,
of his hatred and indignation against sin, insomuch, that heaven and earth may
pass away, but not one jot or tittle of those curses and plagues shall fall to
the ground, which he has denounced against impenitent sinners.

22. And shall not thy own mouth here once again condemn thee, O thou wicked
servant? Dare thou then every hour wilfully, and even contentedly do such
things, as must certainly procure his anger and indignation against thee for
ever? Will thou, for the sinful pleasure of a few minutes, put thy self in such
a condition, that God must of necessity be angry with thee; that he must cease
to be God, unless he hate and abhor thee? Certainly, if thou would descend
into thine own heart, if thou would give thy self leave carefully and
unpartially to examine thy thoughts, thou would find that thy tongue has
given thy soul the lie, when it has told thee, that God is immutably Just and
righteous; and yet for all that, that thou art resolved to run on in such
courses, as must of necessity pull down his heavy displeasure against thee.

23. At least, thou will find in thy heart earnest desires and wishes, that God
were not so righteous as Preachers tell thee he is! Oh, think thou in thy
heart, that God were such an unrighteous person as I am! Oh, that he could be
content to wink at me, when I am about the fulfilling of my ungodly desires!
Alas, what harm is it to him, what inconvenience accrews to him by it, if I
enjoy the sinful pleasures of this life? Or if he will needs be angry, Oh that
it were not in his power to revenge himself upon me! Oh that his power were not
so unlimited as (they say) it is!

24. I know men will be apt to flatter themselves, though they be never so
vicious, and to think that they are extremely wronged, to have such imputations
laid upon them. They will be ready to answer me, in the words of Hazael to the
Prophet Elisha, when he told him what horrible massacres he should commit among
the Israelites, when he should have the Crown of Syria set on his head: What
do thou think us dogs, that we should do such things as these? We are so far
from robbing God of his Justice, that we would be mortal enemies to any that
dare proceed to that height of impiety: Nay, we would be content to sacrifice
our own lives, rather than be brought to deny that, or any other of his
glorious Attributes.

25. Truly, I am so charitably minded, as to think that there is none so
wicked, but would confidently make this defense for himself; yea, and believes
he is in earnest when he speaks so. But this will not serve the turn: For, God
sees not as man sees, he judges not as man judges, but he judges righteous
judgment. For instance, in that great example which our Savior gives of the
fashion and course of judgment, according to which he purposes to proceed in
the last day; He accuses the wicked, and condemns them for neglect of visiting,
and feeding, and clothing, Him. The Apology which they make for themselves, as
having never seen him in that exigence, would not be taken: For, though I am
persuaded they there spoke nothing but what they verily thought, namely, that
if ever they had seen Christ himself in such want and necessity, they would not
have been so hard-hearted to him, as they were to his poor servants: yet Christ
will not allow of that excuse, but accounts of their uncharitableness to
afflicted Christians, as directed to himself.

26. So likewise in the Case in hand. Though I believe it would be hard to
persuade even the most licentious professed sinner, that he believes not indeed
the Justice and righteousness of God; yet he shall find at last, and that
miserably to his cost, that God who knows his heart much better than himself,
for all his professions, will yet esteem him an Atheist; and will prove
evidently and convincingly unto him, that since that knowledge which he
pretended to have of Gods Righteousness, had been so fruitless and superficial,
that notwithstanding such a conceit, he proceeded still on in his ungodly
courses; that therefore he did but delude himself all the while with
fantastical ungrounded illusions; so that whatsoever imagination swim in his
brain, yet in the language of his heart, that is, in the propension and sway of
his affections, he said, There is no God -- Now what has been said of the
Omnipresence, Infinite Knowledge, and Justice of God, may by the same reason
and proportion, be spoken of the rest of his glorious Attributes. But the
straitness of time will force me to leave the rest untouched: I will proceed
therefore to make the like collections from one or two Articles more of the
Creed.

27. Thou believe that after this life (which cannot last very long, it will,
and that shortly, have an end) there remain but two ways for all men of what
stare and condition soever that ever were, to be disposed of, either into life
and glory everlasting, or else into pains and torments infinite and
insupportable. And by consequence, that thy soul is an immortal substance,
which shall for ever continue somewhere: and according to thy behavior here,
during that short measure of time which thou live upon the earth, it must
expect a reward proportionable thereto. If thou can persuade thy self to walk
worthy of that calling whereunto thou art called in Jesus Christ: If thou will
not forswear and renounce that glorious profession which thou made in thy
Baptism: If thou can be content to submit thy self to the easy yoke of
Christ, propose to thy self what reward thou can imagine, give thy thoughts
scope and license to be excessive and overflowing in their desires; if thou art
not satisfied to the uttermost, infinitely above what thou art now able to
comprehend, Tell God he is a liar, and has deceived thee. Oh what unspeakable
joys shall hereafter expect thee? Oh with what a burden and weight of glory
shall thou even be oppressed?

28. But on the other side; If notwithstanding such inestimable blessings as
are now set before thine eyes, thou art yet resolved to content thy self with
such vain trifling pleasures as thou can meet with in this life, which yet
thou can not attain to, but with as much pains, and anxiety, and care; as, if
rightly applied, would have been sufficient to have procured heaven for thee!
What shall I say unto thee? only this, Thou have thy reward: Remember that thou
have already received thy good things. What a terrible affrighting speech is
this? It may be thou have fed and glutted thy lusts with some pleasures of this
life; it may be thou have satisfied in some small measure thy ambition with
honor and preferment; and yet it may be, for all thy cares and travels, thou
have not been able to attain to any of those things as thou did desire;
whether thou have or have not, it is all one, there is little to choose, but
howsoever, Remember that thou have received thy good things; Remember, thou
have thy reward. Do not hereafter presume to offer to pretend to any the least
good from God. It may be hereafter thou may come to such want, as to stand
in need of a cup of cold water; any, it may be thou would think thy self
happy, if any body would afford thee but one drop of water to refresh thy
tongue. But in vain: for, Son, Remember thou have already received thy good
things. Thou never saw beggar so utterly wretched and destitute, but he
might almost every where have filled himself with water, and have thanked no
body for it: and yet though thou should even consume thy self with
entreating, and crying for it, yet none shall be found to give it thee, even
thy liberal good father Abraham will deny it to thee.

29. Surely there cannot be found so impudent, so unreasonable a sinner, as to
profess he is fully persuaded of these things, and that he has a desire, and
even some hope, that God will be so merciful to him, as to perserve him, that
none of those things happen unto him, and yet resolve to follow the devices of
his own heart: To say, He acknowledges that the joys which are reserved for
penitent believers, are so excessively glorious, that the afflictions of this
life are not worthy of them, much less the vain pleasures thereof; and yet
withal, rather then not enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season, to make
himself incapable of those great blessings. Such a generation of men I find in
holy Scripture, and God himself takes notice of them, who say, We shall have
peace, though we walk in the imaginations of our heart: But withal, I can
scarce meet with God so impatient through the whole Bible, as he is with people
of such a temper as this, Surely the Lord will be avenged on such a nation as
this, and will make his fierce wrath to smoke against them.

30. Therefore, whomsoever thou art that have taken up thy resolution, to walk
in the imagination of thine own heart; at least, take so much pity of thy self,
do not thou thy self add violence and heart to the wrath of God, which shall
smoke against thee, by pretending to a belief of Heaven or Hell, or by seeming
to profess, that all the while that thou art busy in the prosecution of thine
ungodly lusts, notwithstanding that, all that time, this opinion has never
left thee, That God will bring thee to Judgment; That even that every body of
thine, which thou made a mansion for the Devil, an instrument for any
wickedness that he would suggest unto thee, yet that that body should be raised
up; that to thy extreme horror and astonishment, God would take such particular
care of that very body of thine, that wheresoever it were lost, he would
recover it, though dispersed to the four winds of heaven, and build it up again
(thou say thou know for what use) even to be a mark against which he will
empty his quivers, and shoot out all darts of his fiery indignation, in the
punishing of whom he will express his Almighty Power.

31. But I cannot allow my self any longer time to prosecute the former part of
my Proposition, viz. to show how much men deceive themselves, who think they
indeed believe the fundamental points of their Faith, when by their practice
and course of life, they live in an habitual exercise of such sins, as are
utter repugnant and destructive to such a belief: And this, I think, I have
performed; but yet only in general terms, not descending to a view of some more
eminent and particular sins and enormities: For that, therefore, which remains
of the time that your patience will allow me, I will spend it in acquitting my
self of the other part of my promise, namely, in instancing in some
extraordinary incontrouled practices of these times; and, discovering how
utterly they do destroy the very grounds and foundations of our Religion, and
how impossible it is they should consist with a true sincere profession of
Christianity.

give me leave to suppose, or put the case, that some one of this company were
guilty of this sin.

33. If I should ask him, Whence and from whom he had his riches or power? whom
he would acknowledge for his benefactour? I make no question, but he would give
me a good religious Answer, and say, That he would not sacrifice to his net,
nor burn incense to his dragge; but that God, who gave a blessing to his cares
and endeavors, had advanced him to such a place and fortunes in the world.
Again, if I should ask him, In what esteem and value (he thought that) God
holds his faithful servants? or, Whether he would take it well, to have them
oppressed and trampled on on by others more potent then themselves? He must
needs answer again, That God is no Accepter of persons, neither riches nor
poverty are a means to procure His favor, but that in all conditions of men,
He that loves righteousness, and hates iniquity, shall be accepted by him.

34. If these be his Answers (as, without all contradiction, unless he will
profess himself an Atheist, such must be the effect of them;) Then, let him
consider, in what a woeful condition he has concluded himself to be in, and,
what reason he has to thank God for his honor or riches? Does he think, that
God has furnished him with strength and weapons for this end, that thereby he
might be able to make war with himself, that he might have the power to
overrun and lay wast those whom God loves as the apple of his own eye? Can he
imagine, that God has been so beneficial and liberal to him, in preferring him
to a rank and degree above others not inferior to him in the riches and
treasures of God's grace, and therefore as dear unto him as himself; for this
end, that thereby he may prove a more able, and fit instrument for the Devil to
wreak his malice and hatred upon those whom God loves?

35. Therefore, if there be ere such a person in this Auditory (yet I hope
there is not); but and if there be! What shall I say unto him? Let him
consider, what a hard task he has undertaken to war against God? Let him
consider, what a strange reckoning he is likely to make unto God, when he shall
at last (as undoubtedly he will) require of him an account of his Stewardship?
Behold, Lord, thou have given me five talents, and what have I done with them?
why, lo, I have made them ten talents. But how, by what courses? Why, I have
unjustly and injuriously robbed and wrung from my fellow servants, those few
talents which thou gave them: I have gained thus much by my violent
maintaining of a cause which thou hatedst, and which my self could not deny but
to be most unjust: This is surely a sore evil under the sun. But, since, I
hope, it little concerns any one here, to have such a crime as this dissected
curiously and purposely insisted upon, it shall suffice me to say, That they
who are guilty of it, are far from knowing of what spirit they are, when they
say, they are Christians, since even a very Heathen would abhor to countenance
or entertain such a vice as this.

How can ye believe (says Christ) who seek honor one of another, and not that
honor which is of God? If these words of Christ be true, That they who too
earnestly desire applause and reputation among men, neglecting, in the mean
time, seriously to endeavor the attaining to the honor which is of God; that
is, obedience and submission to his Commands, which is that wherein a Christian
ought especially to place his honor and reputation: If such men as these, do
in vain, and without all ground of reason, reckon themselves in the number of
true believers: Again, if the chief badge and (...), whereby Christ would have
his servants to be distinguished from the world, be a willingness to suffer
injuries, a desire rather to have the other cheek stricken, and to have the
cloak go the same way with the coat, than to revenge one blow with another, or
to go to Law for a matter of no great moment, for recovering of that which a
man might well enough lose, without endangering his Estate.

37. If these things, I say, be true; Suppose Christ (according to the vision
of Ezekiel) should command his Angels utterly to slay through all Jerusalem,
Ezekiel. 9.5, 6.
that is, the Church, old and young, maids, and little children, and women,
excepting only those upon whom his mark and badge were to be found; what
destruction and desolation would there be? How would the Sanctuary of God be
defiled, and his Courts be filled with the slain? How would many (who now pass,
both in their own and other men's opinions, for good Christians enough) be taken
for Mahomets servants whose Religion it is, by fury and murder, to gain
Proselytes to their abominable profession: Suppose our garments should be
presented to God with the same question that Jacob's Sons sent their Brother
Joseph's, Number haec est tunica filii tui? Is this thy sons coat? Would they not
rather be taken for the skins of savadge Beasts, so unlike are they to that
garment of Humility and Patience which our Savior wore, and which he
bequeathed us in his Legacy.

38. We are so far from seeking that Honor which is of God, from endeavoring
to attain unto, or so much as countenancing such virtues, which God has often
professed, that he will exalt and glorify; such is humility and patiently
bearing of injuries, that we place our honor and reputation in the contrary;
that is counted noble and generous in the worlds opinion, which is odious and
abominable in the sight of God: If thy Brother offend or injure thee, forgive
him, says Christ; if he proceed, forgive him; What? until seven times? I,
until seventy times seven-times. But how is this Doctrine received now in the
world? what counsel would men, and those none of the worst sort, give thee in
such a case? How would the soberest, discreetest, well-bred Christians advise
thee? Why thus: If thy Brother or thy Neighbor have offered thee an injury or
an affront! forgive him? By no means, of all things in the world take heed of
that, thou art utterly undone in thy reputation then, if thou do forgive
him: What is to be done then? Why, let not thy heart rest, let all other
business rest, let all other business and employment be laid aside, till thou
have his blood: what, a man's blood for an injurious passionate speech, for a
disdainful look? Nay, this is not all. That thou may gain amongst men the
reputation of a discreet well-tempered murderer, be sure thou killest him not
in passion, when thy blood is hot and boiling with the provocation; but proceed
with as much temper and setledness of reason, with as much discretion and
preparedness as thou would to the Communion: After some several days
meditation, invite him mildly, and affably, into some retired place, and there
let it be put to the trial, whether thy life or his must answer the injury.

39. Oh most horrible Christianity! That it should be a most sure settled way
for a man to run into danger and disgrace with the world, if he shall dare to
perform a commandment of Christ's, which is as necessarily to be observed by
him, if he have any hope of attaining heaven, as meat and drink is for the
sustaining of his life? That ever it should enter into the heart of a Christian
to walk so exactly and curiously contrary to the ways of God; that whereas he
every day and hour, sees himself contemned and despised by thee who art his
servant, his creature, upon whom he might (without any possible imputation of
unrighteousness) pour down the vials of his fierce wrath and indignation; yet
he, notwithstanding, is patient and long-suffering toward thee, hoping that
his long suffering may lead thee to repentance, and earnestly desiring and
soliciting thee by his Ministers to be reconciled unto him: Yet, that thou, for
all this, for a blow in anger; it may be, for a word or less, should take
upon thee to send his soul, or thine, or, it may be, both, clogged and pressed
with all your sins unrepented of (for thou can not be so wild as to think,
thou can repent of thy sins, and yet resolve upon such a business) to expect
your sentence before the judgment feat of God: wilfully and irrecoverably to
deprive your selves of all those blessed means which God had contrived for your
salvation, the power of his Word, the efficacy and virtue of his Sacraments;
all which you shall utterly exclude your selves from, and leave your selves in
such a state, that it shall not be in Gods power to do you any good. Oh
consider this all ye that fight against God, lest he tear you in pieces, and
there be none to deliver you.

when they who hate and persecute you, shall think they do God good service.
And the time is come, when men think they can give no greater, nor more
approved testimony of their Religion, and zeal of God's Truth, then by hating
and abhorring, by reviling and traducing their Brethren, if they differ from
them in any, though the most ordinary, innocent Opinions: If men accord not
altogether with them, if they run not on furiously with them in all their
Tenets, they are enemies unto God and his Truth, and they can find Scripture
enough to warrant them to disgrace and revile such, to raise any scandalous
dishonorable reports of them, and to poison utterly their reputation with the
World.

An Application to the Communion.

I Have hitherto, as carefully as so short a time would permit (and yet, it may
be, with greater earnestness then you could have been content I should)
searched into the retired corners of our hearts, and there discovered a vice,
which, it may be, you little expected, namely, Atheism: A strange vice, I
confess, to be found in Christian Hearts. I have, likewise, exemplifi'd in some
particular practices of these times, most exactly contrary to our profession of
Christian Religion: If I should endeavor to discover all that might be
observed of this nature, not my hour only, but the day it self would fail me.
Notwithstanding, I am resolved to make one instance more about the business for
which we are met together, namely, The receiving of the blessed body and blood
of our Lord Jesus Christ: I suppose you will all acknowledge with me, that that
is a business of the greatest consequence that a Christian is capable of
performing: I hope I need not to instruct you, how inexcusably guilty those men
render themselves who come with an unprepared heart, with an unsanctified
mouth, to the partaking of these heavenly Mysteries: What art thou (says God
by the Psalmist) that take my word into thy mouth, when thou hate to be
reformed? And if that be so great a crime for a man only to talk of God, to
make mention of his Name, when the heart is unclean and unreformed; with how
much greater reason may Christ say, What art thou that take Me into thy
mouth? what art thou that dare devour my flesh, and suck my blood, that
dare incorporate my flesh and blood into thy self, to make my spotless body
an instrument of thy lusts, a temple for the Devil to inhabit and reign in? To
crucify Christ once more, and put him to open shame? To crucify him so that
no good shall follow upon it, to make the blood of the New Covenant a profane
thing? And thus far, if not deeper, is that man guilty, that shall dare to come
to this heavenly feast with spotted and unclean affections.

The Fourth Sermon.
LUKE IX. 23. -- Let him deny himself.


GOod reason there is, that, according to that excess of value and weight,
wherewith heavenly and spiritual things do surmount and preponderate earthly
and transitory; so likewise the desire and prosecution of them should be much
more contentiously active and earnest, than that of the other: Yet, if men were
but in any proportion so circumspect, and careful in businesses that concern
their eternal welfare, as even the most foolish Worldlings are about riches,
honor, and such trifles, as are not worthy to take up the mind even of a
natural man; We should not have the glorious Profession of Christianity, so
carelessly and sleepily undertaken, so irresolutely and fearfully, nay, cowardly
maintained; I might add, so treacherously pretended and betrayed to the
encompassing of base and unworthy ends, as now it is.

2. To what may we more justly impute this negligent wretchless behavior of
Christians, than to an extreme incogitancy, and want of consideration in us,
upon what terms it is, that we have entered into league with God, and to what
considerable strict Conditions we have in our first initiation at our Baptism,
so solemnly submitted and engaged our selves; without a serious resolute
performance whereof, we have promised by no means to expect any reward at all
from God, but to remain strangers, utterly excluded from the least hope of
enjoying any fruit of those many glorious Promises which it has pleased our
gracious God, so liberally to offer and reach out unto us in our blessed
Savior Jesus Christ.

3. It was no good sign, when the precious seed of the Word was received into
the stony ground with such a sudden Joy. Hearers resembled by that ground, give
good heed to the glorious and comfortable promises, which attend Religion,
without having respect to many troublesome and melancholic Conditions, which
much necessarily go along too* And therefore, when persecution begins, either
within them, when they are commanded to strangle a lust as dear unto them, and
as necessary for their employments, as an eye, or right hand; Or, without them,
when that Profession which they have undertaken becomes offensive or scanda
lous to great men: Then, (as if they had been mistaken in the Purchase, or
deceived by the Preacher,) the joy so suddenly kindled, as soon vanishes, and
they retire themselves home, expecting a more commodious and gainful bargain.

4. Hereupon it is, that our Savior in this chapter spends two Parables, One
of a King preparing for War, The other of a Builder for a House; whereby to
instruct his hearers, what they should do before they did offer to undertake
his service: The sum whereof is this; That if they had any ends and projects of
their own, if they thought to serve themselves upon him, they were much
deceived; that they should deeply, and thoughtfully consider of what weight and
consequence the business was that they were about.

5. There is a Kingdom to be obtained, And a glorious Palace, wherein are to
be erected many fair Mansions to reign in: But it is a Kingdom that suffers
violence, and the violent must take it by force; And it is a Building that will
exact perchance all the means they have, and their whole lives labor to boot:
Wherefore it is good for them to sit down, to send for their friends to
counsel, to question their hearts, whether they have courage and resolution,
and to examine their incomes, whether they will bear the charges to muster
Soldiers for the Conquest, and Laborers for the Building.

6. If they like these large offers, and have means enough for the employment,
and are not unwilling to spare for cost, Let them go on in God's Name: There is
no doubt to be made of an end, that shall fully recompense their losses, and
satisfy their utmost boldest desires, and fill the whole capacity of their
thoughts. But on the other side, unless all these conditions concur, He has so
much care of their credit that he would wish them, not to set one foot further
in the employment, but to betake themselves home, lest, if they should fail in
the business, they should make themselves ridiculous to the world of Scorners:
to whom it would be meat and drink to see some glorious fresh ruins of a
Building left to the fouls and beasts to inhabit; or to see a fierce invading
Army forced to retire them themselves ho me, cooled and content with their
former want and poverty.

Eccl-siastes? And again, that men of low condition are vanity, and men of high
condition (to wit, such, as because they abound with wealth, think that
therefore they are in much better esteem and favor with God then their
Brethen) they are worse than vanity, for as it is Psalm. 62.9. They are a Lie,
Psalm. 62.9.
that is, they are no such things as they take themselves for, they are quite
contrary to what they seem.

8. The answer hereto is not very difficult: For it is true, If we consider our
own abilities such, I mean, as our forefathers have left us, as it is
impossible for us by any worth in our power, to offer at the purchase of
heaven, as to make a new one: yet, such is the mercy of God in Jesus Christ,
that so glorious a Bargain is already made to our hands, the gain whereof will
redound unto us upon very reasonable conditions; Namely, if we can be brought
to acknowledge our own beggarly starved estate, and thereby evacuating our
selves of all manner of worth and desert in our selves, and relying only upon
his mercy which is infinite, submitting likewise our selves to be absolutely at
his disposition without any reservation at all.

9. So that the same unvaluable precious Jewel, which cost the rich Merchant in
the Parable, all his Estate, and had like to have made a young Gentleman in the
Gospel turn bankrupt, may becomes ours, even the poorest and most despised
persons amongst us; if we will be content to part with our totum nihil, all
whatsoever we are, or have: If we can persuade our selves, to esteem pleasure
and profit as dross and dung, when they come in competition with this Pearl? If
we can readily and affectionately hate our dearest friends and kindred, even
tread our Parents under our feet, when they lie in our way unto Christ: If we
can perfectly detest even the most dearest closest lusts and affectionate sins;
Finally, if our own souls become contemptible and vile in our own eyes, in
respect of that glorious Inheritance so dearly purchased for us: Then are we
rich to purchase this Pearl, then are we able and sufficient to go through with
this Building, and strong enough to conquer this Kingdom.

10. Now all this (as must be showed in many more particulars) is properly to
deny our selves, which is a condition that our Savior makes so necessary and
inseparable in every one, that purposes to be any thing the better for Him,
that desires to be found in the number of those that have given up their names
unto him, for says the Text, Jesus said unto them all, If any man will come
after me, let him deny himself. -- Let him --

11. These few words are not conveniently capable of a division; But taking
them in gross, as a Precept or Law delivered by Christ, and which concerns
every man, of what state or condtion soever, that resolves to accept of him for
a Lord and Savior: We will proceed according to the ordinary Method of
expounding a Law: Namely, First, 1. Our own Wisdom or Understanding. 2. Our
Will and Affections. And lastly, our own Desert and Righteousness.


12. Out of this Commandment, then, considered in general terms only, (for so
I shall only handle it in this hours Discourse,) as it is contained in these
two words (...), but two such words, so full and swelling with expression, that
our language can scarce at all, or but faintly, express and render the force
and vigor of them in twenty; I shall observe unto you this doctrinal position;
That it is absolutely, and indispensably required of every man that professes
Christianity; not only utterly to renounce all manner of things that thwart and
oppose Gods will and command, but also resolutely, and without all manner of
reservation, to purpose and resolve upon the denial of whatsoever is in our
selves, or any thing else, how full of pleasure, profit, or necessity soever,
though in themselves indifferent, lawful, or convenient; when they come in
competition with what Christ has enjoined us. Which after I have explained and
confirmed by comparing this law with many other precepts of the same nature in
the holy Scripture, I shall apply unto your consciences by two useful
inforcements. One, taken from the extreme undeniable reasonableness of the
thing here commanded. The other, from the wonderful love and kindness in the
Lawgiver, If any man will come after me, let him do as I have done, even deny
himself, take up his, indeed my cross daily, and so follow me.

13. I told you, I remember, my Text was a Law, and I repent not of the
expression, though, I know not how, since our divinity has been imprisoned and
fettered in Theses and distinctions, we have lost this word, Law; and men will
by no means endure to hear, that Christ came to command us any thing, or that
he requires any thing at our hands, he is all taken up in promise: All those
precepts which are found in the Gospel, are nothing, in these men's opinions,
but mere promises of what God will work in us, I know not how, sine nobis,
though indeed they be delivered in fashion, like Precepts.

14. These, and many other such dangerous consequences do and must necessarily
arise from that new invented Fatal Necessity; A doctrine, that fourteen
Centuries of Christianity never heard of: If we will enquire after the old and
good ways, we shall find the Gospel it self by its own author called a Law:
For thus says the Psalmist in the Person of Christ: Psalm. 2.7.
I will preach the Law, whereof the Lord has said unto me, Thou art my Son,
this day have I begotten thee. And how familiar are such speeches as those, in
our Savior's mouth: This is my command; a new commandment I give unto you; Ye
shall be my Disciples, if ye do those things which I command you. Among the
ancient Fathers, we find not only that Christ is a Lawgiver, but that he has
published Laws which were never heard of before: That he has enlarged the
ancient precepts, and enjoined new; and yet now it is Socinianism to say but
half so much. Clemens Alexandr. (3. (...) in fine) says, that Christ is more
than a Lawgiver, he is both (...), and quotes S. Peter for it.

15. Well then, my Text is a Law, and a preparatory law; it is the voice of one
crying, Prepare the ways of the Lord; let all hills be depressed, and all
valleys exalted. It bears indeed the same office in our conversion, or new
birth, that Aristotle assigns to his Privation in respect of natural
Generation. It has no positive active influence upon the work, but it is
Principium Occasionale, a condition or state necessarily supposed or
prerequired in the subject before the business be accomplished. For, as in
Physical Generation there can be no superinduction of forms, but the subject
which expects a soul must necessarily prepare a room or mansion for it, which
cannot be, unless the soul that did before inhabit there, be dispossessed. So
it likewise comes to pass in our Regeneration; there is no receiving of Christ,
to dwell and live with us, unless we turn all our other guests out of doors.
The Devil, you know, would not take possession of a house, till it was swept
and garnished: and, Dares any man imagine, that a heart defiled, full of all
uncleanness, a decayed ruinous soul, an earthly sensual mind, is a Tabernacle
fit to entertain the Son of God? were it reasonable to invite Christ to sup in
such a mansion, much more to rest and inhabit there?

16. In the ordinary sacrifices of the old Law, God was content to share part
of them with his servants the Priests, and challenged only the inwards as his
own due. And proportionably in the spiritual sacrifices, his claim was, My son,
give me thy heart: He was tender then in exacting all his due. It was only a
temptation, we know, when God required of Abraham, that his only son Isaac
should be offered in holocaustum, for a whole burnt-sacrifice, to be utterly
consumed, so that no part nor relics should remain of so beloved a Sacrifice.
Yet even in those old times, there were whole burnt-offerings; whereby (besides
that one oblation of Christ) was prefigured likewise our giving up our whole
selves, souls and bodies, as a living reasonable sacrifice unto God. And
therefore our Savior Christ (who came to fulfill the Law, not only by his
obedience thereto, but also by his perfect and complete expression of its force
and meaning) does in plain terms resolutely and peremptorily exact from all
them that purpose to follow him, a full perfect resignation of themselves to
his disposing, without all manner of condition or reservation.

17. This was a Doctrine never heard of in the, world before completely
delivered. Never did any Prophet or Scribe, urge or enforce so much upon Gods
people, as is herein contained. Yet in the Evangelical Law, we have it
precisely, and accurately pressed; insomuch, that the holy Spirit of God has
taken up almost all the Metaphors that can possibly be imagined, the more
forcibly to urge this so necessary a Doctrine.

18. We are commanded so perfectly, and wholly, to devote our selves to Gods
service; so earnestly, and resolutely, to undertake his Commands, that we must
determine to undervalue, and despise all earthly and transitory things besides;
nay, from the bottom of our hearts, we must hate and detest all things (how
gainful, or delightful, or necessary soever they seem) if they do in any
measure hinder, or oppugn us in our journey to Christ.

19. We must not so much as look upon Christ, or glance our eyes upon his
glorious mercy, expressed in suffering and satisfying for us (for S. Luke calls
this (...)) but we must resolve to keep them there fixed, and not deign to
think any creature to be a spectacle worthy our looking on; (...), Heb. 12.11.
(says S. Paul) we have no English term that can fully express the force of
this word; for it is not only as we have it translated, looking unto Christ,
but taking off our speculations from other objects, and fastening them upon
Christ, the author and finisher of our Faith.

20. When we have been once acquainted, though but imperfectly, with this
saving knowledge, we must strait bring our understandings into captivity, unto
the obedience thereof; and whatsoever other speculations we have, how
delightful soever they be unto us, yet rather then they should over-leaven us,
and (as Knowledge without charity is apt to do) puff us up, we must with much
greater care and industry, study to forget them, and resolve with S. Paul, to
know nothing, save Jesus Christ and him crucified.

21. When we have had notice of that inestimable Jewel, the Kingdom of Heaven
(so called by our Savior in the Parable) exposed to sale, though our estate be
never so great, our wares never so rich and glorious, yet we must resolvedly
part with all we have; utterly undo our selves, and turn bankrupts, for the
purchasing of it. Hence are those commands, Sell all thou have. And, lest a man
should think, that when the land is sold, he may keep the money in his purse,
there follows, And give to the poor. And such care is taken by the holy Ghost
in those expressions, lest any evasions should be admitted; lest it should
happen that such a Merchant should find no chapman to buy his wates, nor (which
is scarce possible) hands to receive his money, when he would bestow it; it is
further said, Forsake all, leave all: by all means quit thy self of thy own
riches, run away from thy possessions. And if there be any thing yet more dear
unto thee than thy possessions, as necessary as thy clothes, despolia teipsum,
Put off the old man, with his lusts and affections; and though he stick never
so close, tear it from thee, shake off the sin that hangs so fast on.

22. And yet the Holy Ghost proceeds further in a more forcible expression: For
many Heathens have been found, that could persuade themselves to prefer fame
obtained by a Philosophical austere life, before riches, or honors, but every
man loves and cherishes his flesh: Therefore, if there be a lust so
incorporated into thee, that it becomes as useful and necessary as thy right
hand, or eye, yet thou must resolve to be thine own executioner, to deform, and
maim thy self; for what will it profit thee, to go a proper personable man into
hell. Nay, if thy whole body begin to tyrannize over thee, thou must fight and
war with it, and never leave, till thou have brought it into captivity. Then
must thou use it like a slave, with short and coarse dyer, and store of
correction, as S. Paul did, (...). Nay more, says he, (...). Such hatred he
bore to that body of sin, which did always accompany him, that not content to
over-master it, he did ignominiously stigmatize and brand it with the marks of
slavery.

23. Yet this is not all: If it be rebellious and incorrigible, thou must even
dispatch it, put it to death, and that no ordinary one, it must be a servile
slavish, cruel death; Crucify the flesh, with the lusts and affections
thereof. A man would think that this were ^^fficient, and that we might here
rest from further tyrannizing over our selves: but there is no such matter; If
any man hate not father, and mother, and brethren, and sisters* and all the
world besides, even his own soul, for my Name sake and the Gospels* says
Christ, he cannot be my disciple. And now we are at the height, never till
now, did I tell you the full meaning of my Text; how far every man is engaged
by virtue of this Precept, Let him deny himself.

24. The strength and vigor of this phrase (which expresses as much indeed, as
all the former laid together) we shall the better understand, says S.
Chrysostom, if we consider what it is to deny another: If a father, in extreme
displeasure, do so cast off his son, that he denies him to be his son, he
becomes worse than a stranger; for he will not so much as admit him to enjoy
the benefit that common humanity teaches every man to show to another; he will
not endure him in his sight, less will he vouchsafe to expostulate with him;
nay, he will rejoice when he hears of some misfortune that has befaln him, and
be beholding to any man that will revenge his injuries upon him.

25. Thus must every one do, who enters into league or friendship with God; He
must work himself out of his own acquaintance; He must be a stranger, (or, if
God will have him) an enemy to all the world, and especially to himself; though
he flow with wealth, yet he must live as being poor, as having nothing, (says
S. Paul.) If affliction, or persecution, come upon him in Gods behalf, he must
with all joy entertain them. Whatsoever God enjoins him, though otherwise never
so distasteful to him, it must be his meat and drink, to perform it. There is
nothing must lay a necessity upon him, but only God; and, To serve him, he must
account the only Unum necessarium.

26. Will you see an example of such obedience, and that in the old Law. An
extraordinary one you shall find in Exodus 32.29. which depends upon a story
which went before, the sum whereof was this: Exodus 32.29.
Moses, in revenge of that horrible Idolatry which was committed during his
absence upon the Mount, commands the sons of Levi to consecrate every man
himself unto the Lord, upon his son, and upon his brother, and upon his
neighbor, by destroying any man, who ever he were, that came in their way:
which they resolutely performed. And this obedience of theirs, was so
acceptable to God, that at Moses death they obtain the blessing of Urim and
Thummim above all the Tribes, with this Elogy: He said unto his father, and to
his mother, I have not seen them, neither did he acknowledge his brethren, nor
knew his own children, for they have observed thy word, and kept thy covenant.
By which obedience, the children wiped out, as it were, the fact of their
father Levi, who had before abused his sword unto injustice, for which he lost
the blessing, that else he should have had, G^n. 49.

27. But will not here be room for that earnest Objection, which the Disciples,
in great anxiety of mind, made to our Savior, when he was pressing a Doctrine
of the same nature with this we have in hand, Who then can be saved? If there
be required at our hands, so absolute and peremptory a resignation of our
selves to Gods disposal, that we must root out of our hearts, all manner of
love of our selves, or any other creature, then Christ has destroyed the whole
second Table of the Law. For, at the best, we are but to love our neighbors as
our selves: If therefore our first lesson must be to learn to contemn and
despise, nay, even hate our own souls; why do we not with the Levites, so
commended even now, consecrate every man himself to the Lord upon our kindred
and neighbors, destroying all about us? Besides, how dare we presume to be
rich, or retain those possessions, which, as it seems, God has bought from us?
If our goods be not our own, if our souls be not our own, Men and brethren,
what shall we do? Into what a strait are we fallen? We are commanded to love our
Brethren as our own souls, and we are commanded to hate our own souls, We are
enjoined to give God thanks for those blessings which here we are enjoined to
cast away. We are counseled, even by our Savior, to be perfect as our
Heavenly Father is perfect, and yet we must deny our selves; Whereas the Spirit
of God has told us, That it is impossible that God should deny Himself.

28. For answer: This Law must be read and understood, (as the Schools say,)
cum grano salis: For, though it be most true, that by virtue of this Precept,
We are obliged to an utter evacuation of the love and desire of any thing, and
of all manner of confidence in our selves, or any other creature: Yet this must
be understood, not absolutely, but when such things come in competition with
our Love or Obedience to God: For otherwise, we are most necessarily bound, to
love our selves and others, to study and care for our own good, and the welfare
of our Brethren, even to lay down our lives for them, So, that we are not bound
to destroy the love of our selves, but only when it is a hinderance to our
fulfilling of what God commands us.

29. We therefore, who have given up our Names unto Christ, must expect to
enjoy the fruits of his Obedience, by treading in the same steps which he has
left unto us. As shall be showed hereafter more plentifully.

30. And yet it is not necessary, that we should exactly and curiously apply
our selves to the Rule of his Obedience: For, whereas he voluntarily undertook
the form and fashion of a Servant, and being Lord of Heaven and Earth, despised
and neglected the riches and glory of this world: We notwithstanding are not
tied to such hard conditions, but may flow and abound with wealth and honor;
neither need we to deny to our souls any pleasure under the Sun, but liberally
enjoy it as the gift of God, as long as thereby we withdraw not our Obedience
and Allegiance from God.

31. Peccatum non est appetitus malarum rerum sed desertio meliorum, (says St.
Augustine quoted by Lombard, 2 Sent. 42. did.) i. e. Sin does not consist in
desiring' or lusting after things which in their own natures are evil and
inconvenient, but in preferring a low inconstant changeable good, before
another more worthy and of greater excellency and perfection: Whilst
therefore, God has that estimation and value in our thoughts that he deserves,
whilst there is nothing in our selves, or any other creature, which we prefer
before him, whilst we conspire not with our lusts to depose him from bearing a
Sovereign sway in our heats. and Consciences, whilst we have no other God
before Him, not committing Idolatry to Wealth, Honor, Learning, and the like.
It shall be lawful, in the second place, to love our selves: So that we fulfill
this Commandment, when we do not Deifie our selves, whilst we Sacrifice not to
our own wisdom, nor burn incense to the pride of our hearts, etc.

32. Conceive then the meaning of this Law to be such, as if it had been more
fully enlarged on this wise: Let every one that but hears any mention of Christ
this day, take into deep consideration, and spend his most serious morning
thoughts, in pondering and weighing, whether those benefits, which Christ has
promised to communicate to every one that shall be joined and married to him by
a lively faith, be worthy his acceptance: Let him oppose to them all the
pleasures and profits which he can promise, or but fancy, to himself under the
Sun.

33. If after a due comparing of these things together, he have so much wisdom
as to acknowledge, that an eternal weight of joy and glory, an everlasting
serenity and calmness be to be preferred before a transitory, unquiet,
restless, unsatisfying pleasure: And seeing both these are offered, and set
before him; or rather seeing such is the extreme mercy of our God, that whereas
the goods of this life, are not allowed, nor so much as offered equally and
universally to all, (For not many have ground to hope for much wealth, Not many
wise, not many learned, says St. Paul.) Yet to every man, whom God has called
to the acknowledgment of the Gospel; these inestimable benefits are offered and
presented bona fide, without any impossible condition, so that (let the
Disputers of this Age, say what they will) it shall be found, that those who
have failed and come short of these glories offered, may thank themselves for
it, and impute it to an actual voluntary misprision and undervaluing of these
riches of Gods mercies which they might have procured, and not to any fatal
overruling power, that did enforce and necessitate and drive them to their
destruction.

34. These things considered, if you are indeed convinced, that light is to be
preferred before darkness; It is impossible, but that you should likewise
acknowledge, that it were mere madness for a man to imagine to himself any the
most vanishing faint expectation of those glorious Promises, whilst he is busy
and careful, by all means, to avoid those, indeed, thorny and unpleasant paths
that lead unto them, whilst he promises to himself rest and impunity, though
he walk in the Imagination of his own heart; Surely the Lord will be avenged on
such a person, and will make his fierce wrath to smoke against him.

35. Therefore resolve upon something, If the Lord be God follow him, serve
him, conform your selves to the form of new obedience, which he has
prescribed: But if Baal be God, if Mammon be God, if your selves be Gods,
follow the devices of your own hearts; But by no means expect any reward at all
from God for dishonouring him, or preferring a base unworthy lust before his
commands. Lo it is the Lord of Glory who is Salvation and the way too, it is he
that has professed, that there is no possible way of attaining unto him, but
by treading in the same steps which he has left us. A way which he found full
of thorns, full of difficulties, but has left it to us, even strowed with
Roses in comparison.

36. The greatest and most terrible Enemies which we can fashion to our selves,
are those three, which St. Paul, has mustered together, and ordered them just
Roman-wise, the strongest in the Rear, 1. Death, and 2. the sting of that, Sin;
and 3. the poison of that sting, The Law. But over all these, we are more then
Conquerours; for it follows, Thanks be unto God, which bath (mark, has
already) given us the victory through our Lord Jesus Christ. At the first,
indeed, till the paths was worn, and made smooth, there were some difficulties;
for, what could the Primitive Christians expect, having all the world their
Enemies, but reproaches, exiles, deportations, even horrible torments and death.

37. But we (blessed be our gracious God) are so far from being annoyed with
such difficulties and pressures in the way, that all those are to be feared and
expected by them, that dare deny the Profession of our glorious Religion. What
therefore, if the Lord had commanded some great thing of us, even as much as he
did of his Beloved Servants, the Apostles, and Primitive Christians, would we
not have done it? How much more, when he says only; Be not ashamed of me; now,
when you dare not be ashamed of me; now, that it almost death to be ashamed of
me: Deny not me before this generation, who would hate and persecute you to the
death, if you should deny me. Crucify unto you the unclean affections, the
incendiary lusts of your hearts, which the Heathens have performed for the poor
empty reward of fame: Prefer not riches nor honors, before me, which is no
more then many Philosophers have done for those vulgar changeable Gods which
themselves have contemned.

38. Having therefore (beloved Christians) such Promises to encourage us, such
as the poor Heathens never dreamed of, and yet, for all that, traveled more
earnestly after an airy fantastical happiness of their own then we (to our
extreme shame be it spoken) do after the true one: Having such advantages, even
above the blessed Apostles and ancient Martyrs, Let us walk as becomes the
children of God, having our eyes fastened upon the Lord our Salvation, and
conforming our selves freely and unconstrainedly to whatsoever it shall please
him to prescribe unto us: Not admitting our own carnal reason and wordly wisdom
into counsel about his Worship, nor believing any thing which he has proposed
unto us in his Word, but for the authority of him that spoke it, not accepting
the persons of men, nor persuading our selves to the belief of horrible and
unworthy Opinions of God, because men, affected by us, have so delivered. It
was a grievous complaint, that God made by the Prophet Isaiah, Cap. 29. v. 13.
Their fear toward me is taught by the Commandments of men. Isaith 29.13.


39. Again, we must subdue our Affections to be ruled and squared according to
the good Will of God, rejoicing to see our most beloved sins discovered and
rebuked, and even crucified by the powerful Word and Spirit of God. Lastly, We
must be ready for Christ his sake, to root out of our hearts, that extravagant
immoderate Love of our own selves, that private affection, as Basil calls it;
resolving rather to undergo a shameful horrible death, then to maintain any
inordinate base desire, or to take part with our filthy lusts against our
Savior, who has so dearly redeemed us.

40. Thus have you heard in General terms largely, and, I fear, tediously,
delivered the sum and effect of this Doctrine of Self-denial, (for the
restraining of it to particular Cases, I have reserved to another hour): Now I
will, according to my promise, as earnestly as I can, enforce this necessary
duty upon you, from the two Circumstances beforementioned, viz. 1. From the
greater reasonableness in the thing commanded; And 2. Extreme Love and Kindness
of the Lawgiver, that has in his own person, given us a perfect example
directing us how we should fulfill his command.


41. For the first, namely, the reasonableness of the thing commanded: To omit,
how all creatures, in acknowledgment of that duty which they owe to God their
Creator, do willingly submit themselves to his disposition, denying their own
specifical private natures for the general good of the world. For example; The
Elements are subject to alterations and deportations, to be destroyed and
revived, to be Instruments of Gods favor, and again, of his wrath: Surely, Man
above all the World beside, (not excepting that glorious heavenly Host of
Angels,) is by a more indissoluble Adamantine chain obliged and bound to his
Maker; For, to which of the Angels said he at any time, Thou art my Son, this
day have I begotten thee?

42. Again, when a great portion of those glorious Spirits had mutinously
rebelled against God, and Man following the example of their prevarication, had
with them plunged himself irrecoverably into extreme unavoidable destruction;
In that necessity, God had no respect to those heavenly Spirits, which were by
nature much more admirable and perfect then we; for he did in no wise says the
Apostle) take upon him the nature of Angels, but he took on him the seed of
Abraham, and therein performed the glorious work of our Redemption.

43. Surely, after this great Love, than which (I dare not say, God cannot,
but) I may well say, he will never show a greater, we, his unworthy creatures,
are bound to express some greater measure of thankful obedience then we were
for our Creation. And, yet even then, the least that could be expected from us,
was a full perfect resignation of our selves, to the disposition of that God
that gave us our being. Therefore now, after a work that has cost God all that
pains and study in inventing and contriving, and so much sorrow and labor in
performing; Certainly, after all this, it is no great thing, if the Lord should
require our whole selves, souls and bodies, for a whole burnt-offering a
Sacrifice of praise and thanksgiving: If he should require from us our whole
substance, whole Rivers of Oil, and all the Cattle feeding on a Thousand Hills.

44. Yet now he is content, that less thanks shall satisfy, then was due
before ever he performed that glorious work: Nay, he has after all this taken
off and subducted from that debt which we owed him for our Creation. For
whereas then one actual offense against this Law, did necessarily draw along
with it inevitable destruction; yet now, our gracious God perceiving that we
are but dust, accepts of our imperfect sinful obedience; nay sometimes of the
inward desire and willingness to perform, where there is not power to put it in
execution. Nothing then can be more reasonable, then that a Christian should be
commanded, not to prefer the fulfilling of his own will before Gods Will nor to
suffer that his carnal desires, should have greater power and sway with him,
then the command of such a God; or, Lastly, not to withdraw his Allegiance and
Obedience due to his Redeemer, and place them upon a creature, but equal, or
may be, inferior to himself.

45. Secondly, Consider the wonderful love and kindness of the Lawgiver, that
has already tasted unto us; tasted, nay, has drunk the dregs of this
unpleasant bitter potion. He by whom all things were made, even the Eternal
Almighty Word: He which thought it no robbery to be equal with God, became his
own creature, and submitted himself to be trod upon, reviled, hated, despised
by the worst of all creatures, cruel, ungodly, and perverse sinners: He of
whose fullness we have all received, did utterly evacuate and empty himself of
his Glory and Majesty, denying to himself such things, which he would not, even
to the most despised creatures. For, says he, The Foxes have holes, and the
Birds of the air have nests, but the Son of Man has not whereon to lay his
head. 2 Cor. 8.9.
Ye know (says St. Paul, 2 Cor. 8.9.) the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, that
though he was rich, he became poor, that ye through his poverty might be made
rich. So poor he was, that he was forced to borrow Tribute money of a Fish, and
was fain to strain himself to a Miracle to get the Fish to bring it. So poor,
that he was forced to borrow a young Colt of strangers, never known to him;
Say, (says he) The Lord has need of him. A strange unheard of speech! The
Lord that created the world, and can as easily annihilate it, Yet he has need,
and has need of a Colt, the Foal of an Ass. Time would fail me, for I suppose
the World it self would not contain the Books that might be written of his
dangers, his temptations, his fastings, his travels, his disgraces, torments,
and death; all performed, without any end proposed to himself besides our good
and happiness.

46. It behoved him (says St. Paul) to be made like his Brethren in all
things, Heb. 2.17, 18.
that he might be a merciful and faithful High Priest in things pertaining to
God, to make reconciliation for the sins of the People; For in that he himself
has suffered being tempted, he is able to succor them which are tempted. Which
of you (my Beloved friends), when he does seriously meditate on this place,
will not be forced to sit down, even ravished and astonished at the excessive
and superabundant Mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ: That he which was the God
that created us, in whom we live, move, and have our being; and, being more
intrinsecal to us then our own Natures (as the Schools do boldly express) does
know our most hidden thoughts, long before they are, that he, notwithstanding,
should descend to submit himself to the same infirmities and temptations with
us, to this end, that by bettering and adding to that knowledge which he had
before of our wants and miseries, to wit, by perfecting and increasing-his
former speculative knowledge by a new acquired experimental knowledge, he might
be better acquainted with what we want, and thereby more inclined to Mercy and
Commiseration, and more powerful to succor us being tempted.

47. See, Behold (beloved Christians) how for our sakes, he has enlarged, as
it were, three of his glorious incomprehensible Attributes, 1. His Omniscience,
by knowing that personally and experimentally, which he did before only know
contemplatively. 2. His Mercy, in that this his Knowledge, does more incite his
Goodness. And 3. his Omnipotent Power, for (says the Text) in that he himself
has suffered, being tempted, he is (thereby) able to succor them which are
tempted.
There seems likewise to be an access to his Glory by this his great Humility;
For says the Text in Heb. 5.5. Christ glorified not himself to be an High
Priest. Heb. 5.5.


48. Woe unto us, my beloved friends, if such mercies as these be neglected and
sleightned by us: Woe unto us, if a Commandment proceeding from such a
Lawgiver have not greater force upon us, then any Obligation whatsoever.

49. And if these things be so, and scandalously devoted; yet in the mean time,
reserve to themselves many a bosom, private, beloved lust.

50. You that know the story of Ananias and Saphira, may remember with what a
fearful name the Holy Spirit has branded their sin; it is called no less then
Lying to the Holy Ghost: it comes near both in name and condition to that
fearful sin for which Christ did not dye, and for which God could yet never
find mercy enough to forgive.

51. Yet, consider what this sin was: They voluntarily sold all the means they
had, that the money, being equally divided, might supply the necessity of those
that wanted. Notwithstanding, to make sure work for some certain estate
whereupon they might rely, they subducted some part of the money, and laid the
rest at the Apostles feet.

52. S. Peter told them, that their land was in their own power; neither did
any constraint lie upon them, to enforce them to sell all: But since they had
professed themselves among the number of them, which were willing to cloathe,
and cherish, and feed Christ, in the persons of their new-converted brethren:
It was horrible theft, and desperate sying against God, to diminish one penny
of the sum.

53. Now, that you may know how much this concerns you: Which of you (Beloved
Christians) has not solemnly, and publicly, sworn and vowed to Almighty God
at your Baptism, not to prefer the vain pomp and vanities of this world, much
less, the abominable crimes thereof, above your Savior, into whose name you
were baptized?

54. Are not you then most shamefully perjured, when you are so far from
renouncing the vanities of this world for Christ his sake, that you will not be
withdrawn from the crimes of it? When the base lust of an Harlot, or the
furious excess of Wine, or that untempting, undelightful, and therefore more
unpardonable sin of Swearing, and Blasphemy, shall be of sufficient force with
you every hour, not only to withdraw all manner of respect, and obedience from
Christ, but even to make you crucify him again, and to put him to open shame.

55. And do not please your selves in this conceit, that because God does not
exact of you now the forfeiture of your vow and promise, as he did of Ananias
and his Wife, that therefore your case is much better than theirs: For, let me
tell you, as our Savior on such an occasion told the Jews: Think you that you
are less sinners than they whose blood Pilate mingled with the sacrifices, or
those upon whom the Tower of Siloe fell? So let me say unto you: Think you,
that because God showed so terrible an example upon Ananias and Saphira, for
their lying to the Holy Ghost, by taking them away suddenly, by a fearful
death; and has not yet showed the like upon you, that your sin comes much
short of theirs, and that you may notwithstanding escape? I tell you nay, but
except ye repent, ye shall likewise perish. Alas, what a trifle was that
judgment which befell them, to those plagues which are reserved for wilful
obstinate sinners?

56. I beseech you therefore, Brethren, even by the bowels of Jesus Christ,
that you would consider what it is you do, when you allow your selves in the
practice of any one habitual sin; it is no less then a wilful wiping off the
water wherewith you were Baptized; it is no less than an abjuring of Christ:
nay, it is no less than a devoting and sacrificing your selves to Devils.

57. In the second place, Judas did; they will sell him, and take no money for
him. What else do those that spend their time in idle vain Lying, in fruitless
Oaths, in unnecessary Blasphemy? They can be content to see Christ himself
almost every day naked, and do not cloathe him; hungry, and do not feed him; in
prison, and do not visit him; for in as much as they perform not these works of
charity to his beloved little ones, they deny them to Him. Will they be found
worthy of Christ, that for his sake will not do so much as a Heathen has done
in an humor, or for the unprofitable reward of fame? that, for his sake, will
not forgive their brother some small injury received; nay, perhaps some great
kindness offered, as a seasonable correction, or loving disswasion from sin;
that, for his sake, will not take the least pains in furthering their own
salvation?

58. Lastly,

59. What then will become of us, if we, notwithstanding these great
engagements, these inestimable prerogatives, shall turn this Wisdom of God into
foolishness, by exalting, and deifying our own carnal wisdom; if we shall
weaken and make void this Almighty Power, by the violent opposition of our
sinful lusts and affections; finally, if we shall be too sparing and niggardly
in the Dispensing of these his Mercies; if we shall render his goodness
suspected to our hearers, as if those frequent and plentiful Offers of pity and
compassion, were only empty histrionical expressions, and not professions of a
mind, heartily and sincerely inclined unto us.

60. I will tell you what will become of us; and I shall the better do it, by
telling you first, what an excessive weight of Glory, we especially, shall lose
by it: They that be wise (says Daniel) shall shine as the brightness of the
firmament; and they that turn many to righteousness, as the stars for ever and
ever. Not as those vulgar ordinary stars, that have light enough only to make
them visible; but like those more noble lights, which are able to cast a shadow
through the whole Creation, even like the Sun in his full strength. And the
preferment we are likely to gain, is very answerable to our loss, we shall be
glorious shining firebrarnds, of the first magnitude, in whose fearful horrible
destruction, God will show what he is able to do.

The Fifth Sermon.
ROMANS VIII. 34. Who is he that condemns? It is Christ that died, Yea rather
that is risen again. --


IFI durst appear in this place with any ends and projects of mine own; If
whilst I preach unto you Jesus Christ, I could think it worth my labor to
lose a thought about the purchasing of a vain, fruitless reputation, and
opinion amongst my hearers; surely, I should by no means omit so commodious and
tempting an opportunity, as this argument of Christ's Resurrection may suggest
unto me. It being a business, in the effecting whereof, above all the works
which God ever made since he began to work, he most especially glorified almost
all his divine Attributes: It being a deliverance, even of God himself, from
destruction and rottenness.

2. It is an argument so pleasing to S. Paul, that in many places, he seems to
magnify it even to the undervaluing, and disparagement of whatsoever Christ
before either did or suffered. Act. 13.
In a Sermon of his ( Act. 13.) preached at Antioch, he makes it the complement
and fulfilling of whatsoever God before had promised to the Fathers, and of all
the Prophecies which, since the beginning of the world, had been delivered by
Gods Messengers. To make which good, the Apostle himself in that place (whereas
he needed not to strain so far; there were then extant Prophecies enough
purposely and precisely decaring the glory and power of Christ's Resurrection)
he notwithstanding, as it would seem, mistakes that famous Prophecy of Christ's
Birth in those words of the 2d Psalm: Psalm. 2.
Thou art my Son, this day have I begotten thee; and seemingly misapplies them
to his Resurrection. Why, was he then indeed the Carpenter's son? was it a
confession, and not humility, that he called himself the son of man? Were the
torments of his passion and death (as himself seems to intimate, Joh. 16.21.)
only the pangs and throws of his new birth?

3. By no means: He was even in the extremest degree, and lowest point of his
humiliation: yea, when himself in that last terrible Agony, did seem to call it
in question; yet then also he was indeed the only begotten eternal Son of God:
Or, if he had not, most miserable and desperate had been our case. But by his
Resurrection, he did declare, unquestionably, and without all contradiction,
unto the world, his Glory and Majesty: Or, to speak in S. Paul's words, Romans 1.
He was mightily declared to be the Son of God, by his Resurrection from the
dead.

4. But we now celebrate a Feast, a season of Joy and exultation, which we use
not to do upon the memory of Gods most wonderful acts and exploits, though
never so much expressing the glory of his Majesty and Power; unless they have
been beneficial unto us, unless they have very nearly concerned our safety and
happiness.

5. And surely this great deliverance of Christ from the dominion and power of
Hell and the Grave; when God called his Son the third time out of Egypt: this
victory of his, did in a high degree import us, and advance our welfare; it had
some more then ordinary influence upon our salvation; otherwise, this season
dedicated to the memory thereof, would not have been so acceptable to the
primitive Christians, to make them (as it were in revenge and faction against
the late melancholy time of Fasting and repentance) for its sake, to set up an
Anti-Lent, and to appoint other forty days of Feasting and triumph, which was
more (as Tertullian boasts) then all the solemn Holy Days of the Heathen
joined together. Yea, so scrupulous were they in the celebration of this Feast,
(quite opposite to the solemn peevishness of some Christians of our times) that
for the whole space between Easter and Pentecost, as it is thought, they quite
intermitted the works and exercise of their vocations: they would not suffer
one Fasting-day to appear; they left off their severity and discipline, their
Vigilia, and Stationes; Nay, they would not, all that time, so much as De
geniculis adorare (in the witty barbarous expression of the same Father, in his
Book De Corona Militis) they would not show so much faint heartedness and
dejection, as to kneel at prayers.

6. Therefore, in stead of saying fine things of the fashion and contrivance of
this business of Christ's Resurrection; in stead of raising matter of wonder
and astonishment out of the glory and power of it; I will endeavor (being to
conclude the solemn celebration of this Feast) by way of Use and Application,
to discover the issue and fruit thereof in respect of us; not only the
convenience, but the extreme necessity, and the strict cohaerence, which our
Salvation has, not only upon the Satisfaction and death, but upon the
Resurrection and life of our blessed Savior.

7. Now we find many things ascribed to Christ's Life and Death in Holy
Scripture, only as to Patterns and exemplary causes, being Duties which the
consideration of Christ's Death and Resurrection, ought proportionably to exact
from us: As, If Christ be dead, Then count your selves also dead unto Sin; If
risen again, then count your selves alive unto Righteousness. For how it should
come to pass, that so much of our Holiness as makes up mortification and no
more, should be ascribed to Christ's Death, as a proper effect and fruit
thereof; And the rest, which is newness of life and obedience, should be
imputed to his Resurrection, I shall never be able to comprehend.

8. The benefits therefore which accrue unto us by Christ, I suppose may be
divided either into those which flow from the m^rit of his Death, or from the
power and influence of his Life. In the former, are comprehended all whatsoever
Christ has done for us; In the latter, whatsoever he does or will work in us.
And both being extremely necessary, It shall be this hours employment, to show
with what good reason we celebrate a feast at this time, that we should not
terminate our contemplation only on the great love and bowels of compassions on
Good Friday expressed unto us; but also, and with better reason, on the Joy and
comfort, which with great reason we may collect from this business of Easter;
even that lively hope whereunto we are regenerated by the Resurrection of
Christ: And to join with S. Paul in his wonder and amazement, at the
consideration of the infinite mercy and power of God; and thereupon his
boasting and challenging, securely, all manner of adversaries: Who is be that
shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods elect? It is God that justifies: Who
is he that condemns? It is Christ that died, yea rather, that is risen again.

9. In which words are comprehended the great dependence and combination, which
our non-condemnation or salvation has; not only with the death and satisfaction
of Christ, but also rather, even with advantage on his Resurrection. Now,
because they are so few they cannot conveniently be divided, I will out of them
raise this Doctrinal Proposition, That Christ's Resurrection and exaltation, is
fully as necessary and effectual to procure and perfect our salvation, if not
more, then even the all-sufficient Sacrifice upon the Cross.

10. Which, that I may more fully and distinctly confirm unto you, I will
divide into two Propositions, which if sufficiently maintained, does
necessarily infer the Doctrine. The first whereof is this: Prop. 1.
That the purpose of Christ, who satisfied for our sins, and the Covenant which
he made with God, who accepted of this satisfaction, was not, that remission of
sins should immediately ensue upon his death, but only upon performance of the
Conditions of the new Covenant made in Christ's Blood; which are, unfeigned
Repentance for Sin, and a serious Conversion unto God by Faith. The Second:
That by the Dominion and Power of Christ, Prop. 2.
which at his Resurrection, and not before, he received, as a reward of his
great humility; we are not only enabled to the performance of the conditions of
this new Covenant, and, by consequence, made capable of an Actual application
of his satisfaction; but also, by the same power, we shall hereafter be raised
up, and exalted to everlasting Happiness. Of these two Propositions therefore
in the order proposed, very briefly, and even too too plainly. And first of the
first, namely, That the purpose of Christ, who, Prop. I.
etc.

11. I confess, it would be no hard matter for a Disputant, meeting with an
adversary that would be content to be swayed and governed by Reason alone; to
molest, and even fright him from the truth of this Doctrine. For, if we shall
consider not only the excessive unspeakable Torments which Christ suffered for
us, but especially the infinite Majesty and Glory of the Person, who willingly
submitted himself to that Curse: what less reward can be expected, than the
present deliverance and salvation, not only of a few selected men, but even of
many worlds of Men and Angels.

12. But it is not for us; Beloved Christians, to set our price and value upon
Christ's precious Blood, to say, Thus much it is worth, and no more. As there
have not wanted men on the other side, who have dared to affirm, That Christ's
Blood, according to exact estimation, did amount to a certain value, by the
worth and cost whereof, such a set number as shall be saved, were redeemed and
purchased. And if one besides should be delivered, it were more than the price
of the Blood came to. What a fearful dangerous curiosity is this? Is it not a
piece of Judas his sin, to set our own estimation and value, to make a bargain,
and sale of Christ's Death; to set up a kind of shambles to sell his Flesh and
Blood in?

13. But leaving these vain fantastical Calculations to their chief
Professors, the Schoolmen, who are so unreasonably addicted to this dreaming
Learning, that nothing can escape their Compass and Balance. For, to omit
their curious descriptions and Maps of the dimensions, and situation of Heaven
and Hell; the Figure, Borders, Islands of both; They have undertaken to
discover the exact proportionable increase of the graces of the Saints,
especially of the Blessed Virgin; whose good actions they have found to
increase just in Octupla ratione: so that, for example, her twentieth good
action, did exceed the first in virtue and intention of Grace, as much as the
whole earth does exceed a grain of mustard seed.

14. Is not this (Beloved Friends) a learning and wisdom to be pitied? Is not
this that disease which S. Paul discovers (1 Timothy 6.) the effect whereof, is to
make men sick about vain questions, and oppositions of science, falsely so
called? Therefore leaving these vain Speculations, as likewise others about the
business in hand, no less curious, and much more dangerous, yet securely stated
in these days, almost in every Pamphlet and Synopsis. As namely, Whether God
could have contrived any course for man's salvation, beside that which he
prosecuted? Whether, without accepting any satisfaction to his Justice, he
could freely and absolutely have remitted our sins?

15. For, what use or profit can be made of these Questions, though with never
so great subtilty and curiosity stated? Besides, we find that God had professed
unto Adam, that his death, together with the destruction of all mankind, should
be the reward of the breach of his Covenant. By which means Gods Justice being
interested in the business, the very grounds and foundation of this latter
question are destroyed, the doubt and scrue whereof must needs have been
blasphemous: namely, Whether God could have been unjust? Nay more, it makes the
sending of Christ into the world, together with his obedience to the death,
even that accursed death of the Cross, to be a matter of no necessary
importance; to be only a great Complement, whereby God shows unto mankind,
that, though he could easily have remitted their sins without any satisfaction
(for whatsoever is possible to God is easy) notwithstanding, that they should
see, He would strain himself even farther for them, was very requisite; and
withal, to show his abomination of sin, he was content, that all this ado,
all these pompous Tragical businesses should be performed.

16. But what says the Scripture? If there had been a Law which could have
given life, Christ should have died without cause. And thereupon our Apostle
(in Romans 3.25.) says, Romans 3.25.
that God has set forth his Son to be a propitiation through faith in his
Blood, to declare his righteousness for the remission of sins, that are past
through the forbearance of God. To declare, I say, at this time his
righteousness, that he might be Just -- That is, lest by the forbearance of
God, who since the foundation of the world had showed no sufficient example of
his hatred and indignation unto sin; as also to show there was a reason
sufficient to move him to remit the sins of many his chosen servants before
Christ: He has now at last evidently expressed unto the world his
righteousness; to wit, his (...), and (...), by condemning sin, and revenging
himself upon it, in the person of his beloved innocent Son.

17. And lest all this stir should seem to have been kept only to give us
satisfaction, and to create in us a great opinion and conceit of his
righteousness; The Apostle clearly says, He did all this to declare at this
time his righteousness, that he might be Just. Which otherwise it seems he
could not have been. But I am resolved to quit my self abruptly, and even
sullenly, of those questions, and betake my self more closely to the matter in
hand.

18. What therefore is the effect and fruit which accrews even to the elect of
God, by virtue of Christ's satisfaction, humiliation, and death, precisely
considered, and excluding the power and virtue of his Resurrection and glorious
life? Why, Reconciliation to God, Justification or remission of sins, and
finally, Salvation both of body and soul. But is there any remission of sins
without Faith? Shall we not only exclude Works from Justification, but Faith
also? God forbid. For so we should not only contradict the grounds of Gods holy
Word, but also raze and destroy the very foundations of the second Covenant.

19. For answer; We must consider our Reconciliation under a twofold state
(according to the Distinction of the Reverend and learned Dr Davenant Bishop of
Salisbury). 1. Either as it is Applicabilis, not yet actually conferred: Or, 2.
as Applicata, particularly sealed and confirmed to us by a lively Faith.
For the understanding of which, we must know, that in Christ's death, there was
not only an abolishing of the old Covenant of Works; the Handwriting which was
against us, which Christ nailed unto his Cross (as S. Paul says, Col. 1.)
delivering us from the curse and obligation thereof: But also, there was a new
gracious Covenant, or (which is a word expressing greater comfort to us) a new
Will or Testament made, wherein Christ has bequeathed unto us many glorious
Legacies, which we shall undoubtedly receive, when we shall have performed the
Conditions, when we shall be found qualified so as he requires of us.

20. Till which Conditions be performed by the power of Gods Spirit assisting
us; all that we obtain by the death of Christ is this: That, first, whereas
God, by reason of sin, in S. Paul's language ( Ephesians. 2.16.) Enmity is slain.
Col. 1.13.) delivered from the power of darkness, and translated into the
Kingdom of his dear Son.

21 All this, and more (if it were the business of this time to be punctual in
discovering all) has Christ wrought for us, being aliens and strangers, yea
enemies, afar off, without God in the world. Yet for all this, that Christ has
merited thus much for us, and more; notwithstanding, take away the power of
Christ's Resurrection, and Life; take away the influence of his Holy Spirit,
whereby we are regenerated and made new Creatures; and we are yet in the Gall
of bitterness, and Bond of iniquity. For though (as it is Heb. 10.19.) we have
(...), i. liberty, and free leave, to enter into the Holiest by the blood of
Jesus, though there be a way made open; yet walk we cannot, we are not able to
set forwards into it, as long as we are bound and fettered with our sins:
though there be an access to the throne of Grace, yet it is only for them which
are sanctified.

22. And therefore what dangerous consequences do attend that Doctrine which
teaches, That immediately upon the death of Christ, all our sins are actually
forgiven us, and we effectually reconciled. But because another employment is
required by this time, I will, out of many, make use of two Reasons only to
destroy that Doctrine; whereof the one is taken from the nature of the second
Covenant: the other, from the necessity of Christ's Resurrection.

23. For the first: If we, that is, the Elect of God (for I am resolved to have
to do with none else at this time) be effectually reconciled to God, by virtue
of Christ's death, having obtained a full perfect remission of all our sins, why
are we frighted; or to say truly, injured with new Covenants? why are we,
seeing our Debts are paid to the utmost farthing, the Creditor's demands
exactly satisfied, the Obligation cancelled; why then are we made believe that
we are not quite out of danger; nay, that unless we our selves out of our own
stock pay some charges and duties extraordinarily, and by the Bye enforced upon
us, All the former payments, how valuable soever, shall become fruitless, and
we to remain accomptable for the whole debt?

24. But it may be (and that seems most likely) there is no such thing indeed
as a new Covenant: Promises, and Threatenings, are only a pretty kind of
Rhetorical device, which God is pleased to use, sometimes to allure us, and win
our hearts to do that which shall please him; other times to startle, and
affright us, when we are about something contrary to his command. And to say
the truth, This must of necessity be the issue of the former Doctrine: For how
is it possible to make these things hold together; We are already perfectly
reconciled to God by the death of his Son, without any consideration had to our
personal Faith and Repentance; And yet, unless we do earnestly repent us of our
sins, and with a lively Faith adhere to God's Promises, we shall never be
reconciled unto God! Or these, All our sins are already remitted, and that only
for the virtue of Christ's satisfaction: And yet unless we believe, our sins
shall never be forgiven us!

25. So that by this reckoning, we must be forced to purge the Gospel of those
troublesome dangerous terms of Covenants, and Conditions, of those fruitless
affrighting Conjunctions, Si Credideris, Si non poenitentiam egeris. Or (which
is all one) soften them into a sense utterly repugnant and warring against the
natural force and signification of the words; on this wise: Where the Scripture
says, If thou repentest not, thy sins shall not be forgiven thee; Thou art not
to conceive, that forgiveness of thy sins is a work yet to be done, or that it
has any dependence upon any thing in thee: But this great blessing shall be hid
from thine eyes, thou shall never come to the knowledge of it, and thereby shall
live here a discontented pensive, suspicious life: Again, If thou believe,
thou shall be saved, that is, Thou shall obtain a comfortable assurance of
Hope, nay, an infallible faith of thy future Salvation: though that was
intended thee, without any consideration of thy faith.

26. So that the Gospel of Christ, is not the power of God unto Salvation: for,
How can the Word be an Instrument of that, which was long ago absolutely
performed and purchased? And therefore Christ his preaching, his miracles, and
tears, The Apostles travels and persecutions, The sending of the Holy Spirit,
Baptism, Eucharist, Imposition of hands, Absolution, and many more blessed
means of our Salvation, were not instituted for this end, to make us capable of
Remission of our Sins (for that (it seems) was already not only meritoriously,
but effectually procured, and without all manner of Conditions infallibly
destined to Gods Elect); but only for this end, That whilst they live here, to
their thinking, in danger and hazard, (but they are Fools for thinking so) they
may now and then be a little cheared and comforted with apprehending what
Christ has done for them, and to what a comfortable state and Inheritance he
has destined them. Thus the Covenant which God has sworn shall be
everlasting, is by the improvidence and ignorance of some men rendered
unprofitable, yea utterly abrogated: But (Ne quid inclementius dicam) we have
not so learned Christ.

27. The second Reason destroying the former Doctrine, I told you should be
taken from the necessity of Christ's Resurrection. For, if the immediate effect
of Christ's Death, be the purchasing of a perfect reconciliation with God, and
full remission of Sins for us the Elect of God; Then (I will not say, what
Benefit), but, What necessity is there of Christ's Resurrection in respect of
us? For by this account, after the Consummatum est, upon the Cross, when the
satisfaction was perfected, and our debts paid: Though Christ had afterward
miscarryed, though he had been detained by death, though his Soul had been left
in Hell, and he had seen corruption; Notwithstanding we should stand upon good
terms with God, unless we shall conceive of Him worse then of the most
oppressing Usurer, that when a debt is dischar'gd, and the Bond cancelled, will
notwithstanding not release the Prisoner, unless the undertaker come in Person,
or by main force deliver him.

28. I confess, that to see a friend that had ventured so far for us, as our
Savior did, that to do us good had put himself in such extreme danger. I say,
to see such a one to be utterly cast away, without all hopes and possibility of
being able to pay him our thanks, would be a spectacle, which would grieve and
pierce our very souls, it would be a renting to our bowels. But this is only
Charity and Gratitude, or good nature in us, which would procure this grief;
not that it stands upon our safety, his preservation being a matter only of
convenience, not extreme necessity to us.

29. We all do worthily condemn and detest, that blasphemous Heresy of the
Socinians, who exclude the meritorious death and sufferings of Christ, from
having any necessary influence into our Justification, or Salvation, making it
of no greater virtue then the sufferings of the blessed Martyrs, who by their
death, set their Seal and Testimony to the Truth of the Gospel, which freely
offers forgiveness of sins to all penitent believers. Now the same injury which
these Heretics do to the merit of Christ's death, In proportion the former
doctrine fastens upon his Resurrection, and new life, by taking from it the
chief and proper effect thereof, which is an actual vindication of us from the
power of sin, into the glorious liberty of the sons of God, by the power of
Christ's Spirit plentifully by him diffused and shed abroad in our hearts, and
making the chief virtue thereof to consist in affording us only matter of
comfort and hope, that God will deal no otherwise with us, then he has dealt
with Christ, and after a life full of disturbance and misery, revive us to
glory and immortality with his Son for evermore: whereas St. Paul has another
kind of conceit of Christ's Resurrection: for, says he, in Heb. 5.9. Christ
being made perfect, ( i. e. glorified, c. 2.10.) becomes Author of eternal
Salvation to all that obey him: And if Christ be not risen, your faith is vain,
you are yet in your sins; and if Christ be not risen, neither shall we ever be
raised, but be utterly irrecoverably condemned to everlasting rottenness.

30. And thus I am unawares fallen upon my second Proposition, Prop. II.
Namely, That by the Dominion and power of Christ, which at his Resurrection,
and not before, he received as a reward of his great Humility, we are not only
enabled to the performance of the conditions of this New Covenant, and, by
consequence, made capeable of an actual application of his satisfaction; But
also by the same power, we shall hereafter be raised up, and exalted unto
everlasting Happiness.

31. Though by the virtue of the Incarnation of our Savior, the Humane Nature
was raised to a state and condition of unspeakable glory: Notwithstanding, if
in this place, as well as before, we shall be content to submit our Reason to
Scripture, We shall find, that according to a Covenant made between Christ and
his Father, he was content not to challenge to himself any right of Dominion
and Rule over us, till he had perfectly deserved and earned it by a former
voluntary submission and humiliation of himself.

32. The conditions on Christ's part we find most exactly performed by him,
wholly resigning and prostrating his own will to the will and disposition of
his Father. At his private Passion, which immediately went before his
Attachment, when he was sacrificed, and even crucified, alone in the Garden,
without the assistance and malice of a traiterous Disciple, of the chief
Priests or Romans: Though he retained that innocent fear of death and shame
which is natural to Man, which forced him to cry out, Father, if it be
possible, let this Cup pass from me: Notwithstanding, though he could not hate
his own life: yet, to show he preferred the fulfilling of his Fathers will
before it, he adds, Nevertheless, not my will, but thy will be done: Luke 22.42.
By which words he resigns the whole power and faculty of his will into his
Fathers hands. In the words of another Evangelist, he says, Not what I will,
Mark. 14.36.
but what thou will: Where he resigns and submits the Act and Exercise of his
Will. And lastly, to make all complete in the expression of a Third Evangelist,
he says, Not as I will, but as thou will: Matthew. 26 39.
Where he subjects not only the faculty and the exercise of his will to the
performance of what God shall command him, but is willing and desirous to do it
after what manner and fashion soever God shall be pleased. It is not possible
for the understanding of man to add or conceive a degree beyond this.

33. In the next place we shall see, How God the Father is as good as his word
to his Son: But, first, give me leave to complain to you of that Tyranny, which
custom, partiality, or something worse, has laid upon our Understandings: And
that is this, That wheresoever any former Protestant Writer have suspected a
Doctrine as not beneficial, but rather dangerous, to some conclusion, which he
is resolved to maintain against the Papists, we their Scholars are obliged to
make good their jealousies and (may be) groundless suspicions.

34. To omit many examples, I will produce only these few: It lies upon us to
maintain, that St. John's Baptism, was one and the same Sacrament with that of
Christ's, contrary to express words of Scripture, and something else: That
Christ is a Mediator Secundum Divinam Naturam: which borders, I fear, upon an
old dangerous Heresy. As likewise, (which especially concerns this place,)
That Christ merited nothing to Himself by his Passion, neither was the
Exaltation of his Humane Nature to the Dominion and Rule over all Creatures a
reward of his Humility, but a preferment due to his Person, though by special
dispensation the exercise thereof was deferred for a time, but should have been
conferred upon him as fully as he now enjoys it, though he had never suffered.

35. But Scripture reaches us, That Christ was to be made perfect by
sufferings: That, Because he had drunk of the Brook by the way, Therefore he
should lift up his head: That, For the joy which was set before him, (that is,
Having an eye to the glorious reward and fruit of his suffering) he endured the
Cross, and despised the shame, and therefore is set up at the right hand of
Glory. Because being found in fashion as a Man, Phil. 2.8, 9.
he humbled himself, and became obedient to the death, even the death of the
Cross, (...), Therefore, for this reason, God has highly exalted him, and
given him a Name which is above every Name, etc. Nay, St. Paul makes the
obtaining a Rule and Dominion over mankind, a main end of his death, (for in
Romans 14.9. he says, Romans 14.9.
) (...), For this end, Christ both dyed and rose again, that he might be Lord
both of the dead and of the living. By his death, meriting this Dominion; by
his Resurrection, receiving it. But I will forbear controversy, because I
desire to seek out no Adversary, especially in my preaching, but only the Devil
and Sin.

36. This therefore I think, we shall agree upon, That it was the purpose and
immutable decree of God, that after the fall and misery of man, whatsoever good
should befall us toward our restitution and repairing to our lost happiness,
should be conveyed unto us by our own nature, That the Seed of the Woman should
break the Serpent's head; That is, not only in St. John's phrase, destroy the
works of the Devil, but also in St. Paul's, destroy his kingdom and power,
which is Death. So that, As by Man came Sin and Error, so by Man also should
come Grace and Truth: As by Man came Death, so by Man also should come the
Resurrection from the dead; By Man also, life and immortality should be brought
to light.

37. Now that these great projects and entendments might be brought about, and
that the Humane Nature might be furnished with ability to discharge this
Province, and to go through with this great Undertaking: God the Father, for
the merit of Christ's great humility, by his Resurrection, has highly exalted
him far above all Principality and Power, Ephesians. 1.20.
and might, and dominion, and every name that is named, not only in this world,
but also in that which is to come: Phil. 2.9, 10, 11.
And has given him a Name above all Names, that at the Name of Jesus every
knee should bow of things in heaven, and things in earth, and things under the
earth, and that every tongue should confess, that Jesus is the Lord to the
glory of God the Father.

38. And thus much Christ himself confesses, and acknowledges presently upon
his Resurrection for then he says, All power is given unto me in Heaven and
Earth. It was then only he received the Dominion, whereof his Father David's
Kingdom was but a Type and shadow: And as his Father David was anointed and
deputed by God to the Kingdom, but received not actual possession of it till
after many persecutions and afflictions at the hands of his Master Saul: In
like manner, though our Savior even in the days of his humility, teaches us,
that the Father judges no man, but resigneth all judgment to the Son:
Notwithstanding these words are to be understood only by way of Anticipation,
or Prophecy of what should befall him, after he should have performed the work
of our Redemption: For while he lived here among men, he professed he was so
far from being a King, that he had no sufficient authority given him to be a
petty Judge in a case of Inheritance: And that wicked Pilas himself had power
given him from Heaven to become his Judge: So that, though in the days of his
flesh, he was Heir of all things, yet he was only a conditional heir, and
therefore till the conditions were performed, and himself seized of the
Inheritance, even the Heir himself differed nothing from a Servant.

39. But within three days after his Passion, the case was much altered. For,
whereas before he was allowed no Authority, no, not in Israel; At his
Resurrection, he obtains the Heathen for his Inheritance, and the uttermost
parts of the Earth for his Possession. Now it would be a hard undertaking
taking to describe the limits and borders of Christ's Kingdom; as also to
define the Polity, whereby it is administered. Therefore, leaving the most
glorious part of it, which is in Heaven, undiscovered; we find in Holy
Scripture, that according to the several dispositions and qualifications of men
here on earth, He has both a Scepter of righteousness to govern and protect
his faithful subjects and servants; and a rod of Iron, to break the wicked in
pieces like a potter's vessel. And though the greatest part of the world will
acknowledge no subjection to Christ's Kingdom; notwithstanding, this does not
take away his authority over them, no more than the murmuting, and rebellion of
the Israelites did depose Moses their Governor. But there will come a time,
when that Prophetical Parable of his, shall be resolved, and interpreted to
their confusion; when he shall indeed say, Where are those my enemies, which
would not have me to reign over them? Bring them hither, and slay them before
me.

40. But the most eminent and notorious exercise of Christ's Dominion, is seen
in the rule over his Church, which he purchased with his own Blood: Now the
first business he took in hand, presently upon his Resurrection, when all power
and dominion was given him, was, to give commission and authority to his
Ambassadors the Apostles and Disciples, to make known to the world, that so
great salvation which he had wrought at his Passion. Now though the Apostles
were sufficiently authorized, by virtue of that Commission which Christ gave
them in those words; As my Father sent me, so send I you -- Notwithstanding
they were not to put this authority presently in practice, but to wait for the
sending of the Holy Ghost, which Christ before had promised them: That by his
virtue and influence they might be furnished with abilities to go through with
that great employment of reconciling the world unto God, by subduing men's
understandings to the truth and obedience of the Gospel.

41. We read in the Gospel* of S. John, that, during the life which Christ
lived in the flesh, the Holy Ghost was not sent: and the reason is added,
Because the Son of man was not yet glorified. The strength and vigor of which
reason, does excellently illustrate the point in hand. For the sending of the
Holy Ghost, was one of the most glorious acts of Christ's Kingly Office, and the
most powerful means of advancing his Kingdom. Therefore, in the days of his
humiliation, whilst he lived in the form of a servant, before he had purchased
to himself a Church by his own Blood, his Humane Nature obtained no right of
dominion and power over Mankind. For till we were redeemed from the power and
subjection of the Devil, and sin, by the merit of Christ's Death, we were none
of Christ's subjects, but servants and slaves, sold under sin and Satan.

42. So that it being necessary, that the Son of man should not only pay a
price and ransom for our Redemption by his Death, but also, that the same Son
of man, and none else, should actually and powerfully vindicate his elect from
the bondage they were in, and effectually apply his merits and satisfaction to
their souls and consciences; Till he was in S. Paul's words, (...), Heb. 11.9.
For the suffering of death, crowned with glory and honor; He, according to
his Humane Nature (and that was the only instrument whereby our Salvation was
to be wrought) had no power of sending the Holy Ghost.

43. And indeed till Reconciliation was made by his Death, to what purpose
should the Holy Ghost be sent? What business or employment could we find for
him on earth? You will say, to work grace and new obedience in us. I confess,
that is a work worthy the Majesty and goodness of Gods holy Spirit. But yet,
suppose all this had been wrought in us; put case, our hearts were sprinkled
from an evil conscience, and that we were renewed in the spirits of our minds.
Perhaps, all this might procure us a more tolerable cool place and climate in
Hell: But without Christ, it would be far from advantaging us toward our
salvation: for, alas, though we should turn never so holy, never so virtuous
and reformed: what satisfaction or recompense could we make for our former sins
and iniquities? God knows, it must cost more to redeem a soul, therefore we
must let that alone for ever; we must take heed of ever meddling in that office,
we must let it alone to him (even Jesus Christ) who alone is able to be at that
cost.

44. But I might have spared all these suppositions: For, as, excluding Christ,
there is no satisfaction, no hope of redemption for us; so, excluding Christ's
satisfaction, he has no power or authority, as Man, of sending the Holy Ghost,
thereby to work in us an ability of performing the conditions of the second
Covenant; and, by consequence, of making us capable of the fruit and benefit of
his satisfaction. Therefore, blessed be God the Father, for the great glory
which he gave unto Christ; And blessed be our Lord Jesus Christ, for meriting
and purchasing that Glory at so dear a rate; And blessed be the Holy Spirit,
who, when Christ (who is flesh of our flesh, and bone of our bone) did send
him, would be content to come down and dwell among us.

45. We find in Holy Scripture, that our Salvation is ascribed to all the Three
Persons of the blessed Trinity, though in several respects: To the Father, who
accepts of Christ's Satisfaction, and offers pardon of all our sins: To the
Son, who merited and procured Reconciliation for his elect faithful servants;
And to the Holy Ghost the Comforter, who, being sent by the Son, works in us
power to perform the conditions of the New Covenant, thereby qualifying us for
receiving actual remission of our sins, and a right to that glorious
Inheritance purchased for us.

46. And from hence may appear, How full of danger the former Doctrine, which
teaches, that actual remission of sins is procured to Gods Elect immediately
by Christ's death; and how dishonorable it is to the Spirit of Grace, excluding
him from having any concurrence or efficacy in our Salvation. For, if this
should be true, the powerful working of the Holy Spirit, can in no sense,
concern either our Justification, or everlasting happiness. For, how can it be
said, that the Holy Spirit does cooperate to our Salvation, since all our good
and happiness was procured by Christ's death; not only before, but without all
manner of respect had to our Regeneration and Sanctification, by the power of
the blessed Spirit. Therefore by this Doctrine, if we be any thing at all
beholding to the Holy Spirit, it is only for this, that he is pleased, now and
then, by fits; to be a messenger, or intelligencer, to discover unto us what
Christ alone has purchased for us.

47. But I forbear to enlarge my self further in this point; and indeed I have
already done too much wrong to the honor and dignity of this Feast, not only
in mixing the business of Good Friday with it, as I did in my former part; but
also (as I now have done) in taking in the matter and employment of Whitsuntide
too. Suffice it therefore, that the sending of the Holy Ghost, was an especial
exercise of that power, which was given Christ at his Resurrection; by the
influence and virtue whereof, we do restrain and appropriate the merit of his
Death to our own good and benefit.

48. Now I would not be mistaken, as if I said, that the Resurrection of Christ
precisely taken for that individual action whereby he was restored to life and
glory, was then effectual and powerful to produce those admirable effects: For,
that being a Transient action, past and finished many hundred years since, can
very improperly be termed capable of having such effects ascribed to it as have
since, and shall to the end of the world be wrought in Gods Elect. Therefore S.
Paul shall be mine Interpreter, in Romans 5.10. saying, If when we were enemies,
Romans 5.10.
we were reconciled to God by the death of his Son, much more, being
reconciled, we shall be saved by his life; that is, By that glorious Life which
began at his Resurrection.

49. For, as in the matter of Satisfaction, we ascribe our reconciliation to
his Death especially, yet not excluding his former Obedience and Humiliation;
but naming that, as being the complement and perfection, terminating whatsoever
went before: So likewise in Christ's exaltation, though there were diverse
degrees, and ascents, and stages of it; yet we especially take notice of his
Resurrection, because in that Christ took his rise as it were, and was then a
Bridegroom coming out of his chamber, Psalm. 19.
rejoicing as a Giant to run his race. His goings out indeed were from the
Grave, but his Circuit is to the ends of Heaven, and nothing is hid from his
heat and virtue. He illuminates every man that comes into the world: He was
made, says S. Paul, a quickening Spirit, cherishing, actuating, and informing
us with life and motion. By the influence and power of his life, he undergoes,
as it were, a second Incarnation, living and dwelling in our hearts by his
Grace, and reigning powerfully in our souls by Faith.

50. And hereby he even shares his Kingdom, his Power, and his Victory with us:
For, says S. John, This is the victory whereby ye overcome the world, even
your Faith. Christ is not content only to destroy in us, the works of darkness;
to dispel the clouds of ignorance and error, or to rectify the crookedness
and perverseness of our wills: neither yet to implant in us a heavy, unactive,
sleepy harmlesness, a dull lethargick innocence; but withal, indues us,
Justitia germinante, with a fruitful budding righteousness, and works in us, in
the expression of S. Paul, both (...), a patient unwearied hope, 1 Thessalonians. 1.3.
not hasty nor discontented with expecting; and (...), a painful, laborious
love, and (...), a working, sprightful victorious Faith, whereby we violently
lay hold on the promises. And, in this sense, the same Apostle says, that as
Christ died for our sins, Romans 4.24.
so he rose again for our Justification: that is, one chief end of Christ's
Resurrection, in respect of us, was to work in us a lively faith, whereby we
might be justified, and acquitted from our sins.

51. And yet the Power of Christ's Life, leaves us not here neither: Nay, all
this is performed only to make us capable of greater blessings yet. Tertul. de
Res. carnis.
For, by our sanctification and new birth, we are (says Tertullian)
Restitutioni inaugurati, destined and consecrated to a glorious Resurrection.
Hereupon S. John calls holiness, the first Resurrection whereby sin is
destroyed: And it is a pawn of the second, whereby Death also shall be
swallowed up in victory. By the first, the sting of the Serpent is taken away,
which is sin, (as S. Paul says, The sting of death is sin). And when the sting
is gone, the Serpent cannot long out live it; for by the second Resurrection,
that also is destroyed.

52. But you will say, How is Death destroyed? Do not all men dye? Do not all
men see corruption? You may as well ask, How is sin destroyed? For, have not
all men sinned, and come short of the glory of God? Nay, Do not all men sin,
how righteous soever? And, if they were rewarded according to their own
demerits, would they not all come short of the glory of God? Most certainly
true: Therefore to say the truth, As yet, neither Sin nor Death are destroyed,
but only the Dominion of Sin, and the Victory of the Grave. And thereupon the
Apostle contemplating the conquering power of Christ at his Resurrection, says
not, Oh Death, or, Oh Grave, where are you? for a little travel would serve the
turn to assoyl that question: 1. Cor. 15.55.
But, Oh Death, where is thy sting? How comes it to pass, that thy poison is
not so keen and mortal, as it has been; that it is so easily, though not
expelled, yet tempered and corrected by the healing Bezoartical virtue of
Grace. And thou, Oh Grave, where is thy victory? Though thou have given thine
adversary the foyl, though thou have gotten him under thee yet thou shall never
be able to detain him long: For, behold, a little while, and he that shall
come, will come, and will not tarry: He will ransack the most private reserved
corners of thy Treasury; and though thou may consume and devour our bodies,
yet he will force thee to vomit and disgorge them again; he will not leave one
portion, one morsel of them in thy stomach and entrails.

53. I know, the ingenuous and learned Pareus, because he would not suffer any
portion of the merit of Christ's Death to be extended and meant to the ungodly;
or, that He, by the fruit of his Passion, should obtain any power over them,
will therefore, consequently, exclude them from the efficacy and power of his
Resurrection and Life: He will not allow them to be raised by the power of
Christ, but only by the Justice of God to their own condemnation: So that, by
his reckoning, the great business and work of the last day, shall not wholly
lie upon Christ's hands to perform, but shall be parted, and shared between the
Power of Christ, and the Justice of God.

54. I am confidently persuaded, S. Paul in this point was not of his mind,
when he says, As in Adam all have dyed, so by Christ shall all (All, without
exception) be made alive again. And, As by man came death, so by Man also
comes the Resurrection of the Dead. Indeed, I wonder Pareus would not likewise
find some shift to exclude Christ, as well from being a Judge to condemn the
wicked: For with as much reason, and as great ease, he might have given him a
Writ of Ease, a discharge from that Office, as well as the other.

55. And now I could wish I had said nothing all this while: (and likely enough
so could you): But it grieves me, that the portion of time allowed me, will not
suffer me in any reasonable proportion to contemplate the wonderful mercy and
goodness of God; who, to do us good, has given such power to our Nature in
Christ, to make a new Heaven, and a new Earth, to restore a new Generation of
creatures, ten times more glorious and perfect than the first. Only, now tell
me, Did not S. Paul, with good reason, speaking of the Resurrection of Christ,
give it an advantage and pre-eminence, even above his death? Is not the (...)
in my Text, the, Yea rather, verbum (...), a word of great moment and weight?
Since the Resurrection of Christ, actuates and ripens the fruit of Christ's
Death, which, without it, would have withered, and been of no help to us. Is
not the Doctrine of Christ's Resurrection and exaltation, with as good reason
made an Article of our Creed; and as necessarily, if not rather, to be leaned
upon, as any of the rest? Nay, has not S. Paul epitomized the whole Creed into
that one Article, saying (in Romans 10.9.) If thou shall believe in thine heart,
Romans 10.9.
that God raised the Lord Jesus from the dead, thou shall be saved.

56. And now it is time to consider, who are the persons whom the Death, yea
rather, the Resurrection of Christ, will protect and warrant from condemnation.
In my Text, as we find none to condemn, so likewise, we cannot light upon any
to be condemned. In the verse immediately before these words, the Elect of God,
are those which are Justified, and therefore must not be condemned. And, to say
the truth, though we dispute till the worlds end, the event will show, that the
Elect of God, and only they, shall reap the harvest of Christ's sufferings, and
bring their sheaves with them. As for the wicked and Reprobates, it shall not
be so with them: but why it shall not be so with them, whether, because they
have wilfully excluded themselves, or, because God had no mind they should be
any thing the better for these things, I will not tell you.

57. In the verses on both sides of my Text, we find, that, We are those that
must not be condemned: We? which we? why Paul and the Romans, Jews and
Gentiles. What all Jews, and all Gentiles? I told you I will not tell: Only
thus much let me tell you, we may boldly maintain S. Paul's phrase: nay, it is
unsafe, and dangerous to alter it. Why, it is all the comfort we have to live
by, it is our glory and crown of rejoicing, that we are those whose salvation
Christ did so earnestly and unfeignedly desire, and thirst after; that, to
obtain power and authority to bestow it on us, he suffered such torments and
blasphemies, that, Never sorrow was like unto his sorrow, which was done unto
him, wherewith the Lord afflicted him in the day of his fierce wrath.

58. Wherefore, I beseech you (Beloved Brethren) even by the bowels of this
Jesus Christ, that you would give me leave to advise you, if there be any here
fit to be advised by me, if there be any in this company as weak and ignorant
as my self: (And though my heart be deceitful above all things, yet as far as I
understand mine own heart, If I speak these words out of partiality or faction,
let me be excluded from having my part in those merits.) I say, let me desire
you: or rather, let our holy Mother the Church, persuade you (in the 17.
Article) to receive Gods promises in such wise, as they are generally set forth
unto us in holy Scriptures?

59. For, consider impartially with your selves, what an unreasonable horrible
thing is it, seeing there are so many several frequent expressions of Gods
general love and gracious favor unto Mankind, enforced and strengthened with
such protestations and solemn oaths, that the cunning'st Linguist of you all,
cannot with your whole lives, study, conceive, or frame expressions more full
and satisfactory. I say then, Is it not desperate madness, for a man to show
such hatred and abomination at these comfortable and gracious professions of
God, that he can be content to spend almost his whole age in contriving and
hunting after Interpretations, utterly contradicting and destroying the plain
apparent sense of those Scriptures: and will be glad and heartily comforted to
hear tidings of a New-found-out Gloss to pervert, and rack, and torment, Gods
holy word.

60. On the other side; Far be it from us to think, that it is in our power,
when we list or have a mind to it, to put our selves in the number of Gods
elect faithful servants. Or, to imagine, that we have God so sure chained and
fettered to us by his Promises, that we may dispense now then for the
commission of a delightful, gainful crime: Or, that when we have business for a
sin to advantage us in our fortunes, we need not be too scrupulous about it,
seeing God is bound, upon our sorrow and contrition, to receive us again into
favor. Thou wretched Fool! Dare thou make an advantage of Gods goodness, to
assist and patronize thy security? It Is true, God has promised Remission of
sins to a repentant contrite sinner: but has he assured thee that he will give
thee Repentance, whenever thou please to allow thy self leisure to seek it?
No: Know, that there is a time (and presuming Security, like sleep, does hasten
and add wings to that time) when there will be found no way for Repentance,
though thou seek it with tears. And thus more than I meant for the persons.

61. And now what remains, but that we try an experiment: That we may know in
what a comfortable state Christ has set us; let us consider, and look about
us, to see if we can find any enemies that are likely to do us any harm: For
which purpose, we shall not meet with a more acurate Spy and Intelligencer than
S. Paul: who in the remainder of his Chapter, after my Text, has mustered them
together in one Roll. But first, there is one, if he were our adversary, he
would be in stead of a thousand enemies unto us, and that is GOD. But him we
are sure of in the verse before my Text: For it is he that Justifies, therefore
surely he will not condemn: Therefore what say you to Tribulation, or Distress,
or Persecution, or Famine, or Nakedness, or Peril, or the Sword? Why these are
not worthy the naming, for over all these we are more than conquerours. More
than conquerours; what is that? Why they are not only overcome and disarmed,
but they are brought over to our faction; they war on our side.

62. Well, in the next file, there follow adversaries of better fashion; there
is Life, and Death, and Angels, and Principalities, and Powers, (who are those?
In truth I know not; but be they who they will, they can do us no harm:) No,
nor things present, nor things to come, nor height, nor depth; (These are
adversaries we should scarce have dreamed of). And to make all sure, in a word,
There is no other creature shall ever be able to separate us from the love of
God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord.

63. Yet for all S. Paul's exactness, there remains one enemy behind, and that
is a sore one, of prime note; and truly I wonder how the Apostle could miss
him. And that is Sin. I would to God S. Paul had taken notice of him: For this
one enemy is able to do us more harm than all the rest put together: nay, but
for sin, all the rest almost were our very good friends. Had we best supply S.
Paul's incogitancy and even adventure to put him in the Catalogue too? Well,
let them that have a mind to it, do it; Truly, I dare not. And, but that I know
Martin Luther was a bold-spirited man, I should wonder how he durst so
confidently have adventured upon it: In his Book entitled Captivitatis
Babylonicae ( cap. de Baptismo, near the beginning) he has these words: Vides
quam dives sit homo Christianus sive Baptizatus, qui etiam volens non potest
perdere suam salutem quantiscunque peccatis, nisi nolit credere. I will not
translate them to you: and I would they had never been Englished; for by that
means, it may be, some of our loudest preachers would have wanted one point of
comfortable false doctrine, wherewith they are wont to pleasure their friends
and benefactors. Only, let us do thus much for S. Paul's credit, to believe it
was not merely inconsideration in him to leave out Sin in this catalogue; that
there was some ground of Reason for it: For though it may come to pass, by the
mercy and goodness of God, That even Sin it self shall not pluck us out of his
hand; yet it would be something a strange preposterous Doctrine, for a Preacher
of the New Covenant, to proclaim, that we shall undoubtedly obtain the promises
of the Covenant, though we never so much break the Conditions.

64. I do confess my self very guilty, and am sorry that I have thus long
exercised and wearied your patience: And yet, for all that, have not performed
that task which I fully resolved upon, when I adventured upon this subject; and
that was, to spend this time in raising your devotions to the contemplation of
the glorious mercies of God, expressed to us in Christ's Resurrection and
exaltation. But because other thoughts have carried me away (even against my
will) almost all this while, I shall further take leave to wrong and injure
your patience, with proposing one consideration more, which ought by no means
to be omitted.

65. And that is, to take notice of the Person, to whom we have been beholding
for these unspeakable mercies; and that is Christ, Christ alone, none else
mentioned or thought upon. If Bellarmine had been to advise S. Paul, if he had
been privy to the writing of this Epistle, it is likely he would not have taken
it ill, to have had Christ's name in the matter of our Salvation: But he would
not have endured the Apostles utter silence of all helps and aids besides: yea,
though himself acknowlegeth it to be the safest course, to put our whole
confidence, only in the mercy of God; yet, quia magis honorificum est habere
aliquid ex merito, because it concerns our credit, to put in a little for merit
and desert on our side. He would not have us so to disparage our selves, as to
make salvation a mere Alms, proceeding merely out of Courtesy

66. Nay but, Oh thou man, What art thou that answerest against God? What art
thou that justifiest thy self before him? Nay, what art thou that condemnest
God, making him a liar all the Scripture over? the whole project whereof is
this, to let us know, how unable, how sick, how dead we are of our selves, and
therefore ought most necessarily to have recourse to him for our salvation. As
for us (Beloved Christians) if we must needs rejoice, let us rejoice in our
infirmities, let our glory be our shame, and let us lift up our eyes and
behold; Is. 63 1, 2.
Who is this that comes from Edom, with died garments from Bozrah; This that
is glorious in his apparel, traveling in the greatness of his strength? And
Christ will say, It is I that speak in righteousness, mighty to save: But,
wherefore, Lord, art thou red in thine apparel, and thy garments like him that
treads in the wire-fatt? He will answer, I have trodden the wine press alone,
and of the people there was none with me: for which reason I am now crowned
with glory, and honor, and immortality: I alone am mighty to save, and besides
me there is none other.

67. And good luck have thou with thine honor, Ps. 45.
Oh Lord: ride on, because of thy word of truth, of meekness, and of
righteousness: and thy right hand shall teach thee terrible things: Terrible
things for the King's enemies, for them which would not have thee to rule over
them. And good luck have we with thine honor. O Lord: ride on, because of thy
word of truth, of meekness, and of righteousness, and thy right hand shall
teach thee gracious and comfortable things for us thy servants, and sheep of
thy pasture; who dare not exalt a weak arm of flesh against thee. Thy right
hand shall mightily defend us in the midst of all our enemies. Thy right hand
shall find us out, and gather us up, though lost and consumed in the grave;
though scattered before the four winds of heaven: And, thy right hand shall
exalt us to glory and immortality for ever with thee in thy heavenly Kingdom:
where all the days of our life, yea all the days of thy glorious endless
life, we shall, with Angels and Archangels, say, Glory, and honor, and power,
and immortality, be unto him which sits on the throne; and to the Lamb, and
to the Holy Spirit; for ever, and for ever. Amen, Amen.

The Sixth Sermon.
LUKE XVI. 9. Make to your selves friends of the Mammon of unrighteousness,
that when ye fail, they may receive you into everlasting habitations.


THE Children of this world (says Christ) are wiser in their generation then
the Children of Light. To make which good, our Savior, in so much of the
Chapter as goes before my Text, brings in a Story, or, as they call it, a
Parable of a cunning Fellow, yet no great Projector neither, no very subtle
Politician; notwithstanding, one who being in an extremity, turned out of his
Office for mispending his Masters Goods, had found out a shift, and that by
mere cousenage, to procure so much as would serve to keep him, indeed not
according to the Port and fashion after which before he had lived; but only to
maintain him in meat and drink, out of danger of starving, or, which was more
fearful, because more full of trouble or dishonor, hard labor or begging.

2. Surely it had been no hard matter for our Savior, who knew all whatsoever
was in man, to have discovered more subtle projects, plots of a finer and more
curious contrivance than this fellow's: But this, it seems, would serve his
turn well enough for the purpose, for which he made use of it! And to say the
truth, there cannot be imagined an example more exactly suiting, more closely
applicable to his intent, which was not to discredit and dishearten his
followers, by comparing, I, and preferring the cunning of an ordinary fellow, a
mere Bayliffe, or Steward, before that spiritual heavenly wisdom to which they
pretend: Nor, Secondly, to instruct them by indirect and unwarrantable courses
to provide for themselves hereafter. But chiefly this,

3. To teach us, by objecting to our view, a man who by his own negligence, and
carelessness, being brought to an extremity (for there was no necessity he
should be brought to these plunges; a little timely care and providence, even
ordinary honesty, would casily have warranted and preserved him) had upon the
sudden found out a trick of his Office, namely, by proceeding in his old
courses of wasting his Master's substance to the enriching of his
Fellow Servants, thereby gained their good wills, that for the time following
they might preserve him from perishing.

4. Our Savior, I say, by this example, would teach us, That since God has
placed us here in this world as his Stewards, has put into our hands, his
Goods, his Riches, to be dispensed for his use and advantage: And such Stewards
(we are) who have advantages infinitely more urgent and pressing us to an
honest faithful discharge of our Office, than this man in the Parable ever had;
As first, We must of necessity fail, and be cashiered of our Office. All the
power of Heaven and Earth cannot procure us a perpetuity in it: The case did
not stand so with this man, for it was merely his own fault to deserve
discarding; and besides, having deserved that censure, it was his misfortune
too, that his Lord should come to the knowledge of it, (for it is no impossible
thing, that a Steward should thrive by his Lords loss, and yet nere be called
to an account for it.) And secondly, upon our behavior in this our Office,
depends the everlasting welfare of our souls and bodies; we shall for ever be
disposed of, according to the honest, or unfaithful discharge of our place: If
ill, Lord what shall become of us? where shall we appear in that great day of
account? I dare not almost tell you the issue of it: But if we have carried our
selves as faithful Servants; propose to your selves your own conditions, give
your thoughts license and scope to be excessive and overflowing in their
desires, if the whole extension and capacity of your thoughts be not satisfied
and filled to the brim with measure pressed down and running over, God himself
(which is impossible to imagine) will prove a deceiving unfaithful Master.

5. These things therefore considered, without question, it does infinitely
concern us to consult, and project, what we mean to do with our riches, to what
employment we intend to put those honors, and that power which God has
conferred on us in this life: Whether to receive them as our good things, to go
away contented with them as our Rewards, our final rewards, expecting no other
good things from God after them: Or, which is our Saviors advice, use them as
means, and helps of attaining blessings above all conceivable proportion
exceeding them; so dispensing and providently scattering them abroad, that
against our time of need, (which sooner or later will undoubtedly come) we may
oblige to our selves such friends, so gracious, and prevailing with our Master,
who, either by their Prayers and Intercession, or some other way which we know
not, may procure for us admission into our Master's joys, to be no longer
Stewards and Servants, but Friends and Sons: Thus by the help and benefit of
this Mammon of unrighteousness in my Text, these little things, even the least
blessings that God has to bestow upon us, so called in the verse following, and
in the next but one to that, these things of other men, as if they were
trifles, not worthy the owning if compared with what rewards may be had in
exchange for them, purchasing to our selves everlasting and glorious rewards;
By the assistance of our Riches (in the expression of St. Paul), laying up for
our selves a foundation of good works against the time to come, that we may lay
hold on eternal life.

6. And this I suppose to be the force and meaning of this (...), or moral of
the Parable, which Christ has closely contrived and pressed into these few
words, Make to your selves friends of the, etc. In which words, I shall observe
unto you these three general parts.

1. What we must expect at last, notwithstanding all the Riches and Pomps of
this world, i. e. To fail. Christ you see makes no question at all of it, he
takes it for granted, where he says, That when ye fail, as implying, that
certainly fail we must. 2. This being supposed, that fail we must, the counsel
of Christ comes in very seasonably, namely, to provide for the main, to take
order, that though we our selves sink, yet we may procure us friends to support
us in our necessities, and that is by making to our selves friends of the
Mammon, etc. 3. The comfortable issue and convenience which shall accrue unto
us by those friends thus purchased, i.e. by them to be received into
everlasting, etc. Of these, in the order proposed.
7. You do not expect, I am sure, Part. I.
that I should go about seriously to persuade you, that you shall not live here
for ever; For, whom should I seek to persuade? God forbid, I should be so
uncharitable, as to think, or, but suspect, that ever I should find occasion to
make use of any persuasions for such a purpose. Indeed a very good man (it was
the Prophet David) once said In his prosperity, I shall never be removed, Psalm.
30.6.
Thou Lord of thy goodness have made my hill so strong: But was this well said
of him, think you? It seems not: For presently to confute this his confidence,
Verse. 7.
The Lord did but turn his face away from him, and he was troubled. Yet surely
such a speech as this could never be spoken upon better grounds; for this his
assurance, it seems, proceeded not out of any presumptuous confidence of his
own strength or policy: But only out of consideration of God's especial
Providence showed in his wonderful preservation from many great and imminent
dangers, and in preferring him from a low contemptible fortune to the Rule and
Dominion over his People.

8. There is another fellow in a Parable, Luke 12.
who though he came short of David, in this his unwarrantable confidence and
presumption upon that foundation of Riches and Wealth, which with unwearied
anxiety and care he had laid up, notwithstanding was more suddenly and
unanswerably confuted: For, he did not promise to himself a perpetuity, only he
imagined to himself (as he thought, reasonably,) that since he had at last
obtained that which he had aimed at, and which had cost him so many years
travel, it were fit for him now to enjoy the fruit which he had so dearly
bought. And in a joyful contemplation of this his happiness he enters into
Dialogue with his soul, Soul, says he, now take thy rest. No more shall thou
be vexed, and even consumed with the painful and violent thirst after Riches,
thou have that laid up for thee which shall abundantly satisfy all thy
desires. All my business hereafter, shall be to find out ways how to repay unto
my soul all those pleasures which heretofore I have denied unto my self; I have
store sufficient for many years expenses safely laid up in my Barns: Yet for
all this man's thus pleasing himself with assured promises of many years
happiness; If you will but vouchsafe to enquire after him the very next day
after he spoke thus, His garners it is likely you may yet find standing,
thronged and oppressed with the abundance of corn. But for his soul (for whose
sake all this ado had been kept) the Lord knows what became of that, it was
hurried away, no man can tell, whither.

9. Now the thing that it becomes me to desire at your hands from the
consideration of these two Examples, is this, not to require of you to believe
that you must once fail (for that I suppose were needless) nor yet to dissuade
you from allowing to your selves a reasonable use and moderate lawful pleasures
from that abundance of blessings wherewith God has enriched you beyond all
other men. But to beseech you, that this meditation, that certainly you must
fail, may be no unwelcome thought to you, that when the time shall come that
you must leave these riches and pleasures which God has given you here to
enjoy, it may not come upon you as an unexpected misfortune, as a thing you
were afraid of, and would willingly be content to avoid.

10. I confess, this were a meditation sufficient to discourage and quite
dishearten a man that were resolved to take up his rest in the pleasures and
preferments of this world, that were content to sit down satisfied with such a
slight happiness, as this life is able to afford him; for one who would make
Riches his strong City, a place of refuge and security, a fortress whereto he
would have recourse in all his extremities, and from whence he would expect
safety in all dangers and troubles which may assail him: For, what were that,
but to withdraw him from his strong holds, and leave him unfortified and
exposed to any injury and misfortune! How could I be more injurious to such a
man, then to vex and affright him with such sad melancholic thoughts as these,
That the time will come, when that strong Castle of his, his Riches, shall be
undermined and demolished, when he shall be left naked and defenseless. At
which time, if it were possible for him to retain his Riches, which before he
made his Bulwark and place of Security, yet he will find them then but
Paper-Wals, unable to stand the weakest battery.

11. But I hope better things of you, (Beloved Christians) even things which
accompany salvation: And indeed, why should I not? who can forbid me to hope
so? For alas, I know you not. I have no reason to assure my self of the
contrary. And then I should be most inexcusably uncharitable, if I should not
even rejoice in this my hope: I see God has plentifully showered down upon you,
almost overwhelmed you with all the blessings of this life. He has moreover
given you peaceable times to enjoy them, (Blessed be his holy Name for it, and
a thousand blessings be returned into the bosom of his Anointed for his most
pious Christian-like care to confirm this peace, and to preserve it from
interruption.) God, I say, has given you leisure and opportunity to enjoy and
improve these your riches for your everlasting happiness: A comfort which he
has denied almost to all other Nations; Nothing abroad but wars, and rumors of
wars, no joy nor comfort but only in the effusion of precious Christian blood,
nothing but sacking of Towns and Invasions of Countries, God only knows upon
how just pretensions. But, which is above all other blessings, (indeed without
which all the rest will prove very curses) God has given you an abundant
plentiful use of his blessed Word and Sacraments, every week, several times
(till now) a worthy and able Clergy to put you in mind, how great an account
you are to make to Almighty God of these his blessings, and what extraordinary
Interest is expected at your hards.

12. Let me not therefore, I beseech you, be your Enemy, if I prove troublesome
to any slumbring Lethargick Spirit, if I put him in mind, that the time will
come, when sleep shall for ever depart from his eyes, and that if his slumber
last till a Trumpet awake him, darkness he may find, most palpable
Aegyptian-darkness, but not darkness commodious to call on and procure sleep,
not very convenient to take ones rest in. Forgive, I beseech you, my
importunity, if I earnestly desire you frequently to represent to your minds a
time of Failing, and presently after that a severe inexorable Judge, requiring
a strict exact account of your behavior in your Stewardship; if I beseech you,
from the consideration of the foolish Virgins, not to put far from you the
coming of the Bridegroom, not to frame to your selves reasons and
probabilities, why he is not likely to come yet a good while, (for he himself
has told you, he will come as a Thief in the Night, and therefore when you are
thus secure and slumbring, your selves create a night, a fit season for him to
come unawares upon you.) For, if you be unprovided of Oil in your Lamps, of
good works which may shine before men, and the door be once shut, Talk not of
any new devised Faith, and I know not what assurance; there is no possibility
of ever having it opened, but you shall be forced to remain exposed to all
dangers, to all manner of misfortunes, not one shall be found to befriend you,
and to receive you into everlasting habitations.

13. And, I pray you, consider, that if the apprehension of these things
conceived not as present, but as to be expected, it may be, many years hence,
be so distastful and ominous to flesh and blood, Who will be able to abide the
time, when it shall, indeed, overtake him? If now in these days of leisure and
forbearance (a season which God out of his glorious mercy has allowed us on
purpose to spend in such thoughts as these, in projecting against the evil day)
the meditation thereof bring such anguish and torment along with it; what
terrible insupportable effects will it work in us, when we shall find our
selves surpised by it, and caught as in a snare? If a man can no sooner hear
such things related, or but seriously think upon them, though in the height of
his jollity, but straight, as if some ill news had been told him; as if he had
heard some sad tragical story of his own misfortunes, he will presently recoil
from his mirth, pleasure will become troublesome and distastful to him; Oh with
what anguish and vexation of spirit, with what agony of soul shall they be
entertained, when they come in earnest?

14. Observe therefore, I beseech you, that our Savior does not bid you, When
you fail make to your selves friends; No alas, that is not the time to make
friends in; Then is the season when you are to expect comfort and assistance
from those friends which you have gained before, in the time when you were
furnished with such good things as were likely to oblige men unto you. What
title then can be found out equal to express the folly and madness of such
people; who, as if God had created them on purpose for the pleasures and
vanities of this world, make that the whole business of their lives; and, as if
the care of their souls everlasting disposal were but an employment of an hours
dispatch, will not vouchsafe so fruitlessly to cast away any part of the time,
when their souls are vigorous and healthful, about such a trifling design, but
destine their last few hours, when they are unable for any business else, to
settle for themselves an estate of eternity.

15. But because I have not the leisure now to prosecute this Argument as
fully, as it may deserve; Give me leave, I pray you, in brief, to present to
your view, a man brought to such an extremity as this; One fastened and chained
unto the bed of sickness, one that has already received within himself the
messages of death, Death beginning (in the language of the Psalmist) to gnaw
upon him. Take the pains, I beseech you, to imagine to your selves (and it will
require some courage but to consider it) what unquiet busy thoughts shall then
possess him, what terrible affrighting meditations shall then be suggested to
him, when he shall be forced to apprehend, that now he has but a very small
portion of time left him; and yet for all that, all the business for the
disparching of which he came into the world, is left undone; the counsel and
good intention of God, out of which he gave him his Riches, being utterly
defeated, scarce one friend made, that will vouchsafe to look upon him now in
his necessity: but on the contrary, many sore enemies procured, that will be
ready to cry for vengeance against him: No account to be found of the
dispensation of those goods which God has given him, but such a one as will
serve to feed and nourish the distemper and sickness of his thoughts: so much
(may be) spent in the prosecution and fulfilling of his ungodly lusts, so much
in gorgeous raiment and delicious feeding, yet all this while scarce one poor
Lazarus obliged. Now all the remedy that is to be had in such an exigence as
this, is to have the next Preacher sent for, who must instill a little
comfortable Divinity into him, to make him sleep, and so his soul departs the
Lord knows whither. And yet these are but the beginnings of sorrows, but what
the end and perfection of them will be, I confess I have not the courage to
tell you.

16. But yet for all this,

17. As concerning the man which was called the last hour of the day to labor
in the vineyard: whereas, he that shall defer his repentance and amendment of
life, till his last hour, if he indeed prove sorry for his sins, yet labor he
cannot; the best that he can do, is to make offers and resolutions to work the
good work of God, if it shall please him to spare him life: But that those
resolutions of his shall be accepted with God, in stead of real very labor
indeed, I find no commission to assure you. But I confess, it is something
unseasonably done of me, to stand, so long at least, upon such sullen
melancholic meditations, as those are; especially now in the midst of this
solemn glorious Feast: Therefore I am resolved even abruptly to break through
them, and to hasten to my second General, which is the Counsel which our
Savior gives us upon this consideration, that necessarily we must fail,
namely, to provide, and seriously project against that time, by all the means
we can make, to oblige to our selves friends in that extremity; expressed in
these words, Make to your selves friends of the Mammon of unrighteousness.

18. Mammon of unrighteousness? Part. II.
What is that? Shall I deal freely and honestly with you? Indeed I will: (for,
woe unto me, if I should dare to come into this place to flatter you: and woe
unto me, if I should dare to come into this place to vent my spleen against
any). Then all this, for which there is such a do kept, not only here, but all
the world over; such making of friends, nay, such undermining of friends; so
many dangers sought out and despised: This is the Mammon of unrighte^ousness.
An untoward name, I confess, for a thing so much set by, so carefully and
ambitiously courted, so insatiably thirsted after. But yet a name of Christ's
devising, He has afforded this Idol, Riches, no better a title; and therefore I
must, and dare call them so, any where.

19. But may it not be lawful to enquire after; or, give some guesses, at
least, at the Reasons which might move our Savior to put so disgraceful a
name upon Riches? Without question, it is not only lawful to be so curious,
but also very useful and expedient. A main Reason (I have heard) is, because
ordinarily, Riches leave a tincture and infection in the persons who have any
thing to do with them. It is a hard thing, almost impossible, for a man any
ways to meddle with them without sin: ordinarily, they are got with sin, they
are possessed with sin, they are spent with sin. A man (says Siracides) cannot
hasten to be rich without sin: and when he has once got them, how unwilling
will he be to let a lust pass unsatisfied, seeing he is furnished with that, to
which (in his opinion at least) nothing can be denied! How unwilling will he be
to be worsted, though in the most unjust cause, seeing he is furnished with
that which will blind the eyes of the prudent, and pervert the understanding of
the wise! For (says the same wise man) as a man's Riches, so his anger
increases. And upon the same grounds, it may be said, that, As a man's Riches
increase, so likewise his Desires and Lusts increase. I will undertake to give
you one Reason more, why Riches are called Mammon of unrighteousness; and it
is, because they are Mammon, Riches indeed, only to unrighteous men; none
beside such, will rest contented with them, and suffer God to depart from him
without a greater blessing than they can be.

20. But what need I trouble my self about enquiring after reasons, why this so
universally-adored Idol. Mammon, is so dishonourably branded and stigmatized by
our Savior, since himself in another place has said enough of it, which may
suffice, not only to warrant the reasonableness of this title; but also to make
them, who are apt to glory so much in riches, if they well consider it, even to
envy the happiness and security of those who are not trusted with so dangerous
wares. The words were spoken upon occasion of a sudden great sorrow, and
melancholy which appeared in a young man's countenance, and procured by the
temptations of Riches, which made him refuse the most advantageous Bargain that
ever was offered to man. Whereupon, says Christ to his Disciples (as his words
are recorded by S. Matthew) Verily, Mat. 19.23, 24.
I say unto you, that a Rich man shall hardly enter into the Kingdom of Heaven.
And again I say unto you, that it is easier for a Camel to go through the eye
of a needle, than for arich man to enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. Indeed S.
Mark reports this speech something more largely than it is there, Mark 10.24.
and instead of a Rich man, puts in, One that trusts in his Riches: Which he
does not so much to explain the phrase of the speech, as to give a reason of
the Impossibility.

21. For, if our Savior (in saying, It is impossible for a rich man to enter
into the Kingdom of Heaven) by a rich man, had meant one that trusts in his
Riches, there had been no sufficient ground for so great an amazement as seized
upon the Disciples at the hearing of it; For that was a thing which they knew
well enough before; not the most ignorant of his hearers, but could have told
him as much. Therefore S. Matthew's and S. Mark's words joined together, will
make up this sense (which I make no question at all, but that it was Christ's
meaning) namely, that it is even almost impossible for a Rich man to be saved,
because he cannot choose but trust in his Riches.

22. And this is more clearly evinced by that satisfaction which our Savior
gave to his Disciples to recover them from their astonishment; where he says,
With men it is impossible, but not with God; for with God all things are
possible: Intimating thus much; That considering the great, almost
irresistible, Temptations which Riches carry along with them, and man's extreme
weakness and natural impotency; his willing propension, and to all ordinary
natural means, most incurable inclination to make them his place of rest, his
strong city wherein he trusts: It is impossible, that these things meeting
together, he should not put his confidence in them, and so make himself
incapable of Heaven, between which and Riches thus used, there is a large, as
unpassable a gulf as between Heaven and Hell: With men therefore these things
are impossible, but not with God; for with him all things are possible. It is
in his power, by the help and assistance of that grace which he showers upon
every one of us in Baptism, to cure this hereditary weakness and sickness of
our natures; and to render us healthful and vigorous, powerful enough to free
our selves from that bondage and slavery, wherein these outward worldly
blessings are apt to captive us, and whereunto by nature we do willingly submit
our selves. It is in his power to make those pernicious pleasures, which Riches
may promise unto us, to become unwelcome and distasteful unto us: Nay, which is
more, it is in his power to make even this Mammon of unrighteousness against
its own nature, to become an help and instrument to procure for us the true
Riches, even those unvaluable treasures which God has laid up in heaven for
us. Take it not ill therefore, I beseech you, if that, for which you are so
much envied and reverenced above other men, be so undervalued by our Savior in
comparison with the Riches; be not angry with our Savior for it: But rather
endeavor, by trading providently with them, for your own and others benefit,
to render Christ's language in this place improper and abusive.

23. But now if Riches deserve no better a title at our Savior's hands, how
can it be likely that they can prove fit instruments to procure friends, and
such friends as we stand in need of? For, do men gather grapes of thorns, or
figs of thistles? Indeed the argument held well on S. Paul's side, when he
says, If we have sowed to you spiritual things, is it much if we reap your
temporal things? But will the argument hold also on Christ's part; If ye have
not been faithful in the Mammon of unrighteousness, who will trust you with the
true Riches? Certainly, if it does not, not only this, but diverse Chapters
besides, might, without any loss, have been left out of the Gospel.

24. And therefore it was a sullen ill-natured fellow (he in the Parable, I
mean, which received the one talent) and without all question, a shameless liar
(though I fear, there be many, who are not very averse from his opinion) who
with an impudent face durst tell God, He was austere, reaping where he had not
sown, and gathering where he had not scattered. And though he spoke this with
the same confidence that his Proselytes do in these our days, not as a
probable opinion, but as a thing that he is assured of; (for, says he, I know
thee, that thou art austere, etc.) Yet I beseech you believe him not: No, no,
Our God is a gracious God, and requires of us no more than we are able to do.
He does not expect Faith, and Repentance, and Good Works, where he has given no
abilities to perform them: Nay, does not God by his Prophet tell us, and Christ
repeats it in his Parable, that he is so far from that, that after several
years labor bestowed on his vineyard, and yet no fruit issuing; yet he was
content to expect one year longer, even till he had done so much, that no more
could be done; he is at a stay, and asks, What he could have done more?

25. It were therefore very fit and convenient, that we should, at least in our
own hearts, silence and stifle such opinions concerning God as these are. And
believe, that he is a well-wisher to us, when he bestows any means upon us,
whereby we may do good. Otherwise, we shall without any comfort or courage,
heartlesly, and even sleepily go about the performing of what Christ here
counsels us to. If you will not believe me upon my word, take the man's own
confession: says he, When I had once entertained this persuasion, that God
would expect a more yielding plentiful harvest, fruitful beyond that proportion
of seed which he gave me to sow, I was afraid: Horror and uncomfortable
thoughts seized upon me, and I went and hid my talent in a Napkin, I even sat
still, resolved to put all to an adventure, and to expect what God would do
with me; for, alas, how bootless, and to no purpose, would my weak endeavors
be to procure the favor of such a God, that would not be content but with a
great deal more than lay in my power to perform.

26. It Is true indeed, Christ told him, that though he had had such an unworthy
prejudicial conceit of him, yet that even from thence he might have been moved
to have made the best and most advantageous use of that Talent, which God had
bestowed on him; for says Christ, If thou knew I was austere, why did
thou not therefore put my money into the exchangers hands, and trade with it,
that I might have received mine own with increase: Why did thou not at the
least do thy best, to give satisfaction to thy hard austere master? God forbid,
that I should doubt but that there are thousands, who, though, it may be, have
entertained this man's opinion and conceit of God; yet make better use of it
than he did. But yet the man's own confession, shows what ordinarily and
naturally is the fruit and issue of it.

27. That therefore, which God sowes among you, is Riches; but yet, Riches,
most improperly so called; that which he scatters and strews abroad, is the
Mammon of unrighteousness: Now, he which sows (says the Apostle) sows in
hope, and he which scatters, scatters in hope. But what gain or interest,
what a kind of harvest does God hope for after this his Seeds time? why just
such another as the same Apostle speaks of (1 Cor. 15.) where he discourses
upon the Resurrection and glorious change of these our bodies; 1 Cor. 15.42,
43, 44.
They are sown, says he, in corruption, but are raised in incorruption; they
are sown in dishonor, but are raised in glory; they are sown in weakness,
but are raised in power; they are sown natural bodies, but are raised
spiritual heavenly bodies. In like manner, God sowes among you those Riches,
which himself, most disgracefully calls the Mammon of unrighteousness, in hope
that he may reap the true Riches: He scatters among you such small trifles,
that many even Heathen-men have been content to want, for the empty acrial
reward of fame: nay, that some of them have been content to cast away in an
humor; and these small things he scatters abroad, in hope that he may gather
(what, think you?) the everlasting salvation of your souls and bodies. And is
this that harsh austere Master?

28. Indeed, if God were such a person as some men have given him out for; if
he should scatter abroad his Riches as snares, on purpose to fetter and
entangle men with them. If he should bestow upon any this Mammon of
unrighteousness, with an intent, and resolution, that it should become unto
them the Mammon of unrighteousness indeed, that it should make them indisposed
and incapable of attaining unto the true riches; there might be some plea for
them to fasten so injurious an accusation upon God. But can the Judge of all
the earth deal so with his servants? Can he which is Goodness and Mercy it
self, He who rejoices to style himself, The Preserver of men; Can he be so
cruelly bountiful to his creatures, as by heaping upon them, the vanishing,
unsatisfying, blessings of this life, thereby to fat and cherish them against
the day of slaughter and destruction? God forbid!

29. I confess, notwithstanding that, such persons there may be upon whom God
may in his wrath shower down Blessings, and Riches in his fierce displeasure:
But they are only such, as by living in a continual habitual practice of
undervaluing and contemning the daily offers of Grace and favor, have already
condemned themselves, and sealed themselves unto the day of destruction; and
such an one was Pharaoh: concerning whom, God himself testifies saying* For
this reason I have raised thee up, Exodus 9.16.
that I might show my power in thee, and that my Name might he declared
throughout all the Earth, that is, Since by thy continual Rebellions thou have
judged thy self unworthy of life, for this reason I have raised thee up, I have
kept thee alive, and preserved thee that none of my former plagues should sweep
thee away, that at last, by an utter destruction of thee, together with the
whole strength and flower of thy Kingdom, I may be glorified throughout the
whole world. But I will leave discoursing and come nearer unto you, in the
serious application of Christ's counsel here.

30. It is the property of Riches (says the Wiseman) to gather many friends:
Prou. 19.4.
Those who are above others in wealth and power shall presently be furnished
with friends more then they can well know what to do withal; But such friends
are not concerned at all in our Savior's advice in my Text; The friends here
intended are such, who are not here to restore again unto you in the same coin
that they received: Give not to the Rich (says our Savior) for fear they
repay you. Of all things in the world, take heed of being paid back again in
this life, beware how you carry your reward along with you to your Grave. But
leave it to be paid in exchange in another Country, where for using five
Talents well, you shall have ten Cities given you. Where for the bounty of a
Cup of cold water, you shall receive a Prophet's reward. Such a friend was
offered once to the Rich-man in the Gospel, God sent him one to his doors, even
to crave his friendship: But the Rich-man was so busied with the care of his
Wardrobe and his Table, that he was not at leisure to hearken to so gainless an
Offer: Notwithstanding the time came afterward, when he miserably, to his
cost, perceived what a blessed opportunity he had most negligently omitted, and
even in Hell attempted to purchase his favor, and to obtain from his hand a
poor. Alms (God knows), but one drop of water; but all too late, the time of
making friends was past, and a great unfordeable Gulf had divided them from all
possible society and communion for ever.

31. Now consider (I beseech you) that it had been a very easy matter, for God
so to have provided for all his creatures, that each particular, should have
had enough of his own without being beholding to another for supply: But then
two heavenly and divine Virtues had been quite lost; For, Where had been the
Poor man's Patience, and the Rich man's Charity? The poor man, therefore wants
that you may have occasion to exercise your liberality, and that by loosing and
diminishing your wealth upon them, ye may become more full of Riches hereafter.
So that, it is Gods great bounty to you, not only to give you plenty and
abundance, but also to suffer others to languish in penury and want: It may be,
God has suffered himself so long to be robbed of his own Possessions his Tithes,
that you might have the glory and comfort of restoring them: It may be, God has
suffered the ancient superstitious Histrionical adorning of his Temples to be
converted into the late slovenly profaneness (commonly called worshipping in
Spirit, but intended to be Worship without cost,) that you may find a happy
occasion to restore those sacred places dedicated to his honor, to that
Majesty and Reverence as may become Houses wherein God delights that his Name
should dwell.

32. Now, if it be not in my power to persuade you, neither to make God nor man
your debtors by your Riches: Yet I beseech you, make neither of them your
Enemies by them: Do not make your Riches Instruments of War to fight against
God himself; for example, as maintaining an unjust cause by power, a cause
which God abhorrs: Do not so requite God for his extraordinary libegality to
you, as to make his Riches Instruments for the Devil to wreak his malice upon
those whom God loves: If I had not a care not to injure your patience too
far, what might not be said upon this subject? But, I perceive, it is fit for
me to hasten to your release.

33. But before I quit my self, and ease you of further prosecution of this
point, I shall desire you all to suffer one word of Exhortation, and if there
be any here whom it may more nearly concern, I beseech them even by the bowels
of Jesus Christ, that they will suffer too a word of most necessary reproof:
And though what I shall say, does not naturally flow from the words in hand,
yet they bear a reasonable resemblance and proportion with them: So pertinent,
I am sure, they are to the Auditory to whom I speak, that I would choose rather
quite to lose my Text, then here to leave them unsaid.

34. It is about making friends too: Indeed, not with the Mammon of
unrighteousness: No, that is a trifle to it. It is about making friends with
not revenging of injuries, with patient bearing and willing forgiving of
offenses: A duty so seriously, so incessantly, sometimes in plain words,
sometimes in Parables, all manner of ways, upon all occasions, urged by our
Savior, that we cannot so much as pray, but we must be forced to acknowledge,
obedience to this Law, Forgive us, -- As we forgive: Yea, so boundlesly, and
without all restrictions or reservations, is it enjoined, That when as Peter
thought it fair to have it limited to a certain number, and proposed Seven,
as, in his opinion, reasonable and convenient; No, faith our Savior, Forgive
not until seven times, but until four hundred fourscore and ten times: And if
he could have imagined, that it were possible, for a man to have exceeded even
this number also in injuries, without question, he would not have left there
neither.

35. But, How is this Doctrine received in the world? What counsel would men,
and those none of the worst sort give thee in such a case? How would the
soberest, discreetest, well-bred Christian advise thee? Why thus, If thy
Brother, or thy Neighbor, have offered thee an injury or an affront, forgive
him? By no means: Thou art utterly undone, and lost in thy reputation with the
world if thou do forgive him: What is to be done then? Why, let not thy heart
take rest, let all other business and employment be laid aside till thou have
his blood: How? a man's blood for an injurious passionate speech, for a
disdainful look? Nay, that is not all: That thou may gain amongst men the
reputation of a discreet well-tempered Murderer be sure thou killest him not in
passion, whey thy blood is hot and boiling with the provocation; but proceed
with as great temper and settledness of reason, with as much discretion and
preparedness as thou would to the Communion: After some several days
respite, that it may appear it is thy Reason guides thee, and not thy Passion:
Invite him mildly and courteously into some retired place, and there let it be
determined; whether his blood or thine shall satisfy the injury.

36. Oh thou Holy Christian Religion! Whence is it that thy children have
sucked this inhumane poisonous blood, these raging fiery Spirits? For if we
shall enquire of the Heathen, they will say, They have not learned this from
us; or the Mahumetan, they will answer, We are not guilty of it: Blessed God!
that it should become a most sure settled course for a man to run into danger
and disgrace with the world, if he shall dare to perform a Commandment of
Christ, (which is as necessary for him to do, if he have any hopes of attaining
Heaven, as meat and drink is for the maintaining of life!) That ever it should
enter into Christian hearts to walk so curiously and exactly contrary unto the
ways of God! That whereas He sees himself every day and hour almost contemned
and despised by thee who art his Servant, his creature, upon whom he might
without all possible imputation of unrighteousness pour down all the Vials of
his wrath and indignation, yet He notwithstanding is patient and long-suffering
toward thee, hoping that his long-suffering may lead thee to repentance, and
beseeching thee daily by his Ministers to be reconciled unto him: And yet thou
on the other-side for a distempered passionate speech, or less, should take
upon thee to send thy neighbors soul, or thine own, or likely both, clogged
and oppressed with all your sins unrepented of, (for how can repentance
possibly consist with such a resolution?) before the Tribunal seat of God to
expect your final sentence: utterly depriving thy self of all the blessed means
which God has contrived for thy Salvation, and putting thy self in such an
estate, that it shall not be in Gods power almost to do thee any good. Pardon,
I beseech you, my earnestness, almost intemperateness, seeing it has proceeded
from so just, so warrantable a ground; And since it is in your power to give
rules of honor and reputation to the whole Kingdom, do not you teach others to
be ashamed of this inseparable Badg of your Religion, Charity and forgiving of
offenses; give men leave to be Christians without danger or dishonor; Or, if
Religion will not work with you, yet let the Laws of that State wherein you
live, the earnest desires and care of your Righteous Prince, prevail with you:
But I have done, and proceed to my last part, which is the convenience and gain
which shall accrue unto us by friends obliged with this Mammon of
unrighteousness, Namely, by them to be reciv'd into everlasting habitations.

37. I must here again propose another question, Part. III.
but when I have done that, I must be forced to leave it without an answer,
unless you will be content to take a conjecture, a probability, for an answer:
It is, How, or after what manner those to whom we have done good here, shall
hereafter receive us into everlasting habitations? Whether this is performed
only by their Prayers and Intercession with God in the behalf of their
Benefactors; Or, whether they are used as Instruments and conductors, as it
were, as our Savior may probably seem to intimate in the Parable where the
Lord speaks to his Servants, That they should take away the one Talent from him
which had no more, and bestow it on him which had ten Talents. So uncertain it
is, whether this task shall be performed by them one of these ways, or by some
other unknown course, that St. Auguistine ingenuously confesses, he knows not
what to make of it: Yet Cardinal Bellarmine says, he can easily assoil it, and
can in these words find out Purgatory, and satisfaction for sin after death,
and a great deal more then I can understand: But truly, if he be able to spy
Purgatory in this Text, especially such a one as he fancies to himself in his
Books of that Argument, he has made use of better glasses than ever Galileo
found out. And I would to God, those of his Party would consider how much the
weakness of their cause is argued even from hence, that they are forced to
ground most of the Points controverted between us upon such difficult places as
these, of so ambiguous and uncertain meanings, and therefore equally obnoxious
to any man's Interpretation. There may yet be found out a convenient sense of
this place, especially, if we will allow an Hebraism in those words (which is
frequent enough in the Evangelical writings) of putting the third person plural
to express a passive sense, and then the meaning will be, That when, etc. they
may receive you, i. e. That ye may be received into everlasting habitations:
Parallel to a like phrase in Luke 12.12. Thou Fool, this night shall they take
away thy soul from thee, i. e. Thy soul shall be taken from thee. And, if this
sense be true, as it is very likely, many of our Romish Adversaries have spent
much pains about this Text to no purpose.

38. But to leave quarrelling: It is no very considerable matter: whether we
have light upon the true sense of those words, or no, or whether those, to whom
we have done good, have a share in purchasing for us an admission into these
everlasting habitations, as long as we may infallibly hence conclude, that
though it should fall out, that Abraham should forget us, and Israel become
ignorant of us; yet certainly, God, (who alone, is instead of ten thousand such
friends) he will keep a Register of all our good actions, and will take
particular care of us, to give us a just proportion of reward and harvest of
glory according to our sparingness, or liberality in sowing.

39. But, to have an eye unto the recompense of reward? Is Christ also become a
Schoolmaster unto us, as well as the Law was to the Jews, that we should have
need of Thunder and Blackness of smoke, and Voices to affright us, or Promises
to win and allure us? Nay, Have not your ears oftentimes heard, from such
places as this, an Obedience of this nature disgraced and branded for a Servile
slavish obedience; an obedience ordinarily made the mark and badg even of a
formal Hypocrite, the worst kind of Reprobates?

40. I confess, Paul's more excellent way of Charity: the keeping of God's
Commandments merely out of the love of his goodness and consideration of his
infinite inconceivable holiness: And he that can receive this, let him receive
it, and thrice happy and blessed shall he be of the Lord: But in the mean time,
let him not be forward to judge his fellow servants, if they acknowledge
themselves so far guilty of weakness and imperfections, that they have need to
receive strength and encouragement in this their painful and laborious race, by
looking forward unto the glorious prize of their high calling in Jesus Christ.

41. Surely God is wise enough to contrive the surest course, and to set down
the best and likelyest means for persuading us to his service, and the
obedience of his Commandments: He is able to enquire and search into the most
retired corners of our wicked, deceitful hearts, and thereby knowing our temper
and disposition, he is able best to prescribe us a method and diet suitable to
our constitutions. Therefore, if he out of his infinite wisdom, and the
consideration of what encouragements we stand in need of, has thought it fit
to annex to every Precept almost, a promise of happiness, or a threatening of
unavoidable danger to the transgressors; What art thou, O man, that thou
dare take upon thee to calumniate his proceedings, and to prescribe better
directions than he has thought fit!

42. I beseech you therefore, (my beloved Brethren,) by all means make use of
any advantages, which may serve to render you more earnest, more eager and
resolute in your obedience to those holy and perfect Commandments which he
has enjoined you: If you cannot find your selves arrived as yet to that height
of perfection, as that Love and Charity cannot wrest from you sufficient
carefulness to obey him; Let fear have its operation with you, fear and horror
of that terrible issue which shall attend the wilful and habitual
transgressors of his Laws: And you need not suspect this course as
unwarrantable, for you shall have St. Paul for your example, even that Paul for
whose miraculous conversion, Christ was pleased himself in Person to descend
from his Throne of Majesty: that Paul who labored in the Gospe more than all
the rest of the Apostles: that Paul, whose joy and hearts comfort it was to be
afflicted for the Name of Christ: Lastly, that Paul, who for a time, was
ravished from the Earth to the third Heaven after a most inexpressable manner,
and there heard things that cannot be uttered; This Paul, I say, shall be your
example, who after all these things, found it yet a convenient motive, and
received great encouragement and eagerness to proceed in his most blessed
conversation, even from this fear, Lest, whilst he preached to others, himself
should become a castaway.

43. And when Fear has done its part, let Hope come in; Hope of that happy
Communion; which you shall once again have with those friends which may be
purchased in this life at so easy a rate; Hope of that eternal weight and
burden of joy and glory, which is reserved in Heaven for you if you hold fast
the rejoicing of the Hope steadfast unto the end: Heb. 3.6.
Let a comfortable meditation of these things encourage and hearten you to
proceed from one degree of holiness to another, till we all come in the unity
of the Faith and of the knowledge of the Son of God to a perfect Man, to the
measure of the fullness of the stature of Christ: And for an example in this,
take that whole cloud of witnesses mustered together (in Heb. 11.) Or, if they
will not serve the turn, take an Example above all examples, an Example, beyond
all imaginable exceptions, even our blessed Savior Jesus Christ himself,
concerning whom the Author of the same Epistle (it was St. Paul, sure,) says
Chap. 12. That for the joy which was set before him, despised the shame, and
endured the Cross, etc.

44. God knows, we have need of all manner of encouragements, and all little
enough for us, so sluggish and immovable, so perverse and obstinate are we:
Therefore for Gods sake, upon any terms, continue in the service of Christ,
make use of all manner of advantages, and though ye find hope, or fear,
predominate in you, (these servile affections, as they are commonly called) yet
for all that, faint not, despair not, but rather give thanks to Almighty God:
and God who sees such good effect of his Promises and Threatenings in you, (of
which all the Scripture is full from one end to the other) will in his good
time fill your hearts full of his Love, even that perfect love which casts
out fear, and of that perfect Love which shall have no need of Hope, He will
perfect that his good work in you unto the end.

45. To conclude all: Whether ye shall perform this Commandment of Christ, or
whether ye shall not perform it, It cannot be avoided, Everlasting habitations
shall be your reward: Only the difference is, Whether ye will have them of your
Enemies providing, whether ye will be beholding to the Devil and his Angels,
your ancient mortal Enemies to prepare everlasting dwellings for you; And who
can dwell in everlasting fire, (says the Prophet), Who can dwell in continual
burnings? Or, whether ye will expect them from the assistance of those just
persons, whom you have by your good works eternally obliged to you, even those
blessed and glorious Habitations, which God the Father Almighty has from the
beginning of the world provided and furnished for you; which God the Son by his
meritorious Death and Passion has purchased for you; and for the admission
whereunto, God the Holy Ghost has sanctified, and adorned you, that in
thankfulness and gratitude you your selves may become everlasting Habitations,
pure and undefiled Temples for him to dwell in for ever and ever. Now unto
these glorious and everlasting habitations, God of his infinite mercy bring us,
even for Jesus Christ his sake: To whom, with the Father, etc.

The Seventh Sermon.
LUKE XIX. 8. -- And if I have defrauded any man by forged cavillation, I
restore unto him four fold.


THe Son of man (says our Savior of Himself in the end of this story) is come
to seek and to save that which was lost. Verse. 10.
And how careful and solicitous he was in the discharge of this employment and
business about which his Father sent him; this story of Zacchaeus (out of which
my Text is taken) will evidently and lively discover. For here we have a Man,
that among ten thousand one would think were the most unlikely to become a
Disciple of Christ's, so indisposed he was for such a change, so unqualified in
all respects. For first, he was Rich, as the third verse tells us; and if that
were all his fault, yet in our Savior's judgment, which was never
uncharitable, being so clogged and burdened with these impedimenta (as even the
Heathens could call Riches) it would be as hard for him to press through and
enter in at the straight gate, without uneasing and freeing himself from them,
as for a Camel to go through the eye of a Needle.

2. But secondly, these his Riches, as it would seem, were scarce well and
honestly gotten. For his trade and course of life, was a dangerous trade,
obnoxious to great, almost irresistible, temptations: A great measure of grace,
would be requisite to preserve a man incorrupt and undefiled in that course:
and so ill a name he had gotten himself, that all that afterward saw Christ's
familiarity with him, were much offended, and scandalized at it; for we read in
the 7. verse, Verse. 7.
that when they all saw it, they murmured, saying, that he was gone in to lodge
with a sinful man; with one famous and notorious for a great oppressor.

3. Yet notwithstanding all this, such was the unspeakable mercy and goodness
of Christ, that even of this Stone, so scorned and rejected of all the people,
he raised a son unto Abraham, as we find in the 9. verse. Verse. 9.
And to bring this to pass, he took occasion even from a vain curiosity of this
Zacchaeus, an humor of his, it may be such a one as afterward possessed Herod
(though God knows he had not the same success) namely, to see some strange work
performed by Christ, of whom he had heard so much talk. This opportunity, I
say, our Savior took to perform an admirable miracle, even upon the man
himself; and that he brought about by as unlikely a course, only with inviting
himself to his house: By which unexpected affability and courtesy of our
Savior, this so notorious and famous Publican and sinner, was so surpised
with joy and comfort, that presently he gives over all thought and
consideration of his trade, as a thing of no moment; and being to receive
Christ into his house, and knowing how ill agreeing companions Christ and
Mammon would prove in the same lodging; he resolves to sweep it and make it
clean, for the entertaining of him; he empties it of that dross and dung
wherewith before it was defiled; half of his estate goes away at a clap upon
the poor, and the remainder, in all likelihood, is in great danger to be
consumed by that noble and generous offer which he makes in the words of my
Text: Whomsoever I have defrauded by forged cavillation, I restore, etc.

4. In which words I shall observe unto you these two General Parts: Division.
First, If I have defrauded any man, or whomsoever I have defrauded. I restore
unto him four fold. In the former General, we may take notice of two
particulars: 1. Zacchaeus his willingness and readiness of his own accord to
discover and confess his sin, when he said, Whomsoever I have defrauded. And,
2. the nature and heinousness of the crime discovered, which is called a
defrauding by forged cavillation; or, as some Translations read, with false
accusation.
In the second General likewise (which is the satisfaction tendered by
Zacchaeus) there offer themselves two particulars more, namely, 1. So much of
the satisfaction as was necessary to be performed, by virtue of an
indispensable Precept, and that is Restitution in these words, I restore unto
him. 2. That which was voluntary and extraordinary namely, the measure and
excess of this Restitution, which he professes should be four fold.
Of these two parts therefore, with their several particulars in the same order
as they have been proposed, briefly, and with all the plainness and perspicuity
I can imagine: And, 1. Of the former General, and therein of the first
Particular, namely, Zacchaeus his readiness to confess his Sin, in these words:
If I, etc.

5. I said even now only, General. I.
It may be this was a confession of his crime; but now I will be more resolute,
Partic. 1.
and tell you peremptorily, this was a confession: for without all question,
Zacchaeus, as the case stood now with him, was in no humor of Justifying
himself, he had no mind to boast his integrity in his office: Or, if he had, he
might be sure that common fame (if that were all, yet that alone) might be a
sufficient argument, at least too great a presumption against him, to confute
him. But to put it out of question: Our Savior himself, by applying the 10.
verse of this Chapter to him, acknowledges him for a sinful undone man; one
that had so far lost himself in the wandering mazes of this wicked world, that
unless Christ himself had taken the pains to search and enquire after him, and
having found him, by the power and might of his Grace to rescue and recover him
from the error of his ways, by restoring him his eyes, whereby he might take
notice toward what a dangerous precipice he was hastening, there had been no
possibility but at last he must have needs fallen headlong into the gulf of
destruction.

6. Now it being, I suppose, evident, that Zacchaeus was guilty, and that in a
high degree, and openly and scandalously guilty of the crime here discovered:
there is no doubt to be made, but that he who was so willing to unlock and
disperse his ill gotten treasures, would not begin to divert his covetousness
upon his sins, he would not hoard them up, but would place his glory even in
his shame; and whereas he had been the servant and slave of sins, he would wear
his shackles and fetters, as signs of the glorious victory, which through
Christ he had won, and emblemes of that blessed change which he found in
himself, being rescued from the basest slavery that possibly can be imagined,
into the glorious liberty of the Sons of God.

7. But it may be, you will say, Suppose Zacchaeus did freely and voluntarily
confess his sin to Christ, who had authority to forgive him his sins, though he
had never discovered them: what collection shall be made from hence? Zacchaeus
might be as bold as he would with himself; but as for us, his example shall be
no rule to us; we thank God this is Popery in these days, and since we have
freed our selves from this burden, we will not be brought into bondage to any
man; we will confess our sins, I warrant you, only to God, who is only able to
forgive us them; as for the Minister, it may be, we will sometimes be beholding
to him to speak some comfortable words now and then to us, when we are troubled
in conscience, and we have not been taught to go any further.

8. I confess I find no great inclination in my self, especially being in the
Pulpit, to undertake a controversy, even where it may seem to offer it self,
much less to press and strein a Text for it, for I desire to have no
adversaries in my Preaching, but only the Devil and Sin. Only having now
mentioned Confession, and considering how much the Doctrine of our holy Mother
the Church has been traduced, not only by the malice and detraction of our
professed enemies of the Church of Rome, but also by the suspicious ignorance
and partiality of her own children; who out of a liking of the zeal, or rather
fury, of some former Protestant Writers, have laid this for a ground of stating
Controversies of our Religion: That that is to be acknowledged for the Doctrine
of these Reformed Churches, which is most opposite and contradicting to the
Church of Rome. So that, as the case goes now, Controversies of Religion are
turned into private quarrels, and it is not so much the Truth that is sought
after, as the salving and curing the reputation of particular men.

9. These things therefore considered, truly for my part, I dare not take upon
me so much to gratify the Papists, as to think my self obliged to maintain
many incommodious speeches of some of our Divines in this point. Hoc Ithacus
velit and magno mercentur Atridae -- They will never be unfurnished of matter
to write Books to the worlds end, if this shall be the method of stating
Controversies. Oh what an impregnable cause should we have against the Church
of Rome, if we our selves did not help to weaken and betray it, by mixing
therewith the interests and conceits of particular men.

10. Give me therefore leave, I pray you, to give you the state of the
Question, and the Doctrine of our Church, in the words of one who both now is,
and for ever will worthily be accounted, The glory of this Kingdom. Bishop
Usher's Ans. to the Jesuit. Cap. of Confession. p. 84.
Be it known (says he) to our adversaries of Rome, (I add also, to our
adversaries even of Great Britain, who sell their private fancies for the
Doctrine of our Church) that no kind of Confession, either public or private,
is disallowed by our Church, that is any way requisite for the due execution of
that ancient Power of the Keys, which Christ bestowed upon his Church. "The
thing which we reject, is that new pick-lock of Sacramental Confession obtruded
upon men's consciences, as a matter necessary to salvation, by the Canons of the
late Conventicle of Trent in the 14. Session.

11. And this truth being so evident in Scripture, and in the writings of the
ancient best times of the Primitive Church, the safest interpreters of
Scripture, I make no question, but there will not be found one person amongst
you, who when he shall be in a calm unpartial disposition, that will offer to
deny: For, I beseech you, give your selves leave unpartially to examine your
own thoughts. Can any man be so unreasonable as once to imagine with himself,
that when our Savior after his Resurrection, having received (as himself
says) all power in heaven and earth, having led captivity captive, came then
to bestow gifts upon men: when he, I say, in so solemn a manner (having first
breathed upon his Disciples, thereby conveying and insinuating the Holy, Ghost
into their hearts) renewed unto them, or rather confirmed and sealed unto them
that glorious Commission, which before he had given to Peter, sustaining, as it
were the person of the whole Church; whereby he delegated to them an authority
of binding and loosing sins upon earth, with a promise, that the proceedings in
the Court of Heaven, should be directed and regulated by theirs on Earth: Can
any man, I say, think so unworthily of our Savior, as to esteem these words of
his for no better than complement; for nothing but Court-holy-water?

12. Yet so impudent have our adversaries of Rome been in their dealings with
us, that they have dared to lay to our charge; as if we had so mean a conceit
of our Savior's gift of the Keys, taking advantage indeed from the unwary
expressions of some particular Divines, who out of too forward a zeal against
the Church of Rome, have bended the staff too much the contrary way; and in
stead of taking away that intolerable burden of a Sacramental, necessary,
universal Confession, have seemed to void and frustrate all use and exercise of
the Keys.

13. Now, that I may apply something of that, which has now been spoken, to
your hearts and consciences. Matters standing as you see they do; since Christ,
for your benefit and comfort, has given such authority to his Ministers upon
your unfeigned repentance and contrition, to absolve and release you from your
sins: why should I doubt, or be unwilling to exhort and persuade you, to make
your advantage of thi^ gracious promise of our Saviors? why should I envy you
the participation of so heavenly a Blessing? Truly, if I should deal thus with
you, I should prove my self a malicious, unchristian-like, malignant Preacher;
I should wickedly and unjustly, against my own conscience, seek to defraud you
of those glorious Blessings, which our Savior has intended for you.

14. Therefore, in obedience to his gracious will, and as I am warranted, and
even enjoined, by my holy Mother the Church of England expressly, in the Book of
Common Prayer, in the Rubric of Visiting the Sick (which Doctrine this Church
has likewise embraced so far) I beseech you, that by your practice and use,
you will not suffer that Commission, which Christ has given to his Ministers,
to be a vain form of words, without any sense under them, not to be an
antiquated, exspired Commission, of no use nor validity in these days: But
whenever you find your selves charged and oppressed, especially with such
Crimes as they call Peccata vastantia conscientiam, such as do lay waste and
depopulate the conscience, that you would have recourse to your spiritual
Physician, and freely disclose the nature and malignancy of your disease, that
he may be able, as the cause shall require, to proportion a remedy either to
search it with corrosives, or comfort and temper it with oil. And come not to
him, only with such a mind as you would go to a learned man experienced in the
Scriptures, as one that can speak comfortable quieting words to you, but as to
one that has authority delegated to him from God himself, to absolve and
acquit you of your sins. If you shall do this, Assure your souls, that the
understanding of man, is not able to conceive that transport and excess of joy
and comfort which shall accrue to that man's heart, that is persuaded, that he
has been made partaker of this Blessing, orderly and legally, according as out
Savior Christ has prescribed.

15. You see, I have dealt honestly and freely with you; it may be more freely
than I shall be thanked for: But I should have sinned against my own soul, if I
had done otherwise; I should have conspired with our adversaries of Rome
against our own Church, in affording them such an advantage to blaspheme our
most holy and undefiled Religion. It becomes you now, though you will not be
persuaded to like of the practice of what, out of an honest heart, I have
exhorted you to; yet for your own sakes, not to make any uncharitable
construction of what has been spoken. And here I will acquit you of this
unwelcome subject, and from Zacchaeus his confession of his Sin, I proceed to
my second particular, namely, the nature and hainousness of the crime
confessed, which is here called a defrauding another by forged cavillation.

16. The crime here confessed, is called in Greek, Sycophancy; Partic. II.
for the words are, (...). For the understanding of which word in this place,
we shall not need so much to be beholden to the Classical Greek Authors, as to
the Septuagint, who are the best Interpreters of the Idiom of the Greek
language in the Evangelical writings. Two Reasons of the word (...) are given,
the one by Ister in Atticis, the other by Philomnestus de Smynthiis Rhodiis,
both recorded by Athenaeus in that treasury of ancient learning, his
Deipnosophists, in the third Book: which because they are of no great use for
the interpretation of S. Luke, I willingly omit.

17. Now there are four several words in the Hebrew, which the Seventy
Interpreters have rendered in the old Testament by the word, (...), and the
verbal thereof (...). One whereof signifies to abalienate or wrest any thing
from another by fraud and sophistry, opposed to another word in the same
language, which imports to rob by plain open force and violence, Job 25.9.
Psalm. 119.121. Prove. 28.3. Eccles. 4.1. Psalm. 71.4 Prove. 14.33. Levit. 29.11.
Job. 25.9. Psalm. 119.121. Prove. 28.3. Eccles. 4.1. as likewise in Psalm. 71.4.
Prove. 14.33. A second word signifies to deal captiously and fallaciously with
another, Levit. 29.11. A third implies, a punishment or Mulct, which (as the
Latin word mulcta will bear it) is either inflicted on the body or the purse.
And the last signifies, to Circumvent, or rather indeed to roll himself upon
another, Genesis 43.18.
Genesis 43.18.

18. Out of all which expressions in the Hebrew compounded together, we may
extract a full sense of the Crime here confessed by Zacchaeus, and rendered in
the Greek Original by (...), (especially if we have respect to Zacchaeus his
office and trade of life, which was to be a master of the Publicans in that
part of the Country where he lived, i. one who had chief authority in
receiving the rents and customs due from thence to the Empire): Zacchaeus his
crime therefore (as may likewise be collected from that counsel which S. John
the Baptist gave to the Publicans who came to his Baptism; which was, that they
should exact no more than was their due): His crime, I say, was to wring and
extort from his poor contrymen, either by fraud and false suggestions, or by
violence, more than was due from them to the Empire: to enrich his private
coffers by the spoils of the miserable inhabitants; to roll himself upon them
and overwhelm them, by exactions for his private benefit: for that end,
pretending the rights and necessities of State, and thereto tentering and
streining to the uttermost, that power and authority wherewith he was invested
from Rome.

19. These kind of Officers, though they were of good reputation with the
Romans, as we may collect out of several orations of Cicero, for by their place
they had the privilege to be reckoned amongst the Equites Romani; yet in the
Countries wherein they lived, especially in Jewry, a tenacious covetous nation,
they were the most odious persons upon the Earth: Insomuch as the very name of
a Publican was grown into a Proverb, expressing a person that deserved at all
men's hands infamy and hatred. This therefore was Zacchaeus his crime, this is
that which he calls by as odious a name, of Sycophancy. But to leave this
general discourse of the name (for in your behalfs, I am weary of an argument
so useless to you). I will now try, what advantage every one of us may make
from Zacchaeus his behavior this place.

20. You see here Zacchaeus (though he was a man exalted above the ordinary
rank of men, an accuser of the brethren. And though even that be a sufficient
crime; yet it is counted a more plausible generous sin, out of hatred, and
rancour, and ill nature by false accusations, to endeavor the subversion of
ones enemy, than by base delating and informing, only for the hope of a little
gain to himself, to procure the overthrow of his neighbors estate and
reputation; which is the condition of a Sycophant.

21. From hence then we may be taught how differently we ought to behave our
selves in the discovery of our own, and other men's sins. If our brother has
offended, we are to soften and qualify his sin, to think charitably of him
notwithstanding; and to frame to our selves excuses, that the matter may not be
so bad as is generally supposed; as likewise hope, that hereafter, by a
reformed life, he may redeem and cancel his forepast transgressions. And so we
see even John Baptist himself (though a man of no plausible Court-like
behavior yet) giving his advice to these Publicans, he would only call that an
exacting more than was due, which Zacchaeus here in himself most boistrously
terms Sycophancy. Whereas toward our selves, we must be tetrical and almost
uncharitable; we must not break our own heads with precious balm, as the
Psalmist speaks, that is, by softened oylely excuses aggravate and assist our
own disease.

22. Secondly consider, that Zacchaeus his Sin, Peccatum, Heb. 12.1.
(...) (as S. Paul most elegantly calls it) the sin that does so easily b^set
him, or rather, that does so well and fitly encompass him, that does so exactly
suit with him. For ordinarily, every man has some one particular sin, that
sits his humor better, and sits closer to him, like a well made garment, than
any other. (And I think this expression renders S. Paul's peccatum (...),
reasonably well.) Other sins are either too straight for him, and do
continually vex and gird him, so that he can take but little comfort in them:
And such are sins against a man's constitution and temper: as for example, One
act of Adultery, though for the time pleasant, would yet afterward more
torment and afflict a covetous man's conscience, than the devouring, it may be,
of a whole Country. Or else they hang loose about him, so that though they be
easy and delightful sometimes, yet to wear them continually, would prove
tedious and irksome. But his dearly respected sin, is good company at all times
for him; and, so he may have leave to enjoy but that, he cares not much what
becomes of all the rest.

23. As for instance, that I may press a little nearer to your consciences. Put
the case there were any one in this company, a covetous oppressing person, such
a one as Zacchaeus, I Will warrant, he would have been content, that I should
rather have taken any Text in the Bible than this: He would have been pleased,
nay, even rejoiced, to hear me inveigh bitterly against any other sin besides:
Yea, he would willingly, in his own thoughts have joined with me against any
man living; For thereby he would be apt to justify himself in his own eyes,
and to say in his thoughts, The Preacher indeed is very earnest in Gods behalf
against some body, but I thank God I am righteous all this while, I am not at
all concerned in it: Nay, it may be, he would have been content to have taken
my part even against himself too, in any other sin besides this.

24. But now, that I begin to set my self against his darling, only favorite
sin, the delight of his soul, and, as it were, the breath of his nostrils, he
will by no means endure it. What? (thinks he) is there not room enough in all
the Old and New Testament for this Preacher to exspatiate in; are there not a
thousand precepts, and almost as many stories in the Bible, and must he needs
single out this? Am I the only person that he must aim at? Or, if he would
needs be meddling with me, could he not spare me, at least, in this one small
sin? Let him do his worst to the rest of my sins; let him draw blood from me in
any other place besides this: but this is a very sucking of my hearts blood; it
is a renting to my bowels. The Lord surely will be merciful to me in this sin
only; Lo, is it not a little one, and my soul shall live in pleasure and
happiness. And such thoughts as these would the lascivious person have
entertained, if I had light upon his Text; and so the rest.

25. But as for our new convert Zacchaeus, (and I beseech you let him be herein
your example) he deals not so mercifully, no not with his dearly loved sin of
Oppression: No, he is so far from that, that as if, in all other respects, he
had been the most innocent holy man alive; he cannot remember, that his
conscience is troubled with any sin besides: All his aim and spite is directed
against this only sin, which having rooted out of his heart, he supposes he
shall then be worthy to entertain his new invited blessed Guest.

26. And to say the truth, if a heart once enlightened by grace, find so much
courage, as to be able to prevail against his peccatum (...), it will be an
easy secure skirmish and resistance that all the rest will afford him:
Hereupon, says our Savior to the Pharisees who were covetous, If you give
your riches to the poor, all things shall become pure unto you: As if he should
say, This sin of covetousness, is the main chain whereby the Devil holds you
captive at his pleasure; strein and force your selves only to break this chain,
and then you shall be free indeed in perfect liberty; all your other sins will
be only to you as the green withs were to Samson, even as threeds of t^w that
have smelled the fire.

27. Pertinent to this may that saying of our Saviors be in the 13. of S.
John's Gospel; where giving his Disciples a blessed Example of humility, in
vouchsafing to wash their feet; when it came to S. Peter's turn, he would by no
means endure it. But after our Savior had somewhat sharply rebuked him; Well,
says he, since thou will descend so far, as to wash me, Joh. 13.9.
Lord, not my feet only, but my hands and my head: Leave not the work
unperfect, since thou will begin to cleanse and sanctify me; perfect this thy
good work unto the end. Our Savior replies, He that is washed, Verse. 10.
needs not, save to wash his feet, but is clean every whit. As if he should
say, If thou will take so much care, as to cleanse and purify such parts as by
continual exercise and travel, are most subject to be defiled, it will be an
easy matter to preserve thy self pure through all the rest. Thus Zacchaeus
having searched out the head and fountain, whence all those noisome lusts which
appeared in his life, did flow, he supposes he shall sufficiently purify the
streams thence issuing; if he can once cleanse the spring. Which he proceeds to
perform, in my second General; which is the satisfaction by him tendered in lieu
of his former oppressions, in these words, I restore unto him four fold. In the
handling of which, I will according to my promise begin with the first
particular thereof, namely, so much of this satisfaction, as is necessary to be
performed by virtue of an indispensable precept, which is of Restitution, in
these words; I restore unto him.

28. There is a Doctrine blown about and dispersed by a sort of Preachers in
the Reformed Churches, General II. Partic. I.
and greedily embraced by their followers and Proselytes, because they are
persuaded, that themselves are the most interested in it; which teaches, that,
No man has any right or propriety in the goods and riches which he possesses,
unless he be one of Gods elect faithful servants. So that those who are
resolved to account themselves in this number, and to exclude from this
society, all others who suit not with their humors; such, I say, are apt too
forwardly to think all others no better than usurpers of their patrimony and
inheritance. The dangerous effects and consequences of which Doctrine,
(especially where power has not been wanting to make the best use and advantage
of it) was woefully discovered in those tumults, which not very long since were
raised in Germany, especially in Westphalia, about the City of Munster.

29. This Doctrine I suppose was borrowed especially from the Jesuits, who,
upon the same grounds, have entitled their Catholic King to almost all the
Western parts of the world; whereby many millions of poor souls have been most
unhumanely and barbarously massacred, to make way for the supposed right owners
the Spaniards, as we find testified with horror and detestation, even by many
ingenuous honest-hearted writers of their own Nation.

30. Neither the time nor my Text will allow me leisure to stand long upon the
confuting of this pernicious Doctrine, I will only oppose to it that saying of
the Psalmist, The Earth is the Lords, but he has given it to the children of
men: No man alive, has any right in the goods of this world, but only by a
gift from God: and by his gift, all the children of men, without exception, are
instated in it; so that no pretense of Religion or Election can be sufficient
for any one to disseise another man, of what condition or quality soever he be,
that is once legally possessed of them.

31. Therefore, whosoever he be, that whether by fraud, or violence, or any
other title, shall invade, or usurp upon the rights of another, he does, as
much as in him lies, without any warrant, nullify the gift of God, and takes
upon him to oppose and thwart his most wise providence; setting up himself as
it were in Gods seat, and dethroning him, establishing a new order of
providence of his own. And think thou that do these things, that thou
shall escape the Judgment of God? Can thou imagine, that he will patiently
endure to see his Judgments reversed, or his Mercies evacuated by thee? That
whereas he has said, I will bless this man, and enlarge his bounds upon the
Earth; thou should take upon thee to say on the other side, Let God deal as
mercifully as he pleases to this man; but I know what I am resolved of, I am
determined to crush and grind him to powder; I am resolved that his children
shall beg at my gates, and not be satisfied; they shall bow unto me, and not be
regarded. What a wretched unworthy opinion must such a one, of necessity,
entertain of God?

32. And I beseech you, do not think that this is only a Rhetorical forced
streining of a Point. The Holy Ghost will tell you as much in express terms,
Prove. 14.31. and 17 5.
Prove 14.31. and again, Prove. 17.5. He that oppresses the poor, reproacheth
his Maker. He sets his mark and brand of infamy almost upon all Gods glorious
Attributes; as if God had not power enough to maintain the poor-man against his
Adversary; as if he had not wisely enough dispensed his blessings; as if he
would not suffer God to extend his mercies but upon whom himself shall please;
and so of the rest.

33. But I will now, for your sakes, transgress something the limits of my
Text, and whereas I should only meddle with the unlawfulness of deteining Goods
gotten by oppression and sycophancy, I will make the subject more General in
this Proposition, which I beseech you heedfully to attend, and hereafter
seriously to consider of: This therefore I say and testify, That whosoever he
be, whose Conscience shall convince him, that he has gained any thing by an
unlawful course, If he resolve not to restore it, and dye in that resolution,
it is impossible he should be saved. For the confirming of which Proposition,
instead of many, almost infinite, unanswerable reasons, I will only make use of
two, each of them drawn from the impossibility in such a man of performing two
duties, most necessarily required at every man's hands that professes
Christianity; the one whereof is, Prayer; the second, Repentance.

34. Concerning Prayer, I will demonstrate, That he can neither seriously give
God thanks for bestowing upon him those Riches which he calls Blessings; nor
secondly, desire Gods blessing upon those Riches. For the first, Without
question, if such a one shall dare to open his mouth to give God thanks for his
Riches, it will prove to him a greater sin than the unjust unlawful gathering
of them, as the Psalmist says, His very Prayers shall be turned into sin; For
thereby he will entitle the just Righteous God unto his abominable sin. Dares
such a man, with any confidence, give thanks to Almighty God for suffering him
to be his Enemy in oppressing and persecuting, it may be, Gods faithful beloved
servants; for suffering him to be an instrument of the Devils? Therefore, if
there be any such that hear me this day, (yet I hope, nay, I am almost
confident, there is not) but, and if there be, let me beseech him, that of all
things in the world, he will take heed of giving thanks, let him rather proceed
on blindly in his sin, and put out of his mind all thought and consideration of
God; for never any Heathen could offer him such an indignity as this, no not
Epicurus nor Diagoras himself.

35. In the second place: How can such a one desire God to bless unto him, and
increase those Riches so unjustly gotten? Will he say, Lord make it appear unto
the world, by blessing me in these my ungodly courses that thou likest well of
them, and that thou have been of conspiracy with me in all mine ungracious
projects; so shall the godly quickly be rooted out of the earth, for every one
will take advantage to wrong another; if thou will bless me, every one will be
ready to tread in my steps. We see a man in such a state cannot seriously pray
no kind of Prayer, unless he purpose to mock God to his face, so that he has
defrauded himself of one necessary means of Salvation: But that which follows
is of greater importance yet.

36. There is nothing wherein a man (that is resolved not to part with Goods
unlawfully gathered) can dead with more despiteful petulancy and uncivility
with God, then by offering to pretend to an unfeigned Repentance. It is much
like the behavior of Charles the fifth unto God, who caused public Prayers
and Processions to be made unto God for the delivery of the Pope in Spain, whom
himself at the same time detein'd Prisoner in his own Castle St. Angelo, with a
resolution that howsoever those Prayers wrought with God to pity his Vicar,
yet till he had concluded Conditions for his own advantage with him, he should
never be released: Just such another Interlude, and fantastical Pageant must
this man's Repentance be.

37. He will say, perhaps: Lord, I confess, I cannot justify those ways and
courses whereby I procured my wealth; it may be, to make way for my excess and
superfluity many a poor soul (yet richer in thy grace and favor than my self)
has been forced almost to starve for penury and want, It may be, there are
store of Orphans and Widows that are importunate upon thee for vengeance
against my unchristian profession; and I acknowledge, that for my demerits I am
liable to be forced to drink the very dregs of thy fierce wrath and indignation
for ever. I will therefore rely and cast my self upon thy mercy and pity,
which yet, if I cannot purchase without the loss and restitution of my ill
gotten wealth, I will rather adventure upon thy fury; And though I know it to
be a fearful thing and insupportable misery to fall into thy hands, as into the
hands of an Enemy and pursuer; yet upon no manner of conditions will I part
with my Riches; No, not though I were now upon my deathbed, being out of all
hopes of ever enjoying any comfort and pleasure my self from them, and within
few hours expecting to be conveyed into my everlasting Prison: yet rather then
my Son, or my Kinsman (who even after restitution made of what is unlawfully
got, might perhaps have remaining to him sufficient to maintain him plentifully
in this world) yet rather then he shall abate any thing of that vanity and
superfluity which my excess of wealth will be able to bear, I will endanger the
forfeiture of my inheritance in the Land of the living.

38. But it may be, you will say, That it is an impossible thing for any man
that pretends to Christianity, to have such thoughts in him as these.

39. But again, it is possible, I may be replied upon, of the Purchasers: Shall
such men, because they are not able to restore, be concluded in such a
desperate estate as before I have mentioned? No, God forbid! If in such
circumstances a man shall be unfeignedly sorry for his misdeeds, and withal
resolve, if God shall hereafter bless him with abilities,

40. If it shall be again questioned, and the supposition made, that a man (for
example, Canaanites, your Enemies, that so swarm in your Land; Here is a
subject fit indeed for your Charity: and a miserable case it is, God knows,
that they should be the persons, who of all conditions of men should stand in
greatest need of your mercy and charity.

41. Oh! but will some man say: We have found now at what the Preacher aims:
All this ado about Restitution is only to enrich the Clergy. If such thoughts
and jealousies as these arise in your hearts, (as I know, by experience, it is
no unlikely thing they should) Oh then, I beseech you, for the mercies of God,
consider in what a miserable state the Church must needs be, when the most
likely course to keep the Ministers of God from starving must be your sins:
When those to whom you have committed your souls in trust, as they that must
give God an account for them, shall through want and penury be rendered so
heartless and low-spirited, that for fear of your anger, and danger of
starving, they shall not dare to interrupt or hinder you, when you run
headlong in the paths that lead you to destruction: When out of
faint-heartedness they shall not dare to take notice, no, not of the most
scandalous sins of their Patrons, but, which is worst, be the most forward
officious Parasites to sooth them in their crimes, and cry Peace unto them,
when God and their own Consciences tell them that they are utter strangers from
it, and neither do, nor are ever likely to know the ways of Peace: Lastly, when
these Messengers of God shall be the most ready to tell you, that those
Possessions and Tithes which have been wrested out of Gods hands are none of
Gods due, that they are none of the Churches Patrimony; that their right is
nothing but your voluntary Alms and charitable Benevolence, and that they shall
think themselves sufficiently and liberally dealt withal, if you shall account
them worthy to be the companions of the basest and meanest of your servants. I
could almost be silent in this cause, did not our Enemies in Gath know of it,
and if it were not published in the streets of Askalon, insomuch, that you have
given cause to the Enemies of God to blaspheme our glorious and undefiled
Religion.

42. I will conclude this Doctrine of Restitution most necessary certainly to be
prosecuted in these times, only with proposing to your considerations two
Motives, which in all reason ought to persuade you to the practice of it: the
one shall be, that you would do it for your own sakes; the other, for your
childrens sake. For the former; though I could never be scanted of Arguments
sufficient to enforce it, though I should make it the subject of my Sermons to
my lives end, yet because, I perceive, it is time for me to hasten to your
release, I will only desire you to remember how much I have told you already,
that this Doctrine concerns you, since it is impossible for any man while he is
guilty of the breach of this duty, to put in practice even the most necessary
and indispensable Precepts of Christian Religion.

43. But concerning the second Motive, which I desire should induce to the
practice of Restitution, namely, that you should be persuaded to it even for
your childrens sake, I beseech you, take this seriously into your
consideration. That whereas, it may be, you may think that by heaping wealth,
howsoever purchased, upon your heirs, you shall sufficiently provide for them
against all casualties, yet, that God also has his treasures in store to
countervail yours, and to provide so, that your Heirs shall take but little
content, God knows, in all their abundance: for, as it is in Job. 20.8. God
will lay up the iniquity of sinners for their children, i.e. He will not
satisfy himself with wreaking vengeance of other men's wrongs upon your heads
that have done them, but will take care also, that your children shall be no
gainers by the bargain: Therefore, as you desire the welfare of those for whose
sake especially, you dare adventure to hazard even your own souls, bequeath not
to them for a legacy a canker and moth, that will assuredly consume and devour
all your Riches: Take pity of those poor souls who are nothing interessed in
their own persons in those crimes wherewith their wealth was purchased, and
leave not unto them a curse from God upon their inheritance. But, I see, I must
be forced even abruptly to break from this Argument of Restitution; I come
therefore, briefly, to my last particular, namely, the excess and extraordinary
measure of Zacchaeus his Restitution, which he professes shall be fourfold,
to be dispatched in one word.

44. However I found it something a hard task to clear my first particular of
Confession, from the danger and neighborhood of Popery, yet, Zacchaeus,
(namely,

45. I confess, that some particular men, for fear of this consequence, Paul's
distinction of counsels from Precepts in the Gospel, but also from the General
uniform consent of all Antiquity: Whereas, if we shall well consider it, they
have feared where no fear was: For, our Churches never condemned that
distinction, as if there were danger from thence of making way for Popery: But
this is that abomination of a more then Pharisaical self-justifying Pride in
the Church of Rome, that upon so weak a foundation they have most
inartificially erected their Babel of Super-erogation, whereby they teach that
they cannot only through the whole course of their lives exactly perform all
the Commandments of God, without offending in any one mortal sin; by this
means challenging at Gods hands Remission of their Sins, and everlasting
Salvation for themselves; But also by their voluntary unrequired obedience unto
Evangelical Counsels, leave God in arrearages unto them, and make an
extraordinary stock of merits, which shall be left unto the Popes care and
providence to manage, and dispense to any man's use for ready money. This is
that Doctrine which the Church of England, in express words, most worthily
professes a detestation unto, in their 14th Article, which has been
transcribed into the 45th of this Church. And yet for all this, neither of
these Churches have any quarrel to that distinction of St. Paul, (when speaking
of voluntary Chastity, he says, I have received no such Commandment from the
Lord, 1 Cor. 7.25.
yet I give my advice or counsel,) as has been excellently discovered by the
late incomparable Bishop of Winchester in his Resp. ad Apologiam.

46. And now though I have gone through and quite absolved my Text, yet I can
scarce think my Sermon finished, till I have endeavored to make it beneficial
unto you by applying it to your Consciences and practice: But when I should
come to that, I confess, I find these times wherein we live so indisposed for
such an Application, that I know not which way to begin with you: For, shall I
seriously enjoin you, as by a Precept from God, that where you have unjustly
oppressed, or cunningly and closely defrauded your Neighbor, that you should,
as Zacchaeus did here, restore unto him fourfold? No, I dare not adventure so
far, I have received no such Commandment from the Lord: and then, I should be
guilty of that which was an unjust accusation laid upon Moses and Aaron, Ye
take too much upon you ye sons of Levi.

47. Shall I then endeavor to persuade you to conform your selves to this
pattern of Zacchaeus, as to a Counsel? Alas the times are such, that well were
we if as some have turned all Counsels into Precepts, that the same men would
not at least in their practice convert all Precepts into Counsel: If they would
not think that the Moral Legal Precepts were antiquated and dissolved by
bringing in the New Covenant of Grace! Or, if not quite abrogated, yet left so
arbitrary, that they should become matters of no necessary importance and
consequence, duties, which if we shall perform, we shall thereby approve our
gratitude and thankfulness unto God our Savior; and yet, if by chance they be
left undone, since they are esteemed no necessary conditions of the
New Covenant, there is no great danger as long as we can keep a spark of faith
alive, as long as we can persuade our selves that we have a firm persuasion of
Gods mercy in Christ to our selves in particular (which kind of newly invented
faith, an Adversary of our Church pleasantly, and I fear too truly defines,
when he says, Dr. Carrier in his Epistle to K. James.
It is nothing but a strong fancy.

48. These things therefore considered, I will leave the application of
Zacchaeus his extraordinary Restitution to your own Consciences, according as
God and your own souls shall agree together: Only I beseech you, not to make a
counsel of Restitution in general, but to free your selves from the burden and
weight of other men's Riches, lest they over-leaven and swell you so
unmeasurably, that you shall not be able to press in at that straight gate,
which would lead you unto those blessed and glorious habitations which Christ
has purchased for you, not with these corruptible things of silver and gold,
but with his own precious blood: Unto which habitations God of his infinite
mercy bring us all, for the same our Lord Jesus Christ his sake, To whom with
the Father, etc.

The Eighth Sermon.
GAL. V. 5. For we through the Spirit, wait for the hope of Righteousness by
Faith.


THis day the wisdom of the ancient Primitive, and, I think, Apostolic Church
has dedicated to the memory of an Epiphany, or Apparition of a miraculous
Star, which was sent to guide the Magi, or Wisemen of the East, to the place
where our Savior was born. But suppose there were such a Star seen, and three
men of the East conducted by it; must all the Christian world presently fall a
rejoicing for it? There was reason indeed, that they should be exceeding glad,
but shall we therefore lose a whole day's labor by it. To say the truth, there
is no reason for it: therefore either better grounds must be found out for our
rejoicing, or it were well done to make Christ-mass a day shorter hereafter.

2. But for all this, if we well consider it, we Gentiles might better spare
any Holiday in the year than this; for there is none besides this, properly our
own, but the Jews will challenge an equal interest in it. The appearing of the
Star, then, is the least part of the solemnity of this day: For a greater and
more glorious light than the Star this day arose unto us, even that so long
expected Light which was to lighten the Gentiles, which was to give light to
them which sat in darkness, and in the shadow of death, and to guide our feet
in the way of peace. This day, as S. Paul says, Tit. 11.12.
(...), There was an Epiphany likewise of the grace of God, to wit, the Gospel;
which now, as on this day, began to bring salvation, not to the Jews only, but
to all men, even to us sinners of the Gentiles, of whom those three wise men
were the first fruits. And, to say the truth, the appearing of Christ himself,
unless he had brought with him this light to lighten the Gentiles in his hand,
had not been sufficient to make a Solemn day for us. The Star then was not that
light, but it was sent to bear witness of that light, namely, the Gospel, the
glory whereof fills my text fuller than the Majesty of God ever filled the
Temple. For here we have the whole nature of the Gospel comprehended and
straightened within the narrow compass of my Text, yet no part of it left out;
yea, we have not only the Gospel discovered by its own light as it is in it
self, but in comparison with those twinkling cloudy stars of Jewish Ordinances,
and that once glorious, but now eclipsed light, the Law of Works: since then,
this is the day which the Lord has made for us, we will rejoice and be glad in
it, and we will be ready to hearken, especially to any thing that shall be
spoken concerning our Epiphany; concerning that blessed light, for many ages
removed out of our sight, and as on this day beginning to appear in our Horizon.

3. The words of my Text, I find so full and swelling with expression, so
fruitful and abounding in rich sense, that I am almost sorry I have said so
much of them to fit them to this day: But, in recompense, I will spare the
labor of showing their dependence and connection with the preceding part of the
Epistle, and consider them as a loose severed Thesis. In which is contained,
not only the sum and extract of this Epistle, but likewise of Christian
Religion in general, in opposition both to the Mosaical Law given to the Jews;
and the Law of Works, called also the Moral Natural Law, which from the
beginning of the world has been assented to, and written in the hearts of all
mankind. The sense of which words, if they were enlarged, may be this. We
Christians, by the tenor and prescript of our Religion, expect the hope of
Righteousness, i. the reward which we hope for by righteousness; not as those,
vain Teachers newly sprung up among you Galatians, would have us, by obedience
unto the carnal Ceremonial Law of Moses; but through the Spirit, i. by a
spiritual worship; neither by performing the old Covenant of works, which we
are not able to fulfill, but by faith, by such an obedience as is prescribed
unto us in the Gospel. We through the Spirit wait, etc.

4. In these words then, which comprehend the complete essence of the Covenant
of Grace, we may consider, First, through the Spirit, and by Faith. Secondly,
the hope of Righteousness, or Justification.
In the former part, namely, first, through the Spirit; which import, that it
is not such an outward carnal obedience, as Moses his Law required; but an
internal Spiritual worship of the heart and soul. Secondly, by Faith; which
signify, that we do not hope for salvation by the works of the Law, but by the
Righteousness of Faith or the Gospel.
In the second General, we may likewise observe, We wait for the hope, etc. Of
these --

5. First then of the Covenant of Grace, as it is distinguished from the
Mosaical Law by these words: through the Spirit. Where we will consider the
nature of the Jewish Law, and wherein it is distinguished from the Christian.
When Almighty God, with a high hand and a stretched out arm, had rescued the
people of Israel from the Egyptian slavery, and brought them in safety into
the Wilderness, intending then to settle and reduce them into good order and
government himself, and, by common voluntary consent, they all agree to submit
themselves to whatsoever laws he shall prescribe unto them, as we find Exodus
19. from 3d to the 9th verse. Exodus 19.3, etc. Judge. 8.
So that afterward, Judge. 8. when the people, after an unexpected glorious
victory obtained by Gideon, would have made him a King, and have settled the
government in his house: No, V. 23.
says Gideon, ( v. 23.) I will not rule over you, neither shall my Son, rule
over you, The Lord shall rule over you. And likewise afterward when Samuel
complained to God of the perverseness of the people, who were weary of his
government, and would have a King, as the Nations round about them had: Thou
art deceived, says God, It is my government that they are weary of; They have
not rejected thee, but they have rejected me, and now are risen up in rebellion
against me, to depose me from that Dominion which with their free consents I
assumed: For which intolerable base ingratitude of that Nation, in his wrath he
gives them a King, he appoints his Successor, which revenged those injuries
and indignities offered to Almighty God, to the uttermost upon them.

6. Now during the time of Gods reign over them, never any King was so careful
to provide wholesome laws both for Church and Commonwealth, as He was:
Insomuch, as he bids them look about, and consider the nations round about
them, If ever any people was furnished with Laws and Ordinances, of such equity
and righteousness, as theirs were: which Laws, because they were ordained by
Angels, in the hand of a Mediator, namely Moses, are commonly called by the
name of the Mosaical Law, and are penned down at large by him in his last four
Books.

7. The Precepts and prohibitions of this Law, are of several natures: For some
duties therein enjoined, are such as in their own natures have an intrinsecal
essential goodness and righteousness in them, and the contrary to them, are in
themselves evil, and would have been so, though they had never been expressly
prohibited: Such are especially the 10. Words or Precepts written by Gods own
finger in the two Tables of stone: Other Precepts concern matters of their own
nature indifferent, and are only to be termed good, because they were commanded
by a positive divine Law; such are the Ceremonial Washings, Purifications,
Sacrifices, etc. A third sort are of a mixed nature, the objects of which, are
for the most part, things in their own nature, good or evil; but yet the
circumstances annexed unto them, are merely arbitrary and alterable, as namely,
those things which are commanded or forbidden by that which is commonly called
the Judicial Law: for example: The Law of fourfold Restitution of things
stolen. Theft of its own nature is evil, and deserves punishment: But that the
punishment thereof should be such a kind of Restitution, is not in it self
necessary, but may be changed either into a corporal punishment, or, it may be,
into a civil death, according as those who have the government of Kingdoms and
States shall think fit and convenient for the dispositions of the times wherein
they live, as we see by experience in the practice of our own Kingdoms. For the
due execution of which Laws, and punishment of transgressors, God appointed
Judges and Rulers; and where they failed through want of care or partiality,
himself many times would immediately and personally inflict the punishment.

8. Now the general Sanction of this whole Law is expressed Deuteronomy. 27. v. 26 in
these words, Deuteronomy. 27.26.
Cursed is every one that continues not in all the words of this Law to do
them: which curse, as we find it afterward at large interpreted, imported a
sudden violent untimely death, together with all kind of misfortune, that could
make this life miserable: so that he was liable to this curse that swerved in
any one point or circumstance, from what was contained in that Law.
Notwithstanding, in some cases, God was pleased to remit the rigor of this
curse, and to except of certain gifts and offerings, and the expiatory
sacrifices of beasts, as it were, in exchange for the lives of the delinquents.
I should but fruitlesly trifle away the time in insisting any longer upon the
nature and quality of the Mosaical Law. I will now, as I am required by my
Text, show you the extreme difference, and incomparable excellency of the
Covenant of Grace, or the Gospel beyond this, in several respects.

9. As first: The Moral Duties of the two Tables, as they are part of the
Mosaical Jewish Law required only an external obedience and conformity to the
Affirmative precepts thereof, and an abstaining from an outward practice of the
Negative. They did not reach unto the conscience, no more then the National
Laws of other Kingdoms do: so that for example, where the Law of Moses forbids.
Adultery upon pain of death, he that should in his heart lust with any woman,
could not be accounted a transgressour of Moses his Law, neither was he liable
to the punishment therein specified: whereas the Gospel requires not only an
outward, and, as I may say, corporal obedience to Gods commandments, but also
an inward sanctification of the soul and conscience upon the same penalty of
everlasting damnation with the former. And what is now said of the moral
precepts (as they art part of Moses his Law) by the same proportion likewise,
is to be understood of the Judicial.

10. Notwithstanding what has now been said: yet we must know, that these very
Jews, to whom this Law was given, being the children of Abraham, were heirs
likewise of the promises which were made unto him and his seed; And the way or
means whereby they were to attain unto these promises, were the very same by
which himself obtained them, namely, Faith. So that this Mosaical Law
(whatsoever glorious opinion the Jews had of it) was not that Covenant whereby
they were to seek for Justification in the sight of God. Till Christ's coming,
there was no Law given, which could have given life, that is, which could
promise everlasting life unto man; not the Law of works by reason of man's
imperfection and weakness; not the Law of Moses, by reason of its own weakness,
as S. Paul clearly demonstrates, especially in the Epistle to the Hebrews.

11. For what end then was the Law of Moses given? S. Paul shall answer the
question, Gal. 3.19.
Gal. 3.19. It was added (says he) because of transgressions, till the seed
should come to whom the promises were made. It was added, as if he should say,
After the promises made unto Abraham and his seed, this Law was moreover
annexed, not as any new condition whereby they were to attain unto the
promises, but that, in the mean time, till the promises were fulfilled, they
should be restrained, as it were, and kept under a strict outward discipline,
from running into any excess of disobedience: for those, whom perhaps the
goodness and mercy of God, in affording them those promises, would not by the
hope of them be able to bridle, they notwithstanding, when they saw punishment
even unto death without mercy inflicted upon the transgressors, they would be
more careful of their ways. It follows, Till the seed should come to whom the
promises were made; or as himself in Heb. 9. alters the phrase, Heb. 9.10.
till the time of reformation: that is, When Christ, who was that blessed Seed,
promised to Abraham, should come, he would so clearly and convincingly show
unto the world the way of Salvation, that they should no longer need to be kept
under their old Schoolmaster, the Law; and therefore at his coming, the date of
the whole Mosaical Law should expire. And that may be one reason why S. Paul is
in this chapter so violent against those that would urge the observation of the
Mosaical Law; forasmuch as by enforcing it now when the seed was already come,
to whom the promises were made, they did seem to evacuate the Coming and Gospel
of Christ.

12. Now, that the Mosaical Law was not given to the Jews for this end, that by
the fulfilling thereof, they should promise to themselves the reward of
righteousness, everlasting life; is evidently demonstrated, both by our Savior
in the 5. of Matthew, and by S. Paul through all his Epistles, but especially
in that to the Hebrews. The force and virtue of whose arguments, may in general
be reduced to that issue which before I mentioned, viz. That the Law, by the
performance whereof we may expect life, requires not only an external
conformity to the outward works, but an inward spiritual sanctification also of
the soul and heart.

13. But what says the Law of Meses? It was said, says our Savior, by them
of old, Mat. 5.21.
i. in the Law of Moses, Thou shall not kill; not, Thou shall not be angry,
thou shall not bear malice in thy heart: so that if thou abstainest from
Murder, thou fulfillest Moses his Law; And if thou do kill, thou shall be in
danger of Judgment, i. the only punishment which the Law of Moses inflicted
upon the transgressors thereof, was the danger to be condemned to death by the
Judgment, or Bench of Judges appointed for the execution of this Law. But I
say unto you; I, who clearly show unto you that way wherein you must walk,
before you can promise to your selves any hope of eternal life; I say unto you,
not only, whosoever shall kill his neighbor, but whosoever out of malice or
rancour, V. 22.
shall say unto his brother, Thou fool, shall be in danger of Hell fire. V. 27.
So likewise, not only he which commits Adultery in the outward act, is
culpable by my Gospel before God, but also he which looks upon a woman to lust
after her in his heart. V. 33.
And so instead of Forswearing and breaking of Oaths, and Vows, which Moses his
Law forbad; Christ condemns fruitless and unnecessary, V. 38.
though true, Oaths. Instead of the Law of Retaliation of injuries, Christ
commands rather to suffer a second injury, than to revenge the first.

14. But in the last place, the last Example which our Savior gives, may seem
to destroy this collection which has been drawn out of this Chapter: for,
says he Verse. 43. You have heard, V. 43.
that it has been said of old, Thou shall love thy neighbor, and hate thine
enemy. What! did Moses his Law then permit a man to bear hatred and malice unto
another? Did I say, permit them? Nay, it commanded them so perfectly to hate
their enemies, to wit, the seven Nations who possessed that land, which was
theirs by promise, Exodus 34.2. Deuteronomy. 7.1. Exodus 27.19. Deuteronomy. 30.19.
mentioned Exodus 34.2. Deuteronomy. 7.1. to which were added the Amalekites, Exodus
27.19. Deuteronomy. 30.19. That they were enjoined to destroy them utterly, old and
young, men, women, and children, even to the very cattle, without all pity and
consideration. Insomuch, that Saul, for his unseasonable pity but of one
person, and that a King of the Amalekites, and reserving the best of the cattle
for sacrifice to God, had the Kingdom utterly rent from him and his posterity.
Whereas, by our Savior, in the words of S. Paul, Enmity is slain: No enemies
now in Christianity, but all neighbors, and friends, and brethren; nay more,
If any one will needs be your enemy, love him notwithstanding, says Christ, If
he curse you, bless him; If he hate you, do good unto him; If he use you
despitefully, and persecute you, pray for him. To conclude this argument from
our Savior's authority; Christ adds, as a Corollary to his discourse, speaking
to his Disciples and followers, Except your righteousness exceed the
righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, V. 20.
i. whereas they content themselves with an outward carnal obedience to the
Law, unless you, besides this, add a spiritual sanctification of the mind, ye
shall in no wise enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. I deny not now, but that
there may be a mystical spiritual sense even of this Law, and an application
thereof almost as perfect, as is expressed in the Gospel, which those who were
guided extraordinarily by the Spirit of God, and with help of Tradition, might
collect out of it; As the Prophet David, Psalm. 19. where he says, Psalm. 19.7.
The Law of the Lord is perfect, converting the soul; the Commandment of the
Lord is pure, enlightening the eyes, etc. And in this sense, the succeeding
Prophets endeavored to persuade the people to apprehend it. But this was a
forced sense of Moses his Law, not primarily intended by the author; it was no
proper natural meaning of it.

15. Proportionably to this Doctrine of our Savior, S. Paul, speaking of Moses
his Law, considered in its proper natural and direct sense, and as extremely
unsufficient to Justify a man in the sight of God, calls it (...), weak and
beggarly elements, Gal. 4.9. And, Gal. 4.9. Heb. 7.16.
(...), a Law of a carnal commandment, Heb. 7.16. i. a Law which a carnal man,
one not guided by the Spirit of God, might perform. And, a Law which made no
man perfect, Heb. 7.19. Nay more, Ibid. v. 19. Heb. 8.7.
says he, it is not (...), not without fault, Heb. 8.7. i. a man might perform
the Law of Moses, and yet not be (...), He may be a wicked man still in Gods
sight; for all his Legal Righteousness, he may remain dead in trespasses and
sins. Insomuch, as the same Paul, speaking of himself, before he was converted
to Christianity, says he, Concerning the righteousness which is of the Law, I
was blameless; Phil. 3.6.
I did so exactly fulfill that measure of Righteousness, which Moses his Law
required of me; that, in respect of that Law, I was a guiltless innocent
person; I could justify my self; I durst with confidence oppose my self in
Judgment, to the censure of our most severe strict Judges.

16. But what then? Durst Paul with this his Legal Righteousness appear before
God, as expecting to be Justified in his sight, as claiming any interest in the
promises of eternal life, by virtue of this his innocence? By no means: No,
says he, though I were blameless, as concerning this righteousness which is of
the Law, though I had all the privileges that any Jew could be capable of,
Phil. 3.6.
circumcised the eighth day, of the stock of Israel, of the Tribe of Benjamin,
an Hebrew of the Hebrews, according to the Law a Pharisee, ( i. e. of that Sect
which had preserved the Law in the greatest integrity) though I were so zealous
thereof, V. 6.
that I persecuted the Churches of Christ, which sought to abrogate it: and
lastly, though concerning the Righteousness of the Law, I was blameless, Yet,
notwithstanding all these, I will have no better an opinion of these
privileges than they deserve; I will account them only outward carnal
privileges; If I at all rejoice in them, yet this I will account only a
rejoicing in the flesh. Far be it from me, to think to appear before Christ
with such a righteousness as this is. God forbid I should expect to be accepted
of by him, for these carnal outward privileges: Nay, so far am I from that,
that, whatsoever I thought, before I knew him, to be again and a prerogative
unto me, now that I have attained to the excellency of the knowledge of Jesus
Christ, I account as loss, as things likely to be rather a hindrance unto me;
V. 9.
yea, as dross and dung, and desire to be found in him, not having mine own
righteousness which is of the Law: For, alas, how mean, and unworthy will that
appear in his eyes? but the righteousness which is of Faith, the righteousness
which is of God by Faith. The former righteousness was mine own, and therefore
could not stand in his sight; but that righteousness to which Faith or the
Gospel directs me, proceeds not from my own strength, but only from God, who
will crow his own graces in me.

17. I have thus far showed you, both from our Savior's authority, and S.
Paul's likewise; that the performing of the Moral Duties as far as they were
enforced, by virtue of Moses his Law, could not make a man capable of attaining
to the promises of the New Covenant. And (that I may add one confirmation of
this more out of the Old Testament) hereupon it is, that God by the Prophet
Ezekiel manifestly shows, that God gave not the Law of Moses to the
Israelites, for this end, that they should think that the performance of that
Law, was all the duty which they owed unto God; or that that obedience could
make them accepted of him unto eternal life: No, says he, if you have any such
conceit of those Ordinances, Ezekiel. 20.25.
The Statutes which I gave them, were not good, and the Judgments such, as
they should not live by them. I will now proceed to show you the weakness and
unprofitableness of the Ceremonial part of Moses his Law likewise, for such a
purpose; and that by Arguments taken from S. Paul, especially out of that his
most Divine Epistle to the Hebrews.

18. The first argument shall be drawn out of the 9th Chapter of that Epistle,
the sum whereof is this: The first Covenant, which had Ordinances of Divine
Service, and a worldly Sanctuary, Heb. 10.10.
which consisted in meats and drinks, and diverse washings, and carnal
ordinances imposed on them till the time of reformation, in which also were
offered gifts and sacrifices; yet with all these Ceremonies and Formalities,
they could enter no deeper than the flesh, V. 9.
they could not make him which did the service perfect, as pertaining to the
conscience: That is, for example; those Expiatory Sacrifices which were to be
offered for him which had transgressed, they absolved him indeed from a civil
carnal punishment, but they could not reach to the conscience; that remained
still as guilty and defiled before God, as ever it was. And can it be imagined,
that a man so qualified, with such an accusing condemning conscience, could
with any hope or confidence appear before God, as expecting to be freed from
the danger of Hell, for the cost or ceremony of a Sacrifice? Those Sacrifices
therefore and Ceremonies, V. 13.
the blood of bulls and of goats, and the ashes of an heyfer, sprinkling the
unclean, might sanctify a man to the purifying of the flesh, and that is all
they could do; and so fa^ they could sanctify even the most profane person, or
the veriest Hypocrite in the world: But it must be only the blood of Christ, V.
14.
who through the eternal Spirit, offered himself without spot unto God, that is
able to purge our consciences from dead works to serve the living God.

19. But it may be objected, Moses his Law, as it has had since, or as ours has
now? Why should not their pre-figuration of the true Sacrifice by typical
sacrifices, be as much worth as our post-commemoration thereof? for Christ was
the same yesterday, and to day, and for ever. I answer, that Baptism and the
Eucharist, Moses his Leiturgy and Ceremonies, were only civil carnal
immunities; and though it be true, that the Legal Sacrifices were very apt and
commodious, to shadow forth the Oblation and satisfaction of Christ; yet this
use of them was so mystical and reserved, so impossible to be collected out of
the Letter of the Law, that without a special Revelation from God, the eyes of
the Israelites were too weak to serve them to pierce through those dark clouds
and shadows, and to carry their observation to the substance: so that I
conceive those sacrifices of the Law, in this respect, are a great deal more
beneficial to us Christians; for there is a great difference between Sacraments
and Types; Types are only useful after the Antitype is discovered, for the
confirmation of their Faith that follow. As for example, Abraham's offering of
Isaac by faith, did lively represent the real Oblation of Christ, but in that
respect, was of little or no use till Christ was indeed crucified; it being
impossible to make that history a groundwork of their Faith in Christ. The
like may be said of the Legal Sacrifices.

20. My second Argument shall be taken out of those words of S. Paul, Act.
13.38. where, speaking of Christ, he says, Act. 13.38.
By him all that believe, are justified from all things, from which they could
not be justified by the Law of Moses: From which I infer, that since there
were many sins for which the Law of Moses allowed no Sacrifice, no Redemption,
no Satisfaction, no Commutation, in what a fearful desperate case would a
person that should commit fuch sins be, if he were to expect Justification
before God by the Law of Moses, for that must needs lead him to despair? It
could show him no refuge, no Sanctuary to fly unto; nothing would remain unto
such a person but a certain fearful looking for of judgment and fiery
indignation to consume Gods Adversary: And therefore no marvail if the same
Apostle ( Heb. 7.17, 18.) says, Heb. 7.17, 18.
That the former Law for the weakness and unprofitableness thereof ( i. e. to
Justification) was to be disannulled, since it could make nothing perfect.

21. The last Argument shall be inferred from that saying of the Apostle, Heb.
8.6.
Heb. 8.6. where speaking of the New Covenant of Grace, he says, It was
established on better promises, namely, than the Jewish Covenant was: For all
the happiness which was to be expected from Moses his Law, was only an
exemption from the inconveniences and curses of this life, long days and
peaceable, enriched with worldly content and prosperity: Whereas the blessings
which attend the performance of the New Covenant or the Gospel are unspeakable
and glorious, Such as eye has not seen, nor indeed, as long as it is mortal,
can see, neither can the heart of man conceive them, being eternal in the
Heavens. Neither will the ordinary evasion serve the turn, as if these temporal
blessings, or plagues and curses mentioned in Moses his writings, should
purposely signify the blessed estate of glorified Saints, or woes of the
damned, for then St. Paul's Argument would fall to the ground; and indeed, that
whole Epistle to the Hebrews, would be rendered inconcluding, as might easily be
demonstrated, if the time, and throng of matter, which follows would permit.

22. I would not now have you so conceive me, as if I would exclude the Jews of
the Old Testament from being partakers of the Promises of the Gospel: No, God
forbid: But, that which I have said, is this, that they attained not unto them
by performing Moses his Law, but by the very same means by which we hope to be
partakers of them, namely, by performing the substance of those duties which
are clearly delivered unto us in the Gospel, and may be found sprinkled in
several places, even in Moses his writings, and no question but were more fully
and completely delivered unto them by Tradition from their Fathers. And
hereupon, I suppose, it is, that when any were converted to the knowledge and
worship of the true God in those times, they who made them Proselytes, were not
curious to enforce upon them the Observation of Moses his Ordinances and
Ceremonies, as we find in the behavior of Elisha to Naaman the Assyrian, of
Jonah to the Ninevites, of Daniel to Nebuchadnezzar, and of the rest of the
Prophets to the Tyrians, Moabites, Egyptians, to whom they writ, and whose
conversion they sought: None of which urged upon them the Observation of the
Mosaical Liturgy as a thing necessary or needful to be observed by them: Indeed
those who were content to live amongst the Jews, and enjoy their privileges
and immunities, were bound to undergo the burden and costliness of the
Offerings and Sacrifices, which, as St. Paul says, was so great, that they
were both to themselves and their forefathers intolerable.

23. I will conclude this whole point of the difference between Moses his Law,
and the Law of Faith, or the Gospel, in Gods own words by the Prophet, Jer.
31.31.
Jer. 31.31. twice quoted by St. Paul in Heb. chapter 8. and chapter 10. where God
says, Behold the days come says the Lord, that I will make a New Covenant
with the House of Israel, and with the House of Judah: Not according to the
Covenant which I made with their Fathers in the day that I took them by the
hand to lead them out of the land of Egypt, which my Covenant they brake,
although I was an husband unto them, says the Lord: But this shall be the
Covenant that I will make with them, After those days, says the Lord, I will
put my Laws in their hearts, and write them in their inward parts, etc. As if
he should say, The former Covenant which I made with them by Moses, was only
written in two Tables of Stone, as the Roman Laws were in 12. Tables, and
required only an outward conformity and obedience, for the which they did not
need an inward sanctifying spiritual Grace to enable them, as the New Covenant
of Grace does. And therefore for the performi^^ of that, I will abundantly
afford and supply them with all the Graces o^ my Holy Spirit.

24. But a little to interrupt this Text: You will say, What, had not the Jews
God's Law written in their hearts also? did not they worship him in Spirit as
well as we? No question: But this they did not as commanded by Moses his Law,
but by that Covenant made with Abraham, and by him traduced unto them. It
follows, And I will be their God, and they shall be my people, i. e. I will be
their God after a more especial manner then I was unto them in the Wilderness;
I will not only be their King to govern them in peace and tranquillity, out of
the danger and fear of their Enemies the Nations about them, and preserve them
safe in the promised Land; but I will keep them from the fury and malice of
their spiritual Enemies that would seek to destroy their souls, and I will
bring them to a Land infinitely exceeding theirs, and whereof the Land of
Canaan was but a most unproportionable type and shadow, even mine own blessed
and glorious Kingdom, reserved in the highest Heavens, for them who sincerely
perform the conditions of my New Covenant. Thus far as largely as so small a
measure of time would permit me, I have told you the difference betwixt the
Covenant of Grace and Moses his Law, implied in these words of my Text, through
the Spirit: I come now to my second particular, namely, the distinction of the
same Covenant of Grace from the Law of works, wherein I shall proceed by the
same method, i. e. showing you first absolutely the nature of those Laws, and
then the several differences betwixt them.

25. The Law of Works is the same with that, to the obedience whereof Adam was
obliged in Paradise with this exception, that besides the Moral natural Law
written in his heart, (the substance whereof is to this day reserved in the
minds of all the sons of Adam) Adam had a second positive Law enjoined him by
God, namely, the forbidding him to eat of the Tree of Good and Evil: which one
Precept cannot properly be called a part of the Law of Works, or Nature, since
the Action thereby forbidden was not of its own nature evil, but only made
unlawful by virtue of God's prohibition: Excepting therefore this one
particular Precept, the Law which was given to Adam, (called the Law of Works),
comprehended in it all kind of moral duties referred either to God, his
Neighbor, or Himself, which have in them a natural essential goodness, or
righteousness; and, by consequence, the prohibition, of all manner of actions,
words, or thoughts, which are in themselves contrary to Justice, and Reason.
All these Precepts are generally supposed to be contained in the Ten Words
written by Gods own finger in two Tables of Stone; though, with submission, I
think, that those two Tables contain only directly the moral duties of man to
God and his Neighbor: for it will require much forcing and straining to bring
in the duties and sins of a man against his own person within that compass, as
Temperance, Sobriety, and their opposites, Gluttony, Drunkenness,
Self-incontinency, etc.

26. The Obligation to this Law is so strict, severe and peremptory, That it
required not only an universal Obedience to whatsoever is contained in that
Law, in the full extent, latitude, and perfection thereof, but that continual
without interruption through the whole cou^^^ of a man's life: Insomuch, that
he that should but once transgress it (...) least point or circumstance, should
without redemption, or dispensation, be rendered culpable as of the breach of
the whole Law, and remain liable to the malediction thereof. And to this Law in
this strictness mentioned are all men living obliged, who are out of Christ,
and who either know not of him, or are not willing to submit themselves to his
New Covenant.

27. The Justification which was due to the performance of this Law by Justice,
and as the wages thereof, that is, the condition wherein God obliged himself to
such as fulfilled it, was the promises of this life, and that which is to come;
Long, happy and peaceable days in this world, and in their due time a
translation to the joys and glory of heaven: This Justification did not
comprehend Remission of Sins, as ours does, for the Law excluded all hope of
pardon after sin, no promise made to repentance, repentance would do no good:
The Court wherein they were to be judged was a Court of mere rigorous Justice,
Justice rejoiced over and against Mercy, Grace, Loving Kindness, and all those
blessed and glorious Attributes, whereby God for our Savior Jesus Christ his
sake is pleased and delighted to be known unto the world.

28. This Law in the rigor thereof might easily have been performed by Adam;
he had that perfection of grace and holiness given him, which was exactly equal
and commensurable to whatsoever duties were enjoined him: But by his wilful
voluntary (God forbid, we should say enforced, or absolutely decreed)
prevarication he utterly undid both himself and his posterity, leaving them
engaged for his debts, and as much of their own, without almost any money to
pay them: Without Christ, we are all obliged to the same strictness and
severity of the Law, which by reason of our poverty and want of grace, is
become impossible to be performed by us: As the blessed Apostle St. Paul has
evidently proved by Induction, in the beginning of his Epistle to the Romans:
In the first chapter, declaring that the Gentiles neither did, nor could
perform the Law; in the second, saying as much for the Jews; and in the third,
joining them both together in the same miserable desperate estate. The
conclusion of his whole discourse is, All have sinned and come short of the
glory of God. Thus much, for the Law of Works.

29. The state of mankind without Christ, being so deplored, so out of al hope,
as I told you: Almighty God out of his infinite mercy and goodness, by his
unspeakable wisdom found out an atonement, accepting of the voluntary
exinanition and humiliation of his dearly beloved Son, who submitted himself,
to be made flesh, to all our natural infirmities (sin only excepted) and at
last to dye that ignominious accursed death of the Cross for the Redemption of
mankind; Who in his death made a Covenant with his Father, that those, and only
those, who would be willing to submit themselves to the obedience of a new Law,
which he would prescribe unto mankind, should for the merits of his obedience
and death be justified in the sight of God, have their sins forgiven them, and
be made heirs of everlasting glory: Now, that Christ's death was in order of
Nature, before the giving of the Gospel, is (I think) evident by those words of
St. Paul. Heb. 9.16, 17. where comparing the old Covenant of the Jews with that
of Christ, he says, Where a Testament is, Heb. 9.16.16.
there must of necessity be the death of the Testatour: for a Testament is of
force after men are dead, otherwis^ it is of no strength at all while the
Testatour lives; whereupon neither the first Covenant was dedicated without
blood. It was necessary therefore (says he, ver. 23.) that the patterns of
things in heaven should be purified with these, i. e. with the blood of Beasts,
but the heavenly things themselves with better things than those, namely, with
the blood of Christ.

30. Which Covenant of Christ (called in Scripture the New Covenant, the
Covenant of Grace, the grace of God, the Law of Faith) according to the nature
of all Covenants being made between two parties (at the least), requires
conditions on both sides, to be performed, and being a Covenant of Promise, the
conditions on man's part must necessarily go before, otherwise they are no
conditions at all: Now man's duty is comprehended by St. Paul in this word
Faith, and God's promise in the word Justification: And thus far we have
proceeded upon sure grounds, for we have plain express words of Scripture for
that which has been said: But the main difficulty remains behind, and that is
the true sense and meaning of these two words, Faith and Justification, and
what respect and dependence they have one of the other. Which difficulty by
Gods assistance, and with your Christian charitable patience, I will now
endeavor to dissolve.

31. For the first therefore, which is Faith; we may consider it in several
respects, to wit, Paul, We are justified by Faith without the works of the Law,
must be, We are justified only for the obedience of Christ, and not for our
righteousness of the Law, which is certainly a most Catholic Orthodox sense,
and not to be denied by any Christian, though, I doubt, it does not express all
that St. Paul intended in that Proposition. Secondly, Paul, The Obedience of
Faith, Romans 16.26. Romans 16.26. and 4.13. and 9.13. and 10.6.
The Righteousness of Faith, Romans 4, 13. and 9.13. and 10.6. And it is an
inherent grace or virtue, wrought in us by the powerful operation of God's
Spirit: Or thirdly, Romans 10.9.
it may be taken for the Doctrine of Faith, called also by him, the Word of
Faith, Act. 20.32. Gal. 3.2. Romans 3.27.
Romans 10.8. and the Word of Gods Grace, Act. 20.32. and the hearing of Faith,
Gal. 3.2. In which sense, as if he meant, the Word, St. Paul may seem to
resolve us, Romans 3.27. where he says, that boasting is excluded by the Law of
Faith, which words are extant in the very heat of the controversy of
Justification. Now these senses of Faith if they be applied to that conclusion
of St. Paul, We are justified by Faith, come all to one pass, for in effect it
is all one, to say, We are justified by our Obedience, or Righteousness of
Faith, and to say, We are justified by the Gospel, which prescribes that
Obedience: As on the contrary, to say, We are justified by the Law, or by works
prescribed by the Law, There is a fourth acception of Faith, taken for the
single Habit or Grace of Faith, and applied to this proposition (only of all
Christians that I have heard of) by the Belgic Remonstrants: which being a new
invented fancy, and therefore unwarrantable, yet I shall hereafter have
occasion it may be to say something of it.


31. St. Paul's Proposition, I am persuaded, excludes none of these senses; it
is capeble of them all: But, before I show you how they may consist together, I
will, in the first place, declare of what nature that righteousness is, which
God by virtue of his New Covenant requires at our hands before he will make
good his promise unto us. First, then, God requires at our hands a sincere
Obedience unto the substance of all Moral duties of the Old Covenant, and that
by the Gospel: And this obedience is so necessary, that it is impossible any
man should be saved without it. The pressing of this Doctrine takes up by much
the greatest part of the Evangelical Writings. Now, that these Duties are not
enforced upon us, as conditions of the Old Covenant of Works, is evident,
because, by Christ we are freed from the Obligation of the Old Covenant: God
forbids, that we should have a thought of expecting the hope of righteousness
upon those terms: For, that Covenant will not admit of any imperfection in our
works, and then, in what a miserable case are we! There is no hope for us,
unless some course be taken, that not only our imperfections, but our sins, and
those of a high nature, be passed by, and overlooked by Almighty God, as if He
had lost his eyes to see them, or his memory to remember them.

32. The substance then of the Moral Law is enjoined us by the New Covenant,
but with what difference I shall show you presently. And hereupon it is that
our Savior says to the Pharisees, who were willing to make any
mis-construction of his Doctrine, Think you that I am come to destroy the Law?
I, by all means, say we, God forbid else, for unless the old Law be destroyed,
we are undone; as long as that is alive, we are dead: If the Law of Works have
its natural force still, woe be to us. Therefore, that must not be Christ's
meaning: His intent is, as if he should say, Think you that I am come to
destroy the righteousness of the Law? to dis-oblige men from the necessity of
being good, holy, and virtuous? No, by no means; I am not come to destroy the
Law, but to fulfill it: The righteousness of the Law, according to the substance
thereof, shallbe as necessarily required by virtue of that New Covenant which I
preach unto you, and to which I exhort you all to submit your selves, as ever
it was by the Old Covenant; only because of your weakness and infirmity, I will
abate the rigor of it: Those who notwithstanding my offer of Grace and Pardon
upon such easy conditions as I prescribe, will yet continue in an habitual
state of profaneness and irreligion shall be as culpable, nay, ten times more
miserable than if they never had heard of me, for their wilful neglecting so
great salvation. It is easier for Heaven and Earth to pass away, than for one
tittle of the Law to fail: For God would be no looser by the annihilation of
the world, whereas if any part of the Moral Law should expire, the very beams
and rays of Gods essential goodness should be darkened and destroyed.

33. In like manner says St. Paul, Romans 11. ult. Romans 3. ult.
Do we make void the Law through Faith? God forbid: yea, we establish the Law.
Now, if a succeeding Covenant establishes any part of a Precedent, especially,
if there be any alteration made in the conditions established, all obligation
whatsoever is taken from the Old Covenant, and those conditions are in force
only by virtue of the New. When the Norman Conqueror was pleased to establish
and confirm to the English some of the ancient Saxons Laws, Are those Laws then
become in force as they are Saxon? No, for the Authority of the Saxons, the
Authors of those Laws, is supposed to be extinguished, and therefore no power
remains in them to look to the execution of them: But by the confirmation of
the Norman they are become indeed Norman Laws, and are now in force, not
because they were first made by the Saxons, but only by virtue of the
succeeding power of the Norman line. So likewise, when the Gospel enjoins the
substance of the same duties which the old Covenant of Works required; Are we
Christians enforced to the obedience of them, because they are duties of the
Law? By no means! But only because our Savior and only Lawmakers Jesus Christ
commands the same in the Law of Faith.

34. Thus far the New Covenant is in some terms of agreement with the Old,
inasmuch as the same Moral duties are enjoined in them both, as parts of the
conditions of both. But the difference herein is, That the Law commands a
precise exact fulfilling of these Precepts, (as I told you before) which the
Gospel descending to our infirmities, remits and qualifies much: For in the
Gospel, he is accounted to fulfill the moral Precepts, that obeys them according
to that measure of Grace which God is pleased to allow him; that obeys God,
though not with a perfect, yet with a sincere upright heart; that when he is
overcome with a temptation to sin, continues not in it, but recovers himself to
his former righteousness by Repentance and new Obedience: Thus much then for
the moral Precepts and with what difference they are commanded in the Old and
New Covenant.

35. In the second place, there is another part of Evangelical Obedience, which
is purely Evangelical, and which has no commerce nor reference at all to the
Law, and that is the Grace of Repentance: For says St. Paul, Act. 17 30.
Act. 17.30. But now (that is by the Gospel) God commands all men every where
to repent. Now Repentance implies a serious consideration and acknowledgment of
that miserable estate whereunto our sins have brought us, and hereupon an
hearty unfeigned sorrow for them, a perfect hatred and detestation of them,
inferring a full peremptory resolution to break them off, and interrupt the
course of them by new obedience. This, I say, is an obedience purely
Evangelical, The Law of Works did not at all meddle with it, neither indeed
could it: The Law condemns a man as soon as ever he is guilty of the breach
thereof, and makes no promise at all of Remission of sins upon Repentance; but
rather quite excludes it. Yet from the grace of Repentance, we may gather a
forcible argument to make good that which before we spoke concerning the
Renewing of the Moral Precepts in the New Covenant. For no reasonable man can
deny, that Repentance is absolutely necessary before a man can be Justified.
Now what is that for which (for example) a new converted Heathen repents, but
the breach of the Moral Law? therefore by this necessity of Repentance, he
acknowledges, (and so do we) that by such sins, he was excluded from all hope
of being Justified. Now it were absurd, for a man to say that any thing
excludes a man from being capable of receiving the promises of a Covenant, but
only the breaking of the conditions thereof.

36. The third part of Evangelical Righteousness is, Faith, not Moral, but
Christian; which is, A relying upon Christ, as the only meritorious cause of
whatsoever benefit we obtain by the new Covenant; It being for his sake, both
that God bestows upon us grace, whereby we are enabled to perform his will;
and after we have done our duty, that he will freely, and not as wages, bestow
upon us the reward thereof. There is another virtue Evangelical, which is Hope,
but of that I must speak in my last point. And thus I have gone through the
Conditions required on man's part in the New Covenant, all which I suppose are
employed in this word Faith: which being taken in so general a sense, may, I
conceive, be thus not improperly defined, viz. To be a receiving and embracing
of the Promises made unto us in Christ, upon the terms and conditions proposed
in the Gospel.

37. Now follow the conditions on Gods part, comprehended in these words: The
hope of Righteousness, which are equivalent to the term of Justification: the
nature whereof, I shall now endeavor to discover. Justification, I suppose,
imports the whole Treasure of blessings and favors, which God, who is rich in
mercy, will freely bestow on those whom he accepts as Righteous for his beloved
Son our blessed Savior Jesus Christ his sake; which are first, Remission of
sins, and an interest unto the Joys of heaven in this life, and a full
consummation both of Grace and Glory in the life to come. Some, I know, think
that S. Paul when he discourses of Justification, thereby intends only
Remission of sins: And the ground of this opinion is taken from S. Paul quoting
those words of David, Romans 4.6, 7, 8.
when he states the Doctrine of Justification, Romans 4.6, 7, 8. where he says
that David describes the blessedness of the man unto whom God imputes
Righteousness without works, saying, Blessed are they whose unrighteousness is
forgiven, and whose sins are covered; Blessed is the man unto whom the Lord
will not impute sin. But if this Argument out of the Epistle to the Romans be
of sufficient force for their sense of Justification; Then certainly an
Argument from as express words in the Epistle to the Galatians, will be as
concluding for mine (in which Epistle he also purposely states the same
questions). Gal. 3.11.
The words are Gal. 3.11. That no man is justified by the Law in the sight of
God, it is evident, for the Just shall live by faith. Now, to live, I hope,
does not signify, to have ones sins forgiven him, but to be Saved: Therefore,
unless S. Paul include a right unto Salvation within the compass of
Justification, that Text might have been spared, as nothing at all serving for
his purpose. Besides, Is not Salvation, as free, as gracious, as undeserved an
act of God, as Remission of sins? Is it not as much for Christ's sake that we
are saved, as that our sins are forgiven us? Thus much for what I suppose is
meant by Justification. I will now as briefly and as perspicuously as I can
(without using Allegories and Metaphorical expressions, with which this point
is ordinarily much obscured) show you the combination of these two words, in
what sense I suppose S. Paul may use this proposition; We are Justified by
Faith, without the Works of the Law.

38. In the first place therefore I will lay down this Conclusion as an
infallible safe foundation, That if we have respect to the proper meritorious
cause of our Justification, we must not take Faith, in that Proposition, for
any virtue or Grace inherent in us, but only for the proper and principal
object thereof. Jesus Christ and his Merits. And the meaning of that
Proposition must be, that we are not justified for the merits of any
Righteousness in our selves, whether Legal or Evangelical, but only for the
Obedience and Death of our Blessed Savior Jesus Christ. Though this be most
true, yet I suppose that S. Paul in that proposition, had not a respect to the
Meritorious Cause of our Justification; but to that Formal Condition required
in us before we be Justified: as I think may appear by that which follows.

39. I told you even now, that I would in this point purposely abstain from
using Metaphors, and Figurative Allusions; and the reason is, because, I
suppose, and not without reasonable grounds, that the stating of this point of
Justification by Metaphors, has made this Doctrine, which is set down with
greater light and perspicuity in holy Scripture, than almost any other, to be a
Doctrine of the most Scholastical subtilty, the fullest of shadows and clouds
of all the rest. For example: In that fashion and dress of Divinity, as it is
now worn, sliced and mangled into Theses and Distinctions, we find this point
of our Justification thus expressed: That Faith is therefore said to Justify
us, because it is that which makes Christ's righteousness ours: it is as it were
an instrument or hand, whereby we receive, lay hold on, and apply Christ unto
our selves. Here Is naught but flowers of Rhetoric, Figures, and Metaphors;
which though they are capable of a good sense, yet are very improper to state a
Controversy withal.

40. But let us examine them a little: We must not say, they conceive of Faith,
as if it were a Virtue or Grace, or any part of Righteousness inherent in us:
For Faith as a Grace has no influence at all into our Justification. Mark the
Coherence of these things: Faith is considered as an hand or an instrument in
our Justification, and yet, for all it is a Hand, it is nothing in, or of, us;
for it seems, Hands are not parts of men's bodies. Again, Faith puts on Christ,
receives him, lays hold upon him, makes his righteousness ours, and yet it
does nothing for all that. Besides, How can Faith be properly called an
instrument of Justification? An Instrument is that which the principal Cause
the Efficient makes use of in his operation. Now Justification in this sense,
is an immanent internal action of God, in which there is no cooperation of any
other agent, nor any real alteration wrought in man, the object thereof. Does
God then use Faith as an instrument, in producing the Act of Justification? No,
but it is Instrumentum Passivum, says one; That is a thing never heard of in
nature before, and the meaning is sure, Faith, certainly, is something, but
what a kind of thing, we know not. By these means it comes to pass, that the
Doctrine of our Justification, as some men have handled it, is become as deep,
as unsearchable a mystery, as that of the Trinity.

41. Without question, there is nothing can be more evident to a man, that
shall unpartially consider S. Paul's method in his discourse of Justification,
then that by Faith he intends some operative working grace in us: For instance,
The Apostle proves that we Christians are to seek for Justification the same
way that Abraham attained unto it, namely by Faith; for, says the Scripture in
his quotation, Abraham believed God, and it was accounted to him for
righteousness. What was that which was accounted to him? His believing; That
is, say some, Christ who was the object of his Belief: This is a forced
interpretation certainly, and which a Jew would never have been persuaded to.
But that Christ was not at all intended in that place, it is evident; for
Abraham's belief there, had respect to Gods promise made to him of giving him a
Son in his old age, and by that Son, a Seed as innumerable as the stars in
heaven, as appears Genesis 15.4, 5, 6. whereas the Promise of Christ, Genesis 15.4,
5, 6. Genesis 18.18.
follows three Chapters after, to wit, Genesis 18.18. Again, the Apostle in many
places, uses these words, We are Justified by Faith in Christ, and by the
Faith of Jesus Christ; which speeches of his, will admit of no tolerable sense,
unless by Faith he intends some work or obedience performed by us. This
therefore being taken for granted, that by Faith, is meant some condition
required at our hands, (and yet my former conclusion of our Justification only
for the merits of Christ remaining firm): we will in the next place consider
what kind of obedience that of Faith is, and in what sense it may be said to
justify us.

42. What satisfaction I conceive may be given to this Quaery, I will set down
in this Assertion: Assertion.
That since Justification, even as it includes Remission of sins, is that
Promise, to perform which unto us, God has obliged himself in the New Covenant;
it must necessarily presuppose in the person to be so justified, such an
obedience as the Gospel requires; namely first, Repentance from dead works, a
conversion to a new obedience of those holy Moral Commands which are ratified
in the Gospel, and a relying upon Christ as the only meritorious cause of our
Justification and Salvation, by a particular Evangelical Faith. All this, I
say, is pre-required in the person who is made capable of Justification, either
in the exercise, or at least in praeparatione cordis, in a full resolution of
the heart, and entire disposition of the mind: So that, though God be the sole
proper Efficient Cause; and Christ, as Mediator, the sole proper Meritorious
Cause of our Justification: yet these inherent dispositions, are exacted on our
part, as causae sine quibus non, as necessary conditions to be found in us,
before God will perform this great work, freely, and graciously toward us, and
only for the Merits of Christ.

43. This Assertion may, that though there be no qualifications required in a
man, before he obtain Remission of sins, yet they are to be found in us before
we be made capable of Salvation. For, as I have showed before, Paul, We are
Justified by Faith, without the works of the Law, exclude all conditions to be
performed by man; If it exclude not only the righteousness of the Law (which
indeed it does) but the obedience of Faith, or the Gospel likewise, from being
necessary dispositions in us before we receive remission of sins; Then another
saying of his, parallel to this, will exclude as well the necessity of an
Evangelical Obedience to our salvation: For, says S. Paul, Ephesians. 2.8.
Ephesians. 2.8. By Grace are ye saved through Faith, and that not of your selves, it
is the gift of God: not of Works, lest any man should boast. Put I hope no man
will be so unchristian-like, as to exclude the necessity of our good works to
salvation, for all this saying of S. Paul; therefore, they may as well be
pre-required to Remission of sins, notwithstanding the former place.

44. Secondly, dead in trespasses and sins, Ephesians. 2.1, etc.
whilst he walks according to the course of this world, according to the
prince of the power of the air, the Spirit that works in the children of
disobedience; whilst he has his conversation in the lusts of the flesh,
fulfilling the desires of the flesh, and of the mind, being, notwithstanding
his Justification, a child of wrath, as much as the profanest heathen, though
the veriest reprobate in the world; lastly, though he be no child of Abraham
according to faith, that is, not having in him that faith which was imputed to
Abraham for righteousness. Now whether this Divinity be consonant to Gods Word,
let your own consciences be Judges.

45. A third Argument to prove the Truth of the former Assertion, Mat. 12.37.
By thy words thou shall be justified, and by thy words thou shall be
condemned: where we see, Justification is taken in that proper sense, in which
we maintain it against the Papists. Again, If you forgive men their trespasses,
Mat. 6.14, 45.
your heavenly Father will also forgive you; But if you forgive not men their
trespasses, neither will your Father forgive your trespasses. Again, our
Savior speaking concerning Mary, says, Her sins are forgiven her, because she
loved much. Luke 7.47.
If the time, or your patience, could suffer me, Paul, and S. James in this
point upon these grounds, without any new invented Justification before men,
which is a conceit taken up by some men, only to shift off an Adversary's
argument, which otherwise would press them too hard, they think: for, S. Paul's
Faith, taken for the obedience of the Gospel, would easily accord with S. James
his holy and undefiled Religion before God, Jam. 1.27.
or works which is all one; And S. James would be S. Paul's expositour without
any injury or detraction at all from the merits of Christ, or Gods free and
undeserved mercy to us in him. But I must hasten.

46. The full meaning, then, of S. Paul's Proposition, We are justified by
Faith, and not by the works of the Law: and by consequence, the state of the
whole controversy of Justification, in brief, may be this; That if we consider
the efficient cause of our Justification, it is only God which Justifies: if
that for which we are justified, that is, the meritorious cause thereof, it is
not for any thing in our selves, but only for the obedience and satisfaction of
our Blessed Savior, that God will Justify us: But if we have respect to what
kind of Conditions are to be found in us, before Christ will suffer us to be
made partakers of the benefit of his Merits, then we must say, that we are not
justified by such a Righteousness, so perfect, absolute, and complete, as the
Law of Works does require; but by the righteousness of the Gospel, by a
Righteousness proportionable to that Grace which God is pleased to bestow on
us; not by the perfection, but sincerity of our obedience to the New Covenant.
And the Apostle's main argument will serve to prove this to any understanding,
most undeniably. S. Paul has demonstrated, that if we consider the rigor of
the Law, all men, both Jews and Gentiles are concluded under sin, and most
necessarily obnoxious to Gods wrath. Which Reason of his, would not be at all
prevailing, unless by works of the Law, he intended only such a perfect
obedience as the Law requires; which by reason of man's weakness, is become
impossible unto him. For it might easily be replied upon him thus: We confess,
no man can fulfill the Law; but the conditions of the Gospel are not only
possible, but, by the assistance of Gods Spirit, easy to be performed; so that
though, for this reason, the former Righteousness be excluded from our
Justification, not only quoad meritum, but also, quoad praesentiam; yet the
later Evangelical Righteousness is excluded from our Justification, only quoad
Meritum.

47. But I perceive an Objection ready to assault me; and I will impartially
assist the force and strength thereof against my self, with all the advantage I
can. It is to this purpose: When men are disputing in the Schools, or
discoursing in the Pulpit, they may state this question as they please: But the
fittest time to decide this point, is, when, in a serious contemplation, we
present before our eyes Almighty God, the righteous impartial Judge of heaven
and earth, sitting in his Throne, ready to execute Judgment, and our selves
arraigned at the Bar before him, expecting a final irreversible sentence. In
these circumstances, I would fain see the stoutest-hearted man alive, that
should dare to say unto Almighty God, Thou have given me a Law, which my
conscience witnesses unto me, that I have performed. Therefore I now challenge
thee upon thy Truth and Faithfulness, that thou perform thy conditions also
with me, and give me Remission of my former sins, as a Reward of my obedience.

48. For answer to this Objection: This is confessed by all Christians of all
Religions, that a Profane person, or an Hypocrite dying in such an estate,
shall neither in the last day be acquitted of his sins, nor saved: Therefore
unless a man's heart can witness unto him, that he has unfeignedly kept Gods
Commandments, God, 1 John 3. c. 20.
who is greater than his heart, and knows all things, will assuredly condemn
him: But then we must know, that it is not a Christians plea, to rely upon his
own, though sincere unhypocritical Righteousness, and therefore to challenge
heaven. But as our Savior advises us, Luke 17.10.
We when we have done all we can, must say, We are unprofitable servants: And
not say so in a complement only, but in the truth and sincerity of our hearts.
It is the perfection of Evangelical Righteousness, to deny our own
righteousness, to disclaim all meritorious efficacy thereof, either in
Remission of sins, or Salvation. Therefore, he that after he has performed
Gods Commandments, shall think to challenge the reward as of debt, or as
promised only to his own holiness, wants the proper peculiar righteousness of a
Christian: He must say in holy Job's words, Though I were righteous, yet would
I not answer God, Job 9.15.
but I will make supplication to my Judge: I would say unto him, Lord look not
upon that holiness which is in me, which yet is not mine neither, for thou
wrought'st it in me; But look on him in whom only thou art well pleased; Accept
of me in him, and for his sake only, who has fulfilled all righteousness for
me, who through the eternal Spirit, has offered himself without spot unto
thee, being made sin and a curse for me, that I might be made the Righteousness
of God in him. To him only be glory for ever and ever. The sum of all which I
have said, is contained Tit. 2.11,-14. The Grace of God which brings, etc.
And so I come to the 2d General, namely, the Promise which God will make good
unto us who sincerely obey him, contained in these words, We wait for the Hope,
etc.

49. Which General I divided into two Particulars: 1. The nature of the reward
promised, which I told you was, Justification containing Remission of Sins, and
everlasting Life. 2. The interest, which, during this life, we ordinarily have
in that reward, namely Hope, expressed in these words, We wait for the Hope of
Righteousness: that is, by hope we expect the reward of righteousness.
I cannot now enlarge my self in the former particular, something I have
already been forced to say of it, which must suffice: I will in few words
consider the second Particular, namely the interest which we have in the
Promises, which is Hope: We wait for, etc.

50. I know nothing more effectual to persuade me to search for and embrace
Divine Truth with singleness of heart and without respect of persons, then to
consider, that there are no opinions so unreasonable, so directly contradictory
to one another, but the Spirit of contradiction and partiality will make a man
easily to swallow and digest them. As for example, whereas the Papists most
presumptuously maintain, that it is in a man's power, by the ordinary assistance
of Grace, so exactly to perform all Gods Commandments, that he shall have no
need to say, Lord forgive us our trespasses; Some of their adversaries strive
so much to avoid this Assertion on the contrary extreme, that they will not
allow, even the best and most holy Actions of the most Regenerate man, to be
such as God requires at our hands; they will not only have them to be
imperfect, but sinful, I, if strictly examined, sins. And yet for all this,
those who put it in a man's power to fulfill all Gods Commandments, will not
suffer any man to have any certainty of their Salvation: On the contrary, the
others, though they make a man's best actions to be sins, yet require at his
hands an infallible divine Faith of his Salvation, not only as an attendant,
but as the very nature and essence of that Faith, whereby he shall be Justified.

51. It may be possible, that one of these parties might light upon the truth,
if either of them would be willing to change one of his opinions with his
adversary: but, as they have been pleased to yoke such jarring positions
together, I am confidently persuaded, that both of them have missed of the
truth, and left it in the middle to any third person that will be willing to
stand neuter in a mean betwixt them both. I will not now examine how far each
side have outrun the truth contrary ways: only as I am required by that part
of my Text which remains, I will lay down two Assertions participating, in some
measure, The first whereof is this (which I have already touched) That no man
can justly and reasonably expect or hope for the reward of righteousness, but
he whose heart and conscience can unfeignedly witness unto him, that he has,
though not exactly, yet sincerely, and without Hypocrisy, performed the
conditions of the New Covenant. The second, That the interest which such a
person ordinarily has in the Promises, is only Hope.


52. Now concerning the 1. Assertion, Assert. 1.
namely, That no man can justly, etc. I would not now be mistaken, as if I
said, that before a man can hope for salvation, he must perform Gods
Commandments exactly, but only according to the equity of the Gospel;
according to that famous saying of S. Augustine, Retractat. l. 1. c. 19. Omnia
mandata facta deputantur, quando quicquid non fit ignoscitur. Now, that a man
may keep Gods Commandments, as far as the Equity of the Gospel expects from
him, may, I think, be thus demonstrated: There is no man that hears me this
day, I am persuaded, but he does often seriously desire of God, that he would
give him the Grace to do his will: Now, all prayer, if it be right, is to be
performed in Faith, i. e. with a full persuasion, not only that it is lawful,
and warrantable, for him to desire that which he prays for, but also with as
full a persuasion, that Almighty God is not only able, but ready and willing
also to grant him his petitions; otherwise, it is not only a vain, but a sinful
prayer; it is a tempting of God, as if he should desire him to do that, which
he knows is impossible. Besides, can we think that God would command us (and
withal add a promise of hearing and granting our petitions) would he, I say,
command us to pray for that which we are assured of before hand, cannot, and
must not, be granted? Therefore certainly, some Christians have been heard in
these petitions; some men have been found, who have fulfilled the righteousness
of the Gospel.

53. Now till thou have done this, which thou see by the assistance of God's
Spirit, (which will never be wanting to them which desire it) it is possible
for thee to do; nay, I will add further, is easy for thee to do: Does not
Christ say as much? My yoke is easy, and my burden is light. I say, till thou
have done this, thou can have no reason in the world to hope for Gods mercy.
For tell me! why do thou hope, thou that continuest still in an unrepentant
estate, in an habitual opposition to God's holy Commandments? Art thou
resolved to hope, because thou have a mind to it, upon no ground? when thou
ought rather to fear, almost to despair? Or rather, can thou persuade thy
self in earnest, that this is indeed a hope? Is it not a fancy of thine own
brain, or rather a Temptation of the Devil? Hope, Romans 5.5.
which is hope indeed, which is not a fancy and Chimera, makes not ashamed,
says S. Paul: A man may with confidence, without confusion of face, profess
and maintain it. But such a hope as this is, which is not a hope in earnest,
how will it disgrace a man, and put him out of countenance, when God shall ask
him why he did offer to hope?

54. Let thy conscience now answer me, whosoever thou art, in such a state.
Thou that know how often God has said, nay, sworn in his wrath, that none
of those which continue disobedient, shall enter into his rest! That none shall
be partakers of the second Resurrection unto Glory, but those that have been
partakers of the first unto Grace! Can thou for all this, imagine, that God
has such a peculiar particular affection and respect to thee, who art yet a
slave of the Devils; that he will be content to strain his Truth and veracity,
to break his Oath for thy company? Shall the whole Scripture, which promises
glory to none but those who perform the conditions prescribed, for thy sake be
turned into a Romance, into a melancholy Tale to fright children withal? No,
no, Assure thy self, it is not a conceit of Election which will save thee: thou
must work, and work hard, in fear and trembling, before God will raise in thee
the good Spirit of Christian Hope.

55. For to say the truth of all Divine Graces, Hope is incomparably the
hardest to attain unto: And the reason is evident, because it pre-supposes the
possession of all other Graces before it. And yet for all this, nothing counted
so easy, now a days, as Hope, though men both are and resolve to be never so
wicked: Nay, and it is well if Hope will serve their turn, they must have an
infallible assurance, a Divine Faith of everlasting glory; And no manner of
sins, though never so heinous, never so often committed, shall be able to weaken
this their assurance, that they are resolved of. This they think is a spell
strong enough for the Devil in all assails; when God knows, the Devil is more
joy'd and comforted, to see them so vainly delude themselves, then they
themselves possibly can be. This for my first Assertion; now follows the second.

56. When I say, Assert. 2.
that the Interest which a Christian ordinarily has in the Promises of God, is
Hope; I mean, it is not absolute and irrespective, but depending upon
conditions, namely, Grace, and perseverance therein. And this I took for
granted, for I never heard of any yet, that denied perseverance to be necessary
to salvation. If then his Interest be by Hope, then it is not yet by Faith,
properly so called; For it is not possible, that the same object (considered
with the same circumstances at the same time) should be the object both of
Faith and Hope. For example: I believe by a Divine Faith, i. e. a Faith
grounded upon God's Word, that there shall be a Resurrection of the Flesh, even
of this flesh of mine; And I believe it firmly, because God has said that he
will bring it to pass; neither is there any condition of mine pre-required to
the performance of this promise of God; for howsoever I behave my self here in
this world, whether well or ill, it matters not, my behavior cannot make God
alter his resolution. Now, if I assuredly believe this, it would be improper
and absurd, for me to say, I hope there will be a Resurrection of my body; for
when I say, I hope any thing, I imply a possibility, in nature, that such a
thing may not be, which in this case I cannot do without infidelity.

57. But, on the other side, I hope that God will raise this flesh of mine unto
Glory, and I hope this upon safe grounds: Therefore, if it be true that I hope
it, I cannot properly be said to believe it, because my salvation yet depends
upon conditions; namely, perseverance. Therefore let me propose this one
question to any man's conscience: Have thou such an assurance of salvation given
thee of God, that Hope is quite evacuated in thee: Is there no such virtue left
in thee as Hope? Surely God has dealt extraordinarily mercifully with thee;
Thou art many degrees gone beyond the state of those believers which S. Paul
speaks of, and includes himself in the number, when he says, We live by Hope:
For thou do not live by Hope, thou art exalted above it. Notwithstanding, I
beseech you, consider well upon the matter, (for it concerns you very much) be
not too hasty to credit fancies, when conceits of assurance or impeccability
shall be suggested to your minds. There may be great danger of a confidence
ungrounded; a confidence only taken upon trust, from other men's words or
opinions.

58. Do I go about (now think you) to bereave you, or cosen you of any
spiritual comfort in this life? Do I envy any of you your assurance? Alas, why
should I deal so with you? for I was never injured by you; or, if I were,
surely, of all places, I would not make choice of this to execute my Revenge
in. Or if I thought that such an assurance were ordinarily to be had, at least
necessary, to the making up of a Justifying Faith, (and have you never heard it
said so?) would I not (think you) strive and endeavor to obtain it at any
rate, even with the loss of all worldly comforts? Yes certainly, I would count
them all but as dross and dung in comparison of it: But I confess unto you I am
yet contented with enjoying Heaven by Hope: And I bless Almighty God, that he
has dealt so graciously with me, that I should dare to hope for it, and not be
shamed and confounded by my hope. And if there be any amongst you, that will
vouchsafe to content himself with such a neglected degree of comfort, with only
hope, and no more, I will not enter into comparison with those that are
perfect; but I dare promise him, that all those troublesome pleasures, which do
so ravish the men of this world, shall be as nothing; yea, as afflictions and
torments, in comparison of those spiritual heavenly Joys, which Hope, well and
legally achieved, will be able to afford us: No dangers will there be of
terrors or jealousies, as if God would happen to grow weary, or repent himself
of any grace or blessing which he has bestowed upon us.

59. For, tell me; Do you think that Adam, while he continued in his Innocence,
had any grudgings of suspicions or fears? Was he not, during that time, in as
great a quiet and serenity of mind, as any of us dare hope for? And yet the
most that he could do then, was to hope that he might continue in that state
even to the end: The event shows, he could not have an infallible Faith of his
perseverance. If then such a contented settled mind could accompany Adam in
Paradise, even when he knew it was in his power, with but reaching out his
hand, and tasting an Apple; yea, with a sudden wicked word, or an unsanctified
thought, utterly, and irrecoverably to degrade himself from that happy estate;
surely, we Christians have much more reason to rejoice in our hope, since we
know assuredly, that as God has been so gracious to begin this good work in us,
so he will not be wanting to perfect it even to the end, if we will but perform
our parts, which he has already given us more then sufficient grace to do, and
will never fail to supply us with more, for the asking: nay, more, which are
surer grounds to build upon than ever Adam had; since we know, that not one,
nor ten, nor a hundred sins, shall be able so irreparably to cast us out of
God's favor, but that he will be willing upon our Repentance, especially
calling to mind his old mercies, to restore us again to our lost happiness.

60. Neither are we utterly excluded from all assurance; for there is a (...),
a full assurance of Hope, says S. Paul, Heb. 6.11. Ibid. 9.
Heb. 6.11. This Hope we have as a sure Anchor of the soul fastened on a Rock:
The Rock cannot fail us, the Anchor will not; all the danger is in the Cable or
chain of spiritual Graces, whereby we are fastened to this Rock: If this chain
but hold, no tempest, no winds, no floods can endanger us. And part of our Hope
respects this chain; for God has promised his willingness and readiness to
strengthen it every day more and more, till our state shall be so changed, that
there shall be no such things as Tempests known, no tossings of waves, no
tumults of winds, nor fear of leaking or decay in the Vessel, but all calmness
and security. And for the attaining to this happy unchangeable estate, where is
it that we place our Hope? Truly our Hope is even in thee, O God; who, if thou
shall think it convenient or necessary for us, wilt enlarge this our Hope into
confidence, and add, unto that, assurance, and swallow up all in possession:
And that not for any merits of ours, but only for thy free undeserved Mercies
in our blessed Savior Jesus Christ, in whom alone thou art well pleased; To
whom, with thee O Father, and the blessed Spirit, be ascribed by us, and thy
whole Church, the Kingdom, and the Power, and the Glory, for ever and ever,
Amen.

The Ninth Sermon.
1 COR. X. 13. -- God is Faithful who will not suffer you to be tempted above
that ye are able. --


WHatever punishments befell the disobedient Israelites, who murmured and
tempted God in the Wilderness, Verse. 6. Verse. 11.
They all happened unto them (says St. Paul) for ensamples to us, and are
written for our admonition, upon whom the ends of the world are come. This
Privilege we may have beyond our forefathers, that we may present before our
eyes a larger Series and History of God's Providence, even since the foundation
of the World: We may take a view and prospect of his constant unaltered course
of revenging himself upon sin, in whatsoever persons he finds it; And we ought
from thence to collect, that whatsoever immunities and privileges we may
conceive to ourselves, whatsoever comfortable Errors we may take up upon trust,
yet that God will (not for our sakes) begin a new frame of Policy in the
Administration of the World; but that we also, unless we break off our sins by
repentance, and conversion unto God, We, I say, after the example of these
murmuring Israelites, as those upon whom the Tower of Siloe fell, as those
fourteen, whose blood Pilate mingled with the Sacrifices, that we also unless
we repent, shall all likewise perish. Nay certainly, we (upon whom the ends of
the world are come) shall be much more culpable, our punishment and stripes
shall be more in number and weightier, if we (notwithstanding that larger
experience which we may have of Gods unpartial dealing with sinners) shall yet
promise to our selves impunity, If we shall say, we shall have peace, though we
walk in the imaginations of our hearts.

2. The same collection we may proportionably make to our own benefit and
advantage, from Gods gracious dealing and behavior to any of his beloved
faithful servants, we may appropriate to our selves, all those blessings and
promises which have been afforded unto them, If our Consciences can assure us,
that we do obey Gods Commandments in the truth and sincerity of our hearts.
Now for warrant to this kind of collection, instead of several examples in Holy
Scripture, I will only make use of one taken out of (I think) this our Apostle,
Heb. 13.5.
where he says, Let your conversation be without covetousness, and be content
with such things as you have; For God has said, I will never leave thee, nor
forsake thee. Which words by him quoted, as the margins of our Bibles will
direct us, are to be found Josh. 1.5. Which, Josh. 1.5.
though they be a particular Promise which God immediately made to Joshua,
thereby to encourage him after the death of Moses, to take upon him the
conducting of the Jews into the Land of Promise, assuring unto him a
continuation of his extraordinary assistance in the enterprise: Yet
notwithstanding, St. Paul, we see (as if God had proclaimed this Promise to the
whole world) applies these words to all the Faithful among the Hebrews, and by
the same proportion to all Christians likewise.

3. Upon which grounds I may as reasonably direct the words of this verse, out
of which my Text is taken, to you that now hear me, as the Apostle does to the
Corinthians, And say, There has no temptation taken you, but such as is common
to man: For certainly, we will not imagine, that the Church or City of Corinth
had any such extraordinary Immunity or Charter granted them, whereby they
should be exempted from the danger of Temptations above all the Christian world
besides. Therefore let your memories recollect and examine the time past of your
lives, and tell me, Did there ever any Temptation take hold of you, or assault
you so powerful and irresistible, that there was no way left for you but to be
overcome by it? (Take Temptation now in what sense you please, either for a
misfortune and Affliction, or else for a Suggestion to sin.) Was there ever any
calamity, any loss, any pain, any sickness, so violent and impetuous, but that
still you might perceive your selves notwithstanding (though perhaps in your
outward man unequally matched by it) yet in your spirits and minds strong
enough to conquer the malice thereof, and to convert it into wholesome Physic?
Again, Was there ever any sinful Temptation so strongly urged upon you, but
that you might by the assistance of that Grace which God had already given you,
or at the least, for the asking, would have super-added, you might easily have
dulled and diverted the force thereof? Did not your Consciences, even after you
were overcome by such a Temptation, tell you, that it was mere voluntary
cowardice in you, to suffer your selves to be overcome by it, that you
willingly surrendered and betrayed those forces which already God had given you?

4. Now, though I am persuaded this be so evidently true, that there is scarce
any one here but his Conscience will assure him as much; Yet, for all this, we
must not begin hereupon to fancy in our minds any extraordinary worth or
dignity in our selves, as though by our own power or holiness we could work
such wonders. No alas, nothing less: For take away the assistance and guard of
our Auxiliary Forces, God's free and undeserved Graces within us, and his
Divine assistance, together with the Guard of his blessed Angels without us,
and there is no Temptation so weak and despicable, which we should not suddenly
yield unto; Nay, we should need no outward Tempters to help us to sin, our own
wicked hearts would save the Devil that labor; For nothing is there so vile
and abominable, whereunto without God's restraining Grace we should not readily
and impetuously hasten unto.

5. Therefore let us neither defraud God nor our selves of their dues: But as
we have spoken of the time past, so likewise of that which follows, If
hereafter we shall overcome any temptation (as certainly, by Gods help, if we
have but a mind to it, we may) Let us bless Almighty God for assisting us so
far, let us give the glory and Trophies of the conquest to him: But on the
contrary side, if we shall neglect to make use and advantage of those many
helps against sin, which Almighty God is ready to supply unto us: If
notwithstanding those many Promises of assistance so frequently set down in
Holy Scripture; If notwithstanding those many secret whisperings and
inspirations of his Holy Spirit in our souls: If notwithstanding God's Voice,
which (as every day's experience can witness unto us) continually calls upon
us, saying, This is the right way, walk in it, and ye shall find rest to your
souls; we will yet continue to extinguish those good motions, to deafen and
drown God's voice, and be ready to hearken unto, and obey our own filthy lusts
and vile affections: Let us lay the fault where it is due, even upon our own
deceitful wicked Hearts; or otherwise, the time will come when in Hell we shall
be evidently convinced thereof, when the worm of Conscience which never dies
shall continually torment and gnaw us. Let God be true and faithful in his
Promises, and every man a Liar. For, as hitherto God has been so merciful to
you to preserve you, that no temptation should take you, but such as is common
to man; so likewise for the time following, though perhaps greater trials may
befall you, than hitherto you have had experience of, yet of this you may be
confident, that howsoever they may seem grievous; yet the same God continues
faithful and righteous to fulfill his Promises, He will never suffer you to be
tempted above that you are able.

6. Temptation is (...) thing of its own Nature indifferent, and is rendered
good or evil, from the end and intention of the Tempter especially: It is
nothing else but making a trial or experiment. If good; and assay, whether that
good which seems to be in a subject be true and firmly grounded, or no: So God
may be said to tempt, as he did Abraham, etc. And this he performs not to
satisfy his curiosity, but merely out of a good inclination to the party; both
thereby to confirm his graces in him, and to reward them with a greater measure
of Glory. If evil; Temptation is an assay, whether that good which seems to be
in a man, may not by some means or other be extinguished, and so the person
destroyed, so the Devil is most properly called the Tempter: And of this nature
are the Temptations of my Text: Now these we find in Holy Scripture to be
twofold: etc. are called Temptations, because by these a man is inclinable to
be frighted from, or at last discountenanced in a holy conversation:

7. But, I confess, I find it something difficult to determine, whether of these
two senses, with exclusion of the other be intended by St. Paul, in my Text,
whether, when he says, God will not suffer you to be tempted above that ye are
able, his meaning should be, God by his Wisdom and Providence, will so contrive
businesses for you, that, though you are not likely to live in a contiual
uninterrupted course of happiness and security, but that sometimes you shall
dash your foot against a stone, you shall be disquieted and molested with
afflictions of several natures; notwithstanding, this you may be confident of,
that let what misfortue will, come, how grievous and even insupportable soever
it may seem unto you, it shall never be so violent and out-ragious, but that
God will provide a way for you to escape from it, there will be a door left
open for you to avoid the furiousness and impetuousness of it; either God will
arm you with Patience to bear it, and then the comfort which your souls may
feel, in the consideration of what glorious rewards are promised unto your
Patience, shall make your afflictions even matters of rejoicing unto you; in
which respect, (as St. James says) you ought to count it all joy, when you
fall into diverse Temptations, Or, if those Temptations and Afflictions reach so
far as to the destroying of your Lives, yet notwithstanding all this, they are
so unable to make you miserable, unless you will take part with them against
your own souls, by repining and murmuring under the mighty hand of God, that
when you shall consider that blessed change which death shall bring unto you,
when all tears shall be wiped from your eyes, all fear and expectation of
misery removed, nothing but inexpressable and everlasting joys to be expected,
you shall bless the time that ever you were afflicted, and with St. Paul
confess, That the afflictions of this life are worthy of that joy which shall
be revealed. This, I say, is a good Catholic, Orthodox sense, and which it is
very probable, that St. Paul might more directly intend in these words of my
Text.

8. Notwithstanding I cannot exclude the other sense of the word Temptation
from this Text; for according to the Analogy of Faith, and without any wrong
done to the dependence and connection of these words ( God will not suffer you
to be tempted, etc.) St. Paul's intent in them might be such; as if it had been
thus spread out more at large, though considering the many disadvantages we
have in the way of godliness, in respect both of our powerful, malicions,
industrious, and subtle Enemy the Devil, who continually waits upon us to
entrap us; in respect of our seeming flattering friend, the world and vanities
thereof alluring us; But especially in respect of our own wicked and deceitful
Hearts, forward and desirous enough to embrace the wicked suggestions and
temptations of both, nay, sufficient to destroy us without the assistance of
either: I say, that though (these things considered) we may seem to be set (in
the expression of the Holy Ghost) upon slippery places, where it is almost
impossible for us to keep our footing, and to preserve our selves from falling
dangerously, and dashing our selves in pieces.

9. Notwithstanding, if our eyes were opened, as were the eyes of the Prophet
Elisha's servant, we should find as well as he, that they that be with us, are
more than they that be against us: For God and his Holy Angels, who are on our
side, are both wiser and stronger than the Devil, and more willing to do us
good, than the other can be to hurt us: Besides, the expectation of those
gloriousrewards, which are laid up in Heaven for us, are sufficient, even to
any reasonable man, to dis-relish unto him the vain unsatisfying pleasures of
this world: And though our own hearts naturally be never so traitorous and
unfaithful, yet by the power of that Grace which is plentifully showred down
upon every one of us in our Baptism, and which is daily increased and supplied
unto us, they may easily be corrected and renewed. So, that if the suggestion
of any wicked Temptation get the mastery over us, let us not impute too much to
the valor and strength of our Enemies; let us not accuse God of any
unwillingness to succor us; For never any Temptation has or ever shall happen
unto us, but such as is (...), suitable unto the nature of man, such as a
reasonable, considerate, and a circumspect man, by the ordinary assistance of
God's Grace, and careful application of those means wherewith we are abundantly
furnished out of Holy Scripture, as Prayer, Watchfulness, Fasting, and the
like, may easily conquer and subdue.

10. This sense of these words may with as good reason and probability be
supposed to be intended by St. Paul in this place as the former: And indeed,
unless we enlarge St. Paul's words to this meaning also, we shall receive no
extraordinary comfort and encouragement from them: For, though indeed, it is
true, that it is more than we can deserve at God's hands to obtain a Promise
from him, to secure us, that no Temptations, no outward Afflictions of this
world, shall be so violent and furious upon us, as to exceed the strength of
Reason and Grace to withstand them; Yet, since Sin is that only Enemy which is
able to withdraw God's favor from us, and make him our Enemy, unless we can be
put in some hope, that there is a possible course for us to prevail against sin
also, and all the dangerous temptations and suggestions thereof, we should live
but an uncomfortable discontented life, we should be continually affrighted
with sad melancholic thoughts, with disquieting jealousies and fears, that
however we may now and then please our selves with conceits of Gods favor for
the present, yet, since he has passed no promise of securing us for the future,
it may happen, that such a sinful Temptation may come upon us, which may be
able, do what we can, to over-whelm us irrecoverably. Therefore since this
latter sense (which I mentioned of these words) is more profitable and
advantageous to us, I will especially at this time insist upon it, and labor
to demonstrate undeniably to every one of us, that God is faithful, and will
assuredly make good that promise which he has made unto us all, namely, not to
suffer us to be tempted, that is, by any sinful temptation, above that we are
able.

11. Now, he is said to be tempted above that he is able, who, do what he can,
though he strain his natural endowments to the uttermost, and though he
endeavor heartily, to make use of all the outward helps and assistances which
he finds prescribed unto him out of Gods Word, though he extend that measure of
Grace wherewith he is furnished to the extremest activity thereof to resist
such a Temptation; yet, in the end is forced to yield to the power of it,
utterly fainting and languishing in the combat. So, on the contrary, that man
who being completely furnished with all requisite weapons both for his own
defense, and encountering his Adversary, and besides, having in him both ability
of body, and courage enough, and yet out of a sleepy negligence, or obstinate
sullenness, will not take the pains to lift up his arm, or otherways bestir
himself to oppose his Enemy, such a man, if overcome, can in no reason be said
to be Over-match'd, but is a mere Traitor to his own safety and reputation.

12. And indeed, before I can proceed any further, I must either take this for
granted, That some men though (de facto) they have been overcome by a
Temptation, yet might have resisted it by the assistance of that Grace
wherewith they were enabled, Or truly, I know not what to say: For, if this be
a good inference, a man is overcome by a Temptation, therefore he could not
possibly have resisted, Adam, for all he was seduced by the Devil, is not so
culpable as I took him to be. How can I charge such a man for not doing his
duty? How can I convince his Conscience, that it was his own fault and
negligence, that he did not that which he ought and might have done? Is there
no man then to be found, that could possibly have done no more good than
actually he has done? Does every man improve that Talent of Grace which God has
given him to the uttermost of his power and skill? Or will any of you, when you
confess your sins unto Almighty God, tell him to this purpose, Lord, I confess,
I do daily fall into many and grievous sins. But, since they are gone and past,
I perceive there was no remedy for it, it could not be avoided, those sins must
needs have been practiced by me, I did whatsoever I was enabled to do; If I had
had more strength, I had done better; when thou bestowest on me more Talents of
Grace, I shall be a more profitable servant, and yield thee a greater interest
and advantage by them. If any of you entertain such conceits as these, I
confess, you are a great deal more righteous than I thought you had been.

13. For mine own part, I confess with grief and shame, and self-condemnation,
that I have offended Almighty God in many respects, when I might have done
otherwise. I have not only hid my Talent in a Napkin, I have not only not
improved that stock of grace which God gave me; but, on the contrary,
notwithstanding that, I have been very laborious and abounding in the
unfruitful works of darkness. I have wilfully grieved the Holy Spirit of God,
and many times quenched his good motions in me. Yea, so voluntarily and
resolvedly have I done all these sins, that I am persuaded I could easily have
chosen, whether I would have committed them or no; no necessity at all lay upon
me to compel me thereunto, God was faithful and righteous in his promises and
dealings with me, and my own wicked heart deceived me. And, I think, all of you
have been guilty in some measure of betraying and surrendering the abilities
which God has bestowed on you, though I dare not charge you so deeply as my
self.

14. Now that we have heard, who may be said to be able to resist a Temptation
or not: For my more distinct proceeding in the confirmation of St. Paul's
Proposition in my Text, I will take our Savior's counsel, I will sit down and
examine, whether he that has but ten thousand, be able to meet with him which
comes against him with twenty thousand. Here are two Enemies Camps, and no
doubt great Forces on both sides: But without question, disproportionable: It
concerns me therefore now, by taking a survey and muster of each, to
demonstrate, that in all respects the advantage lies on our side. I mentioned
before, briefly, that we had three especial Enemies to deal with, the Devil,
the World, and the Flesh: We will proceed in this order against them, in the
first place examining the Devil's power, and the forces we have to oppose
against him.

15. There are many terrible names, I confess, by which the Devil is described
in Holy Writ, He is called Abaddon, and (...), the Destroyer, as one whose
employment it were to counter-work against God; who calls himself the Savior
and preserver of all men; He is called a ramping and a roaring Lion, that runs
about seeking whom he may devour; He is called the great Dragon, the old
Serpent, the Devil, and Satan, Apocal. 12.9.
which deceives the whole world. (All this in one verse.) He is called the Red
fiery Dragon. There are extant a great many more hideous pictures of him in
Gods Word: But these will serve our turn sufficiently, to show how dangerous an
Enemy we have, and therefore how great ought to be our resolution and wisdom in
encountering with him: And lest we should think, that since he is named in the
forecited places in the singular number, that therefore there is but one Lion,
and but one fiery Dragon to deal with all mankind, and thereupon begin to be a
little more secure; since we should have hard fortune, if it should light upon
us to be singled out by him, out of so infinite a crowd as the world is. No,
God knows, it is so far from that, that there is an unutterable number of
them, such an infinite vast Army, that one whole Legion (which are near about
4000) were at leisure to possess one man; And St. Paul tells us, We wrestle not
against flesh and blood, as if he should say; Ephesians. 6.12.
These worldly Enemies are so weak and despicable, in comparison of those we
are to meet withal, that they are not to be reckoned of: But, says he, We
wrestle against Principalities and Powers, (There are, it seems, many
Principalities and Powers) against the Rulers of the darkness of this world,
against spiritual wickednesses in high places, (the word is) in heavenly places.

16. Now, What have we to oppose against such an innumerable multitude of
Spirits, whereof each particular for his excessive strength is called a Lion;
for his fierceness, a Dragon; for his poisonous malice, a Red Dragon; for the
extreme intenseness of that poisonous malice, a Red fiery Dragon; and for his
wisdom and cunning to make use of this strength, fierceness, and malice, he is
called the old Serpent; one that has been a Serpent continually spitting out
his poison against us, within very few days since any creature was; and
therefore, if at the first, by his own natural wit, he was able, upon even
terms, to overcome Adam, then innocent, and therefore not apt to betray
himself, as we are, What may we conceive of him now after above 5000 years
experience: I say, What shall we who are ready to fall into a sound, if we see
but an apparition of one of them, though he do us no harm, How are we likely,
think you, to behave our selves in combat against so many thousands of them?

17. Why truly, God be thanked, notwithstanding all this, we may do well
enough. For we have spiritual Armies on our side too, that are able to contend
with all these, and overcome them in all these advantages which they have
against us. Are they many? Michael and his Angels are more certainly; Which to
me is evident by that saying in Daniel, Dan. 7.10.
where it is made an expression of Gods Glory and Majesty; His innumerable
multitude of attendants, the words are, Thousand thousands minister unto him,
and ten thousand times ten thousand stand before him; which surely, God would
not have made choice of as fit language to express his Power and Glory, if the
Devil had been able to contend with God, I, and out-vye him too in this
Article: Again, Are they strong? These sure are stronger: for we read of one
that slew an hundred fourscore and five thousand Soldiers in one night: We
never heard of such an exploit of the Devils. Are they malicious against us?
These are more loving and careful to do us good. And certainly, as God is
stronger than the Devil, so likewise excessive goodness in the Angels will
easily prevail against extreme malice in the Devil. Now, it is the nature of
Love, to be willing to take any pains for the good of the person beloved:
whereupon St. Paul, in that most divine description of the three Cardinal
Christian Virtues, 1 Thessalonians. 1.3.
thus expresses them: Remembering your work of Faith, and labor of Love, and
patience of Hope in our Lord Jesus Christ. I confess, it is the nature of
Malice too to be very laborious and observant of all advantages against the
subject Hated: But this must needs be granted, that Love will conquer Malice in
the same degree.

18. Thus, you see, we are reasonably well befriended and backed by these our
Auxiliary Forces of our Guardian Angels, so, that we need not be disheartened,
if we had no more: But beyond all these, we have Almighty God to our friend,
whose power is so unlimitted, that without any straining of Himself, without
the bending of his Bow, and drawing his Sword, only with unclasping his hand,
Substractione Manutenentiae, with mere letting hold go, all creatures in Heaven
and Earth, would return to nothing. Psalm. 84.11.
He is in the language of the Psalmist, a Sun and a Shield, that is, in the
phrase of another Psalm, a Light and Defense; a Sun to discover unto us the
secret ambushes and practices of our Enemies, and a Shield to protect us from
their open force and violence.

19. I (will some man say) there is no man can make any question of God's
Power;

20. Oh, Would any of you, says our Savior, when his Son shall ask him bread,
give him a stone; or instead of a fish to nourish him, a serpent to destroy
him? If then you (which are evil) know how to give good gifts,; If you would
not have the heart to mock poor children after this manner; How much rather
would not God? For Gods sake therefore let there be but as much sincerity, as
much good nature in Almighty God (I will not say as in your selves, for it may
be that would be too much for you to grant, but) as our Savior confesses,
that there were in the Jews that crucified him; And then we all of us have
right enough to his promises; we shall have no reason to doubt of his good
intention to help and assist us so far, that unless we delight in destruction,
unless we will turn sugitives, unless we will fight on our enemies side; All
the Devils in Hell shall not be able to prevail against us. And thus much of
the first squadrons, Michael and his Angels opposed to the Devil and his Angels.

21. The second enemy which we professed hostility against in our Baptism, was
the vain temptations of this world: And so forcible and prevailing are the
temptations thereof; that the Devil (who for his powerful managing of this
weapon is called the God of this world) in his Encounter with our Savior, set
up his rest upon it, as supposing if this would not serve his turn, there were
no more fighting for him; All this will I give thee, said he. And such a value
he set upon this stake, that no less than the extremest degree of horrible
Idolatry could serve his turn to oppose against it; All this will I give thee,
if thou will fall down and worship me. And when he saw that this proffer would
not be accepted, he presently quits the field, despairing utterly of any
success. The more dangerous indeed is this enemy, I may say, more dangerous to
us than the Devil himself; because we all acknowledge the Devil in person to be
our enemy; and therefore not one of us will be beholding to him for any thing,
if he bring us the gift himself; a sick man would not be healed by him, nor a
poor man made rich, but scarce one among a thousand has that opinion of the
vain pomps and sinful pleasures of the world. Our enemy! No certainly, It is
the best and most comforting friend we have in this life; all our thoughts are
taken up with it, it possesses us at all times, we dream of it sleeping, and
pursue it waking; And yet our Savior says, Ye cannot serve God and Mammon.
And again, How can ye believe, who seek honor one of another: And again, If
any man love the world, the love of the Father is not in him. What strength
then have we to oppose this enemy?

22. Why, surely that which would suffice but an ordinary, reasonable man, and
might serve any of us, but that we will needs be unreasonable only in things
which concern our everlasting welfare: And that is the consideration of those
unspeakable joys which shall attend those who can despise the unsatisfying
vain pleasures of this life. A Philosopher, which but reading Plato's Poetical
description of the serenity of that life, which a virtuous soul (delivered from
the Prison of the body) lives, was so far transported with the conceit of it,
though for ought he knew, there was no such thing indeed; or if there were,
perhaps never intended for him, that he becomes presently weary of this prison,
and by a violent death frees himself from it; and God only knows what a change
he found. Whereas we have Gods word for the certainty of that glorious life
which his servants shall live; yea, a great deal of pains he has taken, to
make it desirable and amiable unto us, by ransacking all the treasures of this
world, the most costly jewels, the most precious metals, to embellish the
description thereof with all. We have besides the experience of several men,
who have seen and tasted as much of that glory, as a mortal creature is capable
of; S. Paul, and S. John the Divine. Surely, the consideration hereof might
serve our turn, if not quite to disrelish unto us, and even to make us hate the
vain pleasures of this world, yet, at least, not to prefer them when they come
in competition with the other: And I would to God we would suffer them but so
far to prevail upon us. But I cannot stay.

23. I have ranked the three Armies of our enemies just after the Roman
fashion, reserving the Triaries, the old experienced Soldiers to the last. For
though in show, the first rank of the Devils appear most terrible; yet in very
deed, all their power is nothing, unless the lusts of our hearts take part with
them, and give them advantage against us. The lusts of the flesh, are those
Traitors which continually keep us company, we cannot be quit of them; without
the Devils assistance, they are able to captive us; what, think you, then are
they able to do, being managed by so powerful, so wise an enemy? without them,
all the power of Hell and darkness are insufficient to withdraw us from our
obedience, and, by consequence, from the love and favor of God. For, suppose
the Devil (for example) present a lustful object to our fancy, as it were
holding a lascivious picture before our eyes; if we consent not in our minds,
to any base delight in such a spectacle; if we settle not our thoughts upon it,
as upon a pleasing sight; it will be so far from doing us any harm, that it
will rather prove a means to root us more deeply in the favor of God, as
persons unwilling to take Pay of his and our enemies.

24. But alas, as we are ordinarily so far from this nobleness of mind, from
this bravery of a Christian-like Spirit; that, as if the Devil were too slow to
object such Temptations to us, we will not await his leisure; but on all
occasions be ready and desirous to raise up, and then settle such unworthy
thoughts in our minds; we will be content to spend many hours sometimes in the
acting of this inward contemplative Adultery. S. Paul, speaking of those lusts
of our flesh, calls them our members, when he says, Col. 3.5.
Mortify your members which are on earth; fornication, uncleanness, inordinate
affection, evil concupiscence, etc. And indeed we, by our practice, make good
the Apostles expression; For we account our selves as same unperfect creatures
without them; we know not what to do with our selves, especially when we are
alone, unless we set our selves on work this way, by acting to our selves such
filthy sins, which perhaps natural bashfulness, want of money or opportunity,
will not suffer us to put in practice. What strength have we now to oppose to
these most pernicious enemies, which are so closely cemented, and even
incorporated within us, that they are become as it were flesh of our flesh, and
bones of our bones?

25. Why surely, as naturally we have received this root of Bitterness in our
hearts, which is apt to give an infections tincture to all the thoughts and
actions issuing from thence. So likewise it has pleased Almighty God to
imprint a new Principle in our minds, to plant as it were a new Spirit in our
souls; I mean, that active powerful Grace, which without any cooperation of
our own, he infuses into us especially, in our Baptism; and which is afterward,
(...), strengthened and enlivened daily, by a constant frequent exercising our
selves in the use of those manifold blessed means of our salvation, the
hearing, reading, and meditating on his holy Word, and participation of his
heavenly mysteries. For surely, if Reason alone (by the help of those worthy
grave precepts which are extant in the Treatises of Moral Philosophy) has been
able to change many men from the habitual practice of several vices to a
virtuous (I had like to have said also a Religious) life; why should any man
think so meanly of God's holy Word and Sacraments, as to doubt, but that much
rather they should be able to make us new creatures, to make us wise unto
salvation, especially considering that continual assistance of Gods Holy Spirit
which infallibly attends the use and exercise of those his blessed means. Do
you think God is so favorable to the Devil or his instruments, (our lusts)
that he is unwilling to have them subdued and mortified in us? And, if he be
not unwilling, surely much less is he unable to perform this great work in us,
even to the end.

26. Therefore, as before, speaking of those outward forces, God and his holy
Angels, which are ready to take our parts, and fight on our sides against the
Devil, and his Angels, we applied that saying of Elisha to his servant, If
thine eyes were opened, thou should perceive, that they which are with us,
are more then they which are against us. So likewise in the Case in hand, we
may make use of that saying of S. John, Greater is he which is in you, than he
which is in the world: implying, 1 John 4.4.
that God is not only in himself stronger than the Devil, but also as
considered in us, i. e. as working in our hearts by his Grace; This way, I say,
he is stronger than the Devil; His Spirit cooperating with the means of our
salvation, is more vigorous and powerfuul to reuew us unto the Image of his
Holiness; if we will but do that which lies in our own power, then the Devil
(though taking his advantage of that concupiscence, which in some measure is
continually resident in us) is or can be to corrupt, and so to destroy us. For
his power is not considerable, unless we be willing to join with him. Thus you
see, though our enemies be allowed all the advantages, they can challenge, yet
in exact esteem, without any flattering of our selves, we may conclude, that
they who are ready, and desirons to join forces with us, are greater, in all
respects, than they which are against us.

27. But yet for all this, since the conducting and managing of those forces,
is left to our discretion; for God will not fight single against the Devil in
our behalf, unless we lend him our aid and assistance: And therefore, Curse ye
Meroz, says the Angel of the Lord (in the Victorious Song of Deborah) curse
bitterly the inhabitants thereof. And why must poor Meroz be so bitterly
cursed? Because they came not to the help of the Lord, to the help of the Lord
against the Mighty. Hereupon it may seem, that Almighty God will not put to his
strength in our defense, unless we join with him; He will not be our Champion
to fight, whilst we sit still, only spectators of the combat. And therefore
this consideration alone may be sufficient to abate that confidence, which the
foregoing discourse, might be apt to raise in us, especially if we be not utter
strangers to our selves, if we be not ignorant of our own weakness.

28. For satisfaction therefore to this discouragement, I will now endeavor to
demonstrate by proofs drawn from undeniable Reason, and experience, That there
is no sinful Temptation so strong, but that an ordinary Christian may (by the
assistance before mentioned) easily conquer it. And lest my proceeding herein
may lie open to any manner of exception; let me choose from among you the
weakest, most unexperienced Christian, I dare oppose this man against the
sharpest and most furious Temptation; and will make him confess, that though he
be (de facto) subdued by it, yet that that came to pass merely by his own
voluntary and affected unwatchfulness and cowardice, and that it was truly in
very deed, in his power to have resisted it. I will make choice to instance in
the sin of uncleanness and fornication; a sin, that generally finds such excuse
and patronage in the world; because it is supposed to be so naturally born and
bred up with us, that there is no shaking it off; it is a sin so resolved upon
to be unconquerable, that few men go about to restrain it. The ancient
Antidotes against this sin, Watching and Fasting, are grown out of use with us,
we conclude they will do us little good against this hereditary evil, and
therefore the best is to give them clean over.

29. Yet I say, let me suppose an ordinary Christian, environed with all the
strongest temptations to this so natural, and therefore concluded so excusable
a sin; let him have the most charming beauty, that has the most artificial
ways of solicitation, together with opportunity, and all circumstances which
are not fit to be supposed here; yet for all this, if that man should say he is
not able to resist such a tempration, he lies against his own soul: For if at
that instant, a sudden message should interrupt him, a threatening of Death, if
he did not free himself from the danger of her filthy embraces, would he not do
it? I desire only that each one of you in his heart would answer for him. Then
it is clear, he is able to resist this pretended irresistible temptation: And
why should not the consideration of the danger of eternal Torments be as
persuasive against any sin, as the fear of a momentany death? But I will not
make my advantage of so frightful an enemy to his pleasure, as Death. Suppose
in all those circumstances before mentioned, a good sum of money were but
offered him, upon condition he would abstain but that time from the execution
of his filthy lust: I doubt not at all, but that upon these terms he would find
strength enough to conquer this Temptation. Shall Satan then be able to cast
out Satan, and shall not God much more do it? Shall one sin be able to destroy
the exercise of another, and shall not Grace much rather?

30. Besides, if we believe that generally it is not in our power to resist,
any of these temptations; How dare you who are Fathers, suffer your Daughters
after they are come to years, to live unmarried* How dare you expose their
souls to such dangers, unless you think, that ordinarily any man or woman is
able to resist the Temptations of the flesh? How dare you who are Menchants,
for the hope of a llittle gain, live in foreign Countries as if you were
divorced from your wives; if you religiously think, that were it not for the
benefit of marrige, they could not ordinarily be honest?

31. Lastly, you may remember that our Savior (in his descriptions of Hell)
seldom leaves out this phrase, where the worm dies not: which worm is
general by interpreters moraliz'd into the sting of conscience, i.e. a
continual vexation of soul in the Reprobates, caused by the consideration, how
it was merely their own fault, their wilful folly, which brought them to that
misery. Now this worm would dye, and be quite extinguished in them, if they
were of some men's opinions; that the reason why they sinned, was not because
they would sin, but because they could not choose but do it, because they
wanted power to resist all the temptations which were objected to them. Such a
conceit may serve indeed to vex them, but it is in (...) possible it should
trouble their conscience; For by this Reason, Corah, Dathan, and Abiram, might
with as good reason be tormented in conscience for falling into Hell, when the
earth opened under them, as for their sin of Rebellion against Moses; If the
Reason why they committed that sin, was the subtraction of Divine Grace and
assistance, without which it was impossible for them not to be Rebels. But
indeed, why should Almighty God withdraw his Grace from any man? Because (say
some) by falling,

32. We are apt enough to slander God with too much mercy sometimes, as if he
bore us so particular an affection, that notwithstanding our never so many
sins, yet he will still be merciful unto us. Oh that we could conceive of his
mercy and goodness aright! as rather willing to prevent our sins by giving us
sufficient preservatives against the commiting them. I would to God, that in
stead of making subtil-scholastical disputes of the power and efficacy of Gods
Grace, we would magnify the force thereof, by suffering it to exercise its
sway in our lives and conversation; we should then easily find, that we are
able do all things through Christ that strengthens us.

Errata's in the Sermons
Page 4. lin. 3. for your mouth, read his mouth: p. 5. l. 15. f. studiply, r.
stupidly: p. 19. l. 14. f. were, r. where: p. 2^. l. 12. f. you, every, r. you,
and every: p. 43. l. 42. f. any, r. nay: p. 45. l. 43. f. counnance, r.
conntenance: l. 45, 46. f. words Christ, r. words of Christ: p. 49. l. 49. f.
much, r. must: p. 58. l. 8. f. it almost, r. it is almost: p. 102. l. 41. f.
behavior this, r. behavior in this: p. 103. l. 33. f. tha^, r. that.

A Table of the Texts of the foregoing SERMONS.
SERMON L. on 2 TIMOTHY III. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. THis know also, that in the last days
perilous times shall come. For men shall be lovers of their own selves,
covetous, boasters, proud, blasphemers, disobedient to Parents, unthankful,
unholy, Without natural affection, truce breakers, false accusers, incontinent,
fierce, despisers of those that are good, Traitors, heady, high-minded, lovers
of pleasures more than lovers of God; Having a form of Godliness, but denying
the power thereof. Page 1. SERMON III. on PSALM. XIV.1. The Fool has said in
his heart, There is no God. P. 19, and 35 SERMON IV. on LUKE IX. 23. -- Let him
deny himself. P. 49 SERMON V. on ROMANS VIII. 34. Who is he that condemns? It
is Christ that died, yea rather that is risen again -- P. 63 SERMON VI. on LUKE
XVI. 9. Make to your selves friends of the Mammon of unrighteousness, that when
you fail, they may receive you into everlasting habitations. P. 81 SERMON VII.
on LUKE XIX. 8. -- And if I have defrauded any man by forged cavillation, I
restore unto him four fold. P. 97 SERMON VIII. GAL. V. 5. For we through the
Spirit wait for the hope of Righteousness by Faith. P. 112 SERMON IX. on 1 COR.
X. 13. -- God is Faithful, who will not suffer you to be tempted above that ye
are able -- P. 137
FINIS.

