Britannia Baconica: Or, The Natural RARITIES OF England, Scotland, and Wales.

According as they are to be found in every SHIRE.

Historically related, according to the Precepts of the Lord Bacon;
Methodically digested; and the Causes of many of them Philosophically
attempted. WITH Observations upon them, and Deductions from them, whereby
diverse Secrets in Nature are discovered, and some things hitherto reckoned
Prodigies, are fain to confess the cause whence they proceed.

Useful for all ingenious men of what Profession or Quality soever.

By J. CHILDREY.

Res semper aliquid apportat novi. Terent.

LONDON, Printed for the Author, and are to be sold by H. E. at the sign of the
Greyhound in St. Paul's Churchyard, 1662

To the Right Honorable, my most Noble Lord and Master, HENRY Somerset Lord
HERBERT, andC.
It may please your Lordship,
THe Calling I have entered into, and the capacity wherein I have the honor to
serve your Lordship, will (I fear) offend the weak tenderness of some, who
think these deep searches into reason, mis-becoming a Preacher of Faith, and
the contemplation of the works of Nature very impedimentall (if not
destructive) to the work of Grace; And give them occasion to censure me for
dealing so far with Philosophy. Yet somewhat I have to plead in excuse of my
self; supposing what I do, to be a crime: And more I have to plead in defense
of my self, that what I do is no crime at all. The smallness of the work,
together with its being written, before I put my hand to the plough, is enough
to excuse me, and extenuare the crime; were it indeed, what it is only
supposed to be. But seeing the fortress is defensible, it can be held for no
less then cowardice to capitulate. It would not a little disparage a good cause
to seek to excuse that, which may be justified; especially since it has so
learned and solid a Lawyer, as the Lord Chancellor Bacon to plead in its
behalf. Philosophia Naturalis (says that eloquent Wit) Post Uerbum Dei Nov.
Organ. 1, I Aph. 89.
, certissima Superstitionis Medicina est; eademque probatissimum fidei
alimentum. Itaque merito Religioni donatur tanquam fidissimd ancilla: cum ulter
a Voluntatem Dei, altera Potestatem manifestet. Neque enim erravit ille qui
dixit, Erratis, nescients Mat. 22. 29,
Scripturas, and Potestatem Dei: informationem de Voluntate, and meditation m
de Potestate, nexu indiuidho commiscens and copulans. Natural Philosophy, next
to Gods Word is the most Soueraign Antidote to expel the poison of
Superstition; and not only so, but also the most approved food to nourish
Faith. And therefore well may she be given to Religion as her most faithful
handmaid: seeing the one shows us the Will of God, and the other his Power Nor
was he out that said, Ye do err, not knowing the Scriptures, nor the Power of
God: joining these two together, Instruction touching the Will, and Meditation
on the Pow er, as inseparable, and equally necessary. Want of Philosophy is
indeed the Nurse of Superstition: whence the ignorant age, or Childhood of the
World in which the Natural causes of Eclipses, Comets, Thunder, Earthquakes,
and the like were not known, was the most Superstitious: As are also at this
day the simple and most vulgar sort of men. Who (likethose others, that the
same Noble Author mentions in the same Aphorism) conjiciunt singula ad Manum,
Ibidem
and Virgulam Divinam (quod Religionis, ut putant, maxim intersit) facilius
posse referri: quod nihil aliud est quam Deo per mendacium gratificari velle.
They conceive (says he) that without enquiring into the middle and inferior
causes, all effects may more easily be referred to the immediate act and finger
of God, the supreme cause, as conducing most of all to the interest of
Religion; Which is as much, as to go about to flatter the God of Truth with a
lie, and to make him, what he is not, or would not be thought. All the
treasure of the Earth is Gods, (who doubts it?) for Domini est Psalm 24. 1.
terra, and plenitudo ejus: Yet when our Savior in the Gospel saw the Emperors
stamp upon the penny brought to him, he thought it no robbery, nor injury to
his Father, to say: Reddite quae Caesaris sunt, Caesari; and quae Dei, Deo.
Give unto Caesar the things that are Cesars, and unto God, the things that are
Gods; That is, that are Gods immediate own. Even so I confess all effects and
things, from the very foundation of the world to this present day, are the
works of God. Yet because I find Natures superseription on many (if not most)
of them, (though in some it be not so legible as in others) I hold it no
impiety, or robbing God of his Glory, to say: Reddite naturae, etc. Give unto
Nature, the works that are Natures: And unto God, those that are Gods. There
being a great difference between the dividing of the Red Sea, and Jordan, by
Moses and Joshua: and the dividing of the River ouse in Bedfordshire. related
in this Book: And between the small Vermin that infested the Egyptians, and
the Phthiriasis in the Philosophers finger Which difference nevertheless
without Philosophy we are not capable of knowing, but are apt to think all
strange thingsSupernaturall; and (like those mistaken Philosophers, who think
the Magnet has its Vis directrix, from the Polestar) to seek for that cause
above, which we may find here below.

Besides, it is apparent by several passages in the Book of God, that many of
the Secretaries of the Holy Ghost (as Moses, David, Isaiah, Amos, etc.) had
either from their own parts and industry, the acquired: of from their inspirer
the infused knowledge of natural things: which they were not ashamed to make
use of, even when they were about Gods great work. Nor could the extremity of
Jobs miseries make him forget orlay by thoseMathematicks, 10.33.31.32
which he had learnt in the time of his prosperity. But the example of Solomon
puts the matter out of all scruple, whose divine Pen (so often serviceable to
the Spirit of God) did more then divert it self with Philosophy, writing whole
Volumes of the History of Nature. For we are told, that he spoke (with the
tongue of his Pen) of 3 kin.4. 33.
Trees, from the Cedar tree, that is in Lebanon, even unto the Hysop that
springs out of the Wall. As also of beasts, and of foul, and of creeping
things, and of fishes. And we are told it by him, who surely would not have
commended it, had he disliked it.

Yet not but that (as want of Philosophy nourishes Superstition, so) a care
should be taken on the other side, least the abuse of Philosophy cause
Profaneness and Col. 2. 8.
Atheism, which lies as much against God, as Superstition does for him.

My Lord, though all this be truth, and nothing but reason, yet so petulant is
prejudice, that it will not pass for such, unless besides its dead Advocate to
defend it, it also have a living Patron to afford it the influence of his
countenance and protection. Which favor I most humbly beg of your Lordship,
both for my self and my book; but withal your Pardon for my being so bold to
beg it: and for daring to prefixe your Noble name to the contemptible
endeavors of

My very good Lord Your Honors most faithful, and ever devoted Servant and
Chaplain J. CHILDREY.

The Preface to the READER.
THE design of the ensuing Tract is to make it self useful and satisfactory
to all sorts of men. For every man is either one of these three; One of the
Vulgar, a Gentleman, or a Scholar: Or else (to avoid cavilling) he is both
Gentleman and Scholar. And

First, this Book is intended for the use of the Vulgar, to teach them not to
mis-believe or condemn for untruths all that seems strange, and above their
wit to give a reason for, who are the least able of all men to do it. For here
they may read as strange things, ( and yet true) as any of those reported, or
written by Travelers; and reform their Judgments into so much Charity, as to
think, that many Travelers do not make so much use of their Authority to lie,
as they might. Not that I will undertake for the truth of all the Relations in
Mandevile, and other credulous Writers; but so much may be said in their
behalf, that all is not as the most is; that they have many Truths interserted
with their fables and falsehoods, and some of them altogether as improbable as
they Here are no stories told you of what is to be seen at the other end of the
world, but of things at home, in your own Native Country, at your own doors,
easily examinable with little travel, lesscost, and very little hazard. This
book does not show you a Telescope, but a Mirror, it goes not about to put a
delightful cheat upon you, with objects at' a great distance, but shows you
your selves.

Next Iintend this Book for the service of the Gentry, that they may see
England is not void of those things which they admire abroad in their travels.
And that those ingenious Gentlemen whose occasions carry them into several
Counties, or who are otherwise disposed to see the sports of Nature about them,
may know by this Portable-book, in what parts of what Counties to find them. As
Italy has Virgils Grott, and the Sybils Cave by Puteoli, so England has
Okeyhole by Wells. We have Baiae at Bath; the Alps in North Wales; Mount
Baldus under the Picts Wall, the Spaw in Yorkshire; Euripus at Pool in
Dorsetshire; Gabij in Lincolnshire; Asphaltites at Pitchford in Shropshire;
Harpasa in Cornwall, the Pyramides at Burrowbriggs, the Pearls of Persia on the
shores of Westmorland; the Diamonds of India on St. Vincents Rock. And what is
there worth wonder abroad in the world, whereof Nature has not written a Copy
in our Island? I would have those that know other Countries so well, not to be
strangers to their own, which is a compendium of all others.

Lastly and chiefly, My end is to serve the Commonwealth of Learning, which
much wants such Histories as this to be written, and laid as a sure Foundation,
whereon to build those Axioms that make us true Scholars, and knowing men in
Philosophy. I have as nearly (as I could) followed the Precepts of my Master,
the Lord Bacon, and (by way of acknowledgement, from whom I received my first
light into this way) have given my Book the Title of BRITANNIA BACONICA; and
the rather, because it will serve for a part of several Histories in his
Lordships Catalogue, at the end of his Novum Organon. I have not at all m'dled
with matter of Antiquity, Pedigrees, or the like, those being copiously handled
by several of our Countrymen already; as the learned Cambden in his Britannia,
Mr. Dugdale in his Deseription of Warwickshire, Mr. King in his Vale Royal, Mr.
Lambert in his Perambulation, Mr. Philpot in his Villare Cantianum, and others.
Only I ventured at the description of the Caves in Wiltshire, because I find it
mentioned by none of our Antiquaries. I have here and there attempted to give
the Causes of the Raritie I relate, having the example of my Lord B. for my
authority, who in his Sylva Sylvarum has the like excursions ever and anon
into the AEtiology. And though I cannot but confess, that such kind of writing
is a little too bold yet, before the Histories of Art and Nature are completely
done; yet possibly I may in some, hit upon the true Reason by chance; and
unless men were more forward (then I see they are yet) in collecting such
Histories, these kinds of confidences must be dispensed with. Indeed, had those
men that have spent so much time and pains in writing voluminous Comments on
Arist. but labored as diligently in writing Co^ments upon Nature, and (with
that self denial and indifferency, which becoms ingenuity in the dark) in
trying to render a reason of such and such odd appearances in things, though
some of them had been but false Positions; doubtless the Philosophical part of
Learning would have been at a much better pass, and Inquisition a great deal
more happy and thriving then it is at this day. The pest of Learning is, that
men first fancy Opinions and Axioms to themselves, and then by the help and
art of Distinguishing, wrest and fit particular Instances and Observations to
them. And this was the first original of Distinctions in the Schools, they
being merely invented (like the Astronomers Hypotheses) to salve the Phenomenon
of Aristotle's oversights. And hence likewise the impregnability of Sophistry,
which with its flanking distinctions will repel the strongest arguments, that
would prove that snow is white.

There are many of the other Rarities, whose causes I could make bold with, and
purpose so to do, so soon as I receive the censure of the Learned, on what is
already done; and as they shall encourage or discourage me, I shall proceed or
desist. For though I have much more to say, yet any good and faithful advice
shall persuade me to hold my peace. I purpose also (if God grant me life,
health, and leisure to publish the Philosophical Rarities of the World, so far
as they are communicated to us from Geographers and Travelers, having already
made a considerableprogressin the work. Which I believe will go a greater way
in the advancement of Learning, then is yet imagined, and enable us to write
more confident Comments on Nature, and to draw up such Articlesagainst her, as
if she be examined upon them, she will be forced to confess much more of her
subtle ways of cousenage, then She has yet told us of.

I have endeavored to tell my tale as plainly as might be, both that I might
be understood of all, and that I might not disfigure the face of Truth by
daubing it over with the paint of Language. Renatus des Carts has told us,
not without reason, how bardit is either to tell what we have seen, or what we
have heard, or to understand a related story exactly, according to the
Relatours sense. So much difference there is between seeing and speaking, and
between hearing and apprehending. And therefore in those Rarities which I have
not seen my self, I have followed my Authors close at the heels(word for word)
it may be (and I have cause to fear it) with so much rigidness and nicety (with
some trivial things here and there) in some places as will sound harsh
andungrateful to the Readers ear: yet not with more rigidness then for the
reason above given is necessary. For such articles as we are to examine nature
upon, had need to be so punctually true, that they cannot be too true If there
be but the least matter of doubt or uncertainly in them, she will easily evade
them and fool us. And I am persuaded that diverse of those relations I have
given you from the Authors I speak of, though they sincerely intended them for
truth (and I have as sincerely translated and transeribed them) yet they are
not truth to us by reason of our misunderstanding them: And that if the places
and things themselves were visited. they would tell us as much, and appear
different from what they are said to be And peradventure by examining the
particulars of them, we should find some one that would discover, or give a
light into the cause of them; whereas some relations not being particular
enough, leave us much unsatisfied, and make us think the causes of them much
more strange and dark then they are. This I speak to provoke young Gentlemen
to look and search into these pleasant Speculations morethen heretoforethey
have done, andto visit each his neighbor cuosities, and to bestow upon the
Manes of this Lord VERULAM that circumstantiall History of them, that is
requisite for his great work, The interpretation of Nature.

That I have one or two reflections on Astrology, I hope the Reader will pardon
me. I may say with the learned Clarencieux that I have not been altogether
unacquainted with those vanities. I cannot but profess, that I have an
affection for the study; and why I should not have so, I know not. The only
argument that I know against the lawfulness of Astrology, is that it is not
true. Were it rectified, it might easily be justified. Now that is partly my
aim in those reflections I mention: to lay a foundation for the rectifying it
in the Doctrine of Ascendents, and for redeeming it from that obloquy which it
has for so many ages of the world been obnoxious to. That there is such a
Science as Astrology, there is no question to be made. The stars have an
influence on us, and some small matter touching this influence Astrology knows;
yet no more, and of no more use, then to assure her that she does know
something of it. But her vanity is, she promises much more then she is able to
perform: and is led much more by fancy and plausibilities, then found reason. I
could wish, that to Multae praedicuntur, quae non eveniunt: multa eveniunt,
quae non praedicuntur, she had some other answer then Pudet haec opprobria
nobis, etc. And to let her know I wish it heartily, I shall make it part of my
endeavor to furnish her with an answer. There is much to be found out, if men
did but well attend to observation, and doubt even the very Principles of
Astrology, til they had examined the truth of them. For the most important
maxims in the Art are many of them shrewdly to be suspected, though there may
be peradventure an instance or two alleged to their advantage, wherein they
have hit passing well: because in Astrology (above most, if not all other
pieces of learning) it is very easy to mistake a Non-cause for a true cause.
and a Me ambulante coruscavit, for a Sol oritur, ergo dies est. The way to go
forward in this excellent Art, is to look back and compare the accidents of men
and States, with the influences of heaven, and this will not only try the truth
of the old Principles, but add new ones: such (it is very likely) as the sons
of Art do not yet dream of. Which I have very great reason to say: and yet what
that great reason is, I desire at present to be excused from saying, because it
cannot be said without Ostentation.

I shall conclude my complements to the Reader with two requests; one, that he
will not make any have to pass the sentence of condemnation against me for
setting down several idle, empty, and useless things (as he may possibly
imagine them to be) till he has read the sixth Aphorism of the Lord Bacons
Pa^asceue; The other, that if his native County afford any other Rarity then
what is related in this Book, he will be pleased to communicate it for the sake
of Learning, (For its possible, I have not made the Meshes of my net so narrow,
but that some of the small try of curiosities have escaped me,) And in
particular, if he be of Dorsetshire, that he would bestow upon us a punctual
account of that raining of blood at Pool with all its circumstances. And so I
remit him to the Book it self, wishing him that satisfaction from it, which he
expects, and bidding him heartily

FAREWELL.

An occasional Advertisement to the READER.
THe READER is desired to take notice, that while this Book was in the Press,
on Thursday being All Saints day, November the first, 1660. between ten of the
Clock that night, and five of the Clock the next morning happened an unusual
shifting of the Tides in the Thames at London, ebbing and flowing three
times(as it is reported) in that space. Which how it agrees with the time of my
conjecture (not to say prediction) page 97. of this Book, I shall leave him to
judge.

Further, it happened upon a Northwesterly-wind, sometimes blowing pretty
fresh, and sometimes remitting in a manner to a Calm (as my Diary of
observations of the weather has it for that day and night) and the Tides were
at the Neapest; both which are according to my Hypothesis. Indeed the Moon was
not in Apogaeo but almost in the very place of her Perigaeum; Which makes me
begin to think the Apogaeosis is not altogether so necessary to concur in the
business, but that the Neapness of the Tides and the wind are able to do it of
themselves (assisted I mean with a private cause) so the alternate intensions
and remissions of the wind be but proportionably greater to supply the wantof
the Apogaeosis. I know many will hardly believe that that sentence of my
conjecture at the time of this supposed Prodigy came fairly into the Book, but
that it was foisted in out of a design of the Authors to make himself talked
of, (because it is the first prediction that was ever ventured at in this
nature) But I can aflure them he is not so light a regarder of his reputation,
as to endanger it by a forgery easily to be detected. If this profession be not
of power to persuade the Authors integrity, let doubters know, he can (if it
be required of him) tell when the like prodigy will happen again; and give a
pre-account of some other Prodigies shortly to come. But (as in duty bound) he
confesses, that ( Secundum Deum) he ows all this new knowledge to the Lord
Bacon.

Some busy Scriptorculi may perhaps go about to amuse the people with strange
matters portended in the State, by this pretended wonder; and the rather
because it happened but the night before the arrival of his Majesty's Royal
Mother at London. And it is probable (to affright you the more) they will erect
a figure for the beginning of it, and tell you that Saturn and Mars the two
Malevolents with Sol and Mercury, are altogether in the fifth house in Scorpio,
the worst sign of the twelve, and the house of Mars; But that they hope Venus
applying to a Conjunction of Jupiter in her own house in the 3 not far from an
Angle, will much allay the venom of their influence. But I must tell them that
this strange marvel, signifies nothing at all; and that whatever follows it,
has no relation to it. I believe had the thing fallen out about Midsummer
last, the death of three English Dukes within less then three months space
could not but have been thought the correspondent of that presage: whereas now
(it falling just after) we are to seek for a Portent to bewail the iminence of
so signal a mortality.

Britania Baconica: Or, the Natural RARITIES OF England, Scotland, and Wales.
According as they are to be found in every COUNTY, etc.

CORNWALL.
DEvonshire and Cornish-men are more active in wrestling, and such boistrous
exercises then other Shires in England; being also more brawny, stout, and able
of body: As for instance, one John Bray carried at his back at one time for the
space of a But length, almost six Bushels of Wheaten Meal (reckoning fifteen
Gallons to the Bushel) and the Miller, (a Lubber of twenty four years of age)
upon the whole. And one John Roman a thick short fellow, would carry the whole
Carcass of an Ox. There was also one Kiltor, who lying in Launceston
Castle-green upon his back, threw a stone of some pounds weight over the top of
one of the high Towers of that Castle. Which stoutness and goodly stature of
these people, Cambden reflecting on, makes this observation; That the Western
people of most countries are the tallest and stoutest. I know not whether it
hold in all Countries; but so much is true, that the Chinese, the Eastermost
people of this Continent of the World, are the most esteminate and unwarlike in
the World; for which we have not only the authority of Mendez Pinto, (who never
told lie) but of many authentic Geographers. However I am rather induced to
think, that it is the Rockiness of this County that gives the generality of the
inhabitants these qualities: For it is as well observable, that rocky and
mountainous places breed stout, hardy, warlike, and tall people, as we see by
the Highlanders of Scotland, the Switzers and Grisons; low and flat Countries
rather disposing the Natives to ingenuity, craft, invention and sedentary
industry, as is manifest by the Chinese and the Dutch. And it may be the
reason why the Hollanders are not altogether Chinese in stature, sloth, and
cowardice, is because they inhabit the West side of a Continent:

The Cornish men are very healthful and long livers, eighty or ninety years of
age is ordinary in every place, and in most persons accompanied with an able
use of the body and senses One Polzew lived 130 years; a Kinsman of his 112.
one Beauchamp 106. and one Brawn a beggar above 100. and in one Parish (in Qu.
Elizabeth's time) there died in 14. Weeks space four people, whose years added
together, made 340. And (to urge no more examples) one Mr. Chamond who lived at
Stratton in this County, was Uncle and Great-Uncle to (at least) 300. The cause
of this healthfulness I conceive to be also the rockiness and dryness of the
Country, which though it be for the most part environed with the sea, yet it
has few Marshes or Ouzy shores, but most sandy; and withal, the air is
cleansed by often winds, lying so open to the sea: So that by reason of the
purity of the air, the plague is seldom among them; and it was observed, that
in Anno 1589. when our Fleet returned from the Portugal action, the Diseases
which the Soldiers brought home with them; grew more grievous, as they carried
them further into the Land, then it fell out at Plymouth where they landed; For
there the Disease was though infectious, yet not so infectious; and though
pestilential, yet not the Pestilence, as it after proved in other places. Yet
the air of Cornwall is such, that it is apter to preserve, then recover health,
especially in a stranger that is troubled with a lingering sickness.

There was within these hundred years, one Mr. Alwel Parson of St. Tues in
Cornwall, who withal practiced Physic; but so strange was his Method (not to
say his Humor) that though now and then he used blood-letting, and did
administer commonly Manus Christi, and the like Cordials; yet for all Diseases
he did chiefly prescribe Milk, and very often Milk and Apples; by which means
he did very many strange and desperate cures, and maintained his Reputation
unimpaired, so that he had many Patients from the neighboringCounties.
Butwhether it wereM. Atwels Physic, or the pure air of Cornwall that did the
cures, is hard to say; or whether there may not be some peculiarMedicines
appropriated by Nature to some particular Airs, as well as to some particular
Diseases, and that that which will do in Cornwall, or the like air, will not
elsewhere.

The Spring is later in Cornwall, then in the East parts of England; the Summer
temperate, but Harvest late, especially in the middle of the Shire, where they
seldom get in their Corn before Michaelmas. The Winter is milder then
elsewhere; for the frost and snow come very seldom, and never stay long when
they do come. But this Country is much subject to storms, lying (as I said) so
open to the sea. so that the Hedges are pared, and their Trees dwarf-grown, and
the hard stones and iron bars of Windows are fretted with the Weather. One kind
of these storms they call a Flaw; (and so indeed in some Counties they call any
violent storm of Wind) which is a mighty Gale of Wind, passing suddenly to the
shore with great violence.

Cornwall is hilly, (one cause of the temperate heat of the Summer, and the
lateness of the Harvest, even as its Maritine situation is the cause of the
gentleness of the Winter:) hilly I say, parted with short and narrow Valleys.
The earth is but shallow, underneath which is rocks and shelfs, so that it is
hard to be tilled, and apt to be parched by a dry summer.

The middle of the shire lies open, the earth being of a blackish color, and
bears heath and spiry grass. There is but little Meadow-ground, but store of
pasture for cattle and sheep, and plenty of Corn-ground.

They have a stone here, called Moore-stone, found upon Moors and wast
grounds, which serves them instead of Freestone, for Windows, Doors and
Chimneys. It is white with certain glimmering sparkles: They have a stone
dug out of the sea-cliffs, of the color of gray Marble, and another stone
black as Jett; and out of the Inland Quarries they dig Freestone. Nor must we
forget to tell you (speaking here of stones) that the sea here works the
pebbles upon the shore, by the often rolling of the waves, to a kind of
roundness.

They have a slate of three sorts, blew, sageleaf-coloured, and gray, which
last is the worst; and all these slates are commonly found under another kind
of slate, that they wall with, when the depth has brought the Workmen to the
Water. They also make Lime of a kind of Marble stone, either by burning a great
quantity together with Furze, or with stone-coal in smaller Kills, which is the
cheaper way; but the first Lime is the whiter.

For Metals, they find Copper in sundry places here, and the Ore is sometimes
shipped to be refined in Wales. And though Cicero will have none in Britain, yet
silver has been found in this shire in the time of Edward the first, and
Edward the third, who reaped good profit by it. Nay, Tinners do find little
quantities of Gold, and sometimesSilver among the Tin Ore, which they sell to
the Goldsmiths. Also Diamonds are found in many places, cleaving to those
Rocks out of which the Tin is dug: they are smooth, squared, and pointed by
nature. Their quantity is from a Pease to a Wall-nut; but they are not so black
and hard as the right ones. But the Metal which the Earth yields in greatest
plenty, is Tin, in searching after which the Tinners do many times dig up whole
and huge Timber Trees, which they think were overthrown, and have lien buried
in the earth ever since the flood. And they hold, that the Tin lay couched at
the first before Noah's flood, in certain strakes among the Rocks like a Tree;
from the depth whereof the main Load spreads out his branches till they
approach the open air; but the Flood (say they) carried with the Rocks and
Earth so much of the load, as was enclosed therein, and at the drying up of the
flood, left the same scattered here and there in Valleys and Rivers where it
passed; whence it comes to pass, that they find Tin sometimes upon the
Moor-Lands. In their Tin-Works they find daily among the Rubbish, Pick-Axes of
Holm, Box, and Hartshorn, and sometimes they find certain little Tool-Heads of
Brass; and there was once found a Brass Coin of the Emperor Dometians, in one
of the Works; an argument that the Romans wrought in these Tin-Works in times
past. They discover the Tin-Mines by certain Tin-stones, which are somewhat
round and smooth, lying on the ground, which they call shoad. But (if we will
believe stories) there is another way to discover them very easy, and that is
by dreams; for so it is reported, some have found Works of great value. As in
Edward the sixth his time a Gentlewoman (heir to one Tresculierd) dreamed, that
a handsome man told her, that in such a Tenement of her Land she should find so
much Tin, as would enrich her self and her posterity. She told her husband of
it, who upon trial found a Tin-work there, which in four years was worth to him
almost 4000 pounds. It is said also, that one Taprel of the parish of S. Niot,
by a dream of his daughters was wished to such a place, which he farmed of the
Lord of the soil, and found a Tin-Work accordingly, which made him a rich man.
On which stories we may bestow this observation; That if they be true, they
make much for the credit of Women's Dreams. For the stories touching the success
of Dreams, are not to be rejected altogether as Fables, till they be examined,
and ventilated in their peculiar History, which is the 51. History in the L.
Veculams Catalogue being there called, Historia Somni, and Insomniorum.

From the bottom of the Tin-Works, if they be of any depth, you shall see the
stars at noonday, in clear Weather. And the like may be done from the bottom
of deep Wells (as they say) or any other deep pits. Nor is it any wonder, the
cause being so plain. It is reported that Tycho Brahe in his Isle of Huena,
showed K. James the stars in the daytime) at what time he went into Denmark)
from out of a Cave cut a good way into the side of a Hill for the purpose.

If the load (as they call it) of the tin lie right down, the tinners follow it
sometimes to the depth of 40. or 50. fathoms, and the deeper they sink, the
greater they find the Load.

The labor of the tinners is so hard and tedious, that they cannot work above
four hours in a day. And as they dig their load sloapwise under the ground, the
air at length will not yield them breathing, till they sink a shaft, (as they
call it, that is a hole) perpendicular down to that place from the top, or
surface of the Earth. And though (when they have so done) the light be just
over their heads, yet is the Pit still so dark, that they are fain to work most
by Candlelight, of which the reason is plain enough. In their passage under
ground, they meet sometimes with very loose Earth; sometimes with extreme hard
Rock, (where though commonly they make speedyway through with their Pickaxes,
yet now and then they light upon such an hard piece of Rock, that a good
Workman will scarce be able to hew above a foot in a Week) sometimes again
they meet with great streams of Water; and sometimes with stinking damps that
distemper their heads for the present; but there is no great danger in the
consequence.

The Tin Stone being brought above ground out of the Work, is broken in pieces
with hammers, and then stamped at a Mill into smaller pieces (and if the Stone
be moist, it is dried by the fire in an iron Cradle) and then it is ground to a
fine sand. Then this sand being laid in water that runs over it, has all the
earth washed from it, and then it is called black tin, which is carried to the
blowing house, where it is melted by a Charcole Fire, blown by a great pair of
Bellows moved by a Water-wheel (the attenders on which bellows may be known
from other men by their faces tanned and discolored with smoke) and then it is
coined. Further it is to be noted, that there is hard Tin and soft Tin; but the
soft Tin is the more worth of the two: A foot of black Tin is in measure two
Gallons; but the weight of it is uncertain, and is according to the goodness of
it. A foot of good Moor Tin (which is held the best) will weigh about 80.
pound: A foot of the Mine Tin (which is meaner) 52. pound: of the worst 50.
pounds. Two pounds of good black Tin being melted, will yield one pound of
white Tin. Tin also has been made of that refuse that the Tinners formerly
have rejected, and with good profit. And so much for the Tin-Works, and for
Metals.

In some places on the coast of Cornwall, there are Pearls found that breed in
big Oysters and Muskles, yet though they are great, they are not good, being
neither round nor Orient. Here are also Agates and white Coral, as they say. It
may be this white Coral may be of the same kind with Isidis Plocamos, that
grows about the Isle of Portland, of which more hereafter.

About two miles Eastward from St. Michaels Mount at a low Water, they cast
aside the sand on the shore, and dig up turfs that are full of Root of trees,
and on some of these they have found Nuts, which seems to argue some inundation
of the sea upon this shore: I have heard the like story of a place in Scotland:
I shall not defend or impugn the truth of these stories; only this is
manifest in Nature, that the excluding of air from preying upon bodies,
preserves them much longer from putrefaction.

In the West part of Cornwall there are Bents growing on sandy fields, which
are knit from over the head in narrow breadths after a strange fashion, of
which they make mats.

In this shire grows greater store of Samphire and Sea-holly, (whose Roots
commonly called, Eringo-Roots, are a great rescaurative and corroborative,
being preserved in Syrup) then in any other part of England. Some of the gaully
grounds do also yield plenty of Rosa Solis (more properly called Ros Solis, a
Plant that grows indeed in boggy and quagmiry grounds) Upon the Seacliffs in
Cornwall grow wild Hysope, Sage, Pelamountain, Majoram, Rosmary, and other
fragrant Herbs.

The Husbandmen in Cornwall, about May, cut up all the grass of that ground,
which they intend to break up and till, into turfs, which they call Beating;
and raise these turfs so, that the sun and wind may dry them the sooner; and
after they are thoroughly dried, they pile them in little heaps, and burn them
to ashes. Then they bring in Sea-sand; and a little before ploughing time, they
scatter abroad those ashes, and the sand heaps upon the ground, and plough it
in, weh gives heat to the root of the corn: This sand makes the ground rich;
and if they strew it too thick, the ground will be too rank, and choke the Corn
with weeds. When the ground is thus sanded and ordered, the tiller can
commonly take but two crops of wheat, and two of oats, and then is fain to give
it at least 7. or 8. years layer, or fallow, and to till elsewhere. But the
inland Country requires not so much sand as the places by the sea side. The
tillable fields are in some places so hilly, that the Oxen can hardly take sure
footing: in some places so tough, that the Plough can scarce cut them; and in
some places so shelfy, that the Corn can hardly fasten its roots. They have two
sorts of wheat, viz. French wheat, which is bearded, and requires the best
soil, and brings the best crop; and another wheat not bearded, which is sown in
the worser Land, and yeildeth the less crop. In those grounds that will bear no
wheat, they sow Rye; yet in the western parts of Cornwall they sow Barley in
the parts near the sea, which they carry to the Mill within eight or nine weeks
after they sowed it.

For fruits, they have a sort called Whurts, as also Chestnuts, (but whether
they ripen there, or not, mine Author says not) and Grapes. For though the
Country be bleak, yet Vines prosper well, and their Grapes are pleasant of
taste, as in most other Southern parts of England.

They have little wood or timber, unless in the East quarters of the Shire,
where there are some Coppice woods. And hereabouts (says mine Author) the
Country people have a fable that the Snakes by their breathing about a
hazle-wand, do make a stone-ring of blew color, in which there appears the
yellow figure of a snake; and that Beasts which are stung being given to drink
some of the water wherein this stone has been soaked, will thereby recover.

It is observed, that strangers at their first coming into Cornwall, are much
visited with Lice, and yet the cleanly Natives find no such matter.

For Beasts, here are Marternes, Badgers, Otters, (some of which, though they
are all of the same kind) live in the cliffs, and there breed, and feed on
seafish; and others live in the fresh Rivers, which sometimes also feed on
Lambs and Poultry; Foxes (who have their holes in abundance in the steep cliffs
by the sea side) Goats, Rother Cattle, Horses, (but they are but small and low)
but there are no red Deer at all.

Their draught Oxen have each his Name, which he knows when he is at work.
When Cornwall lay wast and open for want of manuring, the sheep had generally
little badies, and course wool, so that it was called Cornish hair; but since
it has been manured, their sheep are little inferior to the Eastern Flocks
for bigness, fineness of wool, often breeding, speedy fatting and price, and
besides are sweeter Mutton, and freer from the rot. Most of the Cornish sheep
have no horns, and those that are so, have the finer wool, and those that are
horned, have indeed more in quantity, yet courser; yet in some places of
Cornwall the sheep have four horns.

Cornish Cattle are but small.

For Birds and Fowl Cornwall has these following, viz. Woodcocks, (in
abundance) Sparhawks (the most useless of Hawks, serving to fly little above
six weeks in the year, and that only at the Partridge) etc. but there are no
Nightingales, at least very few: A thing not to be wondered at by reason of the
great scarcity of woods, (as I said) the delight of that Bird: Furzes and Broom
being all that looks like woods in this country; of the former of which they
have great, and of the latter good quantity.

In the West parts of Cornwall, during the winter swallows are found sitting in
old deep Tinworks, and holes of the sea cliffs.

In Q. Elizabeth's time a flock of Birds came into Cornwall about Harvest, a
little bigger then a Sparrow, which had bills thwarted crosswise at the end, and
with these they would cut an apple in two at one snap, eating only the
Kernels; and they made a great spoil among the apples. These birds are common
(says mine Author) in Gloucestershire and other apple countries. The cause of
these birds rambling so far into Cornwall that year, was, I conceive, the
failing of fruit in the fruit countries, as in Gloucestershire, Herefordshire,
Worcestershire, etc. and its taking in Cornwall and some other parts. (For we
know that it often happens, that fruit fails in one country, and takes in
another) Which obliged these Birds to seek for their peculiar food where it
was to be had. We read in our Chronicles, that at the time when field Mice did
so swarm in Denge Hundred in Essex, in the year 1580. that they eat up all the
roots of the grass etc. a great number of Owls, of strange and various
colors, assembled and devoured them all; and after they had made an end of
their prey, they took their flight back again, from whence they came. The
reason of which I conjecture to be the same with the former. For that which
produced these Mice in that great abundance, was an extreme dripping warm year,
and a mild and moist winter, as country men assure us, and Keppler himself
belives is the constant cause of that Vermin. Now because (though God can,
yet) nature cannot extend the same extremity of weather all over the world; but
(as is most probable) when there is an extremity of warmth and moisture in one
country, there is as great an extremity of cold and drought in another (even
as we see that the reason why it it flows in one Port, is because it ebbs in
another; the reason, I say, or at leastthe cansafine qua non) hence it follows,
that the extremity of of warmth and moisture that we had then in England, could
not have been without as great an extremity of cold and drought in some other
countries, which (because an enemy to generation, especially to that of this
Vermin) made them fail most certainly in those other countries, whose Nature
and temper is apt to produce them more constantly and abundantly, and (it may
be) almost always. Whence these painted Owls (strangers to us, but not to
those countries, where the abundance and constancy of food makes them daily
Guests) very likely were forced by hunger to seek out food, which provident
Nature had provided for them in other places, where their stay was no longer
then till they had spent their provision, and then ad pristina praesepia. All
which these flying Pilgrims might very well do, without any great notice how
and whence they came, and whither they went, because they are birds of night,
and travel only in the dark: And I conceive the reason of several birds
leaving us, and returning again at set times of the year, to be much like this;
either they find that food that pleases them here among us at some times of
the year, which we have not for them at others; or (which is probable in some
birds) they delight in one certain degree of heat or cold; and as they find the
constant temper of the season to grow hotter or colder, they accordingly take
their flight more Northernly or Southerly; and if the winter prove very mild,
then the Winter birds (as Fieldfares, etc.) come not quite home to us, finding
their due proportion of warmth in countries more Northerly then we; and if the
Winter prove extreme sharp, then they fly beyond us to the southward; yet
taking our climate by the way, at the beginning of the sharp weather, they give
a prefage to country people of a hard Winter by their early appearing.

Every Hill almost in Cornwall, sends out a spring whose waters are pleasant
and wholesome. That the springs should be so frequent in a barren country, I do
not wonder; for where the vegetables are but few and small, to spend the stock
of rain that falls, there must needs be the more left to soak into the earth,
and make springs.

And that the waters of these springs (though strained through the Tin-Mines)
should be all pleasant, wholesome, not Medicinal or purgative, I conceive the
cause may be for that Tin is a fast metal, and not apt to dissolve and
communicate its self to the water, that passes through it, as appears also by
its slow rusting. Whereas iron, which is not so fast, but more apt to rust,
easily gives a Tincture to springs, (as appears by Tunbridge wells) and makes
them medicinal. For fishes, they have these kinds, viz. the Shoate (a fish
proper to Devonshire and Cornwall; it is like a Trout, but lesser, and nothing
near so good as a Trout) Peale, Trout, and Salmon, (which breed in fresh water,
and live in salt.) The Trout and Peale come from the sea between March and
Midsummer, into the rivers to shed their Spawn. The Salmons chief coming is
between Michaelmas and Christmas; for till then the rivers are too shallow for
them. The Salmons are fattest when they come first from the Sea: they pass up
as high as any water can carry them to Spawn the more safely, and to that end
take advantage of the great rain floods. And after Christmas they return to the
Sea, and as the spring comes on, the young fry follow; and it has been
observed, that the Salmon, Trout, and Peale haunt the same rivers where they
first were bred. The nature of the Salmon is, that if in the night he see any
light, as of a Candle, or of Lightning, he will come to the top of the water,
and play in and out. The Cornish-men use to take Salmons and Trouts by tickling
them under the bellies, and so throwing them on the land, Sharkes (in the
rivers) Lobsters, Crabbs, (many of the Crabbs breeding in Cockle-shells, and
many of the Lobsters in Wrinckle-shells (as my self have seen, says mine
Author) and being grown they come forth, and live in holes of rocks, from
whence at low water they are dragged out by a long crook of Iron.) Oysters) of
which they hold that there are male and female Oysters the female Oysters about
May or June have in them a milk, which they then shed and whereof the Oyster is
engendered; the little ones at first cleaye in great numbers to the mothers
shel, and waxing bigger toward Michaelmas they fall away, and fall asunder one
from another: only here and there some are fast knit together (two, three, or
more in a cluster) that nothing but violence will severe them. Some people have
a conceit, that in Summer they are all sick, (as if the males did breed their
wives children) and out of season; as indeed the milky are. But some Gentlemen
(says M. Carew) have found the contrary by experience eating of them at all
times of the year without danger. Oysters have this property, that though taken
out of the water, they open against the flood time, and close upon the ebb.
Yet they will close before; if they chance to be touched; whence it once happened
(says the same Gentleman) that an Oyster lying open did by his sudden shutting
catch three young mice by the heads, that were going to eat him.) Soale and
Playce (both which follow the tide into the fresh rivers) Eels some whereof are
bred in fresh water, and are of the best taste. The great rain floods after
September break their beds, where they breed, and carry them into the Sea; the
other Eeles called Conger-Eeles are bred in Salt water, and when they are grown
a little, they go into the Ocean.) Porcpisce and Seal (the Porcpisce is a very
big fish, and black: they chase the smaller fish from the Sea into the rivers,
leaping up and down the water, oneafter another; puffing like a fat Lubber out
of breath, and so follow their chase as far as any water will carry them, which
the fishermen observing get below them with their Boats, and cast a strong net
cross the stream, with which and their loud and continual shouting they fray
them from retiring, till the ebb has left them, and then they take them. The
Seal-fish is like a Pig; ugly faced, and footed like a Moldwarp: he loves
music, or any loud noise, and after the noise will come a shore, almost above
water, and sometime many of them will come a shore, and lie sleeping in holes
of the cliffe where they kill them with Guns. Seal and Porcpisce use to be cut
in pieces, and powdered, and it seems being so ordered, they are eatable)
Scallops; Seahedgehogs (both which are sound on the Sea coasts. The
Sea-hedgehog is restaurative, being enclosed in a round shell like a loaf of
bread, handsomely wrought and pinked, and guarded with prickcles) the
Sheathfish (which is also found upon the coast: it is as big, and as long as a
man's finger, and tastes like a Lobster, but is more restaurative) Pilchards
(the Pilchard is a little fish, and a great multiplier, he comes up into the
fresh water between Harvest and Allhollandtide pursuing into the rivers a fish
called a Britt, upon which he seeds. He is also himself a prey to a bigger
kind of fish, called a Plusher, which is like a Dogfish, and leaps up now and
then above water, Other fish likewise prey upon the Pilchard, as the Tonny
fish, the Hake (a fish so called) as also a kind of bird called a Gannett) the
Starfish (which is held to be contagious, but whether it be that fish which in
Kent the fishermen call 5 fingers, and 12 fingers I know not.) Tonny and Turbot
(which they use to boil, and preserve fresh in Vinegar) etc.

On the North side of Cornwall, and to the Westward of Foy, few or no Salmons
are taken. The cause whereof I think is, because there both the Seas are too
unquiet for them, as commonly they are about Promontories, and the mouths of
swift rivers, such as Seavern; and because there are no rivers of any competent
bigness thereabout, fit for them to spawn in.

There swims in the Sea upon this coast a round slimy substance, called a
Blobber, which is thought to be noisome and hurtful to the fish (which I
suppose is that that is very frequent in the river of Medway by Rochester, and
called there a Watergall.)

For Sea fowl, they have these following, viz. Gulls, Pewets, and other Sea
fowls, (which breed in little Islands, laying their eggs in the grass, and not
building any nests; and they have young ones about Whusuntide. And here mine
Author relates, that an old Gull, was known for many years together to come,
and feed young Gulls kept tame in a Gentleman's yard joining to his house that
bordered upon a cliff of the Sea.) Puffins (a foul which hatcheth in holes of
the Sea cliffs, and whose flesh tastes like fish) Burranets (a foul that
hatcheth also in holes of the Sea cliffs, and when her young ones are hatched,
she leads them sometimes a mile or better into the land, where they are
ordinarily taken and kept tame with Ducks.

There are also Sprayes here, the same foul, that Pliny calls Haliaetos, but
it is not eatable.

The Chough is a peculiar bird to this County, being found no where else in
England; it haunts the Seas, but feeds not upon fish. His bill is sharp, long
and red, his legs red; and his feathers black. It is a very unlucky bird (and
mischievous like the Pie) for he will hide money, and other little things, and
will carry sticks of fire about, and set barns, stacks, etc. on fire. He is
frequent about the Alps.

There are many Lepers in Cornwall, who are thought to contract that disease
from much eating of fish, especially newly taken, and more especially from the
eating of the Livers of such new fish; but some have it as an heriditary
disease from their Ancestors.

The ancient Cornish men were excellent archers, they would shoot an arrow 24
score: their Arrow was a Cloth yard long, wherewith they would pierce any
ordinary Armor: One Mr. Robert Arundel would shoot 12. score with his right
hand, with his left hand, and behind his head; And one Robert Bone shot at a
little Bird upon a Cows back, and killed the Bird without touching the Cow.

In Cornwall they find that sea sand is more fructifying and enriching then
land sand, by reason of its saltness, as they think. And they further observe,
that the Sand is the better, by how much the farther down in the sea it lies.
They use also ouzy mud to lay upon their land, but it is not altogether so good
as the Sand. There is also a weed called Orewood, whereof some grows upon Rocks
under high water mark, and some is broken from the bottom of the sea by rough
weather, and cast upon the next shore by the wind and flood; and with these
Weeds they compast their Barley Land. This floating Orewood that is cast
ashore by the flood, is now and then found naturally formed like ruffs and
Combs.

Upon the shore of this County, in many places are found shells of sundry
fashions and colors, (as indeed there are upon many shores elsewhere) and in
some places on the shore there are Nuts to be found like a sheeps kidney, but
flatters with a hard brownish rind, and the kernel is without taste, and (as
they say) good for Women in travel.

Edgecomb house by Plymouth is a very healthful dwelling, though near the Sea:
The cause is, because it is hilly, rocky, and free from marshes. For which
reason the Country about Dover in Kent is found to be healthful too, though
lying just upon the Sea. This house is famous for two things; first for the
brave Echo about it, and then for a sort of Stone, that they dig near it,
which serves for building, lime, and marle, and all.

Some Gentlemen in this Country have for their delight Salt Water pond, into
which if you cast Oysters of trees, Oysters will grow upon them.

At Trematon in Cornwall in the Parish Chancell, a Leaden Coffin was dug up,
in which being opened was found the proportion of a very big man's body, but
being touched it turned to dust. It was thought to be the body of Duke Orgarus,
who, as Speed says, married his daughter to King Edgar: for there was an
inscription on the Coffin, that signified, it was the body of a Duke, whose
heir was married to a Prince.

Saltash is a very healthful place; In this Town there is a Well, the water of
which will never boil peason to an eatable softness.

On Hengsten- down a little above Plymouth are great store of Cornish Diamonds.
The people about this Country observe, that when Hengsten top is capped with a
cloud, a shower follows soon after.

The Country men in Cornwall are great eaters of Garlic for healths sake,
whence they call it there, the Country man's Treacle.

The cement or mortar of the walls of Tintogell Castle resist the fierceness of
the weather better then the stones.

The Town of Bodmin is held a very unhealthfull place, and the cause of it they
say is, for that it has one street (a mile in length) running due East and
West, on the South side whereof it has a great high hill that hides the Sun
from it; and their Back-houses, as Kitchins, Stables, etc. are climbed up to by
steps and every great shower washes the Sulledge of them through the houses
into the streets; and (which is more) their Conduit water runs through the
Church yard.

It will not be a miss to add here out of our Author an odd presage of the
Cornish rebellion in the time of Edward the sixth, which happened in this Town
of Bodmin. About a year before that rebellion the Scholars of Bodmin School
grew into two factions, the one (as they call it) for the old religion, the
other for the new; and this quarrel was prosecuted with some eagerness sundry
times, till by an unhappy accident (no other then the killing of a Calfe during
the beardless conflict) complaint was made to the Master, and so the play
ended. Which presage is seconded with several others of the like nature out of
ancient and modern history; but to impercinent to our design and too tedious to
be here related.

In Saint Cleeres parish in Cornwall, there are upon a plain six or eight
Stones, such as are upon Salsbury plain, which like them two will be mistaken
in the telling; so that when they are told over a gain, they will be found over
or under the first number. A thing, that happens (no doubt) meerIy by their
confused standing.

There is a story that passes concerning Saint Kaines well in this County;
which is, that whosoever drinks first of the water, be it husband or wife,
gets the mastery. A fit fable for the vulgar to believe.

At Hall near Foy there is a Faggot which is all one piece of vvood, naturally
grown so, and it is wrapped about the middle with a bond, and parted at ends
into four sticks, one of which sticks is subdivided into two others. It was
carefully preserved (and painted over, that it might keep the better) for many
years by the Earl of Devon, being reckoned a fore-token of his progeny. For his
Estate (says Mr. C.) is now come into the hands of four Cornish Gentlemen, one
of whose Estates is likewise divided between two Heirs.

An Earthen Pot was found many years ago near Foy, gilded and graved with
Letters, in a great Stone Chest, and full of a black Earth; the Ashes ('it is
like) of some ancient Roman.

In Lanhadron Park there grows an Oak that bears Leaves speckled with white;
and so does another called Painters Oak, in the Hundred of East. It is certain
(says our Author) that diverse ancient Families in England, are pre-admonished
of their end by Oaks bearing of strange leaves.

There are two Lakes not far asunder, nor far from St. Agnes Hill in this shire,
whereof the one will live and Fish thrive in, but not in the other.

By Helford is a great Rock lying upon the ground, and the top of it is hollow
like the long half of an Egg. This they say holds water, which ebbeth and
flows with the Sea. And indeed (says Mr. C.) when I came hither to see this
curiosity, the Tide was half gone, and the Pit or hollowness half empty.

There is a Rock in this shire called Mainamber, which is a very great one, and
yet so laid upon lesser Rocks, that the push of a finger will sensibly move it
to and fro; but not all the strength which men can make, can remove it from the
place.

The Cliffs to the Westward of St. Jes in Cornwall, have streaks of a
glittering color, like Copper, which show as if there were a likelihood of
finding Copper there.

An exceeding big Carcass of a man was found by Tinners digging at a Village
near the Lands end, called Trebegean. Hitherto I have borrowed all I have
written (save only my conjectures at the causes) out of Mr. Carew's ingenious
Book, called, The Survey of Cornwall, published in the year 1602.

What Cambden and others say over and above, is as follows.

The chief time of the swarming (as one would say) of Pilchards about the
shores of Cornwall, is from July to November, at which time they are taken,
garbaged, salted, and hanged in the smoke, laid up and pressed, and so carried
away, and sold in France and other Countries.

In the Rocks at the Lands end, at a low Water, are found Veins of white Lead,
and brass.

At St. Michael's Mount, at low ebbs, one may see Roots of mighty Trees in the
Sands, which shows that there has been overflowing of the sea upon this coast
hereabout, as it appears also to have been about Plymouth Haven, and other
places adjoining. And it is manifest that the sea has devoured much Land upon
the coast of Cornwall, toward Silley Islands. For between the Lands end and
Silley, the sea is all of an equal depth of about 40. or 60. fathom, Water
being about 30 Miles in length; only in the mid way there lies a Rock called
the Gulf. The cause of the devouring of this Land by the sea, I conceive to be
its being a Promontory lying open to the merciless storms and weather, and
withal, lying in a place where two currents meet and part; I mean the Tide as
it comes in, and returns out of the Sleeve, or narrow Seas, and the Irish Seas,
and Seavern; the rolling and force of the Sea being apt to carry before it all
that stands in its way, according to the proportion that its own strength
bears to the yeeldingness of the object. But the cause why the Gulf rock was
not washed away with the rest, is because it was of too stubborn a matter, and
too fast founded in the Earth. Nor can I think but that the Silley Islands were
once all parts of the main Land of England, (and the like I conceive of Heysant
in France, an Isle lying before the Promontory of Britain) but severed by
degrees each from other, and all from the Continent by the means abovementioned.

At Stratton in Cornwall grows the best Garlic in all the Country. It may be
old Mr. Chamond (before spoken of) owed part of the cause of his great age. to
his living so near the best Garlic the Country man's Treacle.

On the shore of this shire, about 30. or 40. years, ago, was a huge Mass of
Ambergrise, found by a poor Fisherman; a story very famous, and frequent in the
mouths of several persons of credit and quality.

DEVONSHIRE.
THE west of this Shire (being that which borders upon Cornwall) is stored with
Tin Mines. The River Lid by Lidford runs under ground.

At Combmarton are found Mines of Lead, and some Veins of Silver.

Ordulphus (this Country man, for he was Son of Ordarus, E. of Devonshire) was
a: Giant-like man, that (if William of Malmesbury say true) would break open
the bars of Gates, and stride 10. foot. It Is probable he was one of somewhat a
larger proportion then ordinary (and so might give a fair occasion for the
Hyperbole) and that the brawniness and big-bodiedness of the Cornish men may
extend to their neighbors of Devonshire-

The air of Devonshire is sharp and wholesome: the soil hilly and woody; and
here they use (as in Cornwall) sea-sand to mend and enrich their Land, which
makes it very fat and battle.

Devonshire abounds with Wool, Kersies, Seafish, and Sea-fowl.

Load-stones have been found upon Dartmore Rocks, of good value and virtue.

Upon Exmore are such stones, (huge, and placed confusedly) as are upon
Salisbury Plain; and one of them has Danish Letters upon it, directing
passengers that way.

At Hubblestow in this shire, was a battle fought by the Danes, where their
Banner called Reafan, in which they reposed confidencce of Victory and Success,
was notwithstanding taken, and Hubba their Captain slain.

It is reported by several persons of credit, that during the late War, at the
time that Exceter was besieged by the Parliaments sorces, an infinite number of
Larks came flying into the Town, and settled in a void green place within the
Walls, where they were killed by the besieged in huge quantities, and eaten.

DORSETSHIRE.
THE Air of this Shire is healthful, and the Sea yeildeth the shrub called
Isidis Plocamos, growing without leaves, like Coral; When it is cut, it waxes
hard and black, and is brittle. It grows among that useless Sea-Weed, called
Algar, and is most plentiful about the Isle of portland.

About Birtport, or Burport, grows the best Hemp in these parts of England.

The River of Sture affords great store of Tench and Eeles: Probably it is a
muddy River.

Alume and Coperas is made at Canford in this Shire; the reason I suppose is
because the shores of the Sea (not far from it) may afford Copperas stones for
the purpose, in good quantity.

At Shaftsbury (as say some of our Historians) lived in times past one Aquila
(which yet some will have to be the Bird of that name) who prophesied, that the
British Empire after the Saxons and Normans would return to the old Britans.
There was never any age of the World, but it afforded a Prophet for a pleasing
improbability; and the greater or more pleasing improbability, the more the
Prophets.

At Pool in the year 1653. June 20. it is reported, that it rained warm blood.
The particulars of which would be well worth the while to enquire after,
because Peireskius, the noble French Philosopher, contends, that that blood
falls not out of the air, but is a superfluous matter remaining after the
hatching of a Butter-flye, and left in such places sometimes, where no rain can
come to drop. It were easy to enquire the true particulars of it, being so
late a prodigy. I once had a conceit, (but I had no reason to cherish it long)
that this Blood might be engendered of some Vapors drawn up by the Sun from
that part of the Sea where the cruel Sea Fight was fought between the English
and Dutch, not far from this Town, and not long before this time; as if the
crimsoned Sea had afforded a Crimson Vapor to make this rain of. But this is
not the first plausible error that I have had. Query, whether about Pool, and
in the Isle of Wight, and other places in England, where our Histories tell us
it has rained blood, there be not generally greater store of Butterflies and
Grasshoppers then elsewhere.

In the Haven of this Town of rool, the sea contrary to all other Ports in
England) ebbs and flows (like another Euripus) four times in 24 hours; for
first it flows a S. E. and N. W. Moon, and then a South and by East, and a
North and by West Moon once more, which second flood is caused (as Seamen
conceive) by the return of the fore-ebb, which coming from the Sussex Coast,
and so along between the Isle of Wight, and the main Land of Hantshire, strikes
in here, as lying in its way. Note that Euripus in Eubaea, is situated almost
like Pool.

At Hermitage in Dorsetshire (it lies, I think in the vail of White, Heart) in
the year 1582. and 3. January the 13. being Sunday, a piece of ground of three
Acres, removed from its old place (says Stow in his Summary) and was carried
over another Close where Alders and Willows grew, the space of 40. Rods or
Perches, and stopped up the Highway that led to Cerne (a Market Town) and yet
the Hedges that it was enclosed with, enclose it still, and the Trees stand
bolt upright; and the place where this ground was before, is left like a great
pit.

The Portland men (like the ancient Inhabitants of the Baleares Isles in the
Mediteranean Sea) are excellent slingers.

In the Isles of Purbeck are Veins of Marble running under the earth.

SOMERSETSHIRE.
IN this Shire the Air is mild, and the soil generally very wet, miry, and
moorish.

Of the hot Baths in this Shire (at the City of Bath) Johnson in his Mercurius
Botanicus, gives us this description. Bath (says he) lies in a plain (not
great) encompassed with Mountains almost of an equal height. The Baths are
four; the King's Bath, the Queen's Bath, the Cross Bath, and the Hot Bath: The
King's Bath lies in the middle of the City, being about 60. feet square, and it
has about the middle of it many hot Springs rising, whence it has the greater
heat. The Queen's Bath has no Spring in it, but only receives the Water from
the King's Bath (from which it is only divided by a Wall) for which reason it
is more temperate then the Kings. In these two Baths there is a Pump to pump
Water upon the diseased, where strong Embrocations (as Phisicians speak) are
required; for often times the matter of the Disease is so contumacious, that
simple bathing will not remove it. The Cross Bath and Hot Bath are in the West
part of the City. The Cross Bath is Triangular, and about 25. foot long, and as
broad at one end. It has not so many Springs as the Kings Bath, and hot bath
have; and therefore is of a more gentle heat. About 22. paces from the Cross
Bath, is the Hot Bath, so called, because formerly when it was not so large as
now it is, it was much hotter then the rest. But now it is only as hot as the
King's Bath, or but little hotter. It is 27. foot long, and 13, foot broad. The
Water of all these Baths in a small quantity seems clear and pellucid; but if
one look upon its surface in the Bath, it lookssomewhat green, (or of a blew or
sea-colour, as Cambden says) and it has a Bituminous unsavory smell, but
almost no taste, at least it is hardly perceivable to the palate. Once a week
the Baths are empited, and swept clean; only the Cross Bath, because of its
frequent use and its narrowness, is sometimes cleansed twice a week. For the
nature of the water is, that about 4. or 5. hours after the going out of the
Baths, the water casts out a foamy scum or filth which swims on the top of it,
and fouls it. The Minerals that are conceived by learned Writers to give these
Waters their heat and Tincture, are Bitumen. Sulphur, and Nitre; and there is
Bitumen; Sulphur and Nitre being in less quantity: The Mineralness of these
Waters appears also by a way that the people of Bath have to give Silver Money
a Golden color, which is done with a Composition made (as they say) of the mud
of the Bath, and some of the Bath-Water and Urine mixed together, with which
composition they rub the Money which they intend to gild; but the color is but
pale and faint, and will quickly wear off. Now that it is a Bituminous and
Sulphury matter that gives this Water its heat and tincture; besides its
Medicinal Virtues, as that it dryes, heats, dissolves, softens, opens,
attracts, digests, cuts, and is abstersive, etc. there is this manifest proof,
that the Country hereabouts is full of Cole-Mines, especially about Bristol,
and the southermost parts of Glocestershire, as Mengerfield, Westerley, etc.
and so also under Mendip-Hills, that part of them that lies toward
Frome-Selwood. And all Naturallists agree (as they have reason) that Coal is a
Bituminous and sulphury matter; For that it is a Bitumen, is manifest by its
black pitchy viscosity, and its melting as it burns: And that there is a
quantity of Sulphur in it, is as evident by the Brimstony smell the Embers of
them give, as any one may find that will but hold his head a while over a pan
of them; as also by their burning blew many times, especially when they hurn
eagerly, as in frosty Weather; whence many people reckon the fires burning
blew, a slgne of frost and hard weather: And (which is yet a further argument,
the Coal hereabouts has abundance of Veins like Gold or Brass in it (as I
have often observed my self, and it may be observed every day; for indeed there
is nothing more common) a thing which I could never observe in New Castle Coal,
though this Cake as that does, and does not burn all away to a white ashes, as
the Coal which they dig about Staffordshire, and which I think they call
Canell-Coale.

There are (says Cambden) a kind of pit-coals dug near the River From,
with which Smiths use to soften Iron. These are the Coals I mentioned before,
under Mendip Hills, toward Frome-Selwood: That they should soften Iron, is no
wonder, since we see any Coal, or the like violent sire does the same; but
whether they have a singular power thatway above other coal, may be further
enquired.

It is reported that about Uphill (Parish by the seaside not far from
Axbridge) within these half hundred years, a parcel of Land swelled up like a
hill, and on a sudden clave asunder, and fell down again into the Earth, and in
the place of it remains a great Pool.

At Keinsham in stone quarries, are found stones in the form of a Serpent, like
the Whitbay stones (of which I shall speak more in Yorkshire) only here is the
difference between them; whereas those at Whitbay want heads, some of these
have. Hereabouts also (says Cambden) grows Percepier, or Parsley-break stone,
an Herb proper to England, bitter, hot, biting and sour, without stalk, with
herby Flowers, never above a span high: It grows naturally all the year long;
it is extremely dieuretical, and very quick in operation, Yet however Cambden
puts it down as a special rarity in this place; our modern Herbarists make no
such rarity of it; for Mercurius Botanicus says indefinitely, that it grows in
Agris Siccioribus, that is, in dry grounds; and others say that it is commonly
to be found in airable fields after Harvest.

At Bristol it flows a 11. or 12. Else in height every Tide; an extraordinary
proportion in comparison of most places on the English shore. The cause I
suppose is, the extreme wide and direct mouth of Severn, lying open to the Vast
Atlantic Sea, where the Tide comes rolling in a-main, and being contracted as
it comes in higher into the River, and land-locked, and not being able to fall
back again (til it ebb without in the Main) by reason of the continual
succession of Water, must needs swel to that height in the Severn, and by
consequence very easily communicate part of his burden to the Avon of Bristol.

Not far from Bristol is the famous Rock called St. Vincents Rocks, ragged, and
hanging over the bank of the River of Avon, where (says Johnson) is a Well of
warm Water, pleasing to the taste. It flows out of the Clest of a great Rock,
and is overflowed every Tide, and left open to the air at the ebb; for its
spring breaks out at the Root of the Rocks; the Water is much commended for
Ulcers, and calculous affections of the reins, being taken inwardly. It is also
often applied outwardly to cure old sores with very good success (says he) as
I have heard those say that have tried. There is moreover in this place a Vein
of Iron in the Bowels of the Earth (says the same Author) whence the water
gets its virtue, and a greater heat, which it loses by running a great way
before it can get out. But by my Authors leave, it cannot be conceived how a
vein of Iron should make water so hot, since we see that iron Mines in other
places work no such effect upon those Waters that run through them. I rather
conceive there it is some other Vein of Metal, or rather Mineral there, that is
the cause of the heat, and likely the same Mineral that causes the heat of the
Bath-Waters. Much more I could say, but I am unwilling to enlarge too far upon
Plausibilities. Note that this hot Well is not above 12. miles from Bath.

On the upper side of these craggy Rocks of St. Vincent, are dug out
pellucid stones, sexangular (or six cornered) and quadrangular, (or four
cornered) which we call Diamonds. Some will have them to be Crystal, but
(says Mr. Johnson) I think they are rather of the nature of Fluores. For
(says he) I remember an Apothecary of Bristol told me, the Lord of the place
would not have them taken out of the Iron Mine, (which was the womb in which
they were formed) because the greater quantity of them make the Metal the more
fluid. and apt to melt. And Agricola tells us, that Fluores are very like
Diamonds, but not so hard, and that they are used in the melting and trying of
Metals, till they be thoroughly tried; for (says he) they make the matter in
the fire much more fluid. And Kentmannus in his Catalogue of Fossils, reckons
Pellucid Fluores, sexangular, and like Crystal. Of these St. Vincent Stones,
Cambden speaks thus: They are (says he) so plentiful there, that one may fill
a bushel with them; and they are all either four cornered, or six cornered. And
says Speed, saving their hardness, they are as good as the Diamonds of India.

On another Rock more Western then St. Vincents Rock, there are found Diamonds
enclosed in hollow and reddish Flints after a wonderful manner, and the Earth it
self is red there too.

At Chedder near Axbridge, is a Spring so plentiful of Water presently, that it
drives twelve Mills within a quarrer of a mile of the head of it. The reason I
suppose is, for that the head of it arises in a corner, been encompassed round
with steep barren hills, (save only that way which the stream runs) which pour
out all that plenty of Water they contain in their bowels, into this
head-spring, where it all meets as in a center, and there rusheth forth in a
vast abundance.

In the Isle of Athelney in this shire, was in ancient time a Monastry, which
was so contrived, that the whole Frame thereof hanged upon four main Posts made
fast in the ground. So says Cambden out of William of Malmesbury.

It is credibly reported (says the same Author Cambden) that there was a
Walnut-Tree in the holy Churchyard at Glastenbury, that did never put out leaf
before St. Barnabas day, and upon that very day was very rank and full of
leaves; but that is now gone, and a young Tree set in this place. Also that
there is Hawthorn in Wirall Park hard by Glastenbury, that upon Christmas day
sprouteth forth as if it were in May. This is reported (says he) by very
credible men that live thereabouts. But it is since (as credibly reported) that
the malice and fury of the late wars, has destroyed this Hawthorn too.

There is at Bristow a Church, called the Temple, the Tower whereof shakes to
and fro when the bells ring, so that it has divided it self from the rest of
the Building from the top to the bottom the breadth of three Fingers, and
opens and shuts whenever the bell is rung.

`There is about a mile Eastward from Bath, a great hill, and on the top of it
a very large barren Plain, called Landsdown, under which very probably, if
search were made, would be found the Mineral or Furnace that heats the
Bath-Water; but no doubt it lies so deep, that it would not be worth the time,
the pains, or the cost to search after it; it seems by the very sight of it to
be pregnant of some such matter. These were my thoughts at first, touching the
Bed of the Mineral that heats the Bath; but Dr. Meara of Bristow has since
taught me to lay down that conjecture, by showing me the Copy of a Letter
written by himself in Latin to Dr. Prujean of London, touching astrange thing
that happened in July 1659. at the Bath; the abstract of which I shall take the
boldness to give the Reader in the Doctors own words, as follows.

Aquis Calidis, 4o nonas Aug. 1659 Amplissimo and Excellentissimo D. D. F.
Prujean, Medicinae Doctori, etc. Ampl. and Excel. Domine.
QUod jamdudum factum oportuit, etc. hostiam autem adfero tibiz ut auguror, non
ingratam fortuitam scilicit detectionem Zetematis non ignobilis de cansa
Caloris Thermarum hujus loci, cujus investigatio clarissimos medicos diu
exercuit. Illustrissimus D. Fairfax qui cum Conjuge Valetudinari jam Aquis
Calidis haeret, cum nudiustertius apricandi causa non procul ab urbe
obequitaret, casu offendit cretam quandam nivei candoris sparsime terra in
exiguis cumulis emergentem ad instar terrae a talpis egestae. Hujus Portionem
domum attulit mihique ostendit. Friabilis est, sponte fere in scobem levissimam
abit; saporem exhibet manifest acidum sine astrictione; sed paulatim mordicat,
ac ixflammatoriam strangulationem in faucibus parit, ut non dubitem illam multo
chalcantho abundare, nec esse omnino Arsenici expertem. In frigidam a me effusa
confestim ebullitionem vehementem excitavit, non secus as si calx esset viva;
and pedetentim aqua tam insignem calorem concepit, ut ovis cito coquendis
paresset. Quum haec Creta in Thermarum vicinia reperiatur, verisimile existimo
aquam thermalem hoc igne calescere. Non ignoro authors passim Thermarum
calorune Sulphuri aut Bitumini ascribere. Verum, quamvis negari non possit
Magnam Bituminis and Sulphuris copiam in his scaturaginibus reperiri, ijsque
has thermas abunde impregnari convincat cura scabiei, ulcerum, tremoris
paralyseos, etc. dubito tamen an eorum aliquod fermenti aquam calefacere nati
rationem habere possit, quum utrumque aciditate, fermentationis opifice,
destitutum sit: neutrum vero in aquam conjectum fermentationem aut calorem
producere possit; and quum eorum consistentia tenax sit and viscida, Bituminis
praesertim, ut aqua in minimas eorum particulas expedite se insinuare non
possit; fit ut ad ejusmodi fermentationem sint inepta; Cujus contrarium in
consistentia friabili, and minime cohaerente hujus Cretae continget. Locus ubi
hoc fossile fuit repertum, terra est spongiae instar porosa, ut facile appareat
illud florem esse sive (...) Mineralium fermentantium una cum (...) spiritibus
sursum eluctantem. Verum quid in hac obscuritate potius statuendun sit, tuo
judicio ego libenter subijcio, gratesque quam possum maximas humanitati tuae
refero etc.

Vir Ampl. and Excel. Famulus Devinctissimus, Edm. Meara.

The English thus in effect:
Bath, August the 2d 1659.
To the Worshipful his very much honored friend Fran. Prujean D. of Physic,
etc.

W. and H. Sir,

WHat I should have done long since, etc. The Sacrifice I bring to your Altar,
will not I conceive be ungrateful. It is the strange accidental discovery of
a noble Mystery touching the cause of the heat of the Baths here; the search
into which has long exercised the most famous Physicians, the manner of it was
thus. The right Honorable the Lord Fairfax, who continues still at the Bath
with his Lady, riding abroad not far from this City two days ago, to take the
air, by chance found a kind of Chalk as white as snow, working here and there
out of the ground in little heaps, like earth cast up by Moles. A piece of this
he brought home, and showed me. It is a crumbling matter, and almost of its
self turns to a small light dust: its taste is manifestly acide without
astriction, but by little and little biting, and causing an extreme hot
strangulation in the mouth, so that I am persuaded it has much Chalcanthus in
it, and is not altogether without Arsenick. I put it into cold water, and
presently it fell a boiling, and bubbling apace, just as if it had been quick
Lime; and by degrees the water grew so very hot that it would quickly have
boiled an Egg. Now seeing that this Chalk is found near the Bath, I conoeive
it not unlikely that it is this, that heats the Bath-water, I know very well
that Authors generally attribute the heat of Baths to Sulphur or Bitumen.
Nevertheless, though it cannot be denied that there is a great quantity of
Bitumen and Sulphur found in these Springs, and the cure of Scabbiness, Ulcers,
Trembling, the Palsy, and the like diseases does evince that the Baths are
plentifully impregnated with them; yet I doubt whether either of them has any
thing of a fermentative power in them to heat water, seeing both of them want
acidity, the efficient cause of fermentation; and neither of them being put
into water can produce any fermentation or heat. And since their consistance is
clammy and viseid (especially that of Bitumen) that water cannot readily
insinuate it self into the minute particles of them, they must needs be unfit
for any such fermentation; The contrary of which will follow upon the crumbling
and incoherent consistence of this Chalk. The place where this Fossile was
found, is an earth porous like a sponge, so that it planly appears to be (as it
were) the flos, or excriscence of fermenting Mineral, working up out of the
Earth with those Spirits, that cause the fermentation. But what to determine,
and say positively on this dark riddle, I know not; and therefore humbly submit
it to your judgment; returning you most cordial thanks, etc.

W. and H. Sir, Your most obliged servant Ed. Meara.

Mendip-Hills in this shire afford great abundance of Lead. I have heard it
reported, that the Lead Ore in these hills is found by a very strange means.
There are men; they say, that go up and down upon the hills with forked
hazle-wands in their hands near the places, where they suspect the Ore to be;
And the nature of the wands is, that when they pass over a place where Ore is,
they bend and draw down to the Earth toward the Ore of their own accord; and so
they Ore is found. They say likewise, that any hazle wand will not do it, but
that these we speak of, are prepared after a secret manner, the mystery of
which is kown but to some very few men there who make a living out of this Art
of theirs, by finding out the Ore for the owners. This story is very strange,
and unlikely to be true: nor could I have given any credit to it, had I not
read in Sebastian Munsters Cosmography, that in the Silvermines in Germany the
place where the Ore lies, and the veins run, is found by this very means of
Hazle-wands. And in one of the figures of his Book he gives us the picture of a
fellow going along upon the hills, with a forked wand, or stick in his hand, ad
explorandum metallum. Besides this I remember very well that the Necromancers
have a kind of rodds, called Mosaicall rodds (which are nothing but
Hazle-wands, cut upon such a day of the week, under such a constellation, and
perpared with abundance of ceremonies and circumstances partly Sottish, partly
impious) the virtue whereof they say, is to find out treasure hidden in the
groand.

WILTSHIRE.
IN the edge of this Shire between Luckinton, great Badminton (the seat of my
noble Lord and Master, the Lord Herbert) is a place called the Caves; and by
some the Giants caves, according to the language of ignorance, fear, and
superstition. They are upon the top of a riling hill, a number about. 9. And
some of them are (or were formerly) cemented with lime. Some of them are deeper
and some shallower; some broader and longer then others. They lie altogether in
a row. The manner of them is two long stones, set upon the sides, and broad
stones upon the top to cover them. The least of these Caves is four foot broad,
and some of them are nine or ten foot long. This is, the account, which I have
received from some neighbor Gentlemen touching them with which I was fain to
content my self, because the Earth and Rubbish is now so fallen in, that
(without digging) nothing almost can be seen, but the place where they are the
cavities being all filled up, and bushes over growing them. I presume these
causes are nothing else but the tombs of so many Saxon or Danish Heroes, (or
it may be Romans) slain in a battle fought not far from the place. The
curiosity of some ingenious men (as it is reported) within these 40 years,
tempted them to dig into it, and make a search for some Antic remains, but
they found nothing, but an old Spur, and some few other things not worth the
mentioning. The broadness of the stones is not at all strange, since the whole
Country hereabout is slatty, and in many places affords stones altogether as
large as these.

In this shire is a small Rill, called Deverill, which runs a mile under
ground, like as also does the little River Mole in Surrey, and the river Anas
in Spain, and the Niger in Africa:

Near Warmister (says Cambden) is a natural round, and high copped hill
called Clay Hill. Why Cambden should think this hill to be naturally so as it
is, I know not: Sure I am, there is the like round and high copped hill about a
mile Southward from Aubury in this shire, called Silbury-Hill, in the road from
Bath to Marleborough; which seems not, for many reasons, to be natural, but to
have been cast up by men's hands, and it is not impossible that Clay Hill may
have been made by the same means.

At Juy-Church was in times past found a Corpse 12 foot long, as the tradition
ruuneth, and a Book of very thick Partchment, all written with great Roman
Letters, but when the leaves were touched, the mouldred to dust.

In the forest of Savernac grows a kind of sweet Fern.

Sometimes there breaks out water in the manner of a sudden land flood, out of
certain stones (that are like rocks) standing aloft in open fields near the
rising of the river Kenet in this shire, which is reputed by the common people
a fore runner of death. That the sudden eruption of Springs in places, where
they use not always to run, should be a sign of death, is no wonder. For these
usual eruptions (which in Kent we call Nailbourns) are caused by extreme gluts
of rain, or lasting wet weather, and never happen but in wet years (witness the
year 1648. when there were many of them) In which years Wheat, and most other
grain thrive not well (for a plain reason) and therefore a dearth succeeds the
year following. The Country Proverb in Kent is, that drought never makes a
dearth; Which was sufficiently verified in the years 1654 and 1655. when (after
that lasting drought that began in 1651, and continued till 1655.) the price of
Wheat desceuded to 18d the bushel, and other grain proportionably: And to our
purpose, very remarkable it was in the year 1654, that several springs, and
rivulets were quite dried up by reason of the precedent drought, which raged
most in 1651, 52, and 53. As the head of the stoure, that rises near Elham in
Kent, and runs through Canterbury, was dry for some miles space; and the like
happened to the stream that crosses the Road way between Sittingborn and
Cantsrbury at Ospring near Feversham, which at other times ran with a
plentiful current, but then wholly failed, like the Brooks in Israel in the
days of Ahab.

The Stonehenge upon Salisbury plain in this shire, is counted the most
admirable rarity, that our Island affords. It is in this manner. There are in a
pit great stones standing upright. Some being 28 foot high, and 7 foot broad,
in three ranks round like a Crown, and overthwart them are laid others with
tenants and Mortises. Now the great wonder and question among the learned is,
how these stones came hither. For say they, it is not likely that they were ab
initio, placed here by the God of nature, because the whole Country round for
some miles affords not a stone hardly, either great or small. And they seem too
vast to be brought hither by wagon or the like carriages The learned Cambden
therefore thinks, that they were made there by art, of pure sand, and some
unctuous cement, even as those also in Yorkshire, because anciently there was
such an art of making stone. And Pliny says that the dust of Puteoli (Puzzele)
being laid in water becomes stone presently, and that there were Cesterns at
Rome, made of dug sand, and lime, which were so firm and hard, that they
seemed stone. But notwithstanding the authority of this great Scholar, Iam
clearly of opinion that they are natural stones, and placed there ab initio;
Then which I think nothing is plainer. For upon the Downs between Marleborough
and Aubury, not above 20 miles from Stonehenge, which Downs are but a
continuation, or rather a part of Salisbury plain, differing nothing from it
but in the un-evenness, are to be found abundance of great stones, commonly
called by the Country thereabout, the Gray Weathers; and at Aubury in an
Orchard there are half a dozen, or half a score stones little inferior to
the Stonehenge for hugeness, some standing upright like the Sonehenge, and
others lying flat on the ground. And the Country here, like that about the
Stonehenge, affords not a stone beside. So that unless we will have all these
stones to be artificial, we must grant the Stonehenge to be natural. Now
whereas this unstoniness of the Country about which we speak of, seems to some
a strong objection against the naturalness of the stones, it is on the
contrary, if duly considered, a great argument for it. For what can be more
probable, then that Nature could not provide her self otherwise of Lapidifick
matter enough to make these huge stones of, but by robbing the circumjacent
parts. The more of that matter here, the less hereabouts; because nature
wanting timber, would fetch it nearest hand. I have no more to add touching the
Stonehenge, but that near it men's bones are dug up many times. The reason of
which is, because it was the ancient burying place for the Kings of the Britans.

About Sapworth near Sharstan are found abundance of stones somewhat like
Cockles. yet so apparently differing from their shape, that by the very sight
of them one may plainly see that they never were true Cockles; as some do
believe. But of these I shall speak more in Gloncestershire.

In the Parish of Luckingten in the edge of this Shire (formerly mentioned) is
a well called Hancacks-well the waten whereof is said to be very cold in
Summer, and Warm in Winter, and is commended as a fingalar water for the eyes.

HANTSHIRE.
AT Portsmouth in this shire, they boil Salt out of Salt Water, which is our
Bay Salt, being of a pale or greenish color; and by boiling it again with an
art the have they make it exceeding white.

This shire is very plentiful for all sorts of commodities, especially for
Kerfies and Iron.

Out of the walls of Silcester in this shire a decayed Town grow huge Oaks (of
ten loadsapiece, (says Stow) that seem to grow to the very stones, spreading
both their tops and their roots exceedingly. Also

Near this Town of Silcester, though the land be fruitful enough generally, yet
in some places (as it were by Beds) the Soil is nothing near so fruitful as
elsewhere, which makes men think, that along these Beds the streets of the old
town formerly went. And (which is observable) these unfertile beds do intersect
each other, like streets: The conjecture is not unlikely, because the like is
reported of the streets of old Richborough by Sandwich in Kent.

The Isle of Wight is a wholesome air', and the dwellers very aged. It affords
plenty of Corn, and the best Wool, next to that of Lemster and Cotswald; As
also plenty of Conies, Hares, Pheasants, Partridges, etc.

Our Chroniclers tell us, that in the year 1176. in the Ifle of Wight, it rained
a shower of blood for two hours together.

At Wickham in this Shire are Medicinal Waters.

It is reported, that about Portsmouth is a race of small Dogs, like Beagles,
that they use there to hunt Moles with, which they hunt as their proper natural
Game.

BERKSHIRE.
AT Finchamstead in this Shire, in the year 1100 as Writers say, a Well boiled
up with streams of blood, and continued so 15. days together, whose Waters
madered all others where they came. A story not incredible, though very
strange; because we read of several the like stories touching Fountains in
other Countries, in Authors of good credit.

In this Shire is one of the fruitful Vales of England for Corn, called the
Vale of White Horse.

About the year 1348. (says Cambden) being presently after the Conjunction of
Saturn and Mars, in Capricorn, was a very great Plague over all Europe, and
then was Wallingford, (being a bigger and more confiderable Town then now it
is) almost dis-peopled with it. The Conjunction of Saturn and Mars, that
Cambden means, was 1342. and 43. in February, and it happened in 25. degrees of
Capricorn; but in my opinion, it ushered its pretended effect at too large a
distance to entitle it self the cause of it. Nor can I believe so small a cause
could produce so great an effect; conjunctions of Saturn and Mars happening
constantly every two years, and sometimes (though very rarely) three of them
happening in one year, (as in the year 1640. in the last face of Libra, and (if
Pitatus have calculated right) in the year 1542. in the first face of the
pestilent sign Virgo) without any such extraordinary effects succeeding them.
And which is as observable as any thing, in the year 1578. was a Conjunction
of Saturn and Mars in 23. degrees. of Capricorn, (but two degrees short of the
Conjunction, 1342.) and yet the following years were not guilty of any
extravagant Mortalities, Therefore I conceive it will not be amiss to ascribe
rather this black effect to something nearer 1348. viz. to the conjunction of
Saturn and Jupiter in 1345. in 18. degrees. of Libra (which Astrologers reckon the
house of Saturn) a Conjunction of greater importance and influence, and so more
likely to produce a greater effect. And yet I would not be too bold to fasten
it upon this Conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter neither (till further enquiry be
made) because other Conjunctions of Saturn and Jupiter in Libra have passed
over more lightly. Unless we will say that there may be some particular venom
about the 18th. degree of Libra which other degrees of Libra father off are not
infected with. And indeed in the year 553. we are told by Alsted, that there
raged so horrid a plague at Constantinople, that there died 5000. in a day, and
sometimes 10000. in a day. which was not above two years after a conjunction of
Saturn and Jupiter in 19. degrees of Libra, which happened 1551.

Cambden takes notice, that abundance of Fern grows about Reading, a Plant that
loves gravelly and sandy places, such, as that Country is all about.

SURREY.
THis County is commended for a healthful air; the cause is its sandiness, and
being an Inland County.

Under Holmecastle, standing upon a Hill of Grit or crumbling stone, is a great
Vault of Arched Work. Architects tell us, that Arched Work is the more firm, by
how much the greater weight lies upon it.

The River Mole runs above a mile under ground and at the place where it falls
into the ground grows abundance of Box naturally. Inquiry might be made by
Herbarists, whether the Earth be not of the same nature and composition, where
the same Vegetables grow naturally.

Near Non-such is a Vein of Potters Earth much commended, of which Crueibles
are made for melting of Gold, etc.

The rising of a Bourn or stream near Croydon (as the common people hold)
presageth death, as the Plague; and it has been observed to fall out so. The
rising of Bourns in places where they run not always, we have before proved to
be caused by great wet years, which (according to HYpocrates observation) are
generally the most sickly; and if they prove hot, as well as wet, (because heat
and moisture are the great disposers to putrefaction) they prove also
malignant, and for the most part pestilential. And the reason why the using of
this Bourn does not always presage the Plague, is because all wet years do not
presage hot.

It is observed, that few or no Rivers do ebb and flow so far up from the Sea,
as the River of Thames, which flows up as high as Richmond in this Shire: The
reason of which is very plain, depending chiefly upon two very great causes.
The first is the coming in of the flood, at both ends of this Island, that is,
from the Westward by the Cape of Cornwall, and from the Northward, by the North
end of Scotland, which (as our Books of Navigation tell us) meet at a Rock
called the Galloper (which lies right against the mouth of the River of Thames,
between it and the coast of Holland and Flanders, about the midway) with very
great noise and rippling: Now the two floods (as I said) meeting here, must
needs hinder the course of each other, and by consequence make the Sea swell
much in this place, and so easily discharge it self by a strong flood into the
neighboring River of Thames, lying so conveniently for its reception. The other
cause is the motion of the Earth from West to East, whibh carrying the banks of
the Thames along toward the place where the mouth of it was but now, must
needs (as it were) draw the Water into it, by leaving it behind. And
peradventure upon enquiry, it will be found that the floods run more strongly
(for this reason) up into those Rivers that discharge themselves into the sea
on the East side of a great Island or Continent, then those on the West side;
and that where there are Currents or Streams that run thwart on upon a shore,
they beat more violently (in calm weather) upon Eastern, then Western shores.
But whether this be the reason why on the East side of the Continents of Asia,
Africa, and America, there be many more small Islands, then on the Western side
of those Continents, (for so our Maps inform us, witness Japan, the Philippine
Islands, the Moluccos, the Maldivae, the two Javas, Sumatra, Madagascar, etc.
on the Eastern side of Asia and Africa, and the great swarm of Islands, called,
the Summer Islands, (to which we may ad those vast shoulds on the coast of
Brasil, (on the Eastern side of America) or whether it be from the constant
Intra-tropical Eastwind that galls the Lee-shores, and has in long process of
time carved them so curiously into Islands, is hard to say at present, but must
be left to a more through disquisition.

The Waters of Ebbesham in this shire are very famous, and much frequented for
their Medicinal virtue, and purging by siege. These Waters without doubt
receive their Tincture from some Mineral-Mass that lurks in the
neighboring-hills (it may be under Banstead-Downs) and that the bowels of the
earth hereabout are pregnant of some such matter, seeming by that Crucible-Clay
(mentioned but now) found about Non-such, which (as I am told) blushes
something like Terra Lemnia in some places.

It is reported, that on the hills by Farneham are Snake-stones to be found, of
the form (but not of the color) of those at Alderley in Glocestershire.

SUSSEX.
THis is a Maritine County, and therefore no wonder it affords plenty of Fish
and Sea-Fowl. The Soil is rich, the Land low, and the Ways deep. It was
anciently in a manner an entire Wood, being part of the great Wood Andradswald,
which was 120. miles long, and 30. miles broad.

In this County are many Iron Mines, but the Iron here made is more brittle
then Spanish Iron. Also,

Here they make Glass, but it is neither very good, nor very clear.

The place at Battle, where the fatal battle was fought between William the
Conqueror and Harold, looks of a reddish color after rain. I cannot think it
to be the Conquerors Livery that it still wears. No doubt that was worn out
long since, both color and Cloth, unless that kind of ground be more
retentive of stains then others; or has better luck then the places where the
great Battles of our late Wars have been sought, where no signs remain at all
of the Tragedies acted there. Certainly it is nothing but the natural color of
the earth, which it had before that Battle; for all men know, that in several
parts of England the earth is more then reddish, as in some places of the Weald
of Kent, and particularly at a place in the lower side of the Parish of
Sutton-Valence.

The Downs in Sussex by the seacoast, because they stand upon a fat Chalk, or
Marle, are abundantly fertile of Corn. Downs generally are barren, because eit
her they were ab initio, of a hungry Clay, or else if they consisted of light
loose earth (which is generally more fertile then other sorts of earth) yet it
is continually washed away by great rains into the Valleys. I mean the upper
face of the earth before it is rotted enough to be fat, and disposed for
generation. But where downs and descents (as these we speak of) consist of a
fat clammy (...) Chalk or Marle, the great shoots of rain have not power to
moulder it so fast, and wash it away into the Valleys; so that being fat and
fertile at their first Creation, it is easy for them to continue so. It is
observed in Glocestershire, (and it may be is as true in all Clayie Countries)
that the hills, and sides of hills are the most wet and clayie. The cause doubt
less is the same with this, to wit, That the rains that fall, wash by degrees
the uppermost mould down into the Valleys, because it is more loose and light;
but leaves the underclay behind, because more stiff and fast, and so very
hardly to be tempted away. And this I suppose to be the reason why waters
running over mere Clay, or issuing from it, are hungry, and clear, as we find
in our land-springs about Badminton, because the Clay is unapt to mix with the
water. And I suppose for the same reason, that if Downs consisting of light
loose earth were ploughed, they would in process of time (by constant
ploughing) lose much at theof unevenness, and become plain, (I mean where there
are no more enclosures to stop the concourse of the washed mould) whereas lying
unploughed, they continue with very little alteration: But for the same reason
Clayie Downs ploughed are not likely to suffer any great change.

At Selsey in this shire (says Cambden) are great stores of Cockles and
Lobsters; probably the shore there is rocky and hard, which kind of places
Lobsters and Cockles delight in.

In the year 1250. the Town of Winchelsey was swallowed up of the sea. The like
fate befell the Lands of Earl Goodwin, which were (as we read) once firm Land;
but then by a sudden inundation of the sea devoured (and turned into Goodwin
Sands.) As also were at the same time a great part of the Low Countries, and
some part of Scotland as Hector Boethins says.

KENT.
THis County being a kind of Peninsula, the Sea and the Thames encompassing the
greatest part of it; the air is not very clear, because of vapors continually
rising. Nor is it so cold (says Speed) as other parts of England are: Which
must be understood of the low places near the sea, where the air is not only
not so cold as in other parts of England, but also as in other parts of Kent,
as appears by the sooner dissolving of the snow in Winter, upon a thaw in these
places, then in the Upland and hilly parts of the County, where it many times
in Winter snows, when in the low Maritine places nothing falls but rain. My
self bath several times observed it so, and I belive the like difference may be
observed between the Upland and Maritine places in other Connties.

No Mines in Kent, but a little Iron about Tunbridge.

The Medicinal Wells at Tunbridge are sufficiently known. To render a reason of
which, we need say no more, then that they are made so Medicinal by issuing
from, or running through the Iron Mines there. And that which induces me the
more to think so, is because the Waters are so good for Splenitick Diseases, in
which Powder of Steel is so often prescribed. I do almost believe, could the
truth of it be well searched out, it will hold as an Universal Maxim, that
wheresoever the Waters are Medicinal, there are near the place Iron Mines, or
some of the baser Metals; and that wheresoever the hot Springs rise, (as at the
Bath here) there are near the place Mines of Silver, Tin, or some of the purer
sort of Metals. For we all know, that in Devonshire and Cornwall, the Tin Mines
are, where also Silver has been found, as it has likewise been in Wales: Nor
is it impossible that the like Metals might be found nearer Bath. So much is
already certain, that the Coals that are dug about Bristol, and several
parts in Glocestershire, have Metalline veins (many of them) running along them
like Gold, as is aforesaid in Cornwall. And it is very observable also, that in
the Confines of Germany, between it and Helvetia, and in sundry places of
Saxony, and the parts thereabout, there are as abundance of hot Baths, so also
abundance of Silver Mines.

It is reported that at Egerton near Lenham, is a Spring, whose Water turns
Wood into Stone.

Three miles directly South from Tunbridge, near Frant, in the very edge of
Sussex, in a white sandy ground, are diverse huge craggy stones, of strange
forms, whereof two of the greatest stand so close together, and yet are divided
with so strait a Line, as one would think they had been sawn asunder.

A small Rivulet of Medway loses it self under ground, and rises again at a
Parish called Loose, not far from Cocks Heath.

There are three ridges of Hills in Kent: The first is that, that runs by
Boxtey, Dettling, Hellingborn, etc. and is called, Health without Wealth. The
second is that that runs along by Sutton-Ulcomb, (...) Malherse, etc. and is
called, Health and Wealth. The third is that, that runs by Tenterden, and is
called, Wealth without Health: Names very proper for them, and the reason very
plain why they are so.

August the 4th. 1585. after a very violent tempest of Thunder and Rain, at
Motingham in this shire, eight miles from London, the ground suddenly began to
sink, and three great Elmes growing upon it, were carried so deep into the
earth, that no part of them could any more be seen. The hole left, (says the
story) is in compass 80. yeards about, and a Line of 50. sathom plummed into
it, finds no bottom. Also,

December the 18. 1596. A mile and half from Westram, Southward (which is not
many miles from Motingham) two Closes lying together, separated with aihedge of
hollow Ashes, there was found a part thereof 12. Perches long, to be sunk fix
foot and a half deep; the next morning 15. foot more; the third morning 80.
foot more at the least, and so daily that great Trench of ground, containing in
lenght about 80. Perches, and in breadth 28. began with the Trees and Hedges on
it, to loose it self from the rest of the ground lying round about it, and
withal, to move and shoot Southward day and night for eleven days. The ground
of two Water-pits, the one six foot deep of Water, the other 12. at the least,
and about four Perches over in breadth, having sundry tuffs of Aldars and Ashes
growing in the bottoms, with a great Rock of Stone under them, were not only
removed out of their places, and carried toward the South, at least four
Perches a pieces; but withal, mounted aloft, and become hills, with their
sedge. Flags, and black mud upon the tops of them, higher them the face of the
Water (which they had for saken) by 9 foot, and in the place from which they
are removed, other ground, which lay higher, is descended, receiving the Water
which lies upon it. Moreover in one pace of the plain field, there is a great
hole made by sinking of the earth to the depth of 30. foot at the least, being
in breath in some places two Pearches over, and in length five or six pearches.
Also there is a hedge 30. pearches long, carried Southward with his Trees seven
pearches at the least. And sundry other sinkings there be in diverse places,
one of 60. foot, another of 47. and another of 34. foot. By means of which
confusion it is come to pass, that where the highest Hills were, there be the
deepest Dales, and the lowest Dales are become the highest grounds. The whole
measure of breaking was at the least nine Acres, seven days works, and four
Pearches, etc. To this effect is this strange story related in our Chronicles,
with the other of Motingham, both which we have no reason to doubt the truth,
since of late years; namely Anno 1657. we have had a fresh example of an
Earthsinking at Bickley in Cheshire, of which we shall speak in its place, and
which answers to that or Motingham. And our Chronicles afford us two very
remarkable stories of Earth-removing, one in Herefordshire, 1571. Marcley-Hill,
and another at Armitage in Dorsetshire, of which we have already spoken. Now
for Earth sinking, I conceive I have found out the cause (in cafe the Country
about Motingham and Bickley be loose and sandy) and I imagine it to be this:
The Springs that run to and fro in the body of the earth, the deeper they run,
the more they are increased in quantity; and as they run thus, if the earth be
loose or sandy, they must needs wash and carry away the sand or loose earth
with them by degrees, and so make their passages bigger and bigger, both in
breadth and depth. For the earth being hollowed and vaulted by this means, the
sieling (as I may call it) of this Vault, (being as we conceived sandy and
loose) moulders and drops down by degrees into the stream under it, which as it
falls, still clears it away; and thus at lenght it is not improbable, that it
becomes a very spacious and deep hollowness. Now while this hollowness
continues thus increasing, sometimes little, sometimes much, according as the
temper of the year augments, or diminishes the bulk and force of the waters)
there comes at length a great glnt of Rain, which exceedingly increasing the
waters, and by consequence the violence of these subterrahian streams, they
wash away now much more of the sides of the Vault (this little River
overflowing its ordinary banks) then at other times, and withal the weight of
the incumbent earth; (that I mean which lies right over this cavity) is much
augmented by the extreme wet. So that the weight being much more, and the
strenght to support the mass of Earth much less, I cannot conceive what can
follow hereupon, but a sinking of the incumbent Earth to the very bottom, how
deep soever it be; Sometimes by degrees, and sometimes all at once, acaccording
to the nature of the Earth, which in some places I confess, though sandy, yet
may not be mere sand; And it may be the air within the vault gives not place so
quickly, as the earth has a desire to descend, but must be squeezed out by
little and little. Further I conceive, that after great wets, the strong
tendency of the waters downward altogether, presses in the air in the vault on
all fides, and so begets a conflict between the water and the air, the air
struggling outragiously to free it self, which conflict begets a confusion, and
this confusion must needs loosen the incumbent earth, and so much contribute
also to its falling in, if it be loose and sandy. And I am of opinion, that
whenever the truth comes to be found out, it will appear, that this
tumultuary tendency of waters downward (after great wets) pressing in the air
(as I said) in hollow places of the Earth; begets a conflict, and that a
concussion which is that we call an Earthquake. For so much is truer then truth
it self, that Earthquakes always succeed great wets, or a sudden glut, and
tempest of rain in the time of a great drought, See 1 King. Which commonly
falls all in one place, or Country, and none in another, and is for the most
part much more large and pouring, then in dripping years for a plain reason;
Witness that horrid thunder-shower, that poured down so much rain in so short a
time and within so little compass of ground, and made so great a flood in the
Parish of great Badminton in Glocestershire, June 1652. in the middle of the
greatest drought, that our age has known. Besides it is further to be
considered, that sandy places does more easily let in the rain into the bowels
of the Earth, so that it distills not down by drops, but presently, and almost
altogether; nor can it mix with the sand to make dirt, and evaporate upward
from whence it came (as rain does in most forts of earth) but descends more
entire, little or none of that wet that falls, returning, unless the Sun shine
very forciblyout, immediately after the rain, and then it cannot draw much
neither. And I partly believe, that those little sinkings of Earth in sandy
ways in wet years (called Quicksands) such as I have seen one toward the upper
end of Bocton streer, in the road between Sittingbourr. and Canterbury. and
others in many other places) are but the effects of some of the smaller sorts
of these causes; and the reason why they are rather in road-ways, then other
places, is only because of the great weight of carriages, that sends the
pendulous earth going. Thus far I have ventured at the cause of earth sinking,
and would attempt as much at earth removings, were I but sure, that
Machley-hill in Herefordshire, Westram in Kent, and Armitage in Dorsetshire
were all of a fat and clammy soil, and not very stiff; (for then I think I
have much to say to the cause of those too) but till I am sure, I shall be
silent, though some of Herefordshire have told me, that Marcley-hil is such as
I would have it to be.

In Tenderden-steeple some where about the Belfrey (I have been told) there is
a stone, which as the Rain falls upon it immediately out of the air, or drops
down from the stones on the side of the steeple about it, grows in a matter of
five or six years very manifestly, and having been pared away with an
Instrument, grows up again as high as before.

Upon the shores of the Isle of Shepey are found weighty stones, out of which
Brimstone and Coperas are tried by Minster in the same Island, by boiling them
in a furnace made for the purpose.

Nigh Feversham, and likewise in other parts of Kent are pits of great depth
(says Cambden) narrow at the mouth, and very wide below, which have
distinctions of rooms and Chambers, as it were with several pillars of Chalk
to support them; out of which he thinks, the old Britans dug Chalk to manure
their Land withal, as Pliny also says: And which is observable, and much to
the purpose, they are not found but in Chalky and Marly soil. The pits Cambden
means, I suppose, are the great pit near the Town, called Hagdale-Pit; The
great Chalk pit joining to the Road-way, between Feuersham and Bocton; There is
another too on the right hand of the way going up from the Town toward
Shelwich, near Copton Farme-house; Another between Davington Church, and Stone
Church; to which we may add one or two great pits in the parish of Norton, in
a Field not far from the Beacon-hill, which are very deep, and yet very narrow
to the top.

Wheresoever the streets went in Richborow (an ancient Town near Sandwich, long
since destroyed and gone) the corn that is now there sowed, in those places is
but thin. And it is reported that the cement of the old walls is as hard as the
stone.

Great store of Sampire grows on the clifts between Deal and Dover.

The Weald for wood, East Kent for Corn, Rumney for meadow, Tenbaem for an
Orchard Sheppey and Reculuer for Wheat, Tha^et for Barley and Hedcorn for the
brood of fat, big, and commended Capons.

At Dengeness for a mile and more grow abundance of Holly trees naturally among
nothing but Beach and Pebbles. And westward from Dengeness among the Beach grow
peason naturally like Clusters of Grapes together, in taste very like our field
peason. The like to which as also a kind of Hops do grow naturally among a
great deal of Beach and Pebbles in the Marshes between the Isle of Thanet and
Sandwich, about a mile (or better) from the Town, as I was told by an
inhabitant of Sandwich.

Cambden supposes, that England has formerly been united to the continent
about Calais; because in the middle between Calais and Dover the Sea is but 25
fathom deep (even as between Sicily and Italy it is but 80 paces, which Island
likewise has anciently been thought to have been united to Italy) but on both
sides of it the Sea is much deeper. Moreover in the very middle between Calais
and Dover is one bank called Frowen-shoale, which at a low water is scarce
three fathom deep, but within half a league of it to the Southward it is 27
fathom deep, and to the Northward 25. Likewise the clifts are alike high about
Calais and Dover, and of the same matter and color. My opinion is, that the
Shallowness in that place may peradventure be caused rather from the narrowness
of the Sea there, and its being so near the place where the two floods meet,
that come in at both ends of the Island (of which I spoke before) and so by
degrees work up the sand, gravel, stones, etc here in heaps, which they wash
from the ground, as they come along; and not from having been the Isthmus of
England formerly. For I have been told by credible men, that between the Isle
of Shepey and the continent of Kent, at the place where the two floods meet,
that come in at both ends of the Island, there is the like shelfe or shallow
place, that lies cross from the continent to the Island, which no doubt is
caused by the same means. But as to the likeness of the cliffs on both sides; I
am able to say nothing of it.

It is reported that at Sellenge and Egerton, about 40 years ago were
medicinal waters.

Cranebrook has the name for good Beer.

It is reported, that there are no moles in the Isle of Shepey, and that if
they be carried over thither (as it has been tried) they will not live.

The Isle of Thanet is all Chalky, and has the name for the best Barley. Query
Whether Chalky land be not the most natural soil for Barley.

Tenham, and the parishes in that level, are very unhealthfull. The reason is,
because they stand low, and among the marshes. And another reason may be,
because theearth there is very rotten, and quagmiry, and therefore is apt to
mix with the Spring-waters that issue from it, and corrupt them.

The River Stoure, that runs through Canterbury, breeds the best Trouts in the
South-East parts of England.

At Boxley Abbey, about two miles from Maidstone, is a Spring, the water
whereof (as it is reported) in nine days will turn sticks, and such like wood
into stone.

In the Parish of Lewesham, about six miles from London, is a Medicinal water.
It was found about the year 1651, and has been since much frequented. Taken in
a good plentisull quantity, it purges gently by urine and siege. It rises on
a great Common, upon the descent of the highest hill in that part of Kent, and
is supposed to issue from an Aluminous earth.

I spoke before of the earth sinking at Mottingham. I have since viewed the
place, and find the Country to be all a gravelly loose earth, according to my
Hypothesis. The hole where the earth sunk in, lies in a watercourse, and is
since by degrees filled up with that sulledge that great rains bring into it.

GLOUCESTERSHIRE.
THe hilly part of this County (called Castwald) abounds with fine wool, small
sheep which are long-necked, and square of bulk, and bone) and has a very
pleasant air: The low parts of it are exceeding fruitful and rich in Corns, so
that (as Cambden says) it returns an hundred for one. The parts about Bristol
afford great store of Coals that cake as New Castle Coal does, but yet differ
from it, as I have already said. The Northern parts of it are as abundant in
fruit; And the Apple trees and Pear trees that grow in every hedge, are not
graffed, but grow naturally, by reason the ground is so inclined to bear fruit;
Yet the fruit for beauty and taste far exceeds all others, and will keep till a
new supply come; Yea some of them will not wither or rivell in a whole year.
The part of Gloucestershire beyond the River of Seavern (called the Forest of
Dean) is stored with Iron Mines.

Speed tells us further, that this Shire is very full of Vineyards, which
thrive very happily, and bear very pleasant Grapes; so that the Wines made of
them are little inferior to the French Wines.

The River of Seavern is very swift, and there is a daily rage and sury of its
waters, raising up the Sands and Mire from the bottom, winding and driving
them upon heaps, and sometimes overflowing her banks. And the force of this rage
is such, that it will overturn a Vessel, if it take it on the side.

Tewkesbury has a name for excellent mustard.

About the Quire in the Cathedral Church of Gloucester in an Arch of it, there
is a wall built in form of a Semicircle full of corners; and if a man speak
with a very low voice, at the one side, or end of it, and another lay his ear
to the other, being a good way distant, he may very easily hear every syllable,
theotherspeaks. This whispering place I have seen, and surveighed very
carefully. It is in the form, that I have described here.



A C D E F B is the passage of the voice, or whispering place. At A and B are
the two persons to stand that whisper to each other. At D the middle of the
passage is door and entrance into a Chapel, with Window Cases on each side of
the door, if I remember right. The Chapel is in the place I describe it. And
to my best remembrance there are one or two places open upward in the roof of
the passage. My opinion is, that the Chapel standing so in the middle, much
conduces to the conveighing of the sound so entirely, which is helped by the
open places in the roof I speak of. For they seem to draw in the voice, wchelse
would not so welenter into that narrow passage, but reverberate back into that
broad open place, before the whispering entry. And one thing which makes me
think the Chapel does a great part of the Work, is, for that we see in Viols.
Lutes, and other Musical instruments, there are holes cut into the belly of the
instrument, just under the playing or striking place, which we find by
experience do much augment the noise of the notes, and make them more audible.
But in this, and most other things, I say, I give but my poor judgment,
submitting it to the censure of the learned.

At Stroud (commonly called Stroud-water) they dye Scarlet; the Water there (as
they say) having a peculiar property to give the right tincture, which other
waters generally want. So much variety there is in Water, according to the
several Earths that they pass through.

No Snakes or Adders to be found about Badminton; I suppose the cause to be the
barrenness and coldness of the Land the reabout; for Snakes are bred out of
rich, fat, and hot mould, or mud (whence we find them commonly about ditches,
and low, rich, shady grounds, lurking under long grass) of which this Country
affords no great plenty. Besides being an open Country, it wants that shade
and shelter that they delight in.

In the fields about Badminton are found many times Cylindrical stones, long
and round, like a man's finger. The inner part of them is like flint, somewhat
pellucid, and of a sad brown color, and it is enclosed round on the outside
with a whitish Putamin, like Flint too.

About Badminton also are several holes (called Swallow-holes) where the Waters
(after any great shower of rain, or in Winter, when their Springs run) fall
into the bowels of the earth, and are seen no more, nor is it known whether
ever they rise again. The most remarkable of them are one or two, in the way
between Badminton and Acton Farfeild. All that I can say to them yet, is, that
in a Clayie and slatty Country, if there be any inlets and passages into the
Earth by reason of its discontinuity here and there, they are likely enough to
be kept open, because such kind of earth is not apt to moulder with wet, and
fall in, and so dam them up.

At Alderley (says Speed) a Country Parish 8. miles from the Severn, upon the
hills, to this day are found Cockles, Periwinkles, and Oysters of solid stone.
This place being but four or five miles from Badminton, the seat of that noble
Family, that I have the honor to be a servant to, I have very diligently
examined, and found it thus: The place where the stones are found, is partly a
Sand, and partly a Clay; Cockles I found, but neither Periwinkles nor Oysters:
But though I found not them, yet instead of Periwinkles I found many Serpentine
stones (or Snake stones, as they call them thereabout) flat, resembling the
banner of Dan, as it is given in the Genealogies at the beginning of some of our
English Bibles And instead of Oysters, I found Scallops, perfect fragments of
them I mean (pardon the seeming contradiction) which I conceive had been broken
with Ploughing: They were exactly ridged in rows at certain short distances,
just like a Scallop-shell. Moreover, an honest inhabitant of the parish
bestowed upon me a whole Scallop, that is somewhat bigger then the ordinary
size of Scallops, with a perfect shell upon it, ridged (as is before said) very
naturally, and having an irregular piece of stone growing to it. No man that
looks upon it, would at first sight imagine it to be other then a true
Scallopshell, so curiously it represents it in its color, and only exceeds it
a little (as I said) in its dimension. Besides these, I found other figured
stones, some resembling very much the Musclefish; but they were somewhat bigger
too, then what they were like; and others like the kernel of an Almond, long,
and somewhat roundish, with two edges opposite to each other, and they were
streaked and cranked like a Cockle-shell. Other little stones I found, somewhat
bigger then a Hasel-Nut, and some much less, that were cranked in like a
Cockle-shell, but deeper, and not so thick together as a Cockle-shel: Some of
them did resemble also the Cockle very near, others not so much; yet all did so
sufficiently differ from the form of it, at the supposed opening place of the
Cockle, that a man may easily judge that they never were Cockles; for there the
two shells were bent up in the fashion almost of a blobber-lip. And that which
is not unworthy our consideration, is, that they are few of them like one
another; some being flatter, others more round; some have the lip more turned
up, others less. They have upon them a whitish shining shel, and within they
are (for some I have broken) a mass of little particles, of a pellucid matter
(somewhat like Alablaster) grown hard together. The Country hereabout for some
miles round upon the hills, affords many of these last sort of stones; for I
have found them in gravel that was dug in Badminton, and sometimes I have
found of them growing to great irregular stones about the Country. I have been
told that about Sapworth by Sharston, there are abundance of them to be found.
I found one of them in Witney Town, seven Miles from Oxford, upon a paved
Causey: How it came there, I know not, nor had I time to enquire whether the
Country thereabout afford any store, or any more of them. The Snake-stones I
spoke of, have a perfect spina running all along the back of them (as those
also at Keynsham have; but those at Keynsham are much bigger then these at
Alderley, and lie in another manner) with little ridges (like ribs) on both
sides of them, all along from the head without, to the tail within, in the form
almost of a Roman S. and in this they agree with those of Keinsham too.
Further, the outer part of this snaky wreath is divisible, and may be knocked
off from the inner part of the wreath to which it is joined, without taking
from it, or losing to it; so that it is not one entire Stone throughout, but is
within, as it seems without, separable with a little violence; and in this too
they agree with the Snake-stones of Keinsham. Lastly, on the outside they have
a kind of skale, thin and shining, as if it were a little polished; in some
whitish like Alablaster; in others brownish, of the color of a dried Eel-skin;
and in others again of a dirty yellow color, inclining something to red. My
opinion of all these stones, for many reasons, is that they are not Shel-fish
petrified (as some would have them to be, who think that upon the ebb of the
deluge these fish were left upon the tops of hills, and turned to stone by
degrees, wanting their former moisture to keep them soft within, like other
Shelfish.) For first, they are all solid within, without any cavity, even the
Muscles, Cockles, and Scallops. Again, some of the Muscles, Cockles, and
Scallops, are a great deal bigger then true ones. Thirdly, the Snakestones are
without heads generally, if not all; for as for those appearances of heads
which some fancy at the outer end of some of them, I take them rather for
irregular pieces of stone, and as it were attempts of Nature to continue the
wreath further on; but as all works of Nature are finite, she being here at her
Ne-plus-ultra, is not able to produce what she would, but does what she can
toward it, which is but an imperfect Lump, even as a weak Womb produces a
Moon-Calf. Fourthly, some of these Mockfishes have but half their shapes, the
other part being an irregular and deformed Mass, Nature as it were failing in
her Workmanship, for want of fit matter in that place. Nay one of the
Snake-stones I gathered, has a Segment (as I may call it) of another less
Snake so joined to the side of it, that there can be no room for the other side
of the Segment, but in the very body and bulk of the greater. And one of the
Cockles I gathered (being indeed but half a Cockle, nothing but one
Cockle-shel, with a lump of irregular stony matter in the cavity of it) has
within the hollow of the shel almost joining to it, another little Cockle-shel
peeping (as it were) out of that irregular stony matter I speak of. Fifthly,
these stones are not so absolutely like those creatures they would seem to
represent petrified as they should be; for there is an apparent difference
between the Muscle stone, and the true Muscle of the sea, both in the shape of
the stones, and in the cranking of it; for it is cranked like a Cockleshel
almost, which the Muscleshel of the sea is not, unless perhaps there be some
such Muscle of the sea which I never saw. Again, the stone which I said was
like the kernel of an Almond, I know not what fish or creature to liken it to,
unless it be a Snag without shel (such as are in Peason, and in Gardens at time
of year) when his horns are drawn in, and his body is shrunk up; and yet it
does not so perfectly resemble that neither, because this is cranked on the
side, and that is not. And yet further, those other little stones which I said
were less then Cockles, with a lip turned up, are neither exactly like Cockles,
nor any other Shelfish that I have seen, but seem, rather to be as natural
stones, as Flints or Pebbles. But that which will put the matter quite out of
doubt, is, that the Scallop which I said was given me, and which I have now by
me, and intend to preserve for the satisfaction of the curious, is most
manifestly different from the true Shel-fish of the Name; for whereas the true
Scallop has one shel concave, and the other flat, both the pretended shells of
this Scallop-stone are concave. So that unless there be a kind of Scallop which
I never saw yet, this one stone is able to convince any man that these stones
are not petrificatious. Natural there is no doubt they are, and such as now
they are from the Creation; but how they came to put on such strange and
imitating figures, is a secret we dare not meddle with, til we have satisfied
Sir Francis Bacons mind, by writing a complete History of Nature and Art. I
only forget to tell you, that all these stones are found near the surface of
the Earth; and if you dig any depth, you find no more of them; and that they
are also to be found upon the Hill hetween Hilsley and Upton (about a mile from
Alderley Southward) in the horse-way.

In the Parish of Great Badminton, in a Field there, called, Twelve Acres, the
Husbandmen do often times plough up, and find iron Bullets as big as Pistol
bullets, and some almost as big as Musket bullets.

At Tormanton, (commonly called Tormarton) by Sodbury is a Quarry of
Freestone, and several others there are about the Country. All kinds of stone
are not to be found in one kind of earth, but several soils afford several
kinds of stone. Chalky Countries afford Flint; Sandy (if they find any) a great
rough stone, generally (I think always) of the color of the Sand where it is;
Loamy, a kind of lightish red bastard Flint, such as is to be found in many
places in the road way between Rochester and the top of Boxley-hill; Gravelly
Pebbles, and clayie Countries, in some places afford hard, rough, whitish
stone, and in other places Freestone, according to the difference of the Clay.
It seems every soil is most apt to afford that stone that is most of kin, and
nearest of nature to it. And therefore it may be, it is the less wonder that
Chalky ground should afford Flint, because Flint (like all pellucid substances)
being pulverized, becomes almost perfectly white like Chalk. I have no more to
add of the Freestone of Tormarton, but that if it be nearly viewed with a
diligent eye, it seems to be nothing but an infinite number of little Grains of
Gravel cemented together into a Mass, which I think will be found true of all
Freestone

At Lassington a village about a mile and a half from Gloucester West or
Northwest, on the fide of a hill, a little below the brow of it, in the high
way are to be found little Star-stones, the Greeks call them Astroites. They
are thin (about the thickness of a halfe-Crown,) flat and five pointed like a
Star or Mullet in Heraldry, only the points of them are not sharp, but a
little roundish, and most of them are not so big as a single half penny,
though some are very near as big. Further they are of a grayish color, and on
both sides curiously graved (as it were by art with a fine graving instrument,
and a neat hand) as if there were a little Mullet within the great. You shall
find many of them joined together (flat fide to flat side) in little Columns,
or Prismes an inch long or more, half a score or more of them together, and so
fast, that you cannot sever them without breaking; though they are
distinguished with a perfect line. I believe they were all knit together in
such Columns at first, (even those which are found single) and that they were
severed by frost, or some such piercing cause. Being told of these Rarities so
nigh me, I took a journey to see the place, and gathered many of the stones,
and found them such as I have told you. Being put into Vinegar they have a
motion, as other Astroites have, though not so lively; I suppose because of the
shortness, and roundishness of their points, in the form of which I conceive
lies a great part of the cause of their motion. Some of these stones (like the
stones at Alderly) are deficient in their figure, and have the defect supplied

(or rather Super-supplied) with a rugged formless matter, hard like it self. I
observed that the ground is a miry deep rotten Clay, and extreme bad way in
Winter, and (which I wondered most of all at) there were here and there great
Pebbles as big as a man's fist, or thereabout, mingled with this rotten earth,
and by enquiry I found that this mixture of Pebbles was not from any mending of
the high way, but the mere original nature of the Earth, for I found these
Pebbles in the fields as well as in the high ways. So that since this thwarts,
what we said but now of Pebbles being the natural companions of gravelly land,
we are willing to grant, that (as in Grammar, so) in natural philosophy there
is no general rule without an exception. Query, Whether in other places, where
the Star-stones are found, as about Shugbury in Warwickshire, and Belvoir
Castle in Leicestershire, the earth be so rotten, deep and miry, and withal
whether there be any such great Pebbles mixed with it, as here, and in
particular enquire.

At Purton passage over the River of Seavern, where the shore as it is
reported, yields these Star-stones also, but they are bigger, and the
Columns of them longer then at Lassington. And indeed accordingly it is
delivered to me, as a miry ousy shore in some places, and a quicksand in
others, very dangerous for horse and man at low water, and one of the worst
passages, over the River at those times.

At Puckle Church (about 6 miles from Bristol) they dig a kind of Stone that is
hard, bluish, broad and about half a foot thick, and so even, and the sides
so parallel to each other, as if nature had intended it for Tombestones. The
stones are many of them of a very great breadth, and lie some six or seven of
them one under another in bed, and of about the same thickness all of them; and
then they come to a light bluish Clay, belowwhich is no more of this stone to
be found. The uppermost bed of the stone lies very near to the surface of the
earth, so that in one place near the Town in the high way, a man rides for ten
peirches or more, as if he rode upon a pavement of broad stone; or rather upon
one entire stone.

OXFORDSHIRE.
THis County (says Speed) has a wholesome temperate air, and rich soil.

There are in one place of this shire Stones set up in a round Circle (like the
Stonehenge) called Rollrich stones.

The City of Oxford is a very healthful place, which Cambden thinks is,
because it is defended from the South wind, and the West, but lies open to the
North-East and East wind.

On the descent of Heddenton hill near Oxford rises a spring, which runs down
toward Kingsmill, a mill so called, lying over against Magdalen College. It
is reported, that this spring has a petrifying quality, and will in some short
time, if a stick be laid in it, either turn it into stone, or wrap it in a
stony crust.

BUCKINGHAMSHIRE.
IN this Shire grows Beech in greater plenty, then in any, at least most
Counties of England; and it grows most in the Chalky parts of it.

The Sheep in the Vales of this Shire (says Speed) have most excellent fine
and soft fleeces.

About Marlow, when their land is worn out, they make it rich again with
Chalking of it, so that it bears corn abundantly.

Bedfordshire and Hartfordshire.
BEdfordshire (says Speed) has temperate air, and in the North good soil,
but the South not so good, yet it is excellent good for Barley. So that this
County (as also her next neighbor Hartfordshire) has the name for the best
Barley in the Eastern parts of England.

In the year 1399, just before the wars brake out between the two illustrious
Roses of York and Lancaster, on New years day, the deep River that passes
between Suelstone and Harwood (two villages not far from Bedford Town) called
Ouse, suddenly ceased its course, and stood still; so that forward men passed
three miles together on foot in the very depth of the Channel, and backward
the waters swelled up to a great height, which some judicious men observing,
conceived was an ill omen of that division, which followed shortly after
between K. Richard the second, and his people. I dare not be surety for the
truth of every circumstance of this story, yet I believe the main of it may be
true. But I cannot conceive how so strange a thing should come about, unless it
were by a sudden frost (the time of the year being seasonable for it) which
might congeal those waters that fed the stream, at their first issuing out of
the earth at the head of the River, the rest of the water in the mean time
passing away down, because being in motion they were not so capable of
congelation. Notwithstanding the story mentions not a word of frost, which
peradventure might be the cause of it for all that; the custom of those that
tell such strange stories, being prudently to conceal those particulars that
are likely to bewray the natural cause, and spoil the miracle; It being as
natural to the generality of visible creatures, to love being the Authors of
wonderful relations as to laugh.

There was in time past an odd story of K. Offa's leaden Tomb, (which was once
in Bedford Town) that it appears often to them that esek it not, but cannot be
seen of them that seek it. But whether the report continue still, I know not.

At Aspley-Gowiz near Woburn is an earth, that they say turns wood into
stone, and that a wooden ladder was to be seen in the Monastery hard by, which
having lien a good while covered all over with it, was dug out again all
stone.

Dunstable stands upon a Chalky ground, having four streets, and in each of
them it has a pond, which is fed with rain, and has no Spring (for they have
never a well in the Town under twenty four Cubits deep) and yet these ponds are
never dry.

In our remembrance (says Cambden) near Fishpoole-street in Saint Albans
certain Anchors were dug up: This is a very strange thing indeed, and very
well worth the Ventilating It puts me in mind, of what the Poet Ovid sings in
the person of Pythagoras of Samos,

-- Vetus inventa est in montibus Anchora summis.
On tops of hills old Anchors have been found.
There is near St. Albans a Brook called Wenmere, or Womere, which never
breaks out, but it foretells dearth and scarcity of Corn, or else some
extraordinary dangerous times shortly to ensue, as the Common people believe.
See what we have said of the river Kennet in Wiltshire, touching the breaking
forth of unusual Springs. If now that it is a brook and runs but seldom, it
be of so ill portent, let them that have a mind to smile, say, of how fatal a
signification it was, when it was a river, and a Navigable one too, as the
Anchors before mentioned seem willing to persuade us.

At Ashwell in Hartfordshire rise so many sources of Springs together, that
they presently drive a Mill, and become a pretty big River. See before, what we
said of the Spring at Chedder in Sommersetshire.

MIDDLESEX.
THe air of this Shire is healthful (as being all a gravel) and the soil
rich, as being generally flat and level, and having a ready help at hand, the
fat compost of a populous City.

At Barnet are medicinal waters, very famous.

Heston a small village near Harrow on the Hill, is very famous for yielding
the purest flowr for Manchet.

The water of Crowders Well (says the Author of Tactometria) on the back side
of St. Giles by Cripplegate, and that of the Postern Spring on Tower Hill, have
a very pleasant taste like that of new milk, and are very good for sore eyes.
But Crowders well is far better of the two. An ancient man (says the same
Author) in London whenever he was sick, would drink plentifully of this
Crowders well water, and was presently made well again; and whenever he was
overcome of drink he would drink of this water, which would presently make him
sober again.

The Stews by the Bank-side (says Cambden) in Southwarke were made to feed
Pikes and Tenches sat, and to scour them from their muddy Fennish taste. I have
seen (says he) Pikes panches opened with a knife to show their fatness, and
presently the wounds have come together again by the touch of tenches, and by
the help of their glewy slime been perfectly healed up.

The shore of this Shire is washed by the goodly River of Thames, which glidts
along with a much more clear and gentle stream then the river of Severn. The
cause of the clearness of the Water, is its running in a gravelly Valley, and
over a clear ground, Gravel being unapt to mix with Water, when it is stirred,
and too heavy to swim very far along with it. The River of Severn (as also the
River of Avon that runs from the Bath, and by Bristol) is on the contrary a
very muddy troubled Water, because it washes a miry and ouzy shore almost all
along. For the gentleness of the Current in the Thames, we are to know there
are two principal causes of it, the great winding of the River, which locks in
the Water that it cannot make that haste down to sea, that it would; and the
low lying of the head Springs of it, from whence there is but an easy descent
to the sea. And I think it is not amiss to note here, that this easy descent
of the Waters to the sea-ward, is another reason why the tide flows up so high
into the heart of this River. For who sees not, that the more steep the River,
the less way is the Tide able to force its way up into it? Swift Rivers have
always their Heads lying high, or their course direct, or both. Indeed in case
swift Rivers do, or did at first run winding to, and again; yet if their
Springs lie high, they will in process of time by their violence pare away the
Promontories of their banks, (unless they be rocky and stubborn) and make their
way straighter.

There are in the Thames three other things worth observation, to wit, its
Spring-Tides, its overflowing its banks, and its strange shifting of Tides at
some times; touching all which (because it falls not unhandsomely into this
place) I shall deliver my conceptions, in regard I have (I think) something to
say to them, which I never yet read, And first, for the Spring-Tides in the
Thames and other Rivers (which are higher Tides then ordinary, that happen
about every full and change of the Moon) the great French Philosopher
Descartes, endeavors in his Principia Philosophiae, to give us the reason of
them, by framing a most ingenious Hypothesis (too long here to set down) and
telling us from the Theorique of the Moon, that the Moon moves so in her
Ellipsis, or Oval-fashioned Orb about the Earth, that at her full and change she
comes nearer the earth, and in each Quarter goes farther from it; whence
(according to his Hypothesis) greater Tides must be at full and change, and neap
or low Tides at the Quarters. All which is for the most part true indeed; and
without doubt the Moon her nearness at the Full and Change, is the cause of the
Spring-Tides then, even as the Moon's being further off at the Quarters, makes
the neap-tides then; but there is another thing considerable in the business,
which Descartes never considered, and which I fear he never knew; that is,
that the spring-tides come not just upon the day of the Full and Change, but
follow two or three days after (and so do the Neaps too after the Quarters)
which is against him, and seems to shake his Hypothesis, I mentioned, that
makes the Spring-tides and Neaps to fall just on thedays of the Change, Full and
Quarters. To untye this knot, then I conceive the cause why the Spring-tides
are at the highest two or three days after the Full and Change, and not on the
very day, etc. is the same with that why the sharpest pinching time of Winter
comes not just at the shortest day, when the Sun is at the lowest, but in
January, about a Month or five Weeks after: Why also the coldest time of the
night is not at midnight, but about break of day: Why the hottest time of
Summer is in July, a Month or five Weeks after the solstice; and why the
hottest time of the day is not just at noon, but about two or three a Clock in
the afternoon. To illustrate the reason of which, let us suppose a large
Cistern which has a Cock toward, or at the bottom of it, that constantly lets
out six. Gal. of water (if there be so much in the Cistern) in a certain space
of time; and over the Cistern suppose another Cock that conveys Water from some
other place into this Cistern, and which runs at first but very slowly, but
after by degrees faster and faster, til at length it let in eight Gallons of
water in the same space of time that the cock below (as we said) lets out six
Gallons: And further, let us suppose that the cock above, after it has
continued running for some small time after the rate of eight Gallons does
decrease, by the same degrees (that befote it increased by) to seven Gallons,
and so to six, five, four, and so less and less, til at length it quite give
over running. There is no man, I think, but will say, that this Cistern will be
fuller of Water when it has decreased from eight Gallons, in a space to seven
Gallons, and yet fuller when it is decreased to six Gallons and a half, then
when it was at seven; and fullest of all just before it is decreased to six
Gallons in a space, because til that time there comes more Water into the
Cistern at the one Cock, then there goes out at the other. Even so. though the
heat of the Sun simply considered in its self, be not so great about the middle
of July, as at the solstice in June, because he is descended lower; yet because
the heat that the Sun pours in the air every day, is greater then the cold
which his absence causes by night, nothing can follow thereupon, but an
increase of the heat. And the like may be said of afternoon heats; January
after-Winters, morning colds, and spring-tides coming behind the Fulls and
Changes.

In the next place, the Thames overflowing its banks proceeds from several
causes, as from great rains, whereby the fresh Waters increase up the River,
and going down to sea-ward, are encountered by the Flood, whence they must needs
swel above their usual height; of which there was a notable example in the year
1555. when by reason of excessive rains that had fallen, all St. Georges Fields
in Southwark, and Westminster Hall were overflown. Again, inundations of the
Thames may be caused by boistrous North-west Winds, which cause generally very
great Tides, not only in the River of Thames, and at the mouth of it, but on
the coast of Holland, Flanders, Picardy, and the shores of England opposite to
them. And this is, because that wind does with equal force blow in the Tide of
flood at both the ends of this Island, Westward and Northward, as is partly
touched before. But thirdly, there may be peradventure another cause of great
Tides and inundations in the Thames, which is not yet commonly taken notice of;
and that is, the Moons being in the Perigaeon of her Eccentrick, or in that
part of her Orb which is nearest to the earth. For if (as we said before) the
Moons coming nearer the earth at her Full and Change, make the Spring-Tides, and
her withdrawing her self farther from the Earth at her Quarters, make the
neap-tides, methinks it should follow (but I would have it observed further)
that if to the proximiority which the Moon has to the earth by moving in her
Ellepsis, there be added that proxiomiority which she has in her Eccentrick
(the Astronomers call it sometimes her Opposite Auge) she should operate so
much the more extraordinarily upon the Sea, and make the higher Spring-Tides at
such Full or Change; and on the contrary, that when she is estranged from us by
a double elongation, to wit, of the Quarter in her Ellepsis, and of her Auge in
her Eccentrick, she should operate so much the more weakly then ordinary, and
at that quarter make a slack Neap. I have observed it somewhat my self, and
found it hit, so far as I was able to judge; but I dare not trust my own single
observation, especially because I observed it not long, and never could so
constantly as I should. There rests only one doubt in this matter, which I
profess I know not what to say to it; and that is, that the Moon comes down
lower to the earth in herEccentrick, then in her Ellepsis (pardon the oddness
of the expression, for I confess her Ellipsis is her Eccentrick) and yet her
less approximations at the Full and Change, make the great Tides, whereas her
great Eccentrick approximations make less alterations in them without doubt,
and (it may be) no alterations at all.

Lastly, in the Thames there happens at some times strange shifting of the
Tides, which is vulgarly reckoned a great Prodigy, because it happens but
seldom; and yet I believe it has a natural cause, as well as other common
effects, and would be as common as they, if its cause were as common. Now for
the finding out the cause we speak of, we shall give you a Catalogue and
History of several of these shiftings that have happened, according to the
relation of our Chronicles.

October. 12. 1411. the Thames flowed thrice in one day.

Anno 1550. December. 17. being Thursday, the Thames flowed and ebbed three times
in nine hours below the Bridge. It should have been either Wednesday the 17th.
or Thursday the 18th. The Historian was only out in the day.

Anno 1564. January the 26. being Friday at night were two Tides in two hours,
at London Bridge. The next day were likewise two in the morning, and two at
night. On Sunday January the 28. were two Tides in the morning, and at night
but one (as it used to be) and so continued.

Anno 1574. November the 6. in the morning, there happened two great Tides at
London in the Thames; the first by course, the other within an hour after,
which overflowed the Marshes, with many Vaults and Sellers near adjoining.

Anno 1608, and 609. February the 19. being Sunday, it should have been dead
low Water at London Bridge, but then it was high Water, and presently it ebbed
almost half an hour to a foot depth, and then suddenly it flowed again almost
two foot higher then it did before, and then ebbed again til it came near the
right course; so that the next flood began in a manner as it should, and so
continued. All his (says the Chronicler) happened before 12. of the clock at
noon, the Weather being in different calm.

Anno 1609, and 10. February the 6. was strange shifting of the Tides in the
Thames again.

Anno 1622. and 23. January the 3d. being Friday in the morning, the Thames
shifted four Tides within five hours, viz. Two Floods, and two Ebbs, and then
kept its right course. Thus farout of our Chronicles; to which I shall add two
other instances that happened of late years. Viz.

Anno 1653. and 4. on Candlemas day the Thames ebbed and flowed thrice in six
hours; and the like shifting of the Tides was observed in the Maritine places
of Kent at the same time, as I was assured by many Seamen.

Lastly, Anno 1656. October. 3. the River of Thames ebbed and flowed twice in
three hours. For this we are beholding to C. Wharton's Gesta Britannorum, in
his Almanac.

Which instances if we particularly examine, we shall find, that in all of them
the tides were very slack, and in a manner at the very neapest; and (which is
not inconsiderable) that in all of them (except two, viz. 1574 and 1656. the
Moon was in Apogaeo about three or four days before the shifting, to make them
(if possible) the more neap and slack. And in my Diary of observations for
1654. (in whichyear I was an exact observer of the Wind and Weather) I find
against the second of February, and the days before and after it, 1653. and 54.
that the Wind blew hard at Northwest. In all the other examples abovenamed, I
cannot inform my self how the Wind was, no not in 1622. and 23. though Kepler
has set down the Weather for that year, because he has said nothing at all of
the wind. And in 1656. though I was an observer that year too; yet being in
October afflicted with a fierce Quartan, which had siezed me the August before,
my observations for that Month are very imperfect, both as to Wind and Weather
too, so that I am at a loss how the Wind was then. Nevertheless, by that
little light we have from the example mentioned in 1653. and 54. I cannot but
think that the cause of the shifting of the Tides is only the overbearing of
their course when they are at their slackest, by a North-west Wind, which is
the most powerful Adversary they can have upon our coasts, as is said before.
For if a slow ebb be encountered full in the teeth with a hard storm, what can
follow but a return of the Tide back again? And if the North-west Wind either
abate its fierceness, or shift into some other quarters, as the South-west, or
Northeast for some short time, and then either return to its former place, or
resume its former force, and do thus once, twice, and again, (which we know is
not inconsistent with the nature and custom of the wind off at sea; though at
Land its wanderings are not altogether so sensible) we shall easily believe
(seeing so plain a reason for it) that there will be a playing of the Tide to
and fro, and several floods and ebbs succeeding one another in a few hours
space. And it may be this shifting of the Tides is the more notable in the
Thames, because of its gentle ebb to Sea-ward, which is the more easily turned;
whereas a swift Current in a River would prevail over these irregularities. But
let further observation be made, how the Wind is disposed at the next shifting
of the tides that happens, which (forsome private reasons) I conceive will be
in the next year, 1661. if not this Winter, 1660.

I forgot to say in its due place, that several great inundations speak in
favor of my opinion touching the Moon in Perigaeo, her greatning the Tides.
For I can assure you, that for that great Flood Anno 1530. November 5, on which
was made this Distich.

Anno ter deno cum sequi mill, Novembris
Quinta stat salsis Zelandia totasub undis:
That in the year 1551. and 1552. January the 13. that horrible one 1570. on
All Saints day the first of November, and that not able one in the year 1606.
and 7. January the 20. the greatest that was ever known in Severn, and so fatal
to Somersatshire, Glocestershire, and Monmouthshire; they were all when the
Moon was in Perigaeo, as he that lists to caloulare or search the Ephemerides
for those years, will find.

I have heard it reported, (but I would have further trial made) that the water
of the Postern-spring on Tower Hill, being let stand for several days to
settle, will have in the bottom of it a yellow sediment, much resembling
Brimstone both in color and substance.

ESSEX.
THeair of thisshire is temperate, only toward the Sea it is aguish: The Soil
is for the most part good, but in somparts so fruitful, that after three years
Gleab of Saffron (which they plant much in the North part of the shire) the
Land for 18. more will yield plenty of Barley, without any dung or compost at
all; and so Saffron again. Which Saffron (says Cambden) in the month of July
every third year, when the heads thereof have been plucked up, is after twenty
days spitted, or set again under mould, and about the end of September it puts
forth a bluish Flower out of the middle whereof hang three red chives of
Saffron, which are gathered before sunrise, and being plucked out of the
Flower, are dried at a soft fire; every acre of ground making 80. or 100.
weight of moist Saffron, which being dried, is some twenty pound.

Near Tilbury (over against Gravesend) there are such pits as those spoken of
before in Kent, of ten fathom deep in a chalky ground, and of the same form.

At the mouth of the Thames lies the little Isle of Canvey, the Mutton whereof
is much commended for its sweetness.

The salt water about Harwich makes all their springs brackish.

At Barklow (says Speed) grows an Herb called Dane-wort, very plentifully,
that bears red Berries, which is held by the common people to spring from
Danes-blood. This Herb is no other then that which Herbarists called
Dwarf-Elder; it grows in sundry other places of England, as namely in the high
way between Babchild and Greenstreet, at a place called Radfield, near
Sittingburn in Kent.

Walfleet in this shire is commended for the excellent Oysters it sends to the
City of London. In the time of Rich. the 2d in the Eastern Promontory of this
County, very huge teeth were found; and not far from thence in the reign of Qu.
Elizabeth, extraordinary huge bones were dug up. They are thought to have
been the bones and teeth of some Elephant buried there by their loving Masters
the Romans.

In the year 1580. at Alhallantide, an Army of Miceso overrun the Marshes in
Denge-Hundred, near Southminster, that they eat up the Grass to the very Roots,
and so poisoned it with their teeth, that a great Murrain fell upon the Cattle
that grazed there. But at length a great number of strange painted Owls came
(no man knows whence) and devoured all the Mice. The like vexation was at the
same time in Kent, says Stow. It is reported, that in 1648. there happened the
like again in Essex. But of this we have discoursed somewhat largely already in
Cornwall.

SUFFOLK.
THis County is most of it Clay and rich Marl, and the air so good, that it is
by some Physicians thought to be the best in England, especially about Bury: It
yields much Butter and Cheese; the Butter excellent good, but the Cheese far
inferior to that of Cheshire: It is thought (not without reason) that the
goodness of the one, spoileth the other.

In the year 1555. (says Speed) which was an unseasonable year, that the Corn
through England was choked and blasted in the ear, such a crop of Peason
without tillage, or sowing, grewin the Rocks between Oxford and Aldbrough,
where never Grass grew, or earth was ever seen, but hard Rocks three yards deep
under their Roots, that in August there were gathered above a hundred quarters,
and there remained as many more in blossoming. Cambden says the same, but that
the Peason grew about the end of September, and brought down the price of Corn,
whereas before there was a great Dearth. Query, whether there grow not Peason
in the same place every year (though it may be in wet years, such as 1555.
proved in Harvest, they grow up more plentifully.) because Herbarists say that
they are a distinct sort of Pease (differing from our common Garden and
Field-Pease) and love to grow on such desert shores near the sea side, as is
said before in Kent about Sandwich and Dengeness, where they grow every year,
and never miss.

Ralph Coggeshall (an old Author) reports, that near Oxford, about the year
1187. a fish in all parts like a man, was taken and kept 6 months in the Castle
there, whence he escaped again to sea. Story says he was taken in a
Fisher-mans Net. A story much like this we have in the life of Periskius,
written by the learned Gassendus, which compared with this, makes me give a
little credit to that which Pliny reports, that a Triton or Man-fish was taken
on the shore of Portugal, and that another was caught in the streights of
Gibraltar. But I give not the like credit to the fable of Nubrigensig touching
two green boys of the kind of Satyrs, that should rise out of the ground at
Wulpit, coming from the Antipodes.

NORFOLK.
THis County has a sharp air, especially in in the Champian, and near the Sea,
and the Spring and Harvest are late. The soil is in many places good, but it is
generally Olayie, or a fat Chalk. And though it be healthy in some places, yet
by compasture of sheep the heaths are made mighty rich for Corn; and when they
are laid again from bearing of Corn, they yield a sweeter and more plentiful
feed for sheep. This County also yields good store of Honey and Saffron; but
the best Saffron is about Walsingham.

The inhabitants of this Country (as Cambden relates) are observed to be
naturally very capable of the niceties and quirks of the Law; and those of them
that bend their studies that way, prove generally the best Lawyers. They are
also (he says) of a passing good complexion.

In the shore of this County every September is a great fishing for Herings, it
being the nature of that Fish in great shoals to dance out once a year about
our Island, and keep its duetime and season upon the same shores (unless its
course be a little retarded by storms and foul weather) coming from the Sea
into our narrow Seas by the North of Scotland, and going out again by the Lands
end of Cornwall, and taking this shore in its way in September. It is reported,
that Herings are no where more plentiful then on the coast of England.

The River Bure in this shire is incredibly full of fish. For the finding out
the cause of this, enquiry should be made what kind of soil the head springs
issue from, and what kind of shore it washes. Generally the slowest Rivers (
caeteris paribus) are fullest of fish. And this I take to be one reason why the
Thames is more pisculent, or full of fish then the Severn.

The River Yare by Norwich is very full of a kind of fish called Ruffes, which
(says Cambden) have a body all over rough with sharp and pricky fins. It
delights in sandy places like the Perch, and is as big; in color brown and
duskish above, but of a palish yellow beneath: it is marked by the chaws with a
double course of half circles; the eye for the upper half of it is of a dark
brown; for the nether part of it somewhat yellowish, the ball of it black; and
there is a line goes along the back, which is fastened to the body as it were
with an overthwart thread; it is all spotted over the tail and fins with black
speckles; when the fish is angry, the finnes stand up stiff; and after its
anger is over, they fall flat again. It is a very wholesome Fish, and eats
tender and short, and tastes like a Perch. One cause of its tenderness I
conceive to be its roughness without, and the sharp prickliness of its finnes.
Even as it is probable that the tenderness of venison is caused by the
separation of so great a quantity of hard matter, as the horns of the beast
consist of, from the Mass of the body. This Ruff is a very rare fish to be
found in other Rivers. Query, whether the banks of Rivers that produce peculiar
fish, do not produce peculiar plants, because the peculiarity of the fish seems
to proceed from a peculiar tincture of the Water, which it cannot have but from
the earth.

St. Bennets in the Holm has such fenny and rotten ground about it, that
(says Cambden) if a man cut up the Roots or Strings of Trees, etc. it floteth
aloft on the Water, and follows one whithersoever he pleases. Hereabouts also
are Cockles and Periwinkles sometimes dug up out of the earth, which makes
some think that formerly it was overflowed with the sea.

The ground about Winterton (like that of Bricatium in Africa, mentioned by
Pliny) is the richest, fattest, rottenest, and easiest to plough of any in
England.

Upon the shore of this shire Jeat and Amber are often found; and sometimes
Hawks are taken.

Cambridgeshire.
THis County by reason of the Fennes has but a sickly air. The soil yields
very good Barley and good store of Saffron.

The herb called Scordium (or Water-Germander) grows very plentifully in the
Fenns. Of this they make that well known Cordial and Diaphoretick called
Diascordium.

In the Country about the Fenns (says Speed) water-Fowle is so plentiful and
cheap, that five men may be well satisfied with that kind of fare for less then
a half penny.

In the Fenns, when they have mowen their lid (as they call it) that is their
grass, which is exceeding rank, as much as will serve their turns, they set
fire on the rest in November, that it may come up again in abundance. An
Advertisement for Grasiers in other Counties.

Huntingtonshire.
THe hilly part of this County is for the plough, and the valley for pasture,
which is reckoned as good as any in England. The inhabitants burn much turfe,
which they have in good plenty from the adjacent moors.

At Ayleweston in this shire are two little Springs, the one fresh, the other
somewhat brackish. The latter they say is good for Scabs and Leprosy: and the
other for dim sights.

Wittlesmere-lake, and other Meers near it in this Shire do sometimes in calm
and fair weather, suddenly rise tempestuously with water-quakes; by reason (as
some think) of vapors breaking violently out of the earth. Which may well be,
for the ground near it, is rotten and hollow.

The Natives that dwell about these Meers are heathfull, and live very long,
but strangers are subject to much sickness.

Northamptonshire.
THis County has a wholesome air, and a very rich soil.

By Collyweston in this shire slate stones are dug.

The River Nen runs by the South side of Peterborough, in the middle of which
(as William of Swaffham says) is a gulf so deep and cold withal, that even
in Summer no swimmer is able to dive to the bottom of it, yet in is never
frozen in Winter; for there is a Spring, in it, whence the water always rises
and bubbleth up, and that keeps it from freezing.

Leicestershire.
THe air of this shire is mild and wholesome. and makes the inhabitants very
healthful, and long lived.

Near Lutterworth is a Spring so cold, that within a short time it turns
straw and sticks into stones.

In the North parts of the shire are store of Pit Coals, which are of the
nature of hardened Bitumen, says Cambden.

The people of Carleton (as both Cambden and Speed say) cannot pronounce their
words well, but all of them in a manner have an illfavoured untunable kind of
Speech, fetching their words with much ado deep out of their throat, with a
kind of wharling, whether it be by the nature of the soil or the water, or by
some secret operation of nature. Thus say they, but I have heard from some that
were this Country men, that it is Breson that is the Town of the Wharlers, and
not Carleton.

In the Rocks about Belvoir Castle is sometimes found the Astroits or
Star-stone, resembling little stars joined one to another, wherein are to be
seen at every corner five beams, and in every beam in the middle is small
hollowness. The Astroites of Germany being put into Vinegar (says Cambden)
will move it self and turn round, but whether these of Belvoir will do so too
or no, I never tried. I once saw an Astroite put into Vinegar, which moved
according as Cambden would have it, but from whence it came, or where it was
gathered I know not; only I am sure it was none of those of Lassington, for it
was bigger much then they, and not so much wrought.

At Barrow is dug the best Limestone in England, being extraordinary
strong; Of which it may be was made the Mortar that they used in building in
times past, which was in a manner as hard as the stone it self, as appears in
the walls of Leicester and other Cities at this day.

Notingham. and Rutlandshires.
THe air of Nottinghamshire is healthful; and the soil rich, being in some
places clayie, and others sandy.

In this shire are abundance of Pit Coals. Also

Here grows a stone softer then Alabaster which being burnt makes a Plaster
harder then that of Paris; And with this they floor their upper rooms, and when
it is dry it becomes as hard as a stone.

At Worksop grows the best Liquorice in these parts of England.

In the Town of Nottingham are many rooms with the very Chimneys, Stairs,
Windows, and the like, cut and hewn out of the Main solid Rock.

Rutlandshire has rich Land; but it is red, So that it stains the Wool of
those Sheep that feed on it; into a reddish color. The air is temperate,
wholesome, and not subject to fogs.

Derbyshire.
THis shire (as most inland shires of England) has a wholesome air, and in
theSouth and East parts rich soil, but in the North and West hilly, with a
black and mossy barren ground; Which two differing natures of soil are divided
by the River Derwent. And this is in some places stained black with the soil
and earth it passes by.

The Town of Derby affords excellent Ale; which kind of drink Turnebus says is
more wholesome, and contributory to long life then Wine; and that it is this
that makes many of us live 100 years. Yet Asclepiades in Plutarch says, it is
the cold climate that keeps in the natural heat in our bodies, and makes us
live 120 years. Thus says Cambden. So much indeed is true, that within these
100 years (since the use of Beer has increased among us, which was first known
about the year 1524) we live not generally so great age as formerly.

This shire is well stored with Milstones, Crystal, Alabaster and Whetstone;
And in the Peak withPit Coal, Iron, and Lead; A metal which France wants.

The Peak has under it in many places close to the upper crust of the earth,
Limestone; which makes it so fruitful, that there be in it green grassie
valleys, and hills, which bear full Oats, and feed abundance of Cattle and
Sheep.

The Lead-stones in the Peak lie but just within the ground next to the upper
crust of the earth. They melt the Lead upon the top of the hills that lie open
to the West wind; making their fires to melt it as soon as the West wind begins
to blow; which wind by long experience they find holds longest of all others.
But for what reason I know not, lince I should think Lead were the easiest of
all metalls to melt, they make their fires extraordinary great.

In the Mines and Quarries in the Peak (says Cambden) is sometimes found a
kind of white fluor very like Crystal.

There is Stibiunt found in certain veins of earth in this shire. And if so (
Speed is mine Author for it) I wonder I hear of no medicinal waters, near it.
For I think Newenham Regis in Warwickshire is too far from it, and the waters
of Buxton are not purgative, For

At Buxton nine Springs arise out of a rock within the compass of eight yards,
eight of which are warm, and the ninth very cold. These run from under a fair
square building of free stone, and about sixty paces of receive another hot
Spring from a Well enclosed with four flat stones; near unto which another very
cold Spring bubbleth up. These waters (as daily experience shows) are good
for the stomach and sinews.

There is a Cave (says Speed) called Eldenhole, where (it is confidently
affirmed) the waters that trickle from the top of that Cave, which indeed is
very spacious, but of a low and narrow entrance, do congeal into stone, and
hang like Isicles in the in the roof; and some are hollow within, and grow
Taperwise toward their points; very white and something like Crystal.

In the Peak Forest, not far from Buxton, is a well that ordinarily ebbs and
flows four times in an hour, or thereabout, keeping his just tides.

Warwickshire.
THis Shire is commended much for the wholesomeness of the air, especially the
Town of Warwick. The soil is very rich; especially the Vale of Red Horse,
which has a red Earth, and affords great plenty of Corn.

Here is also great store of Wool and Iron; especially about Bromicham.

At Gofford-gate in the East part of Coventry hangs the shield bone of a wild
Bore, far bigger then the greatest Ox bone, (it is very likely to be an
Elephants) with whosesnout (as the tale goes, and you may believe it, if you
please) the great Pit called Swainswell was turned up.

At Shugbury are found the stones formerly mentioned in Glouceshershire, called
Astroites, or Star-stones,

At Lemington a Salt Spring rises, though a great way off from the Sea.

At Newenham-Regis are three Fountains, which it should seem, are strained
through a vein of Allume. The water looks, and tastes like milk; it procures
urine abundantly: it is very sovereign against the stone, and for green wounds,
Ulcers, and Imposthumes: Being drunk with Salt it loosens the body, but with
Sugar binds it. It turns wood into Stone (says Speed) which I my self saw
by some sticks, that were fallen into it, some part of them ash, some part of
them stone.

Worcestershire.
THis is a very pleasant County, and fertile especially the vale of Evesham. In
some parts of it are many Salt Pits, and Salt Springs. It affords store of
excellent Cheese. The hedge-rows, and highways are beset with Pear Trees of
which they make Perry, a very pleasant drink, but generally very cold and
windy. But (says Cambden) although the Pears be in such huge abundance, yet
are they not so pleasing to the taste. Which if it be true, I much wonder at it.
For certainly there is much reason to believe, that where fruit trees are
planted in hedgerows and highways, their fruit should be better rellishred,
then fruit of the same kind planted in Orchards within the shade of other
trees; because those in hedgerows lie more open to the Sun, and that heat, that
must concoct them to give them their true relish; though on the other side I
deny not, that they are more subject to bsasting winds.

The Seavern here affords great store of fresh water Lampreyes; they are (says
Cambden) like Eeles slippery and blackish; but under their bellies something
blew: they have no gills, but let in the water at seven holes on each side of
their throat: in the Spring they are sweetest, and most etable; for in Summer
the inner nerve, which serves them instead of a backbone waxes hard. The
Italians make a delicate dish of them, taking a Lamprey, and killing it in
Malmesey: they close the mouth with a Nutmeg, and fill all the holes with as
many cloves: then they roll it up, and put (...)-Nut-kernels stamped, crumbs of
bread, oil, Malmesey, and Spices to it, and so they boil it with great care,
and then turn it over a soft gentle fire of Coals in a frying pan. The reason
why Seavern affords Lampreys I conceive is its muddiness, the Lamprey being a
kind of Eele, that breeds and delights in mire. Other fish (as is before said)
Seavern breeds not so plentifully, because as men thrive best in clear air, so
sish in clear water; gross air choking the one, and thick water the other.

At Droitwich are three Fountains of Salt water divided by a little Brook of
fresh water passing between; by the boiling of which Salt water they make pure
white Salt. Gervase of Tilbury (an Historian not rashly to be credited) says,
that these salt Springs are most salt between Christmas and Midsummer; and that
the rest of the year they are somewhat fresh, and not so good to make Salt of;
and that when the Salt water is run sufficiently for the use of the Country,
the Springs do scarce overflow to any wast; and that at the greatestSaltness of
it, it is not allayed by the nearness of the fresh water to it; and lastly,
that it is found no where near the Sea, Cambden doubts the truth of some of
these affirmations, but of which he says not: Only he says, that the Salt is
made from Midsummer to Midwinter, which is quite contrary to Gervase. Indeed if
there be any difference in the saltness of these waters in several times of
the year, they should I think, be fresher from Christmas to Midsummer; because
that half year all Springs (but land Springs) are highest, and run most
plentifully, by reason of the great wet season immediately foregoing, which
must therefore more dilute the salt. And on the contrary the Springs between
Midsummer and Christmas must be the lower, because of the drought just
preceding I have heard Masons in Kent, that used to dig wells, say, that the
Springs that feed their wells, are lowest about Alhollantide, and highest
between Easter and Whitsuntide, for the very same reason I could wish some
ingenuous native would bestow upon us, the perfect History of these Salt
Springs in Worcestershire, and Cheshire. Some Philosophers trouble themselves
much about the cause of the Saltness of the Sea. I think it needs not so much
puzzle and ado. If there be salt Springs that run continually into the Sea,
and no part of the saltness of the water (but that which is mere fresh) ascend
in vapor at the Suns call, why should not the Sea be, and continue salt. There
would rather be more fear, lest the Sea should grow salter and salter, by these
Springs continually running into it, but that the Salinae on several shores of
the world do rob it every day, besides other losses it sustains, and escapes
that it makes through private passages in the earth.

There is a report of a medicinal Water found out lately about
Eckington-Bridge, about 7 miles from Worcester.

Staffordshire.
THe air of this shireis very healthful, yet in the North parts and Moreland
it is very sharp, the wind blowing cold, and the snow lying long. It affords
good store of Albaster, Iron, Pit-Coale (Which is thought to be the Lapis
Obsidianus of the Ancients, if it be at all in England, for it is hard, bright,
light, and easy to be cloven in flakes, and being once kindled it burns away
very quickly.) And Fish, whereof the River of Trent is full. The meadows of
this shire are so moistened withstreams and rivers runningby them, that they
look green in the middle of winter.

In Pensneth Chase is a Coal-Pit, which (says Cambden) was set on fire by a
Candle through the negligence of a digger, the smoke of it is commonly seen,
and sometimes the flame.

In this shire there runs a hill a long, and so through the middle of England
as far as Scotland, like the Apennine in Italy.

In this shire they manuretheir land with Limestone.

The people about Wotton by Wolverhil in Moreland observe, that when the wind
sets West, it always produces rain; but the East and South wind, which
elsewhere brew and bring rain, here bring fair weather; unless the wind turn
from the West into the South; and this they ascribe to the nearness of the
Irish Seas. This observation I fear is somewhat imperfect, and should be driven
a little further by men able to make observation.

If the River Dove overflow its banks, and run into the adjoining meadows in
April, it makes them extreme fruitful. The reason of this is plain enough
without further enquiry. Indeed some Rivers overflowing their banks enrich
more, and others less, according to the fatness or hungryness of their water.

The River Dove uses to rise extremely within twelve hours space, but it will
within the space of twelve hours return again within its banks: but Trent being
once up, and over its banks, flows over the fields four or five days together,
ere the supersluous waters can get away. Of this we have given an account
already, speaking of the Thames and Seavern.

The little River Hans runs under ground for three miles together.

Cambden says that Necham speaks of a Lake in Staffordshire (but where it is
he cannot tell) that foreshews things to come by its roaring, and no wild beast
will enter into it; but he thinks it is but a Fable. And

Gervase of Tilbury tells us of another Lake in this shire, called Mahall, near
a village called Magdalea, which if hunters when they and their horses are
tired do drink of, and give their horses of it, though it be in the hottest,
and most scorching weather; they both become presently as fresh, as if they had
not run at all. Likely to be as true as the former.

Lincolnshire.
IN this Shire upon the East and South parts the air is thick and foggy because
of the Fennes, etc. yet very moderate and mild; and the winds, that come from
the raging Seas disperse those vapors, that they cannot much hurt. The North
and West part of the shire is fruitful, but the East and South are brackish
and fenny, yet extraordinary full of Fish and Sea-fowl; especially Mallards,
which they take in August with nets.

This Shire yields Flax and Alabaster, and Plaster, which I think is that
they call Plaster of Paris, or of that kind.

The ground about Crowland is so rotten, that one may thrust a Pole into it
thirty foot deep. Also

The ground in Holland (apart of this shire so called) is so wet, that as one
stands upon it, the earth will shake under his feet, and he will be ready to
sink into it; Nor shall you beside the paved Causeys meet with so much as a
little stone in it. Here are also many quicksands, which have a wonderful
force both to draw to them, and to hold fast that which they have drawn.
Moreover the people here have no fresh water, but only rain water, and that in
pits. Which if they be deep; becomes brackish presently; And if they be shallow
they dry up as soon.

About Barton upon Humber are abundance of Pewits, Godwits, Knots, (which are
so called from Cnule the Dane, and are thought to have flown hither out of
Denmark) and Dottrells, a sim ple kind of bird, much given to imitating. These
Dottrells are caught by Candle light in this manner. The Fowler stands before
the bird, and if he put out an arm, the bird stretches out a wing: If he
holds out his head, or set forward his leg, the bird does the like, and
imitates the Fowlers gesture so long, till the Fowler drawing nearer and nearer
by degrees, at length throws his net over him, and takes him.

In the Isle of Axholme, grows a sweet kind of Shrub, called Galls, as also
Pets in the Moors, (I know not what that is) and dead roots of Fur wood,
which in burning give a rank sweet smell. Further there have been great and
long Fur Trees found both in this Island, and at Laughton upon Trent: Also
there is in this Isle much Flax and Alabaster; But the Alabaster is more fit
for Plaster then any thing else, because it is brittle.

Shropshire.
THis County (says Speed) has wholesome temperate air, affording health to
the inhabitants at all seasons of the year. This was verified in old Thomas
Parre of Alberbury, who was 152 pears old, and dyed in the year 1635. The soil
is generally fertile, standing most upon a reddish clay, and yields Pit Coals
and Iron.

At Wenlock in the time of Richard the second was found a rich Mine of Copper.

Upon Cleehill grows the best Barley in the shire.

At Pitchford is a Well (or Spring) in a private man's yard, whereon flows a
thick skum of liquid Bitumen; which being cleared and taken off one day, will
have the like again on the morrow. Try (says Cambden) whether this Bitumen be
good for the falling sickness, and have a powerful property to draw and close
up wounds, as that in Judaea is known to have. There is the like swimming of
Bitumen in that lake in Judaea we speak of, called Asphaltites, supposed to be
the place where Sodom and Gomorha stood; as also in a standing water about
Samosata, and in a Spring by Agrigentum in Sicily.

Where the plot of the City Wroxcester lay, the earth is more blackish then
elsewhere, and bears very good Barley.

In the year 1551. April the 15. the English sweating sickness brake forth
first at Shresbury, and so dispersed it self over the whole land, and killed
abundance, especially middle-aged people. The first time of this sweating
sickness was in the year 1485, says Cambden, a little after a great
Conjunction of the Superior Planets in Scropio. The second time (but more
mildly, yet the Plague accompanied it) was Anno 1518, being 33 years after it,
upon a great Opposition of the same Planets in Scorpio and Taurus, when it also
plagued the Netherlands, and high Germany too. And the 3 time was 33 years
after that again, viz. Anno 1551. the year now spoken of, when another
Conjunction of those Planets in Scorpio took its effects, but we must crave
leave to tell Cambden, that his pretended revolution of 33 years is not so; for
the middle sweat was not in 1518, as he affirms it, but in 1517 as both Godwin
and Stow tell us; though we confess, the Plague was in 1518. So that then there
will be instead of 33 and 33, 32 and 34. And that which will do this revolution
more mischief is, that there was a fourth sweat between the years 1517 and
1551, viz. Anno 1528, which Cambden never mentions; besides another fifth sweat,
that (if I be not mistaken) happened before 1517. Moreover whereas Cambden
says, that the sweat 1485 was a little after a great Conjunction of the
superior Planets in Scorpio, if by the superior Planets he mean all the
three, Saturn, Jupiter and Mars; that was not so. For neither did Saturn
Jupiter Mars meet in the same degree of Scorpio, nor were all the three
Conjunctions, which these three Planets made at that turn in Scorpio. It is
true indeed the Conjunction, of Saturn, and Mars, was in Scorpio, about the
12th degree; but it was in November 1483, almost 2 years before that sweat
which began in September 1485; And the Conjunction, of Saturn, and Jupiter was
in Scorpio too, about the 20th degree, but that was almost a year before the
sweat too, viz. about Alhollanday 1484: But as for the Conjunction, of Saturn,
and Mars, that fell not in Scorpio, but about the 25 degree of Libra, and about
Alhollandtide 1483, not far distant from the time of the Conjunct. of Saturn,
and Mars; so that the sweat was neither after a Conjunction of the superior
Planets in Scorpio, nor a little after any Conjunction of them. Again, neither
was the sweat 1517. upon a great Opposition of the same Planets in Scorpio and
Taurus, for the opposition of Saturn and Jupiter, which happened in Taurus and
Scorpio, were all three of them in 1513. and 1514. and so was the opposition of
Jupiter and Mars in Taurus and Scorp. in November. 1513. about the first degree
of those two signs. And for the opposition of Saturn and Mars; and conjunction
of Saturn and Mars, which we grant happened both in one year, and during Saturn
his abode in Scorp. too, they both fell in 1513. the one in March, and the
other in December following. Nor let it startle any one that a conjunction of
Saturn and Mars, and opposition of Saturn and Mars, should happen both, during
Saturn his being in Scorpio; for those that know any thing in Astronomy, must
needs know that Saturn never passes through any sign (no not Gemini where he
moves swistest, because in Perihelio) but Mars gives him a conjunction and
opposition constantly, before he can get out of it; nay sometimes he gives him
two conjunctions, and sometimes three, beside the opposition, especially if he
be near his Aphelium, as he is in Scorpio; and yet now he did not. Nor lastly,
let any man start at the three oppositions of Saturn and Jupiter, that happened
in 1513. and 1514. for all Astronomers know, that it is a very rare thing (or
rather impossible) for an opposition of Saturn and Jupiter to happen single,
they happening constantly every twenty years, and as constantly by threes, of
which the reason is plain to any versed in Calculations. So that it remains,
that the Sweat 1517. neither followed upon such an opposition of the Planets,
nor near it. Lastly, whereas he says, that the Sweat 1551. was when another
conjunction of those Planets in Scorpio, took its effects, this is wider from
the truth then all the rest; for there was no conjunction of the Superiors
within six years of this Sweat: For example, the conjunction of Saturn and
Jupiter in 28. of Scorpio, happened in September 1544 and the conjunction of
Jupiter and Mars, happened in the 27. degrees. of Scorpio, in January 1543. and 44.
And for conjunctions of Saturn and Mars in Scorpio, there happened none that
year, (for the conjunction of Saturn and Mars that was, fell in the beginning
of Sagitarius) though we confess there fell (to admiration) three conjunctions
of Saturn and Mars in Scorpio, in the year 1542. (A very rare thing indeed,
such a triple conjunction of those planets having never happened since till the
year 1640.) But how Conjunctions should work seven or nine years after their
celebration, and not before, is a secret in Astrology that I yet understand
not. In the year 1632. was indeed a very great opposition of Saturn, Jupiter,
and Mars in Taurus and Scorpio, the two Malevolents in Scorpio, opposing
Jupiter in Taurus, the conjunction and two oppositions happening very near
together; yet there happened in the years following, no such sweat as is
pretended to be the effect of such conjunctions and oppositions; so that the
Astrological cause of those contagious sweats lies yet in the dark. I would
adventure something toward it here, but that it requires a distinct Treatise by
it self. Fracastorius attributes this sweating sickness to the Plaistriness of
the soil here in England, (and yet it is so but in few places) and to the
moistness of the weather in those years; but why it does not reign constantly
in such kind of soil in wet years, he says not. Cambden thinks that this
contagion has been long before 1485 as rife in England as since, although it
be not mentioned by Historians; that is not impossible indeed, for for that
last Age wherein Saturn and Jupiter did use to meet in Scorpio, our Chronicles
are very empty and uncertain.

Eclipses of the Sun in Aries (says Cambden) have been most dangerous to
Oswestry; for in the year 1542, and 1567. when the Eclipses of the Sun in
Aries, wrought their effects, it suffered great loss by fire; but most of all
after this latter Eclips; for there were then about two hundred houses burnt. A
good observation indeed, but our Author observed not all; for that which is
most remarkable is, that those two Eclipses happened within two degrees one of
the other; so that it may be the Ascendent of Oswestry (as Astrologers speak)
is about the 27. degrees. of Aries. And peradventure the reason why the late
Eclipse of the Sun in Aries, viz. 1652. March 29. had no influence upon
Oswestry, was because it happened in the 19. degrees. of Aries, 8. degrees. distant
from its Ascendent. This is further observable, (and it looks as if there were
something in it) that in 1567. when Oswestry was burnt, Milnall in Suffolk was
burnt too; and that though the Eclips in Aries 1652. had nothing to do with
them (perhaps for the reason above given) yet within the time (that Astrologers
limit the effects of Eclipses) two Towns in the same Shires, viz. Bungay in
Suffolk, and Drayton in Shropshire, were burnt; as if there were a way to trace
Ascendents from one Town to another, and as if the Ascendents of near places
were not far asunder. But nihil temere statuendum de paucis; enquire farther,
and see what I have written in my Syzygiasticon Instauratum, (published Anno
1653.) where I have treated of the Ascendents of Towns in general, and of the
Ascendent of Teverton in Devonshire in particular. Query also, whether in
February, 1655.56. any thing extraordinary happened to the Town of Oswestry,
upon the conjunction of Jupiter and Mars, in 25. degrees of Aries.

CHESHIRE.
THe air of this Shire is so healthful, that the Inhabitants generally live
very long. And the warm vapors rising from the Irish Seas, do sooner melt the
snow and ice in this County, then in places further off. The soil is very rich,
yet observed to be more kindly and natural for Cheese, then Corn; and it is
thought that it is the soil, and not the skill of the Dairy-Woman, that makes
the Cheese so excellent, the best in Europe. Both men and women here, have a
general commendation for beauty and handsome proportion. This shire (says
Speed) yeildeth Salt, Metals, Mines, and Meres.

In the River Dee is great plenty of Salmons. Giraldus Cambrensis, who lived
about the year 1200, says, that this River foreshewed a sure token of Victory
to the inhabitants living upon it, when they were in open hostility one shore
against the other, according as it inclined more to this side, or to that,
after it had left the Channel. And the relator does in some sort believe it,
and so may any one else if he please.

This River Dee upon the fall of much Rain rises but little; but as often as
the south wind beats long upon it, it swells and overflows the grounds
adjoining extremely. This River is a very straight and broad river to sea-ward,
so that what rain falls, has an easy and quick passage out. But if the
South Wind blow long, the River must needs swell much, because no wind has so
much power on the Irish seas, as that, because it blows right in upon it
between the coasts of Wales and Ireland, and must needs swell and roll it so
much the more, for that it brings the sea still in, which having not so free a
passage quite through by reason of the narrow straight between Scotland and the
North of Ireland, still returns back, where it meets with a fresh supply of
Waters continually coming in: Now the Irish sea thus swelling, will have easy
and ready admission into a straight River.

In the low places on the south side of Cheshire, by the River Wever, Trees are
oftentimes found by digging under ground; which people think have lien buried
there ever since Noah's Flood.

Nantwich, Northwich, and Middlewich, are the famous Salt pits of this Shire,
being 5. or 6. miles asunder. The whitest Salt is made at Nantwich, which
(says Cambden) has but one Pit about some 14. foot from the River, out of
which they conveigh Salt Water by troughs of Wood into the Houses adjoining,
where there stand little Barrels pitched fast in the ground; which they fill
with the Water, and then make fire under the Leads, whereof they have six in a
house, and in them they sees the Water. Then with little wooden rakes they
fetch up the Salt from the botom, and put it in baskets, out of which the
Liquor runs, and the pure salt remains. The Salt pit at Northwich is very near
the brink of the River Dan, being a very deep and plentiful pit. Quaere,
whether the Rivers Wever and Dan be themselves salt at these two places. The
two salt Wells at Middlewich, are parted one from the other by a small brook of
fresh Water.

It is reported, that there are Trees that flote in Bagmere, (a Mere so called,
near the seat of the Family of the Breretons) against the death of any of the
heirs of the Breretons; and after the heir is dead, they sink, and are never
seen more till the next occasion. Cambden says, that this story is verified
upon the credit of many credible persons; and that these bodies of trees swim
for certain days together, and may be seen of any body: And he seconds it with
another story to this purpose. Leonardus Vairus (says he) reports from the
testimony of Cardinal Gravel, that near the Abbey of St. Maurice in Burgundy,
is a Fish Pond, into which are fishes put according to the number of the Monks
of that place, and if any one of them happen to be sick, there is a fish seen
also to flote and swim above the water half dead: And if the Monk shall dye,
the said fish will dye too, some few days before him. Thus Cambden: who gives
so much credit to these stories, that he thinks they are the Works of Angels.
But so does not Speed, who thinks it to be but a conceit, and a fable; as he
does also the prophecy of Leyland concerning Beeston Castle mounted upon a
steep hill; The Castle being ruinated, Leyland prophesied of it in his time,
(thus) that it should be reedified.

The day shall come when it again shall mount his head aloft;
If I a Prophet may be heard, from Seers that say so often.
Whether Leylands Prophecy have proved true since, I know not; but so much is
true, that in the late Wars Beeston Castle was a Garrison. Prophets generally
are very compassionate to the rubbish of stately Piles, and the Elegies they
commonly sing at their fall, are Prophesies of their re-edifying, because they
see men generally willing to believe what they would have, though improbable;
nay, though impossible. And this I think was the true original of that late
Prophecy among the Welsh, that Ragland Castle shall be built again.

I will not undertake to tell you the cause of the floting of those Trees in
Bagmere, because there are several circumstances that render it very dark.
Only observe, that in this shire (as is said) bodies of Trees are often times
dug out of the ground.

July the 8th. being Wednesday 1657. about three of the clock, in the parish of
Bickley, was heard a very great noise like Thunder afar off, which was much
wondered at, because the sky was clear, and no appearance of a Cloud. Shortly
after (says the Author of this relation) a neighbor comes to me, and told me
I should see a very strange thing, if I would go with him. So coming into a
field called the Layfeild, we found a very great bank of earth which had many
tall Oaks growing on it, quite sunk under the ground, Trees and all. At first
we durst not go near it, because the earth for near twenty yards round about,
is exceeding much rent, and seems ready to fall in; but sinee that time my self
and some others by Ropes have ventured to see the bottom, I mean, to go to the
brink, so as to discern the visible bottom, which is Water, and conceived to be
about 30. yards from us, under which is sunk all the earth about it for sixteen
yards round at least, three tall Oaks, a very tall Awber, and certain other
small Trees, and not a sprig of them to be seen above water. Four or five Oaks
more are expected to fall every moment, and a great quantity of Land is like to
fall, indeed never ceasing more or less; and when any considerable clod falls,
it is much like the report of a Canon. We can discern the ground hollow above
the Water a very great depth; but how far hollow, or how deep, is not to be
found out by man: Of this we have said somewhat in Kent. Some of the water, (as
I have been told) was drawn out of this pit with a bucket, and they found it to
be as salt as seawater; whence some imagine, that there are certain large
passages there, into which the sea flows under ground; but I rather think, that
this salt water is no more but that which issues from those salt springs about
Nantwitch, and other places in this shire. Query, whether those Trees that are
before said to be dug up in some places hereabout, were not buried in the
earth by some such sinking as this. I am told, that about Bickley the soil is a
very soul miry clay, that there is hardly any traveling that way in the winter
time. If so, I conceive then, that under this upper Clay lies a mouldring washy
Clay, or Sand, which is carried away by degrees by the course of Springs (as we
said before of Motingham) and that this July being the dryest part of Summer,
and this Summer 1657. being an extreme hot and dry Summer, (the hottest and
dryest I ever knew) this Clayie ground did chap (as it is the nature of Clay to
do in dry hot weather, especially the most rotten and miry Clay, as we see in
Marshes) and divide it self from the rest of the ground near it, to which, and
to its fall, the hollowness underueath, and the weight of the tall Oaks above
did much contribute.

Herefordshire.
THE air is very wholesome, and the soil of this shire exceeding rich for Corn.

About Lemster is the finest Wool of England, though it be not so fine as that
of Aquila and Tarentum in Italy. It is likewise famous for the purest Wheat, as
Weabley is for the best Ale.

By Snodhill Castle is a quarry of excellent Marble.

Not far from Richards Castle, is a Well called Bone-well, wherein are
continually found little Fishes bones, (yet Cambden thinks they may be Frogs
bones) but there is not a Fin to be seen; and being wholly cleansed thereof,
will yet have the like again. But (says Speed) no man can tell whether they are
produced naturally, or brought thither in veins.

In the year 1571. Marcley hill in the East part of the shire, with a roaring
noise removed it self from the place where it stood, and for three days
together traveled from its old seat. It began first to take its journey,
February the 17th. being Saturday at six of the clock at night, and by seven of
the clock the next morning it had gone forty paces, carrying with it sheep in
their cotes, hedge-rows, and Trees, whereof some were overturned, and some that
stood upon the plain, are firmly growing upon the hill. Those that were East,
were turned West, and those in the West were set in the East. In this remove it
overthrew Kinnaston Chapel, and turned two Highways near a hundred yards
from their old paths The ground that thus removed was about 26. acres, which
opening it self with Rocks and all, bore the earth before it for four hundred
yards space, without any stay, leaving Pasturage in place of the Tillage, and
the Tillage overspread with Pasturage. Lastly, overwhelming its lower parts, it
mounted to an hill of twelve fathoms high, and there rested after three days
travel. Cambden thinks this was that kind of Earthquake which Philosophers
call Brasmatias.

Brecknockshire.
THree miles from Brecknock is a hill called Mounch-denny, that has its top
above the clouds; and if a cloak, hat, or staff or the like be thrown from the
top of it, it will never fall, but be blown up again; nor will any thing
descend but stones, or metalline substance, or things as heavy.

On the very top of the hill called Ca dier Arthur rises a Spring which is
deep like a Well, and four square, having no streams issuing from it, and yet
there are Trouts found in it.

Two miles East from Brecknock is a Mere called Llynsauaihan, which (as the
people dwelling there say) was once a City, but the City was swallowed up by an
Earthquake, and this water (or lake) succeeded in the place. They say likewise
that at the end of Winter, when after a long frost the ice of this lake breaks,
it makes a fearful noise like thunder. Peradventure it is, because the lake is
encompassed with high steep hills, which pen in in the found, and multiply it,
or else the ground may be hollow underneath, or near the lake. Through this
lake there runs a River called Levenny without mixture of its waters, as may be
perceived both by the color of the watet, and also by the quantity of it,
because it is no greater then when it entered the lake. The non-mixture of two
waters, does doubtless proceed from nothing else, but the oiliness of the one,
and the acidity, (or if you will have it) the acetosity of the other Water; for
we see that oil and vinegar will not mix.

Radnorshire.
THis Shire has sharp and cold air, because of the Snow lying long unmelted
under the shady hills, and hanging Rocks, whereof there are many.

Montgomeryshire.
THis shire bred excellent horses in times past. There is nothing else rare, or
observable here for our purpose.

Monmouthshire.
THis County has good air, but bad ways.

The two Rivers of Uske and Wye are full of Salmons and Trouts. And they say,
that when the Salmons grow out of season in the one River, they come in season
in the other. But in which of the two it is that Salmons are in season from
September till April, (which is the ordinary and general time-for Salmons) I
cannot learn, though the thing it self be averred by men of the Country.

The River Wye at Chepstow, rises every Tide to a great height; Of the cause
of it we have already said something.

At Lanthony Abbey (says Cambden) the rain, which the Mountains breed, falls
very often; the Wind blows strong, and all the Winter almost it is continually
cloudy and misty; yet there are seldom any diseases there; and the grosser the
air is, the milder it is.

The Moor or Marsh near Chepstow, suffered great loss in January 1606, For when
the Severn sea (says Cambden) at a springtide upon the Change of the Moon was
partly driven back for three days together with a southwind, and partly with a
very strong pirry from the Sea troubling it, it swelled so high, that it came
rushing in a main upon the tract lying so low, and also upon the like flats in
Somersetshire over against it, and overflowed all, overthrowing houses, and
drowning cattle and some people. We have already said that this flood happened
when the Moon was in Perig. not that we exclude the change of the Moon, and the
convenient sitting of the wind to be the joint causes in the effect. We only
would say, that more causes greaten the effect.

On Gold-cliff are yellow stones of a golden color, and glittering by the
reflection of the Sunbeams, which has made some suspect, that there might be a
mine there.

Merlin prophesied, that when a stont Prince with a freckled face should pass
over the Ford called Rydpencarn, being in a River called Nantpen-carn, the
Welsh should be subdued. Which accordingly came to pass, for Henry the second,
who passed over this Ford, was freckle faced; And as soon as the Welsh men
heard where the King came over, their hearts failed them, because of this
prophecy; and so they submitted, through too much credulity, says Cambden. It
is not impossible, that King Henry might choose to go over at this Ford,
because of the prophecy, and his enemies credulity, the more to facilitate his
conquests,

Glamorganshire.
THis shire has a temperate air, and is generally the pleasantest part of all
Southwales.

On the top of a certain hill called Minyd-morgan is a monument with a strange
character, which the dwellers thereabouts say, if any man read the same, he
will dye shortly after. This is not improbable; for if a chid of three months
old read the three first verses of Homers Illiads, I am confident he will not
live three days to an end.

Upon the River Ogmore, and near unto Newton in a sandy plain, about one
hundred paces from Severn springs a Well; the water whereof is not very clear,
in which at full Sea (in the Summer time) can hardly any water be gotten, but
at the ebb of the tide it bubbleth up amain. In Summer time I say, for in
Winter the ebbing and flowing is nothing so evident, because of the veins of
water coming in by showers or otherwise. Besides it is observed, that this
spring never rises up to the brink, or overfloweth. Polybius says the same of
a certain Well at Cadiz.

Clemens Alexandrinus says, that in Britain is a Cave under the bottom of a
hill, and on the top of it a gaping chink. And when the wind is gathered into
that hole, and tossed to and fro in the womb of it, there is heard as it were a
musical sound, like that of Cymballs. It is most likely that he speaks of the
Cave at Aberbarry in this shire, the story agreeing very near with the quality
of the Cave. It is mentioned by the Lord Verulam in his History of the winds,
to this effect. In a certain rocky cliffe, in which there are holes, if a man
lay his ear to them, he shall hear diverse noises, and rumbling of winds under
the earth. These noises Cambden says, are to be heard as well at the lowest
ebb, as the higest flood.

Pembrokeshire.
THis shire has a good, temperate, and wholesome air. The soil yields Pit
Coal, and Marle.

It appears by Giraldus Cambrensis, that the Flemmings that inhabited this
shire in his time were very skillful in sooth-saying, by looking into beasts
inwards.

In the Rocks in this shire there breeds a rare kind of Falcon, which is thus
described. The head is flat and low, the feathers laid in rows. the legs pale
and wan, the claws slender, and wide spread, and the bill soaked round.

About 300 years ago it is reported, that for 5 generations the Father of the
Family in the Earldom of Pembroke (their name was Hastings) never saw his son.

At the time when Henry the second made his abode in Ireland were extraodinary
violent, and lasting storms of wind and weather, so that the sandy shore on the
coast of this shire was laid bare to the very hard ground, which had lien hid
for many ages. And by further search the people found great Trunks of Trees,
which when they had dug up, they were apparently lopped, so that one might
see the strokes of the Axe upon them, as if they had been given but the day
before. The earth looked very black, and the wood of these Trunks was
altogether like Ebony.

At the first discovery made by these storms, the Trees (we speak of) lay so
thick, that the whole shore seemed nothing but a lopped grove. Whence may be
gathered; that the Sea has overflowed much land on this coast; Asit has
indeed on the shores of many Countries bordering upon the Sea; which is to be
chiefly imputed to the ignorance of the Britans and other barbarous Nations,
who were long without the knowledge of Arts, and understood not those ways to
repress the fury of the Sea, which now we do. For without doubt since the
knowing age of the World the Sea has not gained upon the land one quarter of
that it did before.

About Kilgorran are abundance of Salmons taken, and there is a place called
the Salmons leap; as there is the like also in other Rivers for this reason.
The Salmon coveteth to get into fresh water Rivers to spawn; and when he comes
to places where the water falls down right from some high places (and some such
places there be in many Rivers) he uses this policy. He bends himself
backward, and takes his tail in his mouth, and with all his force unloosing his
circle on a sudden (like a lath let go) he mounteth up before the fall of the
stream. And therefore these downright falls (or little Catarracts) of water are
called the Salmons Leap.

In the Isle of Scalmey grows abuudance of wild Thyme.

Cardiganshire.
AT the head of the River Istwyd are some Veins of Lead found.

In the River Tivy in times past, the Beaver (or Castor) has been found; but
now they can find none of them. The Beaver is an amphibious creature, that is,
lives indifferently in the Water, and on the Land. His fore-feet are like a
dogs, but the hinder feet are whole-skinned, like those of a Goose. His
dog-feet serve him ashore to run, and his Geese-feet in the Water to swim. His
tail is broad and gristly, which he uses as a stern to direct and turn his
course: His skin is ash-colored, somewhat inclining to blackish. It is a very
subtle creature.

The Chronicles report, that while David Menevensis Bishop of St. David's,
refuted the Pelagian Heresy at Llan-devi-brevi, the earth whereon he stood and
preached, rose up by Miracle to a certain height under his feet.

Cacrmardenshire.
THis shire (as most hilly Countries) has a wholesome air. The soil is not
said to be very fertile, but only in some places to yield pit coals.

In Carreg Castle is a Well, that (like the sea ebbs and flows twice in four
and twenty hours.

Merionethshire.
THe air may be wholesome, but the soil is but barren: For it is very full of
spired Hills, being the most Mountainous shire in Wales, except Caernarvon
shire. This shire is also subject to many and extraordinary great winds.

Near Bala is a great pool of water that drowns at least 160. acres of ground;
whose nature is (as they say) such, that the high land-floods, though never so
great, cannot make this pool to swell bigger; but if the air be troubled with
violent tempests of winds, it rises above its banks. The River Dee runs
into this pool (says speed) with a sharp stream, and slides through it (as
they say) without mixture of waters. For in this pool is bred the fish called
Guinjad, which is never seen in Dee. And in Dee Salmons are taken, which are
never found in the pool.

Upon the seacoast of this shire, great store of Herrings are taken at the
time of year.

The sea beats so sore and hard upon the West side of the shire, that it is
thought it has carried away part of it.

The Welsh people tell great wonders of Caer-Gai in this shire; but what they
are, I know not. Cambden tells us, that the people of this shire are much given
to idleness and wantonness. I much wonder atit, becauseitis generally observed,
that hilly Countries are least subject to those two vices, breeding for the
most part hardy and warlike people. Indeed I have heard (how truly I cannot
say) that Cambden was not altogether so ingenuous in this Character, as he
should have been; for (they say) when he came to visit this County in his
preambulation, he received some unhandsom affront at one place, which provoked
his choler to bestow this brand of insamy upon the Merioneth-shire men.

Caernarvonshire.
THe air of this shire is sharp and piercing Here are extraordinary high hills
(the highest in all Wales) on some of which the Snow lies long, and on others
it lies all the year long hard crusted together. A thing not at all to be
wondered at, since on the Alps, and many other Mountains much more southerly
then our Island, it does the like. The consideration of which has bred an
opinion in me, that the Globe of the Earth and Sea is of an Elliptick, or Oval
form; that is, like an Egg. And my reason is this: I suppose that every year
under both the Poles, there falls a quantity of snow, (either little or much,
in the time of the suns being at the contrary Tropic, and likely enough at
other times of the year too) which the Sun when he has greatest power upon it,
cannot melt all. And this is more then probable, because not only in Greenland,
but also here in this shire,and (if we will believe Munster) on the top of the
Alps too, there are Mountainous Crusts of frozen snow that never were melted.
So that now after so many years lapse it cannot be, I think, but that the
Diameter of the earth from pole to pole, from the top of the snow at one end of
the earth, to the top of it at the other end, is much longer then in any part
under the Equator, though at the Creation it were (as I believe) made
spherical. And so I suppose in longer process of time it will grow more oblong.
And as it so increases in length, so I believe the sea will decrease in depth,
(tho gh both very insensibly) because snow must consist of something, and that
something can be nothing but a watery vapor condensed and congealed, etc. And
this watery vapor must be drawn out of the sea, or out of that part of the
earth which once (sooner or later) received it from the sea: And this snow
being thrown down at the Poles, and not melting, that so it may return from
whence it came, and re-fil that which is emptied, must needs caufe a decrease
in the sea. Now that which tempts me to embrace this Paradox the more
affectionately, is, for that it serves excellently well to solve a great doubt,
which troubled Tycho and Keppler, about centrel Eclipses of the Moon, that
happen near the Equator, such as that was which Tycho observed in the year
1588. and that which Keppler observed in the year 1624. concerning which he
speaks to this purpose. Notandum est hanc Lunae Eclipsin (instar illius, quam
Tycho, anno 1588. observavit, totalem, and proximam centrali) egregie calculum
fefellisse. Nam non solum mora totius Lunae in tenebris brevis fuit, sed and
duratio reliqua multo magis. Perinde quasi Tellus Elliptica esset, dimetientem
breviorem habens sub AEquatore longiorem a Polo uno ad alterum: that is, We
must note that this Eclipse of the Moon ( viz. that on the 26. of September,
stylo Novo, 1624. like that which Tycho observed in the year 1588. being a
total, and almost centrel one, did notoriously deceive my calculation; for not
only the duration of the total obscurity was short, but also the rest of the
duration before and after the total obscurity much shorter; as if (says he)
the Earth were Elliptical, having a shorter Diameter under the Equator, then
from one Pole to another. And yet I am not so devoted to my own fancies, but
that one solid reason shall prevail with me to abandon the dearest of them,
though for the present I see abundance of reason for what I think.

In some places of this shire are bred certain Shel-fish, which being produced
(says my Author) by an heavenly dew, bring forth Pearls.

In the Pool called Lin-paris, there is (as it is reported) a kind of fish
called Torcoch, having a red belly, which is no where else to be seen but here.

It is said also, that on the high hills of this shire are two Meres, one of
which produces fish that have but one eye; and in the other is a moveable and
floting Island, which as soon as a man treads on, it presently flotes a great
way off. But Speed thinks they are both but fables.

Snowdon Hills (says Cambden) although they have snow always lying on them,
yet are exceeding rank with grass, insomuch that they are become a Proverb
among the Welsh; and it is certain, that there are pools and standing waters
upon the very tops of these Mountains; and they are so coated with that snowy
crust that lies on them, that if a man do but lightly set his foot any where on
the top ofthe Mountains, he shall perceive the earth to stir the length of a
stones cast from him; which I suppose might occasion the fable of the Floting
Island mentioned but now.

Anglesey.
IN diverse places (says Hugh Lloyd) in the low grounds and Champion fields of
this Island, the Inhabitants do every day find and dig out of the earth the
bodies of huge Trees, with their Roots, and Firre-Trees of a wonderful bigness
and length: Which Trees he thinks were such as were cut down by the Romans in
theirtime; because Tacitus says, the Romans when they had conquered this
Island, caused all their Woods to be cut down, and utterly destroyed. But if
some be found with their roots on, I cannot think so, but rather impute
thesespoils made on Maritime places to the want of industry and husbandry in
the first ages of the world.

This Island was in times past full of Woods and Timber; but instead of that
now, it yields plenty of Corn, Sheep, and Cattle. The air is reasonable
healthful, save only a little aguish at some time, and in some places, by
reason of the fogs that rise from the sea. It yeildeth also great store of
Mil-stones, and Grind-stones; and in some places is found an Aluminous earth,
of which they may make Alume and Copperas, but it must be with some cost and
labor.

This Island (says Hugh Lloyd) yields every year such plenty of wheat, that
they call it the Mother of Wales.

Denbighshire.
THe air of this shire is cold, but very wholesome, and the snow lies long on
the hills; for it is a hilly Country, the high hills resembling the battlement
of Walls; on the tops of which, when vapors rise in the morning in Summer time,
it foreshews a fair day to follow.

The highest hill in the shire, called Moilenlly. has a spring of clear water
on the top of it.

The people living in the Vale (says Cambden) are very healthful; their heads
sound and firm; their eyesight never dim, and their age very lasting and
cheerful.

The little Riveret called Alen, runs under ground once or twice.

Near the little Town Moinglath, is plenty of Lead.

In the west part of the shire where the ground is barren, they pare away the
surface of the earth into turfs with a broad spade, and burn them, and lay the
ashes of them upon those grounds, which enriches them much. This way of
enriching Land was used anciently by the Romans, and spoken of both by Virgil
and Horace.

In the year 1574, February the 26. were great Earthquakes, which did many
people much hurt, both within doors, and without, in York, Worcester, Hereford,
Gloucester, Bristol, and other places adjacent. This shaking of the earth made
the Bell in the Shire-Hall of Denbigh to toll twice, but did no other harm at
all thereabouts,

Flintshire.
THe air of this shire is healthful, without any. Fogs or Fenny vapors,
saving that sometimes there rises from the Sea, and the River Dee, certain
thick and smoky mists which yet hurt not at all; for the people here are very
aged, and healthful. The air is colder here then in Cheshire, because it is
encompassed with the Sea and the River, so that the Northwinds being carried
long upon the waters blow the colder; whence it is, that snow lies very long
here upon the hills. The Country affords great plenty of Cattle, but they are
but small.

Millstone is dug in this shire, as well as in Anglesey.

Toward Dee, an arm of the Sea, the fields bear in some places Barley, in
others Wheat, but generally throughout Rye, with twenty fold increase, and
better, (especially every first year, that they be new broken up, and sown)
and afterwardsfour or five crops together of Oats.

At the mouth of the River Cluid the valley on the land seems to be lower,
and to lie under the Sea, and yet the water to the admiration of the beholders
never overfloweth into the valley. There are many things in the world that are
not as they seem, besides Hypocrites.

Near Holy-well in times past was a rich Mine of Silver.

Hard by Kilken is a little well, that at certain times ebbs, and flows.

In this shire is that excellent Well called Saint Winifrids Well, or
Holy-Well, so famous for the strange cures of aches, and lameness, that it has
done. The water ofit is extreme cold; and the brook that flows from it has so
plentiful and violent a stream, that it is presently able to drive a mill. The
stones about it are as it were spotted with bloody spots, and there are many
red stones in the bottom of it. The moss that grows on the sides of it, is of
an exceeding sweet smell, and (they say) though some of it be given to every
stranger that comes, yet it never wastes.

Yorkshire.
YOrkshire being a shire of a very large extent (the biggest in England) has
variety of air, and as great variety of soil, some barren, and some fertile.

In some parts of the Shire, viz. near Shirburn, are quarries of Stone, the
stones whereof being newly hewn, and taken forth of the quarry, are very foft,
but seasoned with wind and weather, of themselves become very hard and durable.
And in other parts is a kind of Limestone, which being burnt serves to manure
and enrich those lands, that are cold and hilly.

About Pomfret and Knaresborough grows great quantity of Liquorice.

About Knaresb. also is great store of yellow Marle, which it may be isa kindly
earth for production of Liquorice, because of the same color with it. But
whether the like Marle be as plentiful about Pomfret, I cannot tell. So much
indeed Speed says, that great plenty of Skirriwort (or Skirrets) grow about
Pomfret, but he says nothing of the quality of the soil.

It is reported that at the suppression of the Abbeys by Henry the eight, in a
certain Chapel in York a Lamp was found burning in a Vault or Sepulcher under
ground, wherein Constantius the Emperor was supposed to have been buried.
Which kind of Lamps Lazius means, when he says that in old time they had a way
to preserve light in Sepulchers by an artificial resolving of gold into a
liquid and fatty substance, which would continue burning for many ages together.

There are many iron Mines about Sheffield.

About the year of Christ 759. the Town of Doncaster was burnt by fire from
heaven.

Some of the inhabitants about Dichmarsh and Marshland are of opinion that the
land there is hollow, and hanging, and that as the waters rise, the land is
also heaved up. And the like (says mine Author) Pomponius Mela has written of
Antrum an Isle some where in France.

About Brotherton is a yellow kind of Marle found, which being cast upon
fields, makes them bear good Corn for many years together. Querie, Whether the
ground here (as about Knaresborough) would not be proper for the planting of
Liquorice.

The River Wherfe is a mighty swift River, roaring, and sometimes driving the
stones in it before it. Though this River have many waters fall into it, yet at
Tadcaster Bridge it is in a manner dry at Midsummer; but in the Winter it is so
deep, that the bridge is scarce able to receive so much water. It seems by the
story that this River has many great shoots into it, and that it is fed
chiefly by land Springs, which run highest in Winter. Of the swiftness of
Rivers we have spoken before.

At Tadcaster Limestone is dug, which is counted a very good and strong Lime.

The Abbey of Fountains has Lead Mines near it

Near Burrow Briggs are certain Pyramids standing, which are supposed by some
to have been made of a factitious stone compounded of pure sand, Lime, Vitriol,
and some unctuous matter. See before, what we have said touching the Stonehenge
upon Salisbury plain.

Under Knaresborough is a Well called Droppingwell, in which the waters Spring
not out of the veins of the earth, but diftill from the Rocks that hang over
it. This water turns wood into stone; for wood put into it will shortly after
be covered over with a stony bark, and at length become stone, as has been
often tried, says Speed.

Alevinus in an Epistle of his to Egelred King of Northumberland speaks of the
raining of blood on St. Peter's Church at York even in a fair day, which
descended in a very violent manner from the top of the roof of the Church; And
thereupon breaks forth into these words, May it not be thought, that blood is
coming upon the land from the North parts? And not long after (to fulfill his
prediction) the Danes invaded England, and among other their outrages, burnt
the City of York.

At Giggleswick a mile from Settle (and a waybit) are small Springs not distant
from one another a quoits cast, the middlemost of which at every quarter of an
hour ebbs and flows about the height of a quarter of a yard, when it is
highest; and at the ebb falls so low, that it is not an inch deep with water.

The little River Derwent increased by rain, does often overflow its banks. It
seems there are great shoots into it, and great windings in it.

The Rivers Humber and Ouse have a very forcible current, and flow with a great
noise, being dangerous for those, that sail therein.

Great store of Goats about Sureby; And upon the hills of this Shire toward
Lancashire is the like for Goats and Deer.

Near Flamborough Head (says Cambden) it is reported, that there are certain
waters called Vipseys, which flow every other year out of blind Springs, and
run with a very violent stream through the low Land, into the Sea. They rise
(they say) from many Springs meeting together within the ground, which makes
their stream so forcible on a sudden. When they are dry, it is a good sign; but
when they break out, they say it is a certain sign of dearth to follow. Yet
when I traveled here; (says he) I could hear nothing of these Springs,
although I enquired very earnestly after them.

Scarborough Castle has a little Well of fresh ater springing out of a Rock,

Scarborough is the chief place for catching of Herrings at time of the year.
In our great grandfathers days (says Cambden) the Herrings kept altogether
about the coast of Norway, but now in our times they swim every year round
about Britain, by shoale in huge numbers, About Midsummer they shoale out of
the deepand vast Northern Seas to the coasts of Scotland, at which time they
are at the fattest. From thence they com to the East coast of England, and from
the middle of August to November is the best taking them between Scarborough
and the Thames mouth. Afterward by some great storm they are carried into the
British Sea, and there till Christmas are caught by Fishermen in their nets.
From hence dividing themselves, and swimming along both sides of Ireland, after
they have coasted round about Britain, they take their course into the North
Seas again, as their home; and there they rest till June, where after they have
cast their spawn, and gotten a young fry, they return again, as before. To this
does that of St. Ambrose agree, where he says, that Fishes in infinite numbers
swim together, and make toward the blasts of the North wind, and by a certain
instinct of nature hasten into the Sea of the North parts; And thus (says he)
they swim through Propontis into Pontus Euxinus.

At Whitbay are Serpents (or snakes) of stone found. Query whether the soil be
such thereabout, as I have described it about Alderley in Glocestershire; as
also whether there be any difference in the shape, color, or bigness of the
one or the other.

Wild Geese flying over cettain fields near Whitbay in the Winter time to pools
and Rivers that are not frozen, in the South parts, suddenly fall to the
ground, from a secret antipathy, as is thought.

Upon the shore by Moulgrave Castle is found Feat. It grows among the Cliffs
and Rocks, where they gape asunder. Before it be polished, it is of a reddish
rusty color, but after it is of an excellent black as every one knows. It is
said by some of the Ancients, that jeat put into water, will take fire and
burn, and that oil quenches it: but experience tells usit is not so.

At Skengrave a little Village in Cleaveland, in the Northriding of the shire,
about the year 1535. a Triton or Manfish was taken, as it is reported, that for
certain days together fed upon raw fish, but espying his opportunity he got
away to Sea again, ans was seen no more.

Upon this shore by Skengrave, whenever it is calm, and the Sea (as it were)
level, there is heard many times on a sudden an horrible and fearful
groaning, as it were a great way off, at which time the fishermen dare not
lanch out into the deep.

Near unto Hunt-cliffe upon the same shore (and not far from the shore) there
appear certain Rocks, about which the Seal-fishes meet together to sleep and
Sun themselves. And upon that Rock that is next the shore, one of the Seals
lies to keep Centinell; and as any man approaches, he either throws down a big
stone, or tumble himself into the water with a great noise, as a signal to
the rest to awake, and get into the water. They are not afraid of women, but
only of men, and therefore they that will catch them, put on women's apparel.
When they are chased by men, if they be destitute of water, they will with
their hinder feet fling backward a cloud of sand and gravel in the faces and
eyes of their pursuers; Yea, and many times drive them away, making them weary
of their design by this means.

Upon the same shore are found stones, some yellow, some reddish, some with a
rough cast crust over them of a Salt matter; which by their smell and taste make
show of Copperas, Nitre and Brimstone. Here are also great store of Marcasites
in color resembling brass.

At Huntly Nab at the roots of the craggy Rocks, that are there upon the shore,
there lie stonesskattering here and there, of diverse bignesses, so
artificially (and yet naturally) round, that one would think they had been
turned for shot for great Ordnance. In which, if you break them, you shall find
stony Serpents wrapped round (that is, just in the form of the Aderley and
Keynsham snakes) but most of them are headless. The way to break them is by
heating them red hot in the fire, and then quenching them in cold water; for by
that means they will fall asunder of themselves. These stones (if that which I
have be of this sort, and he that gave it me assured me it was) are within of a
pellucid whitish matter like Alabaster, though not so white, and are on the out
side covered over with a coat so absolutely like brass, that I think they
cannot be distinguished. The outward form of them is just like the
Glocestershire stones, with a spine and ribbs. The stone that I have is about
an inch in Diameter, but I have seen two or three more, that were near two
inches in Diameter. I have another stone somewhat like this I speak of, but it
is not above a Barley corn in Diameter. It has a brassy coat, and is wreathed
snake-like, as the other: But it is not pellucid within, nor so light colored;
and withal it has no Spine, but instead of it four rows of prickles very
curiously wrought; and it is much bigger toward the head, and lesser at the
tail, then the other. Whether it were found at the same. place with the other
I know not, neither did the giver tell me. There is a place in Provence in
France, near the mouth of the Rhosne, called the Stone field where several
acres are covered with such stones exactly round, (and the like is in the
Island Cuba in America) but whether there be Serpents in them or no, I never
heard nor read.

Gisburgh is much commended for a healthful place, far exceeding Puteoli in
Italy. The land about it is very fertile, and bears flowers a great part of
the year, and is withal extraordinary full of veins of metal, and Alume.
earth of sundry colors, but especially of Ochre and Murray; As also ofIron,
out of which (says my Author Cambden) they have begun to try very good Alume
and Coperas. These veins of earth Sir Thomas Chaloner, Prince Henry his Tutor,
first discovered, by observing, that the leaves of the trees were of a more
weak green color here, then elsewhere; that the Oaks had their roots spreading
broad, but very ebb (or shallow) within the earth, which had much strength,
but small store of sap; and that the earth standing upon clay, and being of
diverse colors; whitish, yellowish, and blew, was never frozen; and in a clear
night glittered in the paths like glass.

Almost at the top of Roseberry-topping (a very high hill hard by Gilsburgh
there is a Spring of water, coming out of a huge Rock, medicinable for fore
eyes. It is likely to be an oily water.

When Roseberry-topping has a cloudy cap on, there commonly follows rain.
Whence this rimeing Proverb is very frequent with the people:

When Roseberry-topping wears a Cap,
Let Cleaveland then beware a clap.
The River Recall hides it self under ground near Elmesly in this Riding.

Abundance of Springs rise together at Hinderskell a little Castle, near
Sherry-Hutton Castle.

The hills in Richmondshire are well stored with Lead, Copper, and Pit-Coals.
And on the tops of these hills stones have been found like Sea-winkles,
Cockles, and other fish. Which (says Cambden) are either natural, or else are
the relics of Noah's flood petrified. Orosius speaks as much of Oysters of
stone found upon hills far from the Sea, which have been eaten in hollow with
the water. In all likelihood these stone-fishes are of the same kind with ours
in Glocestershire.

Plenty of Lead-stones in Wentsedale.

The River Ure is full of Creafishes; but the breed was brought thither out of
the South parts of England by Sir Christopher Medcalfe. It may be from Newbury
in Barkeshire, where there are the like plenty.

The River Swale is a very swift River.

Mask in this shire is full of Lead Ore.

There is a place in this shire called St. Wilfrids Needle, being a passage so
narrow, that one of a mean bulk can but just creep through it. The story goes
of it, that it easily lets chaste women through, but holds fast those, that have
played false. However the thing may seem a Fable at first sight, yet if the
women, that have played false, be with child, it may be true without wonder.

The Bishopric of Durham.
THe air of this County is sharp and piercing, and would be more, but that the
vapors of the Sea do help to dissolve the ice and snow. The Eastern part of it
is the richest, the South is moorish, and the West all Rocky without grass or
grain, only it feeds Cattle, and is well stored with Coal, as indeed the whole
County is, being the greatest in England for great Coals And the Coals grow so
near the surface of the earth, that the Cart wheels turn them up in the
trod-ways.

In the West part of this County are Iron Mines. Query, whether all Mines be
not in a hilly Country.

The East part of the County yields a great plenty of Coal, and yet where it
has plenty of it, it is likewise fruitful and good land.

At Egleston is a Marble quarry.

Near Darlington, whose waters are warm (hot says Cambden) and by an
Antiperistasis, or reverberation of the cold air) are three pits wonderful
deep, called Hell kettles. These are thought to come of an earthquake, that
happened Anno 1179. For on Christmas day (say our Chronicles) at Oxenhall
(which is this place) the ground heaved up alost like a Tower, and so continued
all that day as it were immovable till evening, and then fell in with a very
horrible noise, and the earth swallowed it up, and made in the same place three
deep pits.

It is reported that Bishop Tunstall put a Goose into one of those pits, having
first given her a mark; and the same Goose was found in the River Tees, so that
it seems these Kettles have passages under ground.

Within the River Weere at Butterby near Durham, in Summer time there issues a
salt reddish water, from the sides of certain stones at the ebb and low water,
which with the Sun waxes white, and growing thick beeoms a salt, which the
people thereabouts always use. Cambden says further, that if you pour water
upon these stones, and temper it a little with them, it will suck in a saltish
quality.

Lancashire.
THe air of this County is thin and piercing, not troubled with gross mists or
fogs. And the people are very comely, healthful and long lived, and not subject
to strange diseases. The soil is not very fruitful, yet it breeds great
number of Cattle, that are of huge proportion, and have goodly heads and large
spread horns. Here is also fish and foul on the Sea coasts in good plenty, and
in other places of the shire the like store of Coals, and a competent increase
of flax. Where the ground is plain, it is good for wheat, and barley; that
which lies at the bottom of hills is better for oats.

Along the Sea side in many places lie heaps of Sand, upon which the people
pour water till it contract a saltish humor from the sand; and thus they boil
with turfs, till it become white salt.

This shire in diverse places suffers much by the flowing fury of the Sea, as
in Fourness, much of which the Sea has eaten away by little and little. The
cause is plain. For who can expect less, where a shore full of quicksands (as
this is) is washed, and beaten upon by a Sea, hardly ever quiet, such as every
one knows the Irish Sea is, unless it be sometimes in Summer.

Not far from Fourness Felles lies the greatest standing Water of England,
called Winander Mere, which is wonderful deep, and ten miles over, and all
paved (as it were) in the bottom. There are many such places in England, that
are naturally paved. When I went to Keynsham ( by Bristol), to search for the
snake-stones, there I found the Lane (where they are) as it were all paved with
broad hard stones, and the fnakes lying upon the middle of the surface of the
stones. We have also in some places of Kent such natural pavements; And such I
take stone-streets by Hithe to be if it were not a work of the Romans.

This Winander Mere breeds a kind of fish called a Chare, which is no where
else to be found.

The Mosses in this shire are very unwholesome places to live in. If the upper
coat of this mossie earth be pared away, it yields fat turfes for fuel, and
sometimes trees, that have lien long under ground as it is thought; unless they
grew there, which is unlikely. In diverse places also these mosses underneath
afford abundance of Marle to enrich land with.

On the banks of the River Irwell is a kind of reddish stone.

About Manchester are quarries of very good stone.

By Chatmoss in this shire is a low mossey ground, very large, a great part of
which (says Cambden) not long ago, the Brooks swelling high, carried quite
away with them, whereby the Rivers were corrupted, and a number of fresh fish
perished. In which place now lies a low vale watered with a little Brook, where
trees have been dug up, lying along, which are supposed by some to have come
thus. The channels of the Brooks being not scoured, the Brooks have risen, and
made all the land moorish; that lay lower then others. Whereby the roots of the
trees being loosened by reason of the bogginess of the ground, or by the water
finding a passage under ground, the trees have either by their own weight, or
by some storm being blown down, and so sunk into that soft earth, and been
swallowed up. For it is observable, that trees are no where dug out of the
earth, but where the earth is boggy; And even upon hills, such moorish and moist
grounds are commonly found. The wood of these trees burns very bright and clear
like torchwood (which perhaps is by reason of the Bitumenous earth, in which
they have been so long) so that some think them to be Fur Trees, but it is
not so says Cambden. Such mighty trees are often found in Holland, which are
thought to be undermined by the waves working into the shire, or by winds
driven forward, and brought to those lower places, where they settled and sunk.
But Querie (says Cambden) whether they be not subterraneous Trees, growing
under ground, as well as plants, and other creatures.

At Ferneby the people use Turfs for fire and candle both. And when they dig
them, they find under them a certain dead and blackish water, upon which swimms
a kind of fat oily matter, and in it there are little flshes, which the diggers
take. And just in the same manner (says Cambden) fishes are dug out of the
earth at Heraclea, and Tios in Pontus. But that which is much stranger, is,
that in Paphlagonia many, and those very good fishes are gotten by digging in
places nothing waterish; but (says he) this is a secret in nature.

On the very top of Pendle-hill grows a peculiar plant, called Cloudesberry, as
though it came out of the clouds. This hill (says Cambden) lately did the
country much harm near it, by reason of an extraordinary deal of water gushing
out of it. It is also famous for an infallible sign of rain, whenever the
top of it is covered with a mist.

There are three great hills here, not far distant asunder, seeming to be as
high, as the clouds, which are Ingleborrow, Penigent, and this Pendle.

In the River Lune near Cockersand Abbey is great store of Salmon; That fish
delighting, and thriving best in shallow, sandy, and clear Rivers.

Cumberland.
THis County (like the rest of the rough Northern Countries) has sharp
piercing air which would be worse, if the high Hills in the North did not break
of the storms and falling Snow. The soil is fertile for the most part, both for
Corn and Cattle; and the Maritime places are well furnished with Fish and Fowl,
and the Rivers breed a kind of Musck that bears Pearl. And Speed tells us,
that in the mouth of the River Jet, as they lie gaping and sucking in the dew
that falls, the people gather them, and sell them.

In this County are many Mines of Copper, especially at Keswick, and Newland,
where likewise the Black-Lead is found. Formerly there were Veins of Gold and
Silver in the Copper-Mines about Newland.

At Salkelds upon the River Eden, is a Trophee of Victory, called by the
Country people, Long Meg and her Daughters. They are 77 stones, each of them
ten foot high above ground, and one amongst the rest is fifteen foot high.

Skiddaw-Hill rises up with two mighty high Heads, (like Parnassus) and
beholds Scruffel Hill in Annandale, within Scotland: And according as mists
rise or fall upon these heads, the people thereby prognosticate of the change
of weather, singing this Rhyme:

If Skiddaw have a Cap,
Scruffel wots full well of that.
There are two other exeeeding high Hills in this shire, called Lauvellin and
Casticand.

The sea (as is before said) has eaten a great part of the Land away, upon the
shores of these Western shires. There are on the shore of this shire Trees
discovered sometimes by the Winds at low water, which are else covered over with
Sand. And it is reported by the people dwelling thereabouts, that they dig up
trees without boughs, out of the ground in the mossie places of the shire, and
that by the direction of the dew in Summer; for they observe, that the dew
never stands upon that ground under which they lie.

The earth and stones at Penrith are of a reddish color.

Some Empirick Chirurgions of Scotland take their journey to the Picts Wall
every year, in the beginning of Summer, to gather vulnerary Plants, which they
say grow plentifully there, and are very effectual, being sown and planted by
the Romans for Chirurgical uses.

Northumberland.
THe air of this shire also is sharp and piercing of itsself; but the Germane
Ocean does somewhat abate the edge of it, and helps to dissolve the Ice and
Snow. The soil is rough, hard, and barren, and it should seem the inhabitants
are long lived; for one Mr. Macklain a Scotch man, Parson of Lesbury, (who died
about the year 1659.) did in the year 1657. (two years before) renew his youth;
so that (though for 40. years before he could not read without Spectacles,
being 116. years of age) he would then read the smallest print without them. He
had his hair, which before he had lost, came again like a child's, etc. Which
puts me in mind of an aged Dean, who had the like renovation of age, and when
he dyed, he had this Epitaph bestowed by some barbarous pen upon his Tomb:

Hic jacet edentulus, Canus, atque Decanus;
Rursum dentescit, nigrescit, and hic requiescit.
There are Hills hard by North Tine so boggy, and standing with Water on the
top, that no Horseman is able to ride over them. And yet there are great heaps
of stones cast up together upon them, which it may be, is the mark of some
victory.

By Bywell Castle is great store of Salmons: As indeed there is in most of the
Rivers in the North of England, and in Scotland.

Coquet Isle has a Vein of Sea-Cole in it.

The Isle of MAN.
Has cold and sharp air: It yields much Hemp and Flax. The Cattle and Sheep
are smaller then ours in England, being much like those in Ireland, which are
but small neither, nor have their Cattle so fair a head as ours.

Many Trees are found and dug out of the earth in this Island: And they have
here a clammy turf, which they burn for their fuel.

In the Calf of Man are abundance of Puffins, as also Bernacles, which the
people there say are bred of rotten wood.

The soil of the Isle of Man (says H. Lloyd) is reasonable fertile, both for
Corn and Grass, and yields good plenty of Barley, Wheat and Rye, but especially
of Oats, and feeds great store of Cattle and Sheep; yet the Land is more waste
and barren then that of Anglesey; and the people that are born and bred here,
are weaker, and less fit for the Wars.

Westmorland.
THe air here is sharp and piercing, not subject to gross sogs and vapors, by
reason of which, the people are free from strange and infectious Diseases,
being very healthful, and living generally to great ages. The soil is moorish
and barren for the most part, yet the Southern part is is not so bad as the
rest.

Near the River Loder, is a spring that ebbs and flows many times in a day: And
in the same place there are huge stones like Pyramids (some of them are nine
foot high, and fourteen foot thick) pitched directly in a row for a mile
together

In the River Can, near Kendale, are two Catarrhacts, or Water-falls, where the
waters descend with a great fall, and mighty noise. And when that which
stands North from the Neighbor living between them., sounds clearer and
loud then the other, they certainly look for fair weather to follow; but when
that on the south side does so, they expect fogs and showers of rain.

By Kirkby Lonsdale are many deep and hollow places like Caves.

In ancient time the Pearl-bearing Muskles are found upon this shore, which
conceive by the dew which they suck in; and they are to be found at this day
both here, and in the rivers of Cumberland.

Scotland.
THE air of this Kingdom has its variety according to the situation of
several places and parts of it; but generally it is healthful, because cold.
The Soil in the High-lands is very poor and barren generally, but in the low
lands it is good, and bears excellent Oats, much ranker then ours in England.
The people are strong of body, and of good proportion. Their Cattle are but
small. Their best Nags are bred about Galloway. For Bernacles, or Soland.
Geese, they have so infinite a number of them, that they even darken the Suns
sight. These Geese are most rife about the Basse, an Island at the mouth of the
Frith, going up to Edenbrough; and hither they bring an incredible number of
fishes, and withal, such an abundance of sticks, and little twigs to build
their nests, that the people are very plentifully provided of fuel, who also
make a great gain of their Feathers and Oil. There has been great dispute
among the Learned, about the generation of these Geese, some holding that they
were bred of the leaves of the Bernacle Tree falling into the Waters others
that they were bred of moist rotten; Wood lying in the Waters, but it is since
found, that they come of an Egg, and are hatched as all other Geese are.

Lough-Rian is full of Herrings and Stone-fishes says Cambden.

Near the head of the River Cluyd in Crawford Moor, in wild, waste places,
certain Husbandmen of the Country after great store of violent rain, happened
to find small pieces like scrapings of Gold, which gave them hopes of finding a
Mine of Gold. Indeed (says Cambden) there is Azure gotten out every day
without any labor at all. Thus says Cambden, Ortelius tells us, That in
Drisdale in Scotland is a Mine of Gold, in which also is found that which they
commonly call Lazure. It may be these are but two diverse stories of one and
the same thing.

There is a Well near Edinburgh (says Speed) that floteth with Bitumen: There
is a Spring about two miles from Edenbrough (says Ortelius) on the top of the
Water whereof, drops of Oil continually, swim, so as if you take none from it,
there will be never the more; and if you take any from thence, there will be
never the less: Which Oil is good for the roughness of the skin Likely the same
thing diversely related.

In Galloway (says Ortelius) is a Lake called Myrtoun, part of whose Waters
freezes in the Winter, as other Waters do; but the other part was never known
to be frozen in the greatest Frost that ever were.

In Loghabre are Iron-Mines, says Cambden. And somewhere in Scotland Ortelius
says there are Lead-Mines.

In the Province of Coile (says Ortelius) about ten Miles from Air, is a
stone hardly twelve foot high, and 33. cubits thick, called the Deaf Rock on
the one side of which, though you make never so great a noise, nay if you shoot
off a piece of Ordinance, it shall hardly be heard on the other side, except
you be a good way off from it, and then the sound may easily be perceived.

In Buqhan Rats are never seen: And if any be brought in thither, they will not
live:

This Country of Buqhan yields the finest Wool in all Scotland: And Lorn the
best barley.

The Rivers of the coast of Buqhan are well stored with Salmon, and yet they
never enter into the River Ratra.

On the banks of this River Ratra, in Buqhan, is a Cave near unto Stanys
Castle, in which is Water, which dropping out of a natural Vault, presently
turns into Pyramidal stones, of a middle nature, between ice and hard stone.
It is brittle and crumbling, and never comes to the hardness of Marble: And if
the Cave were not rid of these stones, as they fall, the whole Cave would
shortly be filled.

The Water of the River Nessa, and of the Lough-Nessa, is always warm, and
never freezeth.

The Lough-Lomund is about 20. or 24. miles long, and eight miles broad. It is
well stored with fish, and particularly with one kind of fish, very wholesome
and good, called a Pollac, which is no where else to be found. Necham says,
that this Lough turns sticks into stones. In this Lough (says Ortelius) are
thirty Islands, whereof diverse have Villages inhabited, and Churches; and one
of them, which is very good for feeding of Cattle, flotes up and down in the
Lake, as it is carried by the Wind: Not unlike those Islands reported by Pliny
to be in the Lake, Vadimon, which are full of Grass, and covered over with
rushes and reeds, and swim up and down in the Lake. There are the like also
near St. Omars by Calais. In the Lough Lomund also are fishes without finns.
Further, it is the nature of this Lough to rage, and rise in waves most of all
in the fairest and calmest weather, so that boats are often cast away.

The River Douglass has a black greenish Water.

In the Wood Caledonia in old time, were white Bulls, wild, and very fierce,
whose manes were like Lions, thick and curled: And so hateful they were to
mankind, that they abhorred whatsoever was handled, or breathed upon by men.
And Martial and Plutarch speak of bears here,

In Sutherland (says Cambden) there are whole Hills of white Marble.

Toward the North of Scotland (says Speed) there be Mountains all of
Alablaster, and some all of Marble.

Fife is well stored with Pit-Coals; and the shores of it are as largely stored
with Oysters, and other Shel-fish.

In the Rivers Dee and Done is great store of Salmon, and a shel-fish called
the Horse-Muskle, in which there grow Pearls, as Orient as the best.

The Country of Athole is infamous for witches, and wicked women.

Near Falkirk (says Lythgow) remain the ruins and marks of a Town, etc.
swallowed up into the Earth by an Earthquake, and the void place is filled
with water.

It is credibly reported (says Ortelius) that in Argile there is a kind of
stone to be found, which if it be covered but a while with straw or flax, it
will set it on fire.

The same Author says, That in the Country of Carict are very great Oxen,
whose flesh is very tender, and of a very pleasant and delicate taste, and the
fat never waxes hard, but is thin, like liquid Oil; and that the sea also on
this coast affords great store of Oysters, Cockles, Congers, Herrings (at time
of year) etc. Also he says, That

At the mouth of the River Frith, in the main Sea, is a very high Rock, out of
whose top a spring of fresh water runs abundantly.

The snow lies all the year long upon the hills in Ross.

A huge piece of Amber (says Cambden) as big as an Horse, was not long since
cast upon the shore of Buqhan. Note that this shore lies almost over against
the mouth of the Baltic sea, in which sea upon the shores of Prussia and
Pomerland, both Jeat and Amber are often found, as Geographers generally assure
us. Serapio, and the Modern Philosophers say, that Amber is a clammy Bituminous
Earth, lying under the sea, and by the sea side, of which tempests cast part
upon the shore, and fishes devour the reit.

Near a place called Disert in Fife, which stands by the sea side, is a Heath,
where there is great plenty of an Earthy Bitumen, and it partly burns.

In the Country of Argile (says Cambden) at this day there are Kine and red
Deer ranging wild upon the hills.

In the Country of Murray is a Mere that breeds and maintains a great
abundance of Swans, by the help of the herb, called Olorina, which grows very
plentifully in it, says Cambden.

The River of Aberden breeds great store of Salmon.

The Wool in Galloway (says Lithgow) is nothing inferior to that of Biscay in
Spain: And the Mutton is as sweet as the Wool is fine.

Between the coast of Cathnes, and the Isle of South Rannaldshaw in Orknay
(says the same Author) is a dreadful Frith or Gulf, in the North west end of
which, by reason of the meeting of several (he says nine) contrary tides or
Currents, is a Mael-stream, or great Whirl-pool, that whirleth ever about. And
if any Ship, Boat, or Bark, come within the sphere of its activity, (as it may
be called) they must quickly throw over some thing into it, as a barrel, a
piece of timber, or such like, or else the Vessel will inevitably be swallowed
up. Which the Cathnes and Orkney Mariners know very well, and observe it as a
constant custom to redeem themselves that way from danger.

The HEBRIDES.
In Alize, one of these lsles (says Ortelius) is abundance of Soland-Geese:
And the same Author says, that another Isle of them is a fertile soil for
Corn, and rich in Veins of Metal.

The ORCADES.
In these Isles grow no trees; yet the Land bears barley, and other grain, but
no wheat at all: They breed no Serpent, nor any venomous beast; nor will any
such creature live, being brought into one of these Islands from other places.
They have store of barley (says Hector Boethius) and make much Ale, and are
great drinkers; and yet you shall never see a drunken man, or a mad man, or a
natural fool among them. And they live very long without the use of physic.

In the Isle Pomonia is plenty of tin and lead.

The Island of Zeal (says de la Mothe le Vayer) one of the Isles of Schetland,
will not endure any creature that is not bred and born there.

Holy Island.
The air of it is sickly, because it is both cold and foggy; the soil is rocky
and barren.

Farne. Island.
This Isle has a very sickly air, subject to the Dysentery (or bloody Flux)
and other diseases by reason of the frequent fogs there. It is also much
troubled with tempests of wind, storms of rain, and rage of the Sea. The soil
is barren, and good for little. This Island, and Holy-Island yield good store
of fish and foul.

Garnesey
Has a very fruitful soil. This Island has neither Toad, Snake, Adder, or
any other venomous creature; but Jersey has great plenty of them.

Among the Rocks in this Island is found the hard stone, called Smyris, which
Glasiers use, and Goldsmiths and Lapidaries to cut their stones with.

Jersey.
The air of this Island is very healthful, not subject to any diseases, but
agues in September; And the Island is as fertile. Their sheep have most of them
4 horns a piece, but a very fine and white Wool; of which our Jersey (as we
call it) is made. Upon the coast of this Island in Summer time they catch
excellent Conger and Lobster:

In Jersey they have no wood, butburn the Sea-weed (called Fucus Marinus) being
dried at the fire which grows plentifully on the Rocks there, and with the
ashes of this fuel they manure their fields, and make them very battle.

Alderny.
Both the air and land of this Island are commended to be indifferent good. In
this Island was once found (as they say) a Giants tooth as big as a man's fist,
that was thought to be one of his Molares or Grinders. But I believe it was
rather an Elephants tooth.

Advertisements to the Curiou and Ingenious.
In the year 1653. I published a little Pamphlet (or Almanac) entitled,
SyzygiasticonInstauratum, wherein I desired those that were Astronomically
addicted to take notice of a little long black Cloud, lying cross the milky
way, between the two Constellations of Cygnus and Cepheus, and neither
increasing nor diminishing, nor moving from the place it first appeared in. I
conceived then it was some new apparition, but finding it ever since in the
same place where it was, and not perceiving it to alter in any respect, I began
to think, that it has been always there, and will be so to the end; And that,
though it be obvious to every vulgar eye, yet it might lie hid till our age,
through the inobvertency of the greater part of Astronomers. Besides this,

There is another thing, which I must needs recommend to the observation of
Mathematical men. Which is, that in February, and for a little before, and a
little after that month (as I have observed several years together) about six
in the evening, when the Twilight has almost deserted the Horizon, you shall
see a plainly discernable way of the Twilight striking up toward the Pleiades
or seven Stars, and seeming almost to touch them. It is to be observed any
clear night, but it is best illuc nocte. There is no such way to be observed at
any other time of the year, (that I can perceive) nor any other way at that
time to be perceived darting up elsewhere. And I believe it has been, and will
be constantly visible at that time of the year. But what the cause of it in
nature should be, I cannot yet imagine, but leave it to further euquiry.

There have been lately three sorts of Telescopes invented by this Author, of
two whereof trial has been made, by M. Reeves living over against the foot
and leg in Long-Acre: And the Author makes no doubt at all of the third.

At the said M. Richard Reeves are to be had all sorts of Telescopes, and all
other sorts of Optic glasses.

ERRATA.
In the Title over the pages for Britania, read Britannia, page 7. line ult.
for Veculam read Verulam, p 20.l 26. for Sprayes r. Osprayes, p. 25.11. for
will live and fish thrive in, r. fish will live and thrive in, p.36 l.9. been
r. being, p.45.l.4. aster Luckington add (and) p.55.l 15, and 17. death r.
dearth, l.18 usual r. unusual, p.55 l.1.r. Hippoctates, l.6. using r. rising, l
8. prosage r. prove, p.56.l.32. seeming r. seems, p.63. l,15. breath r.
breadth, p.98. l.5. sequir. sesqui, p. 101 l. 13. and 102. for Oxford r. Orford.


