Sir Josiah Child's Proposals, For the Relief and Employment of the POOR.
THis is a calm Subject, and thwarts no common or private interest amongst us,
except that of the common Enemy of Mankind ( the Devil) so I hope that what
shall be offered toward the effecting of so universally acceptable a Work as
this, and the removal of the innumerable inconveniences that do now and have in
all Ages attended this Kingdom, through defect of such Provision for the Poor,
will not be ill taken, although the Plaster at first essay do not exactly fit
the Sore.

In the Discourse of this subject, I shall first assert some particulars, which
I think are agreed by common Consent, and from thence take occasion to proceed
to what is more doubtful.

1. That our poor in England have always been in a most sad and wretched
condition, some Famished for want of Bread, others starved with Cold and
Nakedness, and many whole Families in all the out-Parts of Cities and great
Towns, commonly remain in a languishing, nasty and useless Condition,
Uncomfortable to themselves, and Unprofitable to the Kingdom, this is confessed
and lamented by all Men.

2. That the Children of our Poor bred up in Beggary and Laziness, do by that
means become not only of unhealthy Bodies, and more than ordinary subject to
many loathsome Diseases, whereof very many die in their tender Age, and if any
of them do arrive to years and strength, they are, by their idle habits
contracted in their Youth, rendered for ever after indisposed to Labor, and
serve only to stock the Kingdom with Thieves and Beggars.

3. That if all our impotent Poor were provided for, and those of both Sexes
and all Ages that can do work of any kind, employed, it would redound some
Hundreds of Thousands of Pounds per annum to the public advantage.

4. That it is our Duty to God and Nature, so to Provide for, and Employ the
Poor.

5. That by so doing one of the great sins (for which this Land ought to mourn)
would be removed.

6. That our Forefathers had pious Intentions toward this Work, as appears by
the many Statutes made by them to this purpose.

7. That there are places in the World, wherein the Poor are so provided for,
and employed, as in Holland, Hambrough, New England and others, and as I am
informed now in the City of Paris.

Thus far we all agree: The first Question then that naturally occurs is,
Question, How comes it to pass that in England we do not, nor ever did
comfortably maintain and employ our Poor?

The common Answers to this Question are, two.

1. That our Laws to this purpose are as good as any in the World, but we fail
in the execution.

2. That formerly in the days of our pious Ancestors the work was done, but now
Charity is decreased, and that is the reason we see the Poor so neglected as
now they are.

In both which Answers (I humbly conceive) the Effect is mistaken for the
Cause: For though it cannot be denied, but there has been, and is a great
failure in the Execution of those Statutes which relate to the poor, yet I say,
the cause of that failure, has been occasioned by defect of the Laws
themselves.

For otherwise, what is the reason that in our late times of Confusion and
Alteration, wherein almost every party in the Nation, at one time or other,
took their turn at tbe Helm; and all had that Compass (those Laws) to Stear by,
and yet none of them could, or ever did, conduct the Poor into a Harbor of
security to them, and profit to the Kingdom, i. e. none sufficiently maintained
the impotent, and employed the Indigent amongst us: and if this was never done
in any Age, nor by any sort of Men whatsoever in this Kingdom, who had the use
of those Laws now in force, it seems to me a very strong Argument that it never
could, nor ever will be done by those Laws, and that consequently the defect
lies in the Laws themselves, not in the Men, i. e. those that should put them
in Execution.

As to the second Answer to the aforesaid Question, wherein want of Charity is
assigned for another cause why the poor are now so much neglected, I think it
is a scandalous, ungrounded Accusation of our Contemporaries (except in
relation to building of Churches, which I confess this generation is not so
propense to as former have been) for most that I converse with, are not so much
troubled to part with their Money, as how to place it, that it may do good, and
not hurt to the Kingdom: For, if they give to the Beggars in the Streets, or at
their Doors, they fear they may do hurt by encouraging that lazy unprofitable
kind of Life; and if they give more than their proportions in their respective
Parishes, that (they say) is but giving to the Rich, for the Poor are not set
on Work thereby, nor have the more given them; but only their rich Neighbors
pay the less. And for what was given in Churches to the visited Poor, and to
such as were impoverished by the Fire; we have heard of so many and great
Abuses of that kind of Charity, that most men are under sad discouragements in
relation thereunto.

I Write not this to divert any Man from Works of Charity of any kind: He that
gives to any in want does well, but he that gives to Employ and Educate the
Poor, so as to render them useful to the Kingdom, in my judgment does better.

And here by the way, not to leave Men at a loss how to dispose of what God
shall incline their Hearts to give for the benefit of the Poor, I think it not
impertinent to propose the Hospitals of this City, and poor laboring people
that have many Children, and make a hard shift to sustain them by their
industry, whereof there are multitudes in the out Parts of this City, as the
best objects of Charity at present.

But to return to my purpose, viz. to prove that the want of Charity likewise
that is now, and always has been, in relation to the poor, proceeds from a
defect in our Laws. Ask any Charitable minded Man as he goes along the Streets
of London, viewing the Poor, viz. Boys, Girls, Men and Women of all Ages, and
many in good Health, etc. why he and others do not take care for the setting
those poor Creatures to Work? Will he not readily answer, that he wishes
heartily it could be done, though it cost him a great part of his Estate, but
he is but one Man, and can do nothing toward, it, giving them Money as has
been said, being but to bring them into a liking and continuance in that way.

The second Question then is,

Question 2. Wherein lies the defect of our present Laws relating to the poor?

I answer, that there may be many, but I shall here take notice of one only,
which I think to be Fundamental, and which until altered, the poor in England
can never be well provided for, or Employed; and that when the said Fundamental
Error is well amended, it is almost impossible they should lack either Work or
Maintenance.

The said radical Error I esteem to be the leaving it to the care of every
Parish to maintain their own poor only; upon which follows the shifting off,
sending or whipping back the poor Wanderers to the place of their Birth, or
last abode: the practice whereof I have seen many years in London, to signify
as much as ever it will, which is just nothing of good to the Kingdom in
general, or the Poor thereof, though it be sometimes by accident to some of
them a Punishment without effect; I say without effect, because it reforms not
the Party, nor disposes the Minds of others to Obedience, which are the true
ends of all Punishment.

As for instance, a poor idle Person, that will not Work, or that no Body will
Employ in the Country, comes up to London to set up the Trade of Begging, such
a Person probably may Beg up and down the Streets seven years, it may be seven
and twenty, before any body asks why she does so, and if at length she has
the ill hap in some Parish to meet with a more vigilant Beadle than one of
twenty of them are, all he does is but to lead her the length of five or six
Houses into another Parish, and then concludes, as his Masters the Parishioners
do, that he has done the part of a most diligent Officer: but suppose he
should yet go further to the end of his Line, which is the end of the Law; and
the perfect Execution of his Office; that is, suppose he should carry this poor
Wretch to a Justice of the Peace, and he should order the Delinquent to be
Whipped, and sent from Parish to Parish, to the place of her Birth or first
Abode, which not one Justice of twenty (through pity or other cause) will do,
even this is a great charge upon the Country, and yet the business of the
Nation it self wholly undone: for no sooner does the Delinquent arrive at the
place assigned, but for shame or idleness she presently deserts it, and wanders
directly back, or some other way, hoping for better Fortune, whilst the Parish
to which she is sent, knowing her a Lazy, and perhaps a worse quality'd Person,
is as willing to be rid of her as she is to be gone from thence.

If it be here retorted upon me, that by my own Confession, much of this
mischief happens by the Non, or ill Execution of the Laws, I say better
Execution than you have seen you must not expect; and there was never a good
law made that was not well executed, the fault of the Law causing a failure of
execution, it being natural to all Men to use the remedy next at hand, and rest
satisfied with shifting the evil from their own Doors; which in regard they can
so easily do, by threatening or thrusting a poor Body out of the verge of their
own Parish, it is unreasonable and vain to hope that ever it will be otherwise.

For the Laws against Inmates, and empowering the Parishioners to take a
Security before they suffer any poor persons to Inhabit amongst them; it may be
they were prudent Constitutions at the times they were made (and before England
was a place of Trade) and may be so still in some Countries, but I am sure in
Cities and great Towns of Trade they are altogether improper, and contrary to
the practice of other Cities and Trading Towns abroad. The Riches of a City, as
of a Nation, consisting in the multitude of Inhabitants; and if so, you must
allow Inmates, or have a City of Cottages. And if a right course be taken for
the sustentation of the Poor, and setting them on Work, you need invent no
Stratagems to keep them out, but rather to bring them in. For the resort of
Poor to a City or Nation well managed, is in effect the Conflux rf Riches to
that City or Nation; and therefore the subtle Dutch receive and relieve, or
employ all that come to them, not enquiring what Nation, much less what Parish
they are of.

Question 3. The third Question: If the defect be in our Laws, how shall we
find a remedy that may be rational and consistent?

This I confess is a hard and difficult Question, it is one of the Ardua Regni,
and may very well deserve the most deliberate consideration of our wisest
Counselors. And if a whole Session of Parliament were employed on this sigular
concern, I think it would be time spent as much to the Glory of God and good of
this Nation, as in any thing that noble and worthy Patriots of their Country
can be engaged in: But seeing I have adventured thus far, I shall humbly
proceed to offer some general Proposals that have a tendency toward the
effecting this great Work, which being seriously thought of and debated by
wiser men, may be capable of snch melioration as may render them in a great
measure effectual to the Kingdom in general, although at present, to prevent
that common Objection, that great Mutations are dangerous; I shall only propose
them to be experimented in these parts of the Kingdom, which are the Vitals of
our Body Politic, which being once made sound, the cure of the rest will not
be difficult.

Proposition 1. First then I Propose, That the City of London and Westminster,
Borough of Southwark, and all other places within the usual Lines of
Cemmunication, described in the Weekly Bills of Mortality, may by Act of
Parliament be associated into one Province, or Line of Communication for relief
of the Poor.

2. That there be one Assembly of Men (and such as they shall from time to time
appoint and deputise) entrusted with the care for, and treasure of all the Poor
within the said Pale or Line of Communication.

3. That the said Assembly be incorporated by Act of Parliament, with perpetual
Succession, by the Name of Fathers of the Poor, or some other honorable and
significant Title.

4. That all Constables, Churchwardens, Overseers, or other Officers in all
Parishes, within the said Line, be subordinate and accomptable to the said
Fathers of the Poor, and their Deputies, for, and in all things relating to the
poor.

5. That the said Fathers of the Poor may have liberty to assess and receive
into their common Treasury, for relief of the Poor, so much Money from every
Parish as they yearly paid to that purpose any of the three Years preceding
this Constitution, and to compel the payment thereof, but not of more.

6. That the said Fathers tf the Poor, and their Deputies, may have very large
and sufficient power in all things relating to the poor, and particularly to
have and receive the charitable benevolence of all persons, once every Lords
Day, in every Parish Church, and in any other Meeting of Pious Christians, and
at any other time or times which they shall think fit.

7. That the said Fathers of the Poor, and such as they shall authorize, may
have power to purchase Lands, erect and endow Workhouses, Hospitals, and
Houses of Correction, and to exercise all other powers relating to the Poor,
that any number of Justices of the Peace now may do, in their Quarter Sessions,
or otherwise.

8. That the said Fathers of the Poor, may have power to send such Poor beyond
the Seas as they shall think fit into his Majesty's Plantations, taking
Security for their comfortable Maintenance during their service, and for their
freedom afterward.

9. That the said Fathers of the Poor may have Power to erect petty Banks, and
Lumbards for the benefit of the Poor, if they shall find it convenient, and
also to receive the one half of what is paid at all the Doors of Play Houses,
and have the Patent for Farthings, and to do whatever else his Majesty and the
Parliament shall think fit to recommend to them, or leave to their discretion.

10. That the Treasure that shall be Collected for this purpose, shall be
accounted sacred, and that it be Felony to misapply, conceal, lend, or convert
it to any other use or purpose whatsoever.

11. That there be no Oaths, or other Tests imposed upon the said Fathers of
the Poor, at their admission, to bar our Nonconformists, amongst whom there
will be found some excellent Instruments for this good Work, and such as will
constantly attend it (for if they be kept out, the People will be cold in their
Charity, and in their hopes of success.)

12. That the said Fathers of the Poor may constantly wear some honorable
Medal, such as the King and Parliament shall devise, besides the Green Staff
which is now used in London to such like purpose, (but upon extraordinary days
only) to denote their Authority and Office at all times, and in all places,
after the manner of the Habits in Spain, or rather as have all the Familiars of
the Inquisition in most Romish Countries, with admirable effect, though to a
wicked purpose; the consequence whereof will be, that the said Fathers of the
Poor, being numerous, and dispersed by their Habitations and Business, into
most parts of their Province, will readily see any neglects of Officers, and as
easily redress them; the Medal which they wear about them, being a sufficient
Warrant to command Obedience from all Parish-Officers wherever they come,
although their Persons be not known there.

13. That the said Fathers of the Poor may have liberty to admit into their
Society, and all Powers and Privileges equal with them, any persons that are
willing to serve God, their King and Country, in this pious and public Work,
the persons desiring to be so admitted, paying at their admission 100 l. or
more into the Poors Treasury. as a demonstration of the sincerity of their
Intentions to labor in and cultivate this most Religious Vineyard. This I only
offer, because the number of the said Fathers of the Poor hereafter mentioned,
may be thought rather too few than too many.

14. That the said Fathers of the Poor, besides the Authority now exercised by
Justices of the Peace, may have some less limited Powers given them, in
relation to the punishment of their own, and Parish Officers, by pecuniary
mulcts for the poors benefit in case of neglect, and otherwise as his Majesty
and the Parliament shall think fit.

15. That the said Fathers of the Poor may have freedom to set the Poor on work
about whatsoever Manufacture they think fit, with a Non-obstante to all Patents
that have been or shall be granted to any private person or persons for the
sole Manufacture of any Commodity, the want of which privilege, I have been
told, was a prejudice to the Workhouse at Clerkenwell, in their late design of
setting their Poor Children about making of Hangings.

16. That all Vacancies by reason of Death of any of the said Fathers of the
Poor, be perpetually supplied by Election of the Survivors.

Quest. 4. The fourth Question is, Who shall be the Persons entrusted with so
great a Work, and such excess of power?

This is a Question likewise of some difficulty, and the more in regard of our
present Differences in Religion, but I shall answer it as well as I can.

In general I say, They must be such as the people must have ample satisfaction
in, or else the whole design will be lost: For if the universality of the
People be not satisfied with the Persons, they will never part with their
Money; but if they be well satisfied therein, they will be miraculously
charitable.

Quest. 5. This begets a fifth Question, What sort of men the People will be
most satisfied in?

I Answer, I think in none so well as such only as a Common Hall of the
Liverymen of London shall make choice of, it being evident by the experience of
many Ages, that the several Corporations in London are the best Administrators
of what is left to Chaoitable Uses, that have ever been in this Kingdom, which
is manifest in the regular, just and prudent management of the Hospitals of
London, and was wisely observed by Dr. Collet, Dean of St. Paul' s, that
prudent Ecclesiastic, when he left the Government of that School, and other
great Revenues assigned by him for charitable Uses, unto the disposition of the
Mercers Company.

Object. But here it may be Objected, That Country Gentlemen, who have Power in
places of their Residences, and pay out of their large Estates considerable
sums toward the Maintenance of their Poor within the afore-limited Precincts,
may be justly offended if they likewise have not a share in the distribution of
what shall be raised to that purpose.

Answ. I answer, the force of this Objection may be much taken off, if the City
be obliged to choose but a certain number out of the City, as suppose seventy
for London, ten out of Southwark for that Borough, twenty for Westminster,
this would best satisfy the People, and I think do the work: But if it be
thought too much for the City to have the choice of any more than their own
seventy, the Justices of Peace in their Quarter Sessions, may nominate and
appoint their own number of Persons to assist for their respective
Jurisdictions, and so to supply the vacancy in case of Death, etc. But all must
be Conjunctive, but one Body Politic, or the work will never be done.

Quest. 6. The sixth Question is, What will be the Advantage to the Kingdom in
general, and to the Poor in particular, that will accrue by such a Society of
men, more than is enjoined by the Laws at present?

I answer, Innumerable and unspeakable are the Benefits of this Kingdom that
will arise from the Consultations and Debates of such a wise and honest
Council, who being men so elected as aforesaid, will certainly conscionably
study and labor to discharge their Trust in this service of God, their King,
and Country.

1st. The Poor, of what quality soever, as soon as they are met with, will be
immediately relieved or set on Work where they are found, without hurrying them
from place to place, and torturing their Bodies to no purpose.

2. Charitable-minded-men will know certainly where to dispose of their
Charity, so as it may be employed to right purposes.

3. Housekeepers will be freed from the intolerable encumbrance of Beggars at
their Doors.

4. The Plantations will be regularly supplied with Servants, and those that
are sent thither well provided for.

5. The said Assembly will doubtless appoint some of their own Members to visit
and relieve such as are sick, as often as there shall be occasion, together
with Poor laboring Families both in City and Suburbs.

6. Poor Children will be instructed in Learning and Arts, and thereby rendered
serviceable to their Country, and many other worthy Acts done for Public good
by the joint Deliberation of so many Prudent and Pious Men, assisted with such
a Power and Purse, more than can be foreseen or expressed by a Private. Person.

Quest. 7. The seventh Question may be, What shall all the Poor of these Cities
and Countries, being very numerous, be employed about?

This Question will be answered best by the said Assembly themselves when they
have met and consulted together, who cannot be presumed deficient of Invention
to set all the Poor on Work, especially since they may easily have admirable
Presidents from the practice of Holland in this particular, and have already
very good ones of their own, in the Orders of their Hospitals of Christ-Church
and Bridewell in London; the Girls may be employed in mending the clothes of
the Aged, in Spinning, Carding, and other Linen Manufactures, and many in
Sowing Linen for the Exchange, or any Housekeepers that will put out Linen
to the Matrons that have the Government of them.

The Boys in picking Okam, making Pins, rasping Wood, making Hangings, or any
other Manufactures of any kind, which whether it turns to present Profit or
not, is not much material, the great Business of the Nation being first but to
keep the Poor from Begging and Starving, and enuring such as are able to Labor
and Discipline, that they may be hereafter useful Members to the Kingdom: But
to conclude, I say the wisest Man, living solitarily, cannot propose or imagine
such excellent ways and methods as will be invented by the united Wisdom of so
grave an Assembly.

The sitting of the said Assembly I humbly conceive, ought to be, De die in
diem; the Quorum not more than thirteen; whether they shall Yearly, Monthly or
Weekly choose a President, how they shall distribute themselves into the
several quarters of the Communication, what Treasurers and other Officers to
employ, and where, and how many, will best be determined by themselves, and
that without difficulty, because many that will probably be Members of the said
Assembly, have already had large experience of the Government of the Hospitals
of London; The manner of Election of the said Fathers of the Poor, I humbly
suppose, cannot possibly be better contrived than after the same way which the
East-India-Company choose their Committee, which will prevent the Confusion,
Irregularity and Incertitude that may attend the Election of Voices, or holding
up of Hands; especially because the Persons to be elected at one time will be
very many; the said manner proposed is, every Elector, viz. every Livery-man to
bring to Guild Hall at the appointed day for Elections, a List of the whole
number of Persons, such as he thinks fit that are to be Elected, and deliver
the same openly unto such Persons as the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and
Common-Council-Men shall appoint to make the Scrutiny; which Persons so
entrusted with the said Scrutiny, seven, or ten days after, as shall be thought
fit, at another Common Hall may declare who are the Persons Elected by the
Majority of Votes.

If it be here objected to the whole purpose of this Treatise, that this Work
may as well be done in distinct Parishes, if all Parishes were obliged to build
Workhouses, and employ their Poor therein; as Dorchester and some others have
done with good success.

I Answer, that such attempts have been made in many Places to my Knowledge,
with very good intents and strenuous endeavors, but all that ever I heard of,
proved vain and ineffectual, as I fear will that of Clerkenwell, except that
single instance of the Town of Dorchestor, which yet signifies nothing in
Relation to the Kingdom in general, because all other places cannot do the
like, nor does the Town of Dorchester entertain any but their own Poor only,
and Whip away all others; whereas that which I design, is to propose such a
Foundation as shall be large, wise, honest, and rich enough to maintain and
employ all Poor that come within the Pale of their Communication, without
enquiring where they were born, or last inhabited: Which I dare affirm with
Humility, that nothing but a National, or at least such a Provincial Purse can
so well do, nor any Persons in this Kingdom, but such only as shall be picked
out by popular Election, for the Reason before alleged, viz. That in my
Opinion, three fourths at least of the Stock must issue from the Charity of the
People; as I doubt not but it will to a greater proportion, if they be
satisfied in the Managers thereof; but if otherwise not the fortieth, I might
say not the hundredth part.

I propose the Majority of the said Fathers of the Poor to be Citizens (though
I am none my self) because I think a great share of the Money to be employed,
must and will come from them, if ever the Work be well done, as also, because
their Habitations are nearest the Center of their Business, and they best
acquainted with all Affairs of this Nature by their experience in the
Government of the Hospitals.

Earnestly to desire and endeavor, that the Poor of England should be better
provided for and employed, is a Work that was much studied by my deceased
Father, and therefore though I be as ready to confess as any shall be to charge
me with Disability to propose a Model of Laws for this great Affair, yet I hope
the more ingenious will pardon me for endeavoring to give aim toward it,
since it is so much my Duty, which in this particular I shall be careful to
perform (though I may be too remiss in others) as shall appear by more visible
and apparent Demonstrations, if ever this design, or any other (that is like to
effect what is desired) succeed.

FINIS.

