A Christian's Journal* OR Brief Directions FOR DEVOTION AND CONVERSATION.

Brevis Praedicatio, longa Comminatio, Actio perpetua.
Denique quid verbis opus est, spectemur agendo?
LONDON. Printed for the Author and sold by R. Bentley in Russel Street. 1684.

TO THE Right Honorable The LADY PHILIPPA MOHVN, Baroness of Oakhampton.
Madam,
I Humbly present to your Ladyship these few Gleanings, which I have gathered
and tied up into this little Sheaf. I am not ashamed to acknowledge, that much
of it is none of my own: In Divinity, all men must be Borrowers; and no man
knows more, than what is Revealed; the Ambition of Discovery, has been one of
the chiefest grounds of those many Heresies and Schisms, with which the World
is at this day overrun, and the Church divided. And to me it is no great
wonder, when men dispute Wisdom with their Maker; when soaring Wits will not
stoop and submit to the plain Truths of the Gospel, but think themselves able
to correct Scripture, and find out more New, and Easy ways to Heaven, than
our blessed Savior, or his Apostles, have ever informed the World of; that so
many Wander, and Miscarry.

You have here, Madam, set down the thoughts of several Learned Divines, upon
the same Subject; Various Rules, from diverse Hands, directing our Practice; and
yet all of them so Weighty, as I doubt not but your Ladyship will confess, few
of them could have well been omitted: You will find men, of different Opinions
here, All consenting to further Holiness of Life.

It is the mischief, Madam, of our Days, that men are too much of a Party in
Religion; and regard not so much what is said, as who is the Preacher: So that
it is as dangerous to quote Charnock, or Owen in the Pulppit as Mead, or
Sanderson in a Meeting. This, Madam, is one Reason why I conceal Men's names;
that the Reader may be no way biased by them: And I have endeavored so to
mingle different Parties, that 'twill not be very easy to discern the Bishop
from the Doctor, or the Coat from the Cassock; that so men, that are set upon
Quarrels, may Fight in the dark, where it is odds they mistake their man. And
this, Madam, is the only excuse I have, for hiding my self in the Crowd of your
Admirers; among whom you have not,

Madam, A more Real humble Servant.
Covent Garden, Sept. 15. 1683.
Errata.
P. 31. l. 13. for a, r. as. P. 51. l. 5, 6. r. Imaginations. P. 54. l. 20. No
Comma after Containing. P. 74. l. 5. for your, r. Our. P. 86. l. 1. blot out
the. P. 89. l. 9. for to, r. by, P. 95. l. 18. r. with. P. 100. l. 18. r.
delight most. P. 121. l. 7. for thy, r. the. P. 134. l. 2. for all, r. ill. P.
139. l. 6. for Neither, r. Never. P. 180. l. 14. No Comma after in. P. 243. l.
13. r. bring us that. P. 246. l. 17. for bat. r. that. P. 258. l. 5. no Comma
after best. P. 280. penult. for know. r. knew.
CAP. I. Introduction.
Sect. 1.
THE best way to please God, the nearest, and readiest way to Heaven, and to
get a cheerful Heart in the mean time till we come thither, is to walk with God
in all Uprightness, to live by Faith, which is to frame our Life according to
the Will of God revealed in his Word. This God commands to Abraham, Genesis 17.1.
I am God all-sufficient, walk thou before me, and be thou upright*: This is
commended to us by a Cloud of Examples; of Enoch, Noah, Job, David, Zacharias,
etc.

Then a Man is said to walk with God, when he daily goes on to repent of his
Sins past, when he believes in Christ for Pardon, and believes his Word for
Direction; when he sets God before him, and walks always as in his presence;
not after the Flesh, but Spirit; not to the will of Man, but God.

Sect. 2.
Everyday is a little Life, bound with the Night and Morning, as with Birth and
Death: one Day is the Brief of the whole; and the whole, but a Day repeated. A
good Christian first turns himself to God, by Prayer alone, then with his
Family, then to his Calling, to his Society, Eating and drinking, and at Night
returns to his rest; in all these walking Godly, Soberly, and Righteously. This
is the sum of Life, and of the ensuing Manual, wherein Directions are offered
for each of these particulars, which may not be without their use, especially
to such who are not better provided.

How to begin each Day.
IN the Morning when you awake, accustom your self to think on God; or
something in order to his Service; let thy fist thoughts be for Him, who made
the Night for Rest, and the Day for Travel; who has given thee rest, preserved
thee while thou slept, and renews his loving kindness to thee every morning;
thankfully acknowledge the Mercies thou have received, and earnestly pray for
those thou stand in need of. Prayer is the best Key to open the Morning, and
the surest Bar to shut up all at Night. A Heart early perfumed with Gods
presence, will savor of him all the day after.

Arise as early, as the necessity of thy Body or Mind will permit; according to
the Example of our Blessed Savior, Joh. 8.2. Matthew. 1.35. This Practice will
be for the Health of thy Body, for the advantage of thy Spiritual and Temporal
estate; hereby thou will have the day before thee, and gain the fitest season,
and large Portions of time, for the exercise of Religion, and works of thy
Calling: besides, thou will be more able and active for any employment. Too
much Sleep hurts the Brain, dulls the Wit, impairs the Memory, and makes a man
more slothful; like the Drunkard who becomes more dry, through excess.

The time betwixt your waking and arising may profitably be employed in
occasional Meditation.

While your Body is dressing, (not with effeminate Curiosity, nor yet with rude
Neglect) let your Mind address her self to her ensuing Task, bethink what is to
be done, and in what order: and because every day thou shall surely be
assaulted by the World, the Flesh, and the Devil, fail not to put on thy
Spiritual Armor, prescribed Ephesians. 6. from the 12. to 18. that thou may be
able to resist. Consider what temptations thy Business or Company are most
likely to lay thee open to the day following, and Arm thy self with Resolution
against them: And again, what occasions of doing Service to God, or Good to thy
Neighbor, are most likely to present themselves; and resolve to embrace them.

And Lastly, thou may consider thy self with thy Equals either in Estate,
Age, or other Circumstances, what are thy particular failings, what thy Natural
Infirmities, what those things are in thy Words, Actions, Behavior, and whole
manner of Life, which diminish thy Reputation, and make thee less than thy
Equals; and what thy aims and ends are, with the Rules of Life thou have set
thy self.

This is likewise a fit time to call to mind what Rules we are to observe in
our Apparel; That they be for Health, Honesty, Comeliness: that we go rather
with the lowest, than highest of our Place and Quality. That the Fashion be
neither Strange, Immodest, Singular, Ridiculous, nor we the first in it. That
neither the making nor wearing savor of Pride, Lightness, Curiosity,
Lasciviousness, Prodigality, Covetousness; but such as becomes Holiness,
Wisdom, and Honesty; following the Example of those of our own Rank, that are
most Sober and Discreet.

Directions for Closet Devotion:
And first for Reading.
HAving thus begun the Day, that thou may walk with God the remainder of it,
it will be needful first to renew thy peace with God, and then keep it. To this
end as soon as thou art ready, (if unavoidable necessity hinder not) retire to
thy Closet, and there in a more solemn manner offer thy morning Sacrifice of
Prayer and Thanksgiving, according to the Command, Matthew. 6.6. And that these
may be the better performed, prepare thy self by Reading, and Meditation; for
though these be distinct Exercises, yet are they most properly joined together,
since they mutually help and assist each other.

That day is lost, whereof some time is not improved, in searching Gods Holy
Word, those Divine Monuments: other Books thou may turn over out of choice;
this thou must read out of Duty, Luke 16.29. They have Moses and the Prophets,
let them hear them: And John 5.39. Search the Scriptures: And Deuteronomy
31.11. Thou shall read this Law before all Israel, that they may hear it, that
they may learn, and fear the Lord God, and keep and observe all the words of
this Law: So also the 6. and the 61. And these words which I command thee this
day, shall be in thy Heart, and thou shall rehearse them continually to thy
Children, and shall talk of them when thou tarriest in thy House, and as thou
walk by the way, and when thou lie down, and risest up: Thou shall bind
them for a sign upon thy hand, and they shall be as Frontlets between thine
Eyes; also thou shall write them upon the Posts of thy House, and upon thy
Gates.

First therefore, when you read this Word, lift up your Heart to God for his
Leave and Blessing, for the Spirit of Understanding and Wisdom, that your Mind
may be more enlightened, and your Heart more strengthened with Grace, by it; for
this Word is Spiritual, and contains the hidden things of God in a Mystery: in
which respect, it is a Sealed Book to those that have not the help of the Holy
Spirit. Then you read the Word aright indeed, when you have the same frame of
Heart as the Holy Penmen had in the Writing of it.

Read the Word with Hunger and Thirst after Knowledge, and growth in Grace: and
as the means ordained of God for this end.

Read it with a Reverend and Humble, with a tractable and honest Heart,
trembling at the Judgments against Sinners, rejoicing at the Promises made to
the Penitent, willing, and resolving to obey the Commands. This is the best
help, and Art of Memory: for exceeding Joys, Griefs, Hatred, and Desires, etc.
do leave the deepest impressions upon us; we do not soon forget the Sicknesses
and Pains we have gone through, and the shortest Wit can remember where he laid
his Gold.

Compare your ways with the Word, bring them to the Rule, see how they and that
agree, be thankful for any Conformity, humbled and grieved for any Failing, fly
to Christ to make your Peace, and resolve to look better to your ways for the
time to come.

Advise about, and resolve upon the means, to bring all into practice;
especially those Duties which are laid before thee in thy present reading;
Observe the very expressions of Scripture, for they are very useful in Prayer,
and do often carry a secret Emphasis in them, that will greatly comfort, and
affect the Heart that considers them.

In reading still keep Jesus in thine Eye, as the End, Scope, and Substance of
all the Scripture, in whom they all are Yea, and Amen.

Meditate on, and strive to find out the meaning, and mind of God, in each
particular Scripture: and to prevent mistake and wresting of Scripture to your
hurt, get first a clear knowledge of the Grounds and Principles of Christian
Religion, and endeavor to frame your Life according to the more easy, and
known Scriptures. Secondly, Be much in hearing the Word read in Public, and
Interpreted by a Learned, and Faithful Minister: Let not God's public
Ordinances be either condemned or neglected, for the sake of Reading, Prayer,
or any other private Duty. This will rather bring a Curse, than a Blessing.
And, Lastly, as above, Cherish an humble and honest Heart, resolved to obey
when you know God's Will, Joh. 7.17. If any man will do his will, he shall know
of the Doctrine whether it be of God.

There is not in the World such another Book, as this Book of God; no Word of
like Authority, Holiness, Wisdom, true Eloquence, Power, and Eternity; no Book
that aims at Gods Glory, and the Salvation of Man's Soul, like this: It
discovers our misery by sin, with the perfect Remedy; it propounds perfect
Happiness to us, and affords the Means to attain it: It Is mighty, through God,
to prepare for Grace; it is the immortal Seed to beget us unto Christ, the Milk
and strong Meat to nourish us up in him, and the only Physic to recover the
Soul from all Spiritual Diseases. By it Christ gives light to the Blind,
hearing to the Deaf, speech to the Dumb, strength to the Weak, health to the
Sick; yea, by it he does cast out Devils, and raise Men from the Death of Sin.
This is that Book alone, that contains all the rich Legacies bequeathed us by
our dying Savior: It Is his last Will and Testament, Sealed with his own Blood,
Heb. 9.15. This is the Magna Charta, or Great Statute Book of the Kingdom of
Heaven; containing in it all the mighty Privileges and Immunities of Gods
Children. It Is the Hammer, the Fire, the Sword, the Plow, the Seed, the usual
Instrument the Holy Ghost makes use of, to build up, pull down, to plant,
purge, and cleanse; by it we have an Inheritance among them that believe, and
are Sanctified, and Presented to God, without spot or wrinkle. In short, it is
the Perfect Rule of Faith and Manners. Let any Man but seriously and
impartially consider the Precepts contained in the word of God, he shall
assuredly find the best Direction in the World, for all kind of Moral and
Divine Wisdom: There are not in all the other Books of Morality together, so
sound, deep, certain and evident Instructions of Wisdom, (yet most strictly
joined with Innocence and Godliness,) as in this one Book.

Of Prayer.
PRayer is a Religious representing of our Will, and pouring out our Hearts
before God; it is the Souls Pulse, and shows the state of the Heart: If
Spiritual Life be weak in us, our Prayers will be so too. We do not pray to
God, that we may make known our desires to him, as if he were not acquainted
with them, for he understands our Thoughts afar off; neither that we may move
him to accept and grant our desires, for with him there is no Change, or Shadow
of turning: but that we may by our Prayers obtain that of him, which we believe
he is willing to bestow; Prayer being a necessary means, both for God's Glory,
and our good, 1 John 5.14. This is our Confidence which we have toward God,
that if we ask any thing according to his will, he hears us.

When therefore thou art about to pray, First look into your present State, and
inquire how all things stand between God and you; mark whatsoever occurs
between your set times of Prayer, the Providence of God, or Sleights of Satan,
what sins you have committed, what Graces you want, and what Fresh Favors God
has bestowed.

Tune thy Thoughts and Affections, wind and Screw them up, when thou come to
Duty. This is that Zophar advises, Job 11.13. to prepare the Heart, and then to
stretch forth the Hands.

When you are about to address your self to God in Prayer, Fix your thoughts
upon some particular Subject to enlarge upon. There is no question, if you
observe your condition well, but you have sometimes one errand to God, sometimes
another: whether it be to confess some predominant Sin, to beg Pardon of, and
Power against. You may have in your Eye some Grace which you stand in more than
ordinary need of, and observe your own weakness, and defect in. Run not out
into Generals only, for you cannot speak to God of all things at one time; but
consider the Present Case of thy Soul, and what business you have to go to God
about at that time: in a particular manner enlarge your thoughts on that
Subject, and follow it home, till you feel your heart warmed and affected.

Implore and expect the Spirit's assistance, and let thy whole heart be engaged
in this work.

See what thou do be according to Gods will, and have a Warrant from his
Word: A Command is our Warrant, a Promise is our Encouragement, and an Example
our Tract, the Footsteps of the Flock wherein we must walk.

Improve your Advocate: This is the Principal part of all our Religion, and
especially of Prayer, to depend wholly upon the Righteousness, and Intercession
of Christ Jesus, for access to, and acceptance with God.

Be not slight, formal, and cursory, in calling your Sins and Duties, Cods
Favors and Promises, into a bare and Fruitless remembrance: if the Heart be
not affected with Anger, Fear, Grief, and Shame, for Sin; with Joy, and
acknowledgment of being beholden to God for his Favors, with Hope and
Confidence in him, in remembrance of his Promises; if it be not gained to a new
Resolution to Reform what is Faulty, and to endeavor after more exactness, all
your preparation is nothing: Nay, Sin will gather Strength upon you thereby;
like idle, Sturdy Vagrants, who, when brought before the Magistrate, if he
either say little to them, or only give them threatening words, but never makes
them smart for their Offenses; they grow thereby ten times more insolent and
lawless.

Keep up Spiritual Frames out of Worship; the Fire was to be kept alive upon
the Altar, when Sacrifices were not Offered, from Morning till Night, from
Night till Morning, as well a in the very time of Sacrifice. One well advises,
to be such out of Worship, as we would be in it: any thing that does unhinge,
and discompose our Spirits, is inconsistent with Religious Services, which are
to be performed with the greatest sedateness and gravity. All irregular
Passions disturb the Serenity of the Spirit: and tho they be allayed, yet they
leave the heart some while after, like the Sea, rolling and swelling after the
Storm is ceased. Ill company leaves a Tincture upon us in Worship. Ephraim has
mixed himself with the People, Hosea 7.8. He is a Cake not turned. This will
make our Hearts and Lives half Dough, as well as half Baked. These, and the
like, make the Holy Spirit withdraw himself, and then the Soul lies like a
Wind-bound Vessel, that can make no way: When the Sun departs from us, it
carries its Beams along with it; then Darkness spreads it self over the Earth,
and the Beasts of the Forest creep out.

Be much in Secret Ejaculations to God: These are the purest flights of the
Soul, that have more of Fervor, and less of Carnality. As frequent sinful Acts
strengthen habits of Sin; so frequent Religious acts strengthen habits of Grace.

Excite and exercise particularly a Love to God, and a Dependence on him. The
Soul that loves God, when it has to do with him, can mind nothing else during
such Impression.

Nourish right apprehensions of God in thy mind. Consider thou art drawing nigh
to God, the most amiable Object, the best of Beings, worthy of infinite Honor,
and the highest Affections thou can give: a God that made the World by a
Word, that upholds the great frame of Heaven and Earth, a Majesty above the
Conceptions of Angels. View him in his Greatness, and Goodness, that your Heart
may have a true value of the Worship of so great a Majesty, and count it the
most worthy employment to attend upon him. A Fear of God will make your Worship
serious; a Joy in God, durable; your Affections will be raised, when you
represent him in the most reverential, indearing, and obliging Circumstances.
We Honor the Majesty of God, when we consider him with due Reverence,
according to the greatness and perfection of his Works: And in this Reverence
of his Majesty, does Worship chiefly consist. Preserve a strong Sense of the
Omniscience, and Omnipresence of God, who Judges thy inward Affections, and is
as really present with thee, as if he were Visible.

Take heed of inordinate desires after the World: it dulls the Word, and
stifles all Spiritual breathings after God in Duty.

Be deeply sensible of thy present wants, and the supplies thou may have in
Worship. It is pardon thou desire? Apprehend then the blackness of Sin, with
the aggravations thereof, as it respects God: be deeply sensible of the want of
Pardon, and the worth of Mercy; endeavor to get your Affections into such a
frame, as condemned Men would be, and as you have seen some dying Men have.
Consider thou art now at the Throne of Gods Grace, but must shortly be at the
Bar of his Justice: endeavor to stir up the same affections now, the same
fixedness and earnest Pleading for Mercy, which thou may suppose forlorn
Souls will have at Gods Tribunal.

If thou could apprehend God as an angry, and offended Judge; or did see
the riches of his Mercy, and his glorious outgoings in the Sanctuary, the
blessed Doles he gives out to those that Spiritually attend upon him: both the
one and the other would make thee perform thy Duty humbly, sincerely,
earnestly, and affectionately; waiting upon him with thy whole Soul, to have
Misery averted, and Mercy bestowed. Christ does not present any Man's Case and
Duties without a sense of his wants; and shall we our selves have none of our
own?

Affect thy Heart with what supplies thou have had in former Worship. The
Israelites would not have been at leisure for Idolatry, had they preserved the
Sense of the Majesty of God, discovered in his late Thunders at Sinai.

If any thing intrudes that may choke thy Worship, cast it speedily out: We
cannot hinder the Gnats from buzzing about us, when we are in our Business; but
we may prevent them from settling upon us.

Lay hold on the most melting opportunities: when thou find thy Heart in a
more than ordinary Spiritual Frame, look upon it as a call from God to attend
him. Such Impressions and Motions are God's voice, inviting us into Communion
with him, in some particular act of Worship; and promising Success in it, Psalm.
27.8. Be not always pouring out Words in Prayer: Pause, reflect upon, and
endeavor to affect thy Heart, with all thou say; in silence wait for the
elapses of the Spiriti.

Examine thy self at the end of Worship, and chide thy self for any Carnality
thou perceivest; review thy Duty, and examine the reason why thou were so low,
and Carnal. If any unworthy Frames have surprised thee in Worship, seek them
out afterward, call them to the Bar, make an exact Scrutiny into the Causes of
them, and let thine Anger and Indignation be raised against them, that thou
may prevent their incursion another time: Apply the Blood of Christ by Faith
for thy Cure; and draw strength from his Death, for the Conquest of them. Also
be humble for them; for God will lift up the humble. Daily examination is an
Antidote against the Temptations of the following day; and constant examination
of our selves after Duty, is a Preservative against vain encroachments in
following Duties.

Labor especially after these two things: To see the wants and imperfections
that are in thy best Prayers, and abhor them; and in thy greatest defects, see
if thou can not find somewhat of Gods Spirit, that so thou may be truly
persuaded in both, That God will through the Merits of Christ pardon thy Wants,
and accept the Work of his own Spirit. It Is a dangerous thing to think that God
likes our Prayers well, when we do so, seeing they have unseen defilements
which pollute them: or on the other hand, to be persuaded that God rejects them
when we dislike them.

In short, Diligently watch and keep thy self from all Sin, especially
Surfeiting and Drunkenness; Luke 21.34. and 53. Which make the Heart dull and
heavy: Endeavor to grow in all God's Commands, and Faith in all his Promises:
Keep in thy heart a Catalogue of thy own Sins, Wants and Infirmities, together
with the sins and wants of the Land, with the Tokens of God's wrath due
thereto: Look at God's Holiness, and what Holiness he requires in Thee; and
then at thy own unworthiness of those things thou beggest of him; thy
Necessity, and Danger. For sins that thou art in danger of, because strongly
inclined to them; ask the overcoming of them, using all the means thereto, and
avoiding the occasion: so for any Grace you want, Importune God after the same
manner Never trust so much to thy Prayers, as to neglect any other means
ordained by God for the obtaining of what thou desire; But use them still
more conscionably: neither ever trust so much to other means, as to neglect
Prayer.

And thus having offered up thy Prayers to God, and committed thy self, and
Cause to him, quietly rest in his good pleasure; according to the Example of
Hannah, 1 Samuel 1.18. and David, 2 Samuel, 12.20. Doubt not but God has heard thy
Prayer, and in due time will grant what shall be most for his Glory, and thy
Good: This is the meaning of the word Amen. Look after thy comings in, and
gettings by Prayer; I will direct my Prayer, says David, and look up.

How we are to conceive of God in our Devotions.
HOw to conceive of the Deity in our Prayers and Meditations, is both the
deepest Point of all Christianity, and the most necessary. So deep, that if we
wade into it, we may easily drown; but can never find bottom: So necessary,
that without it, both our Persons, and services are Profane, and Irreligious.

We are all born Idolaters, naturally prone to fashion God to some Form of our
awn: whether of a Humane Body, or of an admirable Light; or if our mind have
any other more likely and pleasing Image. There are as many carved Images of
God, as there are Minds of men: and as Monstrous shap^s as those corruptious
into which they would Transform him. Hence all Idolatry sprang: Men set up vain
Images of him in there Fancy, before they set up Idolatrous Representations of
him in their Temples. The likening of him to Idols of Wood and Stone, and
various Metals, was the fruit of an Idea erected in their own minds. Hence also
all Superstition received both its Rise, and Growth: When we Mint a God
according to our own complexion, like to us in mutable and various Passions,
soon angry, soon appeased, it is no wonder we invent ways of pleasing him, after
we have offended him, and think to expiate the Sin of out Soul, by some
Melancholy Devotions, and self-Chastisements. Superstition is nothing else, but
an unscriptural, and unrevealed dread of God: When men imagined him a rigorous
and severe Master, they cast about for ways to Mitigate him, whom they thought
so hard to be pleased. All the Superstition this day living in the World, is
built upon this Foundation: So natural it is for men to pull down God to their
Imagination, rather than raise their Imaginations up to God, Hence arises all
the diffidence of his Mercy, though they Repent; measuring God by the contracted
Models of their own Spirit: as though his Nature were as difficult to pardon
their Offenses against him, as they are to remit wrongs done to themselves. And
hence also all Presumption, the too common Disease of the World, springs: All
the Wickedness that is in the World, is nothing else but a presuming upon God;
arising from the ill interpretation of his Goodness, breaking out upon them, in
the Works of Creation, and Providence. God's Patience is apprehended to be an
approbation of their Vices: and from the consideration of his Forbearance: they
fashion a God that they believe will smile upon their Crimes. Psalm. 50.20
A God they Fancy like themselves, that would do as they would do: not be angry
for what they count a light Offense. How does the unclean person represent him
to his own thoughts, but as a Goat; the Murderer, as a Tiger; the sensual
Person, as a Swine: while they Fancy a God indulgent to their Crimes, without
Repentance?

First then, away with all these wicked thoughts, these gross Devotions, and
without any mental Reservation, conceive of God Purely, Humbly, Spiritually, as
of an absolute Being, without Form, without Matter, without Composition; yea,
as Infinite, without all limit of thought: let our Hearts Adore a Spiritual
Majesty which we cannot comprehend, but yet know to be; let us think of him, as
one whose Wisdom is his Justice, whose Justice is his Power, whose Power is his
Mercy; and whose Wisdom, Justice, Power, Mercy, is himself: As Good, without
Quality; Great, without Quantity; Everlasting, without Time; Present every
where, without Place; containing, all things, without Extent; and when our
thoughts are come to the height, let us stay there, and be content to wonder
in silence; and since we cannot reach to conceive of him as he is, let us be
careful we conceive not of him as he is not.

But, besides this awful apprehension of the Deity, we are to conceive of three
Persons in one Essence; not divided, but distinguished. There is nothing
wherein the want of Words can grieve us, but in this: here alone, as we can
Adore, and not conceive; so we can conceive, and not utter. Think here of one
Substance, in three Subsistences; one Essence, in three Relations; one Jehovah,
Begetting, Begotten, Proceeding. Let our thoughts here walk warily, the path is
narrow; and the conceit either of three Substances, or but one Subsistence, is
Damnable.

Yet all this will not avail us, if we take not our Mediator with us; if we
apprehend not a true Manhood, gloriously united to the Godhead, without change
of either Nature, without mixture of both; whose Prisence and Merits must give
passage, acceptance, and Vigor, to our Prayers.

Thus in Prayer God is to be known and considered of, the distinction of
Persons, Father, Son, and Holy Spirit; and Ordinarily our Prayers must be
directed to the Father, by the Son, through the help of the Holy Ghost: John.
16.23. Whatsoever you ask the Father in my name, he will give it you. Ephesians.
5.20. Romans 8.15,27. We call God Abba Father by the Spirit which makes
Intercession for us. For such is the Divine dispensation of God, the Father,
Son, and Holy Spirit, that though they are but one indivisible Essence, and
whatsoever any one does out of himself, the very same do the others also; yet
they sustain different Persons and Offices, (as we may say), and do the same
things in different and distinct Order: yet so as the naming of one does not
exclude, but necessarily include, the other. In Prayer, the Father sustains the
Person and Place of him that is offended by sin, that must be appeased; and
does hear, and grant Requests: 1 John. 2.1. If we sin, we have an Advocate with
the Father. The Son supplies the Place of a Mediator, and Intercessor, by whom
Requests ascend, and become acceptable to the Father: John. 16.23: Revel. 8.3.
He is the Golden Altar, upon which the Prayers of all Saints are Offered, and
ascend as Incense. John 14.6. No man can come to the Father, but by me. He is
appointed of God, to us; and, being both God and Man, is a fit, and
allsufficient Mediator between God and Man: without him no man's Person, or
best Actions, by reason of their many Imperfections, can be acceptable.

The Holy Ghost does supply the Office of a Teacher and Assistant, to help our
Infirmities, and in us to make our Intercessions and Requests for us, that they
may be Offered to the Father, by the Intercession of the Son: Romans 8.26. We
know not what to pray for, as we ought. If the Spirit do not work together with
our Prayers, there would be no goodness at all in them: no, not so much as
Truth and Uprightness, without which Christ will not offer them to his Father
for us; therefore Prayers must be made in the Spirit, and through his help.

And thus Christ, by the Office of his Mediation and Intercession, is an
Advocate to his Church, and does in Heaven apply his Merits, and further the
cause of our Salvation, with his Father. And the Spirit also is an Advocate, by
Energy and Operation, by Instruction and Assistance, by his Counsel and
Inspiration inabling us to manage our own business, and plead our own Cause: he
does not indeed interceed, nor appear before God in Person for us, as Christ
does; but makes Intercession in, and by our selves, giving us access unto the
Father, imboldening us in our Fears, helping us in our Infirmities, and
bringing those things which were blotted out, and forgot, into our remembrance:
Ephs. 2.18. Hebr. 10.15.19.
Admonishing and Directing us John 14.26.
how to order and solicit our own business, what Evidences to produce, what
Witnesses to prepare, what Offices to attend, what preparations to make,
against the time of hearing. And lastly, he makes up Failings by his Wisdom,
and gathers Arguments to further our Suit, which we our selves observed not. So
when we know not what to Pray, nor what to do, when in our own apprehensions
the whole business of our Peace and comfort lies a bleeding; the Spirit does
then help our Infirmities, presenting Arguments by secret intimations, by deeep
and unexpressible groans, unto him who is the Searcher of hearts, and who knows
the mind of the Spirit, which we our selves cannot express. Thus as an Infant
cries and complains, for want of sleep, and yet knows not that it is sleep
which he wants; as a sick man goes to a Physician, and complains that some
Physic he wants, but knows not the thing he asks for: So the soul of a
Christian, by the assistance of the Spirit, is encouraged to request things of
God, which yet of themselves do pass the knowledge and understanding of those
that ask them. Romans 8.26. Ephesians. 3.19. Phil. 4.7. 1 Cor. 14.13.
Hence the Holy Ghost called another Comforter, because he supplies the
Corporal absence of Christ, Joh. 14.16.
brings him down to a Christian, Forms him in his heart, evidences him, and the
Virtue of his Passion and Resurrection, in the powerful dispensation of his
Holy Ordnances: therefore when our Savior speaks of sending the Holy Spirit,
he adds; I will not leave you Comfortless, I will come to you: when the World
sees me not, you see me. John 14.18,20.

Now because of this Order of the Deity, the Father being first, and because of
the different Places they sustain in the work of our salvation; the Counsel and
Will of all three is, That the Father should be Prayed unto, and Worshipped in
the only Mediation of the Son, through the Holy Spirit: and therefore the
Father is fitly named alone; because the Son, by Voluntary dispensation, has
the Part of a Mediator, and the Holy Spirit the Office of an Instructor,
teaching us what to Pray.

In Wishing the effecting of things, it is not necessary to name any Persons; 1 Chronicles. 4.10. Oh that thou would bless me indeed, and enlarge my Coast.
Sometimes it is lawful to name indefinitely; Acts 4.24. Lord, thou art God, who
have made Heaven and Earth. It is lawful also, Act. 22.24
when we name Persons, to name only one, or two: provided we name not one, as
excluding the other two; nor two, as excluding the third. 2 Cor. 13.14. The
grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the love of God, and the Communion of the
Holy Ghost be with you all. The Apostles begin their Epistles thus: Grace and
peace from God the Father, and our Lord Jesus Christ. Acts 7.59. Stephen
prayed, Lord Jesus receive my Spirit. If we exclude the other, while we fix our
heart upon one; our Prayer is Sin: if we retain all, and mention but one, we
offend not. Lastly we may name the Spirit before the Son, and the Son before
the Father, Revel. 1.4.5.
and Saint Paul more than once names the Son before the Father; Now our Lord
Jesus Christ, and God, even the Father, comfort your hearts. 2. Cor. 13.14. 2
These. 2.16.

Here we may add the Rules we are to observe in calling upon God. As first,
that we call upon him, by those Titles by which he has been pleased to make
himself known unto us in his holy Word. That we consider of him in Prayer, as
an All-sufficient God, and see in him the things we desire. Ephesians. 1.17.
The Saints still set God before them, as having that in him for which they
pray. Acts. 4.24.
We must call upon God by such Names, Titles, and Descriptions, Psalm. 86.15,16.
as are most apt to inflame Desire, stir up Reverence, confirm Faith, or
encourage the Heart; according as our necessity and disposition do require. If
many and general requests be to be put up; then such Titles and Names must be
used, as may persuade us we shall be heard in all. If particular requests be
presented, then choice is to be made of such Titles and Names, as may help the
heart in that particular. Genesis 24.12 Acts. 1.24. Ps. 94.1. 2 Chapter 20 6 Dan. 9.4.
Isa. 64.8.
It is necessary for one that would make a good entrance into Prayer, to
acquaint himself with the true understanding of the manifold Names and
Descriptions of God, recorded in Scripture; and then to make choice of such to
name him by, as are specially to be exercised in granting his request, and most
fit to incite Reverence, and confirm Faith. Lastly the express Command of God
forbids to Worship him by any Image, or Similitude. Deuteronomy. 4.16,17. Exodus 10.4.
And he himself, in many places of Scripture, shows how severely he will punish
them that give his Glory to dumb Idols.

Of Family Government.
I If thou art Master of a Family, be watchful over thy Charge, with all
diligence and faithfulness.

Instruct thy Children, and Servants, in the knowledge of God.

Pray with them, and for them:

Bring them to Gods Ordinances.

Prevent, and remove, all occasions of their hearing, seeing, or doing Evil.

But above all, be sure to go before them in a good Example. If a Master be a
Swearer, Drunkard, or the like, it is madness for himever to expect a Sober
Family: his House shall be a Den of Swearers, Drunkards and Whoremasters, etc.

Augustus his Court is filled with Scholars; Tiberius's with Dissemblers, and
Julian's with Apostates.

Duties relating to our Calling.
YOur Closet-Devotions, and Family Duties, being performed, we are in the next
place to set about the work of our Calling: The Law imposed upon Adam binds all
his Posterity; In the sweat of thy Face thou shall eat Bread, till thou return
unto the Ground.

First then, adventure not on any course, without good assurance that it be in
it self Lawful; Acts. 9.25. Ephesians. 4.20.

Make not a Calling of that, which was never made to be one. There are many
things Lawful to do, which are not Lawful to Live by: Lawful as Delights, and
Recreations; which are not Lawful as Callings.

Resolve not upon that for thy Calling, which is rather hurtful, than
profitable to the Commonwealth.

Choose that Calling which is fittest for thee: when thy Inclination, Education,
and Gifts, concur in one and the same Calling; that is ever so.

If thou art altogether averse to that Calling, for which thou have been bred
up, and designed; choose then the nearest of kin to it that thou can like,
that so thy education and time may not be lost: Thus one bred: up for the
Ministry, may make choice of some other Profession that has to do with
Learning; as Law, Physic, or the like.

Ever begin, and end all thy Works with Prayer, begging God's blessing on thy
Labors, and commending all thy endeavors to him that must either wither, or
prosper them: Likewise upon any unexpected accident, or when thou doubtest what
to do, go to God for direction; make known, and commit thy Case to him: he has
not only wisdom for thy Salvation, but for thy outward direction. too.

Carefully avoid all Covetousness; whereby men design no farther end, than the
mere gathering of Wealth and Riches. This is the root of all evil. Would
thou remedy it? Restrain thy Affections from the World; keep thy desires within
Compass; and, as the Scripture terms it, without ^ousness, being contented with
what thou have, Heb. 13.5. Labor to see a particular Providence of God in all
things that come to pass, and befall thee: Health or Sickness, Riches or
Poverty, Liberty or Bondage. He raises up, and pulls down; he only gives
Power to get Wealth, and takes it away again at his pleasure: He Rules the
Kingdoms of the Earth, and gives them to whom he pleases. Assure thy
Conscience that God is thy Father and Portion, and that all things befall thee
by his holy Will, and Fatherly Providence and Appointment: Seek no more than
the things which are necessary and sufficient, even Food convenient. And
lastly, raise your. Affections from the World, to better things.

As carefully shun all Injustice; whereby men abuse their Calling, to the hurt
and hindrance of others. Luke 19.8. For prevention, consider this Sin is
against the express Word of God; 1 Thessal. 4.6. Let no man oppress, or defraud
his Brother in any matter; For the Lord is the avenger of all such things: Tit.
2.11.
That it makes all our Worship and Service abomination; Esaias. 1.13. to the 17.
That the Curse of God it the practice of it; Deuteronomy. 25.16. Thou shall not have
in thy Bag two manner of Weights, a great and a small; nor in thy House diverse
Measures: But thou shall have a right and a just Weight, a perfect and just
Measure shall thou have; For all that do such things, and all that do
unrighteously, are an abomination to the Lord.

Beware of Ambition; whereby men think better of themselves, than there is just
cause, become malecontent with their Condition, and seek for themselves greater
and better Things and Places. Examples of this we have in Adam, and Absalom,
etc. One of the best Remedies in World for this Disease of the Mind, is the
serious consideration of our selves, what we are, in respect of our Bodies, but
Dust; in respect of our dispositions, altogether set on Sin; and in our Places
and Callings, at best but weak and worthless Instruments in the hand of God:
the meanest of ten Thousand.

Be not evercome with Envy; let not thy heart pine away to see others placed in
a better condition, than thy self: Consider, that all cannot have Rich, Easy,
and Honorable Employs; the necessity of the whole requires that some should
drudge in baser and meaner Offices: the highest Callings were not ordained for
the maintenance of Pride, or private benefit of Man; but for the common good.
There should be no shame of that, whereof there can be no want: were there none
to grind at the Mill, there would soon be none to sit on the Throne. Grudge not
thy own Lot; for not the meanest calling, but is a Service unto Christ, Coloss.
3.24. and has a promise of a Blessing, 1 Corinthians. 12.22. Neither envy thou
another's; for not the greatest, but is attended with Worldly Vexations.
Remember, Envy is a denial of Gods Providence: To be sad at the Temporal Goods
or Gifts of another, as counting him unworthy of them, is a reflection on the
Author of those Gifts, and an accusing Providence of an unjust, or unwise
distribution. This temper is peculiarly the product of self-love, which affects
the Principality of the World, and the Conduct of God in distributing his
Goods; that he must not give, but to whom we please. It seems to be a companion
of our fist Parents pride; they envyed God a Felicity by himself, they would be
like him, they would be as Gods: This temper we are all too subject to, Psalm.
37.1.

Shun (...) Impatience; which is a disquietness of mind, arising from the
continual troubles that are incident unto all conditions, making men Weary of
their Place, and condition of Life. Consider, for Remedy, that the Impatience
is a contempt of God's Government: Labor is the condition of our being; we had
not been, but that we might be still busy: There is no Art, but has its Labor;
which va^ in measure, according to the will of the doer: difficulty is not so
much in the Work, as in the Agent; that which you complain of, has been
undertaken by others, not with facility only, but pleasure: and what you choose
for ease, has been abhorred by others, as tedious. Never think to detract from
your Business, but add to your Will; besides, Hours never go away so merrily,
as in the Fellowship of Work: There is a tediousness in doing nothing. But
above all, take heed of fretting at God's management of thy own particular
concerns: this may lead thee to a cursing God; and is indeed an initial secret
swelling against him, and flying in his Face, Isa. 8.12,21. He shall curse his
King and his Gods.

Guard thy self especially against those sins which by reason of thy Vocation,
course of Life, and conversation, thou have the greatest, and strongest
inticements unto: thus the Courtier's sin is to make a God of his Prince, 2
Kings 15.18. The Soldier's sin, to abuse his weapon to private Revenge, Luke.
3.14. The Lawyer's sin, to betray, or delay his Clients Cause; The Judges sin,
to pervert Judgment, or refuse to do Justice, through Fear, or Favor, or
Reward: Every Calling, as it has its Mystery, so its special sins, and Snares,
which the Devil and Custom, for gain, or Credit among wicked men, has made to
seem not only lawful, but necessary; such as a man can hardly shun, without
exposing himself to censure. Look therefore narrowly to the light of Scripture,
to find out these sins; and then as carefully avoid them.

Be diligent in thy Calling: The Sluggard desires, and has nothing; but the
diligent hand makes rich. Perfection comes by leisure; no excellent thing is
done at once. Do not all thou can at one time, but take new days: where the
heart is unwilling, prorogation hinders; but where there is no want of desire,
delay sharpens the stomach; and that which we do unwillingly leave, we long to
undertake.

Be sober: Fly not out, and start beyond thy proper calling, 2 Samuel 6.6. While
you keep your self in your Place, you are under God's special Protection, as
the Bird in the Law, Deuteronomy. 22.6. But whenever thou run'st out of God's
Protection, thou may justly fear his desertion: and if Satan once find thee
idle, he will labor to employ thee in some of his works.

Be Cheerful; Seriously thinking on the Condition of thy Being: The Bird was
made to Fly, and Man to Labor. Be Provident; let not thy opportunites slip,
neither be thou circumvented, and ensnared by Fraud, Falsehood and Suretyship.

Use Truth, Plainness, and Equity: Love thy Neighbor as thy self, observing
that Royal Law, the Standard of all Justice, To do unto others, as thou
would others should do unto thee. Matthew. 7.12.

Above all labor ever to retain in thy heart a habit of Religion that may keep
you always as in the presence of God.

Prefer those Actions of thy life that most concern thee, be sure to mind them
most, to do them first; let other things of less moment give place to these.
Let every business have its due time; and then think of it sufficiently and to
purpose, remitting and checking all other thoughts and cares at that time as
unseasonable and interruptions.

In all thy designs of temporal advantages, keep thy Expectations and Hope
low, clog them with suspicions, abatements, and allays; otherwise thy
expectation will not only cheat thee, but render the good thou shall attain
insipid, because less than what thou did expect.

The idle man, that for want of a course to live in, impoverisheth himself and
Family, such a man is a burden to his Friends, and to the Commonwealth, an
Eyesore to his Kindred, the shame of his Name, and ruin of his House: he
bequeatheth misery to his Offspring, instead of plenty; and instead of giving
his Children God's blessing, and his, he pulls upon himself God's Curse, and
theirs. I Tim. 5.8. He is worse than an Infidel.

Of Civil Conversation.
Civil Conversation is an honest, commendable, and Virtuous kind of living in
this World: a thing, not only profitable, but necessary, for the perfection of
Human life; A most certain Cure to those two great distempers, that grow upon
the Mind, through Solitude: A base Abjection, and vain Presumption of spirit.
By reason whereof, men become either distrustful of their own Actions, and
fearful of other men's Judgment: or else transported wih too good and great an
Opinion of themselves, and too low and small an account and esteem of others.
Instead of these, it gives a man a certain graceful confidence and assurance,
without Impudence or Affectation, in all his Actions: It teaches him to be
civil, without debasing himself; and complaisant, without Flattering others.

some men indeed there are, to whom Conversation is a most burdensome, and
uneasy thing: It Is an intolerable trouble, they say, and kind of Subjection to
them, to frame fitting answers to all manner of Talk, and observe such
circumstances, as the Quality of Persons, and their own Honor do require. For
one man that is tolerable in company, they tell us they meet with more than
hundreds, that either through Pride or Ignorance, through Folly or Ambition,
through some unseemly behavior or other, are so troublesome and vexatious, that
they find themselves rather Tired than Refreshed by company. But doubtless
these men are under a mistake; for what though the number of Knaves and Fools, of
Lewd and Vain men, be greater than the accomplished and Virtuous, yet ought we
therefore to banish our selves the Society of Mankind; and not rather to
consort our selves with men of Worth and Virtue, with such as are Pious and
good, whereby our minds may be confirmed and fortified? For it is a most
certain truth, that the judgment, we make of our selves, is not our own, but we
borrow it from others: and being by diverse persons, either by Signs or
otherwise reproved for the same fault, at length we are content to submit our
selves to the common Opinion of all men, to acknowledge our Imperfections, and
to frame our selves to do, to leave, to change, to correct, according to the
Judgment of other Men.

Our conversation among men is twofold; according to which our behavior must be
regulated. The one is General, Common, and Ordinary, such as our Affairs do
daily lead us into; we change from those we know, to those we do not, without
our choice, or consent: The other is Special, Affected, and Desired company. In
both, our chief care consists in these two things: In the right Government of
our Tongue, and of our Behavior.

First then, let thy revenues be far greater than thy expense. Wise Nature has
given us two Ears, and but one Tongue, that we may hear much, and speak little.
And commonly the weakest in understanding delight to hear themselves speak;
which gave occasion to the Proverbs, that it is one piece of Wisdom for a man
to hide his Folly; That He knows not how to speak, that knows not how to be
silent: For as words well uttered show Eloquence and Learning; so silence, well
kept, shows Prudence and Gravity. A Fools voice is known by the Multitude of
his words; but he that refraineth his lips is wise. Prove. 10.19. Eccl. 5.3. and
10.14. Words well considered, like Money well employed, tend to the profit and
advantage both of him that receives, and him that disburseth: And as it is not
lawful to Coin, or Pay out false Money; so is it as unlawful to invent, or
speak, what may turn to the Prejudice or Reproach of others. There are three
special seasons, wherein a man ought to speak: And in all other cases, silence
is to be preferred. First, when things come in question we understand perfectly
well. Again, when such matters arise we are obliged to speak to. And in the
last place, when men have a good opinion of us, and in things they will
willingly hear, and easily give credit to us.

Heedfully observe those things that beautify and adorn our speech. The
honorable part of Talk is to give occasion, and then to moderate, and pass to
something else, to vary in our Discourse, and intermingle speech of the present
occasion with Arguments; Tales, with Reasons; asking of Questions, with telling
of Opinions: it is a dull thing to Tire and Jade any thing too far, to be too
much in any thing: so as to give another occasion of weariness. This makes a
man cheap, to speak pertinently to the thing in hand, and agreeably to the
Person, is better than Eloquence.

A man must avoid all those things, which make his Discourse less delightful to
the hearers: He must not be so brief, as to be obscure; nor tire men with
superfluous words, and tedious Prefaces, impertinent Circumstances and
Digressions. Discourse is the Image of the Thought, which it ought to set forth
so clearly, that it may be seen, and as it were touched with the Finger. We
shall find upon reflection, that the delight and pleasure, we feel and conceive
in a Discourse, proceeds either from the Images formed by Words in our Minds;
or the resemblance between the Words and the Things, whose Image they bear: So
that it is either the truth that pleases us, or the conformity betwixt Words
and things. Yet in speech we may observe some persons have so strange a force
and sweetness in the delivery of their Words; that, although they be neither
proper nor well placed, yet do so delight our Ears and Minds with their
Harmony, that we neither search nor desire any thing farther: while other men,
whose Words are more pure and correct, lose their force for want of a pleasing
Voice in delivering. A man ought therefore to be very exact in measuring the
force of his Voice, that he offend not other men's Ears by raw and harsh sounds:
And also careful to fill his Memory with proper Terms; So contriving it, that
the Images of things, and their Names be of so strict a Coherence, that the
Images and Expressions may present themselves together. One resembles the
Memory to a Printing press: A Printer who has nothing but Gothic Characters,
let the Treatise be never so good, can Print it in no other. The same may be
said of those, whose Memories are full of nothing but improper Terms. A man's
Words ought to be Proper, Significant, and of efficacy: A Gentleman ought not
to make payment with Farthings and Liards, using such expressions as are base
and low, and defiled by the use of the Vulgar People; who, by turning words
from their Original meaning, to signify vile and sordid things, have forced
upon them many and different Images, hereby debasing and polluting them.

It is certain, that a Sentence receives its Force and Vigor from the
Reputation and Authority of the speaker; the Words and Expressions by which it
is uttered and the Action, and Air of the Countenance, these have their
peculiar Charm, which strangely influence the minds of men. A graceful Majesty
of gesture, and government of Face and Countenance, either in Speech or Silence,
is of great force and effect, for it gains a kind of Reputation, Esteem, and
Reverence, and where that is, almost every thing becomes. There is as well
Eloquence of Body, as of Mind; and a man may Cancel the force of his Words by
his Countenance.

But to give a more exact and sure Rule sor the Tongue; If thou would
rightly Govern it, begin with the Heart. The disorders of the Tongue usually
proceed from the Distempers of the Heart; Idle words, from vanity of thoughts;
rashness of speech, from hastiness of Spirit; boasting, from pride of heart:
Out of the abundance of the Heart, the Mouth speaks.

Beg of God, that he would be with thy Mouth, as he was with Moses, touch thy
Tongue, as he did Jeremy, teach thee at all times, what to say, and put words
into thy Mouth; give thee the Tongue of the Learned, as he did Isaiah; and a
door of utterance, as he did Paul; that he would circumcise, and pare off the
fore skin of thy Lips, all Superfluous, Foolish, and vain Words, that so thy
Language may be pure, and thy Voice sweet; that no sinful, idle, nor rash words
break forth; that he would delight to use thy Tongue, as an Instrument of much
service and praise to his Name, and good to others, making thy Words prosper
and prevail to all good intents and Purposes. Exodus 4.12. Isa. 50,4. Jere. 1.6.
1 Chr. 1.5. Act. 13.9.
As God is Lord over our Tongue, so is he Author of all its gifts.

Mark, and moan for the errors as well of thy Tongue, as Ways. Joh. 40.6.
Once have I spoken, but I will not answer; yea twice, but I will proceed no
farther. Keep a good correspondence, as between Heart and Tongue, to speak what
thou think; So between Tongue and Hand, to do what thou say: Pay thy Vows
to God, and perform thy promises to Men; and say no more to either, than what
thou can and wilt do.

Conform thy Mind and Affections to thy Words; endeavor really to be, what
thou desire to seem: A man cheats not the World so much as Himself, when he
strives to seem greater, wiser, or better than he really is, and covets to be
esteemed a Wise, Just, and Pious man; but neither cares or endeavors to make
himself possessour of these Virtues. It Is impossible this man's designs should
take effect.

Labor for Patience, and moderation: Be slow to Speak, and slow to Wrath,
trust not thy self, without the greatest watchfulness, to speak of those
Persons, who have wronged, or injured thee; lest Envy, Malice, or any other
bitter Ingredient insensibly mingle themselves with thy Words. Resolutely arm
thy self a against all Passion of Joy, Anger, and the like; but be sure thou
never speak when thou art in any: Not only the Wicked, as Rabshakeh, Nabal,
and Herod, but even the most Holy, when transported with disordered Passions,
have broke forth into unadvised speeches: Moses, and David, overcome with
Anger, Job with grief, and Peter with Joy, could not command their unruly
Tongues. Nothing more exposes a man, more betrays and surprises the Powers of
Reason, than Passion; which is bred and nourished, by Pride, Folly, and
Self-love.

Be not too positive in affirming any thing, lest thou prove mistaken: and if
thou have erred, persevere not in it, think it no shame to submit to truth, but
rather rejoice that thou have found it.

Be not too fond of your own Opinion, nor concerned, if others differ from you,
and do not so much regard what you say, as you imagine they ought: make not
applause your end; let neither it, nor distaste, have too great an Influence
upon you in any thing, or Power either to exalt, deject, or raise any unruly
Passion in thee.

Consider always before thou speak, what thou art about to say, and to
whom; Be not over hasty, and inconsiderate, either in thy Speeches or Actions;
Pause and Deliberation do many times discover many Ingredients of Wisdom and
Prudence, requisite to the choice of Words and Actions, and the manner of doing
them: Never run into any conclusion, how quick so ever thou may be in any
matter of importance, suddenly. How many Witty men have fallen into great
errors, because they would not give themselves time to think, nor their
Imaginations time to cool, whereas calm and flow men, who pass for dull in the
common estimation, as they search after truth with more deliberation, so they
find it out with more certainty.

In all disputes, and pleading of Cases, or the like, Prove. 15.28.
use but few words, and those as significant and expressive, as the matter will
bear, and home to the point, and as much as possible, shorten the excursions of
other men about circumstances of no moment, keeping them still to the main
Hinge of the business.

It does greatly add to a man's Reputation to have good Forms. The Exercises in
Universities and Schools, are of Memory and Invention, either to speak by
heart, that which we have set down Verbatim; or else to speak Extempore:
Whereas in Action there is little use of either of these; but most things we
utter are neither Verbally premeditated, nor merely Extemporal; therefore
Exercise should be so framed, to take a little breathing to consider the Heads,
and then to set and form the Speech Extempore. This may be done either with
using Notes, (for in most Actions they are allowed) or else without them.

Speak not the evil thou know of any man; blame the Action, not the Person,
unless lawfully called by Authority, or to those whom it concerns thee to
Reform and Reclaim, or when the concealment may make thee guilty, or accessory,
or to prevent certain damage to thy Soul, Body, or Estate of thy Neighbor; or
lastly, when some particular, remarkable Judgment is upon a notorious Sinner,
that God may be acknowledged in his just Judgments, and Sinners wain'd from
such practices.

Impart to no man the evils thou have heard spoken of him, neither bring any
thing to light, upon which Scandals may ensue.

Seek to stop evil Discourse, by a timely and wise turning of it to the lawful
affairs of this life; for where Religion will not be admitted, these things may
take place.

Let not others see that thou know their defects, ill actions, or hard
thoughts they have of thee, or such as thou love, or any offense committed
against thee; neither the good affections they bear to thy Enemies.

Make good use to thy self of all things that fall out in Conversation: mark
every passage and circumstance, and lay up, and appropriate whatsoever is
commendable; and endeavor to imitate wise men, not only in their words and
manner of delivery, but even in their common behavior, so far as it will
become your Place and Person. All the profit we reap by conversation, flows
from the diligent observation, and imitation of others.

Envy no man his due and just praise, as if it abated thy esteem: rather
rejoice, to hear another man well reported of. Not only stop thine Ears, but
set thy Speech and Countenance against whispering Detractions from thy
Neighbor's good name. And if thou can not without danger by word reprove
men, let thy Countenance, Silence, and contrary Example, testify thy dislike.
Let the Good thou see be matter of content, thankfulness to God, and thy own
imitation: And the Evil, of Grief, Humiliation, and Warning.

When men report good of thee; if it be true, repress such discourse as wisely
and suddenly as thou can: And if not, endeavor to make it so. When men
report evil of thee; be not so inquisitive who raised it, as to make good use
of it to thy self: this evil does not arise without Gods Providence. 2 Samuel
16.11.
And though the report be false, in respect of such or such a Fact; yet consider
whether thou have not run into the appearance and occasions of those evils; and
let this humble thee, and make thee more circumspect. Labor to see Gods wise
and good Providence; not only in discovering the Folly and Malice of wicked
men, who raise and take up an evil Report against thee without cause; but in
giving thee warning to look to thy self, lest thou deservest thus to be spoken
of. Great is the advantage thou may receive, by the wise improvement of the
Railings and Revilings of an Enemy; for though he be a bad Judge, he is a good
Remembrancer: and you may hear from him those things, which Friends and
Flatterers will never admonish you of.

Wrong no man, either in his Life, Name, Chastity, or Estate: do all the good
thou can, according to thy ability and opportunities, even to thy very
Enemies, and forgive all the wrongs men do unto thee.

Let your Actions be always suitable to your Person, Place, and Quality; and
then you need never be ashamed whosoever be your Judge.

So frame your self to the Time, and Company, as neither to serve them, nor
sullenly neglect them; yielding so far, as may neither betray Goodness, nor
countenance Evil; Measure in a just Balance, and maintain both thine own
Honor, and the Reputation of others. Learn rightly to distinguish between men,
and not promiscuously respect all alike: be not in bondage to their Faces, or
Fancies; neither dismantle or expose thy self to their scorn or injury, by too
much goodness or facility of Nature: this sets the fairest Gloss upon a man. It
is a point of great wisdom to keep our affections undiscovered in company: If
thou concealest thy own Judgment, thou shall the better discover another man's
Opinion.

Apply your self so to your Superiors, as to convince them of the affection and
esteem you bear them, and demonstrate that you do it not out of Facility, but
Regard; for nothing ingages the affections of great men more, than a handsome
and graceful address.

Do nothing that may distaste another man's sense or imagination.

As in Apparel so in Action, a man should know not only what is good, but what
becomes him. Our behavior (which is as it were the Garment of the mind) ought
to have the conditions of a Garment: It ought to be such as is in Fashion; not
too curious, and costly, but suitable to our Quality; and so shaped, as to set
forth any good faculty of the Mind, and to supply and hide any deformity.
Neither should it be so strait, as to strain the mind, or hinder and repress
the motion thereof in Business.

In all thy Associations let this be a general Direction, thoroughly examine the
Designs and Ends upon which they were contracted; carefully inquire into thy
own condition, and abilities, and impartially judge how much thou do
contribute to the upholding that Amity: and as thou find thy self of
Importance, and subservient to the ends they have in designing thy Friendship,
so far value thy self, and expect to be valued; and never imagine, that any man
will quit his own particular advantage and profit, to serve thee; or procure
thine, on a friendship established upon mutual convenience.

When thou can not shun evil Company, in respect of the common affairs of
Life, be sure thou give no advantage to them, either to speak ill of thee, or
of Religion: 1 Timothy 5.14.
let thy Conversation be honest, unblamable, and harmless; as soon as possible
leave them; and while thou art with them be full of Fear, lest thou fall. Raise
thy heart to a lothing of their Sin, yet compassionating the Sinner: and when
ever thou see or hear any Wickedness, let it be a grief and vexation of
Spirit to thee; Immediately lift up thy heart to God, and before him confess
it; disdain all liking of it, and pray to be kept from it. Likewise beg of God
to forgive thy Companion his sin, and that he would grant him the grace to
repent.

There is a strange attractive and imperious power in all Company, to impoyson
and pervert even the best dispositions: By holding familiar correspondence with
lewd men, there steals upon a man a secret, and insensible dislike of his
former sober courses; he begins to censure and renounce his former ways of
Innocence, as too strict and restraining, and full of unnecessary abridgment.
The love he bears men's Persons, lessens daily the dislike of their sins: At
first they appear less heinous, then they seem small and Venial; afterward he
thinks them tolerable and excusable, till at last he comes to justify and
defend, to approve and practice them.

We have not only Gods repeated Commands prohibiting our familiarity with
Wicked men, Prove. 1.15. 4.14.23.20. Ephesians. 5.11 2 These. 3.6.
but the Practice and Protestation of the Saints against it, 2 Kings. 3.14.
Jer. 15.17. 2 Chronicles. 19 2.20.37. Prove. 29.27
and Gods heavy Punishments inflicted for it. But besides these, it is
impossible for Wicked Men directly and heartily to love a Christian, when there
is no true love even among themselves. And although these Swine and Bears do many
times agree, it is not Peace, but Conspiracy: and any the least matter of
Profit, Lust, or Pride, will presently make them rage at, and devour one
another. Man is to man, says Ingenious Cowley, all kinds of Beasts; a fawning
Dog, a roaring Lion, a Thieving Fox, a dissembling Crocodile, a treacherous
Decoy, a rapacious Vulture: If then we would not perish in the Destruction of
Wicked men, we must leave their Tents; Numb. 16.26. Rev. 18.4.
and avoid being partakers of their Sins, as we desire to be freed from their
Plagues.

Our Special and affected Conversation must be with the wise and Virtuous:
Especially such as fear God, not only for the Opinion of others, who will ever
judge us to be such as our Company is; but for the benefit and advantage we
shall receive thereby.

Think not thy self too good to learn, even of the meanest Christian.

When thou speak of the things of God, be Humble, Reverend, and serious,
keeping within the Line of thy Calling, and the Measure of Knowledge and Grace
given thee.

Do not wrest, and mistake the Actions, Speeches, or Ends of good men: who,
though they differ from thee in some Points, yet hold all such as are necessary
and fundamental; rather endeavor by all means to keep in the unity of the
Spirit, by the bond of Peace. Nothing certainly brings more Joy, Comfort or
Delight, next to the Communion with God in Christ, than the Actual Communion of
Saints, and the love of the Brethren.

Neither trust any secret, that may endanger thy Estate or Person, with any
Friend, or Servant, whatsoever. While thou art within thy self, thou art safe;
but thy Secret once uttered, makes thee a Bondslave to him thou trustest, and
leaves thee always to his Mercy. It Is certain, never any man revealed a Secret
of importance, of which he did not afterward repent: For although he should
receive no damage thereby, yet he can never free himself from disquiet. How can
a man assure himself his Friend will not disclose that, which he himself (though
it so nearly concerned him) could not keep secret? The safest Rule is, so to
carry thy self to thy Friends, as persons who may one day prove thy Enemies,
and so to thy Enemies, as that thou may yet become their Friend.

You shall never find a Friend in your young years, whose Conditions and
Qualities will please thee after thou come to more Discretion and Judgment:
And then all thou have given is lost, and all wherein thou have trusted such a
man, will be discovered.

Associate thy self with thy betters, at least Peers. If thy Friend be of
better Quality than thy self, thou may be sure he will be careful to keep
thy Counsel; because he has more to lose than thou have; and again he will
esteem thee for thy self, and not for what thou do possess. Yet remember
always, that thou never venture thy Estate with any of those great ones as
shall attempt unlawful things: for such men labor for themselves, and not for
thee; thou shall be sure to partake with them in the danger, but not of the
Advantage and Honor: and to venture a sure Estate in present, in hope of a
better in future, is mere madness. Besides, Great men, when they have obtained
their ends, forget such as have done them Service; and will rather hate thee,
for saying thou have been a means of their advancement, than acknowledge it.

Such as are thy Inferiors, will follow thee but to eat thee up. If thou give
twenty gifts, and refuse to do it but once, all thou have done will be lost;
and when thou leavest to feed them they will hate thee, and become thy mortal
Enemies: Such kind of men the Rich may always have.

Let thy Love therefore be to the best, so long as they do well; but take heed
that thou love God, thy Country, thy Prince, and thy own Estate, before all
others; For the Fancies of men change; and he that loves thee to day, may hate
thee to morrow.

Observe the wise. Accompany the honest. Love the Religious.

As soon as Company is broke up, call thy self to a strict account; examine how
far thou have hindered others, or preserved thy self from Evil; what good thou
have either done, or received; what advances thou have made, either in
Knowledge, or Virtue; and accordingly let thy Heart either check, or comfort
thee.

The Art of making a man's Fortune.
Mostly out of my Lord Bacon.
THis Art chiefly consists of two Points: A right knowledge of other men, and
of a man's self. A wise man ought to purchase, and procure to himself a good
information, touching the particular Persons with whom he has to deal; their
Natures, Desires, Ends, and Customs; their Helps, and Advantages whereby they
are chiefly supported; their Weaknesses, Disadvantages, and where they lie
open, and are obnoxious; their Friends, Factions, Patrons, and Dependencies;
their Opposites, Enviers, and Competitors; their Modes, Times, and Critical
seasons of Access, and the Principal Rules they have set down to themselves; to
all which must be joined a nice observation of the particular Actions, which
are on foot, from time to time, and as it were hot on the Anvil: For men change
with the Action, and while they are engaged and environed with business, they
are one; when they return to their natures, quite another.

These several ways the knowledge of men may be disclosed: By the Face and
Countenance; certainly there can hardly be found so excellent a Dissembler, or
a Countenance so commanded and forced, that can sever from an artificial Speech
these Notes: It will either be more Slight and careless, or more Set and
formal; more Tedious and wandering, or more Dry and reluctant than usual.

By their Words: which, though they be full of Flattery and Uncertainty, yet
these two ways may be excellently discovered: When they are either uttered upon
the sudden, or else in passion. There are few men so true to themselves, and so
settled in their Resolves, but at some time or other, either out of Heat or
Bravery, Intimate good will to a Friend, Weakness, Trouble of Mind, or some
other Passion, that can endure and hold out under these Weights and Tortures,
without communicating and revealing their most inward thoughts: But above all,
it sounds the mind to the bottom, when simulation is put to it by a
counter-dissimulation, according to the Proverb. Tell a Lie, and find a Truth.
But this Rule belongs more to the Statesman, than the Christian, and should
indeed have its place among the Evil Rules.

By men's Actions: Which, though the surest pledges of men's Minds, are not
altogether to be trusted, without a Diligent and Judicious consideration of
their Magnitude and Nature. The Italian thinks himself upon the Rack, when he
is better used than he is wont to be without manifest cause: Small Favors do
but lull men asleep, both as to Caution, and as to Industry.

But the surest Key to unlock men's minds, is, to search and disclose either
their Nature and Dispositions, or their Ends and Intentions. The Weakest sort
of men, are best Interpreted by their Natures; but the Wise, and more Reserved
are best expounded by their Ends: Yet certainly it is a frequent, and very
familiar error with wise men, to over-shoot the Mark, measuring other men by
the Model of their own abilities, and supposing them to Project, and Design
deeper Ends, and Practice more subtle Arts, than ever came into their Heads.
There is commonly less Money, less Wisdom, and less good Faith, than men do
account. Princes, being at the top of Human desires, and having for the most
part no particular ends propounded to themselves, whereto they aspire,
especially with vehemence and perseverance, are best Interpreted by their
Natures.

By Reports likewise we come to the knowledge of men: And here, Weaknesses and
Faults are best learnt from Enemies; Virtues and Abilities, from Friends;
Customs and Times, from Servants; Thoughts and Opinions, from intimate
Confidents. Popular Fame is light; and the Judgment of Superiors is uncertain:
For before Such, men are Masked.

But the most compendious way is, to have general acquaintance and inwardness
with such men, as have most looked into the World, and are well Versed both in
Men and Matters; but especially to endeavor to have conversation and privacy
with some particular Friend: who, according to the diversity of Business, and
Persons, is able to give us solid Information, and good Intelligence of all
Passages.

That a man know himself, is a Rule of Universal Prudence; and to do so, there
is need of very frequent Inspection, we so often forget what manner of Persons
we are. Neither must this Examination be partial, such a view as men, too much
in love with themselves, take but most strict, and exact; taking account not
only of our Abilities, Virtues, and Supports; but also of our own Defects,
Inabilities, and Impediments; ever esteeming These with the most, Those rather
with the least. This Politic Glass, wherein a man should view himself, is
nothing else, but the State of the World, and Times, in which we live.

The first Consideration here should be, How a man's Constitution and moral
Temper sorts with the general State of the Times: If they be found Agreeable,
he may give himself more scope, and liberty; but if there be any Dissonancy and
Antipathy, then in the whole course of his Life he is to carry himself more
close and reserved. The next consideration is, How a man may be valued, and how
he may deport himself, as he is compared with his Equals and Rivals, whom it is
likely he may have his Competitors; and that he take that course of life, where
there is the greatest solitude of able men, and himself like to be most eminent.

And in the last place: A man ought to take heed how he guides himself by
Examples, and that he do not fondly affect the Imitation of others, without due
consideration of all the differences there may be between the Persons he has
chose for his Patterns and Examples in their Natures, Persons, etc. For that
may be Graceful and Fit for them to do, which in him may seem Ridiculous; and
what they may easily accomplish by reason of the sutableness of their natures
and tempers, he (though having the same opportunities) shall never bring about.

Nor is the right understanding of a Man's self sufficient; there are other
things likewise to be regarded: As first, a man must consult with himself upon
a way, how wisely to open and reveal himself. It is a great advantage, if a man
can, by a kind of Art and Grace, set himself forth to others, aptly revealing
without distaste or arrogance his Virtues, Merits, or Fortune; for though Wise and
Solemn men may smile at this, and despise it, yet sure it will take with the
more Ignorant and Vulgar: and the estimation of many will countervail the
disdain of a few. Certainly not a few, more solid than windy natures, have
suffered great prejudice and disadvantage, in point of Reputation and Merit,
for want of this Art of bearing up sail in the heights of the Wind.

But the Covering of Weaknesses, Misfortunes, and Disgraces, is of no less
importance, than the dextrous and wise Ostentation of Virtues. Defects are
concealed by a threefold industry, and as it were under three Coverts; Caution,
Color, and Confidence. Caution, is, when we do wisey avoid being put upon
those things, for which we are not proper; the great error of bold, and
unstay'd Spirits, who thereby publish all their Imperfections. Color is, when
we do warily and wisely make way to have a favorable construction made of our
Faults and Wants, as proceeding from a better cause, or intended for some other
purpose, than is generally conceived: Endeavoring still to cover our defects,
by borrowing and putting on the Color of the next bordering Virtues, whereby
they may be shadowed. But the most sure and effectual Remedy is, that a man
profess to despise what he cannot attain. There is another kind of Confidence
yet more impudent, which is to outface a man's own defects; to boast and
obtrude them upon Opinion: and to help this again, and that the deception put
upon others may come off more roundly, he may feign that he had the least
Opinion of himself in those things wherein he is best; but there is nothing,
avails a man more or, puts a fairer gloss upon him, than that he do not expose
his Person to scorn or injury, but right himself in all points, in all things
showing some sparkles, and edge of a Free and Generous Spirit, that carries with
it as well a Sting as Honey, keeping always a fortified carriage, a prompt and
prepared resolution to vindicate himself from scorn.

A wise man ought to endeavor by all possible means to bend and mould his
mind, that it may become pliant and obedient to Occasions and Opportunities;
nothing hinders the effecting of Business, and making a man's Fortune, more,
than when men are where they were, and follow their old bent, when Occasions
are turned:

We should inure our minds to Judge of the proportion and value of things, as
they conduce more or less to our fortunes, and the ends we intend.

A man ought to look about him on all sides, and observe where things are open,
where shut, where easy, and where difficult to be compassed; and never to
overstrain, or misemploy his strength, where the way is not passable.

We must not always expect Occasion, but sometimes provoke it: A wise man makes
more Occasions, than be sinds. We may observe in the managing of Affairs, and
handling Business, two kinds of sufficiencies: For some can make use of
Occasions aptly and dexterously, but can Plot and excogitate nothing; others,
are all for Plots, which they can well urge and pursue, but cannot accommodate.
Each of these is imperfect, without the other: We ought therefore to have an
eye to our Natures, and Tempers in the mana gery of Businese; to know what we
are most fit for, and not willingly engage in other matters, which though we have
never so many Opportunities for, we shall never bring about.

A man, that would make his Fortune, ought never to embrace any matters which
take up too great a quantity of time. The cause why those who addict themselves
to Professions of Burden, as Lawyers, Divines, Writers of Books, and the like,
are not commonly so Politic in contriving and promoting their own Fortunes, is
no other than this, They want time, which is otherwise employed, to inform
themselves of particulars, to wait upon Occasions, to devise and project
Designs, which may conduce to the making of them.

But after all this, we ought not to be so Weak and Foolish, as to imagine, that
Fortunes are not to be obtained without all this ado; for we know well that
they come tumbling into some men's laps, and a number obtain very good ones in a
plain way, without any great or painful Art, only by Diligence, Assiduity, and
a little Caution intermingled.

In this hot race after Fortune, to cool our selves a little, let us call to
mind that elegant conceit, That Fortune has something of the Nature of a
Woman; if she be too much wooed, she is the farther off. But the best direction
is, that we harken to what Divinity and Philosophy both teach us should be
first sought after: Our Savior commands us, That we seek first the Kingdom of
Heaven, and the Righteousness thereof; and all other things shall be
super-added: And Philosophy injoyns somewhat like this. Seek first the goods of
the mind, and the rest shall be supplied, or thou no way prejudiced by their
absence. These are some of those, which they call good Arts: As for the evil
ones, though we ought not to make use of them our selves, yet it is not amiss to
infert a few of them; that we may know by what Rules some men act, and by what
Rules they judge other men move.

As first, Disparagement or Detraction, Distrust or Suspicion, Compliance or
Neutrality, Reservedness or Closeness, Surprisal or Advantage, Irreligion or
Atheism.

The Politician need not much care for Virtue it self, but only for the
Appearance and shadow of it in the Eyes of the World: Because the Fame and
Credit of it is a help, but the substance hurts; and the use of it is a Cumber.
He must by all means make the most insinuating applications to the People, that
he can; and lock up his own Designs under pretense for Religion, Liberty,
Restitution of Laws, Reformation of Cabals and evil Counselors, Ministers of
State etc. If the Supremacy be invaded, the lapses of the Former Magistrate
must be inculcated with the greatest advantage: What is wanting in reality,
must be supplied with Calumny. He must hire mercenary Jesuits, or other
Divines, to cry up his ayms, in the Churches; that so the Poison may insinuate
more generally into all the parts. If success awaits his enterprises, he must
urge it to Authenticate his Cause. He ought to change with the times. If he
find reason to impose Oaths, let them be of such ambiguity, as may furnish with
a Sense obliging to the Design; and yet so soft, as the People may not feel the
smart. Necessity of State is a very competent Apology for the worst of Actions,
He must wave all Relations, both Sacred and Civil; and Swim to his Design though
in a Sea of Blood. A general Innovation contributes much to the growth and
security of Usurpation. He supposes that men are not rightly and safely to be
wrought upon, and bowed to the Bent of his will, otherwise than by Fear; and
therefore he endeavors by all means possible to have every man obnoxious, low,
and in streights. His Maxims are, Cadant amici, dummodo inimici intercidant,
as the Triumviri sold the lives of their Friends, for the death of their
Enemies. If once a Fire seize upon his Fortune, he will extinguish it not with
Water, but with Ruin. Men are to be deceived with Oaths.

With such corrupt, and pernicious Arts and Positions as these, and others of
the same Impression, (whereof as in all other things the evil are more in
number, than the good and sound) a man may be more speedy and compendious in
the promoting his Fortune: But it is in Life, as in Ways, the shortest way is
commonly the foulest; and surely the fairest way is not much about. Men ought
therefore in the pursuit of Fortune, to set before their Eyes, not only that
general Map of the whole World. That All things are Vanity and Vexation of
Spirit; But also that more particular Card and Description, That Being without
Well being is a Curse, and that all Virtue is most rewarded, and all Wickedness
is most Punished, in its self.

Of Recreation, and Pleasure.
IT is one chief point of Wisdom, to know how to temper our Pleasures, and
Sorrows: Events will Vary; if We continue the same, it matters not. Let us
learn then, by a just survey, to know the due and lawful bounds of Pleasure;
and then neither, to go beyond, nor remove them. Be acquainted with the Quality
of Pleasure, and the Measure: many have lost themselves in a Lawful delight,
through excess. Could we settle in our selves a right estimation of that
wherein we delight, and resolve every thing into it is first matter, there would
be more danger of contempt, than overjoy. What is the Human Body, whose beauty
we so admire, but the same Earth we tread upon? What those precious Metals we
Worship, but Veins of the Earth better colored? and if we look to their end,
we shall see Laughter end in Tears, and Death; and Conscience scourging with a
long smart for a short pleasure.

In Recreations we are to observe all due Circumstances: they must be Decent,
becoming our Person, Place, and Calling. They must be seasonable, at such times
as are allotted, and allowed by God unto them: Pleasures must ever give place
to Duties, and none of our Business must be lost for Sport. They ought to be
taken as Physic, or at least as Wine; our Love and Affections must not fix and
fasten upon them: for then they will not only consume too much of our time, but
our Hearts will be unsettled, and our Affections weaned from Religious.
Exercises. When our sports come to that excess, that we tempt others, and hunt,
and long for Opportunities; when we sit up till midnight, and spend half days,
then we have spoiled the sport; It Is no longer a Recreation, but a Sin.

All our Recreations must be without Scandal: neither using such before others,
at which they have any Scruple; or any unseemly lightness, Vanity, or Passion
in them.

Our Recreations ought not to be too costly: not only considering, how many
empty Bowels, and naked Backs, how many distressed Members of the same Body cry
to us, even with tears of Blood, for Relief and compassion from our abundance:
but the great and exact Account we must e're long give of every Farthing, how
we got it, how we spent it, with what Warrant we kept it.

A good man ought not, for Recreation sake, to consort himself with evil
Company: Ephe^. 5.
Nothing causes more Friendly acquaintance and Familiarity, nothing sooner
breeds likeness of Manners and conditions, than agreement and communion in the
same Delights: From liking the Pleasure, we come to like our Companion in, it,
and from affecting the Man, we come at last to affect his Manners.

Recreation is to be used as a Liberal Exercise, and not as a sordid Trade:
Gameing is an inordinate Course, which God never appointed, nor blessed, to get
Wealth; and so is no better, nay rather worse than common Theft; in that being
committed by mutual agreement, the loser becomes accessory to the Theft of the
Winner, and is, as well as he, not only a Robber of himself, but of his Family;
making both sad and poor, because the Dice turn up an unlucky Chance.

In all our Recreations we must take care that we forget not God, and be not
lovers of Pleasure, more than lovers of Him, Isa. 5.12. 2 Timothy 3.4. And then
when our Pleasures exclude not the presence of God, nor the fruition of him;
when we have his Blessing on them, and use them without dotage, as in God, from
God, and to God, we are safe.

Evening Exercises.
HAving thus walked with God, from Morning until Night, it remains that we
conclude the Day with him. Evening therefore being now come, no Tradesman
should be more careful to clear his Shop-board, and shut up his Windows, than
we should be to shut up our Thoughts, and clear our Minds. That man shall live
miserably, who, like a Camel, lies down under his burden. Before therefore thou
go to thy rest, retire thy self a little; and, having finished thy course of
Reading, sit down, and take a strict view of thy whole carriage the day past:
look back, and call Orderly to thy mind the several places and companies thou
have been in the day past; and how thou have carried thy self in each;
examining thy self by thy Thoughts and Affections, by thy Words and Actions.
For instance, calling thy self to account, say, Thus much time was spent this
day in such a place: Did any Lie drop from me there? Any corrupt, unsavory,
rash, and unsuitable Discourse? Did no unruly Passion break out? Were my
Affections holy and humble, and my heart chaste and pure? My Behavior Wise, and
Courteous, becoming my Place and Person, while I was there? Thus thou may
run through the whole Day.

In the next place, consider your Religious Duties, and carriage in them; Your
Calling, and how you have performed the Duties belonging to that; your
Relations, and carriage to them, As a Husband, Wife, Parent, Child, Master,
Servant; Your particular Corruptions, and the Sins you are most inclined to;
together with your Temptations, and how you have behaved your self in reference
to them; Your Talents, whether you have wasted and misspent, or improved and
employed them for the end they were given; Your Providence, what they have
been, and how you have, and ought to have carried your self under them. In
short, whether you have lived by Faith, that is, have framed your Life
according to the revealed Will of God, the Object of Faith: and whether you
have been constant to your own Rules?

Having thus examined your self, Reform that which you find amiss: Rejoice, or
be grieved, as you find you have done well or ill; and renew and confirm your
peace with God; committing thy Spirit, Soul, and Body, thy Relations, Name, and
Substance, to his Tuition by Prayer and Thanksgiving, who alone can keep thee
in safety.

By this daily examination of our Selves, we gain these two great Advantages:
First, Our Repentance will hereby be more particular, not only of clamorous and
more crying Sins, but multitudes of other particulars; every branch and
circumstance of every Action, every Word, Thought, and Affection, many Sins
which otherwise would have been forgot, will by this means be brought to
remembrance, and repented of by us. And again, when ever Death seizes us, we
shall have but one day of our whole Life to Account for.

The Christian Exercise, taken out of a Learned Divine.
TO keep the Heart in ure with God, is the highest Task of a Christian. Good
motions are not frequent; but the constancy of good Disposition is rare, and
hard: This work must be continual, or else speedeth not. If this Field be not
Tilled every day, it will run out into Thistles. The evening is the fittest for
this work, when retired into our Selves, we cheerfully, and constantly, both
look up to God, and into our Hearts, as we have to do with both.

To God, in Thanksgiving, then in Request. It shall be therefore expedient for
the Soul duly to recount to it self all the specialities of God's favor. A
confused thanks savours of carelessness, and neither does affect us, nor win
acceptance above. Bethink your self then of all these External, Inferior,
Earthly Graces and Favors; That your Being, Breathing, Life, Motion, Reason,
is from him: and that he has given you a more noble Nature, than the rest of
the Creatures, excellent Faculties of the Mind, perfection of Senses, soundness
of Body, competency of Estate, seemliness of Condition, fitness of Calling,
preservation from Dangers, rescue out of Miseries, kindness of Friends,
carefulness of Education, honesty of Reputation, liberty of Recreations,
quietness of Life, opportunity of Well-doing, protection of Angels: Then rise
higher, to your Spiritual Favors, tho here on Earth, and strive to raise your
Affections with your Thoughts. Bless God that you were born in the light of the
Gospel, for your Profession of the Truth, for the Honor of your Vocation, for
your incorporating into the Church, for the privilege of the Sacraments, the
free use of the Scriptures, the Communion of Saints, the benefit of their
Prayers; the aid of their Counsel, the example of their Lives, the pleasure of
their Conversion; for the beginnings of Regeneration, any footsteps of Faith,
Hope, Love, Zeal, Patience, Humility, Peace, Joy for any desire of more. Then
let your Soul mount highest of all into her Heaven, and acknowledge those
Celestial Graces of her Election to Glory; Redemption from shame and Death; of
the Intercession of our Savior; of the preparation of her place; and there let
her stay a while, upon the Meditation of her future Joys.

This done, the way is made for your Requests. Sue now to your God, as for
Grace to answer these Mercies, so to see wherein you have not answered them.
From him therefore cast your Eyes down upon your self; and as some careful
Justice does a suspected Felon, so do you strictly examine your heart of what
you have done that Day, of what you should have done: Inquire, whether your
thoughts have been sequesterd to God, Strangers to the World, fixed on Heaven?
whether Just, Charitable, Lowly, Pure, Christian? whether your Senses have been
holily guided, neither to let in temptations, nor to let out Sins? whether your
Speeches have not been Offensive, Vain, Rash, Indiscreet, Unsavory, Unedifying?
whether your Actions have been warrantable, expedient, comely, profitable?
whether you have performed the particular Duties of the day, in your Awaking,
Refreshing, Calling, Company, Pleasures? then see if you have been negligent in
watching your Heart, expense of your time, exercises of Devotion, performance
of good Works, resistance of temtation, good use of Examples, and compare your
present State with your former, look Jealously, whether your Soul has gained
or lost, lost ought of the heat of her Love, tenderness of Conscience, fear to
Offend, strength of Virtue; gained more increase of Grace, more assurance of
Glory: And when you find (Alas! who cannot but find?) either Holiness decayed,
or Evil done, or Good omitted; cast down your Eyes, strike your Breasts, humble
your Soul, and sigh to him whom you have Offended, sue for Pardon, as for Life,
heartily, yearningly, enjoin your self careful amendment, redouble your holy
Resolutions, strike hands with God in a new Covenant, my soul for your safety.

Rules for the Night.
There Is not a moment of our time our own: The Night brings it is Duties, as
well as the Day. This is a proper Season for Meditation and Prayer; as appears
by the many Instances we have in Scripture; Both of David, Psalm. 42.8. The Lord
will command his loving kindness in the Daytime; and in the Night, his Songs
shall be with me, and my Prayer unto the God of my life: Isa. 6.9. Cant. 3.1.
And of the Church. But it is then especially our Duty, when we are under any
heavy and sore Affliction, in deep Humiliation, or in Suits of great
Importance, which we would solicit with the greatest earnestness and
importunity: Colos. 4.2. 1 Pet. 4.7. 2 Samuel 12.16. Est. 4.3. 1 Kings 2.27. Joel
1.13.
In such Cases, it has been an ancient Custom for the Servants of God to
abstain from their ordinary Sleep, that so they might watch unto Prayer.

As to Dreams, tho they are not much to be regarded, in respect of any guess
can be made by them, yet we are not utterly to neglect them; because we may
gain thereby some knowledge of the temperature of our Body, our natural
dispositions, and the Sins to which we are most inclined; according to that
saying, The Night shall teach me what I am; the Day, what I should be.

Of Sleep.
IT is as impossible to give a constant and certain Rule for Sleep, as to
prescribe the measure of Meats and Drinks: Tho we may as well Surfeit and Sin
in the one, as in the other. Nor is the excess of Sleep without its particular
evils; being hurtful to Soul, Body, and Estate: It robs us of the chief and
principal part of our time, the prime of the morning, and makes the remainder
less Serviceable, by weakening our Body, which by moderate rest is refreshed
and strenthen'd; and making us heavy, lazy, and dull, both less able, and less
active in any employment. It improverishes the Estate, as wise Solomon tells
us, Prove. 6.11. 13.4. 20.4. 23.21.
and brings the Soul also to Beggary, and want of all saving Grace; making us
either utterly to neglect, or else to shorten and hurry over our spiritual
Exercise; excusing our Selves with the importunity of our Affairs, and the
scantiness of our Time, though our voluntary Sloth has brought us into these
Streights.

Of Temptations.
DIvines usually distinguish Temptations into Three sorts: Ascendent, or such
as rise, or fume up from some stirred humor, or lower faculty within us, that
borders next upon Sense, or Affection. Objected, or such as reflect from some
outward object, baited, and suited to the Organs. Injected, or such as the
Tempter immediately affects the faculty itself with. The danger lies especially
in the two first: As to the third, the Devil can do little more, than Trouble
instead of Tempt. Our Savior tells us, that the Wicked one came and found
nothing in him, and so could fasten nothing on him: And his Apostle tells us,
if we could keep our selves, the wicked One could not hurt us* Joh. 14.30.
His power, however great, is limited. It seems little less than an invasion of
God's prerogative, and giving the Devil more than his due, to allow him a power
of immediate, and impressive injection into our minds, without the help of
Object, Organ, lower Faculty, or innate Corruption of our own.

There is not one hour of our Life, in which we do not converse with some
Temptation or other; nor any condition, without its peculiar Temptations. In
lawful Actions, we are subject to the Temptation of immoderateness, and excess:
In Religious, to Formality, and Vainglory: In Prosperity to pride and
forgetfulness of God, luxury, intemperance and contempt of others: in
Adversity, to unlawful means, murmuring, discontent, and accusing Providence:
under Injuries, to vindictiveness and immoderate Anger: Under Comforts, to
security, abatement of Love to God, and setting up our rest and hope in this
present World: In Knowledge, to vain and impertinent curiosity, pride, and
self-conceit: In Sickness, to impatience: In Health, to presumption and
forgetfulness of our latter end: In our Callings, either to negligence,
unfaithfulness, and idleness; or else to overmuch solicitousness, and vexation.
In Company, we are in danger of being misguided by evil persuasion, and the
example of others: If Alone, we are apt to be corrupted by evil suggestions,
either of our own hearts, or of Satan. We ought therefore earnestly to beg of
God, to preserve us from being overcome by the Temptations, that do unavoidably
occur in all Actions and Conditions; and that he would show us the danger we
are in, through the multitude, power, and subtlety of our Enemies; and the
vileness of our own nature, which runs after Satan's allurements, and conspires
with him to its own perdition: and we should also frequently every day reflect
with our selves, what sort of Temptations at the present we are most obnoxious
to: what are most likely to assault us, and how we are to withstand them.

A man may resist any Temptation of the Devil, if he do but simply and purely
will it, without any mixture of unwillingness: But to make such a resistance,
is impossible of a man's self, or from any natural Power in him; but from the
gift of God, and the help and assistance of his Grace; for besides the Gifts of
Graces and Virtues, the Providence and Protection of God is necessary for
Believers, that they may resist Temptations: and likewise those manifold helps
wherewith God succors his Elect. The first of these helps, is the driving away
the Enemy; whereby he is not suffered sometimes to tempt the Elect. Job. 1.
The second is, the bridling him in; not suffering him to tempt so much as he
would. Job. 2.
The third, from the Tempter himself, when ever the shape under which he
tempts, affords some help of Instruction: So the form of the Serpent might have
caused Eve to have suspected. The fourth from the Temptation it self: When it
either stirs up Fear in us, which is the best Keeper; or stirs us up to fight,
and incourages us against the Enemy. The fifth, new Grace, or increase of the
former. Math. 25 Luke. 19.
The Sixth, a Cessation, Peace, or rather Truce from the Temptation. The
seventh, Refreshment in the heat of Temptation, as when the Tribulation is
turned into a Solace. The eighth, a Strengthening, Comforting, and Lifting up
the Heart by a promise of strength and Victory; with a Demonstration of the
weakness of the Enemy. The ninth, a Consolation, or chearing the Heart, in
Troubles, sorrows, and Grief, The tenth, a bestowing Faith and Hope, and
confirmation of the same, against the shaking Fear, which arises from our own
defect and Infirmities.

Again; first an upholding them that are set upon, that they receive no hurt,
though they are sore assaulted often, times, that they are even ready to fall; that
they may acknowledge their own Infirmities, and ascribe it to God's Mercy, not
their own Power, that they are kept. Secondly, God's relieving of them that fly
to him; in which respect he is called, the Hiding place of the Elect. Thirdly,
God's fighting against, and overthrowing the Enemy. Fourthly, Outward
Tribulation, of which there are many profits this way. Fifthly, the Remembrance
of the Last things: Death, Judgment, Damnation, and Happiness.

It is very difficult to overcome Temptations, because no man fights with all
his Strength against any one. A Believer in Temptation, is like a Kingdom
divided within it self; like an Armed Horseman, that Sits upon a wincing,
unruly, and unbroken Colt; like a stout Warrior, upon a Slippery Pavement.

Amongst the Most hidden Treacheries, and most subtle Temptations of the
Devil, whereby the most wise and valiant Christians, are oftentimes overcome;
the first is long, and tedious, whereby he wearies them, and endeavors
deavours to bring them not only into the Temptation, but into Desperation also,
and a Persuasion that they belong not to God, that God cares not for them. This
great Mischief arises from the Ignorance of that good, which may be obtained by
a long, and a frequent Combating with Temptation: It serves for the breaking of
Pride, for the discovering other Infirmities, which else would never have been
seen, and for the preservation of Humility. Secondly the strangeness of the
Temptation, and the unusualness of it; so that a man becomes fearful, whether
he belongs to God, because he cannot hear of any, that have been Tempted in the
same sort. The third subtilty is, when the Devil endeavors to make a man
change that State wherein he is, and wherein he is well: As Birds and Fishes
are often, by noise and stirring, driven from the Places in which they were
safe, into the Snares of the Fowler. The fourth, when he invites a man to those
things which are above his strength. The fifth, when under pretense of some
Good, he draws a man into Danger; and, under pretense of Virtue, persuades a
man to some Vice. The sixth is a Peace and Cessation from Temptation; the most
dangerous subtlety of all: for from hence springs Sloth, Pride, Contempt of our
Brethren, Hardness of Heart, etc.

A man may resist Temptation three ways. First, he resists, that consents not:
The Tempter is overcome, if he overcome not. Secondly, he resists Temptations,
that flies from, and shuns Them. Thirdly, he resists, which beats them back,
and makes opposition.

With the shunning Temptation, we must join Indignation, not vouchsafing to
look after, or harken to the Devil, what ever he offers; contemning and
scorning, when he offers that which is infinitely less worth, and even nothing,
in comparison of God's Love. Here is the great Point of Wisdom, and Spiritual
skill, so fervently to love God, so closely to cleave to him, so diligently to
employ one's self to do his pleasure, to preserve and defend Virtue, and to be
so immovably fixed in these Exercises, that the Darts of Temptation may not
touch us.

A temptation is best beaten back by its own Weapon: Now every Virtue does so,
as often as in the Temptation, its Beauty and pretiousness is seriously thought
upon; for by such Meditations, both the Sins, that do Tempt us, and and the
thoughts, that proceed from them, are always weakened, and sometimes vanish into
nothing, as Darkness flies away, when Light approaches; for the only reason
that Vice, and the Profits and Pleasures thereof, seem in the hour of
Temptation to have some Excellency, and be of some Value and Worth, is, because
at the time the Law and Light of Virtue is hid from our Eyes, either through
Ignorance or Negligence; as rotten Wood, and the Scales of Fishes, do shine in
the Night, because the light of the Sun, and other lights, are wanting.

Of Self-Examination.
THE necessity of this self-reflexion appears from this double consideration:
the danger of the neglect, and the great benefit of the Practice of this Duty.

The neglect of it, makes a man a stranger to himself: (A very dangerous fault,
yet very easily run into, through the Love of Sin and ones self) it throws a
man every moment upon a thousand unexpected dangers; and who can tell how
wicked he shall be, that does not know how bad he is? And when once God shall
awaken a man's Conscience, and tear off the covering, wherewith Sloth and
Security have muffled it, when by some notable Judgment or Sickness, he shall
quicken in a Man the remembrance of his former Iniquities, and summon him to
Death, and Judgment; when he shall see his Sins set in order before him, and
large Rolls of Indictments written against him, full of his Sins and Woes,
within and without; Oh! in what a maze, in what a miserable condition, is such
a Person!

As to the benefit, that comes by this Practice. Hereby a man shall come to the
knowledge of himself, and his present Estate; shall see what Graces he has, and
what those are, he most wants: It will discover the whole temper of his Soul,
and show him what evil Affections are strongest in him, and in what things he
is most apt to Sin; what Graces are weakest in him, what most useful for him,
that he may the more earnestly implore them. And besides, this particular
knowledge will bring forth these three blessed effects.

Watchfulness, and Tenderness of Conscience. He that is acquainted with the
State of his Body, and knows what is hurtful, what is healthful, and what the
danger of a Surfeit, or any other Distemper, is, will be very wary of his Diet,
and course of Life: Nature teaches this; and, surely Grace is a better
Instructor He that has taken thorough notice of the great Distempers of his
Heart, how suddenly he is transported with Passion, how quickly enticed by
every Temptation to practice any evil; that had seen, how ugly and fearful the
face of Sin is, when presented in its true shape, and stripped of all its lying
Pleasures and Profits, and accompanied only with God's hatred and Curse; that
has found, what it is to venture upon Sin, what the loss of Gods Favor, the
joy of the Holy Ghost, the peace and quiet of a good Conscience is: blame not
that man if he be afraid to Sin.

Humility. He that often beholds himself in the unspotted Glass of Gods Law,
will not be very forward to fall in love with his own beauty: When a man sits
down to try himself by the Law of God, he finds therein all perfections of
Holiness commanded, but not the thousand part of it in himself: he reads long
Catalogues of Sins forbidden, upon pain of Gods eternal displeasure; and in his
own Conscience, he finds the Guilt of all, or most of those Transgressions.
When he scans his best Works, he finds they fall short of that Faith, Zeal,
Sincerity, and perfect Charity, wherein they ought to have been performed; he
finds that he has little whereof to be proud: much whereof to be ashamed: So
that, what ever others may think of him, he knows, so much evil, and so little
good by himself, that he cannot have high thoughts of himself: Let him be
despised, reviled, or reproached, as base and vile; it is no Corrosive to him:
he abhors himself more, than any other can despise him; and is more Vile in his
own Esteem, than he can be in theirs.

True Peace and Comfort. He that often calls himself to a strict Account, that
Judges himself for his Transgressions, weeping over them with godly Sorrow,
never ceasing till pardon be obtained: this man alone possesses his Heart in
peace and comfort, and can with great quietness and resolution, expect the
approach of all Adversity nothing can put such a man to much fear or trouble,
neither Adversity, nor Sickness, nor Death, nor Judgment it self.

This is the benefit of this Exercise; and yet how great a shame it is to
consider our neglect and carelessness, who seek to know All things, but our
Selves? Our minds are like our Eyes, we can turn neither of them inward. Oh!
therefore for the furture let us take all opportunities that shall be offered;
we are not at all times alike disposed for this Exercise; there are special
occasions that fit us for it: many times one sad accident or other turns home
our thoughts to our Selves, and makes us see what we are in other men: The loss
of a dear Friend, the sound of a Passing Bell, the sight of a Dying man, have a
strange Virtue many times to compose a disordered Heart. Sometimes a Sermon has
set us to rights, and sent us home quickened with much holy Affection;
sometimes a Fit of natural Melancholy and Pensiveness makes us apt for inward
speculation; sometimes a wakeful Bed calls upon us to examine our hearts: many
such occasions God offers, if we were either Wise to see, or Willing to make
use of them.

But if opportunities do not offer themselves, we should make them: A Wise man
makes more, than he finds. Spare an hour in a Week, one day in a Month, for
this business; Say not, thou have a Calling to mind; many businesses, that
require thy presence, and diligence, and therefore can not mind all; Intend
thou the chiefest, and that is Religion: These are good indeed in their time
and place; This only of absolute necessity.

The Subject of our Trial should be our whole Man: Whether we find the change,
that is, the New brith, begun in us?

Our mind, whether we labor to be daily more enlightened, to know that which
is good and to be embraced; and that which is evil for to be avoided, by
increasing in the knowledge of the Word, and especially of Jesus Christ and him
Crucified, revealed in the same?

Our Memory, whether it do more firmly keep those good things, that it has
learned?

Our Will, whether it more freely choose the good, and refuse the evil, and so
be daily more pliant and obedient to the will of the Lord?

Our Affections, whether they be every day more conformed to the holiness of
Christ: that is, in loving that, which God loves; hating that, which he hates;
rejoicing in that, whereby he is honored and well pleased, grieving for the
contrary; fearing only the offending of him, securing our selves in his love
and favor alone?

Our Conscience, whether it be still tender; Checking us for every fault done,
or intended; Quieting us in this assurance, That our Sins are washed away in
the Blood of Christ. Bearing Witness unto us of our upright lives and
conversations, at least begun: with a resolute purpose so to proceed all our
days?

Our Body, whether it endeavor after more ability daily, to perform every Duty
accordingly, and in every part, and all this at all times, and in all places
convenient?

Finally, we are to examine our whole Life or conversation, whether ewe feel a
change therein unto newness of Life? All these being the Lord's, he does
require this holiness in them all; and that by striving to perfection, each day
to grown a little, until we come to a perfect man, the measure of the age of
the fullness of Christ: Until we fell such a change in some measure, we can
never have any true comfort.

Again, we are to examine our Faith, whether it be true, or no? Revel. 22.17.
John 7.37.
Saving Faith is never without its Grounds, which are God's free proffer. John
6.40. 2 Cor. 5.20. 1 John 3.23. and 5.10.
His Will, and Desire; his Command and Promise. Joh. 6.36.
It has ever some Word, or Writing from God, to show for that which it
believes. It will make one willing to try it ones self, and willing any body
else should try it, yea God himself. 1 Cor. 3.5. Psalm. 139.23.
Where saving Faith is, there will be a Spiritual Struggling, and Conflict; not
between the Conscience convinced, and the Will, as was in Pilate; John. 19.12.
and. 16.
But between the Regenerate and Unregenerate Part, Romans 7.22.23.
as was in Paul. 2. These. 1.3
Again, as a living Child, it always grown, though not in sight, at least in
desire and endeavors, making a man more Conscionable, and giving him better
warning of Sin; as a Clock is known to go true, when it strikes right, though you
cannot see it move forward. It gains by Opportunities, and waxes stronger by
Resistance.

Again, Saving Faith is known by its Antecedents, and Consequents, but more
easily by its Fruits and Effects, than by its Causes; as Life, by Motion; and
Fire, by Heat. Gal. 5.6. Romans 6.13.
And thus it is a living Faith. It loves and desires the Word, Gods Ordinances,
and all holy Means; because it is both begotten, and, nourished thereby. Psalm.
84.2.
It makes a new Creature, pruifying the Heart, and regulating the Life; Acts
15.9. Rom 6.4.
It makes them Virtuous, Temperate, Patient, Godly, which before were the
contrary; 2 Pet. 1.5.
It works Repentance, and a true abandoning of Sin, making us grudge it any
room in us. It makes one not contented with Thinking he has it; but very
desirous, and industrious to be sure, and Certain. It works Self-denial, both
in regard of God, for doing or suffering h is Will: and of our Neighbor, in
forgiving, forbearing, and not doing them the least Wrong, to do our Selves the
greatest Benefit; seeking and desiring his good, as it were our own; and
requiting any hurt done us, by doing all the good we can. It drawn Virtue and
Holiness from Christ, for the cure of our spiritual Diseases. It makes us
complain of much want in our Faith, and weakness in our believing, out of a
Sense of Unbelief, Mar. 9.24.
as a burden to us; It convets more and more earnestly the Favor of God, and
better assurance of it: therefore will make us neither to favor our selves in
any Sin, nor to be content with any prosperity without it. 2. Cor. 5.28. Cant.
8 14. Revel. 22.20.
It will make us long more after Christ, and his ravishing sweetness; as Lovers
for the Marriage day.

It expels Worldliness from rulinginus; because it finds an All Sufficiency in
Christ: So that we cannot love the World more than Grace, and Holiness. 1 John.
5.4. and 2.16. Heb. 11.26. Rom 3.27.
It excludes Boasting of our Gifts, Parts, or good deeds; It works in us
Inward, Spiritual life: Now Christ lives in us, and we in him. Gal, 2.20.
Which life may be known as natural life is, by the Working of the Heart,
panting after God. Psalm. 42.1.
And by the beating of the Pulses in our regular motions of constant
endeavors, and holy obedience; Heb. 5.4.
By the operation of the Senses, discerning Good and Evil. By breathing a
Spiritual and sweet breath of Grace. Ecl. 10.^ Col. 4 6.
By the motion of Hand and Foot, which moves to God, and for God.

It drives out Hypocrisy, which serves not God for Love, but for By-ends. It
will not suffer us to make have to depart from God, by evil means to help our
selves. Isai. 28 16. Psalm. 40.1.
Lastly, true Faith obtaines, what it believes, things for present, in present,
and things to come, in their due time. Matthew. 8.13. and 21 22.
So also this Faith obtains all the Benefits by Christ: As deliverance from the
Reigning power of Sin, Sanctification, and Grace, Romans 6.14.
as well as Salvation, dependence on God, Patience, Contentedness, and
sufficiency in him. If we obtain these things, our Faith is True, or else it is
False and Counterfeit: For how can we know that our believing Salvation shall
bring us Salvation, when as our believing Sanctification does not made us Holy?
Or how shall our Faith prove True for another World, that proves False for
this? But if our believing Sanctification brings us This; then certainly our
believing our Salvation, will bring us at.

Of Set Meditation.
IN Set Mediation there are four things to be consider'ds. The Circumstances,
the Preparation, the Act it self, and the Conclusion.

The Circumstances.
FOR the Time. This is left to every man's discretion; yet Bishop Usher advises
us, to make choice of the Lords day in the Evening, when we may call to mind,
what we have heard: and the better to keep it in memory, take the Hendi of
Sermons.

For the Place; as retired as may be, and the room somewhat dark, that the
Senses may have no object to draw them away.

For the Space, there is required but one hour in seven Days; and thou will
find it the best hour, that ever thou did spend.

The Preparation.
THE time allotted for this Exercise being come, retire into thy Closet, and
having shut the door, before thou go about this great Work, do thy Homage; fall
down prostrate, grovelling, and kissing the dust, laying thy self at the feet of
God, labor to be convinced of, and affected with, the presence of God; consider
whom tho art to deal with, a God before whom all things are Naked and Bare, who
is in the highest Heavens, full of Glory and Majesty, who will not be dally'd
with, or mocked; but Sanctified in those, that approach him: therefore must
thou be careful not to speak Foolishly before so Wise a God. Again, a most Just
God; hat will not endure that you should hide, or foster any Sin: And yet of a
most Gracious and marvellus sweet nature; who, if we ask Pardon and
Forgiveness, Grace and Wisdom, confessing and forsaking our Sins, and hoping in
his Mercy, will not upbraid us with our Unthankfulness, Undutifulness, Sins,
and Rebellions against him.

Beg of God, assistance to perform this Duty; Pray to him, that He would be
pleased to direct thee in the choice of thy Subject: that he would put such
Considedrations and Thoughts into thy Heart, that thou may be convinced of,
and affected with, the Truths of his Word.

The Act it Self.
NOW pitch upon a Subject. The Subjects of our Meditations should be such
things as are Plain, Certain, and Evident; and not Intricate, Abstruse,
Controversial, and Doubtful Speculations; much less, such as are Curious and
Nice.

We must choose those places of Scripture to Meditate on, as are most suitable to
our present condition, and the dispensations of Gods Providence, either in
general or personal; to Ourselves, or to his Church.

Let your Meditation be upon Scriptures suitable to your Temptations.

Let your Meditations be suitable to the Ordinances, you are to be partakers of.

Let Christ be very much the Subject of your Meditation.

This Holy and Solemn Meditation consists of Three parts. The first I call
Consideration; which is nothing else, but the convincing our hearts of several
Truths, which do belong to the Subject whereof we Meditate: To help us herein,
we may consider. 1 what Scripture, 2. what Reason, says, concerning it: a few
pertinent Scriptures, and weighty Reasons, are as good as many, for this
purpose. We should not over multiply our Considerations; but as soon as we find
our Hearts strongly affected, then we are to pass over that part: but yet, we
must be sure to let our considerations take deep root, before we pass over to
Affections and Resolutions; but in case our Affections are very much inflamed,
as soon as ever we begin our Considerations; we are to yield to the Inspiration
of God, and follow the leading of his Spirit, and not bind up, and limit the
extraordinary working of it; but otherwise we must not leave blowing the Fire,
as soon as ever it begins to flame, for green Wood will suddenly go out, unless
it be very well kindled. We should view the Subject in all its Faces, turning
it on all sides; but not tie our selves up to Logical methods.

The second thing in the Act it self, is a Working on the Affections. The
first, which is a calling to mind, and debating the matter, is an Act of the
Understanding; the end of which is to inlighten the Mind with Knowledge. The
second is an Act of the Will and Affections, laying the matter to heart, and
applying of it close and home; the end of which is, to fill the heart with
Goodness. Here therefore we must examine Our selves, and Actions; whether they
be according to the Rule, or wherein they come short, or differ from it: Nor
should we give over this Search, till we find our Hearts in some measure become
Pliable, Broken, and Affected.

The third part of the Act it self, is Resolution, to do this, or that. This
Resolution should be firm and strong, in the present, not future Tense; and as
well against the Means, Occasions, and Temptation to any Sin, as against the
Sin it self: We must peremptorily charge our Souls in every Faculty,
Understanding, Will, and Affections, to Reform, and Conform to the Rule of
God's Word.

In Meditating, we must join all these three together, otherwise we shall never
bring our Meditation to any profitable issue; for if we only study to find out
what is True or False, Good or Evil, we may gain much Knowledge of the Head,
little Goodness of the Heart: And if we only apply to our selves that, whereon
we have mused, we may, by finding our selves Transgressors, lay Guilt upon our
Conscience, without fruit or comfort. But if to both these we add a Resolution,
through Grace, to be such as God commands us, and lay a peremptory charge upon
our selves to live hereafter according to his Law, and to follow his Counsel,
touching what we should believe and do, when we have offended him; then we
shall reap both benefit and comfort by this Exercise.

The Conclusion.
FOR the Conclusion of our Meditations, we must first with earnest desire beg
of God strength, to perform whatsoever we have resolved to do; being humble,
and sensible of our own Infirmity.

Secondly, we must return praise and thanks to God, if we have perceived any
warmth of Love to God, or tasted of him, or any other Spiritual effect wrought
in our hearts.

Thirdly, we must humbly acknowledge our Failings in the performing of this
Duty.

Fourthly, we must remember the Vows and Promises, which we have made.

Fifthly, we must remember what Passages in our Meditation did most affect us,
and lay them up in our thoughts, that we may hereafter think upon them.

Lastly, we must by degrees warily go out of the presence of God, being careful
and watchful, that we lose not the Sense, and Feeling, Warmth, Strength, and
Grace, we have got. This is the most proper and genuine Method for Meditation.

Preservatives against Sin.
COnsider first the Fruits and Wages of Sin: The best, it yields, is Sorrow,
and Repentance, if not dreadful Punishments.

If thou do commit it, it will poison and invenom all Conditions: it will
sour thy Prosperity, with Preapprehensions of Wrath, haunting thee, like an
importunate Creditor a wild Gallant, spoiling thy Jollity and Content. In thy
Adversity, it will add affliction to affliction: Superadding to thy outward
troubles, a misgiving Soul.

Besides, Sin unqualifies thee for any good Duty, either to God, or Man: If
thou prayest, yet the sense of Sin, thou bring with thee, makes thee
ungrateful to thy self; and how can thou expect to be accepted by the Holy
God? In a good work, the Sin, thou art guilty of, makes the comfort of it
Insipid: thy Heart tells thee, There is sin in the Conscience; and this makes
thee ashamed to own the good that is in the Action.

Again, will it not be a grief to the good Angels, to be present, and
Spectators of thy Enormities? will it not work a loathing, and nauseousness in
them, and cause those chaste and pure Spirits, who are employed for thy
preservation, to retire themselves? And will it not be a most grateful
Spectacle to the envious and malignant Spirits, and lay thee open to their
power and malice, who have gotten thee within their Territories, unless God in
mercy restrain them?

Consider the heynousness of the least Sin. It is against God's Infinite
Majesty, and the riches of his Bounty, in giving his Son for us: Also against
his Honor, and the Love, and Loyalty we profess to owe unto him, for all his
Goodness and Mercy; and likewise against our Covenant with him: the vileness of
which is seen in the fearful Punishments of the Sin of Angels, Adam, the old
World, Lot's Wife, Saul; and so of Moses, Vzzah, David, Josiah, and chiefly
that inflicted on the Son of God, for our Sins. Numb. 20.24. Deuteronomy. 3.26.
A Child of God cannot look to carry away the least Sin against Knowledge and
Conscience unpunished, without speedy submission and amendment.

Live always as in God's presence, whose Eye is ever upon thee, and who may
take thee away on a sudden. Genesis 17.1. Job. 32.22. 2 Cor. 5.15.
Remember thy appearance before him, and account every day, thy last; being
always prepared to give upthy Account.

Keep continually a fresh remembrance of God's great Goodness; especially his
chief Mercies Bodily and Spiritual, Ordinary and Extraordinary: Let thy great
Deliverances never depart out of thy Heart; say always with Joseph, How can I
do this, and Sin against my good God? Genesis 39.9. Neh. 6.11,13. Psalm. 103.25.
and. 116.12.16.

Walk ever painfully in thy special Calling, and in the Conscionable use of all
the means of Grace.

Keep a perpetual memory of the former misery of Sin, and Blessings of
Righteousness.

Be resolved to choose, rather to endure any misery, than to Sin against God: as
Joseph, Daniel, and the three Children did. Dan. 1.8.

Warily resist the first motions to any Sin: James, 1.5. Lust, when it has
conceived, brings forth Sin. Achan tells Joshua, by what degrees he came to
finish his Sin; Josh. 7.21. I saw a Babylonish Garment, then I coveted it, and
took it, and it is hid in my Tent. Avoid every occasion of Sin, as you would do
of Infectious Diseases. 1 These. 5.22. Genesis 39.10. 1 These. 5.17. Ephesians. 6.18.


But above all, use Fervent Prayer, to be kept by these Preservatives.

Of the Sabbath.
REmember the Sabbath before it come, that thou may dispatch all thy own
works in six days, to attend the better upon the right Sanctification of the
Sabbath. Meddle not with any Recreation, Pastime, or Ordinary Work, from
Saturday night at eight of the Clock, till Monday morning. Isa. 56.2,4,6.
58.13.14.
Now in thy Evening Devotions allow thy self so large a portion of time, as may
serve for some preparatory Meditations and Prayers; and be not slight, and
uncertain, but constant to thy set times, and earnest in this work: Now look
into thy bypast Life, and chiefly to thy walking with God the last Week; be
sure to set all strait between God and you; examine thy self both by the Law
and Gospel, and see whether there be not some sin or miscarriage that lies
unrepented of, which may blast thy next day's performances; if there be,
consider of it more particularly in its aggravations and nature, reconcile thy
self with God by Faith, and Repentance, and renewing thy Vows of walking more
Conscionably, after thou have cleansed thy heart and hands. Let thy Prayers be
suitable to thy Condition; beg fervently forgiveness of thy particular sins
confessed and bewailed, together with Grace for the future against them, and an
increase of all other Graces, which thou stand most in need of; especially
for a quiet, settled, composed mind, that thou may attend with all thy Soul
upon thy holy concerns and business; likewise for inliven'd Affections, that
thou may not be dull and heartless, but of a tender, and melting Spirit; for
a pliable, and yielding mind, that thou may hear the Word with, and render
the obedience of, Faith; that the Lord would fix thy mind, and make it serious,
inlighten it, and open thy heart, that thou may have a clear and right
understanding, that the Spirit would set in with the Preaching of the Word, and
make it effectual for the beating down of thy Corruptions, and that it may be
the power of God to the salvation of thy soul: And lastly, for the Minister,
that the Lord would teach him what he should teach the People, and direct and
enable him to declare the mind of God, and make it manifest; that utterance may
be given unto him, to speak boldly, as he ought to speak; and that God would
Pardon his sins and frailties.

Earnestly endeavor to taste the sweetness of holy Exercises, and to long for
the enjoyment of God's Sabbaths; that so thou may come to make them thy
Delight.

Rise at least three hours before morning Sermon, if it will stand with your
Health, and not hinder your fitness for Spiritual Exercises through drousiness
afterward.

When thou art up, retire into thy Closet; and having read two Chapters in the
Bible, betake thy self to Meditation and Prayer. Consider with thy self what an
impure Sinner thou art, and into what an holy place thou go, to appear
before the most Holy God, who sees thy Heart, and knows all the Sins of thy
Life, though thou may have forgotten them, and hates all Impurity and
Hypocrisy: Now again examine thy self, and Confess thy sins unto God,
earnestly praying for the pardon and forgiveness of them, and so reconcile thy
self with God in Christ, and renew thy Vows to walk more Conscionably; and
especially pray that thou may have Grace to hear God's Word with profit, and
be enabled to Sanctify his holy Day, not forgetting the Minister And after your
private Prayer, read another Chapter. Be present with the first at all Public
Assemblies of the Church, with cheerful Reverence, and the greatest attention,
as before the Lord of the whole Earth: Both to declare thy Love and Honor, and
for the good Example of others. Be afraid of the least unseemly gesture, or of
being overtaken by sleep, drowsiness, or wandering thoughts. 1 Cor. 12.12. Acts.
2.46. 4.32.
Join in with the Congregation in every public Action, according to due and
holy Order, cheerfully, with thy Heart.

In hearing, apply each speech, as spoken by God to thee in particular: Like a
Practiser of the Art of Memory, refer all things to their proper place. If it
be matter of comfort; this is for my sick Bed, for my outward losses, for my
drooping under affliction, for the Sense of any Spiritual Defection. If matter
of Doctrine; that is for my settlement in such a Trust, for the conviction of
such an Error, for my direction in such a practice. If matter of Reproof, and
threatenings against Sin, whether thy own or others, as a member of the same
Body, or in danger thereof; be humbled, do not point at thy Neighbor, but
deeply charge thy self: This meets with my dead heartedness and security, with
my Worldly mindedness, Self-love, and Flattery of my own Estate; This with my
uncharitable Censoriousness, with my foolish, proud Heart; That with my
Hypocrisy, and the neglect of Gods Service and my Duty; That with my Irregular
Life, and Conversation. Resolve to walk in every good way, and to depart from
all evil.

This is the best Art of Memory; for exceeding Joys, Griefs, Hatred, or
desires, do leave the deepest Impressions in us, and so stick longest by us; In
hearing therefore, labor to exercise Humility under Reproofs, Rejoicing in all
the Promises, Thankfulness for Mercies, Desire after Graces, and holy
Resolution of amendment, and more close walking, with God.

As thou returnest home, or when thou art entered into thy House, Meditate a
little while upon those things thou have heard, and then kneeling down turn all
into a Prayer; beseeching God to pardon thy Sins of Worship, to accept of thee,
and thy Imperfect performances, in, and through Christ thy Lord; to give such a
blessing to those things, which thou have heard, that they may be a direction
to thy Life, and a consolation to thy Soul.

Eat Moderately at Dinner; rather sparingly, than plentifully, on this day:
That thou may be fit for the afternoon Exercises.

Some little and short Discourse about Temporal things, upon occasion may be so
directed, and tempered with Pious Meditation, as that it may rather be a
furtherance than hindrance of the Duties of Religion: and indeed such Business,
or Discourse, in such a manner, does not withdraw the Mind from God's Worship;
But be sure that in all thy Speeches and Actions this day there be no
lightness, nor Vanity, nor any thing unbecoming the Solemnity, Sacredness, and
Seriousness of it.

Walk half an hour after Dinner, to digest thy meat; and then go to thy
Chamber, and recollect what you remember of the forenoon Sermon.

If you are well, be sure you attend on God's Ordinances Fore-noon and
Afternoon: Ps. 92.1. Acts. 20.7.
For so often exercises of public Worship ought to be held.

After evening Sermon, retire to thy Closet, read the Chapters in which the
Texts were; then recollect and examine what you have heard, meditating on the
whole Sermon in order

The Coherence, and Explication of the Text,

The occasion and meaning.

The chief Sum and Scope of the Holy Ghost in it.

The Division or parts.

The Doctrines severally, by marking the Text, and how they were gathered out
of it.

The Proofs and Reasons of the several Doctrines.

The Uses.

And lastly, which is the chief of all, apply it to thy self, and try what work
every part has in thee; If the Preacher's Method be too curious, or confused;
then labor to remember,

How many things he taught, which thou know not before, and be thankful.

What Sin he reproved, whereof thy Conscience tells thee, thou art Guilty, and
therefore must be confessed, repented of, resolved against, and amended.

What Virtues he exhorted to, which are not so perfect in thee; and therefore
thou must endeavor to practice them with more Zeal and Diligence.

After the finishing of thy Closet exercise, or as a preparation to it, thou
may walk in the Fields, and Meditate on the Works of God; for in every
Creature thou may see the Wisdom, Power, Goodness, Providence, and Justice
of God: Pray to God, that he would open thy Eyes, so as thou may give him
the Glory of his Works. Especially consider these things more fully in their
several Ends and Uses, as the Scriptures apply them. Be sure to return so
early, as neither thy Closet, nor Family Devotions (if not performed) be
omitted.

Works of necessity may this day be performed, and works of Mercy thou art not
to forget: Such as Visiting the Sick, Instructing, Exhorting, Admonishing,
Reproving, Comforting, Relieving, Collecting, etc.

To conclude, Thou may certainly expect that God will proportion his
Blessings to thee, as thou measurest to him in thy Preparation to come before
him: Lev. 10.3. 22.3. Ex. 19.22. Mal. 7.2. Mar. 4.14. Psalm. 44.5. Isa. 56.58.
Ez. 7.10. Genesis 35.2.5. Ec. 4.17. 1 Cor. 11.23.24. Mat. 5.23.24.
Therefore as thou desire the Blessing of a Sabbath, so resolve by a constant
Vow, to perform thy work of Preparation, and try whether the Lord will not
perform his Promise abundantly.

Examine thy Life, thou shall find, that a strict and diligent observation of
the Duties of this day, has ever joined to it a Blessing upon the rest of thy
time; and the Week that is so begun has been blessed and prosperous: Whereas
when thou have been negligent of the Duties of this day, the rest of thy Week
has been unsuccessful. I could easily, says Judge Hales, make an Estimate of
my success in my own Secular Employments, by the manner of my passing and
spending the Lord's day.

On Wednesday, or Thursday evening, set some time apart for Recollecting and
Reviewing what thou did hear, and lay up in thy mind, the Lord's day past:
this will rivet the Word the faster in thy Memory, and put thee in mind to
practice it.

A Prayer for the Morning.
QVicken me, O Lord, that I may call upon thy Name: prepare my unprepared
Heart, by the Blessed Influences of the Spirit of Grace and Supplication.

O most holy, and most glorious Lord God, the Almighty Maker, and careful
Preserver of all thy Creatures, but especially the Savior and Sanctifier of
them that Believe, by the Merit and Efficacy of the Blood of Jesus Christ; I,
sinful Dust and Ashes, dare not of my self lift up my Eyes to Heaven, yet
through thy dear Son, my, Savior, come unto thee, according to thy Command and
Promise, freely acknowledging that I am less than the least of all thy Mercies,
and therefore utterly unworthy of the inestimable favor of being thy Child,
and a fellow Heir with Christ; that after suffering a little here, I should
Reign with him for evermore: For thou know, O Lord, that in Sin I was
conceived and born, and that I have lived ever since in Iniquity: I am by
Nature the Child of Wrath, a Vassal of Satan, an Enemy to Thee my God. It was
thy great Mercy that I escaped thy Wrath, due unto me at the very instant of my
Birth, in respect of that Mass of Corruption which I brought with me from my
Mother's Womb; and thy long-suffering Patience and Compassion, that never fail,
that I have not been long ago consumed, swallowed up, or swept away, with some
extraordinary Judgment, for those many gross and heinous Sins of my Life: my
whole Nature is deformed, with Original corruption; my whole Life, my whole
Life abounding with the fruits thereof, all manner of actual Transgressions. My
Understanding is full of Blindness, Vanity, and Infidelity; my Conscience,
Dead, and Remorsless; my Heart, Hard, and Impenitent; my Affections Disorderly
and Violent, Unruly and Masterless; my Appetite, Sensual, and Brutish: I have
no ability to any good Duty; no restraint, or moderation, in Sinning against
thee. Yea, if I do any Good, I am apt to blemish it with Self-love, and
Hypocrisy; if I abstain from any Evil, it is many times rather from the Act,
than from the Love of it. I ought to have lived, as under covenant with thee,
but, wretch that I am, I have broken my Vow, falsified my Faith, and violated
the everlasting Covenant. What Commandment of thine is there, O Lord, I have
not transgressed? What Grace, I have not abused? What Curse, I have not
deserved? When I view the wretched course of my Life, and consider my weighty
and crying Sins, what, Lord, can I say? And what confusion should cover me?
Here confess to God thy secret Sins, with the Circumstances of Time, Place,
Person, and Manner, etc.
In how many things have I Sinned against Knowledge, against Conscience,
against Light, and against many Vows and Promises of better Obedience! I have
no color of excuse, nothing to plead with thee, in defense of my many, and
heinous Sins: if I dispute, I must lay my hand upon my mouth, and learn to
abhor my self in Dust and Ashes; for, Lord, for these my Sins I stand here
guilty of thy Curse, with all the Miseries of this Life, and that to come. But,
O blessed Lord, thou art he, that Justifies the ungodly, and have sent thy Son
to die for Sinners, and have made a general Offer, and invited all to come unto
Christ, that they may be saved, whosoever will, every very one that thirsts;
yea, and have most graciously promised, John 6.37.
That him that comes, shall not in any wise be repulsed, or cast out; John
3.16,17. Luke 2.10.
and that whosoever believes, shall not perish; that thou will not despise a
broken heart. Rev. 22.17. John 7.37. John 6.40. 2 Cor. 5.20. John 3.23
Nay, Lord, it is thy Will, Desire, and Command, that I should believe on the
Name of thy Son, that so I may be saved. 1 John 5.10.
And thy Word of Truth says, That whosoever believes not, makes thee a Liar.
O, Father of Mercies, I am bold, in the name of Christ, to come unto thee, and
by the hand of Faith to lay hold upon thy Promises; yet, feeling my own
weakness, I beseech thee strengthen my unbelief: and what assurance I cannot
have by my Faith, weakly embracing thee, let me have from thy self, embracing
me, who art mighty to save. Thou did enable thy Servant Jacob to lay hold on
thee, and not let thee go, till thou had blessed him: Lord give me the same
Strength, the same Courage, and the same Success. I beseech thee, O Lord, who
despisest not the sighing of a contrite heart, nor desire the death of a
penitent Sinner, but delightest by thy Goodness to Reign, where Sins have most
abounded, to pardon and forgive me all my Sins, and to wash away the
un^leanness of them, by that precious Blood of Sprinkling, which Christ Jesus
my Savior has shed, I hope, for me. And seeing he has born the burden of the
Curse due for my Transgressions; deliver me, O Lord, both from my Sins, and
those Judgments, which hang over my head, as due unto me for the same: bury
them in the Burial of Christ; that they may never have power to rise up against
me, to shame me in this life, or condemn me in that to come. And I beseech
thee, O Lord, not only to pardon the Guilt of my Sins, but to purge my heart by
thy holy Spirit, from the Dross of my natural Corruptions; that I may feel thy
Spirit more and more killing my sins, in the power and practice thereof,
especially my special Sins and Corruptions. Let my Flesh be Crucified, with its
Affections and Lusts: And let me find the power of Christ's death, mortifying
my corruptions; and the power of his Resurrection, raising me up to newness of
life. Arm me. O Lord, with the Furniture of thy Grace, and write thy Laws in my
inward parts; that I may not only be thy Soldier, but thy Servant and Subject:
Set up the Scepter of thy Kingdom in my Conscience, subdue my heart to the
obedience of thy Commands, win my Affections to the Love of thy Statutes,
conform my Life to the Rule of thy Righteousness, and transform me daily more
and more into thy Image. Bless all the Means of Grace unto me, and me with a
heart sanctified, and set upon the Means, for the increase of Grace: let thy
holy Word be my chief Treasure, thy Statutes my Counselors, thy Promises my
Comforters, thy Sacraments my Delicates, thy Sabbaths my best Days, and thy
Servants my dearest Companions. Renew daily with me the Covenant of thy Peace;
and now this morning, let thy Spirit from Heaven Seal me a new Patent of Mercy:
that being to meet with thee in the ways and works of this day, I may be sure
to find thee as a reconciled Father, not as an offended Judge. As thou do
add Days unto my Life, so, good Lord, add Repentance and amendment unto my
Days: and bestow a supply upon me of all those Graces, which thou know to be
wanting in me, and necessary for me; with an increase of all those Gifts,
wherewith thou have already endowed me. Give unto me such Spiritual Eyesight,
that I may see thee in thy Word and Works: Let me live in thy sight, and not
without thee, as the Gentiles do. O, let me not be cast out of thy presence, as
Cain; nor run against thee, as Balaam; but walk with thee, as Enoch, Noah, and
Abraham: in all my ways taking knowledge of thy Presence, Promises, and
Providence. Bless me, O Lord, this day, in the Duties of my Calling; preserve
me from all fraudulent, oppressing, greedy Courses: Draw my Affections from the
Love of this World; fix my heart upon things above: if things succeed according
to my mind, make me thankful to thee, which have given the Blessing; if any
Cross comes, make me patient, and careful to profit by the Chastisement. good
Lord, do thou bless me with such a portion of Health, Peace, Prosperity, and
every good thing, as may enable and make me Cheerful in Duty. And because the
daily occasions of danger to my Soul are infinite, teach me to keep my Heart
with all diligence, to make a Covenant with my Eyes, to keep my mouth as with a
Bridle, for the avoiding all filthy communication, to use such words as may
administer Grace unto the hearers; to be sober in Diet, wary in Disports,
moderate in Apparel, choice in my Company, and ever to practice that continual
Fear, which has a promise of Blessing: especially watching against those Sins,
I am most inclined to, and those Temptations that are most likely to assault
me. Plant in me Faith, without Presumption; Love, without Dissimulation; Fear,
without Infidelity; Zeal, without Hypocrisy; Knowledge, without Pride; Purity,
without Judging: Wisdom, joined with Simplicity; Courage, accompanied with
Meekness; Cheerfulness, with Sobriety; and let every Grace be graced with
Humility. And be thou pleased so to bless all my Studies and Actions, that they
may tend to thy Glory, the good of others, and comfort of my own Soul, in that
day when I shall make my final Account unto thee for them. O my God, keep thy
Servant, that I do no Evil unto any man this Day; and suffer neither the Devil,
nor his wicked Angels, nor any of his evil Members, or my malicious Enemies, to
have any Power to do me any hurt or violence: But defend me from the Power,
Malice, and Multitude of them all, both in my going out, and coming in, with
the impregnable defense of thy Providence, and Guard of thy holy Angels, whom,
thou have said, should to this end pitch their Tents about those that fear thy
Name: For into thy Hands I do here, O Father, commend my Soul, Body, and all
that I have, to be guided and protected by thee; being assured, That whatsoever
thou take into thy Custody, cannot suffer any harm; seeing thou Rulest all
things to thine own Glory, and the greatest good of thy Children; and because
thou have assured me, that thus begging, I shall receive, that I may set forth
thy Glory, whereunto I do here bind my self. And if at any time I shall this
day forget thee, my God, I beseeh thee, do thou in mercy remember me, and
suffer not Sin to swallow me up, or grow strong upon me, lest I perish. And
now, may it please thee to receive at the hands of me, thy unworthy Servant,
this my Sacrifice of Praise and Thanksgiving, for all thy Mercies, both for my
Being, and Well-being; for the Means of Grace, and Hopes of Glory, etc. By thee
at first I was fearfully and wonderfully made; thou did cover me in my
Mothers Womb, and gave me the shape of a Man, when it was free for thee to
have equalled me with the basest Creatures: Thou have made me Perfect in shape,
and not a Monster; Sensible, and of understanding, not a Fool: Thou did
preserve me in the Womb, nourished me, when I hung upon the Breasts, provided
means of Education, fitted me for an honest Employment, and compassed me with
many particular Mercies, which others want. That I am now alive; that Satan has
not had his will upon me; that I know the way, and the means, unto a better
Life; that I have been protected and refreshed the night past, when, for the
Sins of the Day, thou might justly in the dead of sleep have called for my
Soul; and that I have daily access unto thy glorious Presence: Whence are all
these, but from the freedom of thy Grace? If thou should have given me my
desert, I should have perished long ago. Father, I defire to remember with a
thankful heart, all thy Mercies at any time bestowed upon me, or continued to
me: My Health, Peace, Liberty, Maintenance, Credit, Fellowship, Success in my
Affairs, Preservation from Dangers, delivery from Troubles, Recovery out of
Sickness, Consolation in Afflictions, etc. But above all, for the magnifying
thy Mercy to me, in the great work of Redemption and Salvation, by Jesus
Christ; for thy Christ, thy Spirit, thy Word, thy Sacraments, thy Sabbaths, and
the Assemblies of thy Saints with all the helps of Example, Instruction,
Admonition, and Fatherly Correction, by which thou have endeavored to farther
me in the way of my Salvation; yea, though my provocations have been so many, and
so grievous, yet thy Compassions fail not, but are renewed every Morning: For
all those Testimonies of thy Bounty, thy Pity, thy Patience toward me: I do,
according to my poverty, offer up unto thee the Calves of my Lips, confessing
thy Goodness, and the Due Service of my Soul and Body, as a Living and
reasonable Sacrifice. And now, O Lord, I come unto thee in behalf of thy whole
Church and chosen People, and of all my Brethren, wheresoever they live upon
the Face of the whole Earth: Defend them from the rage and Tyranny of the
Devil, the World, and Antichrist; give thy Gospel a free and a joyful Passage
through the World, for the Conversion of those, that belong unto thy Kingdom.
Judge Babylon, and Redeem Sion, in thy appointed time: Call the uncalled, and
perfect the called; raise up the Fallen, strengthen the Weak, heal the Sick,
relieve the Needy and Distressed,, release such as are in Restraint, comfort
them that are Comfortless, either in Body, or Mind, especially such as mourn
for Sin. Strengthen the Hands and Hearts of them, that stand in the just
defense of Religion, and Right; and confound every Adversary, and Antichristian
Power, and Policy: Especially be favorable to all such, a suffer any Trouble
or Persecution for the Testimony of thy Truth, and holy Gospel; support them
under, and give them a gracious deliverance out of all their Troubles, which
way it shall seem best to thy Wisdom, for the Glory of thy Name, the further
enlarging of thy Truth, and the increase of their Comfort and Consolation: Give
me a compassionate fellow feeling of the Miseries, others suffer; and prepare
me for the day of Trial. Bless with all suitable Mercies, this particular
Church, forgive the public Sins, heal the public Calamities, and Diseases.
Bless thy Servant Charles, our Sovereign, adorn him with all Princely Graces,
answerable to his high Estate; especially with a Spirit of Government. Prosper
the work of the Gospel, and make thy Word to grow by the labors of those, thou
have appointed to the Service of the Church: give them Sufficiency, Fidelity,
and Success in thy Business; Increase Wisdom in our Counselors; and stir up
Magistrates, and men in Authority, to seek the advancement of thy Glory, and
good of thy People: contain the Subjects in their due obedience to Authority;
bring to naught all Tumultuous and Rebellious Practices, Visit all my Kindred,
Relations, and acquaintances, and all that are committed to my charge, and
whosoever may claim an interest in this Duty at my hands, with such Blessings
as they need: Reward a thousand fold all, who have shown any kindness to thy
Servant; forgive, and have mercy upon all my Enemies, and let not one of them
ever fare the worse for any wrong done unto me. Finally, both to my self and
all that desire to fear thy Name, grant all the Blessings, of Mercy and Peace
in Jesus Christ; to whom, with thee, O Father, and the Eternal Spirit, be all
Honor, Obedience, and Thanksgiving, throughout all Generations. Amen.

Our Father, etc.

Evening Prayer.
O Lord God Almighty, the Great and Supreme Being, before whom the Blessed and
Glorious Angels cover their faces, thou art a God terrible in Wrath and
Vengeance against all obstinate wicked men; but infinite in Mercy, and endless
in Compassion, to all poor sinners, that with unfeigned Repentance truly turn
unto thee: thou keep Covenant and Mercy for ever, for all who desire to fear
thy great Name, and walk humbly before thee; I, Vile Earth and Ashes, miserable
Creature, laden with Sin, might justly fear to lift up my Eyes to Heaven; but
since thou art so far from despising and driving from thee a Weak, and Vile
Sinful Wretch, as I am, that thou call and drawest such unto thee, I am bold
to approach the Throne of thy Grace, in the name of thy dear Son, my Lord Jesus
Christ, whom thou have given for Sinners, not only a Savior, but also an
Advocate and Intercessor, to put up our Suits, and make our Prayers accepted:
Through him, Lord, admit me into thy Presence, and hold forth unto me the
Golden Scepter of thy Grace; let not thy Power dismay, but strengthen my
Weakness; thy Glory not confound, but cover my Vileness; thy Purity not pursue,
but purge my Wickedness. I can plead nothing but Misery in my self to make way
unto thy Mercy: from thee alone must all motives unto compassion be drawn; I
beseech thee, O Lord, be not ashamed of my Poverty, be not weary of my
Importunity; but as the Sense of my misery, leads me unto thee, so let the Pity
and Commiseration of the same, incline thy Merciful Heart toward me. I brought
with me a World of Sin, into this thy World: I have derived from my first
Parents, not only the Guilt of their Sin, but also the Corruption of their
Nature; that Leprosy of Adam cleaves unto me, and has overspread all the Powers
and Parts both of Soul and Body; darkening, and misleading my Understanding,
benumming and abusing my Conscience, inthralling and hardening my Will,
disturbing and disordering my Affections, and making my Bodily Senses and
Members either as Porters to let in Sin, or as Instruments to execute it. And
from this cursed Root have sprung all those Actual. Transgressions, which, in
Imitation of Adam's Sin, I have committed, and multiplied against thy Majesty,
by breaking every one of thy Commands, in Thought, Word, and Deed; even from
the beginning of my life unto this present time: So that there is scarce any
Sin, but I have been guilty of it, one time of my life or other; nay, this very
day how miserably have I departed from thee! how frequently and sadly have I
backslid! in what Liberty have I allowed my self! how heedlessly have I
conversed! I have walked at a mere peradventure with thee, my God. And here, O
Lord, I desire to confess, with shame, unto thee, not only the Sin of this Day,
but those great and notorious Offenses of all my sinful life past, with all
those heinous Circumstances, whereby my Sins have been made out of measure
sinful: as the abuse of thy Patience, the quenching thy Spirit, despising thy
Gospel, unthankfulness for thy Mercies, unfaithfulness in thy Covenant. These,
and many more, are the Mischiefs, with which my Nature is blemished, my Life
filled, my Conscience hardened, and thy heavy Wrath most justly deserved; yet,
because thou have, out of thy free Grace, given thy Son, Jesus Christ the Lord,
a means of Propitiation, in whom thou reconcilest the World to thy self; I
humbly beg of thee, through him, Grace and Pardon. O, let his sufferings
satisfy thy Justice for all my Sins, and procure favor and forgiveness from
thee; let thy Christ be my Jesus, to save and deliver me from wrath to come:
And whereas thou have not only promised to deal thus with me, but commanded me
to believe that promise of thine; Lord I desire to obey thy Command, and Seal
to thy Truth; yet, privy to the weakness of my Faith, I pray thee help my
unbelief: Behold not my Iniquities, O, Lord, as a severe Judge, to be avenged
of them; but as a Sovereign: Physician, to cure, and heal them. Show me my
Pollutions by Sin, in the Glass of thy World, and by the Lamp thereof help me
to search and know how wicked I am; that Judging and condemning my self, I may
avoid thy Judgment and heavy Sentence; and may so hate, abhor, and be avenged
of my self, as that I may avoid thy Wrath and Punishment: O let Sin be as
bitter to me in the attempting, as in the repenting; at leastwise, more bitter
in the repenting, than ever it was sweet in the committing. Grant me thy Grace
to overcome my special Lusts; at least, always to strive against them. Subdue
my proud, haughty, and vain, Thoughts; and straiten my crooked, and distorted
Affections: Let me look on the Pleasures and Profits of life, not only as thy
liberal allowances unto me, but also as Satan's Baits; avoiding all excess and
abuse, and using them with thankfulness, moderation, and as things that must
shortly leave me, or I them. Let me not value Pleasure, Honor, Profit, Ease, or
any thing whatsoever at so high a rate, as, for the love thereof, to make
shipwreck of a good Conscience: Let me measure my self, not by what others
Judge me, or I feel my self to be; but by that I desire, and labor to be.
Teach me to keep a diligent account of what I receive from thee; remembering,
there will be a day of Reckoning: and grant me so to manage, and employ thy
Talents, that thou may receive thy own with advantage Let my whole Life be a
preparation to Death: And the Meditation of Death, the Rule of my Life. Unto my
old and gray head, O Lord, forsake me not; and let thy Fear keep me from
forsaking thee: let me be amongst those that are planted in thy House, and
flourish in thy Courts, who bring forth most fruit in their old age. Help me
often to consider the danger I stand in, through the Multitude, Power, and
Subtilty of my Spiritual Enemies: And to my Faith in thee, let me always join
Fear; not only of Satan, with whom I am continually to Fight, but also of the
slippery paths of this sinful World, and the Frailty and Treachery of my
deceitful Heart, and Sinful Nature, ever running after Satan's allurements, and
conspiring, with him, my utter ruin. Let me ever remember, how Satan shows only
the fair side of Sin, and chooses the fittest Instruments to deceive, and
knows, how to suit his Temptation: and also of the Scourges which follow after
Sin, the bitter Fruits thereof; how it unfits me for any Service, makes me
miserable, what ever my condition be: And how thou will most certainly make
those that belong to thee, to feel the smart thereof, especially if it be
against Conscience. Lord, let me never forget Satan's deadly malice against thy
best Servants: how few of them have ever escaped to the end of their lives,
without some grievous Wounds! Let me not, O Lord, be drowsy, and secure, in so
extreme danger; nor lulled asleep, when I am even ready to be utterly swallowed
up: but let me ever be preparing and buckling on my whole Armor, that I may
stand fast in this evil day, and preserve my self, until the Conquest be
gotten, and I Crowned. O let me never deceive my self, by imagining my case to
be good, when I am but a Carnal Worldling, or mere Hypocrite; but, Lord, help
me daily (but especially before thy Sabbaths) to examine and try my Spiritual
Estate, how I grow in all Graces, in more sincere obedience to all thy
Commands, Faith in all thy Promises, and in the power of all true Godliness:
That I may hereby not only avoid all Hardness of heart, Lukewarmness, Sleeping
in Sin, prevent an evil Conscience, with the dreadful Punishments thereof, and
be kept from Satan's power; but also may get strong Consolation, may be every
day more filled with content and delight in thee, increasing in Love to thy
Majesty, People, and Ordinances, in Zeal for thy Glory and Kingdom, full of
Life and Cheerfulness in accomplishing all thy good pleasure, and submiting my
self to thee only, and thy gracious direction in all things, having my Eyes and
Faith fixed upon thee, believing thou will always watch over me for good, thy
Fatherly care shall feed and supply all my wants, thy faithful and powerful
Protection make me safe, and thy wise and holy Providence order all things for
my advantage in the end. Save me, O Lord, from backsliding from thee after the
manner of this evil Age, and preserve me from all the causes thereof:
conceitedness of the goodness of my State; standing at a stay in Religion;
neglect of any means of Grace, especially the Word and Sacraments;
unfaithfulness in my Calling committing, or living in, any known Sin, without
speedy Repentance. Grant me to Glorify thee, according to my Knowledge of
thee; and so to love, and practice thy Sacred Truth, that thou may never
leave me, or in judgment give me up to vile Affections, a Reprobate Sense, or
the strong delusions of Antichrist. And now, O Lord, as I am in duty bound, I
do here present unto thee, from an humble heart, this my Evening Sacrifice of
Praise and Thanksgiving, for all thy Goodness and Mercy to me, a poor miserable
Sinner; that I was born, and live in the shining Light of thy glorious Gospel,
and am not, as others, under the darkness of Popery, and Tyranny of Antichrist,
in all Afflictions and Misery: That I have any measure of Peace in my Spirit,
when I might have been in continual horror of Conscience for my Sins, and left
unto the power of Satan; that thou have granted me health and sufficiency of
the things of this Life, many kind Friends about me, my good Name and Credit
preserved, and thy Blessings in any measure upon my labors; whereas thou
might have smitten me to have lain continually Bed rid, tormented with most
loathsome Diseases and Sores, or, like a poor Lazar to have begged my Bread
from door to door; yea, to have layn without in the Streets, or in Prison,
hungry, naked, thirsty, (as many, better than my self do) destitute of
Friends, in the midst of cruel enemies, odious to all, my Name rottenness, and
my labors accursed: and what is more than all this, that thou should
continue all those kindnesses unto me, notwithstanding all my unthankfulness,
great impenitency, and hardness of heart; and although I have profited so little
by the means of Grace, thou have so long vouchsafed me, both of thy Word and
Ordinances, thy Judgments, Mercies; Fatherly Chastisements, and Corrections, so
that thou might in Justice have shut up all thy Loving kindness in heavy
displeasure, and have cast me off, as one in whom thou take no pleasure; it
is thy Goodness, thy Goodness alone, which is the Fountain, whence all those
rich Mercies flow unto me. And that thou may receive all the Glory, shall be
the constant Prayer and endeavor of thy Servant, all the days of his life: to
the which, I do here solemnly engage, and bind my self in thy Sacred Presence;
beseeching thee, to Sanctify unto me this night's rest, that I be not troubled
with any Terrors, or weakened with any Sickness, or impoverished by any
Casualities or Crosses; but, that being defended under the Shadow of thy Wings,
and by the Protection of thy holy Angels, I may be secured both from the
Assaults of Satan, and the designs of evil Men. Into thy holy Protection and
Custody, O Father, I do here commend my self, and all (that through thy
Goodness) do belong unto me: beseeching thee, both to hear and grant these my
Requests, and all other things needful either for my self, or any Member of thy
whole Church, for thy dear Son Jesus Christ, my Lord and Savior's sake; to
whom, with thy self, and the Blessed Spirit, be all Honor and Obedience, from
Generation to Generation. Amen.

Our Father, etc.

FINIS.

